INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Preliminary Considerations of Options to Address
Excessive Delays in the Completion of Article IV Consultations
Prepared by the Strategy, Policy and Review and the Legal Departments
In consultation with other departments
Approved by Reza Moghadam and Sean Hagan
April 28, 2011

Contents

Page

I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................2
II. Legal Background .................................................................................................................3
A. Member’s Obligation to Consult with the Fund .......................................................3
B. Periodicity .................................................................................................................5
III. Broad Options Going Forward.............................................................................................5
A. Option 1.....................................................................................................................6
B. Option 2 .....................................................................................................................6
C. Option 3 .....................................................................................................................8
IV. Issues for Discussion ...........................................................................................................8

Figures
1. Average Delay of Delayed Consultations ..............................................................................3
2. Number of Members Delayed over 18 Months .....................................................................8
Annex
1. Possible Elements of an Obligation-Based Framework.......................................................10

2
I. INTRODUCTION1
1.
This paper aims to engage Directors on how best to promote timely completion
of Article IV consultations. Surveillance is mandatory for both the Fund and its members,
and members have an obligation to consult with the Fund for this purpose. In this context, it
is useful to consider if further steps are warranted to address cases in which members do not
consult with the Fund on a timely basis. This paper does not propose Board decisions at this
stage. Instead it lays out ideas to elicit Directors’ views. Based on this informal discussion,
staff could return later to the Board, if needed for a formal discussion and possible decisions.
2.
Periodic consultations with members on their policies and access to the
necessary information are essential for effective surveillance. The Fund cannot effectively
fulfill its bilateral surveillance obligation without members fulfilling their obligation to
consult with the Fund. Furthermore, the Fund cannot adequately oversee the international
monetary system—its multilateral surveillance obligation—if its bilateral surveillance does
not cover major economies at a reasonable frequency. In this context, discussions with the
authorities and other key stakeholders in the context of staff missions have formed the
cornerstone of Fund surveillance, ensuring the quality of staff’s analysis, as well as the
relevance of its advice.
3.
The Fund’s cooperative approach to consulting with members has worked well,
but a few cases of severely delayed consultations have triggered calls for a discussion on
how to address the issue of timeliness. As discussed in Section II below, the Articles of
Agreement give the Fund the power to require members to consult within a specified period.
To date, the Fund has not subjected these consultations to firm deadlines, setting instead such
deadlines as expectations and relying on members’ willingness to engage in a cooperative
manner. This approach has generally worked well. While at any point in time there have been
countries for which the Article IV consultations were delayed, these delays have tended to be
either reasonably short or, when more extended, for reasons obviously beyond the member’s
control—for instance related to the security situation. However, some recent delays have
been exceptionally long for reasons not clearly beyond the relevant members’ control
(Figure 1). Against this background, a number of Directors have called for a clarification of
the legal framework governing members’ obligation to consult.
4.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses the legal background on
members’ obligation to consult. Section III lays out broad options to address exceptional
delays. Section IV suggests issues for discussion.

1

This paper was prepared by a team comprising J.F. Dauphin, T. Konuki, S. Cogliardi and M. Shannon, (all
SPR) and N. Rendak, M. Makonnen and R. Leckow (all LEG).

3
Figure 1. Average Delay of Delayed Consultations (in months) /1
20

15

10

5

0
2005

2006
All Delayed Cases

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Excluding cases currently delayed by more than 18 months

1/ Excluding Somalia

II. LEGAL BACKGROUND
A. Member’s Obligation to Consult with the Fund
5.
The Articles require the Fund to conduct bilateral surveillance. The Fund is
obligated under Article IV, Section 3(a) to “oversee the compliance of each member with its
obligations” under Article IV, Section 1. Given the importance of exchange rate policies for
the Fund, Article IV, Section 3(b) further requires the Fund to exercise “firm surveillance”
over exchange rate policies of members, and to adopt specific principles for the guidance of
members with respect to those policies. These provisions constitute the legal basis for
bilateral surveillance.
6.
To enable the Fund to conduct bilateral surveillance, each member is required to
provide it with the necessary information and to consult with it when requested. The
obligation to consult is set out explicitly in Article IV, Section 3(b) with respect to a
member’s exchange rate policies and, with respect to the member’s domestic economic and
financial policies, forms part of the general obligation under Article IV, Section 1 “to
collaborate with the Fund and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to
promote a stable system of exchange rates.”2
7.
Consultations must allow for meaningful policy discussions. While the Board has
not provided comprehensive guidance on the scope or content of a member’s obligation to
2

See The Fund's Mandate—The Legal Framework, page 6, footnote 9.

4
consult under Article IV, some essential elements of the obligation can be derived from an
analysis of the provision itself, its legislative history and the manner in which it has been
applied in practice. These elements include the following:


The obligation applies to all members.



The obligation arises when a member is “requested” to consult by the Fund.3 Under
the current framework, this “request” is effectively set out in the provisions of the
2007 Surveillance Decision which provides that “members shall [emphasis added]
consult with the Fund regularly under Article IV” and that “in principle” these
consultations shall take place annually.”4 In the context of individual members, these
provisions are supplemented at the end of each Article IV consultation when the
Executive Board notes the expected periodicity of the next Article IV consultation
with the member. 5



The obligation requires the member to consult with Fund staff on the issues the Fund
considers relevant for the purposes of surveillance. For this purpose, it is the Fund
that delineates the range of issues to be discussed within the parameters of members’
obligations under Article IV and relevant Board decisions.

Separately (but closely related to the obligation to consult), the member must provide the
Fund with the information required for surveillance pursuant to Article IV, Section 3 (b) and
Article VIII, Section 5. 6 For Article IV consultations to fulfill their purpose under the
Articles, the Fund must have the opportunity to have access to critical information that it

3

The need for a request is explicit with respect to consultations on a member’s exchange rate policies under
Article IV, Section 3 (b) and is implicit in the obligation to consult with respect to a member’s domestic
economic and financial policies.
4

Decision on Bilateral Surveillance over Members' Policies adopted June 15, 2007 (“2007 Surveillance
Decision”), paragraph 17, Decision on Article IV Consultation Cycles, adopted September 28, 2010.
5

Since 1983, when the Executive Board endorsed the practice of specifying in Article IV staff reports the
“expected date” of completion of the subsequent Article IV consultation, Fund policy has set forth the
frequency of Article IV consultations in terms of “expectations”. At the time, it was explained that the “practice
of establishing, at the conclusion of each consultation, a final date for the discussion of the next consultation
with the member would be helpful, although the specification of the cycle in this fashion should not be so rigid
as to detract from management’s prerogative, in consultation with the member country and the Executive
Director concerned, to change the scheduling.” On this occasion, the Board also agreed that the status of
members’ observation of the consultation schedule, including the reasons for delays, be periodically reported to
the Board.
6

Article IV, Section 3 (b) requires members to provide the Fund with the information necessary for the conduct
of its firm surveillance over their exchange rate policies. However, for the purposes of requiring information for
surveillance, the Fund has always relied upon the obligation of members to report information under
Article VIII, Section 5. Moreover, the information that members are required to provide under Article VIII,
Section 5 is further specified in Decision on Strengthening the Effectiveness of Article VIII, Section 5.

5
requires to conduct surveillance and to engage in meaningful discussions with the authorities
on policies.
8.
Consultations take place between the member and the Fund, including the
Executive Board. While the consultation under Article IV begins with discussions with
Fund staff, it is only concluded when the Executive Board has reviewed the member’s
policies and decides to complete the consultation.
B. Periodicity
9.
To date, the Fund has not subjected the obligation of members to consult under
Article IV to any firm periodicity. Rather, it has defined the frequency of Article IV
consultations in terms of “expectations” whose “deadlines” are not mandatory. 7 Unless the
Fund specifies a mandatory deadline by which members must consult with the Fund,
members cannot be found in breach of this obligation if they do not consult within the
expected timeframe. For such a breach to be possible, the principles of due process and
uniformity of treatment would require that members be put on notice in a clear and
transparent manner ex ante of the circumstances under which a member could be found in
breach of obligation as well as the consequences if such a finding were made.
III. BROAD OPTIONS GOING FORWARD
10.
The cooperative approach should remain the core pillar of any framework to
support timely Article IV consultations. As noted, the present system has generally worked
well. In considering options going forward, it will be important to continue to put primary
emphasis on cooperation, recognizing that the overwhelming majority of members are doing
what is necessary to consult with the Fund.
11.
Any change to the current framework would need to weigh the costs of
strengthened procedures against their potential effectiveness. Any amendment should
avoid placing an unnecessary burden on the Fund, either by requiring staff to report with
excessive frequency to the Board or by requiring the Board to become involved in cases that
do not merit its attention.8 Any changes should put in place effective incentives for the
reengagement of non-cooperating members, e.g., cases where members are simply unwilling
to consult with the Fund.
12.
Against this background, three broad options are outlined below, ordered by the
extent to which they would depart from the existing system.

7

8

See Decision on Article IV Consultation Cycles, adopted September 28, 2010.

As noted in footnote 5, the Board already monitors all Article IV consultation delays through a dedicated
quarterly report.

6
A. Option 1
13.
The first option would focus on informal mechanisms within the current
framework. Under this approach, management and staff would continue to use informal
channels to engage with members that have not consulted with the Fund on a timely basis.
This approach would build on the assumption that cases of non cooperation have been, and
are expected to remain, very rare, and a view that they are likely to be more effectively
handled through informal channels than formal procedures, with potential scope for more
informal engagement than currently occurs. Such an approach may also take into account the
extent to which Directors consider that such cases will resolve themselves over time.
14.
This option has the advantage of not increasing the burden on staff, the Board,
or members. However, the absence of visible actions to address cases of serious delays may
raise questions about the importance that the Fund attaches to members’ obligation to
consult. There is a reputational risk for the institution to the degree it is viewed as leaving
noncooperation cases unchecked. It also raises the risk of contagion from precedents of noncooperation.
B. Option 2
15.
The second option would establish concrete formal steps to address cases of
serious delays while largely preserving the existing framework. Under such an approach,
the Fund would seek to engage members through explicit, but relatively limited, changes to
existing procedures. This would have the advantage of including concrete actions while
avoiding the creation of a more obligation-based framework for dealing with a handful of
cases. The extent to which the actions that may be taken within the existing framework
would provide enough incentives for non-cooperative members to start re-engaging with
Fund staff would need to be considered. Such actions could be considered individually or,
perhaps more effectively, combined.
16.
One possibility would be to seek formal involvement from Management in
encouraging the member’s authorities to consult with the Fund. For instance, once a
certain delay has passed, say a year, the framework would provide for Management to send a
letter to the member reminding it of its obligation under the Articles and strongly urging it to
engage in consultation discussions with staff.
17.
The Fund could consider increasing the publicity of delayed consultations. For
instance, the Fund could periodically publish a brief report listing members for which the
consultation has been delayed by more than, say, 18 months past the scheduled expectations
date, and stating the reasons for delays along the lines of the categories used in the existing
quarterly Report on Delayed Article IV Consultations (see footnote 8). This report would be
first considered by the Board, possibly on a lapse-of-time basis, alongside the quarterly
report. Publicizing only delays over 18 months would seem reasonable as at any point in time
in the past ten years, the maximum number of members with delays to complete the
consultations of more than 18 months has been no more than 7 (Figure 2). Such a step would
have the advantage of increasing the transparency on all delayed consultations, although

7
members whose delays are attributable to reasons that are obviously beyond their control
may object to publication alongside other cases.
18.
The Board could hold discussions of the member’s economy based on staff
reports prepared without discussions with the authorities. In cases of prolonged delays,
staff could undertake an assessment of the member’s economy and its policies based on
available information and prepare a report including, to the extent possible, staff’s
assessment and policy recommendations.9 The Board could discuss this report in an informal
session. Such reports could be prepared periodically, for instance annually, as long as the
member has not consulted with the Fund, regardless of the reasons for the delay. The Board
could also require that such reports be published, with appropriate deletions and due caveats
on the limitation of the information available to staff. Publication would provide
transparency regarding staff’s understanding of the situation in the member’s economy. 10
19.
Preparing reports without discussions with the authorities would ensure that the
Board continued to monitor developments in member countries on a regular basis, but
the approach would come with its own risks. Such an approach would not constitute a
consultation with members for the purposes of the member’s obligation to consult under
Article IV. It would be difficult for staff to provide a rigorous assessment in the absence of
consultations with the member, particularly where information gaps are large. As a result, the
reports may miss key vulnerabilities. There would be a reputational risk for the Fund if the
circumstances in which the reports would be prepared were not fully understood by the
public or there were confusion regarding the status of this report versus an Article IV
consultation report. Similarly, there is a risk that some members may see this as a possible
substitute for consultations.

9

Such a report would, in any case, need to identify information gaps that affect staff’s assessment.

10

Under Fund policies, the Fund could not publish a report that set out the Fund’s (i.e., the Executive Board’s)
views on a member’s policies or that contained confidential information provided by the member without the
relevant member’s consent. Accordingly, to the extent that the report would be published without the relevant
member’s consent, any such information would need to be deleted. As a practical matter, identifying the
relevant information that would need to be deleted for this purpose may prove difficult in some circumstances.

8
Figure 2. Number of Members Delayed over 18 Months (end-of-quarter data)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

C. Option 3
20.
The third option would be to establish an obligation-based framework to address
cases of noncooperation. The Board could adopt a decision of general applicability
clarifying the scope and content of the obligation to consult, and setting out a procedural
framework for determining the existence of a breach and taking remedial measures. Such a
framework would have similar characteristics to those established for arrears and data
provision. It would be based on clear rules that respect the principle of uniformity of
treatment, would be set up in a manner that focuses on genuine cases of noncooperation, and
would give members the benefit of any reasonable doubt in determining questions of
noncompliance.
21.
The establishment of such a framework would have the advantage of providing a
strong signal of the importance that the Fund attaches to the obligation to consult but
represent a greater departure from the existing system. The Fund would need to
determine whether setting up such a framework would be the optimal way to address such
cases, taking into account the small number of cases with substantial delays currently but
also the possible risk of contagion. Because establishing such a framework would raise a
number of legal and operational issues, a possible design of the framework and related issues
are discussed in some detail in Annex I.
IV. ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION
22.
The above options are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Establishing concrete
steps under the existing system, or adopting a new framework, would not preclude

9
continuing also to use informal channels to seek to reengage with non-cooperative members.
Similarly, a possible obligation-based framework could include ideas discussed under option
2 (e.g., letter from Management, staff report based on available information).
23.

Directors may wish to comment on the following issues.



Do Directors agree that excessive delays in Article IV consultations undermine the
Fund’s ability to effectively discharge its surveillance mandate?



What are Directors’ views on the broad options described in Section III?

10
ANNEX I. POSSIBLE ELEMENTS OF AN OBLIGATION-BASED FRAMEWORK
1.
This annex discusses in greater detail the legal and practical issues in designing
the potential contours of a framework under option 3. Such a framework should seek to
preserve the cooperative approach, while providing the means to deal with cases of noncooperation. Possible features could be as follows:


The Board would continue to specify the periodicity of the next Article IV
consultation at the conclusion of each Article IV consultation with a member, and, on
this basis, the deadline by which that consultation would be expected to be concluded.



A second mandatory deadline would also automatically apply. It would be set
uniformly and would be calculated from the expected date for completion of the
consultation, and would be the limit by which the member would be obligated to
complete its consultation discussions with staff.



The Board would be notified of any case in which the mandatory deadline is
exceeded. The Board would determine whether the delay was for reasons beyond the
member’s control, based on a recommendation from the Managing Director. Where
this was not the case, the member would be found in breach of its obligation to
consult with the Fund.



A framework of remedial measures would be applied, with emphasis on seeking to
engage the member in a cooperative manner. The framework could mirror those
already established for misreporting under Article VIII, Section 5 and financial
arrears.

Establishing Mandatory Deadline
2.
An obligation-based framework could complement the current expected date for
concluding a consultation with a later mandatory deadline. The framework would
continue to rely mainly on deadlines set as expectations at the end of each Article IV cycle.1
But, setting a mandatory deadline is necessary if one wants to enforce the obligation in noncooperative cases, including by finding members in breach of their obligation to consult
where warranted. Three questions would need to be addressed:


1

What should be the subject of the mandatory deadline? Because members have no
control over the time it takes for the consultation to be concluded by the Board, it
would be reasonable to set the mandatory deadline in reference to completion of
substantive discussions for the Article IV with staff as opposed to the conclusion of
the consultation by the Board.

Normally the expected date would be the one stipulated in the most recent Article IV report. However, under
the policy governing Article IV cycles, this expected deadline may shift automatically in certain circumstances,
e.g., when the Fund approves an arrangement for a member.

11


Through what mechanism should the mandatory deadline be fixed? Setting the
mandatory deadline automatically (i.e., through a Board decision of general
applicability) would recognize that the obligation to consult applies to all members,
irrespective of their circumstances.



How far from the expected deadline should the mandatory deadline be? Defining the
appropriate length of such an interval would be a judgment call that would need to
strike a balance between the need to capture only the longest delays while not letting
such delays become so significant that they severely undermine the Fund’s capacity
to discharge its mandate. Leaving about a year and a half between the initial expected
date for concluding the consultation and the later mandatory deadline for completing
the discussions with staff would seem a reasonable interval (see paragraph 17 and
Figure 2 of the paper).

3.
Members would need to be given ample advance notice of the upcoming
mandatory deadline. In keeping with the principle of maintaining a cooperative approach
toward surveillance, a member with a long-delayed Article IV consultation would need to be
reminded well in advance of the upcoming mandatory deadline. This would give it time to
remedy the situation before the matter was brought to the Board’s attention. Under one
possible approach, the Managing Director would send a letter to the member notifying it of
the upcoming mandatory deadline. The letter would also advise the member of the potential
application of the remedial framework (see discussion below) if the discussions with staff
were not completed by the mandatory deadline for reasons that are not beyond the member’s
control. No such letter would be needed when discussions with staff had started, but had not
been completed due to delays resulting from the Fund’s own internal processes.
Finding of Breach
4.
An obligation-based framework would need to set out procedures and potential
remedial actions to be taken if the mandatory deadline were not met. In addressing
potential cases of noncompliance with the obligation to consult, this framework would need
to ensure that members were granted due process and were given the benefit of any
reasonable doubt. Moreover, wherever possible, it would seek to address genuine cases of
noncompliance in a cooperative manner with the relevant member.2
5.
When the mandatory deadline was not met, the matter would be brought to the
Board’s attention, with early notice to the member. A possible approach would be as
follows. The Managing Director would notify the member of his intention to issue a report to
the Executive Board. The member would have, say, 60 days to respond and provide its
explanation for the delayed consultation. The Managing Director would subsequently issue
As such, its approach would be similar to that inherent in the Fund’s policies for addressing cases of breach of
obligation under Article VIII, Section 5 and cases of financial arrears to the Fund.
Decision on Strengthening the Effectiveness of Article VIII, Section 5, and
Procedures for Dealing with Members with Overdue Financial Obligations to the General Department and the
SDR Department.
2

12
the report, which would include the member’s response (if any) and include staff’s
assessment of the reasons why the consultation was not completed. The report would make a
recommendation regarding a possible finding of breach of obligation. The Board would
consider the report within, for instance, 90 days of its issuance.
6.
If the Board found that the member had failed to consult with staff by the
mandatory deadline for reasons not beyond its control, the member would be found in
breach of obligation and subject to the application of remedial measures. In determining
whether the member was in breach of obligation for a failure to consult with the Fund, the
Board (based on the Managing Director’s recommendations) would need to assess the
reasons that prevented the timely conclusion of the discussions. An assessment of
compliance for this purpose would be based upon the relevant circumstances of the member.
A member would not be found in breach of obligation if its failure to consult was due to
circumstances beyond its control.3
7.
An obligation-based framework would need to provide guidance on the types of
circumstances that would be considered beyond the member’s control. Reasons beyond a
member’s control may arise for a number of situations—for example, because of civil unrest,
because there is no recognized government with which the Fund can consult, because the
occurrence of a natural disaster makes it impossible or extremely difficult for the government
to consult. Such circumstances are expected to be extremely rare and it would not be
advisable to seek to identify them ex ante in the framework. In applying the framework, the
Fund would assess whether the circumstances were such as to make it impossible or
extremely difficult for the member to engage in meaningful policy discussions with the Fund.
As noted above, the Fund, in assessing these various questions, would give the member the
benefit of any reasonable doubt.
8.
If the member were not found in breach of obligation, the Board would need to
set a new deadline within which the member would be required to consult with staff.
The Board would review the situation regularly, for instance every 6 months, until the
discussions were held and the consultation was concluded. In cases where the Managing
Director’s report does not recommend a finding of a breach of obligation, its consideration
could be on a lapse-of-time basis.
Possible remedial measures
9.
An obligation-based framework would need to set out procedures for remedial
actions for members found in breach of their obligation to consult.
3

The obligation to consult under Article IV may be contrasted with the obligation of members to report
information under Article VIII, Section 5. In the latter case, the Articles explicitly require the Fund to take into
account the ability of members to furnish the data requested, and the member may not be found in breach of
obligation if its failure to report accurately is due to its inability to provide that information. While the Articles
do not provide for a similar express exemption for purposes of the obligation to consult under Article IV,
principles of due process support an approach under which a member would not be found in breach of the
obligation to consult if the failure to consult were due to circumstances beyond its control.

13


A possible approach could be to mirror closely the measures that apply in cases of
breach of the data provision obligation under the Article VIII, Section 5 or overdue
financial obligations to the Fund. These procedures would include periodic reviews
of the situation by the Board, e.g., every 6 months, and would provide for the
application of remedies that would seek to engage the member in a cooperative
approach. As such, the remedies would be applied on an escalating basis only to the
extent that such cooperation was not forthcoming. Remedies could include:
declaration of censure; suspending the use of the GRA and concessional resources,
suspension of voting rights; and eventually compulsory withdrawal from the Fund. As
in the cases involving arrears to the Fund and breach of obligation under Article VIII,
Section 5, the application of such measures would be expected to be extremely rare,
as the purpose of such framework would be to elicit cooperation before having to
resort to sanctions (Table 1). All Board decisions under the remedial procedures
would be published, as would be the initial findings of breach of obligation.



Another option would be to complement the above framework by the periodic Board
discussions (and, possibly, publications) of staff reports as described in paragraph 18
of the report. This would be done in parallel to the escalating process of remedial
measures.
Table 1. Breach of Obligation and Escalating Remedial Measures:
Number of Precedents in the Past 25 Years
Findings/
Complaint
emergence
issued
of breach

Data provision
Overdue financial obligations

13
18

n/a
16

Censure

0
n/a

Declaration
Ineligibility
of
Suspension
of use of noncoopeCompulsory
of voting
Fund
ration/
withdrawal
rights
resources suspension
of TA
0
7

n/a
2

0
2

0
0

Source: Staff reports and FIN databases.

Transitional arrangements
10.
Should a comprehensive framework be adopted, the transition from the current
system would need to be carefully managed. A new strengthened framework should
probably not enter into force right upon its adoption, but only after a lag (e.g., a year) to
avoid having members potentially be immediately found in breach of obligation without
having time to take remedial action. The details of the transition would also need to be
carefully laid out so that members clearly know when the mandatory deadline would first
apply.

