INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Article IV of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement: An Overview of the Legal Framework
Prepared by the Legal Department
In consultation with the Policy Development and Review Department
Approved by Sean Hagan
June 28, 2006

I. Introduction
1.
This paper provides an overview of the legal framework of Article IV of the Fund’s
Articles of Agreement. It is designed to assist the Executive Board in its consideration of the
steps that could be taken to provide members with more specific guidance as to their
obligations under Article IV.
2.
The present version of Article IV was incorporated into the Articles by the Second
Amendment of the Articles of Agreement in 1978. It established a new code of conduct for
exchange arrangements in the wake of the collapse of the par value system. Under the
original par value system, a member’s choice as to how it valued its currency against the
currency of other members was very limited: the value had to be expressed in terms of gold,
either directly or through the U.S. dollar. A member’s ability to modify the value of its
currency against this common denominator was also limited: beyond a specified limit, a
member that changed the par value of its currency without the concurrence of the Fund
became ineligible to use the Fund’s resources, and the Fund would concur only if it was
satisfied that the change was necessary to correct a “fundamental disequilibrium”. An
important purpose of Fund financial assistance was to enable members to maintain the par
value of their currencies in circumstances where they were subject to balance of payments
pressures.
3.
By legalizing a member’s freedom to choose whatever exchange arrangement it
wished—including floating—the Second Amendment represented a complete departure
from the par value system, which had been the central feature of the Articles. While the
provisions of the present Article IV continue to reflect the view that a country’s exchange
rate policies are a matter of international concern, the approach taken is of a fundamentally
different nature. The rationale underlying the obligations of members set forth in the present
Article IV, Section 1 may be summarized as follows.

-2•

First, there is a recognition that a member should not resist an adjustment to its
exchange rate if such an adjustment is needed in response to underlying
conditions. There was a concern that the par value system had created rigidity
without stability, with members failing to adjust—or delaying adjustment—even
in circumstances of fundamental disequilibrium. This rigidity was perceived as
having hampered the balance of payments adjustment of many members and the
achievement of the sustainable equilibrium of the overall system. The assumption
underpinning the Second Amendment was that if exchange rates reflected
underlying conditions, the overall system would be more stable, even if this
resulted in fluctuations in members’ exchange rates. Reflecting this approach, a
key obligation under the original Article IV—the requirement to collaborate to
promote “exchange stability”—was modified in the Second Amendment to
become the requirement to collaborate to promote a “stable system of exchange
rates.” The stated objective is to achieve the stability of the system— not the
stability of exchange rates as such—and such stability would be best served if
exchange rates were permitted to fluctuate in response to underlying conditions.

•

Second, given the important relationship between a member’s domestic policies
and its exchange rate, the stability of the overall system of exchange rates is
enhanced by the pursuit of domestic policies that create the underlying
conditions for economic and financial stability. While fluctuations of exchange
rates would be inevitable—particularly with respect to those members that chose
to float their currencies—erratic disruptions and disorderly developments in
exchange rates would be limited if members pursued appropriate economic
policies. In recognition of this relationship between domestic policies and the
exchange rate system, the Second Amendment introduced obligations with
respect to members’ domestic policies. However, as will be discussed in this
paper, these obligations are of a particularly “soft” nature, out of a recognition
that members should not have to give up a significant degree of sovereignty with
respect to policies that, while they may have an international impact, are of a
domestic nature.

•

Finally, with respect to members’ exchange rate policies, members should avoid
pursuing policies that are designed to either interfere with the adjustment
process or gain an unfair competitive advantage over other members. In
particular, a specific obligation under Article IV, Section 1 is the requirement that
members “avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary
system in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an
unfair competitive advantage.” As will be discussed, this obligation is broad
enough to include both overvalued and undervalued exchange rates. Moreover,
unlike the obligations with respect to domestic policies, members’ exchange rate
obligations are of a “hard” nature, reflecting the international nature of these
policies. As will be discussed in Section II of this paper, the potential
applicability of the obligation to avoid manipulation is constrained by the need to
determine intent; this determination, however, is made independently by the Fund
and is not based exclusively on the member’s representation of its motives.

-3-

4.
While the present Article IV sets forth obligations of members, it also sets forth
obligations for the Fund. Under Article IV, Section 3(a), the Fund is required to oversee the
international monetary system to ensure its effective operation and to oversee the compliance
of each member with its obligations under Article IV. Because of the particular importance
of members’ exchange rate obligations, the Articles give the Fund even more specific
direction with respect to how members’ compliance with these obligations is to be
monitored: Article IV, Section 3(b) requires the Fund to exercise firm surveillance over the
exchange rate policies of members and to adopt specific principles for the guidance of
members with respect to those policies. As a means of fulfilling this requirement, the Fund
adopted the principles contained in the 1977 Decision on Surveillance over Exchange Rate
Policies (the “1977 Decision”), which is a subject of the present review. To enable the Fund
to perform its surveillance obligation, Article IV, Section 3(b) also requires each member to
provide the Fund with the information necessary for this purpose and to consult with the
Fund upon request.
5.
The remainder of this paper examines those provisions of Article IV that are of the
greatest relevance to the present review. Section II provides an overview of Article IV,
Section 2, which sets forth the rights of members with respect to their choice of exchange
arrangements. Section III analyses members’ obligations under Article IV, Section 1 to
collaborate with the Fund to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable
system of exchange rates. Section IV examines the Fund’s surveillance responsibilities
under Article IV, Section 3 and, in that context, discusses both: (a) the present relationship
between the 1977 Decision and members’ exchange rate obligations; and (b) the scope for
evolution of this relationship. Section V offers conclusions.
6.
Any examination of Article IV must be prefaced with an acknowledgement of the
challenge of interpreting its provisions. Unlike other provisions of the Second Amendment,
the substance of Article IV was effectively negotiated by a small group of members outside
the Executive Board and represented a delicate political compromise among these members.
When the text was presented to the Executive Board by these members, it was generally
understood that the scope for substantive change was very limited, notwithstanding the fact
that a number of Executive Directors—and staff—expressed concern regarding the
vagueness and ambiguity of a number of its terms. As a result, there is very little legislative
history to illuminate the meaning of the provisions. As was noted by the Executive Director
of one of the members that authored the text, it was envisaged that greater precision would
emerge over time:
“[P]recision and purity of language—obviously desirable goals—were most difficult
to achieve when a compromise was involved. That some terms were vague was of
course a matter of some importance, as it was experience gained by their use that
would give them precise meanings. Surely some of the terms used by the framers at
Bretton Woods were considered vague in 1944, but they had sharpened and acquired

-4precision as time had progressed. The [proposed] text had evolved over many hours
of negotiation, and he would be reluctant to see any changes made”.1
7.
Since the adoption of the Second Amendment and the 1977 Decision, the Fund has
not sought to elucidate the meaning of members’ obligations under Article IV for purposes
of its bilateral surveillance activities. As will be described in this paper, however, the Board
could choose to place greater reliance on the legal framework of Article IV, but in a manner
that continues to ensure flexibility and the maintenance of the cooperative nature of the
Fund.
II. Exchange Arrangements Under Article IV, Section 2
8.
Before examining the scope of members’ freedom with respect to their choice of
“exchange arrangements”, it is important to have an understanding of the meaning of this
term. While the term “exchange arrangement” is not specifically defined under the Articles,
the use of the term in Article IV, Section 2 indicates that it refers to the overall method that a
member uses to determine the value of its currency against other currencies (see Box 1). For
example, a decision to peg one’s currency against a specified currency of another member
would represent one type of exchange arrangement, while the decision to freely float would
represent another type of exchange arrangement.

Box 1. Article IV, Section 2 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement
Section 2: General exchange arrangements
(a) Each member shall notify the Fund, within thirty days after the date of the second amendment of
this Agreement, of the exchange arrangements it intends to apply in fulfillment of its obligations under
Section 1 of this Article, and shall notify the Fund promptly of any changes in its exchange
arrangements.
(b) Under an international monetary system of the kind prevailing on January 1, 1976, exchange
arrangements may include (i) the maintenance by a member of a value for its currency in terms of the
special drawing right or another denominator, other than gold, selected by the member, or (ii)
cooperative arrangements by which members maintain the value of their currencies in relation to the
value of the currency or currencies of other members, or (iii) other exchange arrangements of a
member’s choice.
(c) To accord with the development of the international monetary system, the Fund, by an eightyfive percent majority of the total voting power, may make provision for general exchange arrangements
without limiting the right of members to have exchange arrangements of their choice consistent with the
purposes of the Fund and the obligations under Section 1 of this Article.

1

Statement of Mr. Wahl, EBM/75/203, December 22, 1975, p. 17.

-59.
However, an issue that is central to any analysis of Article IV is the nature of the
distinction between the term “exchange arrangements” and “exchange rate policies”, the
latter term being used in Article IV, Section 3 in the context of the Fund’s surveillance
activities. Although the term “exchange rate policies” is also not defined, principles of
statutory construction require that these two terms be given different meanings from each
other.2 In that regard, it has been noted that “exchange arrangements refer to a broad
classification or framework of a member’s exchange system, while the term ‘exchange rate
policies’ refer to the actions or inactions of members in the operation of their arrangements”.3
However, where the line is drawn between these two terms depends on the exchange
arrangement adopted by the member. For example, a member may notify the Fund that its
exchange arrangement under Article IV, Section 2 is one where its currency is allowed to
float, subject to periodic intervention in amounts to be determined from time to time in the
light of developing economic conditions. It has been understood that, in this circumstance, a
member’s policy as to how it would approach intervention decisions would constitute its
exchange rate policy rather than its exchange arrangement.4 However, in circumstances
where a member chooses an exchange arrangement that involves pegging its currency to the
currency of another member (or a basket of currencies), it has also been understood that the
“exchange arrangement” includes not only the currencies being used, but also the rate being
used for this purpose.5 However, and as will be discussed further in Sections III and IV of
this paper, the fact that, in this case, the exchange rate forms part of the exchange
arrangement does not deprive the Fund of its jurisdiction over this rate when it determines
whether the member is fulfilling its obligations regarding its exchange rate policies.
10.
Article IV, Section 2 gives members considerable freedom in the choice of their
exchange arrangements. Of the types of exchange arrangements that members may choose,
Article IV, Section 2 expressly contemplates the pegging of a member’s currency to the
SDR, the pegging to another denominator, and “cooperative arrangements under which
2

“[W]hen the legislature uses certain language in one part of the statute and different language in another, the
court assumes that different meanings were intended.” N.J. Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction, (6th
Edition 2000), p. 194.
3

Sir Joseph Gold, Exchange Rates in International Law and Organization (American Bar Association, 1988),
p. 113. As a general matter, the extensive writings of Sir Joseph Gold, former General Counsel of the Fund,
provide an invaluable resource to any examination of the meaning of Article IV. Among other things, he was
consulted on the preparation of the draft text of Article IV before it was presented to the Executive Board and,
therefore, has some knowledge of the authors’ intentions that are not evident in the rather sparse legislative
history of Article IV. Other publications of Sir Joseph Gold that are of relevance to this topic include
Interpretation: The IMF and International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1996); Developments in the
International Monetary System, the International Monetary Fund and the International Monetary Law Since
1971 (Martinus Nijhoff, 1983); Legal and Institutional Aspects of the International Monetary System: Selected
Essays, Volume II (IMF, 1983); Legal Effects of Fluctuating Exchange Rates (IMF, 1990).
4

Implementation of The Second Amendment—Notification of Exchange Arrangements under Article IV,
Section 2, SM/77/277, November 28, 1977, p. 2.

5

Id.

-6members maintain the value of their currencies in relation to the value of another member’s
currency or a group of currencies”. However, the list set forth in Article IV, Section 2 is
illustrative rather than exhaustive and it is specifically provided that a member may use
“other exchange arrangements of a member’s choice”.
11.
The only type of exchange arrangement that is specifically precluded under
Article IV, Section 2 is one that relies on gold as the denominator. This prohibition reflects
a principal objective of the Second Amendment, which was to reduce the role of gold in the
international monetary system.
12.
Members are required to provide an accurate notification to the Fund regarding
their exchange arrangements and of any changes they make to them. This notification is
for the information of the Fund; the Fund’s consent is not required for a member’s initial
choice of exchange arrangement, nor for subsequent changes. Changes must be notified
“promptly” and the Board has interpreted this as requiring notification within three days of
the modification.6 Shortly after the adoption of the Second Amendment, the Board set out
guidelines on the types of changes to an exchange arrangement that would require
notification.7
13.
Notwithstanding the broad freedom that members have in this area, a member’s
choice of exchange arrangement must be consistent with its obligations under the Articles.
A member cannot put in place an exchange arrangement that would give rise to a breach of
an obligation under the Fund’s Articles. For example, a member could not maintain an
exchange arrangement that gave rise to a multiple currency practice that was inconsistent
with Article VIII, Section 3.
14.
Perhaps of even greater relevance for this review, a member could not put in place
an exchange arrangement that would give rise to a breach of its obligations under
Article IV, Section 1, the content of which will be discussed in detail in the next section.
Indeed, this limitation is expressly referred to in various sections of Article IV, including:
(i) Article IV, Section 2(a) (which provides that each member shall notify the Fund of “the
exchange arrangements it intends to apply in fulfillment of its obligations under [Article IV,]
Section 1”), (ii) Article IV, Section 2(c) (which refers to “the right of members to have
exchange arrangements of their choice consistent with the purposes of the Fund and the
obligations under Article IV, Section 1”), and (iii) Article IV Section 3 (which, in the context
of the Fund’s surveillance responsibilities, refers to “other exchange arrangements of a
member’s choice consistent with the purposes of the Fund and Article VI Section 1”).8
6

See Chairman’s Summing Up, Annual Review of the Implementation of Surveillance (EBM/82/44), April 9,
1982, p. 13.

7

Notification of Exchange Arrangements under Article IV, Section 2, Decision No. 5712-(78/41), adopted
March 23, 1978.

8

Although the legislative history of Article IV is not extensive, there was also some analysis of this issue when
the draft provision was discussed in the Executive Board. In particular, the then General Counsel noted that “the
freedom of members to choose was protected although, of course, they remained subject to the obligations of

(continued…)

-7-

15.
The fact that a member’s obligations under Article IV, Section 1 may limit the
ability of a member to exercise a right that is specifically recognized under the Articles has
been discussed in other contexts. Most importantly, the Articles specifically confer upon
members the right to exercise controls on capital movements.9 However, it has been
understood that a member may not impose capital controls if such controls are used to
manipulate the member’s exchange rate “in order to prevent balance of payments adjustment
or to gain an unfair competitive advantage over other members” within the meaning of
Article IV, Section 1.10
III. The Obligations of Members under Article IV, Section 1
16.
This section examines the obligations of members under Article IV, Section 1,
perhaps the most complex provision of the Fund’s Articles (the text is set forth in Box 2).
For analytical purposes, it is helpful to divide Article IV, Section 1 into three parts. The first
part contains a rather lengthy preamble to the general obligation of Article IV. (The text of
the preamble does not, on its own, constitute an obligation). The second part sets forth the
general obligation itself; namely, the requirement of each member to undertake “to
collaborate with the Fund and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to
promote a stable system of exchange rates.” Finally, the third part identifies four specific
obligations whose performance is judged to be of particular relevance to the general
obligation to collaborate. Each part will be discussed in turn.
A. The Preamble
17.
By setting forth the “essential purpose” and a “principal objective” of the
international monetary system, the preamble may be understood as identifying the broader
economic benefits that flow from members’ adherence to their obligations under
Article IV, Section 1. The “essential purpose” of the international monetary system is

Article IV, Section 1.” See EBM/75/206, December 23, 1975, p. 15. See also, Surveillance over Exchange Rate
Policies; Legal Aspects of the Discussion of SM/77/33, SM/77/59, March 21, 1977, p. 1.
9

10

Article VI, Section 3.

Under the 1977 Decision, one of the “developments” that “might indicate the need for discussion with a
member” regarding the observance of the principle relating to exchange rate manipulation includes the
introduction of or substantial modification for balance of payments purposes of restrictions on, or incentives for,
the inflow or outflow of capital. See also, statements by the General Counsel during the 1977 Executive Board
discussions of the 1977 Decision in which he clarified that the imposition of capital controls or the capital flows
that could occur in the absence of such controls could be legally used as an indicator justifying a need for
discussion between the Fund and the member of the appropriateness of the member’s exchange policies. The
General Counsel reasoned that as with other provisions of the Articles, the members’ freedom in terms of capital
controls was circumscribed by the member’s obligations under Article IV. EBM/77/9, January 17, 1977, p. 10;
EBM/77/10, January 19, 1977, pp. 7, 9, and 17. See also EBM/77/10, January 19, 1977, pp. 16–18 for the
discussion of the same issue during the Board discussions of the 1977 discussions.

-8identified as “provid[ing] a framework that facilitates the exchange of goods, services and
capital among countries and sustains sound economic growth”. Moreover, a principal

Box 2. Article IV, Section 1 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement
Section 1: General obligation of members
Recognizing that the essential purpose of the international monetary system is to provide a framework
that facilitates the exchange of goods, services, and capital among countries, and that sustains sound
economic growth, and that a principal objective is the continuing development of the orderly underlying
conditions that are necessary for financial and economic stability, each member undertakes to collaborate
with the Fund and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable
system of exchange rates. In particular, each member shall:
i.

endeavor to direct its economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering
orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability, with due regard to its
circumstances;

ii.
iii.

seek to promote stability by fostering orderly underlying economic and financial
conditions and a monetary system that does not tend to produce erratic disruptions;
avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in order to
prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive
advantage over other members; and

iv.

follow exchange policies compatible with the undertakings under this Section.

objective of the system is “the continuing development of the underlying conditions that are
necessary for financial and economic stability”. The assumption underlying the preamble is
that, to the extent that members observe their general obligations set forth in Article IV,
Section 1, they will enhance the effective functioning of the international monetary system
and, thereby, contribute to the realization of the broader economic benefits identified in this
text.
18.
The identification of these broader economic benefits in the preamble does not
mean that the achievement of these benefits has become a purpose of the Fund. The
preamble sets forth the purposes of the international monetary system—not those of the
Fund. While the achievement of these broader benefits could have been incorporated into
Article I as a purpose of the Fund at the time of the Second Amendment, this would have
been understood as a significant expansion of the Fund’s mandate, something which the
drafters wished to avoid. It certainly would have increased the tension with other provisions
of the Articles. For example, to the extent that the facilitation of the exchange of capital
became a purpose of the Fund, such a purpose would have been difficult to reconcile with
members’ general right to maintain capital controls under Article VI, Section 3.
19.
Although the text of the preamble does not give rise to obligations, it can be used as
a tool to interpret those obligations that are set forth in Article IV, Section 1. Similarly, it
provides a useful means of understanding the scope of the Fund’s surveillance

-9responsibilities under Article IV, Section 3. In particular, the definition of the essential
purpose of the international monetary system is of relevance when examining the Fund’s
responsibility to “oversee the international monetary system”, which is generally referred to
as “multilateral surveillance”.
B. The General Obligation: The Undertaking to Collaborate
20.
As noted, the general obligation of Article IV is to “collaborate with the Fund and
other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of
exchange rates”. Before analyzing in detail the content of this obligation, it is important to
examine its relationship with the four specific obligations that follow it, two of which relate
to domestic policies and two of which involve external policies. Importantly, the sentence
that links the general obligation to the specific obligations reads “In particular, each member
shall:”. Based on the use of the term “in particular” in this sentence, it may be concluded that
the four specific obligations, while they represent “particularly” important steps that
members must take to fulfill their general obligation to collaborate, are not the only such
steps that must be taken; i.e. the general obligation of collaboration is broader in scope than
the sum total of the four specific obligations.11 A contrary interpretation—one which would
conclude that the specific obligations exhaust the content of the general obligation—would
render the general obligation redundant, contrary to general principles of statutory
construction. 12
21.
The above conclusion is of considerable relevance when one considers the concept
of “collaboration”, particularly in light of the way this term was understood and used prior
to the Second Amendment. Prior to the Second Amendment, Article IV, Section 4(a)
provided as follows:
“Each member undertakes to collaborate with the Fund to promote exchange stability,
to maintain orderly exchange arrangements with other members and to avoid
competitive exchange alterations.”
22.
The collaboration undertaking set forth in the above provision was relied upon as a
basis for the Fund to call on members to take specific actions or refrain from taking
specific actions. While such a call could—and, on occasion, did—constitute a requirement
(with the implication that failure by a member to heed the call could give rise to a breach of
the obligation of collaboration), the Fund often exercised its authority under this provision by
making recommendations, preferring a “softer” means of guiding the membership as to their
11

Sir Joseph Gold, Exchange Rates in International Law and Organization (American Bar Association, 1988),
p. 104.

12

“A statute should be construed so that effect is given to all its provisions, so that no part will be inoperative or
superfluous”; Norman J. Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction, at pp. 185–86. Moreover, as is noted by
Sir Joseph Gold, former General Counsel of the Fund, such an interpretation of “in particular” is also supported
by the interpretation that has been given to the term in other provisions of the Articles; See Exchange Rates in
International Law and Organization, at p. 104.

- 10 obligations under the Articles. It was understood that failure to abide by such
recommendations would not constitute a breach of the obligation to collaborate.13 The Fund
made considerable use of this collaboration obligation during the period between the
breakdown of the par value system and the Second Amendment as a means of limiting
exchange rate instability and competitive depreciation (see Box 3). Following a similar
approach, the Fund could rely on the collaboration undertaking set forth in the present
Article IV, Section 1 as a basis for either requiring or recommending that members take— or
refrain from taking—those actions that, while not included in any of the specific obligations
listed in Article IV, Section 1, are considered by the Fund to be necessary—in light of
changing circumstances—to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable
system of exchange rates.
23.
Indeed, in one respect the collaboration undertaking contained in Article IV,
Section 1 is broader that the pre-Second amendment version. While the earlier version only
required collaboration with the Fund, the present Article IV, also specifically requires
members to collaborate with each other. Although, as in many other aspects of Article IV,
Section 1, the legislative history provides little guidance as to the intent of this expansion, it
is clear that the need for co-operation among members in the conduct of their policies had
become increasingly relevant by the time of the Second Amendment.14 It should be
emphasized, however, that, although this provision specifically contemplates collaboration
among members, it is the Fund—and not its members—that has the exclusive authority to
determine whether such collaboration satisfies the requirements of Article IV, Section 1.

13

As noted by Sir Joseph Gold, it was recognized that, if members did not adhere to recommendations, the
Fund could revisit the issue and determine whether a firmer approach was needed. “Although provisions
imposing obligations to collaborate are expressed in mandatory terms, the IMF has assumed that the exacting
administration authorized by such a provision permits a less rigorous approach, without any sacrifice of
authority should firmer administration of it become advisable”; Interpretation: The IMF and International Law,
at p. 337.

14

The expansion of the obligation to collaborate to includes collaboration among members may have been
inspired by certain arrangements that existed at the time of the Second Amendment, such as the “snake” and the
practice of pegging to certain leading currencies. The “snake” was an arrangement between several European
countries by which each participant maintained a fixed relationship between its currency and the currency of
other participants, with narrow margins for transactions involving these currencies.

- 11 -

Box 3. Duty to Collaborate under Article IV, Section 4(a) of the original Articles of Agreement
Prior to the Second Amendment, Article IV, Section 4(a) set forth a general obligation to collaborate as
follows: “Each member undertakes to collaborate with the Fund to promote exchange stability, to
maintain orderly exchange arrangements with other members, and to avoid competitive exchange
alterations”. On a number of occasions, the Fund relied on this provision to either call on or
recommend to members that they take certain actions or refrain from taking actions in order to achieve
the objectives set forth in this provision. For example:
1. 1947 Decision on Multiple Currency Practices. Notwithstanding the express language of
Article XIV, Section 2, which allowed members to maintain and adapt to changing circumstances (and,
in some cases, to introduce) restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions
at their discretion during the post-war transitional period, the Fund decided that members were required
to obtain the approval of the Fund before introducing or adapting multiple currency practices pursuant
to their duty to collaborate with the Fund under Article IV, Section 4(a). Specifically, the sense of the
meeting was that “the provisions in Article XIV, Section 2, regarding the transitional period did not
modify members’ obligations under Article IV, Section 4, irrespective of the particular exchange device
involved.” 1/ The Board adopted a decision approving the text of a communication to be sent to all
members on multiple currency practices. This communication required a determination by the Fund of
the consistency of the member’s proposed action (i.e. either introduction or adaptation of a multiple
currency practice) with Article IV, Section 4(a) and indicated that a duty to consult with and obtain the
approval of the Fund is implicit in both Article IV, Section 4(a) and in Article XIV, Section 2..2/
2. Recommendations made during 1971–74 Regarding Exchange Rate Policies. During the period
of 1971–74, the Executive Board adopted a number of decisions designed to provide guidance to
members as to how they should conduct their exchange rate policies in an environment when the par
value system was no longer fully operational. For example, in 1971 the Fund adopted—and, in 1973,
subsequently revised—decisions aimed at establishing a system corresponding to the par value system
but with greater flexibility. The decisions identified practices that members “may wish to follow in
present circumstances consistently with Article IV, Section 4(a)...” (emphasis added). The decisions did
not impose an obligation but, rather, indicated that members would be “deemed to be acting in
accordance with Article IV, Section 4(a)” with regard to the introduction of wider margins by a member
or the communication of a central rate with wider margins, if they followed the practices spelled out in
the decisions. 3/ On June 13, 1974, the Board adopted a decision and its attached memorandum (the
Guidelines for the Management of Floating Exchange Rates), which focused on the intervention
policies to be followed by members with a floating exchange system. The decision “recommend[s],
pursuant to Article IV, Section 4(a) that, in present circumstances, members should use their best
endeavors to observe the guidelines set forth and explained in the memorandum.” 4/
________________________________________________________
1

See EBM/47/237, December 18, 1947.

2

See EBM/47/237, December 18, 1947 and Executive Board Document No. 235, Revision 2,
Attachment 8.

3

See Decision No. 3463-(71/126) on Central Rates and Wider Margins—Temporary Regime and
Decision No. 4083-(73/104), adopted respectively December 18, 1971 and November 7, 1973.

4

See Decision No. 4232-(74/67), adopted June 13, 1974, and Annex I attached to Executive Board
Decision No 4232-(74/67).

- 12 24.
The nature of the actions that members must take to satisfy the obligation of
collaboration can only be determined in light of the objectives of this collaboration: to
“promote orderly exchange arrangements and a stable system of exchange rates”. Each of
these objectives is examined in turn, beginning with “a stable system of exchange rates”
because its intended meaning—although still somewhat obscure—is perhaps easier to
ascertain than that of “orderly exchange arrangements.”
25.
A Stable System of Exchange Rates. As was noted in the Introduction, by the time of
the Second Amendment, there was a concern that the par value system had created rigidity
without stability, with members failing to adjust—or delaying adjustment—even in
circumstances of fundamental disequilibrium. It was believed that, in the medium term, the
overall monetary system would operate more effectively—and, accordingly, be in a better
position to achieve its purposes—if exchange rates were permitted to move in response to
underlying conditions, particularly if these underlying conditions benefited from the pursuit
of appropriate domestic economic policies. It is for this reason that the objective of
collaboration set forth in the original Article IV—the requirement to collaborate to promote
“exchange stability”—was modified in the Second Amendment to become the requirement to
collaborate to promote a “stable system of exchange rates.” The present objective is to
achieve the stability of the system—not stability of exchange rates as such—and the
underlying assumption is that such stability is best achieved if exchange rates reflected
underlying conditions that, in turn, are directed towards achieving economic and financial
stability, as indicated in the preamble to Article IV, Section 1.15 As will be seen, the
important relationship between domestic economic policies and the effective operation of the
international monetary system is made explicit in the specific obligations of Article IV,
Section 1.
26.
Even if a member’s exchange arrangement includes a specified exchange rate, the
member’s ability to choose this rate would be constrained by its obligation under
Article IV, Section 1 to collaborate with the Fund to promote a stable system of exchange
rates. As noted in the previous section, in circumstances where a member has pegged its
currency to other currencies, the value at which this pegging is to occur has been understood
as part of a member’s exchange arrangement that requires notification to the Fund.
Notwithstanding the fact that a member has a general right to select the exchange
arrangements of its choice, in these circumstances this right would be limited by the
exchange rate obligations set forth in Article IV, Section 1. Moreover, and as is discussed in
the following section, these rates would be the subject of Fund surveillance under Article IV,
Section 3(b).
27.
Orderly Exchange Arrangements. As noted in the previous section, exchange
arrangements are generally understood as referring to the overall framework that a member
15

The reference to “exchange stability” in the purposes of the Fund under Article I was left intact out of a
reluctance on the part of members to change the language of the purposes in the context of the Second
Amendment of the Articles. See Joseph Gold, Developments in the International Monetary System, the
International Monetary Fund and the International Monetary Law Since 1971 (Martinus Nijhoff, 1983),
at p. 216.

- 13 uses to determine the value of its currency against other currencies. Prior to the Second
Amendment, members undertook to collaborate to “maintain orderly exchange arrangements
with other members”. This text was generally understood as supporting the maintenance of
the par value system which, as noted in the Introduction, only allowed members to value
their currencies in terms of gold, either directly or through the U.S. dollar. Given the freedom
accorded to members in the choice of their exchange arrangements, it may seem somewhat
surprising that “orderly exchange arrangements” was retained as one of the objectives of the
duty to collaborate under the revised Article IV. Although the legislative history is silent on
the question, it must be assumed that, notwithstanding the continuity of language, it was
intended that the underlying meaning of this objective would change in a manner that takes
into account the change made to the other objective of the obligation to collaborate (i.e., the
change from “exchange stability” to a “stable system of exchange rates”, and the broad
freedom given to members to put in place exchange arrangements of their choice). As noted
above, even where the exchange arrangement actually includes a specified exchange rate, the
right of the member to select this component would be constrained by its obligations
regarding a stable system of exchange rates. However, the question arises as to whether the
overall methodology chosen for calculating the value of the member’s currency (rather than
the specified rate in question) could give rise to an arrangement that is “disorderly” within
the meaning of Article IV, Section 1. One example would appear to be a multiple exchange
rate system arising from segmented markets, even one which arises from capital transactions
and, accordingly, is not inconsistent with a member’s obligations under Article VIII, Section
3.16
C. The Specific Obligations
28.
Article IV, Section 1 identifies four specific obligations whose performance is
considered to be of particular relevance to the general obligation to collaborate. To the
extent that a member breaches one of these specific obligations, it would also be in breach of
the general obligation of collaboration. However, adherence to these specific obligations
does not necessarily mean that the member will always be in compliance with the general
obligation. As noted above, the Fund has the authority to call upon the member to take
additional action—or to refrain from taking certain actions—that it considers appropriate in
light of the obligation to collaborate. Each of these specific obligations is discussed in turn.
Direction of Economic and Financial Policies (Article IV, Section 1(i))
29.
Article IV, Section 1(i) requires each member to “endeavor to direct its economic
and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with
reasonable price stability, with due regard to its circumstances.” As discussed above, this
16

From the very beginning of the Fund, it was recognized that multiple currency practices, by virtue of the fact
that they constitute a system of exchange rates, raise issues under Article IV, Section 4(a). In one paper, it was
noted that “[T]he proposal to introduce a new multiple currency practice necessarily involves a threat to
exchange stability or orderly exchange arrangements or constitutes a possible exchange alteration.” See Certain
Aspects of the Jurisdiction of the Fund over Multiple Currency Practices, (note to Committee on Spreads and
Multiple Currency Practices, June 3, 1947), at p. 6.

- 14 specific obligation reflects the view that, although exchange rates should be permitted to
move in line with underlying conditions, the stability—and overall predictability—of the
system of exchange rates would be enhanced through the pursuit of appropriate economic
policies. Accordingly, this obligation describes the types of domestic policies that would be
appropriate for this purpose. In that regard, it recognizes that the exchange rate system will
only be stable on a sustainable basis if domestic policies are directed towards economic
growth—albeit the type of growth that is “orderly” and is accompanied by “reasonable price
stability”. Relative to the pre-Second Amendment text of Article IV, which focused
exclusively on policies relating to exchange rates and exchange arrangements (i.e., external
policies), this provision is significant because it extends members’ obligations—and
therefore the Fund’s jurisdiction—to domestic policies. It should be emphasized, however,
that this obligation is a particularly weak one—precisely because it does relate to domestic
policies. As noted above, members are only required to “endeavor” to direct domestic polices
towards the “objective” of fostering orderly economic growth and with “due regard to the
circumstances”.
30.
The legislative history of the phrase sheds some light on the phrase “fostering
orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability”. Earlier drafts of this provision
placed greater emphasis on price stability relying on the phrase “orderly economic growth
within the context of reasonable price stability”. The change to “orderly economic growth
with reasonable price stability” gave somewhat greater emphasis to growth .17
Promotion of Stability (Article IV, Section1(ii))
31.
Article IV, Section 1(ii) requires each member to “seek to promote stability by
fostering orderly underlying economic and financial conditions and a monetary system
that does not tend to produce erratic disruptions”. Although the language of this provision
is not explicit, the drafting history indicates that the policies referred to in this provision are
domestic rather than external policies. In particular, efforts in the Executive Board to insert
the word “exchange” before stability were rejected.18 Moreover, the reference to “a monetary
system” in Article IV, Section 1(ii) may be contrasted with the reference in the preamble to
Article IV, Section 1 to the “international monetary system.” Reflecting the focus on
domestic policies, the obligation is similar in nature to that of Article IV, Section 1(i);
namely, it is very soft: members are required to “seek” to promote stability by “fostering”
underlying economic and financial conditions. As with Article IV, Section 1(i), the
assumption is that, by fostering orderly underlying economic conditions and a stable
monetary system at the domestic level, members help ensure orderly exchange arrangements
and a stable system of exchange rates. With respect to the phrase a “monetary system that
does not tend to produce erratic disruptions”, it is not clear whether the phrase “erratic
17

18

Sir Joseph Gold, Exchange Rates in International Law and Organization, p. 106.

EBM/75/207, December 23, 1975, p. 29. More generally, for a discussion of the distinction between
domestic and exchange rate policy obligations under Article IV, Section 1, see Sir Joseph Gold, Exchange Rates
in International Law and Organization, p. 107.

- 15 disruptions” only refers to disruptions in exchange rates or whether it has a broader meaning.
At a minimum, and consistent with the general philosophy that underlies Article IV,
Section 1, it would cover erratic disruptions in exchange rates that are not the result of
orderly underlying economic and financial conditions.
Exchange Rate Manipulation (Article IV, Section 1(iii))
32.
As noted above, Article IV, Section 1 also establishes specific obligations
respecting a member’s external policies. The first of these is set out in Article IV, Section 1
(iii) which requires members to “avoid manipulating exchange rates or the international
monetary system in order to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an
unfair competitive advantage over other members.” Unlike members’ obligations respecting
domestic policies, this provision establishes a “hard” obligation that prohibits specific
conduct, reflecting the view that such policies are a more central concern of the international
community.
33.
Article IV, Section 1(iii) is a relatively complex provision and not all of its terms
are easily understood— or easily applied. In particular, it is not clear what type of activity
was intended to be covered by the phrase “manipulating the international monetary system”
(as distinguished from the other prohibited activity, that of manipulating “exchange rates”).
In addition, the determination as to whether the competitive advantage obtained by a member
through manipulation is “unfair” would require the exercise of considerable judgment.
34.
Notwithstanding the above, a number of the key elements of Article IV,
Section 1(iii) are sufficiently clear to provide guidance as to how the provision was
intended to be applied. Its interpretation is facilitated by the fact that the Executive Board
considered its application in the context of the preparation of the 1977 Decision which was
adopted by the Executive Board after the Board of Governors’ adoption of the Second
Amendment (but before the Second Amendment entered in force). Drawing on these
discussions, the following observations can be made with respect to Article IV, Section 1(iii).
(a)
First, there are different ways in which a member could potentially “manipulate”
exchange rates within the meaning of Article IV, Section 1(iii). For example, it could occur
through excessive intervention in the exchange markets or through the imposition of capital
controls. Moreover, manipulation would not necessarily require that official intervention—
whatever its form—result in the movement of the exchange rate. In some cases, the
manipulation may be designed to prevent movement in the rate.
(b)
Second, the term “in order to prevent balance of payments adjustment” is
sufficiently broad to cover situations where a member is manipulating its exchange rate in
a manner that makes it either overvalued or undervalued.
(c)
Third, and perhaps most importantly, a member will only be found in breach of
Article IV, Section 1(iii) if the determination is made that the member manipulated its
exchange rate for the purpose of preventing effective balance of payments adjustment. The
fact that the measure has the effect of preventing adjustment is not sufficient—the use of the
phrase “in order to” means that a determination of intent is required. This does not mean,

- 16 however, that the Fund is required to accept the member’s own representation of its motives.
In terms of the way the Fund determines intent, the discussion surrounding the 1977
Decision is of relevance. As is contemplated under the 1977 Decision, certain developments
could be identified that would trigger discussion with the authorities; e.g. “protracted largescale intervention in one direction in the exchange market”. At that point, the Fund would
ask the member to explain the motivation behind its actions. The Fund would give the
member the opportunity to represent the purpose of the measure and the Fund would give
this representation the benefit of any reasonable doubt. Ultimately, however, the Fund would
make an independent assessment whether the member’s representation was correct, taking
into account all available and relevant information regarding the member’s exchange rate
policy. On that basis, the Fund would make a determination as to whether the actions in
question were being taken for one of the purposes identified in Article IV, Section 1(iii). As
was explained in a staff paper that was prepared for purposes of the discussions surrounding
the 1977 Decision, this is the approach that the Fund generally followed in other contexts
when determining whether a measure has been introduced for “balance of payments
purposes”.19
Exchange Policies Compatible with Undertakings of Article IV, Section 1 (Article IV,
Section 1(iv))
35.
Finally, Article IV, Section 1(iv) requires members to “follow exchange policies
compatible with the undertakings” of Article IV, Section 1. Since this provision addresses
aspects of a member’s external policies, it establishes a “hard” obligation that is expressed in
terms of achieving results, not merely “endeavoring” or “seeking” to achieve results. In
terms of the meaning of this obligation, however, this provision is the least specific of all of
the obligations identified under Article IV, Section 1 and the legislative history reveals that,
at the time of its adoption, there was some uncertainty as to its meaning.
36.
A threshold issue is the intended meaning of “exchange policies”. Since the term is
different from “exchange rate policies”, it must be assumed that the obligation is intended to
cover a different category of external policies that is broader than “exchange rate policies”.
One possibility is that it is intended to ensure that members’ use of exchange controls is
consistent with these undertakings. Among other things, such an interpretation would serve
to confirm that, while members have the general right to maintain exchange controls that are
consistent with their obligations under Article VIII, they may not do so if these controls are
used in a manner that is inconsistent with their obligations under Article IV. However,
although there was some discussion of the meaning of this provision (see below), there is no
evidence that it was intended to include exchange controls.20

19

See Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies: Balance of Payments Purposes, SM/77/97, April 28, 1977. To
illustrate this approach, the paper referred to the Fund’s interpretation of “for balance of payment purposes”
clauses in the context of Fund arrangements.

20

See EBM/75/205, December 23, 1975,, pp. 17–20.

- 17 37.
Although the term “exchange policies” is sufficiently broad to cover exchange rate
policies, it is not clear how this provision was intended to interact and supplement the
other specific obligations set forth in Article IV, Section 1. In terms of its relationship with
members’ obligations regarding domestic policies, one interpretation would be that a
member should follow exchange rate policies that support a member’s ability to pursue the
types of domestic policies that are identified in these provisions. Such an interpretation
would create the result, however, of members’ having to adhere to “firm” obligations
regarding external policies in order to fulfill their “soft” obligations relating to domestic
policies. Moreover, during the Executive Board meeting where the draft of this provision
was discussed,21 the Economic Counsellor expressed concern that this interpretation could
yield results that have the “opposite” effect of the overall thrust of Article IV, Section 1;
namely it could subordinate the stability of the exchange rate system to domestic policy
priorities. Specifically, he noted that the philosophy underlying Article IV, Section 1 was
that, by adhering to their obligations to pursue appropriate domestic economic policies, the
exchange rate system would be more stable. However, he expressed concern that Article IV,
Section 1(iv) could be interpreted as meaning, for example, that a member should pursue an
exchange rate policy that promoted domestic price stability—even if that exchange rate was
overvalued. Although the text was retained, the Executive Director of one of the authoring
members acknowledged that this provision would need to be interpreted “loosely” and, in
any event, could not be used to justify the maintenance of unrealistic exchange rates.
38.
At least with its application to exchange rate policies, perhaps Article IV,
Section 1(iv) can be most easily interpreted as requiring members to follow exchange rate
policies that support the general obligation set forth in Article IV, Section 1; namely, the
obligation “to collaborate with the Fund and other members to assure orderly exchange
arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates”. In contrast to the specific
obligation regarding exchange rate manipulation—which is an obligation of restraint—this
obligation is one that would also require members to take positive measures in this area. This
interpretation would appear to be supported by the 1977 Decision. Specifically, while the
first principle set forth in that decision is clearly designed to provide guidance regarding the
manipulation obligation (indeed, it simply restates the text of Article IV, Section 1(iii)), the
two remaining principles address intervention policies, exhorting members to: (a) “intervene
in the exchange market to counter disorderly conditions” (consistent with the general
obligation to promote a stable system of exchange rates) and (b) “take into account in their
intervention policies the interests of other members” (consistent with the general obligation
to collaborate with “other members”).
39.
Irrespective of the interpretation of Article IV, Section1(iv), if the Fund wishes to
provide further guidance to members as to those exchange rate obligations under Article
IV, Section 1 that go beyond the obligation to avoid exchange rate manipulation, it may
rely directly on the general obligation to collaborate to promote a stable system of
exchange rates. As is discussed earlier, and consistent with the approach that was adopted
21

See EBM/75/205, December 23, 1975, p. 17.

- 18 prior to the adoption of the Second Amendment, the Fund could call on members to pursue
such exchange rate policies that it views as being necessary to achieve the objective of
achieving a stable system of exchange rates. In this regard, and as noted earlier, the specific
obligations contained in Article IV, Section 1(i) through (iv), while being of particular
importance with respect to the Fund’s jurisdiction under Article IV, do not exhaust it.
IV. The Fund’s Responsibilities Under Article IV, Section 3
40.
Article IV, Section 3(a) sets forth two distinct obligations for the Fund. The first
requires the Fund to “oversee the international monetary system to ensure its effective
operation”. This provision provides the basis for the Fund’s multilateral surveillance
activities, which include the World Economic Outlook and the multilateral consultation
process that was recently initiated. The second obligation requires the Fund to “oversee the
compliance of each member with its obligations under Article IV, Section 1”. Accordingly,
this general oversight obligation applies not only to the general obligation to collaborate but
also to all of the specific obligations enumerated in Article IV, Section 1(i) through (iv),
including the obligations regarding domestic policies.
41.
However, because of the particular importance of members’ obligations regarding
their exchange rate policies, Article IV provides the Fund with more specific direction as
to how it is to oversee members’ compliance with these obligations. (See Box 4).
Specifically, Article IV Section 3(b) provides that, in order to fulfill this general oversight
function, the Fund shall “exercise firm surveillance over the exchange rate policies members
and shall adopt specific principles for the guidance of all members with respect to those
policies.” As a means of enabling the Fund to carry out this function, each member is
required to: (a) provide the Fund with the information necessary to conduct surveillance over
such policies; and (b) when requested by the Fund, to consult with the Fund regarding its
exchange rate policies. The requirement of the Fund to adopt specific principles in this area
provides the legal basis for the principles contained in the 1977 Decision, which specifically
provides that it is has been adopted in order for the Fund to perform its responsibilities under
Article IV, Section 3(b) (i.e., firm surveillance over exchange rate policies) rather than the
more general obligation under Article IV, Section 3(a) (which requires the Fund to oversee
all of members’ obligations under Article IV, Section 1).

- 19 -

Box 4. Article IV, Section 3 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement
Section 3. Surveillance over exchange arrangements
(a) The Fund shall oversee the international monetary system in order to ensure its effective
operation, and shall oversee the compliance of each member with its obligations under Section 1 of this
Article.
(b) In order to fulfill its functions under (a) above, the Fund shall exercise firm surveillance over the
exchange rate policies of members, and shall adopt specific principles for the guidance of all members
with respect to those policies. Each member shall provide the Fund with the information necessary for
such surveillance, and, when requested by the Fund, shall consult with it on the member’s exchange rate
policies. The principles adopted by the Fund shall be consistent with cooperative arrangements by which
members maintain the value of their currencies in relation to the value of the currency or currencies of
other members, as well as with other exchange arrangements of a member’s choice consistent with the
purposes of the Fund and Section 1 of this Article. These principles shall respect the domestic social and
political policies of members, and in applying these principles the Fund shall pay due regard to the
circumstances of members.

42.
When considering the existing principles mandated under Article IV,
Section 3(b)—and any possible modifications to such principles—the following should
be noted.
43.
First, the specific principles mandated by Article IV, Section 3(b) are only required
with respect to those obligations under Article IV, Section 1 that deal with “exchange rate
policies”. Accordingly, and in light of the analysis set forth in the previous section, these
obligations comprise members’ obligations under Article IV, Section 1(iii) and (iv) and any
exchange rate actions the Fund may call on members to take pursuant to the general
obligation to collaborate in the promotion of a stable system of exchange rates under
Article IV, Section 1. While it is open for the Fund to adopt principles for the guidance of
members in complying with their obligations respecting domestic policies under Article IV,
Section 1(i) and (ii)(or any other domestic policies that the Fund may determine are
necessary in light of the general obligation to collaborate), it is not required to do so.
Consistent with the above, the 1977 Decision focuses on members’ exchange rate policies,
albeit with an explicit recognition that there is a close relationship between these policies and
domestic policies.22 As was noted in a recent paper, however, the surveillance process has
22

As is evident from the section of the 1977 Decision entitled “Principles of Fund Surveillance over Exchange
Rate Policies,” exchange rate policies have been understood by the Executive Board as embracing a broad range
of external policies that are specifically pursued for balance of payments purposes; e.g. “the introduction of or
substantial modification for balance of payments purposes of restrictions on, or incentives for, the inflow or
outflow of capital.” Moreover, to the extent that certain domestic policies are also pursued for balance of
payments purposes, the indicators suggest that these would also be included; specifically, “the pursuit, for

(continued…)

- 20 increasingly focused on those policies of members that relate to their performance of
domestic policy obligations under Article IV, Section 1; i.e., Article IV, Section (i) and (ii).23
44.
Second, since the principles to be adopted under Article IV, Section3(b) are
intended to provide “guidance” as to how a member’s exchange rate policies will be
consistent with its obligations under Article IV, Section 1, failure to abide by these
principles would not necessarily mean that a member is in breach of these obligations.
Under the existing 1977 Decision, and as noted in Section II of this paper, the principle that
specifically addresses exchange rate manipulation (Principle A) simply repeats the language
of Article IV, Section 1(iii). Accordingly, a determination that a member has not adhered to
this principle would effectively constitute a determination that a member is in breach of its
obligations under the Articles. (The “guidance” is effectively provided by the list of
“developments” which, under terms of the decision, “might indicate the need for discussion
with a member”). In contrast, however, there is no evidence that the remaining principles
(Principles B and C ) were ever understood as actually constituting obligations under
Article IV, Section 1, either under the general collaboration obligation set forth in that
provision or under Article IV, Section 1(iv) (which requires members to pursue exchange
policies that are consistent with their undertakings under Article IV, Section 1). However, to
the extent that a member’s policies are in harmony with these principles, the Fund would be
precluded from finding that a member is in breach of these obligations.
45.
Third, to the extent that the Fund wishes to revise and update its principles on
those exchange rate policies that are unrelated to manipulation for balance of payments
purposes, such a step could be taken on the basis of the Fund’s authority to require or
recommend that members pursue – or refrain from pursuing – specified exchange rate
policies pursuant to their general obligation to collaborate to promote a stable system of
exchange rates.24 Consistent with the approach followed prior to the Second Amendment,
the Fund could decide that, in lieu of identifying exchange rate action that would constitute
obligations under the general obligation to collaborate set forth in Article IV, it would issue
recommendations with respect to such actions. Failure to adhere to such recommendations
would not, in and of itself, constitute a breach of the obligation under the Articles.
balance of payments purposes, of monetary and other domestic financial policies that provide abnormal
encouragement or discouragement to capital flows.” However, domestic policies pursued for these specific
purposes should be distinguished from domestic policies that only have this effect. The latter category would not
be considered “exchange rate policies” within the meaning of the 1977 Decision.
23

Biennial Review of the Implementation of the Fund’s Surveillance and the 1977 Surveillance Decision—
Modalities of Surveillance, Appendix 1 (SM/04/212, July 2, 2004).
24

Consistent with general principles of statutory construction, any call by the Fund for members to pursue
particular exchange rate policies—or to refrain from pursuing certain policies—could not be so general as to
make the specific obligations set forth in Article IV, Section 1 redundant. For example, a call to members to
avoid all forms of exchange rate misalignment (irrespective of the motivation) would effectively render Article
IV, Section 1(iii) redundant.

- 21 46.
Finally, while the principles under Article IV, Section 3(b) must be consistent with
members’ exchange arrangements, they are not intended to provide guidance with respect
to these exchange arrangements. As noted in this paper, members’ rights regarding their
choice of exchange arrangements are qualified by their obligations under Article IV,
Section 1. Specifically, to the extent to which the member’s exchange arrangement includes a
specified exchange rate, the scrutiny of this rate in light of a member’s obligation to promote
a stable system of exchange rates is a proper subject of the principles issued under Article
IV, Section 3(b). However, there also may be situations where Fund is of the view that the
underlying methodology relied upon by the members for valuing their currencies (rather than
the rate itself) constitutes a “disorderly exchange arrangement” within the meaning of
Article IV, Section 1. While the Fund could issue guidelines to members as to what type of
arrangements would be considered disorderly, these guidelines would be issued under
Article IV, Section 1 rather than Article IV, Section 3(b).
V. Conclusions
47.
Since the adoption of the Second Amendment and the 1977 Decision, the Fund has
refrained from elucidating the meaning of members’ obligations under Article IV for
purposes of its bilateral surveillance activities. Taking into account the substance of these
obligations, as described in this paper, the Executive Board could choose to place greater
reliance on the legal framework of Article IV, but in a manner that continues to ensure
flexibility and the maintenance of the cooperative nature of the Fund. Specifically:
48.
With respect to members’ exchange rate policies, the principles that the Fund is
required to adopt to provide guidance to members in this area could be updated in a manner
that takes into account the substance of members’ obligations under Article IV, Section 1.
One of these obligations prohibits exchange rate manipulation for the purposes identified in
Article IV and further guidance could be given as to how this obligation will be applied in
practice, taking into account developments since 1977. As has been described in this paper,
however, the obligations relating to exchange rate policies are not limited to members’
obligations regarding exchange rate manipulation for balance of payments reasons. The Fund
could, for example, make specific recommendations regarding other exchange rate policies it
believes members should adopt as a means of complying with the their general obligation to
“collaborate with the Fund and other members to. . .promote a stable system of exchange
rates”.
49.
With respect to members’ exchange arrangements, while this term is not specifically
defined under the Articles, its use in Article IV, Section 2 confirms that it is intended to
include the overall method that a member uses to determine the value of its currency against
other currencies (e.g. pegging vs. floating). While the Articles confirm that members may
choose whichever exchange arrangement they wish (other than one that relies on gold as the
denominator), members must exercise this freedom in a manner that is consistent with their
obligations under the Articles. First, members must provide an accurate notification to the
Fund regarding their exchange arrangements and any changes to those arrangements. Second,
in circumstances where a member has actually specified the exchange rate that it will use
when implementing its exchange arrangement and this forms part of the member’s

- 22 notification, the rate specified is subject to members’ obligations regarding their exchange
rate policies, discussed above. Finally, a member’s exchange arrangement must be consistent
with its general obligation under Article IV “to collaborate with the Fund to assure orderly
exchange arrangements”.
50.
With respect to members’ domestic policies. Article IV identifies certain domestic
policy obligations, the adherence to which is considered to be of particular importance to the
members’ general obligation to collaborate with the Fund to assure orderly exchange
arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. As discussed in the paper,
while these policies are of international concern because of their impact on external stability,
the relevant obligations are of a “soft” nature, requiring efforts rather than the achievement
of results. To the extent that the Fund were to identify other domestic policies that members
should take pursuant to the general obligation of collaboration, any such obligations would
also need to be of a similarly soft nature. Any guidelines or principles that would be adopted
for this purpose would be adopted under Article IV, Section 1 rather that Article IV,
Section 3(b), the latter dealing with exchange rate policies.

