INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Proposed Decision on Article IV Consultation Cycles
Prepared by the Legal and Strategy, Policy, and Review Departments
Approved by Sean Hagan and Reza Moghadam
September 21, 2010

1.
The attached proposed Decision seeks to implement the staff’s proposals related to
Article IV consultation cycles in Review of the Fund’s Mandate—Follow-Up on
Modernizing Surveillance, which were endorsed in principle by the Executive Board on
September 1, 2010. The goal is to provide for greater flexibility in consultation cycles and
simplify the rules governing consultation cycles for members under a Fund arrangement or
Policy Support Instrument (PSI). The draft Decision also consolidates into one single
document all the rules applicable to Article IV consultation cycles.1
2.

Specifically, the proposed Decision:



Reaffirms the provision of the 2007 Surveillance Decision that, in “principle”,
Article IV consultations will take place annually;2



Reaffirms that members cannot be placed on a consultation that is longer than the
standard twelve-months (“extended cycles”) in certain circumstances, in particular, if
they are of systemic or regional importance, are perceived to be at risk, or face
pressing policy issues of broad interest to the Fund’s membership;3



Raises from 25 percent to 200 percent of quota the limit of outstanding Fund credit
above which a member cannot be placed on an extended cycle, in line with the
threshold for post-program monitoring;

1

At present the rules governing consultation cycles for members are set out in several Board decisions and
summings up of Executive Board discussions. The proposed Decision, would therefore replace Decision 12794(02/76).
2

3

2007 Decision on Bilateral Surveillance over Members’ Policies, Decision No 13919-(07/51), Paragraph 17.

Under current practice, all members placed on extended cycles are placed on a 24-month cycle, with the
exception of one member that is on an 18-month cycle.

2


Applies the 24-month cycle to all members with an “on-track” arrangement (other
than a Flexible Credit Line (FCL) or Precautionary Credit Line (PCL) arrangement)
or PSI, dropping the stricter rule that requires such members to complete their next
consultation sooner than 24 months if their most recent Article IV consultation was
completed 6 months or more before the approval of the arrangement or PSI. In cases
where a program review under an arrangement is not completed by the date specified
in the arrangement, the current requirements (implying a shortening of the cycle in
most cases) would continue to apply;4



Eliminates the rule that automatically places a member on the standard 12-month
cycle at the end of a Fund arrangement (other than FCL or PCL) or PSI.5 Under the
new Decision, the member could either stay on the cycle it is on when the
arrangement or PSI ends, or be placed on a different cycle by a decision of the
Executive Board. Such a decision would be based on the criteria for eligibility for
extended cycles that apply to all members. It could be taken at the time of the last
program or PSI review, or on an ad-hoc basis if need be; and,



Provides that members that are granted a FCL or a PCL arrangement would
automatically be placed on the standard 12-month cycle.6 For members that, prior to
the approval of an arrangement were on a cycle longer than the standard 12 months,
the first Article IV consultation following the approval of the arrangement would be
expected to be completed by the later of (a) 6 months following the approval of the
arrangement, or (b) 12 months plus a grace period of 3 months, after the date of
completion of the previous Article IV consultation. This approach would be
consistent with the fact that qualification for FCL and PCL is based on the Executive
Board’s assessment of members’ policies in the context of most recent Article IV
consultation. At the end of an FCL or a PCL arrangement, the member would remain
on the 12-month cycle unless the Executive Board decided otherwise.

3.
The proposed decision would set out the following framework for consultation
cycles:

4

Article IV consultations would, in principle, take place annually.
See paragraph 2(a) of the proposed Decision.

5

An arrangement can end through completion—i.e., at the end of the arrangement all amounts are drawn —, or
if it is cancelled by the member, or expires with undrawn amounts. A PSI ends when all reviews are completed,
or it expires with uncompleted reviews, or is cancelled by the member, or is terminated on the grounds set forth
in the PSI Decision No 13561-(05/85).
6

This would be consistent with the practice in the first three FCL cases: the Executive Board has not applied the
rules set out in the 2002 Decision on Consultation Cycles that automatically places a member that is granted a
Fund arrangement on the 24-month cycle to the FCL arrangements. (Decision No. 12794-(02/76))

3


The Executive Board could decide to place a member that is not under a Fund
arrangement or a PSI on an extended cycle, unless the member: (i) is of systemic or
regional importance; (ii) is perceived to be at some risk because of policy imbalances
or exogenous developments, or is facing pressing policy issues of broad interest to the
Fund membership; or (iii) has outstanding Fund credit exceeding 200 percent of
quota. Consistent with current practice, the Fund would only place a member on an
extended cycle with its consent and after consulting with its Executive Director.



Members that are granted a Fund arrangement or a PSI, with the exception of FCL or
PCL arrangements (see below), would automatically be placed on a 24-month
consultation cycle. In cases where a program review under an arrangement is not
completed on time, the current requirements (implying a shortening of the cycle in
most cases) would continue to apply.



Except for FCL or PCL arrangements, members that have completed a Fund
arrangement or a PSI (i.e., the arrangement or PSI ended “on track”) could remain on
the 24-month cycle if they do not meet any of the criteria described in the second
bullet above. The Executive Board may decide, at the time of the final review under
the arrangement or the PSI, to shorten the cycle to 12-months taking into account the
above criteria. If an arrangement expires with undrawn amounts or is cancelled by the
member or if a PSI expires with uncompleted reviews, or is terminated or is cancelled
by the member, the member would remain on the cycle it was on, unless the
Executive Board determined that a different cycle should apply (which could be done
through an ad-hoc decision that the Board could consider on a lapse-of-time basis).7



Members that are granted an FCL or a PCL arrangement would automatically be
placed on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. For members that, prior to the
approval of an arrangement were on a cycle longer than the standard 12 months, the
first Article IV consultation following the approval of the arrangement would be
expected to be completed by the later of (a) 6 months following the approval of the
arrangement, or (b) 12 months plus a grace period of 3 months, after the date of
completion of the previous Article IV consultation. At the end of an FCL or a PCL
arrangement, that member would remain on the 12-month cycle, unless the Executive
Board determined that a different cycle should apply (as is the case with other
arrangements or PSI, this could be done through an ad-hoc decision that the Board
could consider on a lapse-of-time basis).



Consistent with current practice, the periodicity and “deadlines” for the completion of
individual consultations with members would be expressed in terms of an
“expectation” rather than an obligation. Except where a member is automatically

7

Such a decision could be adopted by the Executive Board based on a proposal by management made upon
cancellation (termination) of the arrangement or PSI.

4
placed on the 12- or 24-month cycle in the context of a Fund arrangement or PSI, the
consultation cycle for members would be established by the Executive Board at the
conclusion of each Article IV consultation, at the time of the last program or PSI
review, or on an ad-hoc basis.


The 3-month grace period would continue to apply only to consultations that take
place on the standard 12-month cycle.8

4.
While the decision would become effective upon its adoption by the Board, it would
not give rise to any immediate change in the expected timing for the conclusion of the
upcoming Article IV consultations for members. Consultation cycles for individual members
would be established on the basis of the new framework at the time of completion of their
present Article IV consultations or, as the case may be, in the context of the use of Fund
resources, or a PSI. The provisions that automatically place members on the 24-month cycle
(or the 12-month cycle for FCL or PCL arrangements) would apply to members that are
granted new Fund arrangements or a PSI at the time they are approved.

8

Where a member is placed on the standard cycle, it would be expected that the consultation will be completed
within 15 months from the previous consultation.

5
Proposed Decision

The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by a majority of votes cast:
Article IV Consultation Cycles
This Decision is adopted pursuant to Article IV, Sections 3 (a) and (b) of the Fund’s Articles.
It establishes a framework for the periodicity of consultations between the Fund and each
member on the member’s policies under Article IV, Section 1.

1.

Except as provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3 below, consultations with members shall

be conducted in accordance with the principles set out in this paragraph.
In principle, Article IV consultations with members will take place annually. Article IV
consultations that take place on the standard twelve-month cycle will be subject to a grace
period of 3 months and, accordingly, will be expected to be completed within 15 months of
the date of the completion of the most recent consultation.

The Fund may decide to place a member on a consultation cycle that is longer than 12
months but, in any event, is not longer than 24 months (hereinafter an “extended cycle”) only
if the member does not meet any of the following criteria:

(a)

the member is of systemic or regional importance;

6
(b)

the member is perceived to be at some risk because of policy imbalances or
particular threats from exogenous developments, or the member is facing
pressing policy issues of broad interest to the Fund membership; or

(c)

the member has outstanding credit to the Fund under all facilities above two
hundred percent (200%) of the member’s quota.

The Fund will place a member on an extended cycle only after consulting with the Executive
Director for the member and obtaining the member’s consent.

2.

Whenever a Fund arrangement (other than an arrangement under the Flexible Credit

Line (FCL) or Precautionary Credit Line (PCL)) or a Policy Support Instrument (PSI) is
approved for a member, that member shall automatically be placed on a 24-month
consultation cycle. Article IV consultations with such members shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures specified below:

(a)

Article IV consultations with such a member will be expected to be completed

within 24 months of the date of completion of the previous Article IV consultation
with that member. The consultation cycle will be shortened where a program review
under an arrangement for the member is not completed by the date for completion
specified in the arrangement: in these circumstances the next Article IV consultation
with that member will be expected to be completed by the later of (i) 6 months after
the date specified in the arrangement for completion of the review, and (ii) 12

7
months, plus a grace period of 3 months, after the date of completion of the previous
Article IV consultation, provided, however, that, where the relevant program review
is completed before the later of the dates specified in (i) and (ii) above, the next
Article IV consultation will be expected to be completed within 24 months of the date
of completion of the previous Article IV consultation with that member.
(b)

A member that has completed an arrangement (other than an FCL or PCL

arrangement) by drawing all amounts, or a PSI by completing all reviews shall remain
on the cycle determined pursuant to paragraph 2(a) above, unless at the time of the
final review under the arrangement or the PSI, the Executive Board determines, based
on the criteria specified in paragraph 1, that a different cycle shall apply. Where the
arrangement or PSI is cancelled by the member, or the arrangement expires with
undrawn amounts or the PSI expires with uncompleted reviews or is terminated, the
member concerned shall remain on the cycle determined pursuant to paragraph 2(a)
above, unless the Executive Board determines, based on the criteria specified in
paragraph 1 that a different cycle will apply.

3.

Whenever an FCL or a PCL arrangement is approved for a member, that member will

automatically be placed on a 12-month consultation cycle. Article IV consultations with
such members will be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified below:

(a) if, prior to the approval of the FCL or PCL arrangement, the member was on an
extended cycle, the next Article IV consultation with that member will be
expected to be completed by the later of (i) 6 months after the date of approval of

8
the arrangement, and (ii) 12 months, plus a grace period of 3 months, after the
date of completion of the previous Article IV consultation;

(b) if an FCL or a PCL arrangement is completed by drawing all amounts, expires
with undrawn amounts or is cancelled by the member, that member will remain
on the standard 12-month cycle, unless the Executive Board determines that a
different cycle will apply.

4.

At the conclusion of each Article IV consultation with a member, the Fund will

specify the cycle that will apply to the next Article IV consultation with the member.

5.

Decision No. 12794-(02/76), adopted July 15, 2002, as amended, is hereby repealed.

