June 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/214

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

June 2, 2005
March 31, 2005

June 17, 2005
January 29, 2001
2005
January 29, 2001

Republic of Belarus: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statements by the Executive Director
for the Republic of Belarus
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with the Republic of
Belarus, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on March 31, 2005, with the officials of the Republic of
Belarus on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time
of these discussions, the staff report was completed on June 2, 2005. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its June 17, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

statements by the Executive Director for the Republic of Belarus.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Financial System Stability Assessment
Selected Issues Paper
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the
2005 Consultation with the Republic of Belarus
Approved by Poul M. Thomsen and Anthony R. Boote
June 2, 2005

Discussions were held in Minsk during March 16–31, 2005. The team—B. Horváth (Head),
V. Bacalu, M. Cuc (all EUR), and B. Gonzalez-Hermosillo (INS)—was joined by
M. O’Brien (MFD), and assisted by the local Resident Representative office staff. J. Prader
and M. Nikitsenka (ED’s Office) participated in some of the meetings. The mission met with
National Bank of Belarus (NBRB) Chairman Prokopovich, Finance Minister Korbut, other
senior government officials, members of parliament, NGOs, and representatives of
commercial banks and the press. The mission liaised with the Minsk World Bank office, and
held seminars on Belarusian growth—a centerpiece of the consultations and the topic of the
SI paper—on financial programming, and on FDI.
Belarus has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of
Agreement (Appendix I). The authorities have informed staff that they maintain no exchange
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions
subject to approval by the Executive Board. They have recently provided to staff updated
information regarding the legislation in effect, which staff is in the process of reviewing and
assessing. Having fully repaid the IMF by February 2005, Belarus no longer seeks an IMF
program. It has also adopted the SDDS, published fiscal and data transparency ROSCs, and
undergone an FSAP in 2004 (see accompanying FSSA). While adequate data for IMF
surveillance are provided on a timely basis, problems remain with the quality of some
statistics (Appendix V).

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I.

Background and Recent Developments .............................................................................4

II.

Policy Discussions ...........................................................................................................11
A. Fiscal Policy............................................................................................................13
B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ......................................................................16
C. Banking System.......................................................................................................16
D. External Sector........................................................................................................17
E. Structural Policies....................................................................................................18

III. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................20
Boxes
1. IMF Advice and Belarusian Policy Implementation .......................................................12
2. Structural Reform Agenda ...............................................................................................19
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators 2001–06...........................................................................22
2. Monetary Accounts, 2002–06 (Current Policies) ............................................................23
3. Monetary Accounts, 2002–06 (Reform Scenario) ...........................................................24
4. Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2001–06 (in rubels)....................................................25
5. Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2001–06 (in percent of GDP) ....................................26
6. Balance of Payments, 2001–06 (Current Policies) ..........................................................27
7. Balance of Payments, 2001–06 (Reform Scenario).........................................................28
8. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2000–10....................................................29
9. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10.........................................................30
10. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10.................................................31
Figure
1. Monetary Developments, December 2003–March 2005 ...................................................8
Appendices
I. Fund Relations .................................................................................................................32
II. Relations with the World Bank........................................................................................35
III. Statistical Issues ...............................................................................................................40
IV. Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance.................................................44

-3-

Executive Summary
Belarus’s centrally managed economy experienced good recent macroeconomic
performance on the back of demand-boosting policies and a favorable external
environment. Real GDP grew by 11 percent in 2004, helped by rapid centrally-mandated
wage growth, surging credit, and favorable terms of trade effects. General government
operations were in balance, while monetary policy—aided by the exchange rate anchor and
rising demand for rubels—lowered year-on-year inflation to 11 percent by April 2005. A
surge in the current account deficit in late 2004 was largely reversed in early 2005.
However, current policies are ultimately unsustainable and risks are mounting. Real
wage growth has outpaced productivity increases since 1995, international reserves are
precariously low, the share of loss-making enterprises remains high, and market-oriented
structural reforms have stalled. The accompanying FSSA reports improvements in financial
regulation and supervision, but notes that the largest banks require recurrent government
recapitalizations to remain solvent. In the absence of final agreement in several key areas, the
planned currency union with Russia will be delayed. Finally, rapid population aging will
intensify long-term pressure on the pension and health system.
Policy Issues and Discussions
Discussions were frank, focusing on growth sustainability. The authorities emphasized the
social aspects of their policies arguing that they were a better choice for Belarus’ economy,
and expected continued good macroeconomic performance. Staff argued that policies were
unsustainable, with ambitious wage targets threatening to decapitalize enterprises, and—
together with the slow exchange rate crawl—to undermine productivity growth and external
competitiveness. Moreover, the government’s footprint in the economy was excessive, and
the structural prerequisites of long-term supply growth were lacking.
The macroeconomic policy framework needs clarification and restraint. Fiscal policy
should aim for retaining balance in 2005 instead of the envisaged expansion, and quasi-fiscal
activities should be streamlined and brought on-budget. The monetary policy framework
rightly assigns single-digit inflation by end-2005 as the priority objective, but the NBRB
should be accorded with operational independence to achieve it. While the crawling band can
help achieve the inflation objective, a measure of exchange rate flexibility should be retained.
Preserving household confidence in the rubel and the banking system, and receiving greater
support from fiscal and quasi-fiscal policies will be essential for continued disinflation.
Market-oriented structural reforms are needed to lay the foundation for sustainable
growth. Key reforms include phasing out the government’s direct managerial and regulatory
intervention in economic activity, abolishing centrally-mandated wage targets and the golden
share rule, expanding the private sector, and addressing financial sector weaknesses.

-4-

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
1.
Belarus’s political life is dominated by President Lukashenko. With a political
base strengthened by rapidly rising real wages, the president—who first took office in July
1994—solidified his position in a 2004 referendum that lifted presidential term limits. The
state retains direct control over at least three-quarters of the economy through a highly
centralized economic management approach that combines, inter alia, (i) centrally-mandated
wage targets; (ii) rapidly increasing directed lending; (iii) an extreme golden share rule; and
(iv) administrative price controls, caps on trade mark-ups and producer profit margins.
2.
Recent macroeconomic performance was strong. Supported by robust domestic
demand and a favorable external environment, real GDP grew at 11 percent in 2004 and
9½ percent in January-April 2005.1 Meanwhile,
Domestic demand drove growth...
16
twelve-month inflation declined from 28 percent at
(Contribution to GDP growth, percent)
end-2003 to 11.1 percent by April 2005, falling below 12
inflation in Russia since March. Nominal depreciation 8
has slowed down under the crawling band regime,
4
leading to a 2.5 percent real effective exchange rate
0
depreciation in 2004 that was partially reversed in the
first four months of this year. The current account
-4
deficit reached 4.6 percent of GDP in 2004 reflecting
-8
in part temporary factors, but swung into a surplus in
1999
2000
2001 2002
2003
2004
the first quarter of 2005. Gross official reserves have
Non-govt cons
Go vt co ns
Fixed inves t
Invento ries
Net exports
GDP
doubled since end-2003, but remain precariously low
at US$987 million (0.6 months of imports) at endApril 2005.2 Belarus’s income distribution is remarkably equal (with the lowest Gini
coefficient in the CIS), and its poverty head count measure has fallen by 2004 to less than
half its 1997 level.
70

...while all components of inflation declined...

2,200

...and nominal exchange rates have stabilized.

85

(12-month inflation)

60

CPI
Food
Services
Non food goods

50
40

2,150

80

2,100

75

30
20

2,050

Rubel/USD official rate (lhs)
Rubel/ruble official rate (rhs)

10
0
Apr-03

Aug-03

Dec-03

Apr-04

Aug-04

Source: National Bank of Belarus and IMF.

Dec-04

Apr-05

2,000
Apr-03

Aug-03

Dec-03

Apr-04

Aug-04

Dec-04

70
65
Apr-05

Source: National Bank of Belarus; and press reports.

1

While national accounts methodology is broadly in line with international practice, biases remain in enterprise
data owing to pressures to report achievement of output targets and an accounting system that understates costs.

2

A US$220 million technical conversion of deposits not earlier included in the reserves definition contributed
to the 2004 increase.

-5-

3.
Growth and disinflation benefited from strongly supportive macroeconomic
policies and favorable external factors. While the budget was in balance and monetary
policy became tighter with the strengthening nominal anchoring role of the exchange rate, the
authorities’ centralized economic management approach was underpinned by widespread
government intervention. Average real wages grew by 24 percent in the twelve months
through March 2005, accompanied by similar increases in budgetary social transfers,
boosting consumption. High investment rates were supported by the surge in lending, and—
as inflation fell—declining interest rates. Price controls have helped disinflation and
bolstered demand, but have stored up tensions for the future. On the external side, Belarus
benefited from the strong regional upswing, the customs union providing privileged access to
Russia’s large market, and Russian financial support. Belarus also enjoyed low energy import
prices. With three-fourths of its exports to the EU consisting of energy or energy-intensive
products sold at rapidly rising world market prices, this resulted in a favorable terms of trade
shock with positive income effects on domestic consumption and investment (SI paper).
General Government Fiscal Developments, 2001-04
4.
Fiscal policy in 2004 was tighter
(In percent of GDP)
than envisaged. Revenues rose as higher
2001
2002 2003
2004
profit tax receipts more than compensated for
lost revenues from a VAT rate cut.
Revenue
44.9
44.6
45.8
46.2
Expenditures fell by a percentage point of
Expenditure (cash)
46.8
46.4
47.2
46.2
Noninterest
46.1
45.8
46.7
45.7
GDP owing to lower spending on education
and net lending. Budget implementation was
Primary balance (cash)
-1.2
-1.2
-0.9
0.5
-1.9
-1.8
-1.4
0.0
complicated by frequent amendments through Overall balance (cash)
Overall balance (accrual)
-3.1
-1.9
-1.1
0.0
presidential decrees, and the delay until late
Memorandum items:
December of a US$175 million Russian
Change in expenditure arrears
1.2
0.1
-0.3
0.0
government loan. This loan, when disbursed, Quasi-fiscal activities by banks
2.6
1.7
2.3
3.4
facilitated spending of 6.2 percent of GDP in Sources: Ministry of Finance and staff estimates.
December, eliminating the surplus built up
owing to the binding financing constraint and leading to a balanced general government
budget for the year.

5.
Preliminary data point to a large surplus in the first quarter of 2005. Usual
seasonality, combined with larger than budgeted VAT receipts stemming from the switch to
the destination principle in trade with Russia boosted revenues. Nevertheless, an April
Presidential Decree amending the budget left revenue projections unchanged, while
increasing investment expenditures by 0.3 percentage points, raising the deficit to 1.8 percent
of GDP. Government deposits at end-April 2005 reached five percent of GDP split evenly
between the NBRB and selected commercial banks, propping up the liquidity of the latter.

-6-

6.
However, quasi-fiscal operations
expanded in 2004, leaving overall government
intervention in the economy very high.
Extensive quasi-fiscal operations—notably
centrally-mandated US$ wage targets,
“recommended” credits, concessional housing
loans, and off-budget spending—boosted the
state’s effective role. Directed bank lending for
government programs (essentially a net addition
to banks’ market-based lending) surged to
3.4 percent of GDP, while the wage increases
imposed on the enterprise sector in excess of
GDP growth are estimated at almost 2½ percent
of GDP.3

Fiscal and Government-Mandated
Operations
(In percent of GDP)

0
-2
-4
-6

Mandated wage increase 1/
Lending under government programs
General government balance

-8
-10
2001

2002

2003

2004

Source: Belarusian authorities and staff estimates

7.
Budget consolidation has progressed
1/ Wage growth in non-budget enterprises in excess of
nominal GDP growth to meet government-mandated
further. In line with the authorities’ strategy of
wage targets.
enhancing the coverage of the budget, the Social
Protection Fund (SPF) has been consolidated
into the central treasury from April 2004, and Innovation Funds from 2005. On the revenue
side, tax administration continued to focus on large taxpayers, with stronger enforcement
efforts succeeding in alleviating the revenue impact of lower turnover tax and VAT rates.
The VAT was unified for all Belarusian trade, increasing revenue and widening the tax base
by including small traders. In an overhaul of budgetary financing, inflationary NBRB
financing of the budget was discontinued, and privatization receipts were recorded below the
line from 2004.
8.
Monetary policy achieved its inflation objective
despite rapid credit expansion, benefiting from the
exchange rate anchor and strengthened confidence in
the rubel. Disinflation in 2004 stemmed from more
restrained base money growth helped by an improved net
government position, a crawling band to the Russian ruble
(which resulted in some real appreciation), and rising
demand for rubels reflecting dedollarization and growing
trust in banks.4 Two-fifths of the 36 percent increase in real
credit to the economy was due to directed lending for
agriculture, industry, and housing construction—the latter

Contribution to Reserve Money and
Broad Money Growth, 2003-04
(In percent)
2003

2004

Reserve money
Net foreign assets
Net credit to government
Credit to economy (incl. banks)
Other

51.1
33.5
31.2
7.5
-21.1

41.9
34.1
-18.8
15.7
10.9

Broad money
Net foreign assets
Net credit to government
Credit to economy
Other

56.3
6.6
16.2
64.1
-30.6

44.1
5.9
-11.7
61.9
-11.9

Sources: Belarusian authorities; and staff calculations.

3

Staff has no information on own revenues and expenditures of ministries and the presidential administration.
However, these are likely to be balanced, raising only the size of government, not the deficit.
4

Rubel deposits grew by 74 percent, from 46 to 53 percent of total deposits in 2004. The rising share of
monetary forms of payments (84 percent in 2004, up from 74 percent in 2003) also contributed to higher
demand for rubels.

-7-

with maturities of up to 40 years. Accelerating credit growth led to a liquidity crunch in the
banking system in late 2004 (Figure 1).5 Bank liquidity improved in the first quarter of 2005
(in part owing to increasing government deposit placements), allowing interbank interest
rates to decline.
9.
The liquidity crunch in late 2004 exposed structural weaknesses in the statedominated banking system. In recent years, the system benefited from growing deposits
and rising rubel demand, and was bolstered by repeated government recapitalizations of key
banks, increasing government deposits in selected banks, as well as some loan evergreening
and supervisory forbearance. The share of nonperforming loans fell by half since end-2002 to
4.6 percent at end-2004 partly as a result of rapid credit expansion driven in part by directed
lending, which, however, occurred with limited regard to creditworthiness considerations.6
State banks’ profitability remained low, with the single large private bank accounting for
well over half of bank profit in 2004 with a return on equity of 22.3 percent, and the two
largest state-owned banks posting returns on equity below 3.5 percent. The banking system
remains vulnerable to shocks, including to a possible reversal in the recently gained
confidence in the banking system that underpinned the increase in deposits.
Bank Recapitalizations, 2000-04
(In billions of rubels, unless otherwise indicated)

Belagroprombank
Belarusbank
Belpromstroibank
Total
Percent of GDP
Percent of banking system capital

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

35
33
0
68
0.7
45.7

12
15
0
27
0.2
7.0

181
186
0
367
1.4
62.0

319
231
11
561
1.6
46.3

285
216
15
517
1.0
25.2

832
681
26
1,540
...
...

Source: Belarusian authorities.

5

Liquidity problems were concentrated in the two largest state-owned banks, together accounting for 56 percent
of banking system assets and two-thirds of capital at end-2004.
6

Rapid credit increases raise the denominator in this share, while new nonperforming loans would only emerge
with a lag. See accompanying FSSA on the credit risks associated with directed lending.

-8-

Figure 1. Belarus: Monetary Developments, December 2003–March 2005
Rapid expansion in credit to economy in the
second half of 2004...
45

35

Commercial banks: credit to economy,
yoy change (real terms, in percent)

40

...led to a liquidity shortage and a rise in
interbank rates.....
(In percent)
30
refinancing rate

35
25
30
20

25
20

15

15
interbank overnight rate

10
10
5

5
0

0
Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

Dec-03

...bringing banks to draw on their
foreign credit lines...
100

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

...and seek liquidity from the central bank.
200

Net foreign assets, commercial
banks (in billions of rubels)

0

100

-100

0

-200

-100

-300

-200

-400

-300

-500

-400

-600

Net claims on the NBB
(net of required reserves and
cash in vault, in billions of rubels)

-500
Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Source: National Bank of Belarus.

Dec-04

Mar-05

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

-9-

10.
The accompanying FSSA reports significant improvements in financial
regulation and supervision, but notes the risk that systemic banks could become
insolvent in the absence of recurrent large government recapitalizations. Belarus has
made significant progress in upgrading the financial regulatory and supervisory framework
toward international standards. However, state ownership of banks remains predominant and
“recommended” credits drive credit growth despite debtors’ low profitability and
creditworthiness. As a result, the largest state banks’ balance sheets remain weak, posing
significant systemic risk.
11.
The 2004 surge in the current account deficit was partially reversed in early
2005. Last year’s current account deficit was much larger than expected despite favorable
terms-of-trade developments. It was boosted in December by an estimated US$½ billion in
one-off imports owing to temporary tariff exemptions and purchases advanced in anticipation
of switching the VAT on trade with Russia to the destination principle from 2005. Exports
and imports grew by about 40 percent on the back of strong external and domestic demand
coupled with growing margins on energy trade. FDI fell further to minimal levels with
privatization stalled and the golden share rule expanded.7 The current account surplus in the
first quarter of 2005 allowed the NBRB to increase its reserves. While Belarus’s external
indebtedness at end-2004 was low at 18½ percent of GDP, over two-thirds of it—equivalent
to almost four times gross official reserves—were short term.

The trade deficit with CIS countries...
1800

1800

...is in part offset by the surplus vis-à-vis
non-CIS countries.
(U.S. dollar millions)

(U.S. dollar millions)
1350
900

Exports to non-CIS
Imports from non-CIS
Trade balance with non-CIS

1350

Exports to CIS
Imports from CIS
Trade balance with CIS

900

450

450

0

0

-450

-450

-900

-900
2002

2003

2004

Source: Ministry of Statistics of Belarus.

2005

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: Ministry of Statistics of Belarus.

12.
The real effective exchange rate remained broadly unchanged while unit labor
costs rose in 2004. Domestic inflation was largely offset by the 6.6 percent nominal effective
depreciation during the year. The rubel’s real exchange rate vis-à-vis the Russian ruble
depreciated by 3.7 percent (this currency dominates the REER given its 2 ⁄3 weight).
7

A 2004 Presidential Decree enabled the government to impose a golden share on joint stock companies
holding formerly government-owned property—even if now fully private—and, thereby, to take decisions
regarding the enterprise’s activity that are compulsory to implement.

- 10 -

However, the real exchange rate against the dollar appreciated markedly, bolstering dollar
wages. Unit labor costs picked up on the back of rapid wage growth, but with limited
consequences on measured competitiveness so far, since key trading partners experienced
similar increases. Overall, Belarusian exports have marginally increased their market share in
both CIS and non-CIS countries.

115
105

The real effective exchange rate remained
broadly stable...

140

Real Exchange Rate Indices, 2000=100
(higher number means appreciation)

125

95

110

85

95

75

80

65

65

...while unit labor costs are on the rise.
Unit labor cost in common currency
(1996=100)

50

55
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2001

Real effective exchange rate
Real bilateral exchange rate (vs ruble)
Real bilateral exchange rate (vs U.S. dollar)
Source: National Bank of Belarus and IMF.

2002
Belarus
Latvia

2003

2004

Russia
Ukraine

Source: National Bank of Belarus and IMF.

13.
Market-oriented structural reforms have
stalled. The cost recovery of utility services for
households declined by 12 percentage points in 2004
to 54 percent. Privatization, limited to small
municipal property, yielded 0.1 percent of GDP,
while debt conversions and share buybacks resulted in
increased state ownership in several large enterprises
and banks. As a result, the share of the private sector
remained under 25 percent. The concentrated
industrial structure is highly amenable to centralized
economic management, as highlighted by the
government’s close monitoring of 178 state-owned
enterprises that account for 13½ percent of GDP.

Belarus remains well behind other countries
in structural reform progress.
Belarus
Russia
Poland
Banking reform
& interest rate
liberalization

T rade & foreign
exchange system

Private sector
share of GDP
4
3
2

Privatization

1
0

Price
liberalization

Source: EBRD T ransition Report 2004.
Note: Minimum score (little progress) is 1 and maximum
score is 4.33 ("4+"). T he share of private sector in GDP
has been re-normalized to fit the scale. T he privatization
indicator is an average of the small-scale and large-scale.

14.
The planned currency union with Russia
will be delayed. In the absence of final agreement in
several key areas—including fiscal interaction
between Russia and Belarus, the modalities of monetary policy decision making, the
conversion exchange rate, and rules for fiscal prudence—implementing the currency union
from January 2006 is no longer feasible.

- 11 -

II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
15.
Discussions produced a constructive dialogue, focusing on the sustainability of
Belarus’s recent macroeconomic performance. The authorities and staff have argued their
case in the framework of distinctly different economic paradigms. The authorities
emphasized the social aspects of their policies, which, they argued, were a better fit for
Belarus’s economy and would continue delivering the good results seen in recent years.
Staff, on the other hand, argued that Belarus was on an unsustainable path characterized by
centralized demand stimulation but lacking the prerequisites of long-term supply growth.
Discussions covered the macroeconomic framework and the medium-term outlook; the
monetary and fiscal policy framework as well as the need for policy adjustment and for
structural and institutional reform.
16.
The authorities argued that their socially-oriented policies were a success.
They continued to project rapid growth and considered administrative controls and centrallymanaged resource transfers more effective in dealing with macroeconomic shocks and
imbalances than market forces (Box 1). Therefore, they did not see immediate reasons for
foregoing further rapid wage increases, phasing out directed credit or speeding up structural
reforms.
17.
Staff pointed to the risks of Belarus’s centrally-managed demand-boosting
policies. The recent rapid economic expansion with declining inflation was due to favorable
external developments and an ultimately
High wage growth undermines profitability,
unsustainable macroeconomic policy mix. While
placing the economy on an unsustainable path.
the economy’s momentum is expected to lead to
200
Financing real wage growth—cumulative,
considerable growth in 2005, this strategy risks
percent
running out of steam in subsequent years. The
150
productivity increases to underpin sustainable
lower enterprise
growth are unlikely to be forthcoming given the
profitability
100
government’s excessive footprint in the economy
relative price
improvement
and growing tensions resulting from current
50
policies. As discussed in the SI paper, real wage
higher labor
growth has significantly outpaced productivity
productivity
0
increases since 1995.8 Looking forward, ambitious
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
centrally-mandated economy-wide wage targets
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and staff calculations.
threaten to decapitalize enterprises by squeezing
their profit margins, and—together with the slow exchange rate crawl—undermine
productivity growth and external competitiveness. Finally, inflation pressures would mount
with further monetary expansion driven by recommended credits and the consequent need to
recapitalize banks.
8

Real wages in 2004 were 170 percent higher than in 1995, while productivity rose by some 80 percent during
the same period. Even with the recent rise in investments, productivity growth is unlikely to catch up with wage
growth.

- 12 -

Box 1. IMF Advice and Belarusian Policy Implementation
The authorities have responded to several Board recommendations and have a good track
record of implementing technical assistance recommendations. Recent policy decisions in line
with earlier recommendations include the elimination of direct NBRB financing of the budget from
2004, and the incorporation of the Social Protection Fund and, from January 2005, the Innovation
Funds into the central government budget. Cooperation in demand-driven technical assistance has
led to the publication of fiscal transparency and data ROSCs, and Belarus’s subscription to the
SDDS.
However, the effectiveness of surveillance appears limited in areas where fundamental
disagreements remain over the conduct of macroeconomic policies. These areas include key
forms of government intervention in the economy, notably (i) rapid centrally-mandated wage
growth targets; (ii) recommended lending aimed at priority areas determined by the government;
(iii) administrative intervention in price setting; and (iv) the newly expanded golden share rule.
The authorities also do not consider IMF-recommended structural reforms as a priority. In
particular, they do not view privatization as contributing to greater economic efficiency.
In the past two years, differences persisted between the authorities’ and IMF’s projections in
the monetary and fiscal area. The fiscal outcomes bridged the gap between the two in 2003, and
were closer to the IMF’s projections last year. As for the monetary projections, both the authorities
and the IMF have significantly underestimated the massive increase in demand for rubels (the
authorities by a smaller margin). This underestimation explains why inflation was lower than
projected in both years despite much higher reserve and broad rubel money growth.

Monetary and fiscal targets and actual performance
Auth.
Plan

2003
IMF
advice

Actual

Auth.
Plan

Gen. govt. cash deficit (BLR billion)
-890
-363
-500
-925
Gen. govt. accrual deficit (BLR billion)
-890
-50
-395
-925
Rubel reserve money (% growth)
35-42
29
72
35-42
Rubel broad money (% growth)
28-35
25
71
24-27
Source: Belarusian authorities and IMF Country Reports 03/117 and 04/144

2004
IMF
advice

Actual

-148
89
17
23

13
20
39
58

18.
Belarus’s open, unreformed economy is also vulnerable to looming exogenous
shocks. The magnitude of the net resource transfer from Russia cannot grow indefinitely—in
fact, it is likely to shrink as world market energy prices stabilize or retreat, while Belarus’s
gains from preferential access to Russia’s market are likely to diminish as Russia joins the
WTO and reforms its economy.9 Belarus’s long-term supply growth is undermined by
9

See the current Selected Issues paper for estimates of the magnitude of energy pricing-related transfers.

- 13 -

weakened market signals, delays in structural reforms—the basis for economic take-off in
other transition economies—and the lack of the knowledge and resource transfer associated
with FDI. This, together with precariously low international reserves, persistent arrears,
excessive inventory levels and a high, albeit declining, share of loss-making enterprises,
leave the economy vulnerable to shocks. Finally, the rapidly aging population would place
increasing long-term pressure on an unreformed pension and health system.
...trends are projected to worsen sharply,
leading to a doubling of the dependency
ratio, calling for urgent reforms.

After decades of demographic stability...
100%
80%

53

(In percent of total population)
Under working age

(Dependency ratios for different projection variants)

46

60%

Medium
High
Low
Constant-fertility

39

Working age
40%

32

20%

25
Above working age

0%
1958 1969 1978

1988 1998 1999 2000

2001 2002 2003

Source: Statistical Yearbook.
1/ Working age population covers males aged 16-59 and females
aged 16-54.

18
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: Population Division of the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat.

19.
In sum, disagreement remained on the medium-term growth path. The
authorities projected continued rapid growth around 8 percent over the medium term,
accompanied by falling inflation and limited current account deficits. In contrast, on current
policies, staff projected growth at 7.1 percent in 2005, followed by a slowdown to nearstagnation in a few years. Under the staff’s reform scenario, growth would dip in 2005–06
given tighter macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, but would remain strong over
the medium term.10 Inflation would remain in low double digits under unchanged policies,
but decline relatively fast in the reform scenario. The current account deficit would continue
to be constrained by the paucity of external financing if policies were retained, while greater
availability of financing—in particular, FDI—would allow higher growth-enhancing
technology imports, and hence, rising current account deficits.
A. Fiscal Policy
20.
The authorities saw more room for fiscal maneuver and viewed a less restrictive
fiscal policy in 2005 both desirable and financeable. The 2005 budget—as amended—
would represent a marked fiscal expansion. Better-than-expected revenues in January–April
provide a basis for expecting overperformance relative to the budget’s unrealistically
conservative revenue projection, which assumes a two percentage points of GDP drop
10

In the absence of definite information about the likely timing of a currency union with Russia, both scenarios
are based on the existing crawling band exchange rate regime for the foreseeable future.

- 14 -

compared with 2004.11 While the authorities did not rule out a markedly smaller deficit
outcome, they were unwilling to commit to it, since they envisaged higher expenditures in
response to any revenue overperformance. This year’s budget, as previous ones, focuses on
social spending—including substantial support for enterprises, which may need to rise given
the ambitious wage targets—but the authorities also envisage further increasing public
investment, as resource constraints allow. In contrast with earlier years, they considered the
financing situation more favorable, given large government deposits in the banking system
and expected, albeit yet unidentified, foreign financing. They also noted that government
debt was very low, and that the high tax burden was not a source of concern given rapid
growth and continued export competitiveness.
21.
Staff argued for retaining budget balance in 2005 by containing and
rationalizing expenditures to lower the size of government and support further
disinflation. With the size of government—even as conventionally measured—very large,
and against the background of rapid credit expansion and very low international reserves, the
budgeted 1.8 percent of GDP increase in the deficit relative to 2004 could have serious
adverse consequences on fragile inflation and
The size of government remains larger than
exchange rate expectations. Instead, expenditure
in most comparator countries.
should be restrained, coupled with a policy of
60
(General govt expenditure, percent of GDP, 2004)
saving revenue overperformance, which would
suffice to keep general government operations 50 Belarus P oland
in balance this year. This could be followed by 40
Rus s ia
Lithuania
a deficit of ¾ percent of GDP in 2006, as quasiKyrgyz Rep
30
fiscal activities are brought on budget and if
Kazakhs tan
China
fiscal room remains, the tax burden is reduced 20
by cutting the distorting turnover tax levied
10
concurrently with the VAT, combined with a
simplification of tax rate structures and a rapid
0
Source: WEO, International Monetary Fund.
phase-out of discretionary tax preferences.
Revenue reform would be important given the difficulty of sustaining the current high
revenue ratio as growth moderates. Expenditures could be contained by limiting the growth
of budgetary funds, streamlining subsidies, net lending and the wage bill, and improving the
targeting of social spending (e.g., house maintenance subsidies).

11

This projection incorporates lower turnover tax rates, and assumes VAT on trade with Russia on the origin
principle.

- 15 General Government Operations, 2004-06
(In percent of GDP)

2004

2005
Authorities

Current
Policies

2006
Staff
Reform

Current
Policies

Staff
Reform

Revenue

46.2

44.1

44.9

43.7

43.9

43.0

Expenditure (cash)
Noninterest

46.2
45.7

45.9
45.1

45.2
44.9

43.6
43.2

44.4
44.0

43.9
43.4

Primary balance (cash)
Overall balance (cash)
Overall balance (accrual)

0.5
0.0
0.0

-1.0
-1.8
-1.8

0.0
-0.4
-0.5

0.5
0.0
0.4

-0.1
-0.5
-1.0

-0.4
-0.8
-0.8

Memorandum item
Change in arrears

0.0

...

0.2

-0.4

0.5

0.0

Sources: MoF and staff estimates.

22.
Further budgetary reforms were also discussed. The authorities agreed that while a
stable fiscal environment was preferable, frequent amendments to the central budget were
necessary to react to changing macroeconomic conditions. They also agreed to continue bringing
remaining off-budget operations into the budget over time. With regard to recommended credits,
they were of the view that the state legitimately instructed majority state-owned banks to lend
under priority programs, such as housing construction and investment projects, and its role as
main shareholder included ensuring that these banks remained adequately capitalized. Staff
argued for minimizing the number of budgetary amendments to enhance transparency and the
predictability of the business environment, and for the inclusion of all quasi-fiscal operations into
the budget. Existing quasi-fiscal activities could be substantially reduced, providing explicit
budgetary subsidies for those that remain. This would help avoid the resulting recurrent claims
on budgetary resources, notably, annual large bank recapitalizations. Finally, to enhance the
efficiency of budget resource management, central government deposits should be gradually
shifted from state banks to the Single Treasury Account (STA) with the NBRB.
23.
It is critical to avoid the large scale long-term commitment of future budget
resources through directed and subsidized lending, and to address the fiscal implications of
aging. The cumulative costs of directed credits and subsidized housing loans can escalate into a
significant fiscal burden over the medium term, which would coincide with that stemming from
adverse demographic trends that are well advanced in Belarus. On present trends and in the
absence of unexpected large net immigration, the labor force is projected to enter a long-term
phase of decline from 2007, plummeting by 14½ percent in the 15 years through 2020, while the
share of the elderly will increase dramatically. These developments will place great pressures on
pension and health system finances, and raise social assistance needs. The authorities argued that
lending activities were controlled to ensure that their cumulative costs do not become
unbearable. They also pointed to increasing support to families with children as a measure taken
to limit population aging, and reiterated that other social policy targets—wage and pension
increases and housing construction—were more important at present. However, there was

- 16 agreement that quantification of the fiscal impact of demographic changes would be a useful first
step.
B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
24.
There was agreement on the policy objective of lowering inflation, but the monetary
policy framework needs strengthening. The 2005 monetary policy framework rightly assigns
further reducing inflation to 8–10 percent by year-end as the priority objective. Lowering
inflation was seen as monetary policy’s most effective contribution toward stronger external
competitiveness, noting that improvements in productivity and competitiveness depended
primarily on developments in the enterprise sector. However, the NBRB should be accorded with
operational independence to achieve the inflation objective. Clearly, the NBRB’s ability to meet
its policy objectives will depend to an important degree on continued household confidence in
the rubel and the banking system, as well as support from fiscal, quasi-fiscal, and—over the
medium term—structural policies. In this regard, the NBRB’s room for maneuver is severely
constrained by an overly ambitious credit policy, low foreign exchange reserves, and structural
weaknesses in the banking system.
25.
There was also agreement that while the crawling band could help achieve the
inflation objective, a measure of exchange rate flexibility should be retained. This was
warranted by low official reserves, as well as uncertainty about future developments in the terms
of trade, external competitiveness and short-term capital flows. Greater exchange rate flexibility
would also help support attainment of the authorities’ inflation goals in the event that inflation in
Russia exceeds the authorities’ projections. Policy transparency would be greatly enhanced by
confirming the policy focus on the Russian ruble as the peg currency. While external
competitiveness appeared adequate for now, it required close monitoring in light of emerging
risks stemming from continued rapid wage growth and the likely intensification of competition
in Russia’s markets as third-country exporters gain improved access.
26.
Staff argued for restraining domestic credit growth—including directed lending—in
2005 to avoid jeopardizing the achievement of the inflation objective. In particular, real
credit growth to the economy should not exceed the NBRB’s indicative target of 14–18 percent,
allowing the NBRB to stay its anti-inflationary course. The NBRB should inject liquidity strictly
on market terms, eschewing bilateral transactions (notably, refrain from purchasing at face value
the low-yielding government securities used in the end-2004 bank recapitalization). In this
regard, the NBRB reiterated its insistence that future bank recapitalizations be financed through
the budget, avoiding additional money creation.
27.
Close monetary-fiscal coordination is critical for achieving low inflation. Changes in
the large stock of government deposits currently held in the banking system could significantly
impact banks’ liquidity, and should, therefore, be carefully coordinated with the NBRB.
Similarly, enhanced coordination would be important regarding government securities
operations.
C. Banking System
28.
There was agreement that the weak position of several systematically important
state banks was a concern. Despite rapid growth in household deposits, these banks remained

- 17 dependent on periodic government recapitalizations, fresh government deposits, central bank
liquidity injections and ready access to interbank excess liquidity. It was agreed that safeguards
would be desirable to limit the NBRB’s role in any rescue operations of these banks by defining
the role of the NBRB as the lender of last resort, and setting out guidelines for distinguishing
bank illiquidity from insolvency and for the modalities of NBRB and government engagement in
each case.
29.
However, the strategy of safeguarding financial stability through regular top-ups of
fragile banks’ capital while assuming continued remonetization should be reassessed. Using
systemically important state banks as conduits for directing resources to selected sectors and
activities chosen without due regard to profitability or creditworthiness implies that the banking
system cannot effectively channel financial resources toward their best use. This strategy also
results in a government-mandated redistribution of household savings to areas designated by
policymakers as high priority. The recurring recapitalizations that become necessary as a result
perpetuate state banks’ loss-making activity, could undermine the public’s trust in them, and
delay adjustment in the economy in response to changes in the economic environment. This in
turn would undermine the basis for continued remonetization, as well as for increases in
productivity, and hence growth sustainability.
D. External Sector
30.
The significant end-2004 deterioration in the current account is likely to be largely
reversed in 2005, but concerns remain about the rise in short-term liabilities. While the
external debt ratios remain relatively moderate, the share of short-term debt is on rise. Such debt
is generally on relatively favorable terms but still raises roll-over risk. In addition, the current
stipulations under the golden share rule are excessive, sharply reducing the availability of FDI as
well as undermining the quality of the remaining trickle owing to the resulting adverse selection
of investors. Dismantling the golden share rule would facilitate larger net FDI inflows, which
would bring much-needed technology and knowledge transfer, access to international supply
channels and markets, and provide non debt-creating external financing.
31.
The Belarusian economy faces the risk of policy-induced losses in competitiveness.
The envisaged wage and exchange rate policies are likely to undermine competitiveness in
coming years. Belarus’s free economic zones also cause distortions in the tax regime, and hence
lower economic efficiency. A further problem is that while Belarus is making technical progress
in WTO talks, its accession date is likely to be later than Russia’s. To ease adjustment under
these constraints, the authorities noted that they had begun to explore alternative sources of
external financing, including a possible syndicated loan. However, medium-term sources of
financing for 2005 and beyond remained largely unidentified.
32.
Two scenarios quantify possible balance of payment outcomes, while the debt
sustainability exercise suggests limited risks. In the baseline medium-term scenario, the
current account deficit would hover around 3 percent of GDP with external financing remaining
limited and foreign reserves stuck at around half a month’s imports (Table 6). As a result, the
economy would remain highly vulnerable to shocks. In the reform scenario (Table 7), the
authorities would introduce reforms boosting competitiveness and FDI inflows. Following an
initial current account deterioration reflecting higher technology imports, external financing
would shift toward non debt-creating inflows. The current account would subsequently improve

- 18 with rising export competitiveness, and foreign reserves would gradually climb toward three
month’s of imports. The staff’s debt sustainability projections (Table 9) generally indicate a
modest build-up of external debt through 2008.1 Although the public debt dynamics generally do
not give rise to concerns, under some stress test scenarios the debt could approach uncomfortable
levels.
33.
A separate stress-test scenario highlights Belarus’s reliance on the Russian market.
It examines the impact of a hypothetical 30 percent decline in exports to Russia relative to the
baseline projection in 2006. After foreign reserves are depleted, imports adjust downward to
absorb the remaining shortfall and thus stagnate in 2006 (compared with an 8.2 percent increase
in the baseline). This shock would double the current account deficit to nearly 7 percent of GDP.
In the medium term, lower output growth and real depreciation would help reduce the current
account deficit, but with external financing remaining constrained, foreign reserves would
remain low, leaving the country vulnerable to further shocks.
E. Structural Policies
34.
The start of long-delayed market-oriented structural reforms would lay the
foundation for sustainable growth. Belarus could take advantage of the current favorable
external environment to launch a critical mass of structural reforms at minimum cost. Priority
structural reforms would be those that help reduce the dominant role of the government in the
economy—including lower intervention in the enterprise sector and in price formation—harden
budget constraints for enterprises and banks, make the tax and regulatory environment
predictable, and level the playing field for private and public enterprises to enhance the
economy’s competitiveness (Box 2). Critical measures to boost long-term supply growth would
include transparent privatization, and the elimination of centralized wage targets and of the
golden share rule. These measures would represent a significant step forward even if the whole
reform package was not implemented. Reforms would also be necessary to ensure that a
currency union with Russia delivers net benefits for Belarus’s economy. The authorities took
note of the proposed agenda, but have not committed to implementing it. They stressed the
importance of avoiding mistakes made in this area by other transition economies, which, in their
view, led to significant welfare losses in terms of higher unemployment, declining output, and
the increasing power of oligarchs.

1

Debt dynamics are unstable under some stress test scenarios because they project forward the high volatility of the
1993–2003 base period.

- 19 -

Box 2. Structural Reform Agenda
Price liberalization:
•
•
•
•

Reduce the list of regulated prices, including on exports;
Curtail ceilings on mark-ups on goods and services (domestic or imported);
Put in place an independent regulator for monopolies; and
Raise utility prices permanently toward full cost-recovery levels.

Fiscal policy and social safety net—consolidating fiscal and quasi-fiscal activities, lowering the tax
burden and hardening enterprise budget constraints:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Bring all government-controlled quasi-fiscal activities on-budget;
Implement Part II of the Tax Code to streamline tax legislation and reform tax policy;
Simplify SME taxation, utilizing presumptive taxes, where appropriate;
Eliminate ad hoc tax exemptions and deferrals;
Gradually reduce subsidies and lending to inefficient enterprises;
Launch a comprehensive public administration and civil service reform;
Improve the targeting of social support from the budget;
Centralize central government funds in the STA held at the NBRB; and
Reform the pension system to ensure its long-term viability.

Monetary policy and banking sector—reducing government intervention:
•
•

Phase out directed lending to avoid the need for regular bank recapitalizations by the state;
Remove caps on lending interest rates.

Incomes policy—containing public sector wage growth while liberalizing wage setting:
•
•
•

Discontinue enforcing economy-wide wage targets;
Limit wage bill growth in government and in enterprises with soft budget constraints; and
Allow greater flexibility in employment and wage setting in non-public enterprises.

Enterprise sector reforms—revising the legal and regulatory framework, removing barriers to
private sector activity:
•
•
•
•
•

Launch transparent privatization and eliminate the golden share rule to promote FDI;
Harden budget constraints by reducing state support and enforcing bankruptcy against nonviable
enterprises;
Reduce state controls on enterprise activities;
Simplify the registration of small and medium-sized enterprises and rules governing their activity;
and
Develop a timetable for introducing internationally accepted accounting standards in the
enterprise sector.

- 20 -

III. STAFF APPRAISAL
35.
Recent years were characterized by favorable macroeconomic outcomes under a
centralized macroeconomic management and progress in budgetary and monetary
policy implementation. Double-digit growth in 2004 benefited from relatively restrained
underlying fiscal and monetary policies that were tilted in the expansionary direction by large
government-mandated quasi-fiscal operations—most notably rapid increases in directed
credit and wages. Disinflation was aided by remonetization, an effective exchange rate
anchor, the discontinuation of inflationary financing for the budget in 2004, as well as
administrative controls in price formation. Progress was made in fiscal management: the
ministry of finance has integrated several large extrabudgetary funds into the central budget
and held general government operations in balance in 2004. Belarus has also benefited from
trade links with Russia’s rebounding economy. In addition, favorable energy import pricing
has shielded Belarus from the adverse effects of international energy price developments,
while allowing it to increase its net gains from sales of refined petroleum products in
European markets, taking advantage of sharply higher refining margins.
36.
However, with little progress made in enterprise and financial sector
restructuring, Belarus’s centralized macroeconomic management approach is
ultimately unsustainable. The past decade has seen a massive cumulative excess of growth
in real wages over productivity, which was coupled in recent years with an increase in the
external resource transfer through favorable energy import pricing. These trends cannot be
expected to continue. International experience shows that sustained growth requires a supply
response to economic restructuring and reform, leading to improved incentives and economic
efficiency that bring forth rapid productivity growth. In all transition economies, this process
was helped along by reducing the relative role of government in economic activity, and the
knowledge and resource transfer associated with FDI. In the absence of these ingredients,
Belarus’s economy is vulnerable to decapitalization of banks and enterprises, as well as to a
reversal—or even a slowdown—in the favorable external trends. The extent to which
centralized redistribution of domestic resources can prolong the current expansion is unclear.
This underscores the importance of early policy action to sustain growth, especially since
over the medium term, the aging population will raise the fiscal costs of the pension and
health systems while undermining revenues as a result of the declining number of active
workers paying taxes and social contributions.
37.
Now is the best time to address the growth sustainability issue through policy
and structural reforms to allow the Belarusian economy to begin catching up with its
successful EU-member neighbors. The authorities should take advantage of the favorable
current circumstances—the momentum in the economy, ongoing remonetization, and the
favorable external environment—and launch reforms. With low debt levels, considerable
privatizable assets, and the benefit of lessons from the experience of other transition
economies, the authorities could contain the net costs of transition. The overriding objective
should be to substantially reduce the economic footprint of government, and enhance
productivity growth. To this end, the government’s direct managerial and regulatory
intervention in economic activity should be rapidly phased out, centrally-mandated wage

- 21 -

targets dropped, the remaining quasi-fiscal activities brought on-budget, the golden share rule
abolished, the business environment improved, and financial sector weaknesses addressed.
38.
The envisaged fiscal loosening should be avoided in 2005. Fiscal policy needs to
remain tight after incorporating quasi-fiscal activities, to reduce the size of government and
allow room for a meaningful reduction in the high tax burden over the medium term.
39.
Monetary policy needs to be focused on disinflation and be supported by the
government. Lowering inflation should remain the overriding objective of monetary policy.
To that end, the NBRB should be given the necessary operational independence. It should
also retain a measure of exchange rate flexibility to safeguard against excessive real
appreciation, strengthen its ability to react to shocks and further improve its reserve position.
Such flexibility would also help avoid compromising achievement of the inflation target,
should it come into conflict with the envisaged exchange rate path. Strengthened fiscalmonetary coordination and government abstinence from administrative intervention in price
formation are also needed for effective and credible monetary policy implementation.
40.
Staff remains concerned about Belarus’s external vulnerability. With inflation
and wage growth higher than in partner countries, and structural reforms lacking,
competitiveness is likely to be undermined. The end-2004 surge in the current account deficit
financed by running up short-term liabilities to 12.8 percent of GDP coupled with low
banking system foreign exchange reserves is also a source of serious concern. Effective
mechanisms for controlling the contracting and guaranteeing of external debt are needed; and
more importantly, for ensuring that foreign financing is used efficiently.
41.
A lasting, economically favorable currency union with Russia requires the
fulfillment of key macroeconomic conditions. If the authorities decide to join the currency
union, agreement will be needed with Russia on key issues—including the appropriate level
of the conversion exchange rate, the modalities of monetary policy decision making, transfers
prior to and following the adoption of the Russian ruble, rules for fiscal prudence, and
necessary legislative action. While the balance of long-term costs and benefits of the
currency union depends on the specifics of how these issues are resolved, it would be
substantially enhanced with prudent macroeconomic policies and an early start to wideranging structural reforms. Together, these would ensure that Belarus derives net long-term
benefits from the union.
42.
The staff commends the authorities for strengthened technical cooperation with
the IMF and welcomes the significant recent progress made in this area. Belarus has a
good record of implementing TA recommendations, marked by the completion of the FSAP,
the SDDS subscription, and the publication of fiscal and data transparency ROSCs.
43.
The next Article IV consultation is expected to be held on the standard 12-month
cycle.

- 22 -

Table 1. Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001-06
2001

Output
GDP (nominal in billions of rubels)
Real GDP 1/
Industrial production

2002

2003

2004

2005

Prelimin.

Auth.

Staff Proj.
Current
Reform
Policies

2006
Staff Proj.
Current
Reform
Policies

17,173
4.7
5.9

26,138
5.0
4.3

36,565
7.0
6.8

49,445
11.0
15.6

58,900
8.5-10.0
...

59,363
7.1
...

58,392
6.0
...

69,458
4.0
...

68,862
6.2
...

Prices and wages
GDP deflator (y-o-y)
Consumer prices, eop (y-o-y)
Consumer prices, aop
Producer prices, eop (y-o-y)
Wages (thousands of rubels per month)
Real average monthly wage (1996=100)
Average monthly wage (in U.S. dollars)

79.5
46.1
61.1
39.1
125.0
213.9
89.5

44.9
34.8
42.6
42.7
191.6
231.9
107.3

30.7
25.4
28.4
28.6
253.5
238.7
123.3

21.8
14.4
18.1
18.9
350.1
279.0
162.0

12.0-13.0
8.0-10.0
12.0-13.0
...
...
326.4
225.0

12.1
12.0
12.1
...
...
...
...

11.5
10.5
11.5
...
...
...
...

12.5
12.9
12.5
...
...
...
...

11.2
9.0
11.2
...
...
...
...

Exchange rates
Rubel/USD (average)
Rubel/USD (end-of-period)
Rubel/Ruble (RUR) (average)
Rubel/Ruble (RUR) (end-of-period)

1,383
1,580
47.35
52.30

1,784
1,920
56.97
60.40

2,052
2,156
66.92
73.20

2,160
2,170
74.98
77.91

2,240
2200-2275
77.40
75.86-77.65

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

44.9
45.2
45.4
-0.4
-0.5

43.7
43.6
43.3
0.0
0.4

43.9
44.4
44.9
-0.5
-1.0

43.0
43.9
43.9
-0.8
-0.8

5.1
7.8
87.7
26.6
27.0
35.0
...

5.6
8.9
53.6
14.4
15.6
20.0
...

17,084
-19,424
-1,013
-3.4
805
0.5
4.4
15.3

17,945
-20,434
-1,132
-3.6
1,262
0.7
4.2
14.8

(In percent of GDP)
General government finances 2/
Revenue
Expenditure (cash)
Expenditure (commitment)
Balance (cash)
Balance (commitment)

44.9
46.8
48.1
-1.9
-3.1

44.6
46.4
46.5
-1.8
-1.9

45.8
47.2
46.9
-1.4
-1.1

46.2
46.2
46.1
0.0
0.0

44.1
45.9
45.9
-1.8
-1.8

(12-month change in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Money and credit
Annual average broad money velocity (level)
Annual average rubel broad money velocity (level)
NBB net domestic credit
Reserve money
Banking system net domestic credit
Rubel broad money
Refinance rate (percent per annum, end-of-period)

8.2
18.2
156.5
102.8
66.4
96.9
48

8.0
16.1
31.0
32.0
53.7
59.6
38

7.1
13.3
98.1
51.1
68.9
71.0
28

6.6
11.2
-6.0
41.9
35.8
58.1
17

5.8
9.2
...
19.7
...
40.0
...

5.7
9.2
1.6
32.0
30.5
40.0
...

5.8
9.4
-43.2
12.9
19.6
30.0
...

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments and external debt
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Current account balance
As percent of GDP
Gross official reserves
In months of imports of goods and services
Medium- and long-term debt (as percent of GDP)
Short-term debt (as percent of GDP)
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

7,334
-8,141
-394
-3.2
359
0.5
9.2
10.4

7,965
-8,879
-311
-2.1
476
0.6
9.8
11.0

10,073
-11,329
-424
-2.4
499
0.5
8.1
10.8

13,917
-15,983
-1,043
-4.6
770
0.6
5.9
12.8

16,433
-17,972
-411
-1.4
...
...
4.6
11.1

15,743
-17,950
-1,004
-3.7
782
0.5
4.4
14.2

15,887
-18,156
-1,067
-4.0
917
0.6
4.4
14.3

1/ The Belarusian national accounts have overstated real growth by about 1-2 percent. A new industrial production index, which would improve the
estimates is calculated but not published yet.
2/ Consolidates the state government and Social Protection Fund budget; and, from 2002, the activities of the innovation funds, formally incorporated into the state
government budget from 2005.

3,020

50.3
59.6
32.0
40.1
56.8
16.1
8.0
3.5
2.1
1,920

12-month % change in broad money
12-month % change in rubel broad money
12-month % change in reserve money
12-month % change in rubel reserve money
12-month % change in claims on economy 1/
Annual rubel broad money velocity 2/
Annual broad money velocity 2/
Broad money multiplier
Rubel broad money multiplier
Accounting exchange rate (Rbl/US$)

56.3
71.0
51.1
72.3
58.9
13.5
7.3
3.6
2.1
2,156

6,132
3,408
926
2,269
213
2,705
16
3

7,355
977
6,378
-2,386

4,969

1,163
2,666
-1,503

1,687
1,643
926
440
129
192
44

390
872
516
332
24
-482

1,296
1,947
-650

2003

Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For the authorities projection for 2004, increases in rubel claims.
2/ Defined as annual GDP divided by average broad (rubel broad) money for the year.

3,924
1,993
650
1,253
90
1,920
10
0

Broad money
Rubel broad money
Currency outside banks
Domestic currency deposits
Bank securities (outside bank circul.), in rubels
Foreign currency deposits
Bank securities (outside bank circul.), in fgn currency
Precious metals in deposits

4,356
343
4,013
-1,336

Net domestic assets

Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Claims on economy
Other items, net

904
2,022
-1,119

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

Monetary Survey

Reserve money
Rubel reserve money
Currency outside banking system
Required reserves
Correspondent accounts and vault cash
Time depos., NBB sec., and depos. of nonbanks
Non-rubel reserve money

1,116
953
650
290
69
108
163

194
440
168
255
17
-246

Net domestic assets

Net domestic credit
Net credit to government
Claims on banks
Other claims on economy
Other items, net

922
1,516
-594

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

National Bank of Belarus

2002

52.6
67.1
71.4
83.9
54.3
13.5
7.3
3.4
2.0
2,150

6,478
3,639
889
2,598
153
2,827
9
3

7,407
726
6,681
-2,481

4,926

1,552
3,094
-1,542

1,906
1,864
889
499
153
366
42

394
859
516
319
24
-464

1,512
2,143
-631

Mar.

50.0
63.2
37.3
43.8
57.1
12.2
7.0
3.8
2.3
2,155

7,256
4,279
1,113
3,028
138
2,957
18
3

8,391
658
7,733
-2,362

6,029

1,227
2,806
-1,579

1,885
1,865
1,113
537
153
81
20

415
678
251
396
31
-263

1,470
2,071
-601

2004
Jun.

46.2
60.8
38.7
44.2
59.2
12.1
7.0
3.9
2.4
2,167

7,851
4,698
1,211
3,383
104
3,127
22
3

9,268
302
8,966
-2,473

6,795

1,056
2,867
-1,812

2,007
1,986
1,211
575
158
63
21

497
811
373
404
34
-314

1,510
2,072
-563

Sep.

44.1
58.1
41.9
38.9
56.4
11.2
6.6
3.7
2.4
2,170

8,839
5,388
1,339
3,949
100
3,426
21
3

10,234
259
9,974
-2,918

7,316

1,523
3,044
-1,521

2,394
2,281
1,339
639
225
190
113

522
820
199
565
56
-298

1,872
2,057
-184

Dec.

Table 2. Belarus: Monetary Accounts, 2002–06 (Current Policies)
(In billions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)

42.7
57.6
21.1
23.1
54.0
11.0
6.5
4.0
2.5
2,153

9,247
5,735
1,374
4,254
107
3,498
11
3

9,935
-355
10,290
-2,740

7,195

2,051
3,373
-1,322

2,308
2,295
1,374
659
220
56
13

-48
130
-280
384
26
-179

2,357
2,455
-98

Mar.

38.1
46.9
32.7
32.7
43.2
10.2
6.2
4.0
2.5
2,183

10,024
6,288
1,481
4,696
110
3,722
11
3

10,788
-282
11,070
-2,778

8,010

2,015
3,354
-1,340

2,500
2,474
1,481
684
226
108
26

176
357
-247
575
29
-181

2,324
2,424
-100

2005
Jun.
Dec.

37.7
45.6
32.0
32.0
32.4
9.8
6.1
4.1
2.6
2,218

10,813
6,840
1,570
5,159
111
3,959
11
3

11,678
-191
11,868
-2,823

8,855

1,958
3,319
-1,361

2,649
2,622
1,570
737
229
114
26

376
560
-215
743
32
-184

2,273
2,374
-101

34.4
40.0
20.0
24.7
30.5
9.2
5.7
4.1
2.7
2,275

11,879
7,544
1,711
5,710
122
4,320
11
3

12,868
-144
13,012
-2,895

9,973

1,906
3,302
-1,396

2,872
2,845
1,711
799
240
123
27

644
833
-188
986
35
-189

2,229
2,333
-104

Staff projections

Sep.

29.4
35.0
26.6
26.8
27.0
7.8
5.1
4.2
2.8
2,340

15,368
10,184
2,191
7,855
138
5,169
11
4

16,385
-141
16,526
-2,978

13,408

1,961
3,398
-1,438

3,637
3,610
2,191
1,024
263
158
28

1,345
1,539
-203
1,695
47
-194

2,292
2,399
-107

2006

- 23 -

3,020

50.3
59.6
32.0
40.1
56.8
16.1
8.0
3.5
2.1
1,920

12-month % change in broad money
12-month % change in rubel broad money
12-month % change in reserve money
12-month % change in rubel reserve money
12-month % change in claims on economy 1/
Annual rubel broad money velocity 2/
Annual broad money velocity 2/
Broad money multiplier
Rubel broad money multiplier
Accounting exchange rate (Rbl/US$)

56.3
71.0
51.1
72.3
58.9
13.5
7.3
3.6
2.1
2,156

6,132
3,408
926
2,269
213
2,705
16
3

7,355
977
6,378
-2,386

4,969

1,163
2,666
-1,503

1,687
1,643
926
440
129
192
44

390
872
516
332
24
-482

1,296
1,947
-650

2003

Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For the authorities projection for 2004, increases in rubel claims.
2/ Defined as annual GDP divided by average broad (rubel broad) money for the year.

3,924
1,993
650
1,253
90
1,920
10
0

Broad money
Rubel broad money
Currency outside banks
Domestic currency deposits
Bank securities (outside bank circul.), in rubels
Foreign currency deposits
Bank securities (outside bank circul.), in fgn currency
Precious metals in deposits

4,356
343
4,013
-1,336

Net domestic assets

Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Claims on economy
Other items, net

904
2,022
-1,119

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

Monetary Survey

Reserve money
Rubel reserve money
Currency outside banking system
Required reserves
Correspondent accounts and vault cash
Time depos., NBB sec., and depos. of nonbanks
Non-rubel reserve money

1,116
953
650
290
69
108
163

194
440
168
255
17
-246

Net domestic assets

Net domestic credit
Net credit to government
Claims on banks
Other claims on economy
Other items, net

922
1,516
-594

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

National Bank of Belarus

2002

52.6
67.1
71.4
83.9
54.3
13.5
7.3
3.4
2.0
2,150

6,478
3,639
889
2,598
153
2,827
9
3

7,407
726
6,681
-2,481

4,926

1,552
3,094
-1,542

1,906
1,864
889
499
153
366
42

394
859
516
319
24
-464

1,512
2,143
-631

Mar.

50.0
63.2
37.3
43.8
57.1
12.2
7.0
3.8
2.3
2,155

7,256
4,279
1,113
3,028
138
2,957
18
3

8,391
658
7,733
-2,362

6,029

1,227
2,806
-1,579

1,885
1,865
1,113
537
153
81
20

415
678
251
396
31
-263

1,470
2,071
-601

2004
Jun.

46.2
60.8
38.7
44.2
59.2
12.1
7.0
3.9
2.4
2,167

7,851
4,698
1,211
3,383
104
3,127
22
3

9,268
302
8,966
-2,473

6,795

1,056
2,867
-1,812

2,007
1,986
1,211
575
158
63
21

497
811
373
404
34
-314

1,510
2,072
-563

Sep.

44.1
58.1
41.9
38.9
56.4
11.2
6.6
3.7
2.4
2,170

8,839
5,388
1,339
3,949
100
3,426
21
3

10,234
259
9,974
-2,918

7,316

1,523
3,044
-1,521

2,394
2,281
1,339
639
225
190
113

522
820
199
565
56
-298

1,872
2,057
-184

Dec.

Table 3. Belarus: Monetary Accounts, 2002–06 (Reform Scenario)
(In billions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)

42.7
57.6
21.1
23.1
54.0
10.9
6.5
4.0
2.5
2,153

9,247
5,735
1,374
4,254
107
3,498
11
3

9,935
-355
10,290
-2,740

7,195

2,051
3,373
-1,322

2,308
2,295
1,374
659
220
56
13

-48
130
-280
384
26
-179

2,357
2,455
-98

Mar.

36.0
44.3
30.7
30.8
39.8
10.2
6.2
4.0
2.5
2,157

9,865
6,173
1,454
4,611
109
3,678
11
3

10,544
-264
10,808
-2,745

7,799

2,066
3,390
-1,324

2,464
2,438
1,454
679
224
107
26

92
271
-241
483
29
-179

2,372
2,471
-99

2005
Jun.

33.4
40.3
28.1
28.1
26.2
9.9
6.1
4.1
2.6
2,166

10,472
6,592
1,509
4,972
111
3,867
11
3

11,143
-174
11,318
-2,757

8,387

2,086
3,415
-1,329

2,571
2,545
1,509
721
228
113
26

178
358
-203
529
32
-180

2,393
2,492
-99

Dec.

26.2
30.0
12.9
17.4
19.6
9.4
5.8
4.1
2.6
2,180

11,159
7,005
1,582
5,303
121
4,140
11
3

11,823
-105
11,928
-2,774

9,049

2,110
3,448
-1,338

2,704
2,678
1,582
765
237
121
26

285
466
-166
597
35
-181

2,419
2,519
-100

Staff projections

Sep.

17.7
20.0
14.4
14.5
15.6
8.9
5.7
4.2
2.7
2,207

13,133
8,406
1,791
6,483
131
4,713
11
3

13,695
-92
13,787
-2,808

10,886

2,246
3,602
-1,356

3,092
3,066
1,791
902
248
151
26

533
716
-172
841
47
-183

2,559
2,660
-101

2006

- 24 -

- 25 -

Table 4. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2001-06
(In billions of rubels, unless otherwise indicated)
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prelim.

1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other
Revenue of budgetary funds 1/

2005
Authorities
Budget

2006

Current
Policies

Staff
Reform

Current
Policies

Staff
Reform

5,735
534
637
1,447
442
237
300
1,104
1,033

8,663
773
643
2,165
592
390
524
1,651
1,925

12,843
1,024
934
2,895
838
729
957
2,603
2,863

17,417
1,404
1,625
3,815
1,122
957
1,095
3,662
3,739

19,218
1,758
1,685
4,547
1,208
860
1,410
3,403
4,347

20,193
1,767
1,874
4,944
1,281
942
1,312
3,695
4,379

18,997
1,748
1,868
4,911
1,384
1,080
1,293
3,852
2,860

23,129
2,048
2,128
5,749
1,484
1,091
1,520
4,258
4,852

21,949
1,976
2,226
5,798
1,665
1,359
1,613
4,235
3,077

Expenditure (cash)

6,023

9,135

13,333

17,595

20,258

20,385

19,089

23,377

22,658

Expenditure (accrual) 2/
Defense
Law, order and security
Agriculture
Housing and communal services
Education
Health, sports and physical education
Social policies
Servicing of state debt
Budgetary loans
Other
Expenditure of budgetary funds 1/

6,237
184
333
146
450
1,110
873
249
125
164
1,608
996

9,154
260
461
179
612
1,738
1,270
443
154
382
1,849
1,805

13,228
377
654
520
941
2,343
1,810
615
176
168
3,005
2,620

17,587
472
921
767
1,175
3,020
2,581
821
210
47
3,995
3,580

20,258
545
1,147
828
921
3,722
2,982
1,520
219
-30
4,110
4,294

20,493
563
1,124
1,031
1,421
3,722
2,932
1,318
219
163
3,808
4,191

18,870
533
1,088
906
1,350
3,728
2,950
1,275
270
142
3,803
2,826

23,715
665
1,334
1,218
1,678
4,270
3,311
1,557
258
193
4,478
4,753

22,657
599
1,231
1,069
1,669
4,608
3,679
1,789
319
174
4,395
3,124

Expenditure: economic classification 3/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending

6,023
1,266
347
1,574
125
1,401
1,119
191

9,135
2,061
581
2,108
143
1,880
1,999
362

13,249
2,848
780
3,063
186
2,881
3,154
336

17,595
3,880
1,064
3,990
243
3,792
4,367
258

20,258
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

20,493
4,912
1,380
4,595
267
4,618
4,098
623

18,870
4,664
1,311
4,510
287
3,879
4,219
-1

23,663
5,801
1,630
5,364
309
5,496
4,341
721

22,657
5,506
1,547
5,376
403
4,580
5,150
94

-289
-502

-472
-491

-490
-385

-178
-170

-1,040
-1,040

-192
-300

-93
127

-248
-586

-709
-709

2. Social Protection Fund
Revenue
o/w:from the Republican budget
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

1,984
5
2,021
-37

3,055
70
3,061
-6

3,978
57
3,988
-10

5,453
36
5,262
191

6,748
...
6,763
-15

6,504
50
6,521
-17

6,514
0
6,398
116

7,618
250
7,701
-83

7,691
0
7,546
145

3. General government
Revenue
Expenditure (cash)
Expenditure (accrual) 2/
Balance (cash) 3/
Balance (accrual) 2/

7,714
8,039
8,252
-326
-539

11,649
12,127
12,146
-478
-497

16,765
17,264
17,160
-500
-395

22,833
22,821
22,813
13
20

25,966
27,021
27,021
-1,055
-1,055

26,647
26,857
26,964
-210
-317

25,511
25,488
25,268
23
242

30,497
30,828
31,165
-331
-669

29,639
30,203
30,203
-564
-564

Balance (cash) 3/
Balance (accrual) 2/

4. Statistical discrepancy 3/

-30

105

17

-67

0

0

0

0

0

5. Financing (cash) 3/
Privatization
Foreign financing, net
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank (incl. IMF)
Deposit money banks (incl. SPF)
Nonbank

296
12
20
264
261
182
79
3

583
427
29
126
-4
-256
252
131

517
36
-50
531
453
257
196
78

-80
40
273
-393
-725
-325
-400
332

1,055
100
506
449
...
-18
...
...

210
40
30
140
-135
-324
188
275

-23
50
20
-93
-103
-301
199
10

331
50
75
206
6
-15
21
200

564
300
200
64
14
-6
21
50

-220
0
4.5
741
58.4

338
665
5.0
777
69.5

0
0
4.8
832
68.9

Memorandum items:
Change in expenditure arrears
213
19
-105
-8
...
108
Stock of expenditure arrears
313
332
227
220
...
328
Government debt (trillions of rubels)
2.3
2.9
3.8
4.5
4.8
4.7
o/w: external (millions of US$)
682
781
733
732
...
745
GDP (trillions of rubels)
17.2
26.1
36.6
49.4
58.9
59.4
Source: Ministry of Finance, SPF, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes innovation funds from 2002, formally incorporated into the state government budget from 2005.
2/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
3/ The actual deficits from above the line include all the closing expenditure for the year carried out in January of the following
year and correspond to the authorities fiscal year reports. The deficit values from the financing side include January closing
expenditure in the year they were actually paid.

- 26 -

Table 5. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2001-06
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prelim.

1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other revenue
Revenue of budgetary funds 1/

2005
Authorities
Budget

Current
Policies

2006
Staff
Reform

Current
Policies

Staff
Reform

33.4
3.1
3.7
8.4
2.6
1.4
1.7
6.4
6.0

33.1
3.0
2.5
8.3
2.3
1.5
2.0
6.3
7.4

35.1
2.8
2.6
7.9
2.3
2.0
2.6
7.1
7.8

35.2
2.8
3.3
7.7
2.3
1.9
2.2
7.4
7.6

32.6
3.0
2.9
7.7
2.1
1.5
2.4
5.8
7.4

34.0
3.0
3.2
8.3
2.2
1.6
2.2
6.2
7.4

32.5
3.0
3.2
8.4
2.4
1.8
2.2
6.6
4.9

33.3
2.9
3.1
8.3
2.1
1.6
2.2
6.1
7.0

31.9
2.9
3.2
8.4
2.4
2.0
2.3
6.1
4.5

Expenditure (cash)

35.1

34.9

36.5

35.6

34.4

34.3

32.7

33.7

32.9

Expenditure (accrual) 2/
Defense
Law, order and security
Agriculture
Housing and communal services
Education
Health, sports and physical education
Social policies
Servicing of state debt
Budgetary loans
Other
Expenditure of budgetary funds 1/

36.3
1.1
1.9
0.9
2.6
6.5
5.1
1.4
0.7
1.0
9.4
5.8

35.0
1.0
1.8
0.7
2.3
6.6
4.9
1.7
0.6
1.5
7.1
6.9

36.2
1.0
1.8
1.4
2.6
6.4
4.9
1.7
0.5
0.5
8.2
7.2

35.6
1.0
1.9
1.6
2.4
6.1
5.2
1.7
0.4
0.1
8.1
7.2

34.4
0.9
1.9
1.4
1.6
6.3
5.1
2.6
0.4
-0.1
7.0
7.3

34.5
0.9
1.9
1.7
2.4
6.3
4.9
2.2
0.4
0.3
6.4
7.1

32.3
0.9
1.9
1.6
2.3
6.4
5.1
2.2
0.5
0.2
6.5
4.8

34.1
1.0
1.9
1.8
2.4
6.1
4.8
2.2
0.4
0.3
6.4
6.8

32.9
0.9
1.8
1.6
2.4
6.7
5.3
2.6
0.5
0.3
6.4
4.5

Expenditure: economic classification 3/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending

35.1
7.4
2.0
9.2
0.7
8.2
6.5
1.1

34.9
7.9
2.2
8.1
0.5
7.2
7.6
1.4

36.2
7.8
2.1
8.4
0.5
7.9
8.6
0.9

35.6
7.8
2.2
8.1
0.5
7.7
8.8
0.5

34.4
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

34.5
8.3
2.3
7.7
0.4
7.8
6.9
1.0

32.3
8.0
2.2
7.7
0.5
6.6
7.2
0.0

34.1
8.4
2.3
7.7
0.4
7.9
6.2
1.0

32.9
8.0
2.2
7.8
0.6
6.7
7.5
0.1

Balance (cash) 3/
Balance (accrual) 2/

-1.7
-2.9

-1.8
-1.9

-1.3
-1.1

-0.4
-0.3

-1.8
-1.8

-0.3
-0.5

-0.2
0.2

-0.4
-0.8

-1.0
-1.0

2. Social Protection Fund
Revenue
o/w: from the Republican budget
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

11.6
0.0
11.8
-0.2

11.7
0.3
11.7
0.0

10.9
0.2
10.9
0.0

11.0
0.1
10.6
0.4

11.5
...
11.5
0.0

11.0
0.1
11.0
0.0

11.2
0.0
11.0
0.2

11.0
0.4
11.1
-0.1

11.2
0.0
11.0
0.2

3. General government
Revenue
Expenditure (cash)
Expenditure (accrual) 2/
Balance (cash) 3/
Balance (accrual) 2/

44.9
46.8
48.1
-1.9
-3.1

44.6
46.4
46.5
-1.8
-1.9

45.8
47.2
46.9
-1.4
-1.1

46.2
46.2
46.1
0.0
0.0

44.1
45.9
45.9
-1.8
-1.8

44.9
45.2
45.4
-0.4
-0.5

43.7
43.6
43.3
0.0
0.4

43.9
44.4
44.9
-0.5
-1.0

43.0
43.9
43.9
-0.8
-0.8

4. Statistical discrepancy 3/

-0.2

0.4

0.0

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.7
0.1
0.1
1.5
1.5
1.1
0.5
0.0

2.2
1.6
0.1
0.5
0.0
-1.0
1.0
0.5

1.4
0.1
-0.1
1.5
1.2
0.7
0.5
0.2

-0.2
0.1
0.6
-0.8
-1.5
-0.7
-0.8
0.7

1.8
0.2
0.9
0.8
...
0.0
...
...

0.4
0.1
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.5
0.3
0.5

0.0
0.1
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
-0.5
0.3
0.0

0.5
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

0.8
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-0.4
0.0
7.8
2.8
58.4

0.5
1.0
7.2
2.7
69.5

0.0
0.0
7.0
2.7
68.9

5. Financing (cash) 3/
Privatization
Foreign financing, net
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank (incl. IMF)
Deposit money banks (incl. SPF)
Nonbank

Memorandum items:
1.2
0.1
-0.3
0.0
...
0.2
Change in expenditure arrears (current year GDP)
Stock of expenditure arrears (12 month GDP)
1.8
1.3
0.6
0.4
...
0.6
Government debt/GDP
13.2
11.2
10.4
9.0
8.1
7.9
o/w: external debt/GDP
6.3
5.7
4.3
3.2
...
2.9
GDP (trillions of rubels)
17.2
26.1
36.6
49.4
58.9
59.4
Source: Ministry of Finance, SPF, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes innovation funds from 2002, formally incorporated into the state government budget from 2005.
2/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
3/ The actual deficits from above the line include all the closing expenditure for the year carried out in January of the following
year and correspond to the authorities fiscal year reports. The deficit values from the financing side include January closing
expenditure in the year they were actually paid.

- 27 -

Table 6. Belarus: Balance of Payments, 2001-06 (Current Policies)
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2001

Current account balance
Merchandise trade balance
Exports
Imports
Services (net)
Income (net)
Transfers (net)
Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment (net)
Portfolio investment (net)
Trade credits (net)
Loans (net)
Other (net)
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Gross official reserves
Use of Fund resources
Short-term loans
O/w: Central Bank of Russia
Exceptional financing 1/
Memorandum items:
Current account (as percent of GDP)
Trade balance (as percent of GDP)
Overall balance (as percent of GDP)
Y-o-y growth in exports of goods (in percent)
Y-o-y growth in imports of goods (in percent)
Gross official reserves
In months of imports of goods and services
Medium and long-term debt (% of GDP)
Short-term debt (% of GDP)
Debt service ratio (as percent of exports of goods and services)
Public and public-guaranteed debt service ratio
(as percent of exports of goods and services)
External arrears
In percent of GDP
Sources: Belarus authorities and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes accumulation, repayment, and forgiveness of arrears.

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Prelim.

Proj.

Proj.

-394
-807
7,334
-8,141
301
-43
154

-311
-914
7,965
-8,879
433
-29
199

-424
-1,256
10,073
-11,329
585
25
222

-1,043
-2,066
13,917
-15,983
713
26
285

-1,004
-2,207
15,743
-17,950
847
62
293

-1,013
-2,340
17,084
-19,424
934
90
303

282
56
265
96
-20
-56
222
-17
-5

441
53
270
453
-9
-65
127
-118
-127

437
69
368
170
6
134
90
-32
41

1,192
49
1,144
168
60
403
379
135
307

1,025
49
977
168
34
450
311
13
0

1,036
46
989
172
37
496
254
30
0

-118

3

55

456

21

23

118
5
-30
57
51
35

-3
-101
-30
88
95
-55

-55
14
-32
12
-3
-49

-456
-256
-17
-168
-168
-15

-21
-12
-9
0
0
0

-23
-23
0
0
0
0

-3.2
-6.6
-1.0
10.4
8.2
359
0.5
9.2
10.4
7.6

-2.1
-6.3
0.0
8.6
9.1
476
0.6
9.8
11.0
7.1

-2.4
-7.1
-0.3
26.5
27.6
499
0.5
8.1
10.8
8.9

-4.6
-9.0
-0.8
38.2
41.1
770
0.6
5.9
12.8
7.3

-3.7
-8.2
0.1
13.1
12.3
782
0.5
4.4
14.2
7.8

-3.4
-7.8
0.1
8.5
8.2
805
0.5
4.4
15.3
7.3

1.3
489
4.0

1.6
434
3.0

2.2
385
2.2

2.4
370
1.6

0.6
370
1.4

0.3
370
1.2

- 28 -

Table 7. Belarus: Balance of Payments, 2001-06 (Reform Scenario)
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2001

Current account balance
Merchandise trade balance
Exports
Imports
Services (net)
Income (net)
Transfers (net)
Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment (net)
Portfolio investment (net)
Trade credits (net)
Loans (net)
Other (net)
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Gross official reserves
Use of Fund resources
Short-term loans
O/w: Central Bank of Russia
Exceptional financing 1/
Memorandum items:
Current account (as percent of GDP)
Trade balance (as percent of GDP)
Overall balance (as percent of GDP)
Y-o-y growth in exports of goods (in percent)
Y-o-y growth in imports of goods (in percent)
Gross official reserves
In months of imports of goods and services
Medium and long-term debt (% of GDP)
Short-term debt (% of GDP)
Debt service ratio (as percent of exports of goods and services)
Public and public-guaranteed debt service ratio
(as percent of exports of goods and services)
External arrears
In percent of GDP
Sources: Belarus authorities and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes accumulation, repayment, and forgiveness of arrears.

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Prelim.

Proj.

Proj.

-394
-807
7,334
-8,141
301
-43
154

-311
-914
7,965
-8,879
433
-29
199

-424
-1,256
10,073
-11,329
585
25
222

-1,043
-2,066
13,917
-15,983
713
26
285

-1,067
-2,269
15,887
-18,156
845
63
294

-1,132
-2,490
17,945
-20,434
961
94
302

282
56
265
96
-20
-56
222
-17
-5

441
53
270
453
-9
-65
127
-118
-127

437
69
368
170
6
134
90
-32
41

1,192
49
1,144
168
60
403
379
135
307

1,222
49
1,173
214
34
456
453
17
0

1,536
51
1,486
324
37
522
587
16
0

-118

3

55

456

155

404

118
5
-30
57
51
35

-3
-101
-30
88
95
-55

-55
14
-32
12
-3
-49

-456
-256
-17
-168
-168
-15

-155
-146
-9
0
0
0

-404
-345
0
0
0
-59

-3.2
-6.6
-1.0
10.4
8.2
359
0.5
9.2
10.4
3.4

-2.1
-6.3
0.0
8.6
9.1
476
0.6
9.8
11.0
4.1

-2.4
-7.1
-0.3
26.5
27.6
499
0.5
8.1
10.8
11.2

-4.6
-9.0
-0.8
38.2
41.1
770
0.6
5.9
12.8
7.3

-4.0
-8.4
0.6
14.2
13.6
917
0.6
4.4
14.3
7.5

-3.6
-7.9
1.3
12.9
12.5
1,262
0.7
4.2
14.8
7.0

1.3
489
3.9

1.6
434
3.0

2.2
385
2.2

2.4
370
1.6

0.6
370
1.4

0.3
311
1.0

- 29 -

Table 8. Belarus: Medium Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2000-10
(in percent of GDP unless otherwise specified)
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Current Policies
21.9
20.9
3.3
1.7
18.6
19.1

19.8
1.5
18.4

18.9
1.2
17.7

Est.

Gross national savings
government
non-government

22.8
8.2
14.6

20.6
3.4
17.2

20.0
5.7
14.3

24.2
7.5
16.7

23.8
8.9
14.9

23.6
6.4
17.2

22.8
5.3
17.6

22.0
7.9
14.1

19.7
3.0
16.7

18.9
5.2
13.7

22.8
7.1
15.7

22.4
8.5
13.9

22.2
6.1
16.2

21.5
5.1
16.4

20.7
3.1
17.5

19.8
1.6
18.2

18.8
1.4
17.4

17.9
1.1
16.8

0.8
0.3
0.5

0.9
0.4
0.5

1.2
0.5
0.6

1.4
0.5
0.9

1.4
0.4
1.0

1.3
0.3
1.0

1.3
0.2
1.1

1.2
0.2
1.0

1.1
0.1
1.0

1.0
0.1
0.9

1.0
0.1
0.9

Gross domestic investment
government
non-government

25.4
8.3
17.1

23.8
6.5
17.2

22.2
7.6
14.5

26.6
8.6
18.0

28.3
8.8
19.5

27.3
6.9
20.4

26.2
6.2
20.0

25.2
4.8
20.4

24.1
3.7
20.4

23.1
3.7
19.4

22.0
3.6
18.4

Savings-investment balance

-2.6

-3.2

-2.1

-2.4

-4.6

-3.7

-3.4

-3.3

-3.3

-3.2

-3.2

Current account balance

-2.6

-3.2

-2.1

-2.4

-4.6

-3.7

-3.4

-3.3

-3.3

-3.2

-3.2

9,134
5.8
168.6

17,173
4.7
61.1

26,138
5.0
42.6

36,565
7.0
28.4

49,445
11.0
18.1

59,363
7.1
12.1

69,458
4.0
12.5

81,180
3.0
13.5

22.8
8.2
14.6

20.6
3.4
17.2

20.0
5.7
14.3

24.2
7.5
16.7

23.8
8.9
14.9

21.0
7.6
13.4

21.9
6.7
15.2

22.0
7.9
14.1

19.7
3.0
16.7

18.9
5.2
13.7

22.8
7.1
15.7

22.4
8.5
13.9

19.8
7.7
12.0

20.6
6.6
14.1

21.8
6.6
15.2

0.8
0.3
0.5

0.9
0.4
0.5

1.2
0.5
0.6

1.4
0.5
0.9

1.4
0.4
1.0

1.3
-0.1
1.4

1.2
0.1
1.2

Gross domestic investment
government
non-government

25.4
8.3
17.1

23.8
6.5
17.2

22.2
7.6
14.5

26.6
8.6
18.0

28.3
8.8
19.5

25.0
7.2
17.8

Savings-investment balance

-2.6

-3.2

-2.1

-2.4

-4.6

Current account balance

-2.6

-3.2

-2.1

-2.4

Nominal GDP (billions of rubels)
9,134
Real GDP growth rate
5.8
Inflation (annual average rate, percent)
168.6
Sources: Belarus authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

17,173
4.7
61.1

26,138
5.0
42.6

36,565
7.0
28.4

Gross domestic savings
government
non-government
Net factor income and transfers
government
non-government

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of rubels)
Real GDP growth rate
Inflation (annual average rate, percent)
Gross national savings
government
non-government
Gross domestic savings
government
non-government
Net factor income and transfers
government
non-government

94,616 109,674 127,430
2.0
1.0
0.8
14.3
14.8
15.3

Reform scenario
23.0
23.9
6.9
7.1
16.2
16.8

24.6
7.3
17.3

25.3
7.5
17.9

22.7
6.6
16.1

23.4
6.7
16.8

24.1
6.7
17.4

1.2
0.3
1.0

1.2
0.4
0.8

1.2
0.6
0.6

1.2
0.8
0.4

25.5
7.5
18.0

26.0
7.7
18.3

26.5
7.9
18.6

27.0
8.1
18.9

27.5
8.3
19.2

-4.0

-3.6

-3.0

-2.6

-2.4

-2.2

-4.6

-4.0

-3.6

-3.0

-2.6

-2.4

-2.2

49,445
11.0
18.1

58,392
6.0
11.5

68,862
6.2
11.2

79,104
6.4
8.0

89,358
6.6
6.0

Memorandum items:
99,138 108,957
6.7
6.7
4.0
3.0

27.8
1.9
14.8

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

4.7
-6.9
3.0
10.3
11.1
-3.0
0.7

1.9
15.2

28.8

2.9
3.2
3.0
4.4
67.9
72.3
-0.7
0.9
0.5
-0.8
1.2
-0.3

19.5

2001

5.0
12.4
2.3
9.8
9.0
-2.2
0.9

2.0
13.6

33.0

1.3
-1.3
2.2
3.6
63.2
66.8
-0.9
-2.6
0.4
-0.8
-2.2
2.6

20.9

Actual
2002

7.0
13.6
2.7
24.9
25.1
-1.9
1.0

2.5
14.0

29.0

-2.0
-2.3
1.9
3.8
64.9
68.7
-1.0
-3.2
0.5
-1.2
-2.5
0.3

18.8

2003

11.0
15.7
2.6
35.4
39.0
-4.2
0.8

3.3
14.4

27.3

-0.1
-0.4
4.2
5.9
68.4
74.4
-0.8
-3.8
0.4
-1.6
-2.6
0.2

18.7

2004

4.9
17.4
3.0
21.6
20.7
-3.3
1.3

10-Year
Historical
Average
6.1
46.8
0.9
28.4
26.6
1.6
1.0

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

18.5
18.5
18.5
18.5
18.5
18.5

18.5
18.5

7.1
10.4
5.4
13.2
12.2
-2.9
0.6

4.4
16.1

28.3

-0.2
1.9
2.9
5.0
65.5
70.5
-0.6
-0.3
0.9
-1.1
...
-2.1

18.5

2005

2007

3.0
10.0
13.7
5.4
5.6
-0.9
0.5

6.6
19.3

32.9

-0.1
2.2
0.9
4.5
59.6
64.0
-0.5
1.9
2.4
-0.5
...
-2.3

2.0
10.4
16.9
4.3
4.6
-0.3
0.5

7.8
20.4

35.9

0.2
2.4
0.3
4.3
55.1
59.5
-0.5
2.6
2.9
-0.3
...
-2.2

19.8

1.0
10.9
19.7
3.7
4.2
0.3
0.4

9.2
21.4

38.9

0.1
2.6
-0.3
4.2
51.1
55.3
-0.4
3.3
3.5
-0.2
...
-2.5

19.0
21.9
81.4
24.3
31.9
26.0

17.7
19.7

17.4
24.0
355.1
29.9
49.7
25.6

16.4
19.6

17.5
24.1
351.1
30.5
50.2
25.7

15.5
19.8

17.5
24.3
354.6
31.3
50.3
25.9

14.6
19.9

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

4.0
6.9
8.9
8.7
8.3
-1.9
0.6

5.4
18.0

30.7

1.1
2.1
1.9
4.7
64.0
68.7
-0.6
0.8
1.5
-0.7
...
-1.0

19.6

19.9

Projections
2008
2009

I. Baseline Projections
19.7

2006

17.3
24.2
350.4
31.9
50.2
25.8

13.9
19.9

0.8
10.8
17.5
3.6
4.0
0.0
0.4

10.3
21.4

41.9

0.0
2.6
0.0
4.1
47.4
51.5
-0.4
3.0
3.1
-0.1
...
-2.6

19.9

2010

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
ε = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and α = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ The implied change under this scenario is discussed in the text.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2006

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2006-10 5/
A2. Country-specific shock in 2006, with 30 % reduction of exports to main trading partner 6/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

5.8
-0.6
2.9
19.5
21.4
-2.1
0.9

-1.7
0.8
2.1
3.4
60.0
63.4
-0.9
-0.4
0.5
-1.0
0.1
-2.5

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

16.7

External debt

2000

Table 9. Belarus: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

0.5
0.7
9.7
1.2
1.5
0.8

-3.5
0.6

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 7/

3.0
9.9
13.7
6.5
6.5
-1.0
0.5

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 7/
0.6

- 30 -

0.0
-8.1
0.0
45.8
45.8
-8.2
-9.2
-8.9
-0.3
0.9
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
8.1
32.8
5.2
0.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

4.7
9.1
-70.4
-25.3
79.5
8.2
2.4

10.0
1.2

29.5

-1.8
-2.0
2.4
44.9
47.3
-4.5
-6.3
-5.9
-0.4
1.8
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.3

13.2
6.3

2001

5.0
6.3
-38.6
-17.7
44.9
1.9
1.4

8.6
1.3

25.1

-2.1
-0.1
1.4
44.6
45.9
-3.0
-4.0
-3.6
-0.4
0.9
1.6
1.6
0.0
0.0
-2.0

11.2
5.7

Actual
2002

7.0
6.4
-24.3
-10.9
30.7
8.2
0.6

4.8
0.8

22.7

-0.8
-1.5
0.6
45.8
46.4
-2.2
-2.7
-2.1
-0.6
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.7

10.4
4.3

2003

11.0
6.4
-15.5
-0.6
21.8
9.1
-0.5

2.7
0.6

19.5

-1.4
-2.7
-0.5
46.2
45.6
-2.2
-2.2
-1.4
-0.8
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
1.2

9.0
3.2

2004

6.1
4.9
200.2
28.1
199.6
13.3
1.3

Standard
Deviation

4.9
9.2
-145.1
-31.5
154.3
4.6
0.4

10-Year

10-Year
Historical
Average

7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9

7.9
7.9
7.9

7.1
6.0
-6.1
...
12.1
5.5
0.1

2.4
0.7

17.6

-1.1
-0.9
0.1
44.9
45.0
-1.1
-1.1
-0.5
-0.5
...
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.2

7.9
2.9

2005

Projections
2007
2008

3.0
11.2
-2.6
...
13.7
2.0
0.8

3.0
1.0

17.7

0.4
0.6
0.8
43.3
44.1
-0.4
-0.4
-0.2
-0.2
...
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.1

7.7
3.1

2.0
13.3
-1.0
...
14.3
1.4
1.1

3.7
1.4

20.1

0.9
1.1
1.1
42.7
43.9
-0.2
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
...
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.2

8.6
3.4

1.0
16.0
1.2
...
14.8
-0.1
1.1

4.2
1.8

22.8

1.1
1.2
1.1
42.3
43.4
0.0
0.0
0.1
-0.1
...
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.2

9.6
3.9

2009

8.1
13.5
9.7
13.2
9.0
17.2

7.1
6.8
7.5

9.0
26.0
12.2
21.7
9.3
17.3

6.8
6.6
7.9

9.7
37.4
12.9
22.3
10.1
18.0

6.5
6.6
8.9

10.7
49.5
13.9
23.6
11.0
19.2

6.2
6.9
10.0

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

4.0
6.6
-5.9
...
12.5
2.7
0.5

2.6
0.8

16.5

-0.7
-0.1
0.5
43.9
44.4
-0.7
-0.7
-0.4
-0.3
...
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.6

7.2
2.6

I. Baseline Projections

2006

1/ Gross general government debt.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
8/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP. The historical average real interest rate of minus 145 percent was replaced by the actual 2005
level of minus 6.1 percent (to avoid an unrealistic real interest rate assumption).
9/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
10/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

B1. Real interest rate is at 6 percent in 2006 and 2007
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006 9/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2006-10 8/
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2006-10
A3. Country-specific shock in 2006, with reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
5.8
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 7/
18.1
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent) -167.0
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
-23.3
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
185.2
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
12.2
Primary deficit
0.0

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

15.0
9.0

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2000

Table 10. Belarus: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

11.9
62.5
15.2
25.2
12.2
20.7

6.0
7.5
11.3

0.8
17.8
2.5
...
15.3
1.4
1.1

4.8
2.3

25.6

1.2
1.4
1.1
42.5
43.6
0.1
0.1
0.2
-0.1
...
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.2

10.9
4.4

2010

3.0
11.8
-2.0
...
13.8
2.2
0.8

2.6
2.0
0.6
0.9
0.5
0.8

-0.4
0.8
0.5

Debt-stabilizing
primary balance 10/

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
primary balance 10/
0.5

- 31 -

- 32 -

APPENDIX I

FUND RELATIONS
As of April 30, 2005
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 10, 1992; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR million

Percent of Quota

386.40
386.40
0.02

100.00
100.00
0.01

SDR million

Percent of Allocation

0.01

N/A

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

SDR Department:
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

VI.
VII.

Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount Approved
(SDR million)

Amount Drawn
(SDR million)

Stand-by

09/12/1995

09/11/1996

196.28

50.00

Projected Obligations to the Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs): None
Safeguards Assessments:

As there is no arrangement in place, under the Fund’s safeguards assessments policy, the
National Bank of the Republic of Belarus (NBRB) is not subject to a full safeguards
assessment. However, as a potential borrower, the NBRB requested a voluntary safeguards
assessment, and an on-site assessment was conducted in December 2003. The assessment
concluded that significant vulnerabilities existed in the safeguards framework, especially in the
areas of the legal structure and independence, external and internal audit, and in financial
reporting. The assessment made specific recommendations to correct the identified
shortcomings. The authorities have begun to take steps to address some of these issues, and are
considering appropriate measures to address the remaining concerns.

- 33 -

VIII.

APPENDIX I

Exchange Arrangements:

As of August 20, 1994, the rubel (Rbl) became the unit of account replacing the Belarusian
ruble, which was formally recognized as the sole legal tender only on May 18, 1994. The
conversion took place at the rate of 10 Belarusian rubles = 1 rubel. The authorities decided to
drop three zeroes from the rubel denomination as of January 1, 2000. The exchange rate for
the U.S. dollar was Rbl 2149 on May 25, 2005.
In mid-September 2000, the official exchange rate was unified with the market-determined
rate resulting from daily auctions at the Belarus Currency and Stock Exchange. Since then, the
official rate on any day is equal to the closing rate of the previous trading day. In line with the
objective to reach monetary union with Russia, the authorities adopted a crawling band vis-àvis the Russian ruble in January 2001, with monthly rates of devaluation that are revised
quarterly and a band of currently 5 percentage points around central parity. On November 5,
2001, Belarus accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the IMF’s
Articles of Agreement. During the same month, the NBRB suspended all ad hoc exemptions
from the 30 percent surrender requirement.
IX.

UFR/Article IV Consultation:

Belarus is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The eleventh Article IV consultation was
concluded on May 7, 2004. Visits since have included:
Staff visit
2005 Article IV consultation mission
X.

December 20–22, 2004
March 16–31, 2005

FSAP Participation, ROSCs, and OFC Assessments:

The fiscal ROSC was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=17839.0 and the data ROSC on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18013.0. Two FSAP missions took
place in 2004 and an FSSA report is under preparation.
The FSSA report accompanies the staff report.
XI.

Technical Assistance, 2000–05:
Department
Counterpart

Subject

Timing

Missions
FAD

Government Finance Statistics

April 28–May 12, 2005

FAD/MFD

Improving debt management

October 6-20, 2004

FAD

Budget code and other issues in
public expenditure management

March 1–12, 2004

FAD

Tax policy

March 19–April 1, 2003

- 34 -

FAD
FAD
MFD
MFD
MFD
MFD/LEG
MFD
MFD
MFD
MFD
FIN
STA
STA
STA
STA
STA
STA
STA

Resident
Advisors

XII.

STA
STA

Public expenditure management
Treasury development
Banking supervision issues
Monetary policy and monetary
operations
FSAP
Anti-money laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism
legislative issues
Bank supervision and restructuring
Issues in Monetary Unification with
Russia
Assessment of foreign exchange
markets and operations and reserve
management
Assessment in monetary and foreign
exchange policy and operations and
central bank organization
Safeguards Assessment
National Accounts Statistics
Data ROSC and SDDS subscription
SDDS subscription
Balance of payments
Balance of payments
Money and banking statistics
Multisector statistics (report of the
resident advisor)
National accounts statistics
Mr. Umana
(General Statistics Advisor)

APPENDIX I

June 12–27, 2001
January 15–26, 2001
April 11-20, 2005
February 26- March 10, 2005
September, November, and
December 2004
June 17–24, 2004
December 1–12, 2003
April 2–11, 2003
June 2–10, 2002
April 10–22, 2002
December 9-19, 2003
January 10-21, 2005
March 2004
December 2004
August 20–September 3, 2003
November 13–24, 2000
October 25–November 7, 2000
August 7, 1996–August 6, 2000
August 23–September 6, 2000
August 1996–August 2000

Resident Representative:

A resident representative office was opened in Minsk on October 5, 1992. The Fund’s resident
representative was recalled on June 30, 1998, and Belarus was covered jointly with Lithuania
through end-December 2004, when the resident representative’s term came to an end.
Currently, the resident representative office is run by local staff.

- 35-

APPENDIX II

RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK
Partnership in Belarus’ development strategy
1.
The World Bank Group program in Belarus was rather limited during the period
1995–2000, and the 1999 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) set a strict trigger (exchange
rate unification) for the resumption of the IBRD lending. The trigger was met in September
2000, leading to an improvement in the quality and intensity of the dialogue between Belarus
and the Bank. The current CAS was approved in 2002 to advance cooperation with Belarus
in critical areas, help the country open up its economy and society, minimize social and
environmental risks, and address global public good concerns.
IMF-World Bank collaboration in specific areas
2.
The Bank and Fund teams work closely in Belarus and maintain an extremely good
relationship. The IMF plays a key role at the macro level, while the World Bank focuses on
the structural agenda, social and environmental issues. The Bank and the Fund teams carry
out joint activities on the key fiscal and structural issues. The joint work on the Public
Expenditure Review (PER) is an example of excellent cooperation between the two
institutions. Other joint activities carried out during 2004-05 are the Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) and the Country Economic Memorandum (CEM).
Areas in which the World Bank leads
3.
Social sphere. The World Bank technical engagement with Belarus has generated a
significant amount of analysis in areas of relevance to the assessment of poverty and living
conditions in the country. A strong platform for technical collaboration on poverty issues was
provided by technical assistance under the IDF grant for Strengthening of the Capacity of the
Ministry of Social Protection in Policy Formulation and Analysis for preparation and
introduction of Targeted Social Assistance Program (TSAP). The Grant was implemented
successfully during 2000-2003 and completed in June 2003. Driven by demographic and
socio-economic factors, Belarus faces a need for deep pension system reform. To analyze
current situation and discuss possible reform options the World Bank team conducted a
Pension Policy Dialogue with the government during FY 2004.
4.
Energy sector. The Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project (US$22.6 million) aims
to assist in the rehabilitation of the heating system, thermal insulation, and lighting in over
450 public buildings across the country. The project targets schools, hospitals, orphanages,
and community homes for the elderly and the disabled. It also includes measures to increase
energy efficiency.
5.
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) grant (US$50,000) was
approved in 2004 to help the Committee on Energy Efficiency explore market mechanisms to
improve energy efficiency through operation of Energy Servicing Companies (ESCOs) and

- 36-

APPENDIX II

options of strengthening the energy efficiency program by learning experience of
neighboring countries that have managed to weather the impact of multi-fold energy prices
increases.
6.
Environment. Belarus has made good progress in the protection of environment.
However, the country is still facing many environmental problems, including coping with the
legacy of the Chernobyl catastrophe. The Chernobyl theme occupies a central role in the
current CAS. The proposed Post-Chernobyl Recovery Project is intended to “revitalize
selected districts most affected by the Chernobyl accident by improving local people’s
incomes and living conditions”. The project is based on the recommendations of the
Chernobyl Review (2002) and also intended to spearhead greater support of the international
community to the affected regions of the country.
7.
PHRD Climate Change Pilot Project (US$1.0 million, approved in 2003) is aimed at
demonstrating opportunities for greenhouse gas (GHG) emission abatement through energy
efficiency and renewable energy utilization in the supply of heat and hot water to social
sector buildings, and assisting the Belarusian government with the development and
implementation of emission standards for biomass-fired boilers, thereby removing an
institutional barrier to broader introduction of energy supply based on biomass fuel.
8.
GEF POPs Enabling Activity Project (US$499,300). After a two-year dialogue and
preparation activities in cooperation with UNEP, Belarus ratified the Stockholm Convention
on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) and selected the World Bank as a GEF
Implementing Agency for the POPs activities.
Areas of shared responsibility
9.
Economic development. In 2004 the Bank launched preparation of the new Country
Economic Memorandum for Belarus. The major theme of it would be the Sources and
Sustainability of Economic Growth. The Bank team cooperates closely with the IMF on
different issues related to the CEM preparation, one of the chapters - “Macroeconomic
policies and risks”, is being prepared jointly. This chapter will present an overview of
country’s macroeconomic developments since 1996, sources and structure of growth, and
analyze the role of macroeconomic policies in Belarusian growth performance. Special
attention will be paid to the risks associated with Belarus’ current macroeconomic position,
and how these risks might be addressed effectively through adjustments in monetary policy,
fiscal policy, and debt management.
10.
Private sector development. The most challenging reform agenda for Belarus is in
the area of structural reforms and private business development. The Bank Group seeks to
improve the general environment for the creation and operation of private business in Belarus
through technical assistance, policy dialogue and ESW. The Bank and the IFC conducted a
number of studies including Improving the Business Environment and Costs of Doing
Business Surveys to track the developments in this area, define impediments to private
business expansion and provide policy recommendations. The Fund focuses on

- 37-

APPENDIX II

macroeconomic policies aimed at sustainable growth and encouraging private sector
development. The Fund also provides technical assistance to improve taxation, banking
regulations and banking supervision.
11.
Public expenditure management. The current CAS attaches great importance to
fiscal issues, emphasizing the goals of greater effectiveness, transparency, and accountability
in the use of public resources. In 2003 the World Bank with the IMF participation completed
the first Public Expenditure Review (PER) for Belarus.
12.
The IMF and the Bank provide continuous technical assistance to Belarus in the area
of public expenditure management. The government has determined the following priority
areas: modernization of budget classification, Budget Code preparation, MTEF, reform of
inter-budgetary fiscal relations, and development of sector strategies. During FY2004 the
Bank provided technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance for Budget Code preparation.
In FY2005 efforts have been focused on assisting the government in the area of
intergovernmental fiscal relations, in particular, in clarification of revenues and expenditures
assignments for different level of the government and in the development of formula for
intergovernmental fiscal transfers.
13.
Financial sector. At the request of the government and the National Bank, a joint
IMF/World Bank FSAP team visited Belarus in September and November 2004. The FSAP
for Belarus has been centered on assessments of the banking system, including deposit
insurance, securities markets, insurance industry, payment system and transparency in
conducting monetary policy. Regulations, oversight and governance arrangements has been
reviewed also. The team continues working with the NBRB and Belarusian authorities to
finalize the FSAP findings, some of which will be incorporated in the agenda of IMF Article
IV consultation mission and the CEM. The Bank and the IMF also carry out joint
responsibility for providing assistance to Belarus in the prevention of money laundering and
combating financing of terrorism.
Areas in which the IMF leads
14.
The IMF is actively engaged with the Authorities in discussing the macroeconomic
program providing them with technical assistance and related support, including on economic
and financial statistics, tax policy, monetary operations and fiscal transparency. The IMF is
leading the dialogue on setting the objectives for monetary and exchange rate policies, public
debt management, overall budget envelope and tax policy.
15.
The IMF analysis in these areas serves as an input to the Bank policy advice. The
Bank and the IMF teams have regular consultations and the Bank staff takes part in the IMF
Article IV Consultation missions. This helps to ensure consistency of the policy
recommendations by the two institutions.

- 38-

APPENDIX II

The World Bank Group Strategy
16.
Belarus joined the World Bank in July 1992. Bank relations with Belarus have
generally paralleled those of the IMF. Under the 1999 CAS, liberalization of the exchange
rate was set as a trigger for moving to a low case lending (one project per year) scenario. The
unification of the exchange rate in September 2000 allowed the Bank to proceed with the
preparation of a US$22.6 million Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project, approved on June
5, 2001. An improved technical dialogue between the World Bank Group and the Belarus
authorities preceded the preparation of the current 2002-04 CAS, which was completed in
February 2002. In the low case, the CAS focused on the areas compatible with government
priorities and the Bank’s corporate mandate—global public goods and interventions with a
high social content. The CAS left the door open for a broader assistance by spelling out
triggers for a base case, should the government advance in public expenditure reform and
improve business environment.
17.
The CAS implementation results have been mixed. On the positive side, the economy
has continued to grow, poverty incidence has fallen significantly, the Bank’s Economic and
Sector Work (ESW) has been highly commended, and the technical dialogue between the
Bank and the government has reported positive results, some of which are likely to be
sustainable. On the negative side, not a single lending operation was approved during this
CAS period. The CAR, prepared in summer 2004, recommended to complete the key
elements of current CAS before initiation of the new CAS. This includes, completion of
ongoing ESW, particularly the CEM and the FSAP; continuation of the environment
initiatives, and resumption of the Chernobyl Project preparation.
18.
To date, the Bank has committed the total of US$190.6 million, and US$15.0 million
has been provided in the form of grants. The IBRD Belarus active portfolio has one ongoing
operation – Social Sector Energy Retrofitting Project totaling US$22.6 million. Lending
activity in the pipeline has the Post-Chernobyl Recovery Project (tentative amount of
US$45.0 million).
19.
Non-lending activities include extensive analytical work. The most recent work
includes the report entitled Belarus: Chernobyl Review (report No.23883-BY, July 15, 2002),
a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (Belarus: Strengthening Public Resource
Management, Report No.26041-BY, June 20, 2003) and a Poverty Assessment Update
(Belarus Poverty Assessment: Preparing for the Future, Report No.27431-BY), preparation
of the Country Economic Memorandum and Financial Sector Assessment Program (2004ongoing).
20.
The IFC activities in Belarus. The IFC has been actively involved in advisory work
in Belarus since 1993. The work began with the advisory services on privatization of small
businesses. Currently IFC focuses its efforts on small and medium enterprise development
and improvement of the business environment.

- 39-

APPENDIX II

21.
In December 2004 IFC has launched a Business Enabling Environment Project
funded jointly with the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA).
This two-year technical assistance effort will aim at reducing the regulatory burden on SME
and improving SME access to information and business support services.
22.
In addition to the advisory services the International Finance Corporation is also
pursuing investment activities in Belarus. IFC has invested a total of US$44 million in the
financial and manufacturing sectors, including credit lines extended to Priorbank for onlending to private enterprises and providing loan and equity for the refurbishment,
modernization and expansion of Dednovo brewery. Despite the difficult investment
environment in Belarus, IFC continues to seek opportunities for investment projects with the
participation of the strategic investors.

Questions may be referred to Sergiy Kulyk (202) 458-4068

- 40 -

APPENDIX III

BELARUS: STATISTICAL ISSUES
(As of March 2, 2005)
1.
While some weaknesses remain in the statistical system of Belarus, the authorities—
with technical assistance from the Fund—have made significant efforts and improvements
over the past years in a number of key areas, as described below. The Ministry of Statistics
(Minstat) publishes a large amount of data and has a predetermined publication schedule. The
provision of data over the last year has generally been adequate for the analysis of economic
developments on a regular basis (Table 1). Data are usually provided in a timely fashion
through the Resident Representative’s office.
2.
The country’s IFS page has been published since November 1996 and is updated
regularly on a monthly basis. A Statistics Law was signed by the President in February 1997.
A multisector statistical advisor sponsored by the Fund was in place from August 1996 to
August 2000.
3.
The authorities of Belarus participated in a 2004 Data ROSC and the final report was
published in February 2005 (see the TCIRS for partial summary ratings). The ROSC mission
found that all statistical agencies should increase user confidence in the accuracy and
reliability of official statistics.
4.
The authorities subscribed to the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS)
on December 22, 2004: http://www.belstat.gov.by/homep/en/specst/np.htm.
National Accounts
5.
The Ministry of Statistics, with technical assistance from the OECD and the IMF,
switched to the System of National Accounts 1993 (1993 SNA), and discontinued the
calculation of net material product. A first set of quarterly national accounts was published in
January 1996; they are continuously updated on a timely basis. Quarterly national accounts
data are published in the IFS. A full set of annual national accounts has been prepared for
1990–2003.
Although concerns have been raised on the accuracy of GDP estimates due to shortcomings
in reporting by the newly emerging sectors, in particular services, and an active informal
sector, Minstat has made significant progress in improving the coverage of statistics in all
fields. An updated business register (based on administrative sources) and a better discipline
of survey responses promoted by the Statistical Law of 1996 have contributed to this
situation.
A recent TA mission on national accounts statistics found that most of the recommendations
of previous TA missions in 1999 and 2000, as well as those of the 2004 data ROSC mission
have been implemented. The mission also found that Minstat uses sound methods in
estimating GDP given the enterprise level source data both at current and at constant prices.
Data sources for GDP compilation are comprehensive and imputations for nonresponse to

- 41-

APPENDIX III

enterprise surveys amount to only about half percent of GDP. However, the activities of the
informal sector, which are concentrated in agriculture and retail trade, may still need
improvements in sources and methods.
A systematic upward bias in measuring industrial output that has led to significant inaccuracy
in GDP estimates in the past has been partially addressed through improvements in the
industrial production index (IPI) introduced starting with the data for 2002. The authorities
are planning to begin publishing the new IPI in 2006.
Prices
Monthly data on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Producer Price Index (PPI) are
reported to the Fund on a timely basis. Both indices were developed with substantial
technical assistance from the Fund. Other Fund recommendations, such as inclusion of
exports, adequate specification of items, and better selection of representative products and
prices, have either been adopted or are in the process of being adopted. Since January 2001,
the PPI has been compiled using the 1999 weights; and beginning with 2003 data, with 2001
production weights.
Government Finance Statistics
Government finance statistics (GFS) on revenue and expenditure in the functional
classification are provided for the consolidated state budget (republican and local
government budgets) and Social Protection Fund on a monthly basis, about three to four
weeks following the end of the reference period. The economic classification of monthly
expenditure has been available since the first quarter of 2001 for the republican budget, but
only quarterly for the consolidated state budget. A new plan of budget accounts has been
implemented from January 1998; a number of extrabudgetary accounts have been
incorporated into the budget since the start of 1998. Central and local government annual
data for 2000–02 were published in the 2004 GFS Yearbook. Monthly data, covering the
budget sector, excluding social security, are published in IFS.
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) compiles detailed monthly data on tax and expenditure
arrears of the central and local governments. Further implementation of the Treasury project
holds out the promise of significant improvements in preparing regular and timely reports on
spending commitments and deliveries.
Detailed information on domestic bank financing of general government institutions is
compiled by the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus (NBRB) in coordination with the
MoF. Data covering foreign financing of general government institutions as well as domestic
and foreign debt and debt guarantees, have improved significantly in the past year. This has
led to an improvement in reconciling spending and revenue records with financing data,
although some discrepancies still remain. The system to improve the contingent liabilities
recording is in preparation.

- 42-

APPENDIX III

Since the 2004 Data ROSC mission, the MOF has made progress in different areas of
collection, compilation, and dissemination of fiscal data. The authorities have extended the
coverage of the general government (republican and local government) operations by
including data for innovation funds, and the Social Protection Fund in the budget, and
increased the number of officials involved in the GFS compilation work, and increased
provision of detailed budgetary metadata and methodological descriptions on the MoF’s
website. In addition to these improvements, the MoF has prepared new budgetary
classifications codes for revenue, expenditure and financing data that will align them to the
GFSM 2001 analytical framework.
At the end of April, 2005, a GFS technical assistance (TA) mission visited Minsk. This
mission found that the existing fiscal, accounting, and statistical systems have a sound basis
for migrating to the GSFM 2001. Nonetheless, several areas were identified that will need
further work before satisfactory implementation of the GFSM 2001. In order to provide
assistance in this area, the GFS TA mission collaborated with the authorities on the
preparation of a migration plan for a gradual implementation of this analytical framework.
Monetary Statistics
With STA technical assistance, the NBRB made significant progress in improving the quality
of monetary statistics. The balance sheet of the NBRB and the monetary survey are usually
provided with a lag of no more than two weeks; the NBRB monthly balance sheet is
available on or about the fifth of the month following the reference period, but monetary data
for publication in IFS are reported with a lag of about two months. At present, the NBRB has
been working on implementing the new standardized report forms for monetary statistics,
which are based on the framework of sectoral balance sheets and surveys introduced in the
Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual.
As noted above, reconciliation of budget financing data with data on net credit to government
derived from the banking system has improved of late, but some discrepancies remain, and in
these cases Fund staff relies on the banking data.
Interest rate data on bank deposits and credits, as well as data on NBRB credit auctions and
the placement of NBRB and government securities, are provided with a one-month lag.
Exchange rate data are readily available on the NBRB’s web site, and periodically reported
to the Fund in electronic file.
Balance of Payments Statistics
The overall quality and timeliness of data is satisfactory. The NBRB publishes quarterly
balance of payments and international investment position statements in the BPM5 format on
a regular basis. Minstat publishes monthly foreign trade data, with a lag of about six weeks.
Official reserve assets are now available on a weekly basis, generally with little or no lag.
The net foreign assets position of the commercial banks is compiled monthly, with minimum
delay. Scheduled interest and amortization payments on public sector debt are tracked by the

- 43-

APPENDIX III

Ministry of Finance, and timely information is available on arrears on government and
government-guaranteed debt.
The August/September 2003 technical assistance mission noted that most of the November
2000 mission report recommendations had been implemented. Among others, the
International Transactions Reporting System has been broadened to permit a more accurate
classification of external transactions, while coverage and reporting forms for enterprise
surveys were also improved.
Since August 1998, Belarus has been reporting its annual and quarterly balance of payments
to STA for publication. Quarterly international investment position statements are now also
reported to STA for publication.
Belarus has started to disseminate historical data on the reserves template on the IMF's
website: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/ir/colist.htm. Monthly time series start with
November 2004 data.
Starting with the first quarter of 2004, Belarus has begun to disseminate historical quarterly
data on external debt on the World Bank’s external debt webpage:
http://www.worldbank.org/data/working/QEDS/sdds_main.html.

- 44 -

APPENDIX IV

BELARUS: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(AS OF MAY 24, 2005)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
6
publication

Exchange Rates

5/24/05

5/24/05

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

5/01/05

5/10/05

W

W

W

Reserve/Base Money

3/31/2005

4/15/2005

M

M

M

Broad Money

3/31/2005

4/15/2005

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

3/31/2005

4/15/2005

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

3/31/2005

4/15/2005

M

M

M

3/31/2004

5/02/05

D

M

M

Consumer Price Index

3/05

4/17/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

3/05

5/03/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

3/05

5/03/05

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

3/05

4/05

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

12/04

03/05

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

12/04

03/05

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Q1/05

4/05

Q

Q

Q

Gross External Debt

12/04

03/05

Q

Q

Q

Interest Rates

1

2

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
7
soundness

Data Quality –
Accuracy and
8
reliability

O, O, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

O, LO, O, LO

O, O, LO, LO, O

LO, LNO, O, O

O, O, O, O, NO

O, O, LO, LO

LO, O, O, O, O

O, O, LO, O

LO, LNO, LO,
O, LO

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local
governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
7
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published on February 1, 2005, and based on the findings of the mission that took place during March 23–
April 7, 2004 for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (1) concepts and
definitions, (2) scope, (3) classification/sectorization, and (4) basis for recording, are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), not
observed (NO), or not available (NA).
8
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning (1) source data, (2) statistical techniques, (3) assessment and validation of
source data, (4) assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and (5) revision studies.
2
3

Statement by Johann Prader, Alternate Executive Director for Republic of Belarus
and Mikhail Nikitsenka, Advisor to Executive Director
June 17, 2005
Economic Developments
The Belarusian authorities appreciate the open and constructive discussions with the IMF
team. Above all, this year marked a turning point in the discussions between the staff and the
authorities on the magnitude and stability of economic growth in Belarus. The Fund’s
Statistics missions have also contributed to achieving a professional convergence of views.
GDP growth of about 45 percent since 1999, 11 percent in 2004 and 8.9 percent in the first
five months of 2005, confirm the ability of the Republic of Belarus to achieve high economic
growth rates. At the same time, the 2004 budget has been balanced, inflation has been further
reduced and the achievements in respect of social indicators have been remarkable.
In our previous buff statements, we have often pointed out that the actual growth outcomes in
Belarus were 2-3 times higher than the staff projections. Due to these discrepancies, the
authorities and the staff could not agree on the mix of policies to be pursued. Now, for the
first time in the last ten years, in its note prepared at the request of the authorities, the staff
has made an important attempt to study growth in Belarus.
The authorities are grateful for the analysis of growth factors made by the staff during the
Article IV consultation mission. The staff’s note “The Belarus Growth Process and the
Growth Puzzle” was discussed at a seminar in the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus
with broad public and government participation. This note has made possible a better
understanding of the growth projection issues. Similar exercises in the future would be
definitely welcome.
The Belarusian authorities agree broadly with the staff analysis. In the Selected Issues Paper,
the staff has incorporated the feedback from the seminar and recognizes that external factors
by themselves could not have generated the present level of supply response in the absence
of strong internal factors, such as Belarus’ ability to restructure and increase the
competitiveness of its industrial sector, its excellent human capital, improved management of
monetary and fiscal policies, as well as export promotion activities.
Belarus has among the highest internal saving and investment rates in the region. In 2004,
domestic investment was above 20 percent of GDP, about US 4.7 billion. The volume of
investment grew further by almost 22 percent during January-April this year. As in the case
of other non-oil exporting countries of the CIS region, FDI is still small. In Belarus,
reinvestment of enterprise profits constitutes more than half of total investment, the rest,
being financed mostly by local bank credit and state and local budget allocations. Net
corporate profits, which grew by more than 60 percent last year, were the main source of
finance for domestic investment.

-2The above was possible because of the improvement in the performance of the real sector in
2004. This was seen particularly in the growth of enterprise profitability to the present level
of 17 percent in industry and almost 8 percent in agriculture; in the reduction of enterprise
inventories from 59 percent of monthly production on January 1, 2004 to 54 percent as of
January 1, 2005, the lowest level in the last four years; in the reduction of the level of interenterprise and bank arrears; and in the reduction of the share of loss-making enterprises from
about 34 percent to 21 percent.
Improvements in macroeconomic policies facilitated further export expansion, from US$ 6.6
billion in 2000 to almost US$ 14 billion in 2004, with the share of non-CIS countries
increasing steadily to the present level of 50 percent. This reflected the improved
competitiveness of Belarusian export industries in international markets from a historically
very low level. The 38 percent growth of exports in 2004, and an additional 29 percent
growth in the first quarter of 2005, were the main cause of rapid GDP growth in Belarus in
recent years. The country now leads the CIS region in economic openness and in the share of
manufacturing in total exports. It is also among the top ten most open economies in Europe.
From a negative balance in 2004, the current account became positive in the first quarter of
2005. Other important external indicators, such as official reserves, foreign debt, and external
arrears also improved.
According to the Staff Report, wage growth which substantially outpaced the growth of labor
productivity in 2004, was another important factor stimulating demand and GDP growth.
From an economic point of view, the ratio between the growth of wages and the increase in
labor productivity seems unsustainable. The authorities are aware of the challenge this poses
for restoring labor remuneration to a socially acceptable level which had been lost during
previous period of high inflation. The large share of manufacturing in the Belarusian export
product mix makes it necessary to maintain wage competitiveness with countries in the
region. Nevertheless, the growing profitability in both industry and agriculture suggests that
Belarus can afford some wage growth. In this context, the staff rightly points out that the
rapid wage growth had limited consequences on measured competitiveness since key trading
partners have experienced similar increases. The staff is also right that, if wage increases
continue at the same rate, they would present substantial risks for Belarus. Therefore, in 2005
the government is refraining from the mandatory planning of wage growth in the state sector
and is setting only indicative targets.
The staff assesses Russia’s forthcoming WTO accession as another negative factor impacting
growth in Belarus. On the other hand, the analytical report prepared by the Belarus Institute
of Economics of the National Academy of Science has concluded that this accession will not
have any substantial negative consequences for Belarus’ trade with Russia.
Monetary and exchange policies
One of the main factors contributing to the growing competitiveness of Belarus in external
markets is the exchange rate stability which has resulted from the continuation of the
crawling band exchange rate regime. Coupled with declining inflation from a triple digit

-3level in 2000 to 14.4 percent in 2004 and robust GDP growth, exchange rate stability has
contributed to a significant improvement in the demand for rubels. In 2005, the demand for
money has continued to grow faster than its supply, resulting in a further slowing down of
inflation, which averaged 0.8 percent per month in January-April 2005. The share of local
currency in total money circulation increased in 2004 from 56 percent to 61 percent,
reflecting a healthy further decline in the dollarization of the economy.
The authorities have taken very seriously the recommendation made by Executive Directors
in the last Board meeting, that a cautious approach be followed in entering into a currency
union with Russia before closer macroeconomic convergence is achieved. Given the
continued differences in the macroeconomic framework of the two countries, particularly in
the taxation area, the authorities do not at present consider the previously targeted date of
January 1, 2006 as being feasible for the introduction of the union.
The resource base of Belarus’ banking system rose by six times over the last four years. It
strengthened further by 45 percent in 2004, mostly because of the 74 percent increase in local
currency deposits of the population, which can be explained by the attractive interest rates in
the environment of low inflation and expectations of real appreciation of the domestic
currency. The trade surplus achieved in the first quarter of 2005 and the continuing
weakening of the dollar allowed the National Bank to purchase the increased hard currency
supply which resulted in almost a tripling of the level of net foreign assets since 2003 to the
present level of more than US$ 1 billion. This in turn, caused an additional flow of domestic
currency resources into the banking system.
As of January 1, 2005 Belarus had 32 banks. Of these, 27 had foreign capital participation
and 8 were fully foreign owned. Almost all parameters regarding financial soundness of the
banking sector, including capital adequacy, asset quality, liquidity, and foreign exchange risk
have improved quite substantially during the last five years.
At the same time, the authorities are aware that the banking system is underdeveloped and
needs major improvement. They believe that the 2004 FSAP missions will contribute
positively to the design of the financial sector reform program. The authorities had
voluntarily requested the IMF’s safeguards assessment in 2004 and are now implementing its
recommendations.
Fiscal policies
The balanced consolidated budget of last year and the 7.1 percent surplus in January-March
this year, confirm that Belarus has continued its record of fiscal discipline. Revenue
collection in 2004 was good and the level of government obligations to the National Bank
and commercial banks was reduced. The previous practice of National Bank financing of the
budget deficit has been completely abandoned. The 2005 budget envisages tax cuts of about
0.5 percent of GDP.
Revenues from the VAT tax, the profit tax and taxes on foreign trade have exceeded initial
projections for the first quarter of 2005.

-4With the help of IMF technical assistance, the Belarusian authorities have made significant
progress in bringing the regulatory and supervisory framework of the fiscal system towards
international standards. In recent years, there has been a significant reduction in quasi-fiscal
activities. The Government recognizes that a further reduction of these activities is needed
and is actively working toward it. For example, the inclusion of the Pension Fund (Fund for
Social Protection) and of sector innovation funds into the framework of the state budget
represents an important step towards reducing the quasi-fiscal activities.
When looking at the issue of quasi fiscal activities, one must take into account the specific
conditions of a transition economy like Belarus, with a comparatively deep involvement of
the state in economic management. The system of recommended credits and subsidized
interests (compensated through the state budget) is used as an instrument for achieving
certain national economic policy objectives. The authorities prefer this system because by
channeling resources through the banking system, they can make their final repayment more
likely, instead of simply financing through the budget.
Besides cutting back recommended credits in order to help reduce quasi-fiscal activities, the
staff also recommends scaling back the housing construction program through better
targeting. While considering carefully this advice, the authorities would like to point out that
the comparatively high level of state expenditure on housing, as well as on education and
health care, and substantial annual budgetary allocations to overcome the consequences of
the Chernobyl disaster, stem from the social orientation of Belarus’ economic strategy. This
explains the relatively high level of concentration of financial resources in the state budget.
The economic efficiency of such a policy could be questioned. However, this policy has
yielded a fairly robust growth in the living standards in Belarus together with overall
economic stability.
Structural policies
Because of its choice of a gradual approach to reforms, Belarus may be more centrally
managed at this stage of transition, than some other transition countries. In this context, the
staff’s classification of Belarus as a centrally managed economy is somewhat put in
perspective by the recognition in the Selected Issues paper that “structural changes
experienced by the Belarusian economy over the past decade have been substantial.” A
quarter of the Belarus economy is already in private hands.
The classification of Belarus as a transition economy, just as other transition economies were
classified from the beginning of their reform process, would seem more realistic and would
drive home an important message both to the authorities and to the international community.
Regarding structural reforms, we would like to point out that the movement towards
harmonization of structural measures in Belarus with those in Russia has been continuing.
Some further steps were undertaken in 2004 to improve the business and investment climate
in the country. As a result, the average number of licenses required to operate a business was
reduced from three to two. The staff overstates the negative role of the golden share in the
Belarus economy. The share is applied only in limited circumstances, including anti-

-5competitive conduct on the part of a company, possible liquidation, failure to pay taxes, and
failure to pay employee salaries for a period of at least six months.
The new Investment Code of Belarus, which came into effect from January 1, 2005 includes
measures to encourage the inflow of foreign capital along with the cancellation of previously
existing key preferences for companies with foreign capital and the unification of conditions
for foreign and domestic investments. The Code was adopted as part of the work for the
creation of an even playing field for all types of enterprises.
Bank privatization continues to be one of the most important of structural reforms in Belarus.
In addition to eight fully-owned foreign banks, the third largest bank in Belarus, “Prior
Bank”, has sold 61 percent of its capital to an Austrian bank. IFC has recently increased its
investment in Belarusian banks and in the manufacturing sector.
The Government has continued its efforts to rationalize the social support system with more
reliance on a targeted social protection. It is also important to note that GDP growth in
Belarus was achieved without any substantial increase in consumption of energy. In fact, the
energy intensity of the production decreased by 8 percent in 2004 and a further decrease of
10 percent is expected in 2005.
Fund Relations with Belarus
The authorities view the economic results of the past year as a demonstration of their
improved macroeconomic policy performance. They believe that since Belarus has exceeded
quite substantially the macroeconomic parameters and the living standards of before the
beginning of the transition process, and has also demonstrated for a number of years an
ability to maintain stable economic growth, it does not need financial assistance from the
Fund.
As for the pace of reform, the authorities have many times stated that the reason behind the
gradual transformation to a market economy, is to minimize any negative social
consequences. Given specific circumstances in Belarus, gradualism has proved to be
conducive to economic stability and maintaining high social standards.
Belarus has had an excellent track record of implementing the recommendations of the IMF’s
technical assistance missions. The authorities are grateful for the technical assistance which
was provided pursuant to the recommendations of last year’s consultation. For example,
because of the substantial improvements made in the calculation of the industrial production
index, the accuracy of GDP estimates has increased quite substantially. The
recommendations made in the framework of FSAP and other missions have also had a very
positive impact. Belarus is looking forward to maintaining technical cooperation and policy
discussions with the Fund.
The Belarusian authorities are firm in their intention to continue the policies of monetary and
fiscal discipline, and liberalization of the economy, in order to improve the business climate.
They believe that their cooperation with the Fund will contribute to strengthening further the
foundations of economic growth and prosperity of their country.

Concluding Remarks by Johann Prader, Alternate Executive Director for
Republic of Belarus
June 17, 2005
I would like to add to our statement that the authorities will publish, as in past years, the staff
report.
First of all, I thank Directors for their comments and recommendations which I shall
faithfully convey to the authorities. I think there has been general recognition of
achievements of the authorities, but, of course, there were, as always, differences of view
with respect to the speed of reform. But I have to say that even those who are quite
understanding of Belarus’ preference for a slow or gradual approach to reform encouraged
the authorities not to delay reform when conditions are favorable.
Second, I would like to express my appreciation for the excellent work done by the mission
and the mission chief, Mr. Horvath. And thanks, of course, are also due to the technical
assistance missions and the FSAP missions.
Most important, as pointed out in our staff statement and also in more detail in the Selected
Issues Paper, there has been a breakthrough on the issue of growth projections, a major bone
of contention and source of frustration in past Article IV consultations with the Fund. There
was the impression that staff papers tended to predict an imminent demise of the Belarus
economy. The authorities were, therefore, a little bit skeptical in the past about the Fund’s
presentation of Belarus.
This consultation was different, and several factors contributed to this positive development.
One, the willingness of the European Department to discuss the possibility of the systematic
underestimation of growth in CRS countries; and two, the statistical missions established that
the numbers provided were correct, except perhaps for a very small difference as described in
the Selected Issues Paper and today by the Mission Chief.
It is very instructive to read paragraph ten of the Selected Issues Paper about the reasons of
why the Fund’s growth forecasts in past years have been below those of the authorities, as
well as the eventual outcomes. One of several interesting conclusions is that Fund missions
assumed higher short-term adjustment costs due to delays of structural reforms. Also, the
effects of the openness of the economy, the extent of interaction with the Russian and the
Western European trading partners were underestimated. Here, as in other respects, Belarus
has been an underestimated and misunderstood country.
But now that the Fund and the authorities see eye to eye on the numbers, and as there is
recognition of Belarus’ actual growth achievement, the discussion on the sustainability of
this development model of a socially oriented economy can be more neutral and fruitful.
Nevertheless, the authorities are of the view that political concentration should be kept out of
the discussion.
Mr. Ge’s and Mr. Zhong’s proposal of more cross-country comparisons on growth
sustainability of CRS countries is appropriate, and the results could be quite instructive.

-2A comparison of performances on social indicators might also be useful, and it might also be
interesting for the Fund’s strategy on poverty reduction, where I think Belarus would come
out as a world champion.
On the major issues today, the authorities are mindful of the staff’s arguments on the
consequences of directed lending, quasi-fiscal activities, and mandated wage increases,
competitiveness, and the potentially adverse impact of the golden share. Clearly, the
authorities are implementing Fund advice, even though, in the eyes of many, not fast enough.
As recognized in the Selected Issues Paper, quasi-fiscal operations are being reduced, albeit
from very high levels. And on wage policy, taking into account staff’s point about
competitiveness, a shift has been made towards indicative targets. And here, Mr. Misra and
Mr. Srinivas have asked about what this actually means, and I can explain that wage
movements are no longer reported to the Council of Ministers, which in a well-organized
society like Belarus means that enterprises are freer to decide on the basis of profitability and
the needs of the firms.
The Belarusian economy has also been in transition in terms of less government ownership of
the economy, making it de facto a more mixed economy than its defenders or detractors want
to see it. Nevertheless, the positive results in terms of growth and social indicators confirm
the authorities’ gradual approach to implementing certain recommended changes. And given
the movement towards reform, the authorities would therefore disagree with the statement
that the macroeconomic policy mix is ultimately unsustainable. In the same vein, the two
scenarios presented by the staff, mainly current policies versus reform scenario, are perhaps
in reality not as clear-cut and simple.
I also take note of Mr. Raczko’s and Mr. Piatkowski’s note of caution on privatization, and I
also sense an implicit note of caution even in the staff’s call for transparent privatization.
And finally, I would like to emphasize that the authorities are very much interested in
continuing the very good technical cooperation with the Fund. I should add that this view is
shared not only by the government and the central bank, but also by circles outside the
government. Our office has been in contact with these outside circles as part of our long and
continuous relationship with Belarus. All elements of the Belarus society recognize the value
of the Fund’s involvement, be it in the form of Article IV consultations, technical assistance,
or the resident representative office.
On the latter point, I have, of course, to express our disappointment that, after Lithuania’s
succession to the European Union, the Resident Representative was not moved to Minsk as
requested. Of course, we do appreciate the Fund has slightly upgraded the existing local staff
in the Resident Representative’s office. But we hope that soon the Fund will appoint a
Resident Representative to Belarus because the technical assistance is well used and all
technical missions of the Fund have been enthusiastic about their discussions and the
implementation of technical advice by the Belarus counterparts. I am grateful for the support
for technical cooperation today in the Board, and I hope that management and the Board will
find it in their hearts and minds to support more technical cooperation with Belarus and
eventually re-establish a resident representative to Belarus.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/81
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 28, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Belarus
On June 17, 2005 the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with the Republic of Belarus.1
Belarus experienced strong economic growth in 2004, supported by policies aimed at raising
incomes and credit, and a favorable external environment. Inflation was halved during 2004,
and slowed down further to 11 percent in April 2005, aided by a balanced budget, exchange
rate stability, and continued remonetization on the back of rising trust in banks and the national
currency. Inflationary financing of the general government budget from the National Bank was
discontinued, and budgetary consolidation progressed further. International reserves have
increased, and the government’s debt is at a low level. A surge in the current account deficit in
late 2004 was largely reversed in early 2005.
However, market-oriented structural reforms have stalled. Privatization has largely ground to a
halt and the private sector’s share of GDP remains low at around 25 percent. Further, the
“golden share” rule has been expanded in 2004, giving government a unique power to intervene
in any company which used to have state ownership. The business environment is not
conducive to private—including foreign—investment.
While the economy’s current momentum is likely to result in significant growth in 2005, its longterm prospects are uncertain in the absence of wide-ranging structural reforms and a phasing
out of massive quasi-fiscal activities. Under current policies, growth is expected at 7.1 percent in
2005 and 4 percent in 2006, gradually grinding even lower.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.

-2-

Executive Board Assessment

Executive Directors recognized Belarus’s improved macroeconomic performance in recent years
and welcomed, in particular, the strong economic growth and reduced inflation realized in 2004.
In this regard, they took note of the role played by the balancing of the general government
budget, the discontinuation of inflationary financing of the budget, and the exchange rate
anchor, as well as demand-inducing policies and advantageous external factors. Directors
commended the authorities on the marked improvement in poverty indicators in recent years.
Directors cautioned, however, that Belarus’s economy remains vulnerable and that there is a
risk that its current strategy would not produce sustainable growth, and observed that continued
rapid growth and disinflation would require a tightening of macroeconomic policies and wideranging structural reforms to reduce the government’s role in the economy and facilitate private
sector-led growth. Given the favorable external environment and the economy’s current
momentum, Directors urged the authorities to take advantage of this window of opportunity to
launch reforms and create an environment conducive to private sector growth.
Directors expressed concern about the limited progress made in enterprise and financial sector
restructuring. In this regard, they pointed to Belarus’s extensive quasi-fiscal operations
including, in particular, directed credits and subsidized lending for housing through large state
banks. The continued rise in directed credits and subsidized housing loans contributed to
escalating liquidity problems in systemically important banks and necessitated another round of
government recapitalizations which, as set out in the Financial System Stability Assessment,
remain the prerequisite for the continued solvency of Belarus’ banking system. In addition,
Directors noted with concern the rapid pace of wage increases, which over the past decade
outpaced productivity growth and stressed that the enforcement of highly ambitious U.S. dollar
wage targets could lead to inflation pressures, enterprise decapitalization, and waning external
competitiveness.
Against this background, Directors underscored the need for accelerating the consolidation of
quasi-fiscal activities into the budget and at the same time reducing their magnitude in order to
safeguard the budget balance. In line with this, while supporting the government’s goal of
lowering the high tax burden, Directors noted that this would require expenditure cuts.
They viewed that given the strong momentum in the economy and the need to keep inflation
under control, it would not be appropriate for fiscal policy to provide additional stimulus at this
time, despite the easing of the budgetary financing constraint.
Directors agreed that the central bank needed to make low inflation its primary objective and
noted that, to this end, the National Bank of Belarus (NBRB) would need to be granted full
operational autonomy. They emphasized that while the nominal exchange rate has played a
useful anchoring role, further disinflation will require containing credit growth. Directors also saw
a need for retaining a measure of exchange rate flexibility to safeguard against excessive real
appreciation, to help deal with exogenous shocks, and to allow the NBRB to raise its level of
foreign reserves, which remain precariously low, despite a marked increase in the past eight
months.

-3-

Directors stressed that structural reforms would be key for ensuring growth sustainability by
boosting productivity and allocational efficiency. They urged further enterprise reforms and
transparent privatization to help harden budget constraints, noting that, together with reduced
government intervention in economic activity and a pickup in FDI, this could raise the level of
competition and the efficiency of product and labor markets. Directors observed that the
resulting increase in productivity growth would provide a sustainable basis for raising income.
Directors warned that the growth contribution of many of the favorable external factors—notably
the benefit reaped from Russian energy import pricing—is likely to wane. With rapid growth in
neighboring countries, rising incomes and demand for rubels and low external debt, current
conditions are conducive to an early transition toward a market economy with minimized costs
of policy adjustment. In this regard, Directors stressed that the looming costs of population
aging also argued for an early start of reform measures to ensure continued fiscal sustainability.
Directors noted that while Belarus’ overall debt ratio remained low, the increasing dependence
on short-term liabilities and limited foreign exchange reserves raised roll-over risk.
They stressed that Belarus would need to substantially improve the environment for foreign
direct investment, not only to help secure a non debt-creating source of financing, but more
importantly to facilitate the knowledge and technology transfer that has proven to be a critical
contributing factor for rapid productivity growth in most other transition economies. In this
regard, they noted that the golden share rule as applied in Belarus was counterproductive and
urged its elimination or the limitation of its application—as in other countries—to a handful of
preannounced cases that are of central strategic importance.
Directors noted that for the currency union with Russia to prove beneficial for Belarus, a number
of key issues needed to be appropriately addressed. While significant further work remains to
be done in this regard, prudent macroeconomic policies and an early start on wide-ranging
market-oriented structural reforms would increase the likelihood of such an outcome.
Directors welcomed the constructive tenor of the discussions between the staff and the
authorities. They commended the authorities for their good track record in implementing
technical assistance recommendations and the significant progress made in the past year in this
area, marked by the completion of the Financial Sector Assessment Program, the subscription
to the Special Data Dissemination Standard, and the publication of fiscal and data Reports on
the Observance of Standards and Codes. Directors supported the continuation of technical
cooperation with the authorities.
Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country,
following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known
the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over
the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's
assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at
the decision of the Board.

Republic of Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators
2001

2002

2003

2004
Preliminary

(Annual change in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
Real economy
GDP (nominal in billions of rubels)
Real GDP
Industrial production
CPI (end-of-period)
Real average monthly wage (1996=100)
Average monthly wage (in U.S. dollars)
Money and credit
Reserve money
Rubel broad money
Banking system net domestic credit
Refinance rate (percent per annum, end-of-period)

17,173
4.7
5.9
46.1
213.9
89.5

26,138
5.0
4.3
34.8
231.9
107.3

36,565
7.0
6.8
25.4
238.7
123.3

49,445
11.0
15.6
14.4
279.0
162.0

102.8
96.9
66.4
48.0

32.0
59.6
53.7
38.0

51.1
71.0
68.9
28.0

41.9
58.1
35.8
17.0

(In percent of GDP)
General government finances 1/
Revenue
Expenditure (cash)
Expenditure (commitment)
Balance (cash)
Balance (commitment)

44.9
46.8
48.1
-1.9
-3.1

44.6
46.4
46.5
-1.8
-1.9

45.8
47.2
46.9
-1.4
-1.0

46.2
46.2
46.1
0.0
0.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments and external debt
Current account balance
As percent of GDP
Gross international reserves
In months of imports of goods and services
Medium- and long-term debt (as percent of GDP)
Short-term debt (as percent of GDP)

-394
-3.2
359.4
0.5
9.2
10.4

-311
-2.1
475.6
0.6
9.8
11.0

-424
-2.4
499.0
0.5
8.1
10.8

-1,043
-4.6
770.2
0.6
5.9
12.8

(Rubels per U.S. dollar)
Exchange rates
Average
End-of-period

1,383
1,580

Sources: Data provided by the authorities and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Consolidates the state government and Social Protection Fund budgets.

1,784
1,920

2,052
2,156

2,160
2,170

