July 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/245

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

March 25, 2005

2005

January 29, 2001

Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report;
Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the
Executive Director for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on March 25, 2005, with the officials of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste on economic developments and policies. Based on information
available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on May 31, 2005.
The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its June 15, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

a statement by the authorities of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Joint Staff Assessment of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for
the 2005 Consultation with Timor-Leste
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Ambroise Fayolle
May 31, 2005
•

A staff team—Ms. Creane (head), Ms. Fichera and Messrs. Bhundia and Porter (EP)
(all APD), and Mr. Y. Kim (FAD)—visited Dili during March 10-25 to hold the 2005
Article IV consultation discussions. The mission was assisted by Mr. I. Kim (Resident
Representative). Mr. Saramago (OED) joined the discussions. The team coordinated
closely with the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

•

Discussions were held with Prime Minister Alkatiri, Finance Minister Boavida, General
Manager of the Banking and Payment Authority (BPA) De Vasconselos, other senior
officials, and representatives of the donor and business community. The team also met
President Gusmão.

•

The last Article IV consultation was concluded on July 16, 2004, and Directors
comments may be found at http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pn/2004/pn04118.htm.

•

Timor-Leste has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4 and
maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions. Data provision for surveillance purposes is adequate overall,
but weaknesses in the national accounts and balance of payments complicate analysis
(Annex IV).

•

The authorities indicated their intention to publish the staff report and background
documents.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Introduction....................................................................................................................5

II.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................6

III.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................11
A. The Economic Outlook ...........................................................................................11
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................15
C. Monetary and Financial Sector Issues.....................................................................21
D. Private Sector Development and Institution and Capacity Building ......................22
E. Other Issues .............................................................................................................23

IV.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................23

Boxes
1.
Petroleum Policy—Key Features...................................................................................9
2.
The Sector Investment Programs (SIPs) ......................................................................10
3.
Private Sector Development and Public Investment: Removing Impediments
to Growth ..................................................................................................................12
4.
Oil Prospects ................................................................................................................14
5.
Meeting the Budget Execution Challenge ...................................................................18
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.

Regional and Global Comparators...............................................................................26
Recent Macroeconomic Developments .......................................................................27
Central Government—Fiscal Developments and Outlook FY200/01–008/09............28
Medium-Term Projections—Baseline and Low-Price Scenarios ................................29

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Social Indicators ............................................................................................30
Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–2005..................................................................31
Central Government Budget Estimates, FY2003/04–FY2007/08 ...............................32
SIPs Combined Sources Fiscal Operations, FY2000/01–FY2007/08 .........................33
Monetary Developments, 2001–2005..........................................................................34
Balance of Payments, 2000–2005................................................................................35
Medium-Term Outlook, 2004–2009............................................................................36
Vulnerability Indicators, 2000-05................................................................................37

-3-

Annexes
I.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................38
II.
Relations with the World Bank Group.........................................................................41
III.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................43
IV.
Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................44

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic and Policy Developments
•

A moderate economic recovery is underway, while inflation remains subdued. A
post drought rebound in agriculture and expansion in banking activity offset the impact of
a further decline in donor activity in 2004. The official dollar-based monetary and
exchange regime helped keep inflation in check.

•

Fiscal policy has remained cautious despite large oil/gas revenue inflows. The onset
of oil production in 2004 resulted in the emergence of a large fiscal surplus, an increase
in the external current account surplus (including international aid) and accumulation of
international reserves equivalent to about 15 months of imports (March 2005).

•

However, growth prospects are hampered by slow execution of public investment
projects and limited progress in attracting private sector investment.
Notwithstanding large development needs and a favorable revenue picture, budget
execution has been poor particularly for capital projects and in rural areas. At the same
time, the private sector remains inactive as establishment of a legal and regulatory
framework is not yet complete.

Key Policy Issues
•

The authorities face the challenge of harnessing its new oil/gas wealth within a
policy framework supportive of continued macroeconomic stability, higher growth
and reduced poverty. The creation of a Norwegian-style petroleum fund and the
adoption of a cautious saving policy are major steps in the right direction. Efforts are now
needed to ensure productive use of oil/gas revenue takes place, in parallel with
safeguarding long-term fiscal sustainability.

•

Recent measures to improve administrative capacity and remove obstacles to
smooth budget execution are important steps toward resolving expenditure
execution difficulties, but more remains to be done. The articulation of the sector
investment programs should improve the ability to plan and focus spending on feasible
and needed investment projects, and better align increasingly limited donor activity with
the government’s priorities. Further efforts are needed to reorient expenditure toward
improving human capital, infrastructure, and other development needs. Investment
spending remains relatively low in the current medium-term fiscal framework.

•

More rapid and better coordinated implementation of measures to establish an
attractive environment for non-oil private sector activity is needed. The basic legal
and regulatory framework for the private sector remains incomplete, although progress
has been made in key areas including the adoption of investment laws and land related
legislation.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Five years after the international community stepped in to assist Timor-Leste in
the aftermath of post-referendum violence, the country is successfully transitioning
from post-conflict status.1 Security has
been broadly restored and macroeconomic
30
Real GDP Growth
stability re-established and maintained
20
(annual % change)
through the adoption of the US dollar as
Developing Asia
10
legal tender and cautious fiscal management.
0
However, the economy remains fragile.
Cumulative growth over the last three years
-10
T imorwas negative—mainly reflecting the
Leste
-20
UN drawdown begins
drawdown in the international presence.
-30
Unemployment is high, 40 percent of the
Post-referendum violence
-40
population lives below the poverty line, and
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
social indicators are poor. At the same time,
human capital remains scarce, and physical
infrastructure inadequate and financing opportunities limited. Administrative capacity is
weak in the public and private sectors. The winding down of international support at a time
when domestic capacity is still weak and the coming on stream of large oil/gas revenue in
2004 present new challenges (Figure 1 and Table 1).
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Per Capita and Human Development Index (HDI)
in Timor-Leste and Comparator Countries
GDP Per
Real GDP Per Capita
HDI
Capita in
Annual Growth
Rank 1/
US$ (2004)
Average 2000-04
Cambodia
Papua New Guinea
Lao P.D.R.
Bangladesh
Nepal
Timor-Leste 2/

130
133
135
138
140
158

314.1
686.2
415.7
376.4
238.6
366.6

5.5
0.2
5.7
3.5
3.9
0.7

Sources: UN Human Development Report, 2004, and IMF.
1/ Rank out of 177 countries.
2/ Non-oil GDP.

1

The UN peacekeeping mission has been gradually reduced since independence was restored in 2002,
and in May 2005 will be replaced by a downsized number of civilian and police advisors.
Parliamentary and presidential elections are scheduled for 2007.

-6-

2.
Looking ahead, the pace and quality of economic development will depend on
Timor-Leste’s ability to manage its new oil/gas wealth effectively, and to establish the
environment needed for investment and growth in the non-oil sector. The authorities
have designed a development strategy, with
250
the objectives set out in the 2002 National
Donor Financing ($ millions)
Development Plan (NDP) and subsequent
200
documents, incorporated in the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper and assessed in
150
the Joint Staff Advisory Note, which are
being presented to the Executive Board
100
alongside this Article IV Staff Report.2 At
50
the same time, the domestic political
environment is becoming more difficult as
0
popular impatience is growing with the
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005P
absence of a visible improvement in the
quality of life. Given the new oil/gas revenue and continued tapering off of external
financing, donors are now focused on providing continued technical assistance for
strengthening administrative capacity to ensure that progress to date in institution-building is
not lost.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

3.
More recent developments indicate a modest recovery in non-oil economic
activity in 2004, subdued inflation, and large oil/gas revenue inflows (Figure 2 and
Table 2).
•

Despite a further decline in donor activity, non-oil GDP growth recovered, reflecting
a post-drought rebound in the agriculture sector and expansion in banking sector
activity.

•

Inflation declined over the course of 2004, leveling off at about 2 percent since
August (year-over-year), in response to moderate domestic demand and stable non-oil
import prices.

•

The external current account surplus (including international assistance) widened
sharply to 35 percent of non-oil GDP in 2004, due to large oil/gas tax and royalty
income. Coffee exports rose, mainly reflecting a supply response to higher world
prices.

•

Measured against Indonesia and Australia, Timor-Leste’s main trading partners,
overall external price competitiveness deteriorated somewhat, reflecting the
significant depreciation of the rupiah against the U.S. dollar (Timor-Leste legal
tender). Given low inflation in Timor-Leste, relative prices have improved over the

2

(EBD/05/55, Supl. 1 and 2) and (EBD/05/56).

-7-

same period. In the absence of labor market data, anecdotal evidence suggests that
Timor-Leste wages remain well above those in Indonesia, continuing to reflect the
impact of the international presence.
110
105

Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rate Developments 1/
(Jan 2002=100)

100
REER Index

95

NEER Index

90

Relative CPI

85
80
75
Jan-02

M ay-02

Sep-02

Jan-03

M ay-03

Sep-03

Jan-04

M ay-04

Sep-04

Jan-05

1/ Includes Indonesia and Australia, with weights of 70 and 30 percent, respectively.

4.
The fiscal outcome for FY 2004/05 40
FY 2004/05: Expenditure Q 1-Q 3
is now expected to be stronger than
(Millions of US dollars)
35
envisaged, due not only to better-than30
expected oil/gas revenue but also
Budget
stronger non-oil tax administration and
25
Committed
weak expenditure execution (Table 3).3 A
Cash
20
central government surplus (including
grants) of 68 percent of non-oil GDP is now 15
10
expected, compared with the surplus of
33 percent of non-oil GDP expected in the
5
revised FY04/05 budget. The rise in
0
domestic revenue reflects improved tax
Wages and salaries Goods and services
Capital
administration and enhanced use of the
Automated System for Customs Data Administration (ASYCUDA). At the same time,
budget execution through March remained poor, particularly for capital spending. On a
“combined sources” basis (the authorities’ broad estimate of the total public sector including
off-budget donor activities), the fiscal balance will move into a surplus of 30 percent of GDP

3

The fiscal year is July–June.

-8-

in FY04/05 (Table 4).4 The authorities continue to follow a policy of avoiding domestic or
external borrowing and have no debt.5
5.
The government is making good progress with the measures necessary to handle
its new oil/gas wealth responsibly. Oil/gas taxation has been streamlined, the Norwegianstyle petroleum fund is on track to be operational by July 2005 and a long-term fiscal savings
policy has been adopted (Box 1), with assistance from FAD and LEG. Under the new saving
policy, annual budget “sustainable” spending is set equal to the sum of annual non-oil
revenue and the estimated permanent income from the total oil/gas wealth. The draft
Petroleum Fund Act was submitted to Parliament in April. The government has indicated its
commitment to the principles of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
Finally, the preliminary Sector Investment Programs (SIPs) set out a public investment
strategy for Timor-Leste’s long-term economic development to be financed by domestic
revenue and donor funds (Box 2).
Bank lending to the private sector increased rapidly during 2004 (Table 5). As a
6.
share of non-oil GDP, credit tripled to 21 percent at end 2004. The bulk of the increase
financed construction and personal loans for small transportation business. One bank
accounts for most of the expansion, mainly funded by its foreign parent. Financial
intermediation remains concentrated in Dili, while access to financing in rural areas is limited
to the operations of a few rural cooperatives and microcredit institutions.
320

80

Credit to the Economy
(Millions of U.S. dollars)

60

280
240

NFA of BPA and Government Deposits
(Millions of U.S. dollars)

200
160

40

120
80

20

Government
deposits
NFA of BPA

40

0
Mar-03

Jul-03

Nov-03 Mar-04 Jul-04 Nov-04 Mar-05

0
J a n-03

M a y-03

S e p-03

J a n-04

M a y-04

S e p-04

J a n-05

Net foreign assets of the Banking and Payment Authority (BPA) rose sharply,
7.
reflecting the sizable accumulation of government deposits from strong oil/gas revenue.
At end-March net foreign assets reached US$285 million, more than 15 months of projected
imports for 2005 (Table 6).
4

Based on pledges and commitments as reported by donors.

5

A debt sustainability analysis was not conducted given the absence of debt.

-9 -

Box 1. Petroleum Policy—Key Features
The government is seeking to introduce best-practices for managing the oil wealth through a
Norwegian-style petroleum fund and the adoption of a long-term fiscal sustainability policy.
Petroleum Fund
•

The Petroleum Fund Act, drafted with the support of an FAD resident advisor, has been
submitted to Parliament and is expected to become operational as of July 1, 2005.

•

The fund will be integrated into the central government budget. Transfers from the fund will
only be made to finance the non-oil fiscal deficit, and the sum of all transfers in a fiscal year may
not exceed a ceiling set by Parliament on the basis of the fiscal sustainability policy. Fund assets
are to be invested abroad, thus minimizing pressures for real exchange rate appreciation.

•

The petroleum fund is to be managed with a high standard of transparency and
accountability. The government will be responsible for overall management, with operational
management handled by the BPA. An investment advisory board and a parliamentary council will
monitor operations and internationally recognized accounting firms will carry out annual external
audits. Information disclosure requirements will be guided by EITI standards.

Fiscal Sustainability Policy
•

The government has adopted a long-term fiscal sustainability policy for intergenerational
equity. The key element is a saving rule under which only interest income will be used to finance
the non-oil fiscal deficit.

•

The new policy thus sets annual budget spending equal to the sum of domestic non-oil revenue
and the estimated permanent income from the oil wealth. Although in a given year spending
may exceed this limit, over the long-term the rule should minimize the potential for procyclical
spending in response to volatile revenue inflows.1
5000

Oil Fund Assets and Fiscal Balances

90

4500
75
4000
60

45
3000
30
2500
15
2000

0

1500

-15

1000

-30

500

-45

0

-60

2004/5

2006/7

2008/9

Oil fund assets (LHS)

1

2010/11

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

Non-oil fiscal balance (RHS)

2018/19

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

Overall fiscal balance (RHS)

Real oil wealth is the sum of oil savings to date plus the present value of future oil revenue, at constant prices,
and permanent income is the real interest income on the real oil wealth.

Percent ofnon-oil GDP

M
illionsofUSdollars

3500

- 10 -

Box 2. The Sector Investment Programs (SIPs)
•

As a vehicle for achieving National Development Plan (NDP) objectives and the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), the government prepared a comprehensive package of
investment programs for FY 2004/05-2008/09 in 15 economic sectors including health,
education, public works and agriculture.

•

The SIPs: (i) define sector priorities linked to NDP objectives and MDGs; (ii) establish links
between policies, programs and expenditure; (iii) identify shortfalls between planned
expenditure and available funding; and (iv) provide an institutional setting for
communication with and among donors to improve donor coordination and better align
external assistance with government priorities.

•

The FY05/06 draft budget and medium-term fiscal plans have been cast in a “combined
sources” budget framework, based on the SIPs, that covers public expenditure funded by the
central government budget and by programs for which the government has received or is
requesting financing by donors. The authorities’ long-term objective is to bring all budget
and donor-funded spending programs under one “combined sources budget” managed and
monitored by the government.

•

SIPs’ spending proposals for 2005/06-2008/09 as a share of non-oil GDP are similar to the
average “combined sources” expenditure over the previous 4-year period. However, the part
of spending financed by central government (Timor Leste) revenue is higher.

•

If the SIPs’ proposals are to be executed in full, and the government’s oil saving policy
honored as intended (Box 1), the government will need to raise significant additional
financing from donors over the medium term. The government should be prepared to further
prioritize spending should the additional financing not materialize as hoped.
100

Financing of SIPs Combined Sources Expenditure
90
80

Timor Leste own revenue 1/

Committed project financing by donors

Budget support grants

Additional donor financing required

(In percent of non-oil GDP)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10

Avg. 2000/012003/04

2004/05

20050/6

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

1/ From 2005/06 includes transfers from the petroleum fund to finance the central government non-oil fiscal deficit.

- 11 -

8.
Capacity building at the BPA progressed over the past year. All managerial
positions are now held by Timorese and resident foreign assistance is limited to an MFD
central bank advisor to the General Manager. A central bank law, and payment system and
anti-money laundering legislation are in final stages of preparation. A financial intelligence
unit is planned for the BPA by the end of the year.
The pace of establishing the necessary environment to encourage private sector
9.
activity has accelerated; nonetheless, the agenda ahead remains heavy (Box 3). Over the
past six months good progress has been made in some areas, with key land legislation, the
insurance law, and the domestic and foreign investment laws all either approved or submitted
to Parliament. However, the overall legal framework is still incomplete, and complex
regulations, an ineffective administration and weak judiciary continue to discourage private
activity and create opportunities for weak governance. Finally, while administrative skill
levels are improving slowly, local capacity remains thin.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS

10.
The 2005 discussions focused on strategies for harnessing Timor-Leste’s new
oil/gas resources within a policy framework supportive of higher economic growth and
reduced poverty, and consistent with macroeconomic stability over the long term. The
authorities already have began to implement this framework, all of which is in line with Fund
advice in past Article IV consultations. The key policies include: (i) the adoption of a longterm strategy for effective management of the oil/gas wealth through the petroleum fund and
a fiscal sustainability policy; (ii) the implementation of a public investment program focused
on human capital accumulation, infrastructure provision, and basic services to urban and
rural areas; and (iii) the establishment of the legal, regulatory and institutional framework
needed to promote private sector activity in the non-oil sector. The authorities additionally
have reiterated their continued commitment to maintain the official dollarized monetary and
exchange rate regime, as recommended by the Fund in past consultations, acknowledging
that it has been essential in ensuring low inflation. Where differences with past Fund advice
occurred, these have largely related to the pace of policy implementation, mainly due to
institutional and capacity constraints. The authorities also indicated that they generally found
recommendations from past Article IV consultations useful.
A. The Economic Outlook

11.
The staff and the authorities agreed that the near-term macroeconomic
prospects are relatively positive (Table 7). Under current policies and trends, the outlook is
for a pick up of growth in 2005 and a doubling of growth in 2006 to 5 percent. The
improvement mainly reflects the start of increased investment spending in the second half of
2005 and the full year effect in 2006. Private sector activity is expected to respond to higher
public spending, particularly in the construction and service sectors. Expanded provision of
technical extension services to subsistence farmers, the development of nascent agrobusiness and the start of fishing licensing should result in above average growth in the
agriculture sector, assuming normal weather prevails.

- 12 -

Box 3. Private Sector Development and Public Investment:
Removing Impediments to Growth
The growth path in post-conflict Timor Leste has so far been driven by the dynamics of the UN
presence. Emergency reconstruction, humanitarian aid and consumption from expatriates spurred the
economic recovery in 2000-01. Since 2002, the numbers of UN appointed international staff has been
declining in parallel with economic activity. To fully benefit from the “peace dividend” and absorb a
rapidly expanding labor force, new engines for growth are needed. The low level of development
pre-1999, and the limited stock of physical assets following the 1999 destruction suggest that welltargeted public and more private investment could trigger a significant growth response.
With the transition from emergency status now over, public investment could become more
growth-oriented. The SIPs focus on human capital development and infrastructure is appropriate, but
execution of public investment must accelerate, particularly to off-set the slack from declining donor
financing. Public resources should be directed to growth-enhancing infrastructure projects (e.g., roads,
communication, power, and water access) that are complementary to private investment.
To strengthen growth prospects and ensure employment absorption, Timor Leste needs the
emergence of small and medium-sized, labor-intensive private enterprises. The current stable
macroeconomy and liberal trade regime satisfy two preconditions for private sector development.
However, the incomplete legal and regulatory framework, an ineffective administration and a weak
judiciary have discouraged faster private domestic and foreign investment.
Recent steps are welcome:
• New land-lease legislation should encourage property rental;
• The new investment laws, despite potential drawbacks from the envisaged fiscal incentives, are a
major step forward in setting up the broad legal framework needed to attract investment;
• The imminent establishment of a “one-stop shop” for business registration under the new Investment
and Export Promotion Agency is a positive sign;
• The prospective enactment of the insurance law should set the stage for the development of an
insurance market, providing instruments for reducing investment risks; and
• The establishment of a regular dialogue between government and business to exchange views on
solutions for the most urgent legal and administrative impediments to the development of private
sector activity.
However, further rapid action is needed to encourage a strong private-sector response through:
• Additional steps to streamline business registration practices, reduce set-up costs and simplify
interaction with the administration;
• Establishment of a comprehensive land-titling system, the absence of which hinders land
improvement and limits the use of land as collateral;
• A regulatory framework for company incorporation, mediation and arbitration;
• The finalization of bankruptcy legislation to fill a regulatory vacuum on creditor rights in case of
business solvency problems;
• Licensing of insurance companies; and
• Renewed efforts to develop a strong and independent judiciary, given that a fair judicial system able
to enforce contracts consistently is a primary requisite for private economic activity.

- 13 -

12.
The authorities and staff concurred that stronger non-oil growth is essential to
absorb the rapidly increasing labor force over the medium term. In view of the projected
dynamics in the labor force (see box below), the authorities are focusing efforts on labor
intensive sectors such as tourism and agrobusiness. However, staff suggested that under
current policies the authorities’ medium-term growth objective of 6 percent will be difficult
to achieve in light of continued difficulties in budget execution, tapering off of donor
activity, and an incomplete legislative and regulatory framework needed to attract private
investment. In addition, even a more rapid growth rate may be needed to absorb likely new
entrants to the labor force, further giving emphasis to the need for reinvigorated and focused
efforts to put in place the appropriate environment to stimulate private activity (Box 3).
Growth and Employment
•

Unemployment is roughly estimated at about 20 percent of the labor force. Based on rapid
annual population growth of about 3 percent, a youthful population (60 percent are 16 and under)
and an increase in the participation rate to a level common in low income countries, staff
estimates that about 20,000 new entrants would be added each year to the labor force.

•

Based on elasticity of employment to growth comparable to that found in representative crosscountry studies, non-oil growth of about 7 percent would be needed to generate enough jobs to
keep unemployment from rising further and growth of 10 percent would be needed to help halve
unemployment rates over the medium term.

On inflation, both staff and authorities agreed that it should remain moderate, barring major
external shocks and assuming continuation of the current monetary and exchange rate
regime. Based on anticipated oil/gas production from existing fields, current WEO oil price
projections, and some progress in improving spending capacity, large fiscal surpluses
averaging 32 percent of non-oil GDP should emerge over the medium-term (Figure 3).
7
6

Me di u m -Te rm Growth an d
Total Pu bl i c S pe n di n g

90
70

80

Fiscal and Current Account Balances
(In p ercent of non-oil GDP)

60

5
50

4
3

30

Fiscal
balance

40
20

Current
account
balance
excl.
foreign aid

0

2
1

100

Non-oil GDP growt h (LHS)

10

T ot al P ublic Spending/GDP (RHS)

0

-10
2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10

-20
-40
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

- 14 -

Box 4. Oil Prospects
• Timor-Leste’s known oil/gas resources are concentrated in the Timor Sea in an area of

disputed sovereignty with Australia. The sharing with Australia of oil revenue and royalties
in the Joint Development Area (JPDA), where the Bayu Undan field is located, follows an
existing bilateral agreement that favors Timor-Leste with a 90/10 split. Recent negotiations
on revenue-sharing for the Greater Sunrise field (revenue potential significantly larger than
Bayu Undan) reportedly went well. Australia claims most of Sunrise based on a 1972 border
agreement with Indonesia. Timor Leste claims jurisdiction on the basis of the equidistance
line.
• Revenue from Bayu Undan is estimated at $3.2 billion (NPV terms) over 20 years, more than

nine times Timor-Leste’s 2004 non-oil GDP. An agreement on Greater Sunrise could add up to
$5 billion in revenue for Timor-Leste. In addition, recent seismic surveys reportedly suggest
considerable additional resources offshore (in undisputed areas); the Timorese government
will open bids for developing these areas later this year. Finally, some as yet unexplored
onshore resources also exist.

Source: Timor Sea Office.

- 15 -

13.
The risks to the growth outlook largely relate to oil prices and the pace and
strength of further reform. On the upside, the private sector could respond more positively
than expected to current reform, while a more accelerated and pronounced implementation of
reform and improvement in capacity would also trigger more rapid non-oil growth. Among
the downside risks, vulnerability to changes in world oil prices figures prominently. A
US$10 decline in world oil prices would reduce revenue by US$150 million on average each
year, requiring expenditure cuts of US$54 million on average each year over the mediumterm under the government’s saving policy (Figure 4). In addition, given the dominance of
coffee in non-oil exports, a negative price or weather shock in the coffee sector could worsen
the already poor non-oil export performance. Other potential risks to the growth outlook
include further delays in the reform agenda deterring private investment, too rapid increases
in fiscal spending—particularly in the wage bill—creating demand pressure on prices, and
prolonged weak administrative capacity curbing needed development spending. The
authorities were well aware of these risks, and discussed a low-oil price scenario in the
FY05/06 budget documents to raise public awareness of the possible impact of oil price
volatility. The authorities also noted that the potential for additional revenue from new oil
fields over the longer term could offset the impact of lower oil prices (Box 4).6
B. Fiscal Policy

14.
The authorities’ past success in maintaining fiscal discipline under a tight
revenue constraint will be tested in the new environment of large oil/gas revenue
inflows. Staff stressed that to continue with good fiscal management, the authorities will
need to build upon their track-record of resisting expenditure pressure for non-priority
objectives and keep control of the growing non-oil fiscal deficit, while raising expenditure.
The FY05/06 and medium-term central government budget framework show a
15.
welcome shift toward spending to improve human capital and basic infrastructure and
to meet other development needs required to raise growth. Nonetheless, a more sustained
orientation toward development spending is needed, given the importance of public
investment at this early stage of development. As a share of GDP or total expenditure, capital
expenditure has been declining and, under the current budget framework, will level off over
the medium-term after a one-step increase in the FY05/06 budget. The staff also cautioned
the authorities to ensure that the full maintenance costs of the increased investment spending
were incorporated into projections for current expenditure. The authorities explained that the
medium-term development spending path had not yet been fully elaborated and would be
reassessed based on the performance in meeting the targets in the next year.

6

In addition, the budget is based on conservative oil price assumptions, with a 15 percent discount off
revenue projections derived on the basis of NYMEX future price minus 5 U.S. dollars.

- 16 -

100

350

Central Government Revenue
300
(Millions US$)

O il Revenue in Pe rcent
of Total Revenue (2004)

80

250
200
150

60

Oil
Non-oil and grants

40

100

20

50
0

0

C a m e ro o n C ha d

Ga bo n

Ango la

2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06

Tim o rLe s te

Nige ria

The central government budget outlook is based on maintaining public sector
16.
wage levels and the employment ceiling broadly at current levels, and the authorities
reiterated their intention to keep the wage bill in check. Difficulties in filling high-level
managerial positions continued, due to wage compression and limited suitable candidates.
Nonetheless, the authorities were reluctant to raise high-level salaries lest these feedback into
pressure for low-skill wage increases in the public and private sector, thereby increasing
price pressure, and further reducing competitiveness and discouraging employment creation
in the private sector. At the same time, the authorities indicated they were weighing options
for civil service reform, with assistance from the World Bank.
The large one-step spending increase in the proposed FY05/06 central
17.
government budget raises some concerns, although government expenditure would
remain below the estimated “sustainable” level. Staff observed that it supported a move to
the sustainable level of expenditure under the fiscal sustainability policy as quickly as
feasible, given the extensive development needs in Timor-Leste. However, the proposed onestep spending increase by 10 percentage points of GDP in one year would be difficult to
achieve without a sharp improvement in spending capacity. It therefore raised the risks of
unproductive spending occurring and inflation pressure building. Staff viewed a more
Central Government Budget Spending
FY 04/05

FY 05/06

FY 06/07

FY 07/08

FY 08/09

(in millions of US dollar)
Sustainable spending 1/

...

131.9

136.1

140.8

145.8

Draft budget proposed spending 2/

78.7

119.5

106.2

112.0

109.6

Staff's projections 2/

74.3

107.6

99.3

109.3

115.1

1/ On the basis of the new fiscal sustainability and oil fund policy.
2/ For FY 2005/06 includes US$ 10.5 million for the final capitalization of the BPA.

- 17 -

gradual movement toward reaching the sustainable spending level, focused on development
expenditure, as more realistically reflecting the likely measured progress in administrative
capacity and the economy’s absorptive capacity. The authorities noted that about 3
percentage points of the increase in central government capital spending in FY05/06 was for
the one-off final capitalization of the BPA. In addition, the overall public sector spending
envelope, including requested donor-financed off-budget SIPS projects, would be roughly
unchanged compared with earlier years, although an increasing share would now be brought
on-budget to be undertaken by the government. Thus, they anticipated that as aggregate
public spending would not increase, inflation pressure would not arise. Any upward pressure
on wages also could be offset by downward pressure on wages as demand ebbed with the
declining UN presence.
Even modest central government spending increases would require
18.
improvements in administrative capacity, the removal of obstacles to smooth budget
execution, and careful prioritization. The authorities were fully aware that budget
execution problems would need to be addressed if the FY05/06 budget expenditure increases
were to be realized and accordingly announced the introduction of a number of measures
with the new budget cycle (Box 5). While welcoming the new measures, which mainly
address capacity problems at line ministries, staff encouraged the consideration of further
reform to ease bottlenecks at the treasury and procurement stage. In parallel, increased and
strengthened ex-post auditing could help prevent misappropriation. In light of continued
budget difficulties, and in response to a request from the authorities, FAD has agreed to
provide a resident advisor to the head of the treasury directorate in the MOPF.7 The
authorities also pledged to work with donors to speed the start of the institution and capacity
building program aimed at improving the ability to design, execute and monitor development
projects in line ministries.
Staff welcomed the strengthening of links between Timor-Leste’s development
19.
needs, the medium-term central government budget and donor activity through the
SIPs. The SIPs include the sector projects which the government has identified as necessary
to achieve NDP and MDG objectives. Thus, the integration of the SIPs into budget planning,
together with increased donor-government coordination in the SIPs working groups, will
improve the authorities’ ability to focus spending on feasible and needed projects, while
better aligning donor activity with the government’s priorities. At the same time, information
on the execution of off-budget expenditure is still limited, and staff encouraged the
authorities to establish an effective reporting mechanism, in coordination with donors. Staff
also noted that maintenance and operations related to investment spending under off-budget
donor projects would require increasing allocations for recurrent spending which were not
yet incorporated in the medium-term budget plan. More broadly, staff noted that the overall
7

The FAD resident advisor will assist in establishing a modern treasury system with a well-defined
regulatory framework and in developing adequate capacity both in the Ministry of Finance and the
line ministries so that expenditure execution bottlenecks are removed.

- 18 -

Box 5. Meeting the Budget Execution Challenge
A combination of complex and over-centralized processes in the treasury and procurement offices,
and weak human resource and institutional capacity on the one hand, and a high level of commitment
to fiduciary accountability on the other, has resulted in very low levels of budget execution. As a
result, a high percentage of budgeted resources remain unspent—particularly for capital projects and
spending for rural areas.
FY 2004/05: Cumulative budget expenditure Q1-Q3
In percent of annual budget allocation

Total 3/
Salary and Wages

Executed 1/

Committed 2/

Total

48

16

64

67

0

67

Goods and Services

46

16

62

Capital (minor)

16

31

47

6

58

64

Capital Development
Sources: Timor-Leste Treasury.

1/ Goods or service delivered and payment executed.
2/ Spending request approved by treasury, but procurement process not yet completed.
3/ Some spending may overflow to the following year.

To address the problem without sacrificing cautious fiscal management, the authorities introduced a
number of measures with the current budget cycle:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Creation of a committee reporting to the Prime Minister to monitor progress on budget
execution.
An earlier start of the budget process to allow more planning time for ministries.
Posting of technical advisors to key ministries during the planning process.
Improved coordination between the treasury and procurement division.
Establishment of a liaison officer from key ministries in the procurement office.
More detailed specification of capital spending by project and geographic location to permit
closer monitoring.

Additional steps which will take effect with the next fiscal year include:
•
•
•
•

A reorganization to relieve the two ministries facing the most difficulties in executing capital
spending, Education and Public Works, of other responsibilities.
The creation of regional state ministers reporting directly to the Prime Minister to ensure
adequate spending to rural areas takes place.
Some easing of procurement approval requirements.
Further education of line ministries on the procurement process.

- 19 -

SIPs expenditure proposals appear ambitious—with 80 percent of proposed donor support
still uncommitted over the FY05/06-08/09 period, and encouraged the authorities to
strengthen prioritization given the risk of a shortfall in expected donor contributions and the
need to adhere to sustainable spending identified under the saving policy. While the
authorities remained optimistic that donors would commit new resources for the SIPs, they
noted that shortfalls in external support would be met by greater prioritization and that
central government spending would be capped at the sustainable spending level identified
under the oil saving policy (Box 1).
SIPs Combined Sources Expenditure and Financing
Average
2000-2004
2004/05
Estimate

2005/06

2006/07
2007/08
Projections

2008/09

(Percent of non-oil GDP)
Total SIPs planned expenditure 1/ 2/
financed by:
Timor Leste revenue 3/
Budget support grants
Off-budget committed donor financing
Additional financing requested 4/

69.5

62.3

69.8

70.4

67.2

55.1

10.2
8.8
50.3

14.9
8.9
38.5

29.9
2.9
16.1

26.4
2.8
8.3

27.6
2.6
3.4

30.0
0.1
1.5

0.0

0.0

20.9

32.9

33.6

23.5

Source: Timor-Leste authorities and staff estimates.
1/ Includes off-budget sector projects which the government has identified as necessary to achieve NDP and MDG objectives.
2/ In 2005/06 excludes capitalization of the BPA.
3/ Includes petroleum fund transfers in line with savings policy, net of increase in government cash balances.
4/ New commitments requested from donors for the implementation of the SIPs to achieve NDP and MDG objectives.

Major progress has been made toward introducing the petroleum fund, and
20.
remaining efforts should focus on ensuring the smooth start of its operations with the
next fiscal year. Should delays occur in the passage of the law, staff suggested oil revenue
should nonetheless be treated in a manner consistent with the key principles of transparency
and accountability to build confidence regarding the authorities’ long-term commitment. The
authorities noted their intention to establish promptly the investment advisory board and the
petroleum fund consultative council, and set up the framework for regular reporting in time
to support the launch of the petroleum fund. The staff encouraged the authorities to transfer
the bulk of the past accumulated cash balances from FY04/05 oil/gas tax revenue to the new
petroleum fund. Although the utilization of the cash balances would not have significant
implications for the medium-term spending path, transferring the larger part would send a
concrete signal regarding commitment to the new oil/gas saving policy.8 The staff also
8

Staff projections assume that US$30 million (40 percent of current spending) would be kept for cash
flow management purposes and the remaining US$217 million would be transferred to the petroleum
fund. Pending a decision by the government, the draft budget uses the technical assumption that all
cash balances remain intact.

- 20 -

encouraged cautious management of oil fund resources, which could jump from US$60 to
US$400 million in the first year, in line with FAD-MFD expert advice and with joint
Ministry of Planning and Finance (MOPF)-BPA oversight. The authorities agreed and
requested the assistance of a full time advisor to assist in investment and reserve management
of the petroleum fund during its first year of operation.
The authorities intend to establish a national oil company to capture a larger
21.
share of the oil wealth. Staff invited the government to weigh carefully the costs and
benefits given Timor-Leste’s limited capacity and recommended that the company’s structure
be fully consistent with the central principles of the petroleum fund legislation. The
authorities assured the staff of their intention that all oil income would be transferred directly
to the fund and that subsequent transfers to the oil company would be explicitly detailed in
the central government budget. The company’s organization and governance structures
would be transparent and operations run on market principles. In particular, the authorities
noted their aim to avoid the creation of a large company that could produce distortions in the
economy and create an alternative power base within the public sector.
Despite gains in improving tax administration, the authorities and staff agreed
22.
further steps are needed to strengthen non-oil revenue and avoid excessive reliance on
oil/gas revenue over the long term. Non-oil revenue—at about 10 percent of non-oil
GDP—is relatively low in Timor-Leste, even
30
compared with other oil economies, and under
Non-Oil Tax Revenue
current policies is expected to taper off over time
25
(percent of GDP or Non-oil GDP)
as a share of non-oil GDP. The recovery of past20
due tax liabilities in FY04/05 contributed to a
one-off boost in tax revenue. At the same time,
15
several factors—including continued overall poor
10
compliance, smuggling and the introduction of
tax incentives in the new investment laws—point
5
to difficulties in raising revenue levels over the
0
medium term. As a number of taxes are collected
Tim o r-Le s te (% Lo w Inc o m e As ia S ub-S a ha ra n Oil
o f no n-o il GDP )
(% o f GDP )
Expo rte rs (% o f
at the border, further modernization of customs
no n-o il GDP )
procedures—including through the extension of
ASYCUDA outside Dili and additional training—
would be helpful in curtailing undervaluation and misclassification of imports. Enforcement
capacity would also need to be improved to combat smuggling. Staff also encouraged the
authorities to ensure that the revenue service is adequately staffed in auditing, collection and
tax counsel positions. In addition, given the inclusion of tax incentives in the investment
laws, the authorities were urged to introduce monitoring procedures to limit potential abuses
and to identify the foregone revenue explicitly in the budget.9 The authorities observed that
9

The investment tax incentives provide income tax credits for hiring of new Timorese employees and
duty-free imports of capital goods, raw materials and semi-finished products for new or additional
investment.

- 21 -

the second phase of ASYCUDA implementation was in progress, although complicated by
departing technical experts and the absence of electricity outside Dili. They also argued that
the positive impact of the investment laws on economic activity would offset the revenue loss
from the new tax incentives. Finally, the authorities indicated their intention to seek followup technical assistance in tax policy and administration to build on gains made to date and to
reflect the changing nature of the Timorese economy.
Composition of non-oil domestic revenue
FY 2003/04

FY 2004/05
Staff est.

FY 2005/06
Draft budget
Staff Proj.

(millions of US dollars)
Total
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Non tax revenue 1/
Grants
Memorandum items:
Treasury cash balances
Petroleum fund balances

64.0
6.6
18.1
4.5
34.8

64.0
7.6
19.5
6.1
30.8

46.9
7.7
19.2
9.5
10.5

42.4
7.7
19.2
5.0
10.5

62.5
13.9

247.0
63.1

242.6
149.3

30.0
376.2

1/ The difference in non tax revenue relates to interest earned on treasury cash balances. Staff
assumes bulk of cash balances are transferred to petroleum fund. The draft budget is based on
the technical assumption that accumulated cash balances are maintained as of end-June 2005.

The power authority has made progress in moving to financial independence,
23.
but continues to rely on budget transfers; further reform is needed. Revenue collection
improved markedly in the second half of 2004, but is still below target. New pre-paid meters
and outsourced management improved performance, but difficulties continue, including with
an unreliable billing system, user non-payment, controlled tariffs, and heavy interference in
management decisions. The authorities agreed and noted that regulatory framework for the
electricity sector, which would allow more independent decision-making to address
operational problems, was near finalization. They were of the view, however, that electricity
tariffs were already high and did not plan increases.
C. Monetary and Financial Sector Issues

24.
The authorities agreed with staff that the current monetary and exchange rate
regime has served Timor-Leste well, and expect to maintain this arrangement for the
foreseeable future. The dollar regime remains broadly appropriate given the need for a
credible nominal anchor, the still limited institutional capacity and the absence of a welldeveloped foreign exchange market. The authorities concurred that removal of these
constraints should be considered preconditions to the introduction of a national currency and
were well aware that the current regime need to be supported by appropriate fiscal and wage
policy to help improve competitiveness and maintain macroeconomic stability.
While welcoming the increase in financial intermediation, staff noted the need
25.
to remain vigilant to possible emerging risks, particularly given the rapid growth and

- 22 -

sector concentration of bank credit. The BPA was of the view that the financial sector
remained healthy. With assistance from an MFD banking supervision expert, the banks’ loan
portfolios have been assessed as being of appropriate quality and in compliance with
supervision regulations, including for loan provisioning. Staff noted that plans underway to
create a bank credit registry would help limit credit risk in the banking system. The BPA
requested technical assistance on reserve management, in light of the BPA’s pending
responsibilities with the petroleum fund.
D. Private Sector Development and Institution and Capacity Building

26.
The high growth rate and job creation targeted under the NDP require
accelerated efforts to establish an attractive environment for private investment and
stimulate non-oil private activity (Box 3). Staff noted that the needed large-scale job
creation should come mainly from small and medium-size private enterprises, rather than
from the public or oil/gas sectors. Hence, it recommended the authorities extend resources to
shape the framework of the non-oil sector as they have done for the oil/gas sector. Successful
efforts in this direction are essential for the long-term diversification of Timor Leste’s export
base and reduced vulnerability of the economy to volatile oil and coffee prices. Visible
progress with pending economic legislation and faster issuance of simple implementing
regulations are needed to send a credible signal to the business community that Timor Leste
is “open for business.” The authorities agreed fully with this analysis, noting that delays were
largely related to both the need to create a coherent legal framework from a past mix of
Portuguese, Indonesian and UNTAET legislation and to limited domestic capacity. In
addition, they viewed the recent passage of the investment laws as a major achievement
toward attracting new investment.
With the departure of UN-appointed technical experts, the authorities have
27.
taken a pragmatic approach to the continuing need to strengthen administrative
capacity. The Consolidation Support Program, a multi-donor budget support program
coordinated by the World Bank, will assist in building capacity across the public sector,
including in the judicial education, and health sectors. With regard to economic management,
although capacity at the MOPF and BPA has improved, the agencies have continued to rely
heavily on international experts for daily operations. With the scaled-back UN mission, the
lack of domestic capacity could become a major obstacle to faster development. In response,
the authorities have designed a planning and financial management capacity building project
to continue building institutional capacity and improved service delivery at the MOPF and
other government agencies and line ministries. The project is consistent with the SIPs and
would be supported by donor financing.
The authorities indicated appreciation for outreach and capacity building
28.
undertaken during the Article IV consultation mission. Together with EXR, and with the
collaboration of the World Bank, the mission presented a two-day workshop for
Parliamentarians on the role of the Fund and its activities in Timor-Leste. In addition, and
with the additional cooperation of the Asian Development Bank, a workshop was held for
civil society on measures to improve private sector activity.

- 23 -

E. Other Issues

29.
While data provision for surveillance is adequate overall, continuing weaknesses
complicate policy decision-making and surveillance. The authorities acknowledged that
domestic capacity to compile the national accounts and the balance of payments does not yet
exist, although with the assistance of the multi-sector STA expert progress is being made.
Given the considerable data shortcomings, the authorities are seeking additional donor
assistance through the SIPs and the planning and financial management capacity building
project.
Timor-Leste continues to maintain an open trade regime and exchange system
30.
that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international
transactions. There were no developments in the trade and exchange regime since the last
Article IV consultation.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL

31.
Over the past few years Timor-Leste has achieved good progress in establishing
the basis for a stable and healthy economy. As the transition from post-conflict status ends,
Timor-Leste’s challenge is how best to harness its new oil/gas resources within a policy
framework that would support higher non-oil GDP growth, reduce poverty, and maintain
macroeconomic stability over the long term. The government has followed prudent fiscal and
monetary and exchange rate policies over the past few years and is now making promising
progress on introducing a long-term strategy for effective management of its oil/gas wealth.
Key areas remaining to be addressed include the realization of a public investment strategy
focused on basic services and infrastructure spending and supported by sharp improvements
in the capacity to design and execute expenditure programs, and an intensified effort to
complete the establishment of an environment to attract private investment and stimulate
private non-oil activity—the primary source of future job creation.
Given the considerable development needs in Timor Leste, the staff supports
32.
moving toward the sustainable spending level as quickly as possible without
aggravating either nonpriority spending or inflation pressure. In that light, the proposed
FY05/06 spending increase appears ambitious, given still limited administrative capacity in
the government and absorptive capacity in the domestic economy. At the same time, there
also remain downside risks on revenue related to oil price volatility.
Recent measures to improve administrative capacity and remove obstacles to
33.
smooth budget execution are important steps toward resolving current expenditure
execution difficulties. These include improving monitoring of spending through an itemized
program budget, and placing advisors in line ministries to assist with budget preparations.
However, to fully resolve the spending execution difficulties without weakening fiduciary
responsibility, additional measures are needed to further build administrative capacity at line
ministries and the MOPF and to ensure treasury and procurement processes do not create
bottlenecks.

- 24 -

34.
The progress in strengthening the links between Timor-Leste’s development
needs outlined in the SIPs and the budget are welcomed. The integration of the SIPs into
the budget, together with the increased donor-government coordination through the SIPs
working groups, is likely to improve the government’s ability to plan and focus spending on
feasible and needed investment projects, and better align increasingly limited donor activity
with the government’s priorities.
Further efforts are recommended to reorient expenditure toward improving
35.
human capital, infrastructure, and other development needs. Investment spending
remains relatively low in the current medium-term framework. At this early stage of
development, the economic returns on public investment are particularly high. Staff also
welcome the authorities’ commitment to maintaining the existing restraint on the wage bill.
The government’s intention to ensure the needed legislative framework is in
36.
place for the petroleum fund to start with the new fiscal year is welcome. Key steps to
support the fund will include the establishment of the investment advisory board, the
petroleum fund consultative council, and a framework for regular public reporting in time to
support the launch of the petroleum fund. Careful consideration should be given to the costs
and benefits of establishing a national oil company; the authorities’ intention to ensure it
would be fully consistent with the principles of the petroleum fund is welcome.
Consolidation of the progress made in non-oil revenue and power sector finances
37.
is needed. Notwithstanding the large oil/gas revenue inflows, a well-functioning tax
administration is needed for a stable and robust non-oil revenue base. Further action is
recommended, therefore, to continue strengthening tax administration. Continued reform is
needed to allow the power authority to gain financial independence.
The current monetary and exchange regime remains appropriate as it provides a
38.
credible nominal anchor which continues to serve the country well. The staff agrees with
the authorities’ view that a strengthening of institutional capacity and the creation of a welldeveloped foreign exchange market remain preconditions to the introduction of a national
currency. The continuation of prudent fiscal and wage policies is critical to avoid an erosion
in external competitiveness.

39.
Further improvement in financial intermediation remains critical for future
economic growth. The BPA has made good progress in developing a strong supervision and
regulatory environment and in moving forward with the legislative agenda to help establish
the necessary legal structure for banking and private activity. This agenda should be quickly
completed, including approval of the central bank, payment system and anti-money
laundering legislation. The recent increase in financial intermediation is welcome; at the
same time, continued vigilance over bank portfolios is needed to ensure continued soundness.
Accelerated efforts are needed to establish an environment to attract private
40.
investment and stimulate non-oil private activity. Rapid enactment of remaining economic
legislation and issuance of streamlined implementing regulations that are simple to

- 25 -

administer would set the basis for stronger non-oil sector growth. In addition, tax incentives
under the investment laws should be well-targeted to avoid unwarranted revenue loss.
Developing strong institutions and local capacity is essential for effective
41.
economic management and Timor-Leste’s economic development. The authorities’
planning and capacity building program now under development is an important step forward
as the international presence declines. Gaps in macroeconomic data continue to create
difficulties for surveillance and policy decision-making, and the authorities are urged to take
early steps to build domestic capacity to compile the national accounts and the balance of
payments.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be conducted on the standard
42.
12-month cycle.

- 26 -

Figure 1. Timor-Leste: Regional and Global Comparators
Timor-Leste's per capita GDP is low, reflecting
negative economic growth since 1999,
7

300

Developing Countries

Sub-Sahara Africa

Timor-Leste

South Asia

Pacific Islands

Developing Countries

Developing Asia

4
3
2
1
0

and no external debt overhang.

At the same time, the macroeconomic situation has
stabilized with relatively low inflation,
15

80

External Debt, 2003
(percent of GDP)

0

Pacific Islands

20

3

Developing Countries

Timor-Leste

Timor-Leste

40

Sub-sahara Africa

60
Pacific Islands

Developing Countries

Developing Asia

6

Sub-sahara Africa

12

9

Inflation, 2002-04 Average
(annual percent change)

Developing Asia

600

5

Timor-Leste

1200

Population Growth, 2003
(annual percent change)

6

South Asia

Nominal GDP Per Capita, 2002
(US $)

Pacific Islands

1500

900

... and rapid population growth rates,

0

Finally, the onset of oil production and the high level of estimated per capita oil reserves provides TimorLeste with the means for improving living standards.
500

6

Proven Oil Reserves, 2003
(billion barrels)

5

Per Capita Proven Oil Reserves,
2003 (barrels)

400

0

Indonesia

Yemen

100

Syria

Malaysia

200
Bahrain

Timor-Leste 1/

Yemen

Brunei

Syria

Malaysia

1

Indonesia

2

Bahrain

300
3

Timor-Leste 1/

4

0

Source: Timor-Leste authorities; British Petroleum annual report; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Bayu Undan field only. Reserves would be larger if the Great Sunrise field begins production. In addition,
there are significant gas reserves.

- 27 -

Figure 2. Timor Leste: Recent Macroeconomic Developments
Output recovered in 2004, after declines in 200203 linked to UN withdrawal.
450

Inflation has been below 3 percent
since August 2004.
12

Real non-oil GDP
400

Consumer Prices, Mar. 2003 - Mar. 2005
(12-month percentage change)

Real non-oil non-UN
GDP

350

10

300

8

250
6
200
150

4

100
2
50
0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Mar-03

The current account deficit narrowed,
reflecting new oil revenue inflows,
400

350

Sep-03

Mar-04

Sep-04

Mar-05

...but non oil exports remain modest,
and dominated by coffee.
9

External Current Account Deficit,
excluding International Aid
(millions of US dollars)

8

Non-oil Exports
(millions of US dollars)

7

300

Other
Coffee

6
250
5
200
4
150
3
100

2

50

1

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2000

2001

Source: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

2002

2003

2004

- 28 -

80
70
60

Figure 3. Timor Leste: Central Government—Fiscal Developments and Outlook
FY 2000/01- 2008/09
Overall Budget Balances
(percent of non-oil GDP)

50
40

Overall budget balance

30
20
10
0
-10
Non-oil budget balance

-20
-30
2000/1

2001/2

2002/3

2003/4

2004/5 Est.

2005/6 Proj.

2006/7Proj.

2007/8 Proj.

2008/9 Proj.

2003/4

2004/5 Est.

2005/6 Proj.

2006/7Proj.

2007/8 Proj.

2008/9 Proj.

2003/4

2004/5 Est.

2005/6 Proj.

2006/7Proj.

2007/8 Proj.

2008/9 Proj.

80
70

Revenue
(percent of non-oil GDP)

60
Oil revenue
50
40
Non-oil revenue
30
20
10
0
2000/1

2001/2

2002/3

35

Expenditure
(percent of non-oil GDP)

30

Total

25

Recurrent
20
Capital
15
10
5
0
2000/1

2001/2

2002/3

Source: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 29 -

Figure 4. Timor-Leste: Medium-Term Projections—Baseline and Low Oil Price Scenarios
(Millions of U.S. dollars)
Medium-term Oil Revenue Projections
500
400
Baseline scenario (WEO prices)
300
200
100
Low-price scenario (10$ below WEO)
0
2004/5

2005/6

170

2006/7

2007/8

2008/9

2009/10

Medium-term Budget Sustainable Spending

150

Baseline scenario (WEO prices)

130
110
90
Low-price scenario (10$ below WEO)
70
50
2004/5

2005/6

200

2006/7

2007/8

2008/9

2009/10

2010/11

Medium-term External Current Account Balance
(excluding external assistance)

150
100

Baseline scenario (WEO prices)

50
0
-50
Low-price scenario (10$ below WEO)

-100
-150
2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

2008

2009

- 30 -

Table 1. Timor-Leste: Selected Social Indicators 1/
East Asia
and Pacific
island
countries

TimorLeste

Gross national per capita income (U.S. dollars)
Area (in thousands of square kilometers)
Demography
Total population (in millions)
Population growth (in percent) 3/

Low
income
countries

417

1,080

450

15

...

...

1,855
1.2

2,310
2.0

58
57
59
80
123

0.925 2/
4.0

Life expectancy and mortality
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Male
Female
Infant mortality (per thousand live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per thousand live births)

62
60
64
89
107

70
68
71
32
41

Education
Illiteracy rate (in percent) 4/
Male
Female
Net primary school enrollment rate (in percent)

51
46
55
75

10
...
...
93

Health
Immunization rate
(in percent of children aged 12 to 23 months)
Measles
DPT

60
70

82
82

65
67

Other indicators 6/
The population below the poverty line
Households with access to electricity
Households with access to safe water

40 5/
26
52 7/

…
…
78

...
...
75

5/

5/

7/

Sources: UNDP Human Development Report 2004, World Bank, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Data are for 2003, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Data for 2004. Provisional population count from 2004 census.
3/ For Timor Leste, average growth over 2000-2004, including returning refugees. For comparators
average for 1990-2003.
4/ For ages 15 and above.
5/ Figures are for 2001.
6/ In percentage share of the total.
7/ Figures are for 2002.

49
...
...
77

5/

5/

7/

- 31 -

Table 2. Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-2005

2000 1/

Output and prices 1/
Non-oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP growth (percentage change)
Inflation (percentage change, end-period) 2/

316
15.4
3.0

2001 1/

368
16.6
-0.3

2002 1/

343
-6.7
9.5

2003 1/

336
-6.2
4.2

2004
Est.

2005
Proj.

339
1.8
1.8

349
2.5
2.5

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 3/
Non-government
Government
Gross national savings
Non-government
Government
External savings
Central government budget 4/
Revenues
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Grants
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Public debt
Combined sources fiscal operations 4/ 5/
Revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 6/
Net domestic assets (end-period)

41
7
34
-46
-51
5
87

42
9
32
-44
-50
6
86

36
7
28
-48
-54
6
84

31
9
23
-34
-44
10
65

28
9
19
6
-36
42
23

32
9
23
27
-26
53
5

17
4
4
9
15
9
6
2
0

15
6
3
6
15
12
3
0
0

24
6
9
10
21
17
4
3
0

31
9
12
10
21
19
3
10
0

90
10
71
9
22
19
2
68
0

57
9
45
3
30
20
10
27
0

18
69
35
34
-52

16
70
38
32
-53

25
73
44
30
-48

33
66
44
22
-33

92
62
45
18
29

15
70
41
29
-55

6
-4

14
-4

16
-10

22
-11

25
-30

28
-84

-77
119
-194
8
-202
122

-18
149
-204
10
-214
216

-23
35
-57
2
-60
36

-5
43
-58
3
-61
62

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/
Merchandise imports 8/
Overall balance

-275
37
-237
5
-242
16

-316
46
-280
4
-284
8

-288
26
-260
6
-266
20

-218
17
-213
7
-221
18

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/
Merchandise imports 8/
Overall balance

-87
12
-75
2
-77
5

-86
13
-76
1
-77
2

-84
8
-76
2
-78
6

-65
5
-64
2
-66
5

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Non-oil GDP and national accounts data for 2000-2003 are based on estimates prepared by BIDE consultants in October 2004.
2/ CPI for Dili.
3/ Excludes oil/gas sector investment.
4/ Fiscal year basis (July-June); for example, 2000 refers to FY2000/01.
5/ Includes fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international financial institutions,
outside the central government budget. The sharp revenue decline in FY 2005/06 reflects the adoption of the new savings
and petroleum fund policy according to which only the sustainable income from the oil wealth is transferred to the budget.
6/ Exclude currency holdings by the public, for which no data are available.
7/ Excludes oil/gas revenue, which are recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues).
8/ In 2005 includes the transfer of assets from UNMISET, valued at approximately US$ 12 million.

-2.4
...
...
...
13.9

-4.7
...
...
35.9
49.8

-33.0

33.0

22.9
19.7
3.2

55.9
9.2
37.7
8.9

-77.6
-35.9

-113.5

-3.0
...
...
49.2
63.1

-67.9

67.9

21.6
19.2
2.4

89.5
9.6
70.9
8.9

-184.5
-49.2

-233.7

233.7

74.3
66.1
28.2
32.6
5.3
8.2

308.0
33.2
244.0
194.8
49.2
30.8

2006/7
2007/08
Draft Budget 2005/06 3/

0.0
-120.5

-120.5

120.5

112.0
82.4
32.3
44.6
5.5
29.6

232.5
40.8
181.2
127.3
53.9
10.5

-33.8

33.8

27.9
21.3
6.7

-30.0

30.0

27.9
20.5
7.4

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
61.8
57.8
10.2
10.1
48.9
45.1
2.8
2.6

0.0
-128.6

-128.6

128.6

106.2
80.8
31.3
45.0
4.5
25.4

234.8
38.6
185.7
135.0
50.7
10.5

-36.0

36.0

25.8
19.8
5.9

61.8
10.3
51.4
0.1

0.0
-153.1

-153.1

153.1

109.6
84.3
33.6
45.6
5.1
25.3

262.7
43.6
218.6
113.1
105.5
0.5

2008/09

-20.2
72.6
58.6
86.2
149.3

-15.0
57.1
82.6
128.6
277.9

-15.1
60.7
75.1
120.5
398.4

-15.4
65.5
109.3
153.1
551.5

(In millions of US dollars, unless otherwise specified)

-24.0

24.0

33.3
21.7
11.6

57.3
10.1
44.2
2.9

0.0
-86.2

-86.2

86.2

119.5
77.8
28.9
45.3
3.6
41.7

205.6
36.4
158.7
112.0
46.7
10.5

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2005/6

-18.2
65.3
61.3
313.1
376.2

-26.7

26.7

30.0
20.4
9.6

56.7
8.9
44.9
2.9

217.0
-313.1

-96.0

96.0

107.6
73.3
28.9
40.8
3.6
34.4

203.7
31.9
161.3
112.0
49.3
10.5

2005/06

-14.7
55.7
91.2
138.6
514.8

-36.5

36.5

26.1
20.7
5.5

62.6
8.7
51.1
2.8

0.0
-138.6

-138.6

138.6

99.3
78.6
31.3
42.8
4.5
20.7

237.9
33.1
194.3
135.0
59.3
10.5

-16.0
64.2
85.4
127.4
642.2

-31.7

31.7

27.2
20.5
6.7

58.9
8.6
47.6
2.6

0.0
-127.4

-127.4

127.4

109.3
82.4
32.3
44.6
5.5
26.9

236.7
34.7
191.5
127.3
64.2
10.5

2006/07
2007/08
Staff Projections 3/

-18.4
78.2
121.1
152.2
794.4

-35.8

35.8

27.1
20.2
6.9

62.9
8.6
54.2
0.1

0.0
-152.2

-152.2

152.2

115.1
85.8
33.6
47.1
5.1
29.3

267.4
36.5
230.4
113.1
117.3
0.5

2008/09

1/ Fiscal year: July-June.
2/ Based on budget execution as of March 2005.
3/ Assumes authorities' new permanent income savings policy is in place. Only the real permanent income derived from oil wealth may be spent in any year.
4/ Differences in draft budget and staff projections for the period 2005/06-2008/09 reflect different treatment of treasury's cash balances at end FY 2004/05. Budget non-oil revenue is higher than staff 's projections
because it includes interest on high cash balances. Vice-versa, oil revenue are higher in staff's projections because of higher interests accruing to the petroleum fund, endowed with the bulk of end of FY 2004/05 cash
balances (see footnote 7, below).
5/ The draft budget is based on expenditure commitments. Staff's projections are based on estimates of likely execution.
6/ In FY 2005/06 includes US$ 10.5 million to capitalize the BPA.
7/ Staff projections assume that at end-June 2005, existing oil savings and government cash balances above those needed to maintain a cushion against temporary fluctuations in revenue are moved to the petroleum
fund. Pending a policy decision, the draft budget document is based on the technical assumptions that only accumulated royalties (FTP) are transferred to the petroleum fund and the treasury keeps for cash-flow
management the large cash balances accumulated as of end-FY 2004/05 at the BPA.

Sources: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

Non-oil fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Financing of non-oil fiscal balance from oil savings
Net allocation to petroleum fund from savings rule
Net allocation to the petroleum fund 7/
Cumulative oil gas savings (end-period)

Memorandum items:

-9.8

21.4
18.5
2.9

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure

Financing

31.2
8.7
12.3
10.3

Revenue
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Grants

9.8

-29.8
-3.4

Changes in cash balances (increase -)
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -)

Overall balance

-33.2

Financing

10.9
113.5

9.7
33.2

Overall balance

78.7
67.8
28.2
39.6

72.2
62.5
24.0
38.5

Expenditure 5/
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Subsidies
Capital expenditure and net lending 6/

192.2
31.6
129.8
93.9
35.9
30.8

105.4
29.2
41.4
38.0
3.4
34.8

2004/05
Revised
Staff Proj. 2/
Budget

Revenue 4/
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Tax revenues
Royalties and interest
Grants

2003/04

Table 3. Timor-Leste: Central Government Budget FY2003/04-FY2008/09 1/

- 32 -

- 33 -

Table 4. Timor Leste: SIPs Combined Sources Budget FY 2003/04 - 2008/09
2003/04
Est.

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07
Staff projections 1/

2007/08

2008/09

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Revenue
Domestic revenue 2/
Autonomous agencies own revenue
Oil/gas revenue 2/
Grant financing (budget support)

111.1
29.2
5.7
41.4
34.8

315.7
33.2
8.2
243.5
30.8

52.7
31.9
10.3
0.0
10.5

55.1
33.1
11.5
0.0
10.5

57.4
34.7
12.2
0.0
10.5

50.0
36.5
13.0
0.0
0.5

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Central government budget (incl. autonomous agencies)
Donor projects 3/
Capital expenditure
Central government budget (incl. autonomous agencies)
Donor projects 3/

221.4
147.0
66.3
80.8
74.3
11.6
62.7

214.4
153.8
71.6
82.2
60.6
10.9
49.7

260.6
148.1
80.1
68.0
112.5
37.8
74.7

267.5
142.0
86.2
55.8
125.5
24.6
100.9

270.1
140.1
90.5
49.6
130.0
31.0
99.0

234.5
125.1
94.5
30.6
109.5
33.7
75.8

-110.3

101.3

-208.0

-212.4

-212.8

-184.6

110.3
...
-3.4
143.5
-29.8

-101.3
...
-49.2
132.4
-184.5

123.0
65.3
...
57.7
0.0

87.4
55.7
...
31.7
0.0

77.8
64.2
...
13.6
0.0

84.6
78.2
...
6.4
0.0

0.0

0.0

-85.0

-125.0

-135.0

-100.0

Revenue
Domestic revenue 2/
Autonomous agencies own revenue
Oil/gas revenue 2/
Grant financing (budget support)

32.9
8.7
1.7
12.3
10.3

91.7
9.6
2.4
70.8
8.9

14.7
8.9
2.9
0.0
2.9

14.5
8.7
3.0
0.0
2.8

14.3
8.6
3.0
0.0
2.6

11.7
8.6
3.1
0.0
0.1

Expenditure 3/
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure

65.6
43.6
22.0

62.3
44.7
17.6

72.6
41.3
31.3

70.4
37.4
33.0

67.2
34.9
32.3

55.1
29.4
25.7

-32.7

29.4

-57.9

-55.9

-52.9

-43.4

32.7
...
-1.0
42.5
-8.8

-29.4
...
-14.3
38.5
-53.6

34.3
18.2
...
16.1
0.0

23.0
14.7
...
8.3
0.0

19.3
16.0
...
3.4
0.0

19.9
18.4
...
1.5
0.0

0.0

-23.7

-32.9

-33.6

-23.5

-64.2
64.2
159.8
148.6
13.6
135.0

-78.2
78.2
186.8
106.4
6.4
100.0

Overall balance
Financing
Oil fund financing of central government non-oil fiscal deficit
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -)
Committed project financing by donors
Change in treasury cash balances (increase -)
Additional financing requests 4/

(In percent of non-oil GDP)

Overall Balance
Financing
Oil fund financing of central government non-oil fiscal deficit
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -) 2/
Committed project financing by donors
Change in treasury cash balances (increase -)
Additional financing requests 4/

0.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise specified)

Memorandum items:
Non-oil fiscal balance
Transfer from the petroleum fund 2/
Oil fund balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Total donor financing requested
Committed
Uncommitted

-8.2
...
4.1
143.5
143.5
0.0

-10.3
...
18.4
132.4
132.4
0.0

-65.3
65.3
104.8
142.7
57.7
85.0

-55.7
55.7
135.5
156.7
31.7
125.0

Sources: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Based on April 2005 SIPs spending proposals and requests for project financing by donors. Assumes implementation of the oil fund and fiscal sustainability policy starting
in FY 2005/06; Fund staff projections for central government revenue and expenditure.
2/ Oil gas revenue are included in the budget up to FY 2004/05. Thereafter it is assumed that oil revenue flows directly to the petroleum fund, from which the amount
necessary to cover the non-oil fiscal budget deficit is then transfered, up to the estimated sustainable income and recorded as a financing item.
3/ Includes sector projects which the government has identified as necessary to achieve NDP and MDG objectives, but for which donor financing is not yet fully committed.
4/ Project financing requested from donors; still uncommitted.

- 34 -

Table 5. Timor-Leste: Monetary Developments, 2001-2005
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
March

2005
Dec
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars; at end-period)
Banking System
Net foreign assets
Assets
Cash holdings
Claims on foreign banks
Other 1/
Liabilities

65.4
72.9
11.7
61.2
0.1
7.5

89.9
93.3
18.1
75.3
0.0
3.5

108.3
141.6
19.0
122.6
0.0
33.3

186.6
228.2
28.4
65.8
134.0
41.6

283.7
326.1
24.5
65.5
236.1
42.4

392.3
436.3
28.4
54.5
353.3
44.0

Net domestic assets
Claims on government (net)
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)

-14.3
-21.1
3.0
3.8

-35.3
-33.7
5.1
-6.7

-36.0
-49.7
22.1
-8.4

-102.6
-168.4
70.5
-4.7

-197.0
-269.0
75.6
-3.6

-294.5
-373.7
91.6
-12.4

51.1
36.9
14.2

54.6
39.1
15.5

72.3
40.1
32.2

84.0
49.4
34.6

86.7
52.4
34.2

97.8
57.5
40.3

23.7
23.7
0.0

43.5
43.5
0.0

61.3
61.3
0.0

183.1
183.1
0.0

284.5
284.5
0.0

398.9
398.9
0.0

-22.7
1.0

-39.1
4.5

-55.0
6.3

-177.6
5.5

-279.0
5.4

-393.4
5.5

41.7
12.9
51.1
3.5

46.4
10.7
54.6
2.4

47.0
28.8
72.3
3.4

3.5
81.2
84.0
0.7

-0.8
87.7
86.7
0.2

-6.6
105.1
97.8
0.7

37.4
1000.0
0.8
5.9
13.9

37.4
170.4
1.5
9.4
15.9

20.5
432.4
6.6
30.6
21.5

72.3
218.8
20.8
83.9
24.8

122.1
133.6
21.7
87.2
24.8

110.2
30.0
26.2
93.7
28.0

Broad money 2/
Demand deposits
Other deposits
BPA
Net foreign assets
Assets
Liabilities
Net domestic assets 3/
Liabilities
Commercial banks 4/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Deposit liabilities
Liabilities to BPA
Memorandum items
Net foreign assets (annual percentage change)
Credit to the economy (annual percentage change)
Credit/GDP
Credit to deposits ratio
Deposits/GDP ratio

Sources: Banking and Payments Authority; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Investment of oil revenue in US treasury bills on behalf of the government.
2/ Excludes currency in circulation, for which no data are available due to dollarization of the financial system.
3/ The large decrease in 2004 reflects the increase of oil-related government deposits.
4/ Includes the micro-finance institution.

- 35 -

Table 6. Timor-Leste: Balance of Payments 2000-2005

2000

2001

2002
Estimates

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance

-275
37

-316
46

-288
26

-218
17

-77
119

-18
149

Trade balance
Exports of goods 1/
O/w: coffee
Imports of goods
O/w: international assistance-related

-237
5
4
-242
-148

-280
4
3
-284
-163

-260
6
5
-266
-141

-213
7
6
-221
-109

-194
8
7
-202
-100

-204
10
8
-214
-108

-52

-56

-56

-48

-34

-27

2
2

5
4

6
4

5
3

30
26

54
49

Current transfers (net)
O/w: oil/gas tax revenue
international assistance

325
5
313

377
8
362

337
16
314

273
32
235

317
116
195

326
153
167

Capital and financial accounts
Official capital transfers
Financial account

-29
80
-109

-40
86
-127

-11
71
-82

16
53
-37

7
47
-40

67
61
6

7

2

5

-15

-4

0

16
-16
-19
3

8
-8
-2
-6

20
-20
-13
-7

18
-18
-16
-2

122
-122
-119
-3

216
-216
-205
-11

-23
35
-57

-5
43
-58

143
183

203
399

Services (net)
Income (net)
O/w: oil/gas royalty and interest

Errors and omissions (net)
Overall balance
Changes in foreign assets (increase -)
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -)
Other

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance
Trade balance

-87
12
-75

-86
13
-76

-84
8
-76

-65
5
-64

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
Oil/gas revenue
Gross foreign assets (end-period)

7
16

12
24

20
44

35
61

Source: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Exclude oil/gas revenues, which are recorded under the income (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues) because of lack
of detailed data on the oil/gas sector (including production, exports, service payments, and profit remittances).

- 36 -

Table 7. Timor-Leste: Medium-Term Outlook, 2004-2009
2004
Est.
Output and prices
GNP at current prices (in millions of US dollars)
Non-oil GDP
Oil/gas income
Real non-oil GDP growth (percentage change)
Inflation (percentage change at end-period) 1/

2005

482
339
143
1.8
1.8

2006

552
349
203
2.5
2.5

2007
Proj.

547
369
178
4.9
2.5

2008

584
391
193
4.2
2.5

2009

624
413
211
4.0
2.5

803
438
365
4.0
2.5

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 2/
Gross national saving
External saving

28
6
23

32
27
5

34
22
12

31
26
5

30
33
-3

27
69
-41

Central government budget 3/
Revenue
Domestic revenue
Oil/gas revenue
Grants
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Public debt

90
10
71
9
22
19
2
68
0

57
9
45
3
30
20
10
27
0

63
9
51
3
26
21
5
36
0

59
9
48
3
27
21
7
32
0

63
9
54
0
27
20
7
36
0

119
9
111
0
29
22
7
90
0

Combined sources fiscal operations 3/4/
Revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Financing
Net transfers from oil fund
Committed financing by donors
Change in cash balances
Financing gap

92
62
45
18
29
-29
...
38
-54
0

15
70
41
29
-55
34
18
16
0
-21

14
70
37
33
-56
23
15
8
0
-33

14
67
35
32
-53
19
16
3
0
-34

12
55
29
26
-43
20
18
2
0
-24

12
53
30
23
-41
20
20
0
0
-21

Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 5/
Net domestic assets (end-period)

25
-30

28
-84

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

12
99
-192
12
-205
211
140
789
46

181
244
-181
14
-195
365
281
1070
66

3
24
34

41
56
64

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 6/
Merchandise imports 7/
Oil income and transfers
Overall balance
Gross foreign assets (end-period)
(in months of imports of goods and services)

Current account excl. international assistance
Current account incl. international assistance
Overall balance

-77
119
-194
8
-202
143
122
183
11

-23
35
36

-18
-43
-21
149
90
89
-204
-208
-204
10
10
12
-214
-218
-216
203
178
193
216
117
133
399
516
649
22
28
36
(In percent of non-oil GDP)
-5
43
62

-12
24
32

-5
23
34

Sources: Data provided by the Timor Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ CPI for Dili.
2/ Excludes oil/gas sector investment.
3/ Fiscal year (July-June); for example, 2004 relates to FY2004/05.
4/ On a fiscal year basis. Includes fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international
financial institutions outside the central government budget. Projections based on April 2005 SIPs requirements.
5/ Excludes currency holdings by the public, on which no data are available.
6/ Excludes oil/gas revenue, which is recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenue).
7/ In 2005 includes the transfer of assets from UNMISET estimated at US$12 million.

- 37 -

Table 8. Timor-Leste: Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–05
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Est.

2005
Proj.

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
Financial sector risk indicators
Public debt
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis) 1/
Private Sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)
Share of demand deposits in broad money (percent)
External indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Current account balance (excl. international assistance)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of corresponding imports of goods)
Net Foreign assets of commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Total external debt 2/
In percent of exports of goods and services
External debt-service (in percent of exports of goods and services)
Sources: Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes currrency in circulation on which no data are available.
2/ No external or domestic debt has been contracted.

0.0
...
...
96.5

0.0
155.5
900.0
72.2

0.0
6.9
70.4
71.5

0.0
32.4
332.4
55.4

0.0
16.1
218.8
58.8

0.0
16.4
30.0
58.8

-90.5
104.2
-87.1
16.0
0.8
17.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

-19.1
17.4
-85.8
23.7
1.0
41.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

51.4
-6.3
-83.8
43.5
2.0
46.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

23.9
-17.1
-64.9
61.3
3.3
47.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

13.3
-8.4
-22.7
183.1
10.9
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

15.4
5.7
-5.3
398.9
22.4
-6.6
0.0
0.0
0.0

- 38 -

ANNEX I

TIMOR-LESTE: FUND RELATIONS
(AS OF APRIL 30, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 7/23/2002; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million

8.20
8.20
0.00

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

None
None

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangements

III.

% Quota

100.00
100.00
0.00

On January 24, 2000, the U.S. dollar was adopted as the official currency of then
East Timor by the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). This arrangement has been maintained after Timor-Leste’s
independence on May 20, 2002. At present, the monetary authority does not
undertake foreign exchange transactions; they are handled by commercial banks
on the basis of rates quoted in the international markets.
VIII. Article IV Consultations

The 2004 Article IV consultation discussions with the authorities were held
during April 8–21, 2004. The Executive Board discussed the staff report (IMF
Country Report 04/321, 10/12/04) and concluded the consultation on July 16,
2004.
IX.

Technical Assistance

Since late 1999, a significant amount of technical assistance has been
provided by the Fund as part of the international community’s efforts to
reconstruct the Timor-Leste economy in the aftermath of the widespread
violence and destruction that followed the August 1999 referendum. The
Fund’s technical assistance has focused on establishing key economic

- 39 -

institutions (especially fiscal and monetary authorities) essential for
macroeconomic management, as well as on developing local capacity to
manage them. It also played a key role in the adoption of a new currency
arrangement based on the U.S. dollar. Between late 1999 and early 2005,
numerous technical assistance missions (including staff visits) took place,
making Timor-Leste one of the largest recipients of Fund technical
assistance.
FAD: A series of multi-topic FAD missions took place to establish and develop
the Central Fiscal Authority (CFA, February 2000), which now functions as the
Ministry of Planning and Finance. In this connection, assistance was provided to
develop budget preparation, establish tax policy and administration, strengthen
treasury and expenditure management, and advise on oil sector fiscal regimes and
the establishment of an oil fund. In addition, long-term resident advisors were
assigned to the Ministry of Planning and Finance and the Revenue Service of
Timor-Leste to advise the authorities on a number of fiscal areas (including
budget policy and tax administration) partly under a cost sharing arrangement
with the UN. Since August 2004, a resident advisor is providing assistance for the
design and establishment of a Petroleum Fund. FAD has recently agreed to
provide a long-term advisor to the Treasurer of the Ministry of Planning and
Finance to strengthen expenditure management and budget execution.
LEG: A number of LEG missions have been to Timor Leste to advise the
authorities on key fiscal and financial legislation. These included the customs law
and directives, income tax legislation, directives and rulings, the budget and
financial management law, and banking regulations (relating to the monetary
authority, the banking system, and the payments system). Jointly with MFD,
technical assistance has recently been provided to assist the authorities in drafting
an AML/CFT Law. LEG has also recently provided assistance, in collaboration
with FAD, for the drafting of the Petroleum Fund Act, and Petroleum Fund
Management Agreement, and in collaboration with MFD, for the drafting of the
Central Bank Law.
MFD: A large number of MFD missions took place to establish and develop the
Central Payments Office (CPO, January 2000), which was transformed
subsequently into the Banking and Payments Authority (November 2001). To this
end, assistance was provided to establish a payment system, prepare banking
legislation, and develop key functions of the monetary authority, including
banking supervision, asset management, accounting, and organization and
management. Assistance was also provided on the introduction of a dollar-based
currency system and to issue domestic coins to supplement the use of U.S. dollar
coins. More recently, assistance has been provided to (i) develop a framework for
insurance supervision, (ii) to train officers in the supervision department, and
(iii) address a broad range of issues relating to money laundering and financing of
terrorism. In addition, long-term resident advisors, including on bank supervision,

- 40 -

payments, and accounting, have been assigned to the Central Payments Office and
the Banking and Payments Authority under a cost sharing arrangement with the
UN. In 2004, technical advice on the drafting of an insurance law, the design of a
more effective organizational structure at the BPA and the strengthening of its
investment management capabilities was also provided. Since early 2005, an
MFD long-term advisor has been assisting the BPA general manager.
STA: A multi-sector statistical mission took place in November 2000 to assess
the availability and quality of official macroeconomic data, and help establish the
Statistic Division of the Ministry of Planning and Finance. A long-term statistical
advisor assists the authorities in improving data compilation and developing local
capacity.
X.

Resident Representative

A resident representative office was established in Dili in August 2000. The
current resident representative, Mr. Insu Kim, assumed the post in August 2004.

- 41 -

ANNEX II

TIMOR-LESTE: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of April 30, 2005)

Timor-Leste joined the World Bank Group on July 23, 2002. It became eligible for
1.
IDA assistance on October 9, 2002. Thus far, there has been no lending to Timor-Leste,
reflecting the authorities’ policy to avoid external borrowing, including concessional loans.
However, the World Bank has been actively involved in the reconstruction and development
of the economy since late 1999, by playing a key catalytic role in mobilizing and
coordinating international assistance to Timor-Leste.
During the transition to independence, the World Bank’s involvement centered
2.
around its role as trustee and co-manager of the Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET), which
was established in December 1999 as a vehicle to provide grant assistance for reconstruction
activities and economic development in Timor-Leste.1 Under the TFET, which is comanaged with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank has administered
projects relating to social services (especially health and education), agriculture, private
sector development, community development and governance, economic capacity building,
and petroleum sector development. Total funding for the World Bank-administered projects
reached $115 million, of which $94 million was disbursed by end-March 2005. The World
Bank has also provided analytical and advisory services, including through a Country
Economic Memorandum, a Poverty Assessment, a Public Expenditure Management and
Accountability Note, a Public Expenditure Review, and an Education Sector Review.
3.
In addition to its involvement through the TFET, the World Bank has also been
playing a key role in mobilizing budgetary assistance for the post-independence period
through the annual multi-donor Transition Support Program. The first Transition Support
Program (TSP I) was approved by the World Bank Board in July 2002 and focused on
creating institutions, establishing a legislative and regulatory framework, and strengthening
the management systems required for core government functions. IDA financing consisted of
a $5 million grant in support of the FY2003 budget. The second Transition Support Program
(TSP II) was approved in July 2003. IDA financing consisted of a $4 million grant in support
of the FY2004 budget. The third Transition Support Program (TSP III) was approved in
October 2004. IDA financing consisted of a $5 million grant in support of the FY2004
budget. Both TSP II and TSP III have focused on three thematic areas: (1) good governance,
including developing a legal framework for governance and the judiciary and strengthening
public expenditure management; (2) service delivery for poverty reduction, particularly in
education and health; and (3) job creation, especially through private sector development,
1

Pledges to the TFET were made by 12 donor countries, the European Commission, and the
World Bank, with the total amount of funds reaching $178 million. This comprises donors’
contributions of $169 million (including $10 million by the World Bank) and investment
income of $8.7 million. Of this total, $148 million was disbursed by end-March 2005. TFET
projects are expected to wind down by end-2007.

- 42 -

agriculture, and improvements in basic infrastructure. The TSPs have been used as a unifying
framework for donors’ budget support, mobilizing a total of $99 million over three years
from 10 bilateral donors (including parallel financing from Portugal).2 The Government has
requested the extension of budget support for an additional three years, through FY2008,
under the Consolidation Support Program (CSP) to reflect the shift from post-conflict
transition to consolidation of gains made thus far.
Prior to Timor-Leste’s independence, the World Bank co-chaired six bi-annual
4.
donors’ meetings with the UN. After independence, the World Bank has co-chaired the
Timor-Leste and Development Partners Meeting (TLDPM) with the Government of TimorLeste. The TLDPM has taken place in December 2002, June 2003, December 2003, May
2004, and April 2005.

2

The bilateral donors who have participated in one or more TSPs consist of Australia,
Canada, Finland, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. In addition, China, Japan, Malaysia, ADB, UNMISET, UNDP, and
UNICEF have been providing technical assistance in support of the TSP.

- 43 -

ANNEX III

TIMOR-LESTE: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(AS OF APRIL 30, 2005)

Timor-Leste joined the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) on July 24, 2002. To date,
1.
there has been no lending to the country, reflecting the authorities’ policy to avoid external
borrowing. However, like other international financial institutions and bilateral donors, the
AsDB has been actively involved in the reconstruction and development of the economy
since late 1999.
The AsDB’s involvement has centered around co-managing with the World Bank the
2.
Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET), which was established in December 1999 as a vehicle to
provide grant assistance for reconstruction activities and economic development in TimorLeste.1 AsDB is now preparing its “consolidation” phase program to be funded
predominantly from Asian Development Fund grants ($15.2 million over 4 years) and
technical assistance (about $4.0 million over 4 years). Under the TFET, the AsDB has
managed six projects with total funding of $53 million,2 which aimed at the rehabilitation of
physical infrastructure (rural power, rural roads, ports, and water and sanitation) and the
development of microfinance. In the wake of the post-referendum destruction, the focus of
the projects was on providing emergency assistance, but subsequently shifted to meeting the
country’s long-term development needs. At end-March 2005, disbursements for AsDBmanaged projects totaled $45 million. Most projects were completed at the end of 2004. Only
one project (EIRP-2) is ongoing, with completion expected by November 2006.
The AsDB has also been actively involved in technical assistance. Thus far, the
3.
AsDB has approved 24 technical assistance programs totaling $10 million. Most technical
assistance programs have been undertaken in parallel with the implementation of the TFETfunded projects, focusing on project preparation and sector-specific capacity/institution
building essential for project implementation. The latter includes the development of
regulatory and legislative frameworks, the analysis of sectoral policy issues, poverty
assessment and statistics, and strategies for economic and social development and planning.
As of end-March 2005, 14 technical assistance programs were completed and 10 programs
continued.

1
2

See footnote 1 in Relations with the World Bank Group.

These projects comprise the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project
($29.8 million); the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 2 ($9 million); the
Water Supply and Sanitation Rehabilitation Project ($4.5 million); the Water Supply and
Sanitation Rehabilitation Project 2 ($4.5 million); the Hera Fisheries Port Facilities
Rehabilitation Project ($1 million); and the Microfinance Development Project ($4 million).

- 44 -

ANNEX IV

TIMOR-LESTE: STATISTICAL ISSUES

Significant weaknesses remain in the macroeconomic data available for surveillance,
especially regarding balance of payments and national accounts. This reflects limited
institutional capacity in Timor-Leste and the legacy of post-referendum turmoil. Prior to
1999, macroeconomic data in Timor-Leste (including national accounts, prices, labor,
provincial budget, and money and credits) were compiled by the Indonesian Central Bureau
of Statistics (Badan Pusat Statistik, BPS) and the Central Board of Statistics of the East
Timor Province. While these data provided useful economic information, their improvement
was viewed as necessary especially in terms of coverage and methodology. The most serious
data problem lay in the balance of payments statistics, which were almost nonexistent as
Timor-Leste was previously treated as one of the Indonesian provinces.
Compilation of macroeconomic data was seriously disrupted in 1999, as the post-referendum
turmoil led to the destruction of databases and the collapse of institutional capacity as a result
of the departure of most Indonesian statistical officers. Under the economic reconstruction
process beginning in late 1999, efforts have been made to begin the compilation of key
macroeconomic data through technical assistance provided by international financial
institutions and bilateral donors.
To this end, a multi-sector Fund statistics mission visited Dili in November 2000 and assisted
the authorities in establishing short- and long-term objectives for the restoration of economic
statistics and in setting up a Statistical Division in the Ministry of Planning and Finance in
2001. Also, a long-term resident statistical advisor was attached to the Statistical Division
during November 2001-Februray 2004 to lay a basis for compilation of macroeconomic data
while developing local capacity. This effort continues with a new resident advisor, in post
since October 2004. The new advisor is focusing efforts on developing capacity to produce
methodologically sound national accounts and balance of payments data. Institutional
capacity remains very limited, constraining progress in collection and compilation of
macroeconomic data. Availability, coverage, and quality of data remain very weak.
National accounts

Under a World Bank-financed project, national accounts data for 2000 (both type of activity
and expenditure basis) were estimated by the Boston Institute for Developing Economies
(BIDE). Also, Fund staff produced estimates for 1999-2003 on the basis of information
obtained during various missions. In late 2004, BIDE, under a follow-up World Bank project,
produced methodologically sound national account estimates for 2001-2003. Nonetheless,
the robustness of the new estimates still suffers from limited available data and substantial
extrapolation. Given the limited skills and human resources, it is not certain that the Division
of Statistics would be able to replicate the BIDE estimation exercise for 2004 without
additional assistance. To make further progress on the compilation of the national accounts,
there is a need to plan and execute substantial data collection and elaboration for the different
economic sectors.

- 45 -

Prices, employment, and wages

Following the disturbances of 1999, a consumer price index was compiled on a monthly
basis for Dili and on a quarterly basis for the whole of Timor-Leste, with April 2000 as a
base period. However, the price index suffered from a number of problems, including its
weighting scheme, which was based on a household expenditure survey conducted by the
BPS for Jakarta. To address these problems, the commodity basket and the weighting scheme
were revised in mid-2003 under a donor-supported project to better reflect the expenditure
composition of households, and a new monthly consumer price index for Dili has been
compiled, with December 2001 as a base period. Data on public sector employment and
wages are available on an annual basis through fiscal data. However, no official data are
compiled regularly on private sector employment and wages, although some partial data are
available through household surveys conducted jointly by the UNDP, AsDB, and World
Bank.
Government financial statistics

Official data on the central government’s revenues and expenditures are published on a semiannual basis as part of the budget preparation and review process. In addition, monthly data
are available on request (mainly in connection with missions’ visits) through the budget,
treasury, and revenue services. The compilation of revenue and expenditure follows the
Manual on Government Finance Statistics (GFSM 1986) classification (including
expenditure data on the basis of both functional and economic classification), and steps need
to be taken in order to compile the data on the basis of the Government Finance Statistical
Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). However, data on financing are incomplete and are estimated by
Fund staff on the basis of various sources. Only limited data are available on fiscal and quasifiscal activities undertaken by bilateral donors and special funds established for economic
reconstruction outside the central government budget (e.g., the Trust Fund for East Timor).
At present, there are three non-financial public enterprises, and only partial data are available
on their operations. No data are currently reported for the GFS Yearbook and the
International Financial Statistics.
Monetary accounts

Monetary statistics on the banking system are compiled by the Banking and Payments
Authority (BPA), generally following the classification recommended by the Fund. There is
scope for the BPA to collect more detailed information on the banking system’s assets and
liabilities with nonresidents and sectorization of the domestic institutional units. Monetary
survey data are incomplete because of the absence of official data on currency holdings by
the public, which are difficult to compile under the current currency regime. Statistics on key
monetary aggregates are now published on a monthly basis in the BPA’s website and on a
yearly basis in the BPA’s annual report. Compilation of data on interest rates (both deposit
and lending rates) and bank lending and investment in a comprehensive manner has begun
only recently. However, the availability of these data is extremely limited because the BPA is
concerned that their public release will reveal confidential information concerning

- 46 -

commercial bank operations (especially with regard to lending) given the very small number
(four) of banks comprising the banking system. No monetary data are currently reported to
STA for publication in the International Financial Statistics.
Balance of payments

No official data on the balance of payments are available, except for data on merchandise
exports and imports. Merchandise trade data are compiled on the basis of customs data with a
breakdown according to major commodity categories, and are available on a monthly basis
starting March 2000. However, these data are incomplete, and their classification by
commodities and trading partners needs improvement. The data do not include large
unrecorded border trade. Data on oil/gas revenue are currently recorded under the income
account (for royalties) and under transfers (for tax revenue) on the basis of fiscal data, as no
comprehensive information on production and investment in the oil/gas sector is available.
All other major items in the balance of payments, including the services account, transfers,
and capital and financial account transactions, are estimated by Fund staff on the basis of
information obtained during staff visits from various sources, including bilateral donors.

- 47 –

Timor-Leste: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of April 30, 2005)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Exchange Rates

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
6
publication

Not applicable
1

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

Q

Reserve/Base Money (excludes currency in circulation)

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

M

Broad Money (excludes currency in circulation)

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

M

Interest Rates

03/2005

3/2005

A

A

Consumer Price Index

03/2005

05/2005

M

M

2

4

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General Government
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing– Central Government

...
03/2005

...
04/2005

...
M

M

No debt contracted

External Current Account Balance

Data not available

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
1

5

03/2005

03/2005

2003

10/2004

M
...

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

...

M

M

M
...

...

M
...

...

Not applicable

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic non-bank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments. For
Timor Leste it includes public spending from donors, on which data on execution are not available
5
Includes only goods. No information on services is available.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); NA: Not Available
2
3

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/92
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 20, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
On June 15, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the 2005 Article IV consultation with Timor-Leste.1
Background
Five years after the international community stepped in to assist Timor-Leste in the
aftermath of post-referendum violence, the country is successfully transitioning from postconflict status to relative calm. Security has been broadly restored and macroeconomic
stability re-established and maintained through the adoption of the U.S. dollar as legal
tender and through cautious fiscal management. However, the economy remains fragile.
Cumulative growth over the last three years was near zero—mainly reflecting the drawdown
in the presence of international agencies. Unemployment is high, 40 percent of the
population lives below the poverty line, and social indicators are poor. At the same time,
human capital remains scarce, physical infrastructure inadequate and financing
opportunities limited. The winding down of international financial and technical support at a
time when domestic capacity is still weak and large oil and gas revenue is coming on
stream present new challenges and opportunities.
Looking ahead, the pace and quality of economic development will depend on TimorLeste’s ability to manage its new oil/gas wealth effectively, and on the establishment of the
environment needed for investment and growth in the non-oil sector. The authorities have
designed a development strategy, with the objectives set out in the 2002 National
Development Plan (NDP) and subsequent documents, that is incorporated in the Poverty
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2Reduction Strategy Paper and assessed in the Joint Staff Advisory Note of the IMF and
World Bank.
More recent developments indicate a modest recovery in non-oil economic activity in 2004,
subdued inflation, and large oil/gas revenue inflows. Despite a further decline in donor
activity, non-oil GDP growth recovered, reflecting a post-drought rebound in the agriculture
sector and expansion in banking sector activity. Inflation declined over the course of 2004,
leveling off at about 2 percent since August 2004 (year-over-year), in response to moderate
domestic demand and stable non-oil import prices. The external current account surplus
(including international assistance) widened sharply to 35 percent of non-oil GDP in 2004,
due to large oil/gas tax and royalty income. Coffee exports rose, mainly reflecting a supply
response to higher world prices. Measured against Indonesia and Australia, Timor-Leste’s
main trading partners, overall external price competitiveness deteriorated somewhat
through March 2005, reflecting the significant depreciation of the rupiah against the U.S.
dollar (Timor-Leste legal tender). In the absence of labor market data, anecdotal evidence
suggests that Timor-Leste wages remain well above those in Indonesia, continuing to reflect
the impact of the international presence.
The fiscal outcome for FY 2004/05 is now expected to be stronger than envisaged, due not
only to better-than-expected oil/gas revenue but also stronger non-oil tax administration and
weak expenditure execution. A central government surplus (including grants) of 68 percent
of non-oil GDP is now expected, compared with the surplus of 33 percent of non-oil GDP
expected in the revised FY04/05 budget. On a “combined sources” basis (the authorities’
broad estimate of the total public sector including off-budget donor activities), the fiscal
balance will move into a surplus of 29 percent of GDP in FY04/05.
The government is making good progress with the measures necessary to handle its new
oil/gas wealth responsibly. The Norwegian-style petroleum fund is on track to be operational
by July 2005 and a long-term fiscal savings policy has been adopted. Under the new
savings policy, annual budget “sustainable” spending is set equal to the sum of non-oil
revenue and the estimated permanent income from the oil/gas wealth. The government has
indicated its commitment to transparency and accountability principles in line with the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). Finally, the preliminary Sector
Investment Programs (SIPs) set out a public investment strategy for Timor-Leste’s longterm economic development to be financed by domestic revenue and donor funds.
Bank lending to the private sector increased rapidly during 2004. As a share of non-oil GDP,
credit tripled to 21 percent at end 2004. Financial intermediation remains concentrated in
Dili, while access to financing in rural areas is limited to the operations of a few rural
cooperatives and microcredit institutions. Net foreign assets of the Banking and Payment
Authority (BPA) rose sharply, reflecting the sizable accumulation of government deposits
from strong oil/gas revenue. At end-March net foreign assets reached US$284 million, more
than 15 months of projected imports for 2005. Capacity building at the BPA progressed over
the past year. A central bank law, and payment system and anti-money laundering
legislation are in final stages of preparation, and a financial intelligence unit is planned for
the BPA by the end of the year.
The pace of establishing the necessary environment to encourage private sector activity
has accelerated; nonetheless, the agenda ahead remains heavy. Over the past six months

-3good progress has been made in some areas, with key land legislation, the insurance law,
and the domestic and foreign investment laws all either approved or submitted to
Parliament. However, the overall legal framework is still incomplete, and complex
regulations, an ineffective administration and weak judiciary continue to discourage private
activity. Finally, while administrative skill levels are improving slowly, local capacity remains
thin.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the progress that Timor-Leste has made towards
establishing the basis for a stable and healthy economy. In particular, Directors commended
the authorities for maintaining prudent macroeconomic policies at a time when the country
is transitioning from post-conflict status, donor support is declining, and oil/gas revenue is
coming on stream. While a moderate recovery in the non-oil economy is underway,
Directors stressed that stronger performance will be needed to reduce poverty and create
sufficient jobs for a rapidly increasing labor force.
Directors agreed that the pace and quality of Timor-Leste’s economic development will
depend on the effective management of its new oil/gas wealth and creation of an
environment conducive to private investment and activity in the non-oil economy. They
concurred that the authorities’ long-term strategy based on a fiscal sustainability policy, a
sound public investment strategy as set out in the Sector Investment Programs (SIPs), and
the productive use of the oil/gas resources, including through the establishment of the
petroleum fund, provides a solid basis for addressing these challenges and making
progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
In light of Timor-Leste’s considerable development needs, Directors supported the
authorities’ budgetary objective of moving quickly toward the sustainable spending level,
without creating inflationary pressures or undertaking non-priority expenditure. The
proposed spending increase for fiscal year 2005/06 appears nevertheless ambitious, given
still limited administrative capacity and limited absorptive capacity in the domestic economy.
While welcoming recent measures to remove obstacles to smooth budget execution,
Directors called for early additional steps to eliminate remaining bottlenecks, particularly for
capital spending. They welcomed the provision of Fund technical assistance in this area.
Consideration might also be given to spreading out the spending commitment over a
somewhat longer period. Directors also encouraged further efforts to shift spending toward
improving human capital and basic infrastructure, and welcomed the authorities’ intention to
maintain the restraint on the wage bill.
Directors saw the SIPs as providing an appropriate framework linking Timor-Leste’s
development needs, available donor assistance, and the budget process. While the SIPs
will help ensure that donor support is in line with the government’s priorities, it will be
important to strengthen SIP prioritization further in light of the still large amount of
uncommitted external financing, and Directors welcomed the authorities’ assurances in this
regard.
Directors commended the progress made in establishing the legislative framework needed
to make the petroleum fund operational by the beginning of the new fiscal year. They saw
the establishment of the investment advisory board and the petroleum fund consultative

-4council as key steps, and especially welcomed the intention to operate the fund in a
transparent and accountable manner consistent with the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative. They cautioned the authorities to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of the
intended creation of a national oil company. Directors also noted the favorable
developments in non-oil revenue. They encouraged a further strengthening of the tax and
customs administration, and stressed the need for careful administration of the tax
incentives in the new investment laws.
Directors endorsed the authorities’ plan to maintain the current monetary and exchange rate
regime, which provides a credible nominal anchor and continues to serve the country well.
They agreed with the authorities’ view that stronger institutional capacity and a welldeveloped foreign exchange market are essential preconditions to the introduction of a
national currency. Going forward, continued cautious fiscal and wage policies will be key to
preserving external competitiveness.
Directors welcomed progress at the Banking and Payments Authority in developing a strong
supervisory and regulatory environment, particularly in light of the recent increase in
financial intermediation. They encouraged continued vigilance over bank portfolios and
looked forward to the early approval of central bank, payment system, and anti-money
laundering legislation. The authorities were also encouraged to support the expansion of
financial institutions to rural areas.
Noting that strong, sustainable growth and poverty alleviation require a dynamic laborintensive private sector, Directors urged the authorities to accelerate efforts aimed at
establishing an environment conducive to private investment and non-oil private sector
activity. They welcomed the maintenance of a liberal trade and investment regime, and
called for early enactment of pending economic legislation and the issuance of regulations
that are transparent and simple to administer. Directors stressed in particular the
importance of finalizing bankruptcy legislation, developing a strong and independent
judiciary system, and establishing a comprehensive land-titling system. Given that local
capacity and strong institutions will be critical for effective economic management and rapid
economic development, Directors urged the prompt implementation of the new planning and
capacity building program. Close coordination with, and continued technical assistance
from, the donor community will be key in this respect.
To address weaknesses in macroeconomic data, Directors encouraged the authorities to
seek additional assistance to strengthen domestic capacity, particularly for the compilation
of national account and balance of payments statistics.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–2005

2000

2001 1/

2002 1/

2003 1/

2004

2005

Est.

Proj.

Output and prices 1/
Non-oil GDP

316

368

343

336

339

349

Real non-oil GDP growth (percentage change)

15.4

16.6

-6.7

-6.2

1.8

2.5

3.0

-0.3

9.5

4.2

1.8

2.5

32

Inflation (percentage change; end-period) 2/

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 3/

41

42

36

31

28

Non-government

7

9

7

9

9

9

34

32

28

23

19

23

Government
Gross national savings
Non-government

-46

-44

-48

-34

6

27

-51

-50

-54

-44

-36

-26

Government

5

6

6

10

42

53

External savings

87

86

84

65

23

5

17

15

24

31

90

57

Domestic revenues

4

6

6

9

10

9

Oil/gas revenues

4

3

9

12

71

45

Central government budget 4/
Revenues

Grants
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure

9

6

10

10

9

3

15

15

21

21

22

30

9

12

17

19

19

20

6

3

4

3

2

10

Overall balance

2

0

3

10

68

27

Public debt

0

0

0

0

0

0

18

16

25

33

92

15

Combined sources fiscal operations 4/ 5/
Revenues
Expenditure

69

70

73

66

62

70

Recurrent expenditure

35

38

44

44

45

41

Capital expenditure

34

32

30

22

18

29

-52

-53

-48

-33

29

-55

6

14

16

22

25

28

-4

-4

-10

-9

-11

-18

Overall balance
Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 6/
Net domestic assets (end-period)

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. international assistance

-275

-316

-288

-218

-77

-18

Current account incl. international assistance

37

46

26

17

119

149

-237

-280

-260

-213

-194

-204

5

4

6

7

8

10

Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/

-6-

Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–2005
Merchandise imports 8/

-242

-284

-266

-221

-202

-214

16

8

20

18

122

216

Current account excl. international assistance

-87

-86

-84

-65

-23

-5

Current account incl. international assistance

12

13

8

5

35

43

-75

-76

-76

-64

-57

-58

Overall balance

(In percent of non-oil GDP)

Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/

2

1

2

2

2

3

Merchandise imports 8/

-77

-77

-78

-66

-60

-61

5

2

6

5

36

62

Overall balance

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and IMF Staff estimates.
1/ Non-oil GDP and national accounts data for 2000–2003 are based on estimates prepared by BIDE consultants in October 2004.
2/ CPI for Dili.
3/ Excludes oil/gas sector investment.
4/ Fiscal year basis (July-June); for example, 2000 refers to FY2000/01.
5/ Includes fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international financial institutions outside the
central government budget. The sharp revenue decline in FY2005/06 reflects the adoption of the new savings and petroleum fund policy
according to which only the sustainable income from the oil wealth is transferred to the budget.
6/ Excludes currency holdings by the public, for which no data are available.
7/ Excludes oil/gas revenue, which are recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues).
8/ In 2005 includes the transfer of assets from UNMISET, valued at approximately US$12 million.

Statement by Pier Carlo Padoan, Executive Director for the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
and Luis Saramago, Advisor to Executive Director
June 15, 2005

Main Highlights
¾ A prudent approach to policy has been the authorities’ trademark , upheld in recent
times and to be kept in the future – namely, but not exclusively, as regards the fiscal
stance, monetary policy and the framework for dealing with oil/gas revenues;
¾ Such prudence is particularly appropriate in view of the still exceptionally difficult
challenges facing the country, not the least in terms of poverty reduction, basic services
provision and capacity building, as underscored in the PRSP;
¾ The magnitude of those challenges, as well as the economy’s limited absorption
capacity, should be taken into account when considering recent and future (confirmed
and uncertain) inflows of oil/gas revenues – and their macroeconomic impact;
¾ Well aware of how crucial it will be to ensure that oil/gas wealth be put to good use,
the authorities have been especially careful in setting up an appropriately cautious and
transparent framework for that purpose, following international best practices;
¾ Taking into consideration that oil/gas revenues are to a large extent uncertain and
must be used in a sustainable way, the country will require a continued commitment
from the international community to address its manifold development needs;
¾ In order to better channel such external support, as well as the domestic contribution,
recently concluded Sector Investment Programs will be critical – aiming to put the
economy on firmer grounds, together with reforms for private sector enhancement.

At the outset, and on behalf of the authorities, we would like to thank staff for their very
useful and highly professional work during this consultation, which is well reflected in the
quality of the reports.
Recent developments and general remarks
After two years of significant contraction, essentially determined by the progressive UN
withdrawal but also by last year’s drought, the economy of Timor-Leste started growing
again in 2004 – more precisely its non-oil/gas part, at an estimated rate of 1.8 per cent in real
terms. Although modest, especially if set against what would be necessary for an adequate
pace of job creation and poverty reduction, that represents a welcome shift towards reliance

-2on truly domestic (in lieu of expatriate-induced) demand. Moreover, it could hopefully
represent the beginning of a new dynamism from small private business, while reflecting
further progress towards overcoming the widespread destruction of 1999.
That tentative recovery was accompanied by a slowdown of inflation to less than 3 per cent
(year-on-year) from August 2004 onwards, thanks to the benefits of official dollarization but
mostly to reduced demand pressures, as the international presence subsided. This trend
culminated less than a month ago, with the replacement of UNMISET by much downscaled
UNMOTIL, which has a mandate for another year, focusing on broad capacity building.
Lower inflation allowed for an improvement of relative prices, thus helping to sustain
external competitiveness, one of the critical elements for broad-based sustainable growth.
Recent macroeconomic developments were further dominated by the impact of sizeable
oil/gas revenue inflows, which allowed for a significant improvement of the fiscal and
external positions. Such enhanced inflows had no effect on the authorities’ consistently
prudent approach to policymaking – government savings reached 42 per cent of non-oil/gas
GDP in 2004, while recurrent expenditures are estimated to be kept at the same level of the
previous year (19 per cent of non-oil/gas GDP). Indeed, the crucial framework for disposing
of hydrocarbon revenues in a sustainable way, following international best practices, is
broadly on-track to become operational with the new fiscal year, starting next July.
That will be one of the main instruments on which the authorities rely to address the
country’s huge needs, summarized in its ranking as the Asian country with the lowest Human
Development Index. After being introduced three years ago, the strategy for overcoming
poverty has been progressively refined – lately through Sector Investment Programs (SIP)
that take the National Development Plan (NDP) a step further. Sustained growth is naturally
emphasized as a cornerstone, requiring that a combination of factors are gathered, notably
security maintenance, macroeconomic stability preservation, a well-focused public
investment effort and a business-friendly environment – all on-going parts of the
development strategy pursued by the authorities. In what can be seen as a basic dilemma
facing these latter ever since independence was regained, in 2002, such aspirations will have
to be reconciled with a variety of conditioning factors – among them weak institutions,
capacity constraints and the economy’s limited absorption possibilities.
Fiscal Policy
Even more than in most other places, this is an area particularly critical for Timor-Leste, in
view both of the fact that those conditioning factors significantly constrain fiscal policy and
that it touches, to a large extent, most of the main challenges faced by the country. It falls, in
fact, within the context of fiscal policy to take a leading role as a vehicle for tackling poverty;
to be at the center of macroeconomic stability preservation, as results from the officially
dollarized environment that has been instrumental for the purpose; and to assume paramount
responsibility for sustaining the implementation of basic infrastructures, essential in
attracting investment and promoting growth.
Against this background, the authorities can claim to have followed, and intend to maintain,
an appropriately prudent and transparent line – reflected, for instance, in their choice not to

-3borrow or in the sizeable accumulation of oil/gas savings. On the revenue side, in addition to
adopting the set-aside rule which allowed for that accumulation – to be consolidated for the
future through the upcoming hydrocarbon framework – their long-term commitment is to
broaden the base for non-oil/gas revenues. This is to be pursued, even after accounting for
well-focused investment incentives, by means of actions like the extension and improvement
of ASYCUDA or several measures aimed at enhancing tax administration, thus ultimately
pointing to long-term fiscal sustainability.
As for expenditures, its recurrent part is to remain subdued, as was the case so far – namely
regarding wages, for the sake of stability and competitiveness, while maintenance costs for
public investment are to be accommodated. Taking into due account the strategic importance
of capital expenditures, the authorities are well aware of the need to enhance its execution
rate and have made a considerable effort towards it, pushing forward the SIP framework and
a diversified array of measures – acknowledged in Box 5 of the staff report. Nevertheless, if
implementation shortfalls persist, the authorities are prepared to further refine expenditure
prioritization, as they have done in the past and the SIP exercise allows for. Moreover,
prioritization will also be in line if identified financing gaps prove difficult to fulfill – even
though the authorities trust the international community’s continued commitment – since the
framework for disposing of revenues, notably from oil/gas, is to be overriding.
Hydrocarbon Sector Issues
As staff rightfully emphasizes and further elaborates, oil/gas revenues must be harnessed
within an adequately supportive framework if they are to fulfill their unique potential as a
vehicle for faster growth and poverty reduction in Timor-Leste. After careful preparation,
with technical assistance from the Fund, such a framework is broadly on-track to become
operational for the next fiscal year, starting July. It will follow international best practices
and is based both on the establishment of a Norwegian-inspired Petroleum Fund – currently
under detailed scrutiny by the Parliament, after general approval a couple of weeks ago – and
on the adoption of a savings policy aimed at long-term fiscal sustainability.
This policy is essentially based on striking an inter-generational balance, thus establishing
that annual government spending will be equal to the sum of domestic non-oil/gas revenues
and the estimated permanent income resulting from oil/gas wealth – an estimate subject to
annual reviews, guided by the principle of preserving the real value of that wealth. This latter
is to be administered by the upcoming Petroleum Fund, which will accumulate all
hydrocarbon revenues accruing to the authorities and invest them abroad – to counter
pressures for real exchange rate appreciation. Furthermore, that is to be done according to
prudent and clear guidelines, while following the highest standards of transparency and
accountability, including those set by the EITI.
Monetary Policy and Financial Sector
The fundamental reason why Timor-Leste opted for a monetary regime based on official
dollarization – simplicity – is still largely pertinent, the more so since it has indeed provided
an effective anchor for price stability and further allowed for broad preservation of external
competitiveness, thanks also to adequate support from fiscal and incomes policies. In fact,

-4the authorities are well aware that human and institutional capacity constraints might
arguably have undermined, also in this context and to a significant extent, the potential
benefits associated with an independent monetary policy.
Conversely, being relieved from the operational burden of conducting it, the Banking and
Payments Authority (BPA) could devote its time and efforts to other pressing needs – from
preparation of basic legislation to practical concerns related to areas such as the payment
system or banking supervision. Actually, this latter is closely following credit developments,
namely a slight rise of the NPL to total loans ratio since mid-2004 – although it still
considerably improved on 2003 figures and banking indicators remain fundamentally sound.
That rise followed the significant increase of credit to the private sector that took place from
the second half of 2003 onwards – a trend that has since subsided, and will go on requiring
careful surveillance from the BPA, but that is essentially welcome, since it did not
compromise macroeconomic stability and represents financial intermediation in action,
favoring both social advancement and private sector enhancement.
Structural Reforms and Poverty Reduction Strategy
A dynamic private sector is, in fact, acknowledged by the authorities as the critical
determinant of long-term sustainable growth, on which effective poverty reduction is
contingent, largely through the main vehicle of accelerated job creation. Efforts aimed at this
latter are to be complemented, for the purpose of poverty reduction, by parallel action in
other crucial areas – such as provision of basic social services, where on-going substantive
progress has already been achieved, or strengthening institutions in crucial fields like justice
administration, where new momentum is being instilled.
Intensive legislative action at different levels in recent years allowed for much of the legal
and regulatory framework to be already in place – although the authorities recognize that
additional steps are in order, including some streamlining. Besides promoting an adequately
pro-business environment, they will continue to focus on the more immediately growthenhancing task of advancing public investment – towards which the SIP process is already
being instrumental. Indeed, it builds on the NDP as well as on its ensuing Road Map and
essentially supplies focused structures that aim to address previous shortcomings such as
insufficient coordination with and among donors or a general lack of quantification and
alignment with the budget process.
Concluding Remarks
The authorities wish to express their appreciation for the technical assistance provided by the
Fund, including within the context of Article IV consultations and especially in view of
prevalent capacity constraints as well as pressing institution building requirements, which
prompt them to request that the Fund’s effort be maintained.

