October 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/371

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Bosnia and Herzegovina: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Bosnia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on June 27, 2006, with the officials of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the
time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on September 27, 2006. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its October, 13, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2006 Consultation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Approved by Juha Kähkönen and Scott Brown
September 27, 2006
The 2006 Article IV consultation discussions took place in Sarajevo and Banja Luka during June 13–27. The
staff team, comprising Messrs. Demekas (head), Chelsky, Kanda (all EUR), Jahjah (PDR), and Maliszewski (FAD),
and assisted by Messrs. Norregaard and Slack, Resident Representatives, and Mmes. Selimovic-Mehmedbasic and
Milic at the Resident Representative’s Office, met Mr. Paravac, Member of the State Presidency; Mr. Terzić,
Chairman of the State Council of Ministers; Ms. Marić, State Finance Minister; Mr. Hadžipašić, Prime Minister, and
Mr. Vrankić, Finance Minister of the Federation of Bosnia & Herzegovina (Federation); Mr. Čavić, President,
Mr. Dodik, Prime Minister, and Mr. Džombić, Finance Minister of the Republika Srpska (RS); Mr. Kozarić, Governor
of the Central Bank of Bosnia & Herzegovina (CBBH); Dr. Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative, and Mr. Butler,
Principal Deputy High Representative; and other representatives of the international community, political parties, and
the media. Mr. Klein (OED) attended some of the meetings. The mission’s concluding statement is available at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/ms/2006/062606b.htm.
Two Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) missions took place during December 2005 and March 2006,
and Mr. Craig (MCM) joined the Article IV mission to discuss its conclusions with the authorities. The main findings
of the FSAP are summarized in this report, and the FSSA paper is circulated under a separate cover.
The governance structure created under the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement is complex and expensive. The DPA
created two largely autonomous Entities (the Republika Srpska (RS) and the Croat-Bosniac Federation of Bosnia &
Herzegovina, itself divided into 10 cantons) and the tiny District of Brcko, which exercise most of the economic
power, as well as a State government, with a limited—but increasing—mandate. This structure causes fragmentation
and duplication of many domestic policy functions, aggravated by weak reporting and coordination and low
administrative capacity. An internationally appointed High Representative has extensive powers to dismiss elected
officials and impose or overrule legislation, but his office will be closed and replaced by an EU Special Representative
in mid-2007. Elections for State and Entity governments will be held on October 1.
Negotiations on a Stabilization & Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU started earlier this year. The
authorities intend to conclude SAA discussions by year-end, but slow progress in police, media, and other reforms and
lack of progress in cooperation with the Hague Tribunal (ICTY) may delay the process.
Despite recent improvements in trade statistics, poor data quality impedes effective surveillance, especially in the
areas of national accounts and balance of payments statistics.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has not accepted the obligations under Art. VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 but maintains
restrictions arising from measures taken with respect to frozen foreign currency deposits, mainly on the transferability
of balances and interest accrued for nonresidents. Staff does not recommend approval of these restrictions.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Background ....................................................................................................................5

II.

Report on the Discussions............................................................................................11
A. Fiscal Policy................................................................................................14
B. Fiscal Governance .......................................................................................16
C. Financial Stability .......................................................................................18
D. Competitiveness and External Sustainability..............................................19

III.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................20

Text Boxes
1.
What Is the True Current Account Deficit in Bosnia & Herzegovina? ....................... 6
2.
The Impact of the VAT................................................................................................10
3.
FSAP Key Findings .....................................................................................................11
4.
Implementation of Past Fund Policy Advice ...............................................................14
5.
Domestic Claims Against the Government..................................................................15
6.
International Experience with Fiscal Coordination Mechanisms ................................17
Figures
1.
Competitiveness Indicators, 2000–06.......................................................................... 7
2.
Progress in Structural Reforms, 2003–05 .................................................................... 8
3.
Selected Indicators, 2000–06 ....................................................................................... 9
4.
Money and Financial Sector Developments, 2001–06 ................................................12
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06......................................................................23
Selected Economic Indicators for the Entities, 2002–06 .............................................24
Balance of Payments, 2003–07....................................................................................25
Vulnerability Indicators, 2003–06 ...............................................................................26
General Government, 2003–07....................................................................................27
Elements of General Government, 2003–07................................................................28
Monetary Survey, 2002–06..........................................................................................29
Monetary Authorities' Balance Sheet 2002–06 ...........................................................30
Survey of Domestic Money Banks, 2002–06 ..............................................................31
Staff Illustrative Medium-Term Framework, 2003–11 ...............................................32

Appendixes
I.
Debt Sustainability Analysis........................................................................................33
II.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................39

3
III.
IV.

Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................42
World Bank Relations..................................................................................................45

Appendix Figures
5.
Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests, 2001–11 .....................................................36
6.
External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests, 2001–11 ..................................................38
Appendix Tables
11.
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2002–11.............................................35
12.
External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2002–11.....................................................37

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Bosnia & Herzegovina has enjoyed rapid growth and price stability in recent years, but
stronger policy ownership, improved policy coordination, and meaningful progress in
structural reform are needed to provide the basis for sustained, private sector-led
growth. Postwar reconstruction and expansion of public consumption and investment,
financed by international assistance, has supported living standards but has left the economy
behind other countries in the region, with an oversized and inefficient government, a large
external imbalance, and high unemployment. This year, the temporary gains from the VAT
and the forthcoming elections are fueling spending pressures, whose full effect will become
evident in 2007; and structural policies are drifting, particularly in the Federation.
The policy discussions focused on the following areas:
•

Ensuring the sustainability of public finances in the face of emerging spending
pressures and still uncertain domestic liabilities. Staff felt that undoing the incipient
loosening of fiscal policy this year and achieving and maintaining a small general
government surplus in 2007 and the medium term would help counter domestic
demand pressures and support the currency board by contributing to domestic
savings. Moreover, notwithstanding recent progress in this area, it would provide a
cushion to deal with continuing uncertainties about the cost of settling domestic
claims against the government. The authorities agreed with the need for caution but
felt that sustained surpluses were unjustified. Looking forward, the governments that
will emerge after the October elections would need to accommodate new spending
needs, particularly on infrastructure and state-building, while reducing the tax burden.

•

Improving fiscal governance and coordination. The recent agreement on a draft
National Fiscal Council (NFC) law is welcome, but the political will to adopt and
implement it has yet to be proven. Going beyond the NFC law, staff pointed out that
effective fiscal governance requires deeper reforms in intergovernmental fiscal
relations, and harmonization of the various social safety nets and pension systems in
the country. The authorities felt that some of these reforms were premature.

•

Reducing financial sector vulnerabilities. The rapid credit growth in recent years has
highlighted the need for reliable credit risk assessment by banks, as well as their
effective supervision. The authorities and staff agreed on the desirability of unifying
bank supervision, but the authorities remain divided on the prospective of the
institutional setup. The regulation and oversight of leasing needs to be strengthened.

•

Strengthening the private sector while improving competitiveness and the external
position. The authorities and staff agreed that the viability of the currency board had
to be underpinned by increased domestic savings and stronger external
competitiveness. Macro-critical reforms include implementing bankruptcy laws,
accelerating corporate restructuring, improving the business environment, and
liberalizing labor markets. The authorities did not have an overall strategy to tackle
these issues—this task would fall to the governments that would emerge after the
elections.

5
I. BACKGROUND
1.
Growth has been strong and inflation low over the past several years, and there
has been some progress in structural reforms. Growth has averaged 5 percent annually,
and inflation has remained low, underpinned by the currency board. Financial deepening has
continued and the banking system has been largely privatized. International reserves are high
and rising (Tables 1–2). Customs and indirect tax policy have been unified and a VAT
successfully introduced in January 2006. Finally, the general government balance has
strengthened by 4 percentage points of GDP during 2001–05 while, at 32 percent of GDP at
end-2005, public debt is relatively low. At the same time, an uncertain but potentially large
amount of outstanding war damage and other claims against the government continues to be
a major threat to fiscal sustainability. Recent steps toward restructuring some of these claims
are mitigating these concerns, but risks remain.
2.
These achievements, however, are hostage to fundamental political and
economic imbalances:
•

Policy coordination is hampered by weak institutions and lack of political will.
Several incidents highlight the ineffectiveness of current coordination mechanisms
and the resistance against centralizing key policy functions, notably the controversy
over unifying bank supervision and the continuing dispute over the allocation of
indirect tax revenue among the Entities and Brcko District, which froze the transfer of
funds from the treasury to their budgets for several months this year. In addition, the
first attempt at amending the constitution to strengthen core State institutions (notably
the Council of Ministers and the House of Representatives) with a view to facilitating
policy-making at the State level was narrowly rejected in April.

•

The external imbalance, while likely much smaller than official estimates indicate
(Box 1), is large, reflecting insufficient private savings (Tables 3–4). Poor current
account data introduce greater-than-usual uncertainties in any quantitative assessment
of the level of the real exchange rate. The CPI-based REER has been stable and
exports have recently been rising fast and are projected to continue rising, suggesting
that there is no major misalignment. But the export base is narrow and vulnerable to
commodity price movements, and unit labor costs and other competitiveness
indicators are mixed (Figure 1 and Section II.D).

•

Structural reforms lag behind neighbors’ and sustained private sector-led growth
has yet to take root. Bosnia & Herzegovina ranks last among all European transition
economies on the EBRD transition index, and the pace of reform is disappointing
(Figure 2). In the World Bank’s Doing Business 2007 report, Bosnia & Herzegovina
slipped from the 91st to the 95th position. The government is large, wide swathes of
the corporate sector remain loss-making, and bankruptcy procedures are not effective.
Unemployment is estimated by the World Bank at over 20 percent. Notwithstanding a
few large foreign investments in metals and mining, FDI penetration, at less than
US$600 per capita, is one of the lowest in the region.

6
Box 1. What is the True Current Account Deficit in Bosnia & Herzegovina?
Staff has explored, in consultation with the CBBH, two alternative approaches that provide more
accurate estimates of the current account deficit than the official estimates (see accompanying
Selected Issues paper). A range of plausible estimates is derived first by using alternative data for
remittances—a key component of the current account—and second by estimating the current account
from capital and financial account data.
The CBBH estimate of remittances underestimates receipts substantially. This estimate relies on
a 2004 household survey. There are, however, indications that remittances are larger and have been
increasing in recent years: the most tangible one is a substantial increase in remittances recorded through
the banking system. Regional comparisons also suggest remittances in Bosnia & Herzegovina are
underestimated. On this basis, staff estimates that remittances are likely to be 3–5 percent of GDP higher
than reported by the CBBH. On account of this factor alone, the true current account deficit is lower than
the CBBH estimate by at least this amount.
Capital and financial accounts statistics provide an alternative estimate of the current account
deficit. Identified capital inflows in recent years amounted to 7–13 percent of GDP annually. This
provides a lower-bound estimate of the current account deficit.
These two estimates suggest that the current account deficit is at the range of 7–18 percent of
GDP. But the size of the current account deficit relative to the economy is exaggerated by the
underestimation of GDP in the national accounts due to sizeable nonobserved activity. While this is a
common problem in many economies, the evidence suggests that it is larger in Bosnia & Herzegovina,
and may indeed have increased in recent years. Previous staff analysis (IMF Country Report No. 05/198)
concluded that GDP in Bosnia & Herzegovina could be 30–50 percent higher than official national
accounts suggest, although a recent upward revision in official GDP estimates (by about 10 percent) to
capture imputed rent has shrunk this gap. Combining the range of current account estimates with an
adjusted GDP suggests that the true current account deficit in Bosnia & Herzegovina has been in the
range of 6–14 percent of GDP in recent years.

3.
Recent macroeconomic trends, correcting for the effects of the VAT, underscore
these concerns (Figure 3). Growth is projected to accelerate slightly in 2006 (to 5½ percent)
on account of strong consumption, and the current account deficit to improve (from
21 percent of GDP in 2005 to 17 percent this year). The latter projection, however, reflects a
large decline in imports in early 2006 following a surge late last year in anticipation of the
VAT (Box 2). Correcting for this temporary shift, estimated at about 1¾ percentage points of
GDP, as well as for the likely VAT-induced improvement in the statistical coverage of
exports, which is harder to quantify, all but eliminates the current account improvement.
Underlying inflation—excluding the impact of VAT and administrative price hikes—is
estimated at 3–4 percent, slightly higher than last year.
4.
The persistently large current account deficit and the uptick in underlying
inflation reflect strong domestic demand. Demand pressures are fueled by wage growth
(7.5 percent in the year to July) and continuing robust credit expansion: following a VATrelated surge in December 2005, private sector credit grew at an annualized rate of 19 percent
through July.

7
Figure 1. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Competitiveness Indicators, 2000-06

150

The CPI-based real effective exchange rate
has been stable...
7.8

...and wages and labor productivity appear
to be in line with neighboring countries.

CPI-Based REER
(Index, 2000=100)

130

Bosnia & Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Slovenia

120

110

7.4
Gross Wages ($U.S., log scale)

140

Selected Transition Countries: Gross
Wages and GDP per Employment, 2005
Hungary

Slovenia

Croatia

7.0

Poland
Estonia
6.6

Czech Rep.
Slovakia

Lithuania
BiH
6.2

Latvia

Macedonia
Romania

Serbia&Montenegro

5.8

100

Bulgaria
90
Jan-00 Jan-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 Jan-04 Jan-05 Jan-06

170

160

150

But unit labor costs have risen faster than
in neighboring countries...
Unit labor costs
(In euros; index, 2000:Q1=100)

5.4
8.8

9.2
9.6
10
10.4
GDP per Employee (log scale)

...and export growth, while strong, has a
narrow base.
Composition of Exports, 2005
(in percent)

Bosnia & Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Slovenia

140

130

120

110

100

90
2000q1 2001q1 2002q1 2003q1 2004q1 2005q1 2006q1
Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Base metals

Mineral products

Wood products

Other

10.8

8
Figure 2. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Progress in Structural Reforms, 2003-05
Bosnia & Herzegovina still lags behind neighboring countries...
Bosnia & Herzegovina and Selected Countries: EBRD Transition Indicator Scores, 2005
Enterprises
Private sector
share of GDP
EBRD midyear
estimate (%)

BiH
CE/Baltic 1/
SE Europe 2/

Large-scale
privatization

55
76
67

2.7
3.8
3.3

Small-scale
privatization

Markets and Trade
Governance &
enterprise
restructuring

3.0
4.3
3.8

2.0
3.4
2.4

Price
liberalization

Trade & foreign
exchange
system

4.0
4.3
4.2

3.7
4.3
4.2

Financial Institutions
Competition
policy

Infrastructure

Banking reform
& interest rate
liberalization

Securities markets
& nonbank
financial
institutions

2.7
3.8
3.1

1.7
3.3
2.1

1.0
2.9
2.1

Infrastructure
reform

2.3
3.2
2.6

Sources: EBRD Transition Report , 2005; and IMF staff calculations of (unweighted) regional averages.
1/ Eight new EU member states: Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia.
2/ Southeastern Europe (excluding Bosnia and Herzegovina): Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia and Montenegro.

0

Latvia

1

Slovenia

Slovakia

Poland

Macedonia

Lithuania

Hungary

Estonia

Bosnia & Herzegovina

2

Albania

3

Czech Republic

4

Croatia

5

Romania

6

Number of UIgrades in EBRD Transition Indicators between 2003 and 2005,
Covering Nine Areas of Reform 1/

Bulgaria

7

Serbia & Montenegro

... and the pace of structural reform has been slow...

Sources: EBRD Transition Reports , 2003 and 2005; and IMF staff estimates of unweighted regional and category averages. Indicators
range from 1 (no reform) to 4+ (standards of an industrialized market economy).
1/ The nine areas are large-scale privatization; small-scale privatization; governance & enterprise restructuring; price liberalization; trade &
foreign exchange system; competition policy; banking reform & interest rate liberalization; securities markets & nonbank financial
institutions; and infrastructure reform.

9
Figure 3. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Selected Indicators, 2000-06
...and inflation has increased, even after
excluding the impact of VAT

Demand pressures remain strong...
240

114

Indicators of Activity
and Demand, SA

220

Industrial production
(2000=100)
Federation retail sales
(Dec. 2002=100)
Imports (2000=100)

200

180

Prices
(Dec. 2002=100)

112

110
Retail price index (RPI)
108
RPI excluding VAT

160

106

140

104

120

102

100

100

80
Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-06

98
Dec-02

The underlying external deficit, excluding VAT
impact, is broadly unchanged in 2006.

Dec-04

Dec-05

Foreign aid has continued to decline,
while FDI remains low.

18

-5

Dec-03

Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign
Aid Inflows
(In percent of GDP)

15
-10

FDI

12

Foreign aid

9

-15

6
-20
3

Current Account Deficit
Excluding VAT impact
Headline estimates
-25

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Proj.

2000

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Proj.

10

Box. 2 The Impact of the VAT
On January 1, 2006 the sales tax was replaced by a VAT at a standard 17 percent rate with very
limited exemptions. VAT revenue accrues to the Indirect Tax Authority (ITA). The successful
introduction of the VAT had manifold effects on the economy.
Consumer prices in July were 8.5 percent higher than their level a year earlier. Staff estimates that the
VAT accounts for 3–3½ percentage points of the increase, and the rest reflects underlying inflation and
the impact of administrative price increases in late 2005 and 2006.
Imports spiked in December 2005 in anticipation of the VAT and fell drastically in January. This shift
in imports, which raised the external current account deficit in 2005 and reduced it in 2006, is estimated
at 1¾ percent of GDP.
Exports increased strongly in early 2006 (43 percent in the first seven months relative to the same
period last year). Some of this increase probably reflects stronger incentives for accurate reporting by
exporters due to the VAT, but the precise extent of this factor is hard to estimate.
VAT collection through July amounted to 9½ percent of GDP compared with 6 percent for the sales tax
in the same period last year. However, collection of delayed sales tax from December 2005 was
1 percent of GDP, which will not be repeated next year; and outstanding 2006 VAT refunds and credits
another 0.5 percent of GDP, which will be refunded in 2007. The permanent gain from the VAT is thus
estimated at about 1 percent of GDP.

5.
After years of successful consolidation, the underlying fiscal stance weakened
this year and spending pressures are rising. After achieving a general government surplus
for the first time in 2005, the adopted 2006 budgets—the first to be prepared without
intervention by the Office of the High Representative (HR)—targeted a deficit of
½ percentage point of GDP, despite the concerns about fiscal sustainability arising from the
outstanding domestic claims against the government (also flagged at the conclusion of the
last Article IV consultation). In the event, given the substantial unexpected temporary VAT
windfall (Box 2)—and assuming the Entities will not revise their budgets to raise spending—
staff estimates that the consolidated general government will again register a surplus in 2006,
overperforming the budget targets by a
Consolidated General Government
substantial margin. Adjusted for the
(in percent of GDP)
transitory gains from VAT, however, the
2005
2006
outcome would be a small deficit, implying
Actual
Budget
Staff est.
an easing of 1 percentage point of GDP
Balance
0.9
-0.5
0.7
from 2005 (Tables 5–6). Moreover, the
adjusted for VAT
-0.2
VAT windfall and the pre-election
Primary balance
1.5
0.2
1.4
adjusted for VAT
0.4
environment are generating spending
pressures at all levels of government, the
impact of which will be felt mostly next year (Section II.A).

11
6.
The financial sector is dominated by foreign banks that, while resilient to a
variety of shocks, have contributed to demand pressures by aggressively expanding
credit (Figure 4 and Tables 7–9). The recent FSAP found that foreign banks may be
underestimating credit risk and relying on low-cost foreign funding from their parent
institutions, and identified weaknesses in supervision and corporate governance (Box 3).
Box 3. FSAP Key Findings
The financial sector is dominated by banks, with total assets at 75 percent of GDP. Foreign-owned
banks are the main players, with the six largest holding 65 percent of bank assets.
The dominance of foreign banks minimizes solvency risk and—as stress tests show—enhances the
system’s resilience to shocks, but raises other concerns. These include possible underestimation of
credit risk, as these subsidiaries strive to meet high return on equity targets set by their parents, and
reliance on low-cost foreign funding, which diminishes the incentive to mobilize long-term local
deposits and raises the risk of contagion from adverse developments in other countries
Supervision is fragmented and has important gaps. The two Entity-based supervisory agencies are
weak and subject to political interference. Strengthening is needed in consolidated supervision, loan
evaluation, provisioning, and cooperation with foreign supervisors to enhance oversight of foreignowned banks.
Institutional capacity and corporate governance are poor, even in comparison to neighboring
countries. Despite progress in establishing the legal framework for insolvency, contract enforcement,
and creditors’ rights, implementation is weak. Corporate governance suffers from opaque ownership,
lack of accountability of boards and managers, and poor financial reporting and, according to the EBRD,
is the least effective in the region. This is evident in the Privatization Investment Funds, which control a
substantial share of corporate sector assets.

II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
7.
Discussions focused on the need to create the basis for sustainable and dynamic
private sector development and broad-based growth. Bosnia & Herzegovina’s growth so
far has come mostly from postwar reconstruction and expansion of public consumption and
investment financed by international assistance; public enterprise restructuring and private
sector development have been neglected. While this approach has supported living standards
and spurred much-needed institutional development during the last decade, it has left the
economy well behind other countries in the region, with an overweight and inefficient
government, chronically loss-making state enterprises, distorted factor markets, high
unemployment, and a weak private sector—except in a few pockets, that have been
successfully transformed by foreign investment.
8.
Staff’s medium-term scenario highlights the risks of continuing on present
trends (Table 10). The main driving force in the baseline (no policy change) scenario is the
projected increase of exports, driven by a near doubling of output and exports of aluminum
and steel as a result of a few large foreign investments in these sectors during 2003–04. High
world prices of metals projected in the near term reinforce the impact on the current account.
Hence, with unchanged policies, growth could accelerate to 5½–6 percent annually and the

12

Figure 4. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Money and Financial Sector Developments, 2001-06
Net free reserves of the currency board are
stable...

5000
4500

...but recent increases in international
reserves reflect bank-related inflows.

5000

Reserve Money
(In millions of marka)

4000

4000

3500

3500

3000

3000

2500

2500

2000

2000

1500

1500
Reserve money

1000

International reserves
(In millions of marka)

4500

Gross international reseves
less bank-related inflows
Gross international reserves

1000

Gross international reserves
500
Jan-01

Jan-02

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-06

500
Jan-01

Credit growth remains strong...

Jan-02

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-06

...and is likely to continue.

120

70

Private Sector Credit Growth and Credit as
Share of GDP, 2005

Credit Components
(year-on-year change)

110
100

Croatia

60

90

Enterprises

80

Households

Slovenia

Credit/GDP ratio

70
60
50
40

BiH

50

Private sector

Bulgaria
Czech Rep.

40

30

30

Macedonia

20

Romania

20

10
0

Albania

-10
Jan-01

10
Jan-02

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-06

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

0

20

40
Credit Growth

60

80

13
current account deficit decline by some 3 percentage points of GDP by 2009. This outlook
seems reassuring: without major additional policy effort, the external imbalance would
decline and, toward the end of the decade, the true current account deficit would be in the
single digits. Staff, however, pointed out four important downside risks. First, this
improvement in the baseline current account would be temporary and hostage to world steel
and commodity prices: indeed in the outer years, when metal prices decline according to the
latest WEO projections, exports would fall, the current account deficit start increasing, and
reserves decline. Second, absent reforms to improve the business climate, private investment
would remain low and income and consumption growth could not be sustained if exports
slowed or in the event of other shocks. Third, vulnerabilities in the financial sector, which is
now underwriting the growth in private consumption, could, if left unaddressed, amplify the
impact of possible shocks. Fourth, without expenditure adjustment, the fiscal deficit would
slowly rise and public debt would remain stuck at relatively high levels. Far from reassuring,
the baseline scenario underscored, in staff’s view, the fragility of the gains achieved so far
and the vulnerability of the economy.
9.
The authorities felt the staff’s baseline was too pessimistic. They pointed out that
non-metal export performance had been strengthening and expected this to continue. They
argued that the pace of reform would accelerate after the elections, stimulating higher private
investment and more broad-based and sustainable growth. And they remained committed to
maintaining a prudent fiscal position over the medium term.
10.

Nevertheless, they agreed with staff on the main medium-term policy priorities:

•

ensuring the sustainability of public finances in the face of emerging spending
pressures and still uncertain domestic liabilities;

•

improving fiscal governance and coordination;

•

reducing financial sector vulnerabilities that reflected weaknesses in supervision and
underestimation of credit risk in an environment of rapid credit growth; and

•

strengthening the private sector and improving competitiveness and the external
position through structural reforms.

11.
But a strategy to tackle these priorities has yet to emerge. The authorities
reiterated their commitment to the currency board, which they saw as the cornerstone of the
economic stability achieved in recent years, and were aware of the exigencies this posed for
policies. But the response to the recommendations of past Article IV consultations has been
limited (Box 4) due to poor political cooperation, fragmented institutions, weak
administrative capacity and—this year—absorption with the forthcoming elections. These
factors have also prevented the development of a comprehensive medium-term strategy. The
SAA currently under discussion with the EU and the prospect of eventual membership,
though unanimously supported, have so far failed to act as a focal point for policies.

14
Box 4. Implementation of Past Fund Policy Advice
The last Fund arrangement expired in February 2004. Since then, there have been two Article IV
consultations (http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/scr/2004/cr0467.pdf,
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/scr/2005/cr05199.pdf) with broadly similar conclusions.
Fiscal policy. The general government maintained a small primary surplus in 2005 and 2006, but the
underlying policy easing in 2006–07 is inappropriate. There has been some progress toward settling
domestic debt this year, but major risks remain (Section II.A). There has been no progress toward
identifying expenditure savings to reduce the tax burden and accommodate future spending needs.
Fiscal governance. In recent months, the authorities reached agreement on a draft National Fiscal
Council law—a key Fund recommendation. Despite some shortcomings (Section II.B), the draft is an
important step forward. But the timetable for its adoption has drifted, raising questions about the
political will to implement it.
Structural reform. Corporate restructuring and privatization have been slow: they have moved forward
in the RS but have ground to a halt in the Federation. Indeed a recent Federation law on debt write-offs
is a step backwards. Consistent with Fund advice, the Federation government abolished minimum wage
indexation; however, there has been little progress toward rationalizing labor market regulations to
facilitate worker mobility. The business climate remains inimical to investment.

12.
Against this background, discussions focused on (i) identifying immediate steps
that could stop the policy drift this year, and (ii) outlining the policies that could start
addressing the medium-term priorities. The latter could be of use to the governments that
will take office after the October elections. With the closure of the Office of the HR next
year, these will for the first time have full responsibility for governing the country.
A. Fiscal Policy
13.
The authorities saw the budget targets for 2006 as appropriate and, despite
election pressures, feasible. The governments in both Entities and the State acknowledged
that pressures were mounting, as indicated by recent legislative initiatives to expand social
benefits, proposals to introduce exemptions to the VAT, and wage increases granted at lower
levels of government, particularly in the Federation (which the Entity government could do
little to stop in the highly decentralized Federation setup). Both Entity governments,
however, stressed that they would not revise their own budgets before the elections. On this
assumption—as also suggested by staff projections—the consolidated outcome for the year
as a whole would be a small surplus.
14.
In staff’s view, more ambitious fiscal targets were needed. Staff pointed out that
the projected outcome this year reflected mostly the temporary VAT windfall; without it, the
general government balance would show a sizeable deterioration from 2005. Looking ahead,
the payment in 2007 of delayed VAT refunds, the continuing erosion of trade tax revenue as
a result of ongoing liberalization, and the permanent effect of any spending increases granted
this year would put significant pressures on the budget. Staff estimated that, if left
unchecked, these factors would generate a consolidated general government deficit of 1½–
1¾ percent of GDP in 2007, a cumulative deterioration of some 2½ percentage points

15
since 2005. Although this deficit was still low by international standards, in staff’s view a
fiscal correction was needed for two reasons:
•

Fiscal policy is the only macroeconomic instrument that can counter domestic
demand pressures and redress the large external imbalance, given the currency
board and open capital account. Indeed staff econometric analysis (see accompanying
Selected Issues Paper) suggests a strong impact of fiscal expenditure on the current
account deficit.

•

Despite recent progress, significant uncertainties remain about the future burden of
settling domestic claims against the government (Box 5), arguing for a cautious
policy stance, at least until the situation is clarified.
Box 5. Domestic Claims Against the Government
Following Constitutional Court decisions in December 2004 and April 2005 that invalidated laws
restructuring domestic claims against the governments (IMF Country Report No. 05/199), the authorities
have taken a number of steps.
•

In April 2006, a State law was approved settling some KM 1.9 billion of claims arising from
frozen foreign currency deposits with a combination of cash payments in 2006 and 2007 and
bonds of up to 13 years’ maturity to be issued in 2007–08 at an interest rate of 2.5 percent

•

The RS has passed legislation to settle war damage claims capped at KM 0.6 billion, by
issuing bonds of up to 35 years’ maturity by 2008 with a 25-year grace period at an interest
rate of 1.5 percent. The Federation recently passed a similar law, setting the limit at KM
0.9 billion (although actual claims are estimated at about half that) and issuing bonds with
slightly longer maturity, a 13-year grace period, and an interest rate of 2.5 percent

•

General liabilities of KM 0.2 billion in the RS, including wage and other arrears, would be
settled through 25-years bonds issued by mid-2007, with a 15-year grace period at an interest
rate of 1.5 percent. These liabilities are negligible in the Federation, and the government is
settling them in cash.

•

The terms of settling restitution claims are still unclear and their size is potentially very large.
In a draft law under preparation, the authorities have indicated that they intend to maximize
restitution in kind and cap monetary compensation at KM 3 billion. But the preparation of the
law has been very slow.

Under plausible assumptions, domestic claims under the first three categories would increase
government debt by about 25 percent of 2005 GDP and generate average annual debt service
(principal and interest) of about 1 percent of GDP over the medium term. However, there are
pressures for more favorable terms, as illustrated by amendments to the frozen foreign currency
deposit law recently approved by the House of Representatives, and now awaiting approval by the
upper house; while the size of restitution payments remains uncertain.

15.
Staff argued in favor of a small general government surplus over the medium
term. From the point of view of short-term macroeconomic management, the priority was to

16
withdraw as soon as possible the fiscal stimulus generated by the policy drift this year. From
a medium-term perspective, as the staff’s debt sustainability analysis indicates (Appendix I),
a small surplus (¼–½ percentage point of GDP) would steadily reduce the public debt ratio
after taking into account the estimated impact of settling domestic claims. Staff pointed out
that (i) reducing, rather than just stabilizing public debt would insure against the considerable
uncertainties still surrounding the size and settlement terms of domestic claims; and (ii) a
longer-term debt sustainability analysis (see accompanying Selected Issues paper) reveals
that the concessionality of existing government obligations will lapse over time, requiring a
larger debt-stabilizing primary balance than during the initial five years.
16.
Maintaining small fiscal surpluses would involve tough political choices. This
year, it would require keeping spending in line with the budgets, especially on wages,
maintaining spending discipline across all levels of government, and rejecting proposals for
exemptions from the VAT. In 2007 and the medium term, it would require identifying
sizeable savings. These would be necessary not only to bring the fiscal balance to the
required level but, more important, to lower total spending—matched on the revenue side by
lower labor taxes—and, within this shrinking envelope, accommodate emerging spending
needs. Plans to expand the State administration, prepare for eventual EU membership, and
raise public investment will lay increasing claim on government resources, totaling—
according to the World Bank’s Public Expenditure and Investment Review—some 2–
3 percentage points of GDP annually by 2010. In staff’s view, savings of this magnitude
could be found by rationalizing the wage bill, better targeting subsidies and transfers (onethird and one-quarter of total spending, respectively), and reducing inefficiencies and
duplication of government functions.
17.
The authorities, however, were noncommittal. They agreed that the uncertainty
about domestic claims was the biggest threat to fiscal sustainability, and therefore justified a
more cautious approach to fiscal policy; but they considered chronic fiscal surpluses
economically unjustified and politically unsustainable. They stressed the need to raise public
investment on infrastructure, especially roads, but were not in a position to discuss offsetting
expenditure cuts, preferring to defer this debate to the governments that would emerge after
the elections.
B. Fiscal Governance
18.
The recent intergovernmental agreement on a draft National Fiscal Council
(NFC) law was a major step toward improved fiscal policy coordination. According to
the draft law agreed by the governments at end-June, the NFC comprises the three Prime
Ministers and three Finance Ministers of the State and Entities, with the CBBH Governor,
Mayor of Brcko District, and ITA Chairman as observers. It is tasked with adopting annually
a rolling three-year fiscal framework with aggregate targets for the consolidated budget, as
well as for the budgets of the State and Entities, including indirect revenue projections.
Decisions require the support of five of the six voting members, including at least one
representative of each ethnic group (Bosniac, Croat, Serb). If agreement cannot be reached
on a budget target, the governments are obliged to continue using last year’s budget
allocations. If a government violates the agreed framework, it would be obliged after 60 days

17
to place an amount equal to one-tenth of the deviation in escrow, to be used exclusively for
paying domestic debt.
19.
Staff welcomed the draft law despite its shortcomings, but noted that the
timetable for its implementation was unclear. Compared to international experience
(Box 6 and accompanying Selected Issues paper), the draft law seems to provide a strong
institutional mechanism for coordination, with clear—though perhaps too demanding—
voting and deadlock-breaking rules. But the penalties that are envisaged to enforce
compliance are weak, and the definition of the consolidated budget balance excludes most
capital spending. More importantly, the timetable for its implementation was unclear, and
recent statements raised questions about the political commitment to adopt it.
Box 6. International Experience with Fiscal Coordination Mechanisms
Research drawing on the experience of Austria, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, South Africa, Switzerland,
and the EU shows that there are different approaches to fiscal coordination; all involve fiscal rules or
independent fiscal institutions or a combination of the two:
•

Countries with fixed exchange rates require stricter rules and stronger institutions than those
with flexible exchange rates.

•

Successful coordination requires a unified budget calendar, consistent accounting rules, and
regular fiscal reporting across all levels of government.

•

The effectiveness and credibility of any coordination mechanism depends on the existence of
penalties, as well as the ability and willingness to enforce them. The strongest mechanisms
impose penalties automatically on those governments violating the agreed policies. Such
penalties can be waived only by a majority vote.

•

In most cases, the total level of public spending and the aggregate balance are decided at the
national level and the responsibility for enforcement of penalties rests with the national
government. The distribution of revenue, spending, and the aggregate balance is negotiated
between national and subnational governments.

•

Fiscal rules and independent fiscal institutions are necessary but not sufficient to guarantee
good fiscal policies; political will to coordinate is a central requirement.

20.
Staff considered that improving governance and promoting efficient and
accountable fiscal structures required fundamental reforms going well beyond the
NFC; the authorities, however, felt these were premature. Staff pointed out the need to
reform and coordinate direct taxes to reduce distortions and improve tax compliance and
labor market participation; harmonize the provisions of the multitude of social safety nets
and pension systems to ensure their viability and develop a single labor market; and
rationalize intergovernmental fiscal relations, both between the State and the Entities and
between the Entities and local governments, to strengthen incentives for cooperation and
align taxing authority with spending responsibility. The authorities were not prepared to
contemplate these reforms at this juncture: they felt such action would open fundamental

18
issues of distribution of competencies between Entities and State that go to the heart of the
current constitutional arrangements.
C. Financial Stability
21.
In the context of the currency board, the CBBH can do very little to affect
macroeconomic conditions. As the CBBH does not set interest rates or have lender-of-lastresort functions, the only tool at its disposal to influence overall liquidity conditions is the
reserve requirement. Credit has grown rapidly in recent years, but the starting point was low
and the pace is in line with that elsewhere in the region. Given the recent deceleration of
credit growth (from 27½ percent last year to 19 percent on a seasonally adjusted annualized
basis in the year to July), the CBBH saw the current level of the reserve requirement
(15 percent) as appropriate but stood ready to adjust it if necessary. Staff agreed: the reserve
requirement had limited effectiveness as a macroeconomic policy instrument and could not
be adjusted frequently. Nevertheless, staff supported the removal of the statutory 20 percent
ceiling, if only as a signal of the CBBH’s readiness to use this instrument if necessary.
22.
The CBBH’s main role instead is to help safeguard the stability of the financial
system. The principal sources of vulnerability are underestimation of credit risk and
reliance—especially by foreign banks—on low-cost foreign funding. On the former, the
CBBH explained that the credit registry for corporate loans that started operating in April,
which it planned to extend to household loans by year-end, would help improve risk
assessment by banks. Staff agreed, but pointed out that the use by banks of the information in
the registry should be encouraged and integrated into the regulations and the work of the
supervisors. As regards the latter source of vulnerability, staff and the CBBH discussed
several options but agreed that all entailed significant risks. Relaxing the current maturitymatching requirements of the CBBH for assets and liabilities would allow banks to use lowcost domestic short-term deposits, rather than foreign borrowing, to fund credit, thus
reducing reliance on potentially volatile capital flows; but this option risks exacerbating
credit growth if not implemented gradually. Introducing higher reserve requirements for
foreign liabilities would reduce their cost advantage; but, as the experience of other countries
in the region shows, it can also stimulate disintermediation.
23.
Although there was agreement in principle, staff’s advice to unify bank
supervision was controversial. All concurred that a single supervisor was needed for what
was increasingly becoming a unified banking system. But there was no agreement on the
coverage (banks or the entire financial sector), institutional setup (the CBBH or an
independent agency), or location (Sarajevo or Banja Luka) of the supervisor. While some of
these open issues are genuine, they also have a political angle: unifying supervision was seen,
especially by the RS, as one more step toward centralizing institutions at the State level.
Leaving that aside, staff argued that a unified supervisor should start by covering banks and
leasing, an activity that was increasingly used as a substitute for bank lending. Staff was
agnostic about the institutional setup; it pointed out, however, that establishing a separate
agency would demand effort to ensure its independence and protection from political
interference, while in the case of the CBBH, this was already established.

19
24.
Leasing and insurance activities are growing fast but supervision is weak or
nonexistent. Staff pointed out the risks this created for these sectors and, ultimately, for the
public. It urged the authorities to set up the legal framework for leasing, give supervisory
authority to the unified supervisor, and build up technical regulations and capacity in
insurance supervision.
D. Competitiveness and External Sustainability
25.
The large external imbalance, narrow export base, mixed competitiveness
indicators, and recent policy inaction raised concerns about external sustainability and
the viability of the currency board. Staff noted that even after correcting for the known
data shortcomings, the current account deficit was still large and, although projected to
improve, would remain large over the medium term. Given the relatively high level of
external debt, this situation increased external vulnerability (Appendix I). How did the
authorities assess the external position and prospects? What would be the risks for the
currency board if the external imbalance did not improve? And how could domestic savings
rise to ensure sustainability?
26.
The authorities did not share staff’s concerns about external sustainability. They
agreed that the current account deficit was a source of vulnerability, but pointed out that its
true ratio to GDP was probably comparable to other countries in the region, including some
with currency boards. They noted that the external debt had highly concessional terms, the
debt service burden was light, and short-term portfolio flows were negligible, lessening the
risk of a capital account crisis. And they argued that staff’s medium-term baseline
underestimated the strength of non-metal exports.
27.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to the currency board, which they
saw as a viable arrangement until EU membership and euro adoption. They argued that
the currency board had ensured monetary stability during the difficult post-conflict period
and, despite the exacting requirements it placed on other policies, particularly fiscal, it—as
well as the level of the peg—was still appropriate for Bosnia & Herzegovina. Although the
currency board was occasionally criticized by economic commentators, including during
outreach activities of the mission, the authorities felt that there is no serious alternative. Their
exit strategy remains euro adoption, as in some Baltic countries and Bulgaria.
28.
The authorities concurred that for this exit strategy to be successful, domestic
savings had to increase and competitiveness to strengthen through structural reforms.
Their exit strategy implied that the currency board would have to be maintained for a long
time. To reduce the risks during this period, structural reforms are needed to strengthen
private sector activity and boost exports. The authorities acknowledged that recent progress
in structural reforms had been disappointing, but they were not in a position to outline an
overall strategy going forward; this task would fall to the governments after the elections.
29.
Staff agreed that structural reforms were the most important instrument to
improve the external position, and expressed concern with policy drift in this area. Staff
noted that macroeconomic policies—essentially fiscal—could not by themselves generate the
incremental domestic savings required to reduce the current account deficit to sustainable

20
levels: reforms to boost private profitability and savings were needed. From this angle, staff
saw two priorities:
•

Corporate restructuring and private sector development. Privatization, bankruptcy,
and liquidation should be accelerated, particularly in the Federation, and tax
enforcement stepped up. To improve the business environment, enforcement of
property rights should be strengthened, business registration and inspection
streamlined, and regulations reduced.

•

Labor market flexibility. To facilitate corporate restructuring and new business
creation, labor and other laws should be amended to stop the accumulation of wage
arrears when the workers are not effectively employed by the firm and to allow
worker mobility without first having to clear existing arrears. The current rigid
collective agreements should be replaced by a firm-level system of wage bargaining.
Labor market flexibility, alongside public sector wage moderation, is particularly
important for maintaining competitiveness in a currency board setting.

Staff noted that although there were signs of movement in some of these areas, the lack of a
comprehensive strategy was worrisome, as indicated inter alia by the lapsing in August of
the World Bank’s Privatization Technical Assistance Credit due to the authorities’ lack of
interest in drawing on it.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
30.
Bosnia & Herzegovina has enjoyed a period of rapid growth and price stability.
This has been largely underwritten by the extensive support provided by the international
community during the last decade. But it has also reflected key policy choices, notably the
currency board and the fiscal consolidation of the last several years, including the successful
introduction of the VAT in 2006. That macroeconomic stability has been maintained in the
face of a large external imbalance—even after correcting for statistical shortcomings that
overstate its size—bears testimony to the validity of these choices.
31.
This good performance has contributed to complacency and the recent policy
drift, which the country can ill afford. The current macroeconomic stability is fragile, as
highlighted by staff’s analysis of the medium-term outlook and the financial sector
vulnerabilities documented in the FSAP. Even if it is maintained, stability alone cannot
guarantee sustainable growth and job creation. As international assistance declines, a robust
and competitive domestic private sector must become the engine of growth. The authorities
are aware of the need for a comprehensive policy agenda to achieve this, but there is little
sense of ownership and commitment to translate this agenda into action.
32.
The governments that will be formed after the elections should make sound
macroeconomic policies and structural reforms a key priority. For Bosnia &
Herzegovina to have a chance of achieving its ultimate goal of European integration, these
governments must fill the gap that will be left by the closure of the HR’s Office and the
transformation of this position into an EU Special Representative. In the economic policy
area, this means safeguarding macroeconomic stability and promoting a healthy private

21
sector. This will entail difficult political choices but has to be weighed against the risks that
continued inaction would pose for growth, macroeconomic stability, and the currency board.
33.
Fiscal policy should aim at sustained small surpluses over the medium term.
Staff believes that a sustained surplus of ¼–½ percentage point of GDP would help generate
the increase in domestic savings needed to address the external imbalance; ensure that public
debt is on a declining path, taking into account the burden of domestic claims against the
government; and insure against the uncertainties still surrounding these claims. This goal
should be re-assessed once the size and settlement terms of these claims have been finalized.
34.
The bigger challenge is to find the expenditure cuts that are needed not only to
improve the overall balance but also to reduce the size of the government and make
room for new spending. The size of the government is large for an economy like Bosnia &
Herzegovina’s. This is partly because the state-building agenda of the last decade paid little
attention to the efficiency of public spending. As a result, unless large savings are found in
other areas, there will be no room to reduce the burden of taxation, especially on labor, while
satisfying demands to create new state institutions, meeting the exigencies of preparing the
country for EU accession, and making the much-needed investment in infrastructure. These
savings are likely to be found mainly in the public wage bill and social spending, where
public resources are wasted on inefficiency and duplication of functions.
35.
The agreement on a National Fiscal Council law is welcome, but the challenge of
creating efficient and accountable fiscal structures goes well beyond the coordination of
budgetary policies. The draft law has shortcomings, especially in the area of enforcement.
Still, it is a major step toward better fiscal policy coordination. It should now be approved
and implemented as soon as possible. But political will to cooperate and abide by the spirit of
the law will be the key to securing fiscal policy coordination, and coordination by itself is not
sufficient to deliver good policies—this requires formulating, setting, and achieving the right
targets. Moreover, improving fiscal efficiency and accountability requires far-reaching
reforms in harmonizing the provisions of the multitude of social safety nets and pension
systems, as well as rationalizing revenue-sharing and intergovernmental fiscal relations.
36.
Maintaining financial stability requires taking steps to improve credit risk
management by banks, unifying bank supervision, and closing gaps in the oversight of
the nonbank financial sector. Within the constraints of the currency board and an open
capital account, the CBBH’s only—and inefficient—instrument to influence bank liquidity is
the reserve requirement. Although its present level is appropriate, staff supports the removal
of the statutory ceiling on the reserve requirement. Staff welcomes the operation of the credit
registry and the plans to extend it to households by year-end. Other options to reduce the
excessive reliance of banks on low-cost foreign borrowing, such as differentiated reserve
requirements on foreign liabilities, are possible, but their benefits should be carefully
weighed against the potential pitfalls. Bank supervision should be unified as soon as possible,
preferably at the CBBH, which is already well established, or at a new independent agency,
and the legal and regulatory framework for leasing and insurance should be strengthened.

22
37.
Structural reforms are critical for strengthening competitiveness, creating an
enabling environment for private sector activity, and ultimately ensuring external
sustainability. Although the recent strength of exports does not indicate a major real
exchange rate misalignment at this point, an accurate overall assessment is impeded by data
weaknesses while other indirect competitiveness indicators are mixed. But given the large
external imbalance, reforms that boost private sector profitability and savings are macrocritical and, in any event, necessary if Bosnia & Herzegovina is to catch up with its
neighbors—much less with the advanced economies in the EU, which it aspires to join. Staff
urges the authorities, particularly in the Federation, to start corporate restructuring and
privatization in earnest; improve the business environment; step up bankruptcy proceedings,
including through tax enforcement; amend labor laws to stop the accumulation of wage
arrears when workers are not effectively employed by the firm; and replace the current
collective agreements by a firm-level bargaining system. Improvements in the quality of
statistical data, especially in the national accounts and balance of payments, are urgently
needed to enable accurate economic analysis and effective surveillance.
38.
Bold structural reforms and a sustained prudent fiscal position are also key to
the viability of the currency board. The currency board continues to serve Bosnia &
Herzegovina well. However, given that the authorities envisage maintaining it until EU
membership and euro adoption, it is imperative to start on the path of the reforms outlined
above that will boost domestic savings, both public and private, and mitigate financial sector
vulnerabilities. These reforms will take time to bear fruit. But unless they are implemented
now, the risks to the currency board will increase with time.
39.
It is proposed that the next consultation with Bosnia & Herzegovina take place on the
standard 12-month cycle.

23
Table 1. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06

2002

Nominal GDP (millions of marka)
Gross national saving (in percent of GDP)
Gross investment (in percent of GDP)

2003

2004

2005

2006

Est.

Proj.

17,533

12,806

13,492

14,534

15,605

1.0

-0.6

-0.6

-2.0

3.6

20.1

20.4

18.8

19.2

20.5

(Percent change)
Real GDP
Index of industrial production (period average) 1/
Gross wages (period average) 1/
CPI (period average) 1/

5.0

4.1

5.8

5.0

5.5

11.6
6.9

3.0
8.1

13.6
3.4

11.0
3.4

7.4
8.7

0.3

0.6

0.2

2.8

6.5

22.4

Money and credit (end of period)
Broad money 2/
Total credit
Of which : credit to the private sector

7.0

10.0

24.3

18.2

37.4

25.4

31.1

27.7

19.3

36.2

24.8

27.5

27.5

23.0

51.3

(In percent of GDP)
General government budget
Revenue
Of which: grants
Expenditure (on a commitment basis)
Of which: investment expenditure

46.0

50.3

50.0

51.1

7.2

6.3

5.5

4.8

4.3

49.3

52.4

50.4

50.2

50.6
9.6

9.8

11.1

10.2

9.8

Primary balance

-2.1

-1.2

0.2

1.5

1.4

Overall balance

-3.3

-2.0

-0.4

0.9

0.7

External public debt

34.3

30.2

27.8

30.0

29.4

NPV of external public debt

26.2

23.1

21.2

22.9

22.5

Total public debt

34.8

30.6

28.1

31.7

48.2 3/

(In millions of euros, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
Exports of goods and services

1,721

1,935

2,398

2,897

Imports of goods and services

5,012

5,313

5,704

6,455

6,742

Unrequited transfers, net

1,500

1,462

1,502

1,484

1,527

Current account balance

-1,252

-1,444

-1,437

-1,695

-1,523

-19.1

-20.9

-19.3

-21.3

-17.0

281.8

337.6

487.7

239.7

658.7

4.3

4.9

6.6

3.0

7.3

1,272

1,436

1,782

2,160

3.3

3.5

4.0

3.8

4.6

Net international reserves (in percent of private sector deposits)

70.3

69.7

68.3

69.0

...

External debt service

132

131

116

119

144

7.7

6.8

4.8

4.1

4.3

(In percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment
(In percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves
(In months of imports)

(In percent of exports of goods and services)
Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based on weighted averages for the Federation and Republika Srpska.

2/ Broad money includes currency, demand deposits, time and savings deposits, bonds, and money market instruments.
3/ Assuming 17 percent of GDP of debt to settle domestic claims against the government.
4/ End-July.

3,316

2,512 4/

24
Table 2. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Selected Economic Indicators for the Entities, 2002–06
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Est.

Proj.

Federation
Nominal GDP (millions of marka)

8,705

8,953

9,494

9,946

11,176

(percent of BiH GDP)

68.0

66.4

65.3

63.7

63.7

Real GDP (percent change)

5.0

3.0

4.5

2.9

5.5

Index of industrial production (percent change; period average)
Gross wages (percent change; period average)

14.2
7.8

2.0
8.2

13.6
1.8

8.7
2.1

7.1
...

CPI (percent change; period average)

-0.2

0.2

-0.3

2.7

6.5

(In percent of Federation GDP)
Central government budget
Revenue

12.0

11.5

11.3

11.5

10.1

Expenditure

12.8

11.1

10.4

9.6

9.5

-0.4

0.6

-0.4

-0.7

0.0

Overall balance

-0.8

0.3

1.0

1.9

0.6

Overall balance (percent of BiH GDP)

-0.5

0.2

0.6

1.2

0.4

Of which: change in stock of arrears

Budget for cantonal governments and extrabudgetary funds
Revenue

26.0

33.1

34.0

34.7

34.9

Expenditure

26.2

32.8

33.1

34.6

34.3

Of which : change in stock of arrears

-0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

-0.2

0.3

0.9

0.1

0.6

Overall balance (percent of BiH GDP)

-0.1

0.2

0.6

0.1

0.4

Republika Srpska
Nominal GDP (millions of marka)

3,706

4,097

4,487

5,068

5,694

(percent of BiH GDP)

28.9

30.4

30.9

32.5

32.5

Real GDP (percent change)

3.5

6.5

7.1

10.9

5.5

Index of industrial production (percent change; period average)

4.5

5.7

13.8

17.7

8.2

Gross wages (percent change; period average)

2.4

9.2

11.5

10.1

...

CPI (percent change; period average)

1.7

1.8

1.8

3.0

6.5

(In percent of Republika Srpska GDP)
Budget for central government and municipalities
Revenue

32.7

31.1

30.0

29.5

29.2

Expenditure

33.3

29.9

30.4

27.6

26.8

Of which : change in stock of arrears

0.0

-0.8

-0.4

-0.1

0.0

Overall balance

-0.6

1.2

-0.4

1.9

2.4

Overall balance (percent of BiH GDP)

-0.2

0.4

-0.1

0.6

0.8

Extrabudgetary funds
Revenue

10.7

13.4

14.7

14.7

14.6

Expenditure

10.7

13.4

14.5

14.1

14.4

Of which : change in stock of arrears

0.0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.1

0.0

Overall balance

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

Overall balance (percent of BiH GDP)

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.1

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections..

25
Table 3. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Balance of Payments, 2003–07
(In millions of euros, unless otherwise indicated)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Projections
Merchandise trade balance (based on country-partner data)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Reconstruction
Other

-3,671
1,303
-4,974
-351
-4,623

-3,678
1,677
-5,355
-281
-5,074

-4,005
2,080
-6,085
-242
-5,843

-3,928
2,422
-6,350
-235
-6,116

-4,186
2,706
-6,893
-273
-6,620

Services, net
Exports
Imports

293
632
-339

372
721
-349

447
817
-370

503
895
-392

544
962
-418

Income, net
Earnings
Debit
Of which : interest payments

472
574
-102
-49

367
460
-93
-41

379
475
-96
-45

376
470
-94
-52

381
473
-92
-51

1,462
1,571
25
1,009
-109

1,502
1,641
5
1,054
-139

1,484
1,633
19
1,063
-149

1,527
1,675
22
1,103
-149

1,561
1,710
16
1,144
-149

Current transfers, net
Receipts
Of which: official grants
private
Outflows
Current account balance

-1,444

-1,437

-1,695

-1,523

-1,701

Direct investment (net)

338

488

240

659

877

Capital transfers
Private transfers
Official transfers

411
241
170

393
256
137

360
244
116

369
254
116

379
263
116

Foreign loans (net)
Disbursements
Project loans
Program loans (Incl. from World Bank and EU)
Amortization
Commercial banks+private sector nonbank borrowing
Trade credits

414
181
181
0
-37
226
44

185
162
144
18
-37
5
55

679
136
126
10
-41
484
99

345
128
119
10
-55
168
104

544
202
157
45
-75
304
113

1,163

1,066

1,279

1,374

1,800

Capital account balance
Errors and omissions 1/

711

896

587

657

657

Overall balance

430

526

170

508

756

Financing

-430

-526

-170

-508

-756

Change in net international reserves (increase, -)
Gross official reserves

-179
-164

-370
-346

-411
-378

-508
-471

-756
-741

-15
30
-45

-24
14
-38

-33
0
-33

-37
0
-37

-14
0
-14

-20.9
-53.2
6.0
11.5
21.2
4.9
55.3
30.2
6.8
1,436
3.5
6,898

-19.3
-49.5
7.6
28.7
20.2
6.6
53.5
27.8
4.8
1,782
4.0
7,431

-21.3
-50.2
13.6
24.0
18.6
3.0
57.9
30.0
4.1
2,160
3.8
7,978

-17.0
-43.8
4.4
16.4
17.0
7.3
54.7
29.4
4.3
2,631
4.7
8,964

-17.5
-43.0
8.5
11.8
16.0
9.0
54.2
28.6
3.8
3,372
5.5
9,740

Net use of Fund resources
Purchases
Repurchases (Projections are on expectations basis)
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Trade balance (percent of GDP)
Import of goods (change, percent, in euros)
Export of goods (change, percent, in euros)
Transfers (percent of GDP)
Net foreign investment (percent of GDP)
External debt/GDP (percent)
Of which: public
External public debt service/GNFS (percent)
Gross official reserves
(Months of imports of goods and services)
Nominal GDP

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Errors and omissions are explicitly projected to capture unrecorded capital inflows.

26
Table 4. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Vulnerability Indicators, 2003–06
2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

11.5
6.0
-20.9
16.9
1,436
3.5

28.7
7.6
-19.3
14.3
1,782
4.0

24.0
13.6
-21.3
16.0
2,160
3.8

16.4
4.4
-17.0
15.2
2,631
4.7

Broad money/NFA (end of period)
Foreign exchange deposits/reserves (percent, end of period)

2.8
68.4

2.5
74.4

2.9
74.6

2.8
75.4

Total external public debt (percent of GDP)
External public debt service/exports of GNFS (percent) 1/
External debt service to multilateral creditors/exports of GNFS (percent)
External debt service to multilateral creditors (percent of total debt service)
External debt service to the IMF (percent of total debt service)

30.2
6.8
5.2
76.9
36.8

27.8
4.8
3.7
76.4
35.2

30.0
4.1
3.2
77.2
29.7

29.4
4.3
3.4
77.2
26.8

1.73
-16.1

1.57
-2.3

1.57
1.0

…
…

Import of goods (change, percent, in euros)
Export of goods (change, percent, in euros)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account (percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves (end of period, millions of euros)
In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services (GNFS)

Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
REER (annual average percentage change; depreciation =-)
Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes repayment of IMF loans.

27
Table 5. Bosnia and Herzegovina: General Government, 2003–07
(In percent of GDP)
2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Budget

2006
2007
Projections

Revenue
Tax
VAT / sales tax
Excises
Trade taxes
Direct taxes
Social security contributions
Nontax
Grants
For budget support
For investment

50.3
37.0
10.5
5.7
4.8
2.8
13.4
7.0
6.3
0.4
6.0

50.0
37.2
11.2
5.7
3.8
2.9
13.8
7.3
5.5
0.2
5.3

51.1
38.8
11.8
6.3
4.0
2.9
13.8
7.5
4.8
0.3
4.5

48.6
37.5
12.3
5.9
3.3
2.8
13.2
6.8
4.3
0.2
4.1

51.3
40.1
14.7
5.6
3.0
2.9
13.8
7.0
4.3
0.2
4.1

49.1
38.2
12.8
5.6
3.0
2.9
13.8
6.9
4.0
0.2
3.9

Consolidated expenditure on a commitment basis
Wage bill
Of which : severance package
Goods and services
Subsidies and transfers to nonpublic agents
Transfers to households
Subsidies to industry and agriculture
Interest payments
Other current spending
Investment expenditure
Foreign-financed investment projects
Other investment expenditure

52.4
13.7
0.0
11.1
14.1
12.7
1.4
0.8
1.6
11.1
8.6
2.5

50.4
13.0
0.1
10.6
13.9
12.5
1.4
0.6
2.1
10.2
7.2
3.0

50.2
12.4
0.0
10.6
14.3
12.9
1.4
0.6
2.6
9.8
6.0
3.8

49.1
12.0
0.0
9.7
14.9
13.1
1.9
0.7
3.0
8.8
5.4
3.4

50.6
12.2
0.0
9.7
15.4
13.5
1.9
0.7
3.0
9.6
5.4
4.2

50.8
12.2
0.1
9.7
15.5
13.7
1.9
0.7
3.0
9.7
5.5
4.2

Balance

-2.0

-0.4

0.9

-0.5

0.7

-1.7

Financing
Domestic financing
GSM proceeds
Privatization proceeds
Repayment of domestic claims
Repayment of other arrears and float
Other domestic financing
Foreign financing
For budget support
For investment
Amortization

2.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
1.8
0.4
2.6
-1.2

0.4
-1.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4
-0.4
-0.3
1.4
0.4
1.9
-1.0

-0.9
-1.6
0.4
0.3
-0.6
-0.5
-1.1
0.7
0.1
1.6
-0.9

0.5
0.1
0.2
0.0
-0.6
0.0
0.5
0.4
0.2
1.3
-1.1

-0.7
-1.1
0.2
2.0
-0.8
0.0
-2.4
0.3
0.1
1.3
-1.0

1.7
0.6
0.2
1.8
-0.1
0.0
-1.3
1.1
0.4
1.6
-0.9

Memorandum items:
Underlying balance 1/
Primary balance

-2.0
-1.2

-0.4
0.2

0.9
1.5

-0.5
0.2

-0.2
1.4

-1.3
-1.0

Sources: Ministries of Finance; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Corrected for temporary effects of VAT refunds by replacing actual refunds and tax credits with requests for refunds
and tax credits.

28
Table 6. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Elements of General Government, 2003–07
(In percent of GDP)
2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Budget

Federation budget
Revenue and grants
Expenditure
Of which: transfers to other levels of government
Balance

7.4
7.2
0.5
0.2

7.2
6.6
0.7
0.6

7.1
5.7
0.2
1.3

6.0
5.1
0.2
0.8

6.3
5.1
0.2
1.2

6.1
5.1
0.2
1.1

Federation Road Fund
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from the Federation budget
Expenditure
Balance

0.6
0.0
0.6
0.0

0.6
0.0
0.6
0.0

0.7
0.0
0.8
-0.1

0.6
0.0
0.7
-0.1

0.6
0.0
1.0
-0.4

0.6
0.0
1.0
-0.4

Cantonal and municipal budgets
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from the Federation budget
Expenditure
Balance

11.5
0.1
11.4
0.1

11.7
0.1
11.4
0.3

11.4
0.1
11.6
-0.1

11.0
0.1
11.1
-0.1

11.6
0.1
11.7
-0.1

11.0
0.1
11.7
-0.7

Federation extrabudgetary funds
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from the Federation budget
Expenditure
Balance

10.1
0.0
10.0
0.1

10.2
0.0
9.8
0.4

10.2
0.1
10.0
0.2

9.8
0.1
9.8
0.0

10.2
0.1
9.8
0.4

10.2
0.1
9.8
0.4

RS budget and municipalities
Revenue and grants
Expenditure
Of which: transfers to other levels of government
Balance

9.4
9.1
0.9
0.4

8.8
8.9
1.1
-0.1

9.2
8.5
1.0
0.7

8.5
8.0
0.9
0.4

9.1
8.4
0.9
0.7

8.6
8.5
0.9
0.0

RS Road Fund
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from the RS budget
Expenditure
Balance

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.4
0.0
0.5
0.0

0.5
0.0
0.5
-0.1

0.4
0.0
0.5
-0.1

0.4
0.0
0.5
-0.1

0.4
0.0
0.5
-0.1

RS extrabudgetary funds
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from the RS budget
Expenditure
Balance

4.1
0.7
4.1
0.0

4.5
0.8
4.5
0.1

4.8
1.0
4.6
0.2

4.5
0.9
4.5
0.0

4.7
0.9
4.7
0.0

4.7
0.9
4.7
0.0

1.3
0.6
1.4
-0.1

1.6
0.8
1.6
0.1

2.4
0.0
2.2
0.3

3.7
0.0
3.8
-0.1

3.7
0.0
3.8
-0.1

3.7
0.0
3.9
-0.1

...

...

0.4

...

0.6

...

Brcko District
Revenue and grants
Expenditure
Of which: transfers to other levels of government
Balance

1.4
1.5
0.0
-0.1

1.4
1.1
0.0
0.3

1.2
1.5
0.0
-0.2

1.1
1.2
0.0
-0.1

1.1
1.2
0.0
-0.1

1.1
1.2
0.0
-0.1

Foreign-financed investment projects
Grants
Expenditure
Balance

6.0
8.6
-2.6

5.3
7.2
-1.9

4.5
6.0
-1.6

4.2
5.2
-1.0

4.1
5.4
-1.3

3.9
5.5
-1.6

State
Revenue and grants
Of which: transfers from other levels of government
Expenditure
Balance
ITA
Balance

Sources: Ministries of Finance; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

2006
2007
Projections

4,997
2,969
1,737
155
1,076
706
301
70
2,028
261
1,767
-933

Broad money
Narrow money
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits of noncentral government
Demand deposits of the private sector
Nonfinancial enterprises and cooperatives
Households
Other
Quasi-money
Time and savings deposits in domestic currency
Foreign currency deposits

Other items (net)

10.0
22.3
-9.9
16.9
-4.2
40.7
34.3
37.6
14.6
13,492
2.5
2.1

-1,066

5,496
3,113
1,601
220
1,293
820
389
83
2,383
462
1,921

4,630
-468
22
5,076
3,017
1,966
92

1,932
4,370
2,438

2003

24.3
18.0
41.8
15.2
14.7
47.0
37.6
40.5
18.1
14,534
2.1
2.1

-1,372

6,832
3,535
1,671
343
1,521
877
564
81
3,296
703
2,593

5,465
-443
25
5,883
3,146
2,629
108

2,739
5,391
2,652

2004

18.2
27.7
0.6
22.1
0.2
51.8
44.7
48.0
22.2
15,605
1.9
2.0

-1,655

8,077
4,108
1,729
410
1,970
1,139
717
114
3,969
818
3,150

6,977
-553
32
7,498
3,924
3,457
117

2,755
6,314
3,559

2005

22.5
21.1
29.5
17.4
11.3
54.8
44.8
50.5
24.0
16,729
1.8
2.1

-2,042

9,174
4,577
1,811
568
2,197
1,199
884
114
4,597
980
3,618

7,501
-987
37
8,451
4,335
4,009
107

3,716
7,348
3,632

22.4
19.1
28.7
16.7
9.8
56.4
47.5
52.6
24.8
17,533
1.8
2.1

-1,984

9,886
5,217
1,867
571
2,779
1,858
800
121
4,668
727
3,941

8,323
-935
37
9,220
4,747
4,354
118

3,547
7,503
3,956

2006
December
July
Proj.

Sources: Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Because data for March 2005 onward are based on the upgraded classification of general government, there is a structural break in March 2005.
2/ The jump in broad money growth in 2004 reflects banks' efforts to mobilize foreign currency deposits, following a tightening of end-month
forex exposure limits. Further regulatory changes in late 2004 dampened these efforts.

7.0
25.6
-15.7
16.5
-8.5
39.0
29.6
32.5
11.2
12,806
2.6
2.2

3,787
-400
29
4,158
2,643
1,440
75

Domestic credit
Claims on central government (net)
Claims on noncentral government
Claims on private sector
Nonfinancial enterprises and cooperatives
Households
Other

Memorandum items:
Broad money growth (year-on-year) 2/
NDA growth (year-on-year)
NFA growth (year-on-year)
Domestic credit contribution to broad money growth (year-on-yea
NFA contribution to broad money growth (year-on-year)
Broad money (percent of GDP)
Domestic credit (percent of GDP)
Private sector credit (percent of GDP)
Credit to household sector (percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP
Velocity of broad money
Broad money multiplier

2,144
3,940
1,796

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

2002

(In millions of marka, unles otherwise indicated)

Table 7. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Monetary Survey, 2002–06 1/

29

-8.9
-8.1
-45.2

143.2
49.7
122.7

12-month growth rates (percent)
Reserve money
Net foreign assets
Net claims on general government

Memorandum items:
NFA in percent of currency outside the banks
NFA in percent of broad money
Net free reserves

Sources: Monetary authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

-142

Other items (net)

-27
-27
0.2

2,487

Net foreign assets

Domestic credit (net)
Claims on general government (net)
Claims on the private sector

2,318
1,869
1,737
131
447
3

Reserve money
Currency outside monetary authorities
Currency outside banks
Commercial bank cash in vaults
Commercial bank deposits with CBBH
Other demand deposits with CBBH

2002

175.3
51.1
153.3

12.5
12.9
-30.4

-181

-18
-19
0.2

2,807

2,608
1,722
1,601
121
884
2

2003

208.6
51.0
173.0

24.2
24.1
139.6

-203

-43
-45
1.8

3,484

3,239
1,817
1,671
147
1,420
2

2004

(In millions of marka, unless otherwise indicated)

244.2
52.3
187.1

22.6
21.2
-15.4

-217

-36
-38
1.9

4,223

3,970
1,907
1,729
178
2,060
3

2005

283.4
55.9
192.8

30.4
35.4
51.3

-415

-248
-250
2.3

5,132

279.8
52.8
205.8

21.0
23.7
380.3

-241

-179
-181
2.2

5,224

4,804
2,081
1,867
214
2,718
4

2006
July
December
Proj.
4,469
2,022
1,811
211
2,443
4

Table 8. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Monetary Authorities' Balance Sheet 2002–06

30

3,257
2,038
1,219
1,767
1,490

Deposits (excl. central government)
Demand deposits
Time and savings deposits
Deposits in foreign currency
Deposits in domestic currency

13,492
4,613
24.8
2,554
17.2
36.6
19.5
918
34.2
5,413
15.8
3.5

3,893
2,329
1,564
1,921
1,972

4,768
-449
24
473
22
5,076
1,966
3,017
92
884
271
613
...
121
-885

-875
1,562
2,437

2003

14,534
5,882
27.5
3,146
23.2
33.6
32.5
806
40.5
7,584
12.8
2.8

5,159
2,851
2,308
2,593
2,566

5,904
-398
21
419
25
5,882
2,628
3,146
108
1,420
758
661
...
147
-1,170

-745
1,906
2,651

2004

15,605
7,496
27.5
3,924
24.7
31.5
23.0
1,615
48.0
9,902
9.8
2.5

6,345
3,528
2,816
3,150
3,195

7,812
-515
19
533
32
7,496
3,456
3,924
117
2,060
1,435
625
...
178
-1,439

-1,467
2,090
3,558

2005

16,729
8,449
24.7
4,335
20.2
30.5
16.0
953
50.5
10,990
11.0
2.3

7,359
4,105
3,254
3,618
3,741

8,775
-737
17
754
37
8,449
4,007
4,335
107
2,443
1,632
812
...
211
-1,628

-1,416
2,215
3,631

17,533
9,220
23.0
4,747
21.0
26.0
26.3
1,724
52.6
11,969
11.5
2.2

8,014
4,446
3,568
3,941
4,073

9,691
-753
20
773
37
9,220
4,354
4,747
118
2,718
1,795
923
...
214
-1,745

-1,677
2,278
3,955

2006
July
December
Proj.

Sources: Monetary authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Because data for March 2005 onward are based on an upgraded classification of general government, there is a structural break in March 2005
2/ Starting in June 2003, cash in vaults are excluded from assets eligible to meet reserve requirements.
3/ 2002-03 data are adjusted to correct for the structural break due to the RS govt. takeover of KM 463 million of old bank claims on RS enterprises
in June 2004.

12,806
3,695
36.2
2,180
9.5
111.2
8.8
849
28.9
1,750
12.4
3.9

3,601
-373
32
406
29
4,158
1,440
2,643
75
578
175
403
131
...
-791

Net domestic assets
Net claims on central government
Credits
Deposits
Claims on noncentral government
Claims on private sector
Households
Nonfinancial enterprises and cooperatives
Other
Reserves 2/
Required reserves
Excess reserves 2/
Of which : cash in vaults 2/
Cash in vaults, not included in reserves 2/
Other items (net)

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP
Adjusted credit to the private sector 3/
12-month growth (percent)
Adjusted credit to enterprises 3/
12-month growth (percent)
Credit to households (12-month growth, percent)
Year-to-date growth of deposits (percent)
Year-to-date increase in credit to private sector
Adjusted credit to the private sector (percent of GDP) 3/
Base for reserves
Excess reserves/deposits (in percent)
Velocity of deposits

-343
1,452
1,795

Net foreign assets
Assets
Liabilities

2002

( In millions of marka, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 9. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Survey of Domestic Money Banks, 2002–06 1/

31

32

Table 10. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Staff Illustrative Medium-Term Framework, 2003–11
2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006

2007

4.1
0.6

5.8
0.2

5.0
2.8

5.5
6.5

6.0
2.5

128.6
26.3
102.4
20.4
11.1
9.3
-0.6
4.0
-4.5
20.9

125.7
26.1
99.6
18.8
10.2
8.5
-0.6
4.6
-5.2
19.3

125.4
26.1
99.3
19.2
9.8
9.4
-2.0
6.2
-8.2
21.3

General government
Total revenue and grants
o/w Grants
Total expenditure
Current
Capital
Overall balance
Overall balance excl. grants

50.3
6.3
52.4
41.3
11.1
-2.0
-8.4

50.0
5.5
50.4
40.2
10.2
-0.4
-5.9

Public debt (percent of GDP)2/

30.6

28.1

31.7

48.2

54.8

58.0

Foreign assistance (in percent of GDP) 3/
(In millions of dollars)

9.4
733

7.9
726

6.5
643

5.7
646

6.1
767

-20.9
34
27
3.5

-19.3
29
8
4.0

-21.3
24
14
3.8

-17.0
16
4
4.7

-17.5
12
9
5.5

6.8

4.8

Real sector
Real GDP growth (percent)
CPI, period average percent change
Savings and investment
Consumption 1/
Public
Private 1/
Investment
Public
Private
National savings
Public
Private
Foreign savings

Balance of payments
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Export growth rate (percent)
Import growth rate (percent)
Gross reserves (months of imports of GNFS

Total external debt service

2008
2009
Projections

2010

2011

6.0
1.9

5.4
1.8

4.5
1.8

4.0
1.8

(In percent of GDP)
117.7
116.6
116.1
25.3
25.4
25.4
92.4
91.3
90.7
20.5
20.8
17.7
9.6
9.7
9.1
10.9
11.1
8.7
3.6
3.3
2.9
6.9
4.8
4.5
-3.4
-1.5
-1.5
17.0
17.5
14.8

115.0
25.4
89.6
17.0
8.3
8.7
2.9
4.1
-1.1
14.1

116.5
25.4
91.1
16.8
8.1
8.7
0.7
3.7
-3.0
16.1

116.4
25.4
91.1
16.4
7.7
8.7
0.3
3.3
-3.0
16.0

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
51.1
51.3
49.1
48.6
47.8
4.8
4.3
4.0
3.8
3.4
50.2
50.6
50.8
50.5
49.9
40.4
41.0
41.1
41.5
41.6
9.8
9.6
9.7
9.1
8.3
0.9
0.7
-1.7
-2.0
-2.1
-3.9
-3.6
-5.7
-5.7
-5.5

47.3
3.2
49.8
41.7
8.1
-2.5
-5.7

46.6
2.9
49.6
41.9
7.7
-3.0
-5.9

56.3

55.9

56.1

5.0
682

4.3
623

4.0
623

3.6
596

-14.8
22
8
5.6

-14.1
11
6
5.6

-16.1
-2
5
5.2

-16.0
3
4
4.8

3.2

3.3

3.2

(In percent of exports of GNFS)
4.1
4.3
3.8
3.2

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Reflects a structural break in 2006 due to a change in statistical coverage.
2/ Data from 2006 onwards include an estimate of debt assumptions to settle domestic claims on government.
3/ Grants and disbursements of foreign loans.

33
APPENDIX I—BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA: DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
1.
Bosnia & Herzegovina’s current and projected government indebtedness is
comfortable, although bound tests show significant risks. In the staff’s baseline scenario
(Table 10), the effect of the projected growth rate would offset the deterioration of the fiscal
position and broadly stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio. But assumptions to cover domestic
claims against the government are a risk to debt dynamics. In the main scenario, in which
debt assumptions to cover domestic claims are conservatively assumed to total slightly over
30 percentage points of GDP over 2006–08—see details in Box—the debt ratio broadly
stabilizes over the medium term and gross financing needs, though increasing as a share of
GDP, remain manageable. This is also the case in the “contingent liabilities shock” stress
test, in which debt assumptions to cover domestic claims are higher than in the main scenario
by 10 percentage points of GDP. But a significant growth slowdown could lead to explosive
debt dynamics: the “growth shock” scenario (growth lower by 2 standard deviations,
averaging 3.4 percent annually starting in 2007), combining the growth slowdown with an
unchanged nominal expenditure path, demonstrates the risks of continued slow structural
reform combined with ambitious expenditure plans. With the policy adjustment suggested by
staff, however (Scenario A3), the debt-to-GDP ratio declines rapidly over the projection
period.
Key Assumptions for the Fiscal Sustainability Analysis
•

Continued strong growth and low inflation, and no policy change from the current stance over
the medium term, in line with the staff’s baseline medium-term projections (Table 10).

•

Continued access to concessional external borrowing, with an average grant element of
35 percent and disbursements gradually declining from a peak of 2.1 percent of GDP in 2007 to
0.7 percent in 2011.

•

Domestic borrowing on commercial terms (average projected LIBOR at 5 percent + 200 basis
points) to cover additional financing needs, gradually increasing from deposit accumulation in
2007 to 2 percent of GDP in 2011.

•

Increase in the face value of debt by 17 percent of GDP in 2006 associated with the settlement
of frozen foreign currency deposits (FFCD), war claims, and general government obligations.
The average grant element of these settlements is expected to exceed 25 percent (see Box 5).

•

Increase in the face value of debt equivalent to 10 percent of GDP in 2007, and to 5 percent of
GDP in 2008 from the possible recognition of additional domestic claims (losses of state
enterprises, restitution claims, and other potential claims) on terms similar to those for the
settlement of FFCDs.

•

Privatization receipts of 2 percent of GDP in 2006 and in 2007 from the sale of the RS
Telecom.

34
2.
Bosnia & Herzegovina’s external debt relative to GDP is relatively high. External
sustainability indicators (external debt-to-export and GDP ratio) improve over the medium
term. Bound tests show limited risks except for shocks on the current account. This reflects
the assumption that economic growth is projected to remain well above the real effective
interest rate on external debt. Gross external financing needs as a percentage of GDP remain
constant after peaking in 2007 due to a jump in the demand for imports. The highest risk to
external sustainability stems from a current account shock. Effective interest rates on external
debt are low, largely the result of concessional borrowing from the World Bank. A change in
the borrowing structure (from public to private or from concessional to nonconcessional)
would also weaken the sustainability of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s external debt position.
Finally, an additional risk is that of a liquidity, rather than solvency, crisis. Although the
dynamics in the baseline appear reassuring, current account financing will continue to
depend heavily on largely unidentified and potentially volatile inflows. Reversal of these
inflows could constrain liquidity and either compress imports or force short-term borrowing
at much less favorable terms.

Key Assumptions for the External Debt Sustainability Analysis
•

Continued strong growth and low inflation, and unchanged policies in line with the staff’s
baseline medium term projections (Table 10).

•

Decelerating growth rate of exports and imports (in value), with the exports growth rate higher
than imports.

•

Continued access to concessional external borrowing, with an average grant element of
35 percent and disbursements gradually declining from a peak of 2.1 percent of GDP in 2007
to 0.7 percent in 2011.

•

Sustained but declining, inflows of remittances, cross-border and seasonal workers’ income.

0.8
0.5
2.3
13.3
2.1
6.5
3.0

2010

6.0
1.4
-1.1
2.4
2.5
6.5
1.0

6.0
1.9
0.0
0.5
1.9
4.6
1.0

4.0
0.5

0.2
-2.5
1.0
48.6
49.5
-3.4
-3.3
-0.1
-3.2
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.6
118.8

57.7
27.1

54.7
24.0

5.4
2.1
0.3
0.4
1.8
3.9
0.9

4.1
0.6

4.5
2.4
0.6
0.4
1.8
4.0
1.3

5.0
0.8

57.0
62.6
59.7
58.7
67.8
64.3

59.9
48.6
51.0

56.9
65.8
60.3
59.1
66.6
63.3

59.2
45.5
47.8

57.4
70.4
61.7
60.1
66.2
63.0

58.5
42.8
45.0

-1.2
-1.1
-2.0
-1.5
-2.1
-2.0

-2.9
-1.4
-1.7

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/

5.2
2.1
0.1
0.8
2.0
4.4
1.2

Projected
Average

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ General government.
2/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g + ae(1+r)]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as ae(1+r).
5/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
9/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
10/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

58.8
61.9
60.6
59.9
70.8
67.1

61.3
53.1
57.7

4.0
2.7
0.9
0.4
1.8
3.1
1.6

6.0
1.0

-2.3
-0.7
0.0
-2.0
-0.9
-0.2
0.9
1.3
1.6
47.8 47.3 46.6
48.8 48.6 48.2
-2.9
-2.2
-1.7
-2.8
-2.1
-1.6
0.1
0.3
0.4
-2.9
-2.3
-2.1
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3
0.2
0.1
115.7 115.7 117.4

55.4
25.3

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/
54.7
-1.7
22.8

2011

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

5.5
2.4
-4.1
-0.4
6.5
6.2
-1.4

2.7
0.3

58.1
59.2
59.1
58.7
71.5
67.5

4.8
2.5
-0.2
3.5
2.7
1.0
2.1

Standard
Deviation

Historical
Average

1.7
0.2

50.1
50.1
50.1
50.1
50.1
50.1

5.0
2.2
-0.1
-11.6
2.3
4.5
-1.5

10-Year

10-Year

57.5
28.6

18.5
7.4
15.7
5.2
-1.4
1.0
51.3
49.1
49.9
50.2
-2.7
-4.0
-2.8
-3.3
-1.2
-0.6
-1.5
-2.8
0.1
-0.7
19.8
8.2
-2.0
-1.8
21.8
10.0
0.0
0.0
2.7
2.2
97.6 117.1

50.1
29.4

Projections
2008 2009

I. Baseline Projections

2007

B1. Real interest rate is at baseline plus one standard deviations
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus 2 standard deviations
B3. Primary balance is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using one-quarter standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006 9/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

5.8
2.1
0.2
9.1
1.9
2.2
-0.2

0.7
0.1

3.6
2.3
-1.5
51.1
49.6
2.1
-1.4
-0.1
-1.3
3.5
1.7
-0.3
2.0
0.0
1.3
62.0

31.7
30.0

2006

59.6
55.1
57.5

4.1
2.4
1.2
20.7
1.2
6.0
1.2

1.4
0.1

-2.5
-4.2
-0.2
50.0
49.9
-4.0
-1.6
0.0
-1.6
-2.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7
56.1

28.1
27.8

2005

50.1
50.1
50.1

5.0
3.3
2.8
14.1
0.5
1.7
2.1

3.2
0.3

-4.2
-5.5
1.2
50.3
51.6
-6.7
-1.0
0.4
-1.4
-5.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
60.8

30.6
30.2

Actual
2003 2004

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2006–11 7/
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2006–11
A3. Balance consistent with staff advice (of 1/4 percentage point of GDP) in 2006–11
B. Bound Tests

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percen
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

4.2
0.3

-1.5
-3.1
2.1
48.5
50.7
-5.1
-0.8
0.9
-1.7
-4.4
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
1.6
71.6

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3)
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

Gross financing need 5/
in billions of U.S. dollars

34.8
34.3

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2002

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 11. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2002–11

35

36

Figure 5. Bosnia and Herzegovina: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests, 2001-11 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and historical scenarios
7

75
70
65

Gross financing need under
baseline (right scale)

Historical

60
55

Baseline

50

6
58
55

45

5
4
3

40

Interest rate shock (in percent)
75
70
65
60

30

1

25

20
0
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

50

75

35
30
25

Growth
shock

50

20
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

70

75
70
65

Baseline

62

55

50
45
40

Baseline: 5.2
Scenario: 3.5
Historical: 4.8

55

55

40
30

PB shock

60

45
35

Baseline: 0.0
Scenario: 1.2
Historical: -0.2

Primary Balance Shock (In percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (Constant primary balance)

60
55

55

Baseline

45

Growth Shock (In percent per year)

65

57

55

40
2

35

70

interest-rate
shock

35
30

Baseline
No policy change

43

Baseline: -1.2
Scenario: -2.7
Historical: -2.1

25

25

20
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

20
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Combined shock 2/

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

75

75

70

70

65
60
55
50

Combined
60
shock

65
60

Baseline

55

contingent
liabilities shock

55
50

45

30 %
depreciation

Baseline

66
63
55

45

40
35

40

30

35

25

30

20
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

25
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Sources: Bosnia's data; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent one-fourth standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ Onetime real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2007, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

5.0
5.4
6.0
3.3
-0.5
8.4
-17.6
4.3

2.1
33.3

4.1
19.7
21.2
3.3
34.7
26.9
-19.4
4.9

3.1
39.7

197.1

-1.2
4.3
19.4
49.0
28.1
77.0
-4.9
-10.2
1.5
-1.8
-9.9
-5.5

55.3
4.4
14.7
20.0
44.6
36.3
80.9
-3.0
-2.3
1.2
-2.5
-1.0
-10.3

57.9

2005

5.8
9.9
12.0
2.7
36.2
18.0
-18.1
6.6

3.8
41.5

5.0
0.2
2.0
2.4
21.0
13.4
-20.0
3.0

4.6
46.1

165.7 159.4

-1.8
4.2
18.1
44.5
32.3
76.8
-6.6
-7.4
1.2
-2.7
-5.9
-6.0

53.5

Actual
2003 2004

7.2
2.1
4.9
2.8
16.4
16.3
-14.4
3.6

4.8
10.7
9.4
0.4
15.5
17.5
5.8
1.7

7-Year
7-Year
Historical Standard
Average Deviation

2008

-0.5
2.9
16.5
37.4
37.7
75.1
-9.0
-4.6
0.9
-2.9
-2.6
-3.4

54.2
-0.6
7.7
13.9
33.8
41.0
74.7
-2.8
-3.4
0.9
-3.0
-1.3
-8.3

53.5
-1.0
7.6
13.2
32.0
41.7
73.7
-2.6
-3.0
0.9
-2.7
-1.2
-8.6

52.5

5.2
41.1

6.0
0.5
2.4
1.8
18.1
8.1
-13.9
2.8

5.3
39.2

5.4
0.4
2.3
1.8
9.8
6.3
-13.2
2.6

5.8
39.5

7.2
43.3

4.5
4.0
0.4
0.4
2.2
2.2
1.7
1.6
-0.1
4.2
4.7
4.4
-15.3 -15.3
2.5
2.3

6.6
42.3

133.7 136.3

0.0
10.6
15.3
32.8
38.3
71.1
-2.3
-2.3
0.8
-2.0
-1.1
-10.6

54.7
54.7
54.7
54.7
54.7

54.7
54.7

54.3
55.1
57.1
56.1
73.4

57.4
54.2

53.7
55.0
59.2
57.2
65.8

55.3
52.7

52.8
54.3
60.7
57.7
58.3

53.4
51.4

52.5
53.9
62.9
58.6
50.9

50.4
49.0

52.6
53.4
65.3
59.7
44.2

48.1
47.4

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

5.5
6.0
0.8
2.4
7.4
5.0
2.0
1.9
15.4 13.3
5.3 11.1
-15.9 -16.5
7.3
9.0

4.8
42.6

-0.3
10.3
15.3
33.3
39.0
72.3
-2.5
-2.5
0.8
-2.2
-1.1
-10.6

52.2

-4.6
-3.8
-5.2
-4.4
-5.5

-7.8
-7.7

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/

5.2
0.8
2.8
1.8
9.0
6.9
-14.8
3.9

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
52.1
-4.7

Projections
2009 2010 2011

I. Baseline Projections

2007

147.8 143.9 130.7 125.8

-3.2
2.9
15.9
38.2
37.0
75.2
-7.3
-5.7
1.0
-2.8
-4.0
-6.0

54.7

2006

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
4/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
5/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation
B3. Non-interest current account is at baseline minus one-half standard deviation
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/4 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2006–11 4/
A2. Adjustement policy scenario

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Exchange rate appreciation (US dollar value of local currency, change in perc
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 3/
in percent of GDP

214.9

5.6
9.7
17.6
50.3
26.3
76.6
-4.3
-3.6
1.5
-2.3
-2.9
-4.0

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3)

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

56.5

External debt

2002

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 12. Bosnia and Herzegovina: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2002–11

37

38
Figure 6. Bosnia and Herzegovina: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests, 2001-11 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
60

66

62

58

Gross financing need under
baseline (right scale)

Baseline

55

Historical

60

58

50

Baseline: 1.8
Scenario: 1.9
Historical: 2.8

56
45
52

54

interest rate
shock

54
40

50

35

48
46
30
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

53
52

70

58

Baseline: 5.2
Scenario: 2.8
Historical: 7.2

56

65

Growth
shock

52

50
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Growth shock (in percent per year)
60

Baseline

Non-interest current account shock
(in percent of GDP)
Baseline: -14.8
Scenario: -17.7
Historical: -14.4

65

CA shock
60

54
55

52

Baseline

52

52
Baseline

50
50
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

62
60

Combined shock 2/
84
60
Combined
shock

74

Real depreciation shock 3/
30 %
depreciation

58
56

64

54
52
52

Baseline

52

54
Baseline
44

50
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

44
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Sources: Bosnia's data; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent one-fourth standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ Onetime real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2006.

39
APPENDIX II—BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA: FUND RELATIONS
As of August 31, 2006
I.
II.

Membership Status: Member since 12/14/1992; Article XIV
General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency

SDR Million
169.10
193.10

%Quota
100.00
114.20

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
20.48
0.25

%Allocation
100.00
1.20

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-by-Arrangements

SDR Million
24.00

%Quota
14.19

V.

VI.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Approval
Date
Type
Stand-by
8/02/2002
Stand-by
5/29/1998

Expiration
Date
2/29/2004
5/29/2001

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
67.60
94.42

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
67.60
94.42

Projected Payments to Fund on Expectations Basis:(SDR Million; based on existing
use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2006
2007
2008
2009
Principal
10.50
12.00
1.50
0.00
Charges/Interest
0.49
1.27
0.82
0.79
Total
10.99
13.27
2.32
0.79

VII. Safeguards Assessment
Under the Fund’s safeguards assessments policy, the Central Bank of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (CBBH) is subject to a full safeguards assessment with respect to any new
Stand-By Arrangement. The assessment was completed on January 24, 2005 and
concluded that safeguards in place at the CBBH were generally adequate. However,
weaknesses were identified in the internal audit and control system, and the safeguards
assessment recommended measures to address them.
VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangements
The currency of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the convertible marka (KM), introduced on
August 11, 1997. On September 5, 2002, the State parliament approved an amendment

2010
0.00
0.79
0.79

40
to the CBBH law that changes the peg of the KM from the DM to the Euro under a
currency board arrangement. The KM is pegged to the euro at KM 1 = 0.5113 euro.
Bosnia and Herzegovina maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions resulting from measures taken with respect to frozen foreign
currency deposits as identified in IMF Country Report No. 02/52.
IX. FSAP
Two FSAP missions took place in December 2005 and March 2006, and an Aide
Mémoire was presented to the authorities. The FSAP assessed risks to financial stability
and weaknesses in banking supervision using a Basel Core Principles assessment. It
also consider financial sector development needs in the areas of insurance, access to
finance, the insolvency regime and corporate governance, drawing on a detailed
assessment of the OECD Principles of Good Corporate Governance. The FSSA is being
presented to the Board along with the 2006 Article IV consultation.
X.

Last Article IV Consultation
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on the twelve month cycle, subject to the provisions of the
decision on consultation cycles approved on July 15, 2002. The last Article IV
consultation was concluded on May 27, 2005.

XI. Resident Representative
Mr. John Norregaard and Mr. Graham Slack have been the Fund’s resident
representatives in Bosnia and Herzegovina since August 2004. Mr. Norregaard
completed his assignment in June 2006.
XII. Technical Assistance 2000–2006
Department
FAD

MCM

Timing
August 2000
September–October 2000
July 2001
April 2002
April 2002
February 2003
May 2003
June 2004
March 2005

Purpose

March 2005-2006

Treasury systems
Value-added tax
Treasury Systems
Value-added Tax
Treasury systems
Treasury systems
Public expenditure management
VAT policy and implementation
Poverty and social impact analysis
(VAT)
Macro-Fiscal advisor

September 2000

Advisor on payments system.

41
March–April 2001

STA

January–February 2002
October–November 2002
August–September 2003
September 2003
April 2004
January 2005
January 2005
April 2005
September 2005
November–December 2005
March 2006

Payments system, currency
management, accounting and
research
Payment system
Strengthening Banking Supervision
Banking supervision
International reserve management
AML/CFT Supervision
Advisor to CBBH Governor
Banking supervision
Credit Risk and Rapid Credit Growth
Financial soundness indicators
FSAP (primary mission)
FSAP (second mission)

October 2000
December 2001
April–May 2004
May 2004
March 2005
November 2005–2006

Money and banking statistics
Money and banking statistics
Money and banking statistics
Government finance statistics
Workers’ remittances
Real sector statistics advisor

42

APPENDIX III—BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
Data provision is inadequate for surveillance purposes. The Dayton peace treaty,
which ended the civil war, implicitly gave responsibility for statistical functions to the two
Entities (The Federation of Bosnia & Herzegovina and Republika Srpska). In August 1998,
the State created its own statistical institute, the Bosnia & Herzegovina Agency for Statistics
(BHAS) with a view to compiling country-wide statistics in accordance with internationally
accepted methodologies, consolidating data produced by the Entities Statistical Institutes, and
acting as the primary coordinating agency for contacts with international agencies.
Significant technical assistance was provided in recent years, mainly by the European Union.
A Fund resident statistical advisor was assigned to the Central Bank of Bosnia &
Herzegovina (CBBH) in May 1999, to provide technical assistance in the development of all
areas of macroeconomic statistics on the basis of the comprehensive review conducted in
early 1998 by the Fund’s Multisector Statistics mission and the recommendations of Fund
missions in the areas of monetary and balance of payments statistics. A country page for
Bosnia & Herzegovina in International Finance Statistics (IFS) was introduced in July 2001.
A STA resident real sector statistical adviser was appointed to Bosnia & Herzegovina in
November 2005.
A. Real Sector
2.
In recent years, efforts have been made in both Entities to improve real sector
statistics, but results have been mixed. The Federation and RS both have published nominal
GDP estimates using the production approach based on international standards recommended
by the 1993 SNA, since 1998 and 1999, respectively. However, in both cases, production
estimates at constant prices and GDP by expenditure are still unavailable and informal sector
activities are under-recorded. A household budget survey, which will serve as the basis for
revising price indices and facilitate the compilation of GDP by the expenditure approach, has
been completed. There are still no meaningful short-term business and consumer surveys.
Both statistical offices compile price indices using outdated methodologies, and consistent
time series are not available. Industrial production indices are prepared in each Entity, but
there is no index at the country level and consistent time series are not available. Labor
statistics are the weakest area for both Institutes, and data on employment, unemployment,
and wage rates are based on deficient methodologies.
B. Balance of Payments
3.
Trade data are published by the BHAS and balance of payments statistics by the
Central Bank of Bosnia & Herzegovina (CBBH). There is however a high degree of
uncertainty about the true values of balance of payments aggregates. Shortcomings in the
data limit their usefulness. The quality of the balance of payments data is generally poor, in
particular with regard to the coverage of foreign grants, workers’ remittances, income
residents receive from working for international organizations in Bosnia & Herzegovina and
the spending of by their nonresident staff, and trade credit by suppliers. Significant progress
has been made in improving merchandise trade data as a result of the introduction of the

43
ASYCUDA processing system; moving to an integrated customs administration for the
whole country; reorganization of customs; and the introduction of a trade classification
system. BHAS now produces export and import data from customs records, but needs to
produce these data on a general trade basis and not just on a special trade basis.
C. Government Finance
4.
The CBBH has recently agreed, in accord with the finance ministers of the State and
two entity governments, to take the lead in compiling Government Finance Statistics (GFS)
on a countrywide basis, and assigned a team of three staff to work on the GFS. At its request,
STA fielded a GFS technical assistance mission in September 2003. The mission examined
the structure of the relations between governments and advised on sector classification for
international comparison purposes. It developed a system to allow budget data to be
classified, aggregated, and consolidated into summary GFS aggregates for all governments,
except for municipalities. This exercise also demonstrated that currently available data do not
provide a satisfactory basis for compilation of GFS. The mission suggested enlisting the help
of USAID to develop reporting systems that can electronically link GFS codes with
ORACLE accounting systems used in the Treasuries. Reporting systems are still being
developed.
5.
The mission developed a medium term development plan for fiscal statistics in
Bosnia & Herzegovina, taking account of the problems posed by the complexity of the
Bosnia & Herzegovina government structure and the difficulties faced by the CBBH in
collecting and processing data. The mission recommended a conservative approach, with the
essential first step utilizing simple systems and processes which allow summary GFS reports
to be produced on a timely and regular basis. Progress requires commitments by all parties to
cooperate, as well as additional computer resources and, in the long run, more staff, at the
CBBH.
6.
In 2005, Bosnia reported GFS to STA for the first time for publication in the
Government Finance Statistics Yearbook covering central government operations for 2003
and 2004.
D. Monetary Accounts
The CBBH reports monetary accounts to the Fund on both a countrywide and Entity basis. It
also began, in early 2003, reporting weighted average interest rate data for bank deposits and
loans with data from January 2002 onward for publication in the IFS. Over the period 1996–
2001, several Fund technical assistance missions have assisted the authorities in establishing
an integrated system for compiling countrywide monetary statistics meeting Fund standards.
The latest mission, in April/May 2004, reviewed in particular the recent institutional changes
and accounting developments that have important implications for monetary statistics and
assisted in revising and updating the current monetary data compilation procedures. The
mission recommended improvements in, among other areas, the treatment of “passive
accounts” on banks’ balance sheets, banks’ claims arising from “credit card debts,” “eurolinked” loans in national currency, and government accounts.

July 2006
July 2006
July 2006

Broad Money

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

2005 (p)

GDP/GNP

March 2006

July 2005

July 2006

July 2006

A

A

Q

Q

A

M

A

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

D

Frequency
of
6
Data

A

A

Q

Q

A

M

A

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

D

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

A

A

Q

Q

A

M

A

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

D

Frequency of publication

6

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and
local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A);Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).

1

2005

Q1 2006

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Gross External Debt

Q1 2006

March 2006

August 2006

June 2006

2005

July 2006

August 2006

August 2006

August 2006

August 2006

August 2006

August 2006

August 2006

8/31/06

Date received

2005

July 2006

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central Government

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – General
4
Government

Consumer Price Index

July 2006

July 2006

Reserve/Base Money

2

July 2006

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
1
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Interest Rates

8/31/06

Exchange Rates

Date of latest
observation

AS OF AUGUST 31, 2006

APPENDIX III: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE

44

45
APPENDIX IV—BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA: WORLD BANK RELATIONS
A. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Poverty Reduction Strategy
1.
The World Bank has taken the lead in supporting the structural and institutional
reforms underpinning progress from post-conflict recovery as well as in the finalization
of the Medium-Term Development Strategy/Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
The PRSP, drawing on the EC’s 2003 feasibility study of the stabilization and association
process, was agreed by entity and state governments in February 2004 for the period
through 2007. It commits the authorities to sustainable and balanced economic
development, poverty reduction, and accelerated EU integration.
2.
After one year, a large number of the proposed measures have been implemented.
But hesitant cooperation between entity governments has delayed implementation of
some of the most important measures including adoption of a framework law on higher
education, a legal framework to establish minimum social entitlements for all citizens,
introduction of targeted safety nets, and definition of reform to the pension system.
B. World Bank Projects
3.
A Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) covering FY05–07 was approved in August
2004. It is anchored in the PRSP and structured along three pillars: (i) improving public
finance and strengthening institutions; (ii) promoting sustainable private-sector led
growth; and (iii) investing in key social and economic infrastructure. The base case sets
IDA allocations at US$152 million and is conditional on satisfactory macroeconomic and
reform performance. The CAS is designed to help improve creditworthiness, which
should ultimately enable BiH to access a substantially larger pool of IBRD resources.
4.
While no longer receiving the levels of financing following the 1995 Dayton
Accord, BiH still enjoys exceptional access to concessional IDA financing despite
income per capita well-above the IDA threshold. The active IDA portfolio includes 13
investment and three adjustment projects with a total commitment of US$361 million, of
which US$230 million remain to be disbursed. Negotiations have recently been
completed on the US$290 million “Power 4” electricity sector modernization project.
The Bank will provide US$36 million, with other multilateral and bilateral donors
providing the rest.
5.
The investment side of the portfolio has performed well, with only a few problem
projects. However, there have been significant challenges on the adjustment side. The
Second Social Sector Structural Adjustment Credit (SOSAC II), with an undisbursed
amount of US$51 million, lapsed at the end of June 2006, with the 2006 budgets still not
in line with the authorities' commitments under the credit despite repeated extensions of
the deadline for declaring the credit effective.
6.
Reforming government spending and higher education finance is the key
objective of the Economic Management Structural Adjustment Credit (EMSAC), the
first tranche of which was released in December 2004. A second tranche of about

46
US$25 million is scheduled to be disbursed by end 2006 provided the credit’s conditions
are met, including submission to the state parliament of a draft higher education law,
enactment of state and RS salary laws, and enactment of internal and supreme audit laws.
Progress on most of these conditions is moderate to slow. The Bank delivered the Public
Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) to the authorities in June 2006.
7.
Improving the business environment with support from Bank’s Business
Environment Adjustment Credit (BAC) will be critical to strengthening growth and
employment and encouraging investment. Although delayed, supporting legislation has
now been passed in both entities but needs to be implemented to permit disbursement of
the final US$24 million tranche in early 2007. The World Bank has been discussing with
the authorities the importance of accelerating corporate restructuring, including via
privatization and bankruptcy. A Programmatic Development Policy Credit could be
offered to support this reform.

Statement by Jeroen Kremers, Executive Director for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Nir Klein, Senior Advisor to Executive Director
October 13, 2006
General remarks
Not withstanding extreme complexities, stemming from its unique political and
economic structure, Bosnia & Herzegovina (BiH) has made considerable progress in
recent years. With assistance from the international community, including the Fund, the
authorities have succeeded in restoring macroeconomic and financial stability, rebuilding
policy-making institutions and reconstructing the infrastructure severely damaged from
the three-year war. These policies have had a significant and positive impact on economic
activity and stability. Over the past decade, GDP – although from a very low level tripled; the high fiscal deficits turned into surpluses; inflation significantly declined and
structural and state-building reforms were launched. These achievements paved the way
to talks with the EU representatives toward the Stabilization and Association Agreement
(SAA) at the end of 2005.
Having said that, the authorities acknowledge that much remains to be done and
there are many risks up the road. The unemployment and poverty levels are still high, the
current account deficit is large, the private sector continues to be weak and the financial
system and business climate need to be enhanced. Additionally, the high internal debt
threatens fiscal sustainability. Indeed, the economy is lagging behind other countries in
the region in several transition indicators. Sharing the staff’s observations and concurring
with the main recommendations for policy priorities, the authorities stress that lack of
political support exacerbated by fragmented institutions have prevented them from more
forcefully moving forward with important reforms.
It is therefore regrettable that after two successful SBAs, the authorities and staff
failed to agree on the third SBA, particularly in an election year, when budgetary
pressures mount. The authorities hope that cooperation with the Fund will continue soon
after the new government is formed. This would be highly important for the Bosnian
authorities, to agree on a prudent consolidated budget for 2007 and to formulate an
explicit reform agenda for strengthening the private sector and competitiveness.
Moreover, close cooperation with the Fund would also be beneficial to facilitate public
consensus on the required structural reforms as well as to improve the country’s image
for investors.
Macroeconomic developments
Supported by favorable external conditions along with the growing interest of
foreign investors, economic activity continues to record strong growth, making the
country one of the fastest growing economies in the region. In 2005, GDP grew by 5
percent, and with the ongoing surge in exports and investment, the authorities project that

2
the growth rate will accelerate to 6 percent in 2006 and further to around 7 percent in
2007-09. The current account balance has improved in the past year and together with
high capital inflows, contributed to the economy’s external resilience. In this context,
international reserves this year have reached the highest level in the post-war era, both
nominally and in terms of months of import, and the external debt-to-GDP ratio is
projected to slightly decline to below 30 percent. Following a moderate decline in 2005,
Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) renewed their upward path and reached, in 2006, a
record-high level.1
The authorities welcome the staff’s selected issues paper on BiH’s current
account deficit, which shows that the “true” current account deficit is much lower than
the official figure suggests. This estimation supports the authorities’ position in past
discussions and shows that the external vulnerability of BiH is equivalent to that of other
countries in transition, including some with a currency board arrangement. Going
forward, the authorities concur with staff that the large current account deficit is still a
matter of concern and requires sound policies to support its reduction. In this context, the
authorities stress the importance of a combined policy action of fiscal and monetary
instruments to improve the external position. They also believe that the growing external
demand for Bosnian products with sustained strong growth will stimulate a continuous
decline in the current account-to-GDP ratio.
Structural reforms
The authorities fully concur with staff that strengthening the private sector,
widening the export base and improving competitiveness are beneficial to further reduce
external vulnerabilities. The authorities also agree that the implementation of reforms is
somewhat protracted; however, they stress that this is not a result of a lack of clear
strategy. In this context, the private sector and the labor market reforms are properly
addressed within the Mid-Term Development Strategy for 2004-07 (PRSP), which has
been supported by the World Bank’s and the IMF’s Executive Boards. The current MidTerm Development Strategy ends next year and the elected governments will have to
prepare the new one by the end of 2007. The authorities believe that this will be an
opportunity for the new governments to commit to speeding up structural reforms.
Despite some delays, the authorities have continued to enhance private sector activity by
moving forward with companies’ restructuring this year. However, following the
amendment to the Republika Srpska (RS) privatization law, which allows greater
flexibility in the privatization process, it gained greater momentum in RS than in the
Federation. A development worth noting in that respect is the RS government’s decision
to call for an international tender for the sale of the publicly held telecommunications
1

According to the data, which was published by the CBBH early October, the total FDI for 2005 was KM
823 mln.

3
provider, Telecom Srpska, which is the second largest telecom company in BiH. The
authorities hope to conclude the sale by the end of the year. Preparations for the sale of
the oil refineries at Brod and Modrica together with a fuel retailer, Petrol, are taking place
as well. As for the Federation, the government sold 67 percent of Bosnia's biggest fuel
retailer Energopetrol (September), but its plan to sell 24 sizable companies in 2006 is
somewhat lagging behind. The authorities expect that the adoption of the law that allows
privatization of firms via the stock exchange (July) will speed up the process.
Bosnia & Herzegovina remains committed to trade liberalization. Despite its high trade
deficit, the authorities fully liberalized the trade of agricultural goods and reduced the
average custom protection to the lowest in the region. The authorities also take active part
in the current CEFTA discussions, aimed at establishing a free trade zone in Southeast
Europe to replace the existing bilateral free trade agreements. The last round of CEFTA
negotiations are supposed to be held by the end of October.
Fiscal issues
With the successful implementation of the VAT and the fiscal discipline kept
throughout 2006, the authorities are pleased to note that the country will record a fiscal
surplus in 2006 following the surplus recorded in 2005. The authorities do not share the
staff’s view that the growing spending pressures in 2006 have not been resisted. To the
contrary, they underscore that neither the state nor any of the entities rebalanced their
budgets despite the elections and the strong growth in VAT revenues. They are aware
that some deterioration occurred at the canton level and by approval of the new warveteran legislation in the Federation; however, given the strong VAT revenues, they
project that fiscal consolidation will be even stronger in 2006 than over the previous year.
The authorities are pleased to note that this outcome will occur in the absence of the
IMF’s SBA – an evidence of the authorities’ continued commitment to strong and
prudent fiscal policies.
The BiH state government has recently approved the Budget Framework Paper
(BFP) for the next three years (2007-2009). The BFP adheres to the principle that the
demand for increased spending on priority projects should be covered by savings in low
priority areas, and it envisages explicit recommendations for a higher level of fiscal
sustainability through fiscal consolidation and fiscal reforms, particularly in the areas of
revenue collection, social services systems, public investment and public expenditure
management. The BFP needs to be approved by the National Fiscal Council (NFC), and
should be seen, at this point, as the authorities’ commitment to prudent fiscal policy.
In view of rising spending pressures, including from diminishing donor assistance, the
settlement of domestic claims and the EU integration process, which requires building
new state institutions, the authorities are not convinced that the staff’s proposed fiscal
targets are appropriate. According to their view, fiscal targets should remain close to
balance to ensure fiscal sustainability, and at the same time provide sufficient resources
to overcome increasing needs.

4
The authorities note with satisfaction that the introduction of the VAT went
smoothly, and attempts to adopt VAT exemptions were successfully blocked by the
parliament. So far, VAT revenues are significantly higher than previously expected and
the authorities project that further improvement of tax collection will boost revenues even
more. The authorities plan to spend a share of total VAT revenues to decrease direct
taxes, particularly labor taxes, which will promote creation of new jobs in the private
sector, and reduce the currently large informal sector of the economy. Accordingly, in
2006 the authorities continue with preparations of direct taxation system reform,
including taxes on capital, labor and property.
The authorities agree with staff that inadequate fiscal co-ordination remains a
serious weakness. To enhance coordination of budget design and execution among
various levels of government, the authorities have agreed on a draft of the NFC law,
which is consistent with the staff’s key recommendations. The draft contains clear and
well-designed mechanisms for fiscal coordination and envisages the maximum
enforcement possible under the current constitution of BiH. Many political parties have
expressed commitment to continue discussion on constitutional changes after the
elections and are of the view that any constitutional changes should address positioning
the NFC within the Constitution in order to strengthen the enforcement mechanism under
the existing draft law.
Like staff, the authorities perceive the domestic claim settlement a priority. The
plans for settling the war-related claims have been approved by the both entities and the
work on settlement of restitution and frozen deposits claims is underway. Indeed, these
claims envisage large fiscal pressures; however, the authorities reiterated their
commitment to approve the new legislation prudently and in a fiscally sustainable
manner.
Monetary issues
The high credibility of the currency board has served the economy well in
keeping inflation under control and maintaining financial stability. In 2006 inflation has
somewhat accelerated due to the VAT introduction, the increase in oil price and the
continuous reform in the energy sector, however, from 2007 onwards the authorities
project that inflation will revert to low levels. The Central Bank of BiH (CBBH)
intervened several times in the past by raising the required reserves (RR) rate in order to
slow down credit growth. To that end, in December of 2005 the CBBH raised the RR to
15 percent and succeeded to somewhat suppress the rapid credit growth.2 At this juncture,
the current level of RR is seen by the CBBH as appropriate, yet it is closely monitoring
2

Although in nominal terms the credit growth rate is still high, in real terms, in view of the relatively high
inflation this year, credit growth is significantly lower than in 2005.

5
credit developments and is prepared to adjust its policy if needed. The CBBH confirm
that, in line with the staff’s advice, the statutory 20 percent cap on RR has been removed
(as of early October).
Financial stability and supervision
The authorities are committed to thoroughly analyze the FSAP recommendations
and to address the identified shortcomings. In this context, the CBBH is developing its
own capacities to better assess potential risks and weaknesses within the financial sector.
The Fund’s continued help in this regard is of great importance and the authorities hope
to be able to rely on it in the future as well.
The authorities are well aware that the current organization of banking supervision is not
adequate and it hinders further development. In this regard, a unified supervision system
at the state level seems to be more effective in safeguarding financial stability and will be
in line with the general approach of building a single economic space in BiH. However,
since this issue is politically charged, further discussions on the supervision’s coverage,
institutional setup and location are expected to take place after the newly elected
governments are formed.
The authorities agree that the leasing sector needs better supervision; however
they do not share the staff’s view that this should be done under the umbrella of banking
supervision, particularly given that the leasing companies are not deposit taking
institutions and do not affect the functioning of the banking sector in a material way. The
authorities stress that, in view of the multiple assignments together with the limited
resources, the banking supervision agencies should focus, at this point, on improving
their risk assessments and bank oversight.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/117
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 19, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina
On October 13, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Bosnia and Herzegovina.3
Background
Economic activity has remained robust and inflation low over the past several years.
Growth has averaged 5 percent annually, and inflation—underpinned by the currency
board—has remained low. Financial deepening has continued, the banking system is
largely privatized, and international reserves are high and rising. Customs and indirect
tax policy have been unified and a value-added tax (VAT) successfully introduced
in January 2006. The general government balance has strengthened by 4 percentage
points of GDP during 2001–05, while public debt at 32 percent of GDP at end–2005 is
relatively low.
But these achievements continue to be hostage to fundamental political and economic
imbalances: policy coordination hampered by weak institutions and lack of political will,
lagging structural reforms, and a large current account deficit. While the recent
intergovernmental agreement on a draft National Fiscal Council law represents a major
step toward improved fiscal policy coordination, it has yet to be implemented.
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions
with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and
financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments
and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the
basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion,
the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive
Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities.
3

2
The fragmented fiscal system and the continuing dispute over the allocation of indirect
tax revenue highlight the ineffectiveness of current coordination mechanisms and the
resistance against centralizing key policy functions.
The approach of the October elections has led to fiscal policy slippages this year.
Although the general government is likely to record a small surplus in 2006, this reflects
temporary gains from the introduction of the VAT. If these lapse in 2007,
the government deficit could—in the absence of corrective action—deteriorate by over
2 percentage points of GDP. Moreover, an uncertain but potentially large amount of
outstanding claims against the government continues to be a major threat to fiscal
sustainability over the medium term. Recent steps toward restructuring some of these
claims are mitigating these concerns, but risks remain.
The current account deficit of the balance of payments, while likely much smaller than
official estimates indicate, is large, reflecting insufficient private savings. Export growth
has accelerated in 2004 and 2005, but the export base remains narrow and vulnerable
to commodity price movements. Competitiveness indicators are mixed.
The rapid growth of credit to the private sector has drawn attention to the financial
sector’s vulnerabilities. The recent Financial Sector Assessment Program has found
that, while the large presence of foreign banks may help enhance the system’s
resilience to shocks, they may underestimate credit risk and their reliance on low-cost
foreign funding diminishes the incentive to mobilize long-term local deposits.
The fragmentation of bank supervision among different agencies, the absence of
consolidated supervision, and severe weaknesses in corporate governance are also
sources of vulnerability for the financial sector.
Structural reforms lag behind those in neighboring countries and sustained private
sector-led growth has yet to take root. At 50 percent of GDP, the government dominates
the economy, while large segments of the corporate sector remain loss-making and
unemployment is widespread. Notwithstanding a few large investments in metals and
mining, foreign direct investment penetration, at less than $600 per capita, is one of the
lowest in the region.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the strong economic growth and price stability achieved
in recent years. They noted, however, that while postwar reconstruction and expansion
of public consumption and investment had improved living standards, it had left the
economy with inefficiencies in the structure of government, a large external imbalance,
and high unemployment. While achievements in fiscal consolidation and in fostering
price stability were recognized, Directors voiced concern over fragmented economic
policy making and called for stronger policy ownership, improved coordination, and

3
meaningful progress in structural reforms to strengthen the basis for sustained, private
sector-led growth.
Directors noted that the fiscal situation remains fragile, given the intensifying spending
pressures along with the transitory windfall from the VAT introduction, and the
potentially large, unresolved domestic claims against the government. In this context,
they cautioned that unrealistically generous terms for settling outstanding domestic
claims would jeopardize long-term fiscal sustainability. Directors advised that a fiscal
policy that aims at sustaining small surpluses over the medium term will help generate
the increased domestic savings needed to address the external imbalance and keep
public debt on a declining path. Reducing the duplication of government functions,
prioritizing expenditures, and rationalizing social transfers and the wage bill will create
room for additional priority spending, as well as for reducing the high burden of taxation.
Directors welcomed the agreement on a draft National Fiscal Council law, and urged
that it be implemented without delay. They noted that, while the law is indispensable for
better fiscal coordination, securing better fiscal policies and more efficient
intergovernmental fiscal relations will also depend on strengthening the political
cooperation. Over the medium term, it will be necessary to harmonize the provisions of
the multitude of social safety nets and pension systems, as well as to rationalize
revenue-sharing arrangements. These reforms will contribute to reducing the size of
government and the tax burden.
Directors considered that the currency board has served Bosnia and Herzegovina well
by providing an anchor for macroeconomic policies and contributing to business and
investor confidence. They emphasized that, in addition to a prudent fiscal policy,
structural reforms will be critical for maintaining the viability of the currency board,
and expressed concern at their slow pace this year. Directors urged action on measures
to make labor markets more flexible, amending labor laws to stop the accumulation of
wage arrears, and accelerating corporate restructuring through bankruptcy and
privatization. As the authorities intend to maintain the currency board until EU
membership and adoption of the euro, the early launching of these reforms is
imperative.
Directors noted that financial sector stability indicators are largely positive, and urged
the authorities to address remaining vulnerabilities. The rapid credit growth of recent
years highlights the need to improve credit risk management by banks. In this context,
Directors urged the authorities to unify bank supervision as soon as possible. Directors
welcomed the operation of the credit registry and the plans to extend it to cover
households by end-2006.
Directors noted that, despite recent improvements in trade statistics, poor data quality
hampers policy making and impedes effective surveillance. They urged the authorities to
make data quality a priority and take all necessary steps, including by taking advantage

4
of the donor technical support, to improve transparency, timeliness, and
comprehensiveness of economic and financial data, particularly in the areas of the
national accounts and balance of payments.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5

Bosnia and Herzegovina: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Est.

Proj.

Real GDP

5.0

(Percent change)
4.1
5.8

5.0

5.5

CPI (period average) 1/

0.3

0.6

0.2

2.8

6.5

7.0
37.4
36.2

10.0
25.4
24.8

24.3
31.1
27.5

18.2
27.7
27.5

22.4
19.3
23.0

Money and credit (end of period)
Broad money 2/
Domestic credit
Of which: credit to the private sector

(In percent of GDP)
General government budget
Revenue
Expenditure (on a commitment basis)
Overall balance

46.0
49.3
-3.3

50.3
52.4
-2.0

50.0
50.4
-0.4

51.1
50.2
0.9

51.3
50.6
0.7

External public debt
NPV of external public debt
Total public debt

34.3
26.2
34.8

30.2
23.1
30.6

27.8
21.2
28.1

30.0
22.9
31.7

29.4
22.5
48.2

3/

(In millions of euros)
Balance of payments
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)

1,721
5,012
-1,252
-19.1

1,935
5,313
-1,444
-20.9

2,398
5,704
-1,437
-19.3

2,897
6,455
-1,695
-21.3

3,316
6,742
-1,523
-17.0

1,272
3.3

1,436
3.5

1,782
4.0

2,160
3.8

2,512
4.6

External debt service
(In percent of exports of goods and services)

132
7.7

131
6.8

116
4.8

119
4.1

144
4.3

Exchange rate regime
Exchange rate, October 13, 2006
Real effective exchange rate (2000=100, increase=appreciation)

Currency board since August 1997
1KM = Euro 0.5113
95.1
95.4
94.4
93.4

Gross official reserves
(In months of imports)

...

Sources: Bosnian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based on weighted averages for the Federation and Republika Srpska.
2/ Broad money includes currency, demand deposits, time and savings deposits, bonds, and money market instruments.
3/ Assuming 17 percent of GDP of debt to settle domestic claims against the government.
4/ End-July.

4/

