Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/109
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 26, 2002

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Mexico
On September 23, 2002 the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Mexico.1
Background
The economic slowdown in the United States triggered a sharp weakening in Mexican
economic activity in 2001 from the rapid pace in the preceding year. There was also a
marked deceleration in domestic demand growth, as disposable income was adversely
affected by a contraction in employment and confidence sagged. Last year’s recession,
which was characterized by a 0.3 percent decline in real GDP, was the first in Mexico’s
recent history not associated with a domestic economic crisis. The 12-month inflation rate
slowed to 4.4 percent at end-2001, well under the target of 6.5 percent. The weakness in
domestic demand last year contributed to a narrowing of the external current account deficit
to 2.8 percent of GDP from 3.1 percent of GDP in 2000. The current account deficit was
more than financed by foreign direct investment (FDI), reflecting the US$12.5 billion
purchase of Banamex by Citibank. Other capital inflows were also strong, helped by
investors’ perception of Mexico as a “safe haven” among emerging markets.
Economic activity rebounded strongly in the second quarter of 2002, as exports were
supported by stronger demand from the United States and final domestic demand grew
sharply. The 12-month inflation rate rose to 5.3 percent in August 2002, owing largely to
increased transport and electricity tariffs, and a weather-related hike in food prices; the core
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities.
1

-2inflation rate continued to decline to under 4 percent. The external current account deficit
continued to moderate in the first half of 2002. About 90 percent of the deficit during this
period was financed by net inflows of foreign direct investment.
Net international reserves increased by US$1.7 billion during the first eight months of 2002,
following a gain of over US$9 billion in 2001. Gross international reserves amounted to more
than US$46½ billion at the end of August 2002, equivalent to 125 percent of short-term debt
by residual maturity and 82 percent of annual gross external financing requirements.
The authorities made progress in rebalancing the policy mix in 2001 as fiscal policy was
tightened on a cyclically-adjusted basis and monetary policy was relaxed. Monetary policy
was tightened in September 2002 in response to an uptick in inflation expectations and the
turbulence in international markets, in line with the Bank of Mexico’s strategy of achieving a
decline in inflation to low levels. Domestic interest rates fell during 2001 and the first four
months of 2002, but that fall subsequently has been partly reversed.
Mexican financial markets have weakened since early April 2002 in response to the rise in
global risk aversion and developments in Brazil. Nevertheless, market sentiment towards
Mexico remains favorable, supported by the country’s investment-grade rating which has
contributed to a widening of the investor base. The peso depreciated from end-March 2002,
which contributed to some gain in competitiveness. In any case, the peso still has
appreciated significantly in real effective terms in recent years both in relation to relative
consumer prices and (by less) in relation to unit labor costs.
The government has made substantial progress in improving public sector debt
management, resulting in a lower cost of funding, longer maturities and reduced external
vulnerability. Nonetheless, exposure to short-term interest rates and the large gross
financing needs of the public sector still constitute vulnerabilities for the public sector.
Executive Board Assessment
Directors commended the authorities for maintaining prudent fiscal and monetary policies in
the face of weak economic activity. As a result, inflation has declined, the external current
account deficit is moderating, and international reserves have strengthened significantly.
Directors noted that last year’s recession was the first in Mexico’s recent history not
associated with a domestic economic crisis—demonstrating a resilience that distinguishes
the country as a relatively “safe haven” among emerging markets.
Directors observed that the difficult external environment had weakened Mexico’s economic
performance in 2001, but that growth has begun to rebound this year in line with the pick up
in activity in the United States. Continued skillful macroeconomic management and strong
focus on trade, as well as further progress in structural reforms, will be essential for
achieving faster growth and continuing to reduce poverty.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ medium-term economic program (PRONAFIDE), which
centers on structural reforms aimed at strengthening further the fiscal position, enhancing
competitiveness and increasing productivity. Full implementation of the reforms is now

-3essential to place the economy on a higher growth path that would facilitate poverty
reduction. Directors emphasized the particular importance of reforms in the tax system to
reduce reliance on oil revenues, as well as in the energy and telecom sectors, the labor
market, and the judicial system, including improvements in governance.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment to a fiscal framework aimed at a sizable
reduction in the fiscal deficit and public debt by 2006. They stressed that successfully
implementing the authorities’ objective of a front-loaded fiscal adjustment in 2003 would be
important to further enhance Mexico’s market credibility, following the easing of the fiscal
policy stance this year. Achieving this objective would also reduce pressure on real interest
rates, allowing room for increased private sector activity, and raising Mexico’s resilience
against external shocks.
In considering the mix of adjustment measures, Directors noted the authorities’ firm
commitment to curtail spending as needed to achieve the medium term fiscal targets. They
welcomed the fact that, despite the tight spending constraints, the authorities had increased
social expenditures markedly in recent years, which had led to an improvement in poverty
indicators. Directors supported the authorities’ intention to continue to build support for the
much-needed second stage of fiscal reforms, especially the harmonization of the VAT rates,
and commended the authorities’ continued efforts to improve tax administration.
Directors welcomed the main findings of the fiscal ROSC mission, namely, that the
government has made considerable progress in improving transparency and complying with
international standards. Major initiatives included reforms to the budgetary process, timely
disclosure of fiscal information, and strengthening of internal controls. The recent publication
of the fiscal ROSC is an important example of this progress. Nevertheless, Directors noted
that additional actions are still needed, including a redefinition of the institutional coverage of
government, and presentation of the budget within a medium term context.
Directors noted that Mexico’s central bank has gained considerable credibility in recent years
in the conduct of monetary policy. In light of the recent uptick in inflation expectations and
the turbulence in international markets, they endorsed the bank’s monetary policy stance,
including today’s tightening of policies, as appropriately geared toward achieving a decline in
inflation to low levels. An easing of monetary conditions could be considered at a later stage
should prospects for economic recovery weaken, and provided inflationary expectations are
successfully reduced.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to strengthen further the inflation targeting
framework, and the announced adoption of a long-term inflation objective for 2004 and
beyond. Most agreed that the “corto” continues to be a flexible and efficient monetary policy
instrument that allows for appropriate adjustments in interest rates. Moving forward, some
Directors saw merit in considering a shift toward the direct targeting of short-term interest
rates as a means of further enhancing transparency in monetary policy—especially in a
strengthened inflation targeting framework—and reducing interest rate volatility, while others
noted that such a move could increase volatility in the exchange rate.

-4Directors welcomed the continued strengthening of the financial system, and the additional
measures that are being introduced, aimed at achieving international standards. In particular,
they noted the measures to reduce the Bank of Mexico’s credit risk associated with the
payments system, and the recent legislation to modernize the state-owned development
banks. Some Directors expressed concern about the stagnation in bank credit to the private
sector, but took note of the authorities’ expectation that a resumption in lending could be
facilitated by the reforms introduced to improve the credit infrastructure, including the
framework for creditor rights, and to strengthen bank supervision.
Directors viewed the present level of international reserves as broadly adequate in the
context of a flexible exchange rate regime, noting that reserves more than fully cover shortterm debt. A few Directors felt that a further accumulation of reserves would be desirable to
provide an extra margin of safety. As regards external competitiveness, several Directors
observed that the timely implementation of productivity enhancing measures as proposed by
the authorities would help allay possible concerns about the appreciation of the real
exchange rate in recent years, although it was noted that Mexican exports continue to gain
market share in the United States, its main trading partner.
Looking ahead, Directors noted that despite favorable economic prospects uncertainties
remain, including the strength of the recovery in the U.S., volatility in equity markets, and the
weakening of sentiment toward other emerging market economies. In addition, a number of
Directors pointed to the risks related to the large public sector financing requirement, and the
structure of public and corporate debt, and cautioned that delays in implementing the
authorities’ medium-term fiscal adjustment and structural reform agenda could increase the
economy’s vulnerability and lower growth prospects. In this context, Directors took note of
the results of the stress simulations that suggest that the external sector could weather well
a potential sizable capital account crisis. They welcomed the authorities’ efforts to further
improve public debt management through continued issues of long-term fixed-rate
instruments, and by establishing benchmarks in the domestic debt market. They also
welcomed the authorities’ intention to undertake a World Bank-led ROSC on corporate
governance, and encouraged them to continue their close monitoring of the corporate sector.
In general, Directors were reassured by the authorities’ well-deserved reputation for
addressing adverse circumstances through prudent economic management, and by the
measures that have been taken to strengthen the institutional basis for maintaining economic
and financial stability.
Directors noted that Mexico’s data are generally of good quality, timely, and adequate for
conducting surveillance effectively.

Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board.

-5-

Mexico: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators

1997

1998

1999

2000

Prel.
2001

6.8
5.1
25.9
24.0
15.7

5.0
3.4
24.3
20.5
18.6

3.6
2.0
23.5
20.5
12.3

6.6
5.0
23.5
20.4
9.0

-0.3
-1.7
20.7
17.8
4.4

15.0
22.7
-1.9
13.5
34.0

6.4
14.2
-3.8
3.7
41.1

16.1
13.2
-2.9
3.9
34.4

22.0
22.9
-3.1
8.2
25.9

-4.8
-3.5
-2.9
9.2
22.3

62.6

47.9

43.8

41.8

39.4

Nonfinancial public sector (in percent of GDP)
Primary balance
Overall balance
Net public external debt (including IMF)

3.3
-0.7
27.0

1.7
-1.2
20.1

2.6
-1.1
19.7

2.6
-1.1
15.9

2.6
-0.7
15.3

Money and credit (annual percentage change)
Monetary base
Broad money (M4a)
Treasury bill rate (28-day cetes, in percent, annual average)

29.6
29.0
19.8

20.8
24.2
24.8

43.5
19.4
21.4

10.7
-12.2
15.2

8.0
16.1
11.3

Real economy (annual percentage change)
Real GDP
Real GDP per capita
Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross national savings (in percent of GDP)
Consumer prices (end of year)
External sector (annual percentage change)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
External current account (in percent of GDP)
Change in net international reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) 1/
Outstanding external debt (in percent of GDP)
Total external debt service
(in percent of exports of goods, services, and transfers)

Sources: National Institute of Statistics and Geography; Bank of Mexico; and Secretariat of Finance and
Public Credit.
1/ IMF definition.

Statement by Mr. Hernan Oyarzábal , Executive Director for Mexico
and Mr. Mario Beauregard, Advisor to Executive Director
September 23, 2002
An orderly adjustment of economic activity
Last year, in my statement for the 2001 Article IV Consultation on Mexico, I stressed the fact
that for the first time in the last three decades Mexico experienced a smooth change of
political power that was not characterized by a deep economic and financial crisis. In this
opportunity, I would like to point out the fact that for the first time in many years, the marked
slowdown in economic activity in 2001 took place in an orderly manner as a result of my
authorities’ timely and appropriate policy response to the changing economic environment.
New challenges emerged soon after we last met
The sharp slowdown in world economic activity in 2001, particularly in the United States,
and the uncertainty that prevailed after the terrorist attacks on September 11, had a negative
impact on Mexico’s economic activity. After growing 6.6 percent in 2000, last year’s GDP
contracted 0.3 percent. This result in the real economy, and both the Federal Government’s
fiscal discipline and Banco de México’s prudent monetary policy, led to a significant
reduction in the inflation rate to 4.4 percent (the official target was to achieve an inflation
rate not greater than 6.5 percent). As a result, nominal and real interest rates declined and the
peso remained stable.
Public sector finances were negatively affected by the economic slowdown, the strength of
the peso and the fall in international oil prices. Nevertheless, decisive and timely actions
were key to reach the fiscal deficit target set for the year. On a cyclically adjusted basis,
public finances recorded one of the most important adjustments in recent years. I would like
to emphasize that these efforts have been pursued while protecting the allocation of resources
to social sectors, like education and health. In particular, expenditures in social programs
increased 6.1 percent in real terms during 2001.
On the external front, the deficit in the current account remained stable (2.8 percent of GDP).
This deficit was financed totally with long-term external resources, particularly Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI). The surplus in the capital account was 22.7 billion US dollars, of
which FDI flows were 24.7 billion US dollars, 1.4 times the deficit in the current account.
Net international reserves increased by 7.3 billion US dollars and the ratio of gross official
reserves to short-term debt by residual maturity increased from 86.8 percent in 2000 to 122.4
percent at the end of 2001.
In sum, economic policies in Mexico were geared at maintaining economic stability and
adjusting to the new economic conditions. Importantly, even during this difficult year, my
authorities were able to further reduce Mexico’s vulnerabilities. As a result, two of the
leading rating agencies (Standard & Poor’s and Fitch IBCA) upgraded Mexico’s external
sovereign debt rating to investment grade at the beginning of 2002 and Moody’s, which
upgraded Mexico to investment grade in March of 2000, improved the country’s rating one
additional notch. These upgrades have made Mexico more resilient to external shocks by
diversifying the type of investors willing to invest in the country.

