December 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/424

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

October 7, 2005
July 24, 2005

October 24, 2005 January 29, 2001
2005
January 29, 2001

Central African Republic: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for the Central African Republic
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with the Central
African Republic, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 24, 2005, with the officials of the Central African
Republic on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time
of these discussions, the staff report was completed on October 7, 2005. The views expressed
in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its October 24, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Central African Republic.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with the
Central African Republic
(In collaboration with other departments)
Approved by Saul Lizondo and Mark Plant
October 7, 2005

•

The discussions on the 2005 Article IV consultation were held in Bangui, Central African
Republic (C.A.R.), during July 10–24, 2005. The staff met with the President, the Prime
Minister, the Minister for Finance, other members of the government, and the National Director
of the Bank of Central African States (BEAC), as well as representatives of the National
Assembly, the private sector, the donor community, Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGOs), and the local press.

•

The staff team consisted of Messrs. Lewis (head), Bakhache, Kalonji, Ould-Abdallah (all
AFR), and Yehoue (INS). Mr. Mamadou, Advisor (OED), along with World Bank and African
Development Bank representatives, also participated in the discussions.

•

The Executive Board concluded the last Article IV consultation on April 2, 2004 (Country
Report No. 04/159), and an Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) program was
subsequently approved on July 23, 2004. Measures adopted in advance of and during the EPCA
program reflected many of the challenges identified during the 2004 Article IV consultation. In
the context of the country’s gradual return to peace and security, the authorities have targeted
measures to improve public finances, combat corruption, and improve social services. These
priorities have been reiterated by the new government, which assumed office following the
recent elections.

•

The C.A.R. has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4, and maintains
an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions. Outstanding obligations to the Fund totaled SDR 25.1 million
(45 percent of quota) at end-August 2005. The C.A.R.’s relations with the Fund are
summarized in Appendix I.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................. 4
I.

Introduction.................................................................................................................. 5

II.

Political and Security Development............................................................................. 5

III.

Recent Economic Developments and Program Performance ...................................... 6
A.
Weak Signs of Recovery.................................................................................. 6
B.
Uneven Program Performance...........................................................................7

IV.

Macroeconomic Outlook: Modest Rebound Under the Baseline Scenario ............... 10

V.

Policy Discussions ..................................................................................................... 13
A.
Macroeconomic and financial policies .......................................................... 13
B.
Governance and structural reforms: Improving the effectiveness of the
state and the climate for the private sector.................................................. 17
C.
Boosting Trade and Enhancing Competitiveness .......................................... 19
D.
External Debt and Arrears ............................................................................. 21
E.
Future Fund Support: Creating the Necessary Conditions ............................ 22

VI.

Social Sectors and the PRSP...................................................................................... 22

VII.

Donor Coordination, Technical Assistance, and Statistical Issues ............................ 23

VIII.

Staff Appraisal ........................................................................................................... 24

Boxes
1.
2.
3.

Wage Bill ..................................................................................................................... 9
Cost Structure in the Cotton Sector ........................................................................... 20
Donor Technical Assistance, 2005-06 ....................................................................... 24

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-08.............................................. 27
Central Government Operations, 2001-08................................................................. 28
Authorities’ Indicative Targets, January 1-December 31, 2004 ................................ 29
Authorities’ Indicative Targets, March 1-December 31, 2005 .................................. 30
Structural Reform Measures Under the 2004 Emergency Post-Conflict Program .... 31
Priority Actions of the C.A.R. Authorities for the Remainder of 2005 ..................... 32
Balance of Payments, 2001-08 .................................................................................. 33
Monetary Survey, 2001-08 ........................................................................................ 34

-3-

9.
10.

Indicators of Fund Credit, 2001-08............................................................................ 35
Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2015 ............................................................ 36

Appendices
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Relations with the Fund ............................................................................................. 38
Relations with the World Bank Group....................................................................... 41
Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... 44
Debt Sustainability Analysis...................................................................................... 48

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Recent Developments:
Peaceful presidential and legislative elections were held during March-May 2005. Security has
generally improved in the cities, but banditry remains a major problem in rural areas.
Economic activity has yet to recover from the sharp contraction that resulted from the 2003
conflict. Real GDP is estimated to have increased by about 1 percent in 2004 and initial indications
through mid-2005 do not suggest a pick-up in activity. The average price level fell by about 2 percent
in 2004 but has increased moderately thus far in 2005. Despite some improvement over the past year,
the social sectors are in a dire condition with services absent in many parts of the country.
Performance under the EPCA program was uneven, with serious fiscal slippages accompanied
by some progress on structural reforms. Revenue performance was disappointing, and there were
sizable expenditure overruns, particularly on the wage bill. The authorities introduced measures to
improve tax administration and expenditure management, and have advanced on some governance
reforms, including enhancing the transparency of fiscal operations.

Policy Discussions:
The C.A.R.’s medium-term outlook is clouded by a number of factors, including the destruction
of the country’s physical capital, high transport costs, and the deterioration of human capital. Annual
real GDP growth over the medium term is projected at 3-4 percent, hinged on economic reforms and
an improvement in the security situation.
The staff underlined the urgency of implementing sound policies to address the country’s
tremendous difficulties. This would also aid the authorities in attracting much needed higher levels
of international support.
Addressing the severe public finance weaknesses will be essential to restoring financial stability.
The staff underlined that action on the wage bill was critical to bring it in line with the government’s
resources and avoid further arrears. Continued efforts are needed to improve expenditure controls and
monitoring. The authorities and staff agreed on the importance of raising government revenue to
ensure that sufficient resources are available for basic government functions. Key reforms will
include efforts to combat fraud in customs and improve domestic tax administration through
increased controls and verification procedures.
Regarding governance and structural reforms, the authorities and staff agreed that tackling
corruption is essential to improving the functioning of the state and the business climate. Continued
efforts to boost transparency will also be important. Reform of the natural resources sectors,
improvements in competitiveness through lower transport costs, and efforts to lower costs of doing
business in the country need to be strengthened.

The C.A.R.’s external debt situation is unsustainable. Given the difficult fiscal position, the
C.A.R. has not been servicing its external debt, except to the IMF, since 2001 and has thus continued
to accumulate external arrears.
The C.A.R. could be a candidate for further Fund support under the EPCA policy. Moving
ahead on a new EPCA program requires addressing the fiscal slippages and implementing outstanding
governance and structural reforms. Looking further ahead, the C.A.R. would need to establish a good
track record of policy implementation and regularize relations with external creditors to proceed with
a PRGF-supported program.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The Central African Republic (C.A.R.) has seen a considerable deterioration in
its economic and social conditions over the past decade. The country is endowed with
sizable natural resources and arable land, but intermittent political and military disturbances
and weak governance have led to a degradation of the country’s capital stock, a collapse of
the private formal sector, and a steady erosion of living standards.
2.
Poor management of public finances has been a central feature of this decline,
and presents a major challenge as the C.A.R. authorities try to rehabilitate the economy
and restore public services. Government revenue now stands at about 8 percent of GDP,
which is very low by both African and international standards, and insufficient for financing
the core functions of the state, including social services. At the same time, weak expenditure
control has led to unproductive spending and a very large and growing public sector wage
bill. The wage bill now far exceeds the authorities’ ability to pay salaries with their own
financial resources and diverts scarce resources from priority social spending.
3.
In this setting, the C.A.R. continues to accumulate external and domestic
arrears—at end-2004, external arrears totaled 25 percent of GDP and domestic arrears
amounted to roughly 30 percent of GDP. A durable resolution will require reaching
agreement with creditors and putting public finances on a sustainable footing to prevent the
accumulation of new arrears.
4.
Weak institutions and pervasive corruption have accompanied and contributed
to the economic decline and poor public finance management. Weaknesses in the judicial
sector and a heavy regulatory burden, in the context of widespread public corruption and
poor public services, have created an extremely difficult climate for private sector activity.
Moreover, on top of being a land-locked country, the C.A.R. has seen little investment in and
maintenance of the infrastructure network. Combined with banditry in many parts of the
country, this has resulted in some of the highest per unit transport costs in the world and
contributed to the decline of key export activities, notably in the agriculture sector.
Addressing these shortcomings will be essential to support private sector development.
5.
The 2005 Article IV consultation provides a useful opportunity—ahead of a
possible request for further assistance under the Fund’s Emergency Post-Conflict
Assistance (EPCA) policy—to take stock of the progress to date and challenges ahead.
The discussions with the authorities focused on these challenges and on the steps that would
foster a rebound in economic activity and an improvement in living standards.
II. POLITICAL AND SECURITY DEVELOPMENTS
6.
The political situation has settled since the March 2003 coup, and the transition
to democratic rule culminated in peaceful presidential and legislative elections during
March-May 2005. According to most observers, the elections were generally free, despite
logistical constraints and some allegations of fraud. The incumbent, President Bozizé, won in
the second round, and a coalition supporting him has a majority in the National Assembly.

-6-

Despite these developments, the political situation remains fragile largely because of the
population’s deepening impatience with the difficult economic situation, including the
recurrent problem of public sector wage arrears.
7.
The security situation has generally remained calm in the capital, Bangui, but
banditry continues in the rural areas. While some demonstrations took place around the
elections, little political violence was reported. Several hundred troops from France and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) continue to be stationed in
the C.A.R. to support the peace process. In addition, the first two phases of the disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration program of ex-combatants (DDR) are expected to be
concluded by the end of this year, while the reintegration phase will likely take two years to
complete. Efforts are also under way to train and better equip the armed forces. Nonetheless,
rural areas remain beset by armed bands harassing local populations and robbing passing
vehicles. The C.A.R. armed forces are undertaking operations to dismantle those bands.
III. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROGRAM PERFORMANCE
A. Weak Signs of Recovery
8.
Economic activity in 2004-05 has yet to recover from the sharp contraction
associated with the 2003 conflict (Table 1). Real GDP grew by only about 1 percent in
2004, resulting in a further deterioration in per capita income. A number of factors have
hindered a rebound in the economy, including capacity constraints resulting from the
accumulated destruction of the capital base; continued insecurity in rural areas which mutes
any significant upturn in agriculture production; and the political uncertainty of the transition
period, which made economic
operators cautious, notably about
Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 2001–05
investment. In this setting, a
2001 2002 2003
2004
2005
contraction of output in the forestry
Est.
Prel.
Proj.
sector as a result of heavy rainfall
(Annual percentage change)
further depressed real GDP growth, Real GDP
0.3
-0.6
-7.6
1.3
2.2
Consumer prices (yearly average)
3.8
2.3
4.4
-2.2
2.4
and was only partly offset by some Export volume
4.8
0.2 -29.0
2.2
4.0
Import volume
-8.1
13.9 -15.5
6.9
3.4
increase in diamond production.
Broad money
-1.1
-4.3
-8.0
14.2
2.9
Initial indications through mid(In percent of GDP)
2005 offer little suggestion of an
Overall fiscal balance,
commitment basis, incl. grants
-0.9
-1.2
-3.1
-2.2
-2.7
uptick in growth. Recent heavy
External current account balance
-2.5
-3.1
-4.9
-4.3
-3.9
rainfall in Bangui displaced a
number of people from their homes, Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
but it appears to have had little
impact on overall economic activity.
9.
The average price level fell by about 2 percent in 2004 but has picked up
moderately in 2005. These developments were driven by a decline in food prices in 2004
induced by more stable conditions in the agricultural sector, followed by a modest upturn in
food prices during the first half of 2005. The real effective exchange rate has remained

-7-

broadly flat since 1995, one year after the devaluation of the CFAF franc, in large part
reflecting the low inflation over this entire period.
Effective Exchange Rates, January 1993–June 2005
(1990=100)

Consumer price index, 2000–05
(Average annual percent change)
6

150

4

125

Nominal effective exchange rate

2

100
0

75
-2

50

-4
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

Real effective exchange rate

25
1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

10.
The external current account deficit narrowed by about ½ of 1 percent of GDP
to 4⅓ percent of GDP in 2004 and is expected to decline by a similar amount in 2005.
The deterioration in the trade balance in
Money Aggregates, March 2003–June 2005
2004—largely caused by a worsening terms
(In billions of CFA francs)
of trade, the decline in timber exports, and a
120
higher demand for petroleum products for
Money supply
100
election-related activities—was more than
80
offset by an increase in current transfers,
Net credit to government
60
partly reflecting donor support for carrying
40
Private sector credit
out the elections, and some improvement in
20
the services balance.
0
Jun-05

Mar-05

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Sep-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

11.
Regarding monetary developments,
net credit to the government and private
Source: C.A.R. authorities.
sector credit picked up in 2004, although the
increase in private sector credit—linked to
petroleum imports and several large loans in the forestry sector—partly receded in the first
half of 2005.
B. Uneven Program Performance
12.
The C.A.R.’s performance under the EPCA program was uneven, with some
progress on structural reforms but also serious fiscal slippages (Tables 2-4).1 The outturn

1

The EPCA program period covered July-December 2004; the program targets were revised
in the context of a mission in October 2004 (the discussion above concerns the revised
(continued)

-8-

for the narrow primary deficit in 2004 was more than 1 percent of GDP higher than targeted.2
In the first half of 2005, the narrow primary deficit exceeded the target by 1 percent of annual
GDP; on a cash basis it exceeded the target only slightly because of the accumulation of
additional salary arrears, which restrained cash outlays.
13.
Overall revenue performance has been disappointing. Initial shortfalls in 2004
were partially corrected, and the target for end-2004 was met. However, revenue weaknesses
continued in the first half of 2005, and the end-June target was missed by about ¼ of
1 percent of annual GDP. Customs performance, in particular, has been weak, because of a
low level of taxable imports, but also because of persistent and pervasive corruption. The
average effective tariff—import tax receipts as a share of total imports—is about 9 percent,
against a weighted statutory tariff estimated at 15 percent, suggesting that there is room to
significantly increase customs receipts through eliminating fraud and exemptions (see
para. 42 for a description of the trade regime).
14.
The authorities’ control over payroll management slipped considerably in 200405, and was marked by a worrisome rise in the wage bill and a further accumulation of
wage arrears (Box 1). Public sector wage commitments exceeded the budget envelope by
0.8 percent of GDP in 2004, and are projected to exceed the 2005 budget envelope by over
1 percent of GDP. As a result, the wage bill far surpasses the authorities’ ability to pay
salaries, and about 1½ months and three months of additional salary arrears have been
accumulated, respectively, in 2004 and thus far in 2005.3 There were also some overruns on
other current public spending in both 2004 and early 2005, linked in part to the elections.
15.
The authorities made progress on fiscal structural measures (Table 5), although
the reform momentum slowed considerably as the electoral process got underway, and
the impact of the measures on the fiscal situation has been limited. Regarding the
domestic tax administration, measures were implemented to improve value-added tax (VAT)
collections and strengthen performance of the Large Taxpayer’s Unit. These measures
enabled the domestic tax administration to improve collections in 2004 over 2003. At
customs, the authorities introduced measures to better control smuggling, although progress
has been slow and efforts to reduce fraudulent CEMAC labeling of imported goods have so
far proved ineffective, with the result that customs receipts have remained stagnant. The
authorities also made some progress on public expenditure management, including the
targets). The authorities and staff agreed on indicative targets and structural reform measures
for the first half of 2005.
2

The measure of the fiscal balance used for program monitoring purposes is the narrow
primary balance, which excludes interest payments, foreign-financed investment, and grants.
The overall deficit, including grants, was also higher than projected in 2004, by ⅔ of one
percent of GDP.

3

These amounts are on top of a stock of more than 30 months of salary arrears (representing
about 10 percent of GDP) which was accumulated during 1992-93 and 2001-03.

-9-

introduction of a monthly treasury cash flow plan, and better identifying spending at the
commitment stage.
Box 1. The Wage Bill
The government wage bill (on a commitment
Wage Bill in the CEMAC
basis, which includes wages paid plus new
(In percent of GDP)
arrears) is projected at 5.8 percent of GDP
2003
2004
2005
for 2005, about 1 percent of GDP more than
Est.
Proj.
in the 2005 budget. This follows slippages of
C.A.R.
5.0
5.6
5.8
about 0.8 percent of GDP in 2004 as measures1 Cameroon
5.8
5.9
5.9
Chad
4.8
3.5
3.2
adopted in the 2004 budget to contain
Congo, Rep. of
5.8
5.4
4.8
commitments on wage spending were not
Equatorial Guinea
1.8
1.2
1.4
effective. Although base salaries have been
Gabon
6.5
5.9
5.3
frozen since 1985, the wage bill continues to
CEMAC average
4.9
4.4
4.1
increase because of the rapid expansion of
Sub-Saharan
Africa
7.7
7.7
7.8
allowances and benefits, the creation of highlevel posts carrying salary premiums, and delays in retirements. Commitments on wage
spending now represent close to 100 percent of government cash revenue (excluding offsets,
earmarked revenue, withholding taxes on government salaries, and taxes and duties on projectrelated imports), and have resulted in further salary arrears being accumulated.
Net recruitment also accounts for part of the increase in the wage bill. The largest
percentage increase was in the defense ministry (armed forces and gendarmerie).
Evolution of the Components of the Wage Bill,
2003-04

Size of the Public Administration

(In percent)

Base salary
Benefits and bonuses
Family allowance
Retroactive adjustments
Other allowances
Total

2003

2004

Percentage
Change

Share

Annual
Change

69.2
22.2
5.8

9.1
19.9
21.4

Permanent staff
Civil servants
Armed forces and gendarmerie
Contractual staff

21,512
15,283
6,229
2,874

23,201
15,991
7,210
3,068

7.9
4.6
15.7
6.8

1.6
1.3

37.1
31.6

Total

24,386

26,269

7.7

100.0

12.9

Sources: Central African authorities; and WETA database
1

Most notably, a 25 to 30 percent reduction of annual salaries in excess of CFAF 300,000 (about
US$550).

16.
The government also made some advances on governance issues. A new
organizational structure for the Ministry of Justice, including a financial unit, was introduced
in mid-2005 after some delays. The financial unit is expected to strengthen the government’s

- 10 -

ability to prosecute corruption cases, and defend the financial interests of the state in legal
disputes, both areas where the authorities have acknowledged weaknesses in the past.
Transparency has also been enhanced through wider and regular publication of information
on fiscal revenue and expenditure, as well as on the allocation of permits in the mining and
forestry sector, with the latter being allocated in a competitive bidding process.
IV. MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MODEST REBOUND UNDER THE BASELINE SCENARIO
17.
The C.A.R.’s short-term outlook is predicated on a modest increase of real GDP
of 2¼ percent in 2005. Project financing from donors has started to pick up, which should
accelerate infrastructure spending, and diamond mining and agricultural activity are
projected to rise. Consistent with developments through July 2005, inflation is expected to
return to its historical range of 2-3 percent, in line with the CEMAC trend level. The trade
balance is expected to remain largely unchanged in 2005 as both imports and exports pick up,
with the projected reduction of ½ a percentage point of GDP in the external current account
deficit (to 4 percent of GDP) reflecting in particular a mild increase in remittances and some
improvement in the services account.
18.

The medium-term outlook for the economy is clouded by a number of factors:

•

Destruction of the physical capital base. The long legacy of conflict has led to the
destruction of much of the country’s physical capital and the disappearance of most
of the industrial sector.4 The resulting capacity constraints suggest a limited near-term
growth potential for industry.

•

High transport costs. The continued banditry in rural areas, coupled with the terrible
state of infrastructure, have raised transport costs and hampered the recovery of trade,
undermining the development of markets in food products and dampening the
recovery of cash crop production. Infrastructure improvements will be crucial, but the
gains would only be realized gradually over time.

•

Deterioration of human capital. The country’s history of poor governance,
ineffective public spending, and disruptions in the educational system have
undermined human capital, and led to a deterioration in institutional capacity and
educational achievement. An additional obstacle is the high and rising prevalence of
HIV/AIDS. These factors have had an immense human cost and also seriously
weakened public administration and prevented the development of a skilled labor
force.

4

It is estimated that more than two-thirds of manufacturing enterprises have disappeared
since the early 1990s. The Industrial Production Index has been dropped because most of the
component enterprises have closed.

- 11 -

19.
Given those circumstances, economic growth in the C.A.R. is expected to reach
3½ percent in 2006 and remain in the range of 3½-4 percent over the medium term.
This baseline scenario represents a more muted recovery than that observed in many other
post-conflict countries and, as outlined below, hinges on the country’s making steady
progress in reforming the economy and
Growth Performance in Post Conflict African Countries
enhancing security, both of which are
(t=year conflict ended)
critical for improving the environment for
10
Uganda
8
private sector activity and, hence, for
6
increasing investment and savings. The
Republic of
4
balance of payments is expected to remain
Congo
2
broadly unchanged over the medium term,
0
-2
with higher investment-related imports
Central African
-4
offsetting a gradual rebound in exports
Republic 1/
-6
(Table 7). The forestry sector has been a
-8
Mozambique
key growth area, but is expected to reach
-10
the limit on sustainable harvesting within
t
t+1
t+2
t+3
t+4
S o urc e : IM F s ta ff e s tim a te s .
four to five years, underlining that other
1/ F o r the C .A.R . t=2003.
sectors will need to pick up the slack.
Consistent with a return to stability of public finances, fiscal policy would aim at a reduction
in the overall deficit, including grants, of about 1 percent of GDP over the 2005-08 period,
predicated on a gradual improvement in revenue and restraint on spending not financed by
donors. The annual financing gap over the medium term is projected at around 3 percent of
GDP and corresponds to external debt service due and is anticipated to be financed by the
accumulation of external arrears except to the Fund.5
20.
There are risks to the baseline scenario. A high–case scenario based on an
acceleration of the reforms discussed below shows a sizable increase in investment—higher
donor support paired with a “crowding in” of private investment—and an improvement in
public finances, which would permit a boost in priority spending. As a result, growth would
accelerate to 5½ percent in 2006 and beyond, resulting in per capita income growth of close
to 3 percent. In a low–case scenario, poor policy performance would result in a further drop
in investment levels. Weaker revenue collection combined with lower donor assistance
would result in a deteriorated public finance position as well as lower priority spending.
Domestic arrears would increase rapidly. Real GDP growth would hover around 1 percent,
implying a further erosion in people’s standards of living and greater uncertainty about
political stability.

5

The gap in 2005 also includes about ½ of one percent of GDP in undisbursed budgetary
support from donors conditioned on the presence of a Fund-financed program.

- 12 -

Alternative Macroeconomic Scenarios, 2005–08

Real GDP Growth
(In annual percent change)

Investment
(In percent of GDP)
15

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

High-c a s e s c e na rio

High-c a s e s c e na rio

10
B a s e line s c e na rio

B a s e line s c e na rio

Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

5
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

0

2005

2006

2007

2005

2008

2006

2007

2008

Change in Domestic Arrears
(In billions of CFA francs)

Fiscal Deficit
(In percent of GDP)
25

3.0
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

2.0

15

Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

5

B a s e line s c e na rio

1.0
-5

0.0

High-c a s e s c e na rio

B a s e line s c e na rio

-15
High-c a s e s c e na rio

-25

-1.0
2005

2006

2007

2005

2008

Social Spending
(In percent of GDP)

2006

2007

2008

Export Growth in Volume
10

1.4

High-c a s e s c e na rio

8

1.2

High-c a s e s c e na rio

1.0

6
B a s e line s c e na rio

0.8

B a s e line s c e na rio

4
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

0.6

2
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

0.4

0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2005

Credit to the Economy
(In billions of CFA francs)

2006

2007

2008

Change in Foreign Reserves
(In billions of CFA francs)
85

80
High-c a s e s c e na rio

70

High-c a s e s c e na rio

80
75

60

B a s e line s c e na rio
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

50

B a s e line s c e na rio

70
Lo w-c a s e s c e na rio

65

40

60

2005

2006

2007

2008

Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.

2005

2006

2007

2008

- 13 -

V. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
21.
The authorities underlined that, with the electoral process complete, they could
focus their attention on rehabilitating the economy. They highlighted the significant
achievements made on the security front and in concluding the electoral process, to which
they had given priority up to May 2005. But these activities weighed heavily on the
authorities’ ability to advance the economic reform agenda and achieve concrete results
under the EPCA program.
22.
The views of the authorities and the staff diverged on the appropriate timing of
greater international support and policy reforms. The authorities—and civil society—
fully anticipated a sizable increase in international assistance following the elections. They
considered increased aid essential to jump-starting the economy, rehabilitating public
finances, and improving the performance of the administration, which would, in turn,
engender greater domestic political support for subsequent economic reforms. The authorities
generally shared the staff’s view on the medium-term outlook but considered it fully
conditioned on the level of international support, including an early move to a program
supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).
23.
The staff welcomed the authorities’ greater focus on economic issues but stressed
the urgency of implementing sound policies to address the country’s tremendous
difficulties and attract international support. The staff agreed that significant international
support was necessary to accompany the recovery, and noted that the significant delays in the
provision of technical assistance due to procedural obstacles on the part of donors were one
reason why the results of the EPCA program were not more encouraging. Nonetheless,
without action by the authorities to place public finances on a sustainable footing and firmly
confront governance issues, international aid—including from the IMF—would be lower and
most likely ineffective.
24.
In this context, the discussions focused on the actions the C.A.R. should take in
the near term to stabilize the fiscal situation; the reforms needed to fight corruption
and improve the private sector climate; and the possibility of future IMF support.
A. Macroeconomic and Financial Policies
Fiscal policy: Bridging the gap between current spending and revenue
25.
The authorities recognized that the severe weaknesses in public finances were at
the heart of the country’s economic ills. Poor or nonexistent public services, a very narrow
tax base that squeezes the formal sector, and sizable arrears to civil servants and domestic
suppliers are the legacy of a long period of poor public finance management and have
contributed to the C.A.R.’s intermittent political instability.

- 14 -

26.
The overall deficit on a commitment basis (including grants) is projected to
widen to 2¾ percent of GDP in 2005. Total expenditure commitments are expected to be
1 percentage point of GDP lower than in 2004, even accounting for the higher wage bill
commitments. However, a decline of almost
2 percent of GDP in donor budgetary grants
Revenue and Expenditures, 2000–05
(In percent of GDP)
paired with only a small increase in revenue
20
(about 0.2 percent of GDP) implies the
18
T otal expenditure
deficit will rise. The authorities are trying to
16
identify additional grants that would obviate
14
12
the need for additional bank financing or the
10
further accumulation of arrears. The staff
8
T otal revenue, incl. grants
noted that the projected deficit for 2005 is
6
4
now almost 1½ percent of GDP higher than
2
the objective agreed with staff earlier in the
0
year, and which was reflected in the 2005
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
budget. Moreover, the nonsalary expenditure
Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff.
envelope was extremely tight and that further
ti t
salary arrears were likely if additional
financing did not materialize.
27.
The staff stressed that the public sector wage bill has dominated public finance
policy. The authorities are now confronted with the dilemma that the timely payment of
wages is their principal policy priority, but this goal has become increasingly difficult to
achieve as the wage bill continues to rise while revenue stagnates. The staff stressed that
reductions of about 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis in the wage bill were needed to
bring it in line with the government’s resources and assure that a minimum amount of
resources is available to finance essential non-salary spending. The staff proposed immediate
measures to reduce allowances, accelerate retirements,6 and introduce cuts in some of the
higher salary bands not subject to reductions in 2004, while urging the authorities to initiate
the time-consuming task of cleaning up the payroll files. The staff noted that the full-year
impact of many of these measures would only be realized in 2006, and thus the target on the
wage bill for 2005 was likely to be exceeded by a wide margin.
28.
While underlining their commitment to reduce the inflated wage bill, the
authorities expressed concern about political fragilities. Citing the disruptions prompted
by the moderate salary reduction adopted in early 2004, they noted that drastic measures to
cut salary expenditures could be politically destabilizing. Their preference has been to
undertake a census of civil servants as a means of identifying anomalies in the payroll files.
This work is ongoing and although a number of anomalies have been identified, possible
savings remain unclear. The staff welcomed this initiative, but noted that similar efforts had
not proved successful in the past. The authorities have also started to accelerate retirements,
6

Savings from an acceleration of retirements will be partly offset by an increase in pension
obligations. The average pension represents about 45 percent of the average salary.

- 15 -

and indicated their intention to freeze recruitment for at least one year.7 The authorities are
examining ways of strengthening payroll management. One option they are considering is to
transfer the management of the computerized payroll database to a private operator;
corruption in the public agency responsible for managing this database has reportedly been a
key source of anomalies in the payroll.
29.
Raising public revenue remains a critical challenge for the authorities. At about
8 percent, the C.A.R.’s revenue-to-GDP ratio ranks among the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa,
mainly because of the contraction of the formal sector, weak administration, and corruption
and fraud. Given the weak revenue outturn through the first semester of 2005, achieving the
targeted increase in the revenue-to-GDP ratio for the entire year will require a concerted
effort. The authorities acknowledged that
these problems were chronic, but cited
Fiscal Revenue as Share of GDP, 2004
(Excluding grants)
gains, including some progress in
controlling customs fraud. Their progress is 25
partly attributable to the implementation,
20
albeit delayed, of a number of measures in
the EPCA program. In addition, the
15
authorities are curtailing tax exemptions and
10
exceptional customs clearance procedures,
and are considering measures to address
5
revenue shortfalls linked to widespread
smuggling by the informal sector. However,
0
even with better controls, smuggling is
C.A.R.
CEMAC
SSA
S o urc e : IM F , WEO/Ec o no m ic Tre nds in Afric a da ta ba s e , 2005.
expected to remain a serious challenge as
economic operators attempt to evade tariffs
that rise to 30 percent for consumption goods (see para. 42). On domestic tax administration,
improvements will continue to focus, in line with the FAD technical assistance
recommendations, on boosting controls and tightening verification procedures.
30.
The authorities agreed with the staff that using petroleum tax reductions to limit
a pass-through of world oil prices had undermined the revenue base.8 While
acknowledging the sensitivity of this issue, the staff encouraged the authorities to examine
ways to mitigate this effect, notably by raising retail prices. The staff noted that the impact on

7
8

Except in the gendarmerie, for which recruits have already been identified.

Under the current administered price system, higher world oil prices have a negative impact
on tax receipts in the absence of changes in domestic retail prices of petroleum products
because the specific tax on petroleum products is lowered to offset the increase in the world
price. The authorities have not adjusted retail prices since 2000. This issue has recently
become more urgent, with petroleum tax revenue now close to zero. The increase in prices
thus far in 2005 has led to a loss in revenue of about ½ of 1 percent of annual GDP.

- 16 -

the poor could be mitigated by containing any increase in the price for kerosene, a key
household good of the poor.
31.
On public expenditure management, the staff underlined that expenditure
controls and monitoring remained very weak. As a result, the authorities have often
exercised spending restraint through cash rationing. They have been working closely with an
FAD expert to reform the system and ensure that most spending will have a corresponding
budgetary allocation and be in compliance with regulated expenditure procedures.
32.
The authorities recognized the importance of finding a lasting solution to all
government domestic arrears, including to civil servants and suppliers. An ongoing
investigation, with the assistance of a World Bank consultant, is identifying the government’s
domestic arrears, which preliminary estimates suggest amounted to about 30 percent of GDP
at end-2004.9 The authorities are committed to finalizing a strategy in early 2006 for
eliminating the stock of domestic arrears and will seek assistance from donors to clear them.
This strategy could include a significant discount on the payment of many of these claims.
Continuity in monetary policy and reducing strains in the banking sector
33.
Monetary and exchange rate policy is conducted at the regional level by the
BEAC, whose main objective is price stability. The authorities and the staff agreed that the
institutional arrangement has proved helpful in maintaining low inflation and providing some
policy certainty in an otherwise difficult macroeconomic situation (see para. 45 for a
discussion of real exchange rate and competitiveness issues).
34.
The authorities are currently negotiating an exceptional central bank advance to
help them meet current obligations. They negotiated a similar advance of 1½ of GDP last
year.10 The staff expressed strong reservations about this operation, urging the authorities to
exhaust all possibilities of grant financing from donors and regional partners before
contracting such expensive debt. To this end, the staff strongly encouraged the authorities to
use any available foreign budgetary grants to reimburse this advance.

9

Roughly half of these arrears are owed to suppliers of goods and service; one-third are
salary arrears; and the remainder are due primarily to domestic financial institutions. Box 2
of Country Report No. 04/159 discusses the origin and composition of the C.A.R.’s domestic
arrears.

10

These advances carry an annual interest rate of 10 percent with a maturity of three years.
Last year’s advance was guaranteed by other members of the CEMAC zone and the first
installment of interest and principal payments on that advance has been deferred from July
2005 until January 2006.

- 17 -

35.
The staff noted that due to the government’s dependence on commercial banks’
resources, the liquidity situation in the banking sector remained tight. As a result, the
monetary authorities have maintained the suspension of reserve requirements for Central
African banks introduced in mid-2003. The staff encouraged the authorities to limit further
strain on banks’ liquidity so as to prevent a crowding out of private sector credit. The staff
also encouraged the authorities to be vigilant in supervising banks’ compliance with
prudential regulations. The authorities acknowledged the delay in recapitalizing one problem
bank, which met only one of the nine prudential ratios in the CEMAC, but underlined their
intention to address this issue.
36.
Access to financial services in the
C.A.R. is very limited, with total bank
deposits representing only 4 percent of
GDP. The authorities indicated their
intention to improve the population’s
access to financial services, in particular by
strengthening the microfinance sector, in
partnership with donors.

Depos its in Banks to GDP, 2004 1/
(In percent)
25
20
15
10
5
0
C.A.R.

CEMAC

SSA

Sources: BEAC; and IMF st aff est imat es.
1/ Fgures are preliminary.

B. Governance and Structural Reforms: Improving the Effectiveness of the State and
the Climate for the Private Sector
Tackling corruption
37.
The authorities recognize that the economic revival of the country hinges on
improving the functioning of the state and the climate for private sector investment,
and progress in both these areas depends, in turn, on more effectively fighting
corruption. While agreeing that this would take time, the staff emphasized that the need for
progress was urgent and encouraged the authorities, in particular, to strengthen the judiciary
and enhance transparency. The authorities indicated their intention to adequately staff and
equip the newly-created specialized financial units within the Ministry of Justice. They
underlined the dire lack of resources and technical expertise at the ministry and were seeking
appropriate donor assistance. The staff welcomed the authorities’ publication of revenue and
aggregate expenditure data, and encouraged them to widen this information to include, for
example, data on the composition of expenditure, which could foster greater accountability of
public officials responsible for key expenditure items.
38.
The authorities have also committed to reforming weak public procurement
practices, which potentially engender corrupt practices. The staff welcomed the
authorities’ initiative to seek World Bank expertise in identifying reform measures in line
with international best practices. The objective is to enhance the transparency and
predictability of public procurement and reduce the discretionary power of the state.

- 18 -

Improving the business climate
39.
The staff encouraged the authorities to
consider ways to reduce the cost of doing
business in the country. Aside from poor
governance, the C.A.R. rates very poorly in the
World Bank’s Doing Business report, notably
regarding labor market flexibility, the time
needed to set up a business, and the cost of
enforcing contracts.11 The staff underlined that
recent work by the World Bank’s Foreign
Investment Advisory Service emphasized that
advancing private sector development reforms in
tandem with—rather than following—capacitybuilding efforts would enhance the prospects for
a strong economic recovery following a conflict.

Cost of Enforcing Contracts
(In percent of debt)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Developed
countries

Emerging
markets

SSA

C.A.R.

Source: World Bank, Doing Business

40.
The authorities will continue to reform the natural resource sectors. In the
forestry sector, they are now expanding inspections—carried out by an independent
inspection agency—of logging activities to deter smuggling and improve the payment of
stumpage fees and taxes. The authorities will also widen the information published on the
sector to include export activities and taxes paid. They are hopeful that, with the renewed
interest of foreign companies, the medium term prospects of the mining sector will improve.
With regard to the chronic problem of tax evasion in the sector, the authorities are
determined to strengthen the capacity of the office of diamond and gold valuation and control
to value diamonds more accurately and fight smuggling. They will continue to abide by the
certification requirements of the Kimberley Process.
41.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the need to address public enterprises’
severe financial and operational difficulties. Toward this end, they are considering
privatizing the billing and collection services of the electricity and water utilities. Each
company bills only half of total production to consumers because of theft and losses, and
collects only about half its billings in payments. The combined losses of the three largest
public enterprises—the electricity and water companies, plus the telecommunications
company—represented about 0.7 percent of GDP in 2003.12

11
12

See Chapter II on governance in the forthcoming Selected Issues paper.

More recent data is unavailable. The measure of the fiscal deficit presented in this report
covers only the central government, and does not include public enterprises.

- 19 -

C. Boosting Trade and Enhancing Competitiveness
42.
As a member of the CEMAC, the C.A.R. applies a common external tariff to
imports from countries outside the zone. Four rates are applied—5 percent for essential
goods, 10 percent for raw materials and investment goods, 20 percent for intermediate goods,
and 30 percent for consumer goods—and the weighted average tariff is estimated at about
15 percent.13 Imports of goods produced in CEMAC countries are not subject to tariffs. A
few quantitative restrictions remain, the most important being on the import of sugar.
43.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the importance of trade liberalization
and regional integration in the context of the CEMAC. The staff underscored the potential
benefits to the C.A.R. of a reduction in the region’s common external tariff (CET) and
stressed that the authorities needed to renew their efforts to strengthen the application of
regional trade regulations, including on the classification and attribution of goods to the
relevant tariff categories. The authorities noted that they are well aware of the distortions
introduced by a preferential regime for regional trade, and that a drop in the CET would
provide important economic benefits, although they expressed some concern about the
possible decline in fiscal revenue should the CEMAC lower its external tariff.
44.
The authorities recognize that high transport costs represent a major obstacle
for exporters in their efforts to access regional and international markets. In particular,
the quality of the C.A.R.’s roads as measured by, for example, the ratio of paved to total
roads, is very low compared to other African countries. The staff underscored that, if
transport costs are not lowered, economic recovery is likely to be muted. With a view to
facilitating trade, including in the traditional export sectors (Box 2), the staff encouraged the
authorities to seek further donor support and collaborate with their CEMAC neighbors to
rehabilitate land and river transport infrastructure.14
Estimated Unit Road Transport Cost per Container for
Selected African Routes and the United States

Quality of Roads in Selected African Landlocked Countries
(Index, Botswana=1)
6
5
0.75

US$/km

Proportion of paved roads

1.00

0.50

4
3
2
1

0.25

0
DoualaBangui

0.00
C.A.R.

Botswana

Swaziland

Burkina
Faso

Rwanda

S o urc e : F a ye , M c Arthuir, S a c hs , a nd S no w, J o urna l o f Hum a n
De ve lo pm e nt, 2004.

DoualaD'Jamena

Dar-esSalaamKigali

Walvis BayHarare

United
States

S o urc e : R e vie w o f M a ritim e Tra ns po rt, UNC TAD 2003.

13

The average effective tariff—as measured by the ratio of import taxes collected to total
imports—is about 9 percent.

14

See Chapter III in the forthcoming Selected Issues Paper.

- 20 -

Box 2. Cost Structure in the Cotton Sector
The cotton sector in the C.A.R. has all but
disappeared in recent years. After exceeding 40,000
tons in 1998, cotton production bottomed at about 1,500
tons in 2003, in part because of the various
conflicts, but also because of low international prices,
high transport costs, and an inefficient parastatal. The
sector had previously played an important role in
boosting cash incomes in rural areas, and the authorities
consider it to be an important potential contributor to
economic growth and poverty reduction.
The staff noted that the sector was currently
uncompetitive, and counseled prudence if the
authorities were to consider committing public
resources to the rehabilitation of the sector. Losses
are inevitable at current world prices and taking into
account the C.A.R.’s high transport costs. As illustrated
by the cost structure for the 2003/04 season (production
level of 1,500 tons), at low production levels, the
average unit cost far exceeds the export price. The
resulting losses have been absorbed by the nowbankrupt cotton parastatal and through nonpayment to
farmers. While many ginning and other costs are fixed
and will decline significantly as production increases,
transport costs are very large and mostly variable.

C.A.R. Cotton Cost Structure 2003/04 1/
(In CFAF per kilogram)

Average producer price of seed cotton

121

Ginned cotton equivalent price 2/

285

Ginning and sales cost

100

Other cost

171

Transport cost 3/

177

Freight, insurance, and other charges

94

Average total cost

827

Average export price

634

Average loss

193

Source : C.A.R. authorities.
1/ On the basis of a production level of 1,500 tons
2/ With 0.425 ginning productivity
3/ Includes international and domestic land transport
as well as minor transaction costs

45.
The authorities and the staff agreed on the importance of improving the
competitiveness of the C.A.R. economy. The C.A.R.’s real effective exchange rate remains
25 percent below its level prior to the 1994
Real Effective Exchange Rate and Terms of Trade, 2001–05
devaluation of the CFA franc, although a
(1991=100)
continuation of the decline in the terms of trade
112
observed in recent years could eventually pose
108
Real effective exchange rate
overvaluation concerns. In light of the fixed
104
exchange rate regime, the staff stressed the need for
100
flexibility in labor and product markets—including
easing rules on hiring and firing and reducing
96
T erms of trade
licensing requirements—to enable them to better
92
adjust to shocks and maintain competitiveness.
88
Strengthened security, as well as structural reforms
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
to reduce input costs faced by producers, will also
Source: IMF, IFS database.
be essential.

- 21 -

D. External Debt and Arrears

46.
Given its difficult fiscal position, the C.A.R. has not been servicing its external
debt, except to the IMF,15 since 2001 and has thus continued to accumulate external
arrears to both bilateral and multilateral creditors. The stock of external arrears at end2004 is estimated at about US$335 million
External Debt Indicators, end-December, 2004
(25 percent of GDP). Normalization of
relations with external creditors will require
NPV of external debt
a comprehensive arrears clearance plan,
In percent of exports
531.8
including with the World Bank and the
Debt-service-to-exports ratio
African Development Bank (AfDB). The
In percent
21.8
authorities have, as a first step, started to
Total stock of external arrears
verify with their creditors the stock of debt
In millions of U.S. dollars
335.5
outstanding and of arrears at end-2004. They
Of which: multilateral debt
105.3
also have exchanged views with some
creditors on the possible profile of arrears
Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
clearance operations. The authorities agreed
with the staff that all external financing should be in the form of grants, although they have
recently contracted some interest-free loans. The staff urged the authorities to seek more
support to improve their debt data management.16
47.
The debt sustainability analysis in Appendix IV clearly shows that the C.A.R.’s
external debt situation is unsustainable. For end-2005, the net present value (NPV) of the
ratio of its debt to exports is projected at about 480 percent and would decrease only
marginally to 435 percent under the assumption of traditional debt–relief mechanisms
(Appendix IV, Table 3). All key debt ratios in both the baseline and alternative scenarios are
above the policy-dependent indicative thresholds17 and as such, the country can be classified
as “in debt distress” as further evidenced by the accumulation of external arrears. The C.A.R.
could be eligible for debt relief under the Highly–Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative
but would have to establish a good track record of policy performance and make satisfactory
progress in its poverty reduction strategy.

15

The C.A.R. has made net repayments to the Fund of about SDR 3.3 million in 2005; it
received net disbursements from the Fund of SDR 3.9 million in 2004.

16

Including funding and technical expertise to upgrade their software for managing debt
data, which has become outdated.
17

The C.A.R. is ranked in the bottom quintile of the World Bank’s Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating.

- 22 -

E. Future Fund Support: Creating the Necessary Conditions

48.
In this setting, a key theme of the discussions was the conditions necessary for
additional Fund financial support. The staff indicated that given the C.A.R.’s continued
weak administrative and institutional capacity, further support under the Fund’s EPCA policy
would be more appropriate at this stage than a PRGF-supported program.18 The staff
underlined that addressing the fiscal slippages and implementing key governance and
structural reforms, including those measures outstanding from the first EPCA program
(Table 6) would be necessary to proceed with another post-conflict program. Specifically on
public finances, given that corrective measures were only being implemented in the latter
part of the year, several of the end-year fiscal targets for 2005 were not likely to be achieved.
Thus, staff indicated that satisfactory progress would entail meeting the revenue target—
which would require additional revenue measures, including on petroleum prices and tax
exemptions; maintaining restraint on non-salary spending; and introducing measures that will
yield savings on the wage bill of 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis. Looking further
ahead, the staff emphasized that the C.A.R. should establish a good track record of policy
implementation and improve capacity to be able to move ahead with a PRGF-supported
program. In addition, the C.A.R. would need to avoid accumulating domestic arrears, reduce
the delays in the implementation of structural reforms, make progress on a draft poverty
reduction strategy paper (PRSP), normalize relations with its external creditors, and finalize a
strategy to settle its domestic arrears.19 The staff underlined the importance of the authorities
continuing to meet their obligations to the Fund in a timely manner.
VI. SOCIAL SECTORS AND THE PRSP

49.
Despite some improvement over the past year, the social sectors are in a dire
condition with services absent in many parts of the country. In recent years, the C.A.R.
has lost ground in terms of meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs—Table 10).
Health indicators, in particular, have deteriorated, with life expectancy over the past decade
declining by an average of six months every year. The authorities have expressed a strong
commitment to reverse this situation, including by extending the fight against HIV/AIDS
with the support of donors. Also, they are determined to provide the appropriate incentives
for qualified education and health personnel to relocate to the provinces.
18

To be eligible for EPCA support, a country must demonstrate an urgent need for help in
meeting essential current payments; a disruption to the country’s institutional and
administrative capacity so that the member is not yet able to develop and implement a
comprehensive program that could be supported by a Fund arrangement; sufficient capacity,
nonetheless, for policy planning and implementation, and demonstrated commitment on the
part of the authorities; and a concerted international effort to address the aftermath of the
conflict in a comprehensive way.

19

The latter point is intended to ensure that an increase in donor assistance accompanying a
PRGF does not induce a surge in domestic claims on public resources.

- 23 -

50.
The authorities have made progress in preparing the PRSP. With the support of
the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), workshops were conducted across the
country to ensure the widest possible participation. Sectoral strategies have also been
elaborated with education, health (including HIV/AIDS), infrastructure, and food security
identified as priority intervention areas. The authorities will collaborate closely with the
World Bank to consolidate the participatory process and put in place a monitoring and
evaluation mechanism. They intend to finalize the PRSP by the first quarter of 2006.
VII. DONOR COORDINATION, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND STATISTICAL ISSUES

51.
The donor community is working with the authorities to identify areas for
project and budgetary support. During the first half of 2005, France and China have
provided some budgetary support. In addition, France and the European Union have signaled
their intention to provide additional budgetary support in the context of a credible
macroeconomic framework. These and other donors have been providing much-needed
project financing to priority sectors. This support is expected to increase, and since the
elections, efforts have been made to widen the circle of donors.
The authorities and the staff considered that an acceleration and better
52.
coordination in the provision of technical assistance (TA) were essential to meet the
C.A.R.’s still vast needs in almost all areas of economic management and governance
(Box 3). Its priority needs are tax and customs administration, public expenditure
management (PEM), the judicial system, statistics, and the PRSP process. In the public
finance area, the Fund has been active in tax administration, PEM, and treasury management.
The statistical database in the C.A.R. remains weak and is minimally adequate
53.
for surveillance purposes (Appendix III).
Real GDP, Petroleum Imports, and Electricity Production,
While the African Development Bank is
(1990–2005, 1990=100)
leading the effort to improve the country’s
140
statistical capacity, the Fund has provided
Real GDP growth
120
TA in government finances and the real
100
sector, which lacks reliable source data. The
80
staff expressed the view that the national
60
Electricity production
income estimates could be significantly
40
overstated, not fully reflecting the sizable
Petroleum imports
20
contraction in activity in key sectors—
notably manufacturing—observed over the
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
past 15 years that is suggested by, for
Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
example, reduced energy consumption.

- 24 -

Box 3. Donor Technical Assistance, 2005-2006
Donor
World Bank
(LICUS)

Areas of intervention
•
•
•
•
•

UNDP

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

FAO

•
•

European
Union

France

Census of domestic arrears
Public sector payroll (evaluation of FURCA)
Customs and tax enforcement
Treasury Department
PRSP participation, prioritization, monitoring,
evaluation
Macroeconomic advisor
Computer systems TA 1/
Mining and justice sectors 1/
Interconnection of the Sydonia system in the CEMAC
Expert to support the Inspection générale des finances
Customs: One advisor and two experts.
Sector specialists in customs, tax, treasury, and IGF
Training and equipment for Ministry of Finance:
Military assistance and training
Ministry of Finance and treasury department
Statistical capacity and projections
PRSP preparation, including observatory and
pluriannual statistical development plan
Financial governance and transparency
Rehabilitation of statistics in agriculture

African
• Institutional support for econ. management and the
Development
PRSP
Bank
• Support for economic and social statistics

Status
Ongoing for 4 months
Ongoing for 4 months
Ongoing for 4 months
Ongoing for 4 months
To start in 2005 for 12
months
To start in 2005 for 9 months
2006
2006
To be completed in 2005
To start in 2005 for 6 months
To start in 2005
2006
2006
Ongoing
Ongoing
2005-07
Ongoing
Ongoing
Before end- 2005
2006
2006

1/ Contingent on approval of a second LICUS allocation.

VIII. STAFF APPRAISAL

54.
The C.A.R. has managed its political transition commendably. The recent
peaceful elections with wide participation provide a hopeful sign that, despite the C.A.R.’s
fractious political history, sufficient stability could set in that would permit the authorities to
address more firmly the country’s dire economic and social situation.
The economic challenges the authorities face are profound. The steady ratcheting
55.
down of economic activity over the years has left the economy with limited scope to
rebound, at least in the short term. A more effective provision of public goods paired with an
environment more conducive to private sector activity will be essential to launch economic
growth.

- 25 -

56.
International assistance will play an important but complementary role in
helping the C.A.R. move forward. A significant ramping up of technical assistance, greater
support to the social sectors, and substantial infrastructure investment will be key elements of
any economic recovery. However, international support will be ineffective unless the
authorities are able to implement sound policies and better manage public resources.
Additional support under the Fund’s EPCA policy would be appropriate once the authorities
demonstrate the ability to implement sound policies in the post election environment.
Greater stability in public finances, starting with the public sector wage bill, is
57.
crucial. With poor revenue performance and a swelling wage bill, the provision of public
goods has been subordinated to the payment of salaries. The authorities’ commitment to
address the problem is welcome. Containing the wage bill and then paying salaries on a
timely basis would be a minimum demonstration of financial stability and would allow
budgetary aid from donors to finance essential nonsalary current spending. Continued efforts
on broader public expenditure management are also needed, including strengthening
expenditure procedures and monitoring.
The government’s revenue performance has been discouraging, underlining the
58.
urgency of reform. Low revenue has been both a symptom and a cause of the state’s
unraveling in recent years. Corruption has sapped the effectiveness of the tax agencies and,
with insufficient revenue, the state has been unable to meet its basic operating needs.
Measures to strengthen the customs and tax administrations and widen the tax base through
better controls and reducing fraud on imports will be essential.
The exchange rate arrangement and membership in the regional central bank
59.
have provided policy certainty in a difficult macroeconomic situation. The exchange rate
anchor has contributed to low inflation and the central bank is one of the few public
institutions in the C.A.R. whose functioning was not severely impaired during the conflict.
As measured by the real exchange rate, the C.A.R. has managed to preserve much of the gain
from the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc. To continue using the stability of the fixed rate
regime to the economy's advantage, particularly in the face of recent adverse trends in the
terms of trade, the authorities need to pursue a sound fiscal policy accompanied by flexibility
in factor and product markets—most notably on nominal wages—to better adjust to shocks
and strengthen competitiveness.
Boosting the C.A.R.’s competitiveness will also hinge on structural reforms to
60.
make the economy more competitive. In this regard, the authorities should push ahead with
trade reform as well as improve security and transportation infrastructure. Enhancing security
and transportation networks in rural areas in particular would be instrumental to reducing the
costs faced by agricultural producers and exporters. In addition, the authorities should take
steps to reduce the cost of doing business in the C.A.R, notably by strengthening the judicial
system and improving property rights and contract enforcement.
Continued close supervision of the banking sector is important. The authorities
61.
should be vigilant in supervising banks’ compliance with prudential regulations while
examining how access to financial services can be increased, notably through microfinance.

- 26 -

62.
Tackling governance problems and corruption will be crucial to strengthening
the management of public resources and the climate for private sector activity. The
quality of governance in the C.A.R. has deteriorated with each successive period of political
instability. Progress to reverse this trend will take time and require technical assistance from
international partners. The authorities have increased the transparency of government
operations and should widen these efforts. Anticorruption efforts need to be enhanced and
will require committed leadership.
The C.A.R.’s debt situation is unsustainable. A resolution will require assistance
63.
under the HIPC Initiative as traditional debt relief mechanisms will not be sufficient to
restore debt sustainability. Hence the authorities should implement sound policies and
quickly establish the necessary track record to reach the decision point in order to start
benefiting from HIPC assistance. The authorities should remain in contact with external
creditors on debt data questions and possible arrears-clearance plans.
The C.A.R.’s very poor social indicators call for a concerted effort from the
64.
authorities, in partnership with donors, to improve the delivery of social services. The
rising prevalence of HIV/AIDS poses a further challenge as the authorities struggle to restore
social services. The MDGs are a distant goal, but substantial gains can be achieved with an
appropriate policy focus and donor support.
To better monitor economic developments, the C.A.R. must improve its
65.
statistics. Information on real sector developments is particularly weak, and restoration of
the appropriate data-collecting apparatus should be a priority for the authorities.

66.
There are sizable risks to the C.A.R.’s medium-term outlook. Despite the
successful conclusion of the electoral process, political instability in the C.A.R. is an everpresent concern. The authorities will need to be firm in pursuing sound policies and in
resisting pressure from various interest groups. Another potential risk factor would be
insufficient international support, which would render it more difficult to achieve an
economic recovery and a strengthening of public administration, even over the medium term.
Regarding the Fund, the authorities have done a commendable job of honoring their
repayment obligations, but repayment risks remain.
Not all the risks are on the downside. Should the authorities—buttressed by
67.
appropriate levels of international support—stabilize public finances, make a serious dent in
corruption, and significantly improve the private sector climate, a virtuous circle of more
effective public spending and higher levels of private investment could set in, substantially
boosting growth over the medium term and leading to a significant rise in incomes and an
improvement in social indicators.

It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month
68.
cycle.

- 27 Table 1. Central African Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–08
2001

2002

2003
Est.

Prog. 1/

2004
Rev. 2/

2005
Prel.

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP at current prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices
Yearly average
Central government finance
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Money and credit
Net domestic assets 3/
Domestic credit 3/
Broad money
Velocity of broad money (end of period)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b. (U.S. dollar basis)
Export volume
Imports, f.o.b. (U.S. dollar basis)
Import volume
Terms of trade (U.S. dollar basis)
Nominal effective exchange rate 4/
Real effective exchange rate 4/

0.3
3.8
3.6

-0.6
2.4
3.0

-7.6
-4.3
3.6

2.3
4.7
2.4

0.8
0.6
-0.2

1.3
-0.6
-1.9

2.2
4.6
2.3

3.5
6.3
2.7

3.8
6.4
2.5

3.9
6.5
2.5

3.8

2.3

4.4

0.8

-2.1

-2.2

2.4

2.3

2.1

2.0

4.3
-11.5

24.2
22.4

-31.6
-25.4

18.1
-3.6

2.5
1.3

3.9
9.2

7.2
-0.9

12.6
-0.2

10.7
7.0

9.5
8.7

13.2
16.9
-1.1
6.5

2.9
2.2
-4.3
6.9

-0.1
2.5
-8.0
7.2

1.2
1.1
5.8
7.1

...
...
...
...

12.0
13.6
14.2
6.3

2.6
2.6
2.9
6.4

2.8
2.8
6.5
6.4

3.1
3.1
7.3
6.3

3.1
3.0
7.4
6.3

-9.0
4.8
-9.8
-8.1
-11.5
5.3
3.3

2.5
0.2
16.8
13.9
-0.2
3.4
3.3

-16.1
-29.0
-5.3
-15.5
5.4
4.3
6.3

38.6
29.9
18.7
16.9
5.1
...
...

6.0
5.3
18.4
11.8
-4.9
...
...

2.4
2.2
16.2
6.9
-7.8
1.7
-2.4

12.4
4.0
12.3
3.4
-0.5
0.6
1.2

8.0
4.1
13.1
10.7
1.6
...
...

7.8
6.3
7.9
6.8
0.3
...
...

6.4
6.3
3.8
2.7
-1.0
...
...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Gross national savings
Of which: current official transfers
Gross domestic savings
Government
Private sector
Consumption
Government
Private sector
Gross investment
Government
Private sector

5.8
1.6
3.9
0.4
3.5
96.1
3.2
92.9
8.4
3.5
4.9

5.8
1.9
3.9
0.8
3.1
96.1
3.9
92.1
9.0
4.8
4.2

1.1
0.5
0.1
-1.8
1.8
99.9
3.1
96.9
6.0
2.1
3.9

3.8
0.7
2.2
0.4
1.8
97.8
2.3
95.4
6.7
2.3
4.4

2.2
0.7
0.1
-1.3
1.4
99.9
2.6
97.2
6.8
2.4
4.4

1.9
0.6
-0.3
-2.7
2.3
100.3
3.2
97.1
6.1
2.0
4.1

3.3
0.8
1.1
-1.4
2.5
98.9
2.4
96.5
7.2
2.3
4.9

4.2
1.0
1.6
0.2
1.4
98.4
2.4
96.0
8.3
2.7
5.6

5.2
1.0
2.5
0.6
1.8
97.5
2.7
94.8
9.0
2.8
6.2

6.1
1.0
3.5
0.8
2.7
96.5
3.0
93.5
9.7
3.0
6.7

Resource gap
Current transfers and factor income (net)
External current account balance
Overall balance of payments

-4.5
2.0
-2.5
-3.9

-5.0
1.9
-3.1
-5.0

-6.0
1.1
-4.9
-4.7

-4.5
1.6
-2.9
-2.7

-6.7
2.0
-4.7
-3.1

-6.5
2.2
-4.3
-2.8

-6.2
2.2
-3.9
-2.8

-6.7
2.6
-4.1
-2.2

-6.6
2.8
-3.8
-2.4

-6.2
2.7
-3.5
-2.3

8.9
-13.2

10.8
-15.8

7.7
-12.3

8.7
-12.4

7.8
-12.3

8.1
-13.5

8.3
-12.8

8.8
-12.0

9.1
-12.1

9.4
-12.3

-4.3
-0.9
0.3
-1.0

-5.0
-1.2
1.0
-0.5

-4.6
-3.1
-2.1
-3.3

-3.7
-1.0
-0.6
-1.8

-4.5
-1.6
-1.3
-2.5

-5.5
-2.2
-2.7
-3.9

-4.5
-2.7
-1.3
-2.4

-3.3
-1.4
0.5
-0.8

-3.0
-1.1
0.7
-0.4

-3.0
-1.2
0.7
-0.3

External public debt before debt relief
Net present value of total debt 8/
Scheduled debt-service ratio 8/
Actual debt-service ratio 8/

97.0
375.1
14.8
7.3

94.1
374.8
24.7
0.8

96.5
486.1
30.6
0.3

93.5
382.0
23.2
...

95.4
438.6
27.9
1.7

82.5
531.8
21.8
1.7

79.1
477.7
20.7
20.7

77.2
462.2
19.8
19.8

72.9
445.4
19.9
19.9

68.6
432.3
20.6
20.6

Gross official foreign reserves
(in millions of U.S. dollars, end-of-period)
(in months of imports, f.o.b.)
Nominal GDP (in billions of CFA francs)
Exchange rate (average; CFA francs per U.S. doll

119.8
13.6
709.2
732.4

121.0
10.9
726.2
694.8

131.0
12.4
694.7
580.1

134.6
12.1
728.5
...

148.8
12.0
703.6
...

148.4
12.0
690.7
527.6

136.5
10.9
722.3
...

138.6
9.5
767.8
...

141.2
9.0
816.8
...

143.5
8.8
870.3
...

Central government finance
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Overall balance (commitment basis)
Excluding grants 5/
Including grants
Narrow primary balance 5/ 6/
Basic balance 5/ 7/

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to the 2004 EPCA program targets.
2/ Revised on the basis of an October 2004 staff visit.
3/ In percent of broad money at beginning of the period.
4/ For 2005, average of 12-month period ending June 2005.
5/ In line with the 2004 EPCA program, the projections for 2004 include 1 percent of GDP in priority spending financed by grants.
6/ Excludes interest payments, foreign-financed investment, and grants.
7/ Excludes foreign-financed investment and grants.
8/ In percent of exports of goods and services.

- 28 Table 2. Central African Republic: Central Government Operations, 2001–08
2001

2002

2003
Prog. 1/

2004
Rev. 2/

2005

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

Est.

(In billions of CFA francs)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect domestic taxes
Taxes on international trade
Of which: taxes on imports
Nontax revenue
Of which: MONUC receipts 3/

63.2
51.8
15.2
24.8
11.8
7.0
11.4
4.4

78.4
61.4
17.2
33.3
10.9
7.6
17.0
2.8

53.7
45.3
14.0
20.5
10.7
7.7
8.4
0.0

63.4
51.9
16.8
24.4
10.7
7.8
11.5
0.0

55.1
46.1
14.0
22.4
9.7
6.8
9.0
0.0

55.8
48.3
15.6
22.1
10.6
7.1
7.5
0.0

59.8
51.2
14.6
25.4
11.2
7.4
8.6
0.0

67.3
57.7
16.3
28.4
12.9
8.5
9.6
0.0

74.5
64.1
17.4
32.0
14.7
9.1
10.3
0.0

81.6
70.6
19.0
34.9
16.7
9.6
11.0
0.0

-93.6
-51.0
-29.2
-7.2
-14.6

-114.6
-57.3
-33.1
-7.1
-17.1

-85.5
-58.1
-34.5
-7.3
-16.3

-90.2
-57.6
-33.0
-10.1
-14.4

-86.7
-55.4
-33.0
-9.4
-13.0

-93.4
-66.7
-38.9
-10.0
-17.8

-92.5
-61.6
-42.0
-7.9
-11.7

-92.4
-55.0
-35.0
-8.2
-11.8

-98.8
-58.9
-35.7
-8.9
-14.3

-107.4
-63.4
-36.5
-9.7
-17.2

-9.8
-8.5
-1.3

-11.3
-7.3
-3.9

-7.9
-5.0
-2.9

-8.5
-5.5
-3.0

-8.5
-5.5
-3.0

-8.5
-5.5
-3.0

-8.4
-5.4
-3.0

-9.9
-6.2
-3.8

-8.9
-6.2
-2.7

-9.1
-6.2
-2.9

-32.8
-9.7
-23.1

-46.0
-13.5
-32.5

-19.5
-10.5
-9.0

-24.1
-10.1
-14.0

-22.8
-8.8
-14.0

-18.2
-7.7
-10.5

-22.5
-7.3
-15.2

-27.4
-8.2
-19.2

-31.0
-9.9
-21.1

-35.0
-11.9
-23.1

-30.5
2.5
-6.2

-36.2
7.6
-8.6

-31.8
-14.9
-21.8

-26.8
-4.3
-7.4

-31.7
-9.2
-10.9

-37.7
-18.6
-15.0

-32.8
-9.1
-19.1

-25.1
4.1
-10.5

-24.3
5.6
-9.1

-25.9
6.3
-10.0

-7.3
-15.1
7.8

21.3
-4.7
26.1

30.5
6.2
24.3

0.0
0.0
0.0

20.4
-2.3
22.7

21.1
2.9
18.2

3.5
3.5
0.0

-3.0
-3.0
0.0

-3.0
-3.0
0.0

-4.0
-4.0
0.0

Overall balance (cash basis)

-37.7

-14.8

-1.4

-26.8

-11.3

-16.6

-29.2

-28.1

-27.3

-29.9

Identified financing
External, net
Projects
Grants
Loans
Program
Grants
Loans
Amortization due
External debt relief

37.7
26.5
23.1
21.8
1.3
12.2
2.5
9.7
-15.2
6.4

14.8
14.5
32.5
26.5
6.0
2.3
1.0
1.3
-20.4
0.0

1.4
-1.3
9.0
6.0
3.0
9.1
4.1
5.0
-19.4
0.0

4.1
6.2
14.0
10.0
4.0
9.4
9.4
0.0
-17.2
0.0

11.3
7.5
14.0
10.0
4.0
10.7
10.7
0.0
-17.2
0.0

16.6
8.1
10.5
7.9
2.6
14.8
14.8
0.0
-17.2
0.0

5.0
4.2
15.2
11.4
3.8
2.2
2.2
0.0
-13.2
0.0

6.8
4.1
19.2
14.6
4.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
-15.0
0.0

2.5
2.4
21.1
15.2
5.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
-18.7
0.0

3.8
3.2
23.1
15.8
7.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-19.9
0.0

11.2
9.1
8.9
7.3
1.7
0.2
2.1

0.4
1.0
2.1
0.0
2.1
-1.1
-0.6

2.7
2.9
2.9
0.0
2.9
0.0
-0.2

-2.1
-2.1
-1.3
-1.3
0.0
-0.8
0.0

3.8
3.8
4.8
3.1
1.7
-1.0
0.0

8.5
8.5
9.9
3.1
6.7
-1.4
0.0

0.8
0.8
1.5
-2.6
4.0
-0.7
0.0

2.7
2.7
1.0
-3.2
4.3
1.7
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.9
-3.9
4.8
-0.8
0.0

0.6
0.6
0.0
-4.6
4.6
0.6
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

22.7

0.0

0.0

24.2

21.2

24.9

26.1

8.1
-13.5
-5.6
-1.4
-2.6
-1.1

8.3
-12.8
-5.8
-1.1
-1.6
-1.0

8.8
-12.0
-4.6
-1.1
-1.5
-1.1

9.1
-12.1
-4.4
-1.1
-1.7
-1.2

9.4
-12.3
-4.2
-1.1
-2.0
-1.4

-5.5
-2.2
-2.7
-3.9

-4.5
-2.7
-1.3
-2.4

-3.3
-1.4
0.5
-0.8

-3.0
-1.1
0.7
-0.4

-3.0
-1.2
0.7
-0.3

Expenditure
Current primary expenditure
Wages and salaries
Transfers and subsidies
Goods and services
Interest due
External
Domestic
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Externally financed
Overall balance, commitment basis
Excluding grants
Of which: narrow primary balance 4/
Including grants
Change in arrears (net; reduction -)
Domestic
External

Domestic, net
Banking system
Bank of Central African States
Counterpart to IMF resources
Other
Commercial banks
Nonbank
Residual financing need
Memorandum items:
Revenue
Expenditure
Of which: wages and salaries
transfers and subsidies
goods and services
domestically financed investment
Balance, commitment basis (deficit -)
Excluding grants
Including grants
Narrow primary budget balance 4/
Basic balance 5/

8.9
-13.2
-4.1
-1.0
-2.1
-1.4

10.8
-15.8
-4.6
-1.0
-2.4
-1.9

7.7
-12.3
-5.0
-1.1
-2.4
-1.5

-4.3
-0.9
0.3
-1.0

-5.0
-1.2
1.0
-0.5

-4.6
-3.1
-2.1
-3.3

(In percent of GDP)
8.7
7.8
-12.4
-12.3
-4.5
-4.7
-1.4
-1.3
-2.0
-1.8
-1.4
-1.3
-3.7
-1.0
-0.6
-1.8

-4.5
-1.6
-1.3
-2.5

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ In line with the 2004 EPCA program, the projection for 2004 includes 1 percent of GDP in priority spending financed by grants.
2/ Revised on the basis of an October 2004 staff visit.
3/ United Nations Mission in C.A.R.
4/ Excludes interest payments, foreign-financed investment, and grants.
5/ Excludes foreign-financed investment and grants.

8.3
1.1
0.0

0.0
...

Wages and salaries 2/

Floor on narrow primary balance 3/

Net change in domestic arrears

Change in net claims of the
banking system on the
government

New nonconcessional external debt 4/

...

-1.6

2.6

0.4

8.9

16.1

Act.

...

Yes

No

No

No

No

Target
met

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.7

16.5

30.3

Prog.

0.0

0.9

2.0

-2.3

18.8

30.1

Act.

End–June

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

Target
met

0.0

1.2

0.0

-1.2

24.8

46.8

Prog.

0.0

4.4

2.4

-9.3

28.6

41.3

Act.

End–Sept.

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

Target
met

0.0

0.0

0.0

-5.3

33.0

63.4

Prog.

0.0

2.6

-2.3

-9.2

33.0

55.1

Rev.
Prog.

0.0

5.4

2.9

-18.6

38.9

55.8

Act.

End–Dec.

1/ Including withholding taxes on government salaries, earmarked revenue, and taxes and duties on project-related imports.
2/ Including withholding taxes on government salaries.
3/ The narrow primary balance compares revenue on a cash basis (that is, excluding withholding taxes on government salaries, earmarked revenue, and taxes and duties on
project-related imports) with total expenditure, excluding interest payments and foreign-financed investment. Objectives for end-September and end-December have been adjusted
by CFAF 3.4 billion and CFAF 7.7. billion, respectively, to reflect 1 percent of GDP grant-financed priority expenditure envisaged under the 2004 EPCA program.
4/ Contracted or guaranteed by the government.

16.5

Floor on total government revenue 1/

Prog.

End–March

(In billions of CFA francs; cumulative from January 1, 2004; ceilings, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 3. Central African Republic: Authorities' Indicative Targets,
January 1– December 31, 2004

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

Target
met

- 29 -

-1.5
0.0
1.0
0.0

Floor on narrow primary balance (cash) 3/

Net change in domestic arrears

Change in net claims of the banking
system on the government

New nonconcessional external debt 4/

0.0

Floor on narrow primary balance (commitment) 5/

Net change in domestic arrears on goods and services 6/

...

-3.1

4.9

0.0

2.7

2.3

0.2

10.0

15.8

Act.

...

...

...

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes

Target
met

0.0

-1.0

11.9

0.0

0.7

0.0

-1.0

16.8

31.0

Obj.

...

-8.6

9.6

0.0

2.0

8.2

1.5

20.7

29.4

Act.

End-June

...

...

...

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Target
met

0.0

-0.3

13.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.3

19.5

36.2

Obj.

...

-10.3

11.4

0.0

3.3

9.0

0.7

24.3

34.1

Act.

End-July

...

...

...

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Target
met

0.0

-1.2

15.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

-1.2

22.2

39.7

0.0

0.0

17.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

-2.2

24.9

42.8

Objective

0.0

0.0

23.8

0.0

-0.8

0.0

0.0

33.1

59.8

End-August End-September End-December

1/ Including withholding taxes on government salaries, earmarked revenue, and taxes and duties on project-related imports.
2/ Including withholding taxes on government salaries.
3/ The narrow primary balance compares revenue on a cash basis (that is, excluding withholding taxes on government salaries, earmarked revenue, and taxes and duties on project-related imports)
with total expenditure on a cash basis, excluding interest payments and foreign-financed investment and including treasury operations. Targets will be adjusted downward if external grants
allocated to priority spending are above the projected amounts.
4/ Contracted or guaranteed by the government.
5/ The narrow primary balance compares revenue on a cash basis (that is, excluding withholding taxes on government salaries, earmarked revenue, and taxes and duties on project-related imports)
with total expenditure on a commitment basis, excluding interest payments and foreign-financed investment and including treasury operations. Targets will be adjusted downward if external grants
allocated to priority spending are above the projected amounts.
6/ Arrears on goods and services include unpaid spending commitments vis-à-vis suppliers as well as deposit accounts of enterprises at the Treasury.

6.2
-1.5

Customs receipts (cash basis)

Memorandum items

8.5

15.0

Wages and salaries 2/

Floor on total government revenue 1/

Obj.

End-March

(In billions of CFA francs; cumulative from January 1, 2005; ceilings, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 4. Central African Republic: Authorities' Indicative Targets,
March 1– December 31, 2005

- 30 -

- 31-

Table 5. Structural Reform Measures under the 2004 Emergency Post-Conflict Program
Measure

Date

Revenue
July 2004
• Introduce a procedure requiring that the customs posts on the Central
African Republic borders record on bills of lading the detailed and precise
identification on merchandises not clearing customs at the border.
•

•
•

Require the posting of a financial guarantee at the revenue office of the
destination to cover the amount of duties pending the transportation
within the national territory of any merchandise not clearing customs at
the border.
Give the Large Taxpayers Unit sole authority for the general auditing of
all taxpayers included in its portfolio, and give its revenue office
responsibility for the entire collection process.
Establish a computer link between the single taxpayer number system
software at the Tax Department and the information system of the
Customs Department. 1/

Expenditure
• Instruct mobile phone operators to suspend service on all lines except
those of the Head of State and members of the government, and restore
service on a case-by-case basis. With respect to the national
telecommunications company, government consumption should respect
the budgeted monthly ceiling. 1/

Status

July 2005

July 2004

Pending

July 2004

July 2004

March 2005

July 2005

March 2005

Pending

October
2004
Ongoing

November
2004
Ongoing

October
2004

July 2005

December
2004

Pending

Budget management
•
•

Finalize the draft 2005 Budget Law and submit it to the National
Transition Council (CNT).
Prepare a monthly cash-flow plan covering the entire year and update the
plan on a weekly basis. 1/

Governance and transparency
• Introduce a new organizational structure for the Ministry of Justice,
including a specialized financial unit within the Bangui Prosecutor’s
Office and a State Legal Agency.
• Write, disseminate, and explain to all customs personnel a code of
conduct on professional ethics based on the model prepared by the World
Customs Organization (WCO) and inform the public of this measure.
•

Publish each month the forecasts and outcome for the Treasury cash-flow Ongoing
plan, as well as all awards of permits in the forestry and mining sectors.
1/ Corrective measures identified during October 2004 and February 2005 staff visits.

Ongoing

- 32 -

Table 6. Priority Actions of the C.A.R. Authorities for the Remainder of 2005
Expenditure
•
•
•
•

Reduce the monthly wage bill by CFAF 600 million.
Eliminate the recruitment of contractual staff and do not extend the term of existing contracts.
Transfer the management of contractual staff to the Payroll Office.
Transfer the processing of electronic civil service data from the national computer agency (ONI)
to the Payroll Office.
• Strengthen the monitoring of expenditure on a commitment and payment order basis.
Revenue
• Prohibit from operating in the C.A.R. all customs clearing agents that have not paid the
CFAF 50 million bond.
• Eliminate, with a minimum of exceptions, suspended clearance procedures and the practice of
using fictional warehouses that makes it possible to evade the payment of import duties.
• Suspend, with a minimum of exceptions, the application of the reduced rate on imports for
investments and submit all requests for preferential tariff treatment to a review committee
comprising the Ministry of Commerce, the tax and customs departments, and the import
verification group BIVAC.
• Adopt the measures recommended in the report of the General Inspector of Finances concerning
fraudulent CEMAC certificates of origin.
• Increase the number of controls carried out by tax auditors and update the specific goals for each
verification team.
Budget management
• Prohibit the Treasury from disbursing public funds without a prior payment authorization, with
the exception of wages, pensions, legal expenses, and other specified exemptions.
Governance and transparency
• Appoint staff to the Special Section (financial unit) of the Bangui Court and the State Legal
Agency which are responsible for pursuing corruption cases.
• Make public the information on anti-corruption cases initiated by these entities.

- 33 -

Table 7. Central African Republic: Balance of Payments, 2001–08
2001

2002

2003
Est.

Prog. 1/

2004
Rev. 2/

2005

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

Prel.

(In billions of CFA francs)
Current account
Balance on goods
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which : diamonds
wood products
Imports, f.o.b.
Petroleum products
Public investment program
Other
Services (net)

-17.8

-22.7

-33.9

-20.8

-32.9

-29.4

-28.4

-31.3

-31.2

-30.7

25.6
104.1
41.2
45.3

14.3
101.3
36.3
49.6

2.2
70.9
28.6
34.6

14.8
87.1
34.7
39.3

-4.8
68.1
28.8
29.0

-6.6
66.0
27.8
28.7

-7.3
73.9
31.5
31.1

-12.4
82.1
34.0
35.1

-13.5
88.3
36.5
36.7

-11.7
93.7
37.9
38.7

-78.5
-13.5
-4.4
-60.6

-86.9
-11.0
-8.4
-67.5

-68.7
-8.1
-5.1
-55.5

-72.3
-10.5
-5.0
-56.8

-72.9
-13.4
-4.0
-55.5

-72.6
-17.8
-1.9
-52.9

-81.2
-23.9
-4.1
-53.2

-94.5
-30.7
-5.2
-58.7

-101.8
-32.8
-5.7
-63.4

-105.4
-35.3
-6.2
-63.8

-57.4

-50.9

-43.5

-47.4

-42.4

-38.0

-37.1

-39.0

-40.3

-42.2

Income (net)
Of which: interest due on public debt

-7.5
-8.6

-5.1
-7.5

-3.5
-5.1

-4.2
-5.6

-4.2
-5.6

-3.0
-5.6

-1.4
-5.5

-2.0
-6.3

-1.8
-6.2

-1.8
-6.2

Current transfers (net)

21.4

18.9

10.9

16.0

18.5

18.2

17.5

22.0

24.5

25.0

Capital account

13.1

13.6

6.9

6.4

15.5

18.5

7.6

6.9

7.2

7.5

10.4
2.5
0.2

12.6
1.0
0.0

2.8
4.1
0.0

4.8
1.7
0.0

4.8
10.7
0.0

3.8
14.8
0.0

5.4
2.2
0.0

6.9
0.0
0.0

7.2
0.0
0.0

7.5
0.0
0.0

-8.0

-30.2

-10.6

-5.0

-4.5

-8.7

0.5

7.3

4.2

2.7

-4.2
1.3
9.7
-15.2

-13.1
6.0
1.3
-20.4

-11.4
3.0
5.0
-19.4

-13.2
4.0
0.0
-17.2

-13.2
4.0
0.0
-17.2

-14.6
2.6
0.0
-17.2

-9.4
3.8
0.0
-13.2

-10.5
4.6
0.0
-15.0

-12.8
5.9
0.0
-18.7

-12.6
7.2
0.0
-19.9

Private sector (net)

-3.8

-17.1

0.8

8.2

8.8

5.9

9.8

17.8

17.0

15.3

Errors and omissions

-15.0

3.0

5.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

-27.7

-36.3

-32.4

-19.4

-21.9

-19.5

-20.3

-17.0

-19.8

-20.4

Project grants 3/
Program grants
Debt cancellation
Financial account
Public sector (net)
Project disbursements
Program disbursements
Scheduled amortization

Identified financing

27.7

36.3

32.4

-3.3

21.9

19.5

-3.9

-4.2

-5.1

-5.6

Net official reserves movements 4/
Net IMF credit
Purchases and loans
Repayments (cash basis)
Other reserves (increase -)

13.7
7.3
7.3
0.0
6.5

10.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.3

8.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.1

1.1
3.1
4.4
-1.3
-2.0

1.1
3.1
4.4
-1.3
-2.0

1.4
3.1
4.4
-1.3
-1.8

-3.9
-2.6
0.0
-2.6
-1.4

-4.2
-3.2
0.0
-3.2
-1.0

-5.1
-3.9
0.0
-3.9
-1.2

-5.6
-4.6
0.0
-4.6
-1.0

Exceptional financing
Debt rescheduling 5/
Debt payments arrears (reduction -)

14.0
6.2
7.8

26.1
0.0
26.1

24.3
0.0
24.3

0.0
...
0.0

22.7
...
22.7

18.2
...
18.2

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

22.7

0.0

0.0

24.2

21.2

24.9

26.1

-11.5
-13.2
-1.8
33.0
4.7

-0.2
2.3
2.5
33.1
4.6

5.4
18.1
12.1
17.9
2.6

5.1
6.7
1.6
14.3
2.0

-4.9
0.7
5.9
23.3
3.3

-7.8
0.2
8.7
23.9
3.5

-0.5
8.0
8.6
20.3
2.8

1.6
3.7
2.2
15.9
2.1

0.3
1.4
1.1
17.1
2.1

-1.0
0.1
1.0
18.4
2.1

89.2
13.6
-2.5
133.4
31.2

78.9
10.9
-3.1
160.4
44.1

70.8
12.4
-4.9
182.1
57.5

72.8
12.1
-2.9
...
...

72.8
12.0
-4.7
...
...

72.6
12.0
-4.3
...
...

73.9
10.9
-3.9
...
...

74.9
9.5
-4.1
...
...

76.1
9.0
-3.8
...
...

77.1
8.8
-3.5
...
...

Residual financing need (+)

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

Memorandum items:
Terms of trade (U.S. dollar basis)
Unit price of exports (U.S. dollar basis)
Unit price of imports (U.S. dollar basis)
Net resource transfer
Net resource transfer (in percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves
(in billions of CFA francs, end-of-period)+B2
(in months of imports, f.o.b.)
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Total stock of external arrears (in billions of CF
Of which: arrears to multilateral creditors

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to the 2004 EPCA program targets.
2/ Revised on the basis of October 2004 review of EPCA program.
3/ A portion of project grants is included under current transfers.
4/ Based on definitions consistent with the IMF's Balance of Payments Manual (5th ed.).
5/ Includes debt relief under the 1998 Paris Club rescheduling agreement, as well as agreements reached with other creditors in 1999.

- 34 -

Table 8. Central African Republic: Monetary Survey, 2001–08
2001

2002

2003
Prog. 1/

2004
Rev.

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

54.0
58.4
73.1
-16.5
1.8
-4.4

59.1
63.5
74.0
-12.7
2.1
-4.4

64.7
69.1
74.9
-8.0
2.2
-4.4

(In billions of CFA francs at end of period, unless otherwise indicated)
Net foreign assets
Bank of Central African States (BEAC)
Operations account
Use of IMF credit
Other
Commercial banks

63.7
66.3
87.6
-22.9
1.6
-2.7

55.7
58.1
76.9
-20.9
2.1
-2.4

Net domestic assets

46.0

49.2

49.2

50.3

...

60.7

63.6

66.8

70.6

74.5

Domestic credit

97.1

99.6

102.2

103.3

...

115.4

118.2

121.4

125.2

129.1

Credit to the public sector
Credit to central government (net)
BEAC
Current account
Consolidated loans
IMF (net)
Deposits
Commercial banks
Credit to other public agencies (net)

54.6
55.3
48.7
17.2
14.6
22.9
-6.0
6.7
-0.7

50.2
54.3
48.7
14.1
14.6
20.9
-0.8
5.6
-4.1

52.8
55.2
49.7
17.1
14.6
18.9
-0.8
5.6
-2.4

51.3
53.8
49.0
17.1
14.6
18.2
-0.8
4.8
-2.4

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

60.2
62.9
58.7
25.1
14.6
21.2
-2.2
4.2
-2.7

62.1
64.8
61.3
30.7
13.0
19.8
-2.2
3.5
-2.7

64.4
67.5
62.3
35.0
13.0
16.5
-2.2
5.2
-3.1

64.5
67.6
63.2
39.8
13.0
12.7
-2.2
4.3
-3.1

65.1
68.2
63.3
44.4
13.0
8.0
-2.2
4.9
-3.1

Credit to the economy
Public enterprises
Private sector

42.5
8.0
34.5

49.4
8.1
41.3

49.4
8.4
41.0

51.9
8.4
43.5

...
...
...

55.2
6.7
48.4

56.1
6.7
49.4

57.0
6.7
50.2

60.7
6.7
54.0

64.0
6.7
57.2

Other items (net)
Money and quasi money
Currency
Deposits
Demand deposits
Term and savings deposits
Memorandum items:
Net domestic assets of the central bank
Monetary base
Nominal GDP
Velocity (GDP/broad money)
End of period

47.4
51.9
67.9
-18.9
2.9
-4.6

51.7
54.6
69.9
-18.2
2.9
-2.9

...
...
...
...
...
...

49.5
51.4
69.6
-21.2
3.0
-1.9

49.8
54.2
72.3
-19.8
1.6
-4.4

-51.1

-50.3

-53.1

-52.9

...

-54.6

-54.6

-54.6

-54.6

-54.6

109.7
82.6
27.1
16.6
10.5

104.9
77.4
27.5
17.3
10.2

96.5
70.4
26.1
15.1
11.1

102.1
72.4
29.7
18.7
11.0

...
...
...
...
...

110.2
81.3
28.9
16.4
12.5

113.4
82.0
31.4
17.7
13.7

120.8
83.0
37.8
21.4
16.4

129.7
84.6
45.0
25.4
19.7

139.2
90.9
48.4
27.4
20.9

17.7
84.0
709.2

20.9
79.0
726.2

20.7
72.6
694.7

20.5
75.1
728.5

...
...
...

32.3
83.7
690.7

30.7
84.9
722.3

28.0
86.4
767.8

24.5
88.0
816.8

25.2
94.3
870.3

6.5

6.9

7.2

7.1

...

6.3

6.4

6.4

6.3

6.3

0.3
2.6
2.6
1.8
0.8
2.9

3.7
2.8
2.8
2.4
0.8
6.5

4.2
3.1
3.1
0.1
3.1
7.3

4.3
3.1
3.0
0.5
2.5
7.4

1.4
1.7
0.0
1.9

1.7
1.5
0.0
1.7

1.9
6.5
0.0
7.4

7.1
5.4
0.0
6.1

(Annual change, in percent of broad money at beginning of period)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to central government
Credit to the economy
Money and quasi money

-14.3
13.2
16.9
8.7
3.2
-1.1

-7.3
2.9
2.2
-0.9
6.3
-4.3

-8.0
-0.1
2.5
0.9
0.0
-8.0

-6.2
9.2
-0.5
11.6

-6.0
16.3
1.4
19.7

-8.0
0.1
4.7
-0.8

4.6
1.2
1.1
-1.5
2.6
5.8

...
...
...
...
...
...

2.2
12.0
13.6
7.9
6.0
14.2

(Annual percentage change)
Monetary base
Credit to the economy
Public enterprises
Private sector

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to the 2004 EPCA program targets.

3.3
5.1
0.0
6.1

...
...
...
...

15.3
11.6
-20.2
18.2

- 35 -

Table 9. Central African Republic: Indicators of Fund Credit, 2001–08
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Proj.
Outstanding use of IMF credit
In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFA francs
In percent of government revenue
In percent of exports, f.o.b.
In percent of external public debt
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

24.5
22.8
36.1
21.9
3.3
3.2
43.9

24.5
22.0
28.1
21.8
3.2
3.0
43.9

24.5
19.9
37.0
28.0
3.0
2.9
43.9

28.4
22.2
39.8
33.6
3.3
3.2
51.0

25.1
19.5
32.7
26.4
2.8
2.7
45.1

21.0
16.5
24.6
20.1
2.4
2.2
37.7

16.1
12.7
17.0
14.4
1.8
1.6
28.9

10.2
8.0
9.9
8.6
1.1
0.9
18.4

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.1

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.2

0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.2

1.8
1.4
2.5
2.1
5.7
0.2
3.2

3.4
2.7
4.5
3.6
12.5
0.4
6.2

4.4
3.5
5.1
4.2
14.1
0.4
7.9

5.9
4.6
6.2
5.2
16.0
0.6
10.5

7.9
6.2
7.6
6.6
20.1
0.7
14.1

8.0
8.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

3.9
5.6
1.6

-3.3
0.0
3.3

-4.1
0.0
4.1

-4.9
0.0
4.9

-5.9
0.0
5.9

Repurchases, repayments, charges and interest due 1/
In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFA francs
In percent of government revenue
In percent of exports, f.o.b.
In percent of debt-service payments
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota
Net use of IMF credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments

Sources: IMF, Finance Department; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding SDR charges and assessments.

- 36 -

Table 10. Central African Republic: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015

1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

...
...
...

66.6
38.1
2.0

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
2.0

...
49.0

23.2
51.0

...
...

...
44.0

...
...

53.1
23.9
52.1

...
...
60.0

54.7
...
58.5

...
...
...

...
58.5

58.9
60.1
...
4.0

...
69.3
...
4.0

...
66.7
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
70.0
...
...

180.0
115.0
62.0

180.0
115.0
46.0

180.0
115.0
29.0

180.0
115.0
...

180.0
115.0
...

...
...

...
45.9

1,200.0
44.0

...
...

...
44.0

...
...
...

...
14.8
...

13.5
...
110,000.0

...
...
...

13.5
28.0
...

2015
Target

Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is
less than one dollar a day.
1. Population below US$1 a day (percent)
2. Poverty gap ratio at US$1 a day (percent)
3. Share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent (percent)
Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people suffering from hunger
4. Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
5. Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent)

24.5

Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a full course of
primary schooling
6. Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
7. Percent of cohort reaching grade 5
8. Youth literacy rate (percent ages 15-24)

100.0
100.0
100.0

Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably
by 2005, and to all levels of education by 2015
9. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (percent)
10. Ratio of young literate females to males (percent, ages 15-24)
11. Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent)
12. Proportion of seats held by women in the national parliament (percent)
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality
Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate
13. Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
14. Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
15. Immunization against measles (percent of children under 12 months)
Goal 5. Improve maternal health
Target 6: Reduce by three-fourth, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal
mortality ratio
16. Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
17. Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Target 7: Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS
18. HIV prevalence among females (percent, ages 15-24)
19. Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
20. Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS

60.0

- 37 -

Table 10. Central African Republic: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015 (concluded)

1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

2015
Target

Target 8: Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other
major diseases
21. Prevalence of death associated with malaria
22. Share of population in malaria risk areas using effective prevention and treatment
23. Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
24. Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (percent)

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
45.0

...
...
339.0
28.0

...
...
337.8
...

...
...
493.0
6.0

37.3
...
...
0.1
...

...
8.2
...
0.1
...

36.8
8.2
...
0.1
...

...
8.2
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

48.0

...

70.0

75.0

...

24.0
...

...
...

25.0
...

27.0
...

...
...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...
...

2.5
...

5.3
1.9

...
...

...
...

Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into policies and
programs. Reverse the loss of environmental resources.
25. Forest area (percent of total land area)
26. Nationality protected areas (percent of total land area)
27. GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
28. CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
29. Proportion of population using solid fuels
Target 10: Halve by 2015 proportion of people without access to safe drinking water
30. Access to improved water source (percent of population)
Target 11: Achieve by 2020 significant improvement for at least 100 million slum
dwellers
31. Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
32. Access to secure tenure (percent of population)
Goal 8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development 1/
Target 16. Develop and implement strategies for productive work for youth
45. Unemployment rate of population ages 15-24 (total)
Target 17: Provide access to affordable essential drugs
46. Proportion of population with access to affordable essential drugs
Target 18: Make available new technologies, especially information and
communications
47. Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
48. Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators database, 2003; and UNDP, Human Development Report 2005.
1/ Targets 12-15 and indicators 33-44 are excluded because they cannot be measured on a country-specific basis. These are
related to official development assistance, market access, and the HIPC initiative.

74.0

APPENDIX I

- 38 -

Central African Republic: Relations with the Fund
(As of August 31, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 07/10/1963; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR million
55.70
61.12
0.16

%Quota
100.00
109.73
0.29

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR million
9.32
0.14

%Allocation
100.00
1.50

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
PRGF arrangements
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance

SDR million
19.54
5.57

%Quota
35.07
10.00

V.

Financial Arrangements:

Type
ESAF/PRGF
Stand-By Arrangement
SAF
VI.

Approval
date
07/20/1998
03/28/1994
06/01/1987

Expiration
date
01/19/2002
03/27/1995
05/31/1990

Amount
Amount
approved
drawn
(In millions of SDRs)
49.44
24.48
16.48
10.71
21.28
21.28

Projected Obligations to the Fund
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/interest
Total

2005

2006

0.0
0.17
0.17

4.10
0.55
4.65

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not Applicable

VIII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Forthcoming
2007
5.59
0.53
6.12

2008

2009

7.68
0.43
8.11

5.34
0.31
5.64

The Bank of the Central African States (BEAC) is the regional central bank of the
Central African States, of which the Central African Republic is a member. A
safeguards assessment of the BEAC completed on August 30, 2004 found that the
BEAC has implemented a number of measures to strengthen its safeguards
framework since the 2001 safeguards assessment, but further progress needs to be
made in key areas.

- 39 -

APPENDIX I

The main recommendations of the assessment, applicable to the BEAC as an
institution, include: (i) preparation of financial statements in full accordance with an
internationally recognized accounting framework, initially the ECB guidelines;
(ii) publication of its full financial statements, together with the auditor’s report,
starting with the 2003 financial statements; (iii) formulation of Board-approved
formal guidelines under which the BEAC Governor is authorized to make
exceptional advances to BEAC member countries; (iv) annual review by the BEAC
internal audit department of the process of program data reporting of member
countries to the IMF; (v) implementation of a risk-based audit approach, and
finalization of a charter, for the internal audit function; and (vi) systematic follow up
of all recommendations pertaining to the BEAC’s system of internal controls to be
coordinated by the internal audit department, with regular reporting to the Audit
Committee and the BEAC Governor.
Other priority recommendations of the assessment, but of a country-specific nature,
are: (i) the BEAC should clarify with its member countries that hold foreign reserves
outside the BEAC the statutory basis and circumstances for doing so, to avoid an
apparent conflict with the BEAC statutes and to ensure full transparency of reporting
of reserves by the member country; (ii) the BEAC and its member states are
encouraged to establish a mechanism to prevent IMF overdues and facilitate timely
payments through advance acquisitions of SDRs and an authorization to debit the
SDR account of the member; and (iii) the BEAC should cooperate with its members
to reconcile and confirm the Treasury balances to ensure that the balances reported
by the BEAC in respect of credit to government as reflected in the accounts of the
Treasuries are in agreement with the BEAC.
Exchange Rate Arrangement

The Central African Republic is a member of a monetary association with a common central
bank, the Bank of Central African States (BEAC). The exchange system, common to all
members, operates without restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions. The CFA franc is pegged to the euro at the fixed rate of
CFAF 655.957 = € 1. On October 7, 2005, the rate of the CFA franc in terms of SDRs was
SDR 1 = CFAF 784.52.
Article IV Consultations

The Central African Republic is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations.
The last Article IV consultation was concluded on April 2, 2004.
Recent Technical Assistance

Date

Department

Purpose

April 2001

FAD

To follow up on the introduction of the VAT and discuss
measures to improve tax and customs revenue
collection.

- 40 -

APPENDIX I

Jan–Feb 2004

STA

To assist the authorities in reviewing and updating the
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and to
provide technical assistance in government finance
statistics.
To assist the authorities in the area of revenue
administration.

March 2004

FAD

April 2004

FAD

To assist the authorities in the area of public expenditure
management.

Aug-Oct 2004

FAD

To assist the authorities improve tax administration.

Feb-Dec 2005

FAD

May 2005

FAD

Jun-July 2005

STA

July 2005

STA

To assist the authorities improve public expenditure
management.
To follow up on implementation of tax administration
reforms and review the progress made since the end of
the three-month assignment of FAD tax expert.
To assist the authorities improve government finance
statistics.
To assist the authorities improve real sector data.

Resident Representative

The Fund’s office in Bangui was closed in September 2003.

- 41 -

APPENDIX II

Central African Republic: Relations with the World Bank Group

(As of September 23, 2005)
World Bank (WB) assistance to the Central African Republic (C.A.R.) has been
69.
disrupted by the recurrent conflicts which the country has suffered for much of the past
decade. Assistance has also been limited by protracted arrears payments to IDA. The C.A.R.
has been under suspension of IDA disbursements since January 2002, with arrears of
approximately US$49 million as of September 14, 2005. The recent presidential and
parliamentary elections in May 2005 marked the end of a two-year political transition,
following a coup d’état in March 2003, and were generally deemed to have been
satisfactorily conducted. The Bank’s objective over the coming months is to help The
C.A.R. design and implement a framework to guide the country’s recovery and longer-term
development and poverty reduction efforts, and pave the way for increased volumes of donor
financing within this framework.
The Bank Group strategy in lending and technical assistance

At present, there is one approved operation in the portfolio in support of HIV/AIDS
70.
prevention and control. The WB approved a US$17 million credit in December 2001, to
support the country in combating the spread of HIV/AIDS. The prevalence rate is alarmingly
high, estimated at 13.5 percent.1 An exception on suspension of disbursements was made for
the project preparation facility (PPF) of the HIV/AIDS project. To date, three PPFs totaling
US$1.35 million have been fully disbursed. The WB has approved a fourth PPF advance
(US$650,000) and the effectiveness date for the IDA credit has been extended until March
2006. Implementation of the PPFs has continued satisfactorily.
The WB prepared a Country Re-Engagement Note, presented to the Board in July
71.
2004, which is centered on two building-blocks: (i) supporting a smooth transition by
addressing urgent governance and security issues; and (ii) improving delivery of social
services. Within the first building-block, the intention is to focus on economic management,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, and providing support for leadership
capacity-building. The second building-block focuses on activities on HIV/AIDS, and
assistance in the education and health sectors. To support activities in these areas during the
transition, US$4 million of grant financing was obtained from the LICUS Trust Fund.
IMF-World Bank collaboration in specific areas

72.
The WB has worked closely with the IMF on the reform program in the C.A.R., and
generally shares the same views on policy issues. There is broad agreement on the core
reform program in the C.A.R., namely: (i) reinforcement of public expenditure and public
payroll management; (ii) revenue mobilization and improvement of tax and custom
1

The 2005 UNDP Human Development Report.

APPENDIX II

- 42 -

administration; (iii) improving governance and transparency; and (v) improving the delivery
of public services, including education and health.
Table 1. Bank-Fund Collaboration
Area of Structural Reform

Lead Institution

1. Fiscal area
Public expenditure management
Tax administration

IMF
IMF

2. Governance
Adoption by the government of an anti-corruption law
Natural resources management

IMF
World Bank

3. Other
Monetary and credit policy
Social sector assessment
Poverty reduction strategy
External sector

IMF
World Bank
World Bank
IMF

Areas in which the World Bank leads and there is no direct IMF involvement

73.
The Government has advanced in its preparation of the (full) PRSP, with assistance
from UNDP. The WB is working closely with the UNDP and Government on the PRSP
process, and plans to scale-up support in the coming months to ensure that the PRSP is able
to provide the requisite medium-term framework with sufficient depth and breadth of
coverage of the country’s recovery and longer term development and poverty reduction
needs.
To assist demobilization and socio-economic reintegration of ex-combatants into their
74.
home communities, the WB approved the Reintegration of Ex-combatants and Support to
Communities Special Project in an amount of $9.6 million in April 2004. The project is
funded entirely through the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of the Multi-Country
Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP), and is expected to contribute to the
overall stability of the country by: (i) demobilizing ex-combatants and reintegrating them
socially and economically back into their community; (ii) strengthening the capacities of
communities of return to ensure the sustainable reintegration of the ex-combatants; and
(iii) supporting projects on security and conflict prevention in and by communities that are
the most vulnerable to and the most affected by security problems. Disbursement of the
above project is under way, and about $3.3 million has been disbursed to date.

- 43 -

APPENDIX II

Areas in which the World Bank leads and its analysis serves as input into the IMF –
supported programs

75.
The WB is taking the lead on laying the groundwork for the preparation of a medium
term structural reform framework in the context of the PRSP. In addition to the LICUS Trust
Fund activities, the WB has continued to engage in analytical and advisory work. In
collaboration with other partners, it has prepared a set of Policy Notes, focusing on key
thematic areas including security, natural resource management, social sectors and public
finance. A draft of the Policy Notes is currently being finalized to share with the authorities,
and would provide input into an assessment of the current situation as well as in drawing up a
framework for the country’s recovery and longer-term development. The IMF has a strong
interest in the financial sector from a macroeconomic perspective, including growth and the
monitoring of quasi-fiscal deficits and contingent public liabilities, as well as an interest in
governance and transparency issues in natural resources management.
Areas of shared responsibility

76.
The WB and IMF are working together to assess debt sustainability and HIPC
eligibility for the C.A.R. The WB and IMF are also active in the area of regional integration.
The WB is implementing a Regional Assistance Strategy for the CEMAC countries,
including a support to the payments systems, while the IMF has been active in regional
macroeconomic surveillance.
Areas in which the Fund leads and its analysis serves as input into the World Bank–
supported programs

77.
The IMF has taken the lead on core macroeconomic and fiscal policies. The IMF is
also taking the lead on revenue mobilization and the management of aggregate expenditures.
The WB is working with the IMF to ensure consistency between its own projects and policy
advice and the overall fiscal framework. In the framework of a donor partnership, the WB is
providing training and technical assistance to strengthen the C.A.R.’s public finance
administration.
Areas in which the IMF leads and there is no direct World Bank involvement

78.
The IMF has led the dialogue on monetary policy, exchange rate management, and
balance of payments issues, although given the nature of the CFA franc arrangement, there is
little scope for policy action in the last three areas at the national level.
The C.A.R. Country Director: Mr. Ali Mahmoud Khadr—contact number: (202) 458-7860

- 44 -

APPENDIX III

Central African Republic: Statistical Issues

(As of September 26, 2005)

A. Outstanding Statistical Issues

1.
The statistical database of the Central African Republic is minimally adequate for
surveillance purposes, suffering from severe weaknesses due to years of negligence,
inadequate resources, and destruction linked to the various conflicts. On the basis of a 1999
multisector statistical mission, efforts were initiated to improve the national statistical system
including through adopting the statistics law and setting up a National Statistical Board in
2001. The authorities also decided to participate in the General Data Dissemination System
(GDDS). The conflicts of 2002 and 2003 prevented these efforts from bearing fruit, and in
fact the statistical production and dissemination deteriorated further.
Efforts were renewed more recently to revive statistical improvement plans. With the
2.
support of a statistical and a government finance statistics expert mission during January 26February 13, 2004, the C.A.R. became a formal participant in the GDDS. Its metadata were
first posted on the IMF’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB) on June 14, 2004.
The plans for improvement are currently being updated by the authorities. Issues of source
data, compilation, and dissemination are present in all sectors, but are particularly severe in
the real, government finance, and external trade areas.
Real sector

3.
The compilation of national accounts is the responsibility of the Division of Statistics
and Economic Studies (DSEE) of the Ministry of the Economy, Finance, Planning, and
International Cooperation. Gross domestic product data have been reported to STA through
2004, including a breakdown by expenditure. Annual data on foreign trade statistics have
also been reported through 2004. The latest data reported to STA for the consumer and
wholesale price indices refer to June 2005.
A 1999 STA multisector mission found serious deficiencies in the institutional
4.
arrangements for compiling statistics which have likely worsened in recent years. There were
several weaknesses in data collection procedures and compilation techniques. The authorities
should continue efforts to improve the quality of national accounts estimates and the
reporting of quarterly foreign trade data. At the same time, there is a need to revise the
wholesale and the consumer price indices because the limited coverage and the obsolescence
of the weights used in compiling these indices cast serious doubts on their accuracy.
A statistical expert visited Bangui during July 11-22, 2005 and found a serious
5.
resource gap at the DSEE and recommended a number of measures, particularly
redeployment of resources to strengthen the national accounts services. There is an urgent

- 45 -

APPENDIX III

need to develop source data, by conducting surveys, particularly for the agriculture sector
which represents around 27 percent of the economy. In addition, activity in the informal
sector is still based on survey of the sector conducted in 1982. In the manufacturing sector,
the estimation is based on an old and outdated list of enterprises, which likely overestimates
activity in the sector given that many of these enterprises either do not exist anymore or have
reduced their production considerably. There is also an urgent need to revise this list through
a survey of enterprises and reestablish the industrial production index.
Government finance

6.
The Central African Republic does not report government finance statistics for
publication in the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook or International Financial
Statistics (IFS). The 1999 multisector statistics mission noted that there was no single
primary data source that could be used for the production of government finance statistics
and that the available information was not communicated to the Ministry of Finance. This
situation was confirmed by the government finance statistics mission that visited Bangui
during January 26-February 13, 2004. The mission underscored that, in order to establish a
systematic compilation of government finance statistics, substantial additional assistance will
be required, notably in the area of Treasury accounting and expenditure management, with a
view to producing reliable source data and improving the accuracy of the measures of
domestic arrears. The mission made specific recommendations toward this objective, and a
subsequent March 2004 FAD mission confirmed and reinforced these recommendations.
Support in these this area is provided by an FAD public expenditure management advisor
currently stationed in C.A.R. A GFS mission that visited Bangui during June 19-July 7, 2005
reviewed recent developments and proposed a concrete action plan for improving the
Tableau des Opérations financières de l’État and the Treasury cash plan.
Monetary accounts

7.
Monthly data for the Central African Republic, as well as for the other members of
the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC), are regularly reported
to the Fund in electronic form by the regional central bank (BEAC). Accuracy of data on
currency in circulation is affected by large cross-border movements of currency among
CEMAC member countries. Only 31 percent of banknotes issued in the C.A.R. by the
national BEAC directorate remain in the territory, 47 percent circulate in Cameroon and
about 16 percent in Chad, while currency in circulation in the C.A.R. includes some
10 percent of banknotes from Cameroon and 4 percent of banknotes from each of the
Republic of Congo and Congo.
Priorities for the C.A.R. include the need to adapt the bridge table linking bank data
8.
with the monetary statistics to the new format for monthly reporting by the banks. Other
perennial issues concern the accrual recording of interest and the treatment of nonperforming
loans.

- 46 -

APPENDIX III

Balance of payments

9.
As in other CEMAC countries, the agency responsible for the compilation of balance
of payments statistics is the Balance of Payments Unit of the national agency of the BEAC.
Past delays with data compilation and dissemination, which were mainly related to the
transition from the Fourth to the Fifth Edition of the Balance of Payments Manual, have been
addressed through the BEAC’s recent implementation of methodological improvements. The
last complete reporting, prepared by the national balance of payments committee, covered
2002 annual data. Preliminary statements for 2003-04 are available from the national
direction of the BEAC office in Bangui, and have been transmitted to Fund staff.
The October 1999 STA multisector mission provided a thorough assessment of the
10.
statistical needs in balance of payments statistics. Efforts have been made to address some of
the problems identified by the mission, including training, compilation system, and
development of a flexible questionnaire. Nonetheless, problems remain and the main issues
concern data sources, including the need to update the BOP survey (list of respondents,
reporting form, codification etc.). Various methodologies or statistical techniques need to be
reviewed, such as the computation of freight and insurance and procedures for attributing
banknote movements among transactions. The timeliness of the biannual balance of
payments (presently 90 days) needs to be shortened.
B. Technical Assistance Missions in Statistics (1995–Present)
Subject

Staff Member

Date

Government finance statistics

K.W. Abadallah

Nov. 29–Dec. 13, 1995

Multisector statistics

Thiet Luu

Oct. 28–Nov.12, 1999

Government finance statistics

Mohamed Maiga

Jan. 26–Feb. 13, 2004

GDDS

Éric Métreau

Jan. 26–Feb. 13, 2004

Government finance statistics

Mohamed Maiga

Jun. 20-July 5, 2005

Real Sector

Maxime Bonkoungou

Jul. 11-22, 2005

- 47 -

APPENDIX III

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR
SURVEILLANCE
AS OF SEPTEMBER 6, 2005
Date of
latest
observation
Exchange Rates

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency of
6
Reporting

Frequency of
6
publication

Aug 2005

Aug 2005

D

D

M

Aug 2005

Aug 2005

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Jun 2005

Jul 2005

M

M

M

Broad Money

Jun 2005

July 2005

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Jun 2005

Jul 2005

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Jun 2005

Jul 2005

M

M

M

Jun 2005

Jul 2005

M

M

M

Jul 2005

Aug 2005

M

M

M

July 2005

Sept 2005

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

July 2005

Sept 2005

M

O

External Current Account Balance

Dec 2004

Feb 2005

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Dec 2004

Feb 2005

A

A

A

GDP/GNP

Dec 2004

Feb 2005

A

A

A

Jul 2005

Sept 2005

M

O

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Interest Rates

1

2

Consumer Price Index
3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General
4
Government
3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government
5

Gross External Debt
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
2
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)

- 48 -

APPENDIX IV

Central African Republic: Debt Sustainability Analysis
1.
This appendix analyzes the external debt sustainability of the Central African
Republic (C.A.R.) using the recently approved joint Fund-Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis
(DSA) framework for low-income countries. The results show that C.A.R.’s debt burden is
clearly unsustainable even after the application of full traditional debt relief mechanisms.

2.
The analysis covers external debt only. While the C.A.R. government faces a heavy
domestic debt burden which is estimated at around 30 percent of GDP, there is much
uncertainty about the exact magnitude of the domestic debt. The results of the verification
work being conducted by the working group on domestic arrears are expected to provide a
more reliable picture of the domestic debt situation.
The DSA was conducted jointly with the World Bank and is based on staff’s
3.
estimates of the outstanding stock of external debt at end-2004 and reflects creditor data for
most multilateral and some bilateral creditors, which the authorities have verified. The
baseline scenario assumes no debt relief and no clearance of external arrears. The financing
gap is assumed to be filled through the accumulation of new external arrears and by new
borrowing on concessional terms.1
4.
The baseline projections, which cover the period 2005-2025, assume some
improvements in macroeconomic performance over the medium- and long-term, and
incorporate the September 2005 World Economic Outlook (WEO) projections for
commodity prices, exchange rates, and interest rates. Specifically, real GDP growth is
projected to rebound to 4 percent per annum by 2008 on account of strong growth in the
forestry and mining sectors and a rebound in cash crop production, before tapering slightly to
about 3½ percent by 2015 which is in line with the 10-year historic average (excluding crisis
years)2. The current account deficit is expected to narrow moderately to about 3½ percent of
GDP by 2008 as exports (timber and diamond) pick up at a slightly faster rate than imports,
and over the longer term the deficit should decrease even further to about 2 percent of GDP
as oil imports become cheaper. Exports of goods and services are projected to remain at
around 12 percent of GDP throughout the period.

1

The bulk of the financing gap is filled by the accumulation of arrears and new borrowing is
assumed to fill less than 1 percent of the gap. The terms for new debt are: interest rate of 2
percent per annum, 30-year maturity with a 10-year grace period for a grant element of 36
percent.

2

Crisis years are defined as years during which there was at least one attempted coup, a
mutiny or politico-military related violence. They include 1996, 2001-3.

- 49 -

APPENDIX IV

The 2004 World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) ranks
5.
the C.A.R. as a ‘poor performer’ with a CPIA of 2.6. The debt-burden thresholds for
countries in this category are NPV of debt-to-exports of 100 percent, NPV of debt-to-GDP of
30 percent and debt service-to-exports of 15 percent. Under the baseline scenario, the CAR’s
ratios remain above the thresholds until the end of the period (2025) except for the debt
service ratio which falls below 15 percent after 2010 (see Table 1).
The debt sustainability outlook remains the same under the two standard alternative
6.
scenarios with all ratios staying above the sustainability thresholds, including the debt service
ratio. The first alternative scenario assumes that key variables including real GDP and the
current account balance grow at their ten-year historical levels, while the second scenario is
based on less favorable terms for new financing (i.e., an interest rate that is higher by two
percentage points over the baseline rate). Table 2 shows various stress tests that suggest that
the debt situation is particularly vulnerable to an export shock (bound test B2). Additionally,
staff simulated the application of full traditional debt relief mechanisms, i.e., a Naples stock
of debt operation in 2005. Unlike with the baseline scenario, arrears are not accumulated and
instead new borrowing is assumed to cover the gap. As anticipated, the debt ratios remain
unsustainable, indicating that the C.A.R. is a candidate for debt relief under the enhanced
HIPC Initiative (see Table 3).

...
...
...
...
24.6
24.6
0.1
-2.6

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

1.0

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)
1.2

-7.6
24.0
0.8
-15.2
-2.8
...

...
...
...
...
30.5
30.5
0.1
0.8

103.6
103.8
3.4
-8.1
4.2
6.0
11.5
17.5
-1.6
-0.2
-0.3
-12.0
0.7
6.7
-19.4
11.5
-0.7

2003

1.3

1.3
7.9
0.6
12.5
14.6
...

62.8
531.0
62.9
531.8
21.8
21.8
0.1
24.8

82.5
82.6
-21.1
-5.1
3.7
6.5
11.8
18.3
-2.6
-0.2
-0.6
-8.2
0.6
-1.2
-7.6
-16.0
-0.4

2004

0.5

-0.4

5.1
12.4
0.4
12.8
15.5
...

1.0

-2.6

0.7
4.4
1.3
-2.2
0.5
...

2.0

Standard
Deviation 6/

2.9

Historical
Average 6/

1.4

2.2
2.8
0.7
14.6
9.5
40.2

61.7
477.7
61.7
477.7
20.7
20.7
0.1
6.7

79.1
79.1
-3.4
1.6
3.3
6.2
12.9
19.1
-2.4
-0.4
-0.6
-1.2
0.6
-1.7
…
-4.9
0.0

2005

Estimate

1.4

3.5
-0.3
0.7
6.2
8.2
40.6

61.4
462.2
61.4
462.2
19.8
19.8
0.1
5.5

77.2
77.2
-1.9
0.8
3.6
6.7
13.3
20.0
-2.9
-0.3
-0.6
-2.2
0.5
-2.7
…
-2.7
0.1

2006

1.5

3.8
2.7
0.7
6.8
6.2
36.8

59.3
445.4
59.3
445.4
19.9
19.9
0.1
7.7

72.9
72.9
-4.3
0.5
3.3
6.6
13.3
19.9
-3.0
-0.2
-0.6
-2.3
0.5
-2.7
…
-4.8
0.0

2007

1.6

3.9
2.9
0.6
5.8
4.0
37.3

57.0
432.3
57.0
432.3
20.6
20.6
0.1
7.4

68.6
68.6
-4.3
0.3
3.1
6.2
13.2
19.4
-2.9
-0.2
-0.6
-2.3
0.4
-2.7
…
-4.6
0.0

2008

1.7

4.1
2.7
0.6
5.6
7.7
36.2

55.2
423.8
55.2
423.8
18.2
18.2
0.1
7.6

64.6
64.6
-4.0
0.8
3.6
6.5
13.0
19.5
-2.7
-0.2
-0.6
-2.3
0.4
-2.6
…
-4.8
0.0

2009

1.8

4.2
2.6
0.5
4.8
5.5
36.1

53.6
419.9
53.6
419.9
15.6
15.6
0.1
7.6

60.7
60.7
-3.8
1.0
3.8
6.5
12.8
19.3
-2.6
-0.1
-0.6
-2.2
0.3
-2.5
…
-4.8
2.3

2010

Projections

3.6
2.2
0.6
7.3
6.9
37.9

2005-10
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Source: Staff simulations.

-0.6
8.6
1.1
1.5
5.7
...

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

Key macroeconomic assumptions

100.2
100.2
4.7
-4.6
2.1
5.0
15.5
20.6
-2.6
-0.3
-0.7
-6.0
1.0
0.5
-7.5
9.3
-0.2

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2002

Actual

Table 1. Central African Republic: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002-2025 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2.5

3.6
2.4
0.3
5.9
5.7
36.2

45.4
363.9
45.4
363.9
10.3
10.3
0.0
3.6

45.5
45.5
-2.6
-1.0
0.9
3.1
12.5
15.6
-2.1
0.0
-0.5
-1.5
0.1
-1.6
…
-1.6
0.0

2015

4.5

3.5
2.4
0.1
7.0
5.6
36.1

38.8
319.3
38.8
319.3
4.5
4.5
0.1
3.5

25.9
25.9
-1.5
0.8
2.0
3.2
12.2
15.4
-1.4
0.3
-0.4
-0.9
0.0
-0.9
…
-2.3
0.0

2025

3.6
2.5
0.3
5.8
4.6
36.1

-0.5

-1.9

1.4

2011-25
Average

- 50 APPENDIX IV

- 51 -

APPENDIX IV

Table 2. Central African Republic: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2005-25
(In percent)
Estimate
2005

Projections
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2015

2025

62

61

59

57

55

54

45

39

62
62

60
61

59
59

57
57

56
56

55
54

56
47

59
45

62
62
62
62
62
62

67
63
67
62
68
88

70
64
72
61
76
85

67
62
69
59
73
81

65
60
67
57
70
79

63
58
65
56
68
77

53
49
55
47
58
65

46
40
47
40
48
55

478

462

445

432

424

420

364

319

478
478

452
462

440
446

434
433

430
427

430
425

449
377

483
368

478
478
478
478
478
478

462
594
462
470
552
462

445
755
445
461
652
445

432
734
432
448
633
432

424
719
424
439
621
424

420
713
420
435
615
420

364
620
364
378
535
364

319
522
319
325
451
319

21

20

20

21

18

16

10

4

21
21

19
20

20
20

21
21

19
18

16
16

13
12

15
12

B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

21
21
21
21
21
21

20
25
20
20
23
20

20
32
20
20
28
20

21
34
21
21
29
21

18
30
18
19
26
18

16
26
16
16
23
16

11
19
11
11
16
11

9
16
9
10
14
9

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

37

37

37

37

37

37

37

37

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 52 -

APPENDIX IV

Figure 1. Central African Republic: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2025
(In percent)
100

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

90
80
70
60
50
40
30

Threshold

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

20
10
0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

800

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
700
600
500
400
300

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

200

Threshold

100
0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2019

2021

2023

2025

40

Debt service-to-exports ratio
35
30
25
20
15

Threshold

10

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

5
0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

2015

2017

1,374.9
177.5

Memorandum items
Nominal GDP
Exports of goods and services 2/
1,419.2
188.6

58.0
420.8
25.1

61.4
462.2
19.8

2006

1/ Debt refers to public and publicly guaranteed debt.
2/ Exports of goods and services as defined by the BOP Manual 5th Edition. Current year exports.

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

57.7
434.7
20.4

61.7
477.7
20.7

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 2/
Debt service-to-exports ratio 2/

Additional scenario: After full traditional debt relief mechanisms

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio 2/
Debt service-to-exports ratio 2/

Baseline scenario: No arrears clearance

2005

1,512.8
201.5

55.8
402.9
25.3

59.3
445.4
19.9

2007

1,617.1
213.1

53.2
387.8
26.1

57.0
432.3
20.6

2008

48.4
366.0
26.1

53.6
419.9
15.6

2010

45.8
349.0
36.5

51.9
409.3
14.7

2011

43.4
332.8
34.4

50.2
398.8
13.4

2012

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
1,727.7
1,845.8
1,964.8
2,091.6
225.1
235.8
249.0
263.2

50.6
374.0
28.9

55.2
423.8
18.2

2009

Table 3. Central African Republic: External Debt Sustainability Indicators, 2005-2025 1/
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

2,225.0
279.0

41.2
316.8
32.2

48.5
386.8
12.2

2013

2,367.1
296.3

39.1
301.1
30.5

46.9
374.5
11.4

2014

2,512.1
313.7

37.3
287.4
28.5

45.4
363.9
10.3

2015

4,502.7
547.1

26.6
217.1
16.4

38.8
319.3
4.5

2025

1,814.6
232.9

49.3
368.6
28.6

54.6
423.1
16.6

3,421.8
418.4

31.7
250.4
17.4

42.6
347.7
6.8

Averages
2005-14 2015-25

- 53 APPENDIX IV

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/158
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 29, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with the
Central African Republic
On October 24, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the Central African Republic.1
Background
The Central African Republic has seen its economic and social conditions deteriorate seriously
over the past decade due in part to poor economic management but also political and military
disturbances that culminated in the March 2003 conflict. The country’s physical and human
capital suffered, its formal sector contracted significantly, and the production of cash crops almost
ceased. Due to continued insecurity in rural areas and caution on the part of investors associated
with the political transition, economic activity has yet to show signs of recovery from the sharp
contraction associated with the 2003 conflict. Real GDP grew by 1 percent in 2004 as activity was
stagnant in most sectors. While diamond production increased, activity in the forestry sector
contracted due to heavy rainfall. The recent heavy rainfall in the capital Bangui caused some
population displacement, although its impact on overall economic activity appears limited.
Price developments in the C.A.R. have by and large reflected food supply conditions.
The average price level declined by about 2 percent in 2004 as stability returned to the
agricultural sector, but has picked up moderately so far in 2005 in line with food prices.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return
to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive
Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board,
summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

-2–
Credit to the economy increased in 2004 reflecting a pick up in both private sector credit and net
credit to government. The increase in private sector credit, largely associated with petroleum
imports and several large loans in the forestry sector late in the year, has partly receded in 2005.
The external trade balance worsened in 2004 due to a terms of trade deterioration, a decline in
timber exports, and a higher demand for petroleum product imports linked to election activities.
The increase in donor support for carrying out the elections along with improvement in the
services balance more than offset the deterioration in the trade balance. As a result, the current
account deficit declined by ½ of one percent of GDP to 4⅓ percent of GDP. The C.A.R. is still not
servicing its external debt except to the IMF and therefore external payment arrears continue to
accumulate to both bilateral and multilateral creditors. The stock of external arrears at end-2004
is estimated at US$335 million (about 25 percent of GDP).
Serious weaknesses in public finances remain, and the large gap between expenditures and
revenue continues to weigh heavily on the ability of the government to honor its current
obligations and provide basic public services. While revenue increased in 2004, at around
8 percent of GDP it is still very low relative to other low-income African countries. Weaknesses in
tax and customs administration, rooted partly in corruption, continue to hamper efforts to improve
revenue performance. There has been a serious loss of control on expenditure, in particular over
the wage bill, which has exacerbated the already difficult fiscal position. Although salaries have
been frozen since 1985, the wage bill continues to increase because of the rapid expansion of
allowances and benefits, the creation of high-level posts carrying salary premiums, and new
recruitment paired with delays in retirements. The untenable fiscal position is reflected in the
large build up of domestic payment arrears, including three months of new salary arrears
accumulated so far in 2005.
Developments in the banking sector continue to be dominated by the government’s heavy
reliance on commercial banks’ resources. Reflecting the difficult liquidity position of the banks,
the regional central bank’s (BEAC) temporary suspension of reserves requirements for C.A.R.
banks remains in effect.
Social conditions in the country have worsened as a result of the political and military
developments that led to the 2003 conflict. The C.A.R. has lost ground in terms of meeting the
Millennium Development Goals. Health indicators, in particular, have deteriorated, with the
incidence of HIV/AIDS rising, and life expectancy over the past decade declining by an average
of six months every year.
Significant achievements have been made on the security front and in ensuring a smooth
transition to democratic rule. The presidential and legislative elections were conducted peacefully
and were generally free. The security situation has improved with the support of several hundred
troops from the C.A.R.’s international partners. In addition to the ongoing efforts to train and
better equip the armed forces, progress is being made in the implementation of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, and Reintegration program. However, banditry remains a problem in rural areas.

-3–

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities of the Central African Republic for the recent
peaceful completion of parliamentary and presidential elections and the continued improvement
in the security situation. Directors believed that these positive developments bode well for
reinforcing stability in the country and for deepening the economic reform program in the period
ahead. They considered that the main challenges facing the country include further consolidating
peace and security, establishing the conditions for strong economic growth, and reversing the
deteriorating social conditions. Directors emphasized that this will require stabilizing public
finances, more effectively delivering public services, and establishing an environment conducive
to private sector activity.
Directors agreed that timely international assistance, including effective technical assistance,
more support for social sectors, and substantial infrastructure investment, will have an important
role to play in supporting the recovery. They emphasized that to be effective, this assistance
should complement the authorities’ own efforts. To this end, Directors urged the authorities to
implement sound policies and improve the management of public resources, including by
addressing recent policy slippages, particularly in the public finance area. Determined action by
the authorities will send a strong signal to the international community of the authorities’ ability to
implement reforms, and should pave the way for greater international support, including further
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance from the Fund. Directors accordingly welcomed the
authorities’ recognition of the difficult challenges ahead, and their efforts to build consensus
among the major stakeholders for the reform process.
Directors expressed concern about the persistence of severe weaknesses in the country’s public
finances, as manifested in the low level of government revenue, the difficulty in controlling
expenditure, and the accumulation of domestic and external payment arrears. With monetary and
exchange rate policy conducted at the regional level, sound fiscal policies will be critical for
achieving macroeconomic stability. Directors accordingly called for urgent fiscal consolidation
based on decisive actions both to contain expenditure and to boost revenues. These actions will
be crucial for generating much-needed resources for social spending and public services.
Directors urged the authorities to move swiftly to bring the public sector wage bill under control,
as containing the wage bill and paying salaries in a timely manner will be critical for establishing
and maintaining financial stability. While acknowledging that this will be challenging in the context
of a still fragile political environment, Directors encouraged the authorities to give serious
consideration to staff proposals to reduce allowances, accelerate retirements, and introduce cuts
in some high salary bands, while initiating a cleanup of the payroll files. Directors also
encouraged the authorities to improve public expenditure management, including by
strengthening expenditure procedures and monitoring. In this regard, they welcomed the recent
introduction of the monthly treasury cash flow plan and improved identification of spending at the
commitment level.
Directors expressed concern that the level of government revenue remains far below the needs
of the country. They urged the authorities to strengthen tax collection and improve the customs
and tax administration, in order to reduce corruption and enhance the ability of tax agencies to
function effectively. Directors also saw an urgent need to widen the tax base by reducing

-4–
exemptions, improving controls, and fighting fraudulent practices in the customs area—in line
with the recommendations of the Fund’s technical assistance.
Directors underscored their concern at the magnitude of the domestic arrears problem. They
urged the authorities to put in place a realistic strategy for clearing the arrears, and noted the
authorities’ commitment to do so by early 2006. At the same time, Directors underscored the
importance of timely payment of current obligations to avoid the further accumulation of arrears.
Directors observed that the regional monetary and exchange rate arrangement has provided a
useful policy anchor in a difficult macroeconomic environment, and has helped keep inflation low.
They encouraged the authorities to be vigilant in supervising commercial banks’ compliance with
prudential regulations and to act vigorously to find a lasting solution to the one problem bank
having difficulty meeting prudential ratios. Directors called on the authorities to work with their
partners to strengthen the microfinance sector with a view to broadening access to financial
services.
Directors underscored the importance of improving the competitiveness of the C.A.R. economy.
This will require rebuilding the infrastructure, enhancing security, and advancing on structural
reforms. Improved infrastructure—especially for land and river transport—and better security in
rural areas will be instrumental in reducing costs faced by agricultural producers and exporters.
Directors also stressed the importance of flexibility in factor and product markets. Additional steps
to strengthen the judiciary and improve property rights and contract enforcement should also
contribute to reducing the cost of doing business in the C.A.R. and enhancing competitiveness.
Directors stressed that governance problems are at the heart of the weak management of public
resources and the poor climate for private sector activity. While noting the need for international
assistance in this area, Directors urged the authorities to demonstrate strong commitment in the
fight against corruption. To this end, they encouraged them to equip the newly created unit within
the Ministry of Justice adequately so that it can pursue corruption cases effectively. In addition,
Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to continue to enhance transparency, and emphasized
the importance of widening these efforts, including in the areas of public expenditure and natural
resources.
Directors noted that the C.A.R.’s debt situation is unsustainable. They urged the authorities to
establish the necessary good track record of policy performance to be eligible for debt relief under
the HIPC Initiative. Directors also encouraged the authorities to remain in close contact with their
external creditors to work toward a plan to clear arrears. The importance of steps to improve the
C.A.R.’s debt data was also noted.
Directors expressed concern about the C.A.R.’s very poor social indicators, and called for a
concerted effort, in partnership with donors, to improve the delivery of social services. They also
encouraged the authorities to continue making progress on the preparation of their PRSP.
Directors noted the vast technical assistance needs of the C.A.R. They welcomed the technical
assistance provided by the Fund and strongly encouraged the international community to
accelerate and better coordinate its support to the C.A.R. In the period ahead, priority should be
accorded to improving public expenditure management, strengthening tax and customs

-5–
administration, and upgrading the statistical database to enhance surveillance as well as program
design and monitoring in the period ahead.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the
IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV
consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of
post-program monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term
program engagements. PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy
matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.The staff report for
the Article IV consultation with the Central African Republic may be made available at a later stage if
the authorities consent

-6–

Central African Republic: Selected Economic Indicators 2001–05
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel.

2005
Proj.

(Annual percentage change)
Production
Real GDP
Consumer price (yearly average)

0.3
3.8

-0.6
2.3

-7.6
4.4

1.3
-2.2

2.2
2.4

-2.2
-2.7

-2.7
-1.3

(In percent of GDP)
Public finance (central government)
Overall balance (commitments, including grants)
Narrow primary balance 1/

-0.9
0.3

-1.2
1.0

-3.1
-2.1

(Annual change in percent of beginning
Period broad money)
Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Broad money (M2)
Credit to the economy
Net credit to central government

-14.3
-1.1
3.2
8.7

-7.3
-4.3
6.3
-0.9

-8.0
-8.0
0.0
0.9

2.2
14.2
6.0
7.9

0.3
2.9
0.8
1.8

External sector
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
NPV of debt/exports of non factor goods and services
Actual debt -service ratio 2/
Exchange rate (CFA francs per U.S. dollars)

-2.5
375.1
7.3
732.4

-3.1
420.9
0.8
694.8

-4.9
486.1
0.3
580.1

-4.3
531.8
1.7
527.6

-3.9
477.7
20.7
…

Sources: C.A.R. authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes interest payments, foreign-financed investment, and grants.
2/ In percent of exports of goods and services.

Statement by Damian Ondo Mañe, Executive Director for Central African Republic
October 24, 2005

I. Introduction
On behalf of my Central African Republic (CAR) authorities, I would like to thank
Management and the staff for their support and policy advice and their appreciable work as
reflected in the set of papers before us today. The selected issues paper raises a very
important challenges not only for low income countries but also for countries in transition. It
is not only focused on political and macroeconomic stability but also on some specific
concerns and bottlenecks on governance, infrastructure, and political instability. We have to
recognize the high quality of these studies and congratulate the staff for its valuable work.
As Directors may recall, the CAR has been beset by a number of social and political crises in
the recent past, and despite a difficult economic and social context, my authorities have made
commendable efforts to address these crises. These efforts have resulted in the stabilization
of the political and security situation.
My authorities recognize that much more needs to be done to address the challenges facing
the Central African economy, including the destruction of physical capital, the deterioration
of human capital, and the limited size of the private formal sector affected by conflicts. My
authorities would like to find the best way to address these challenges effectively so as to
avoid the repetitive conflicts and disruption of the political and economic situation. This
objective had caused the authorities to be more cautious in the way they are approaching the
situation. Therefore, while they agree with the staff’s analysis on the need to reverse the
downward trend of the CAR economy, they have moved prudently taking into account the
fragile political and social context. While, my authorities acknowledge that continued efforts
are needed to implement the difficult policy measures of the program, they also firmly
believe that the involvement of the Fund under the new Emergency Post-conflict Assistance
(EPCA) along with that of other donors, through technical and financial assistance, remain
critical to mitigate the risks of a political or social disruption, and contributing to create an
environment conducive to macroeconomic stability.
My authorities are committed to implementing all the policy measures described in the
EPCA aiming to move as soon as possible to a PRGF program. The progressive recovery of
the macroeconomic situation would induce the improvement of the social indicators which in
turn would contribute to the achievement of the MDGs.
II. Recent developments
Political and Security Situation
The security environment has been improved, thanks to the support from regional and
international community peacekeeping forces. The troops from France and the Central

-2African and Economic (CEMAC) group continue to carry out their duties towards the peace
process. Almost 1000 combatants have been disarmed in the framework of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) program supported by United Nations. In order to
ensure a global security climate throughout the national territory, the CAR’s armed forces
are making repeated operations towards rural areas aiming at stopping bands residual attacks.
The national dialogue conducted by my authorities since 2003 has led to a peaceful
legislative and presidential elections held respectively during March and May 2005.
International observers underscored that these elections were broadly fair and democratic.
My authorities are working closely with major stakeholders, including representatives of
parties and unions to explain to them the policy measures envisaged under the EPCA
program so as to build a consensus around these measures.
Recent Economic Developments
The economic situation improved slightly under the EPCA program despite the capacity
constraints and the climate of wait-and-see which affected negatively economic activities
during the transition period. Real GDP grew by 1.3 percent in 2004, the best growth rate in
several years. For 2005, it is estimated at 2.2 percent. After falling by 2.2 percent in 2004,
inflation increased in the first half of 2005 but remains under control. The stability of the real
exchange rate since 1995 along with good agriculture production underpinned this favorable
performance in CAR which is in line with the CEMAC trend. Likewise, the external current
account position has been strengthened in 2004 and similar improvement is expected in 2005.
On the monetary side, there was an increase of credit to the private sector, reflecting the
resumption of activity as confidence is coming back progressively in the CAR economy.
In view of the many challenges facing the authorities, and despite their best efforts, program
performance has been mixed. On the positive side, my authorities introduced several
measures which improved the domestic tax collections in 2004 over 2003. They have also
taken steps to better control smuggling at customs. On the expenditure management side,
some progress was registered, including the introduction of a monthly cash flow plan, and
better identifying spending at the commitment stage. Concerning the governance issues, a
new organizational structure for the Ministry of Justice, including a financial unit, was
introduced in mid- 2005. The mission assigned to this unit is to strengthen the government’
ability to prosecute corruption cases and to defend the financial interests of the state in legal
affairs. Regarding the public procurement, the government envisages to reform the existing
law by updating the current regulations. Finally, efforts to enhance the transparency have
been made through regular publication of information on fiscal revenue and expenditure, as
well as on allocation of permits in the mining and forestry sector. However, the lower than
programmed revenue collection in 2004 and in the first half of 2005 was due to the climate
of wait-and-see by the private sector prior to the elections. Many enterprises reduced the
scope of their economic activities during that period. As to the wage bill slippages, they
reflect partly the negative consequences of the National Dialogue which resulted in the
appointment in the administration of parties representatives participating to this dialogue.

-3III. Medium-term outlook and policies for the second half of 2005
The estimated growth rate of 2.2 percent of GDP reflects an improvement of activities in the
diamond and agricultural sectors expected in the second half of 2005. Inflation is expected to
decrease slightly, offsetting the pick up underlined in the first semester of 2005. Overall,
inflation will return at its historical level of 2-3 percent, in line with the CEMAC countries
trend. The flow of remittances along with other improvement in the services account is
expected to induce a reduction of external current deficit of around 0.5 percent of GDP.
With the gradual return in confidence, and as the reform efforts take hold, the authorities
expect real GDP growth, over the medium term, to be around 3.5-4 percent. However, given
the country sizable endowments with natural resources and arable land and taking into
account the authorities’ desire to break off with the past and put their economy on the path of
macroeconomic stability and growth, they believe that, with strong external assistance, the
growth could be higher.
Fiscal Policy
My authorities remain concerned by the low revenue-to-GDP ratio, which reflects the
frequent disruption of political and economic situation which led to, namely a disappearance
of formal private sector and the development of bad practices, including fraud and
corruption.
Reacting against the downward trend of revenue collection in 2005, the authorities are
curtailing tax exemptions and exceptional customs clearance procedures. They are also
considering measures to address revenue shortfalls linked to widespread smuggling by the
informal sector. In line with the FAD technical assistance recommendations, they are
exerting a greater focus on domestic tax administration which is improving, as recognized the
staff.
Regarding the expenditure side, my authorities are convinced that the stabilization of
macroeconomic stance in the Central African Republic requires measures to bring the wage
bill to a level that is consistent with the revenue collection. However, given the high
unemployment rate, the large salary arrears, the authorities are proceeding cautiously by
seeking the appropriate measures which will preserve the political and social stability. In this
regard, they do not think that an immediate cut in salaries is appropriate at the present time.
However, they are starting a census of civil servants as a means of identifying anomalies in
the payroll files. The result of the survey will enable them to take the necessary measures that
will reduce the size of the wage bill.
On public expenditure management, the authorities are working with FAD in order to reform
the system and ensure that most spending will have corresponding budgetary allocations. As
to the government domestic arrears, while continuing the ongoing investigation, with World
Bank assistance, they envisage to finalize a strategy in early 2006 for eliminating this stock.
Before the complete elaboration of the strategy, they will seek assistance from donors so as
to mobilize the needed clearance funds.

-4Monetary Policy and Banking Sector
Thanks to the institutional arrangement supervised by the BEAC, the level of inflation
remains low. The banking system remains at the heart of the authorities’ strategy to
reinvigorate the economy. In this regard, the authorities are committed to maintaining close
attention to the banks’ compliance with existing regulations, in particular by addressing as
soon as possible the problem of the only bank in breach of the law. Likewise, to ensure a
broad access to financial services, they envisage to take measures to strengthen
microfinance, in partnership with donors.
Structural reforms
Other reforms aimed at improving the business climate are underway. In this context, the
authorities are considering the possibility of giving the billing and collection services of the
electricity and water companies to private units so as to stop the large losses undergone by
these companies. In the forestry sector, the authorities are also making repeated inspections
to discourage smuggling and improve the payment of stumpage fees and taxes. The
information published on the sector will be widen to include export activities and taxes paid.
Similar actions, including the reinforcement of the capacity of the office of diamond and gold
valuation, are underway. The reforms aimed at easing the cost of doing business in terms of
labor regulations and protecting investors, will be undertaken as soon as possible.
With regard to the policies aimed at boosting trade and enhancing competitiveness in the
CAR economy, my authorities are fully convinced of the importance of trade liberalization
and regional integration in the context of the CEMAC. The authorities appreciate the staff’s
recommendations regarding the necessary reforms to improve competitiveness, including
easing the rules on hiring and firing, strengthening security throughout the country, and
rehabilitating the land and river transport infrastructures.
External debt
The debt burden, estimated in both the baseline and alternative scenarios, is unsustainable,
with the NPV of external debt at about 480 percent. The stock of external arrears is estimated
at about 25 percent of GDP. My authorities are committed to engage in discussions with
their multilateral and bilateral creditors, in order to reach a credible and comprehensible
arrears clearance plan. To be consistent with their strategy to reduce the debt burden and
pave the way to future PRGF program, for all new external financing they will seek grants.
However, They would like to point out that, grants may not always be forthcoming and in a
timely way.
Social indicators and the PRSP
The intermittent conflicts and frequent economic disruption resulted in a profound
deterioration of standards of living, as reflected the social indicators which rank the country
among the poorest in Sub-Saharan African countries. Key actions, including the provision of
health, and education services and HIV/AID treatment and prevention to the population

-5require donor support. The authorities are determined to finalize the full PRSP, which is
expected by the first quarter of 2006. They welcome the World Bank support which is
instrumental in the achievement of participatory process and setting a monitoring and
evaluation device.
Donor coordination
Given the extent of needs and the urgent response needed, my authorities have focused their
priorities on tax and customs administration, public expenditure management, the reform of
the judicial system, statistics, and the PRSP process. To be effective in addressing accurately
these challenging objectives, the authorities stress the need for an acceleration and better
coordination of the assistance devoted to CAR.
IV. Conclusion
The economic and social conditions of the CAR economy are very fragile and require the
concerted efforts of the international community to move the country forward. It is clear that
prospects for economic recovery in CAR hinge, not only on the reestablishment of peace and
security throughout the country, but also on the acceleration of donor support. My authorities
are aware of the enormous challenges facing the economy and are committed to implement
skillfully but firmly all the measures needed to reverse the situation. In this regard, the
Fund’s role will be crucial to set a credible post-conflict program which could pave the way
to a PRGF-supported program and lead to debt relief opportunities under HIPC Initiative
while preserving or consolidating the political and social equilibrium gained since the
beginning of transition in 2003.
The fragility of the political situation has increased with a population displaying a deepening
impatience against the difficult economic situation and recurrent wage bill problem in the
public sector. In that context, we would like to appeal to the international community for an
urgent and adequate contribution consistent with the nature and the dimension of the
problem.

