February 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/63

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

January 3, 2005
November 2, 2004

February 1, 2005
2004
February 1, 2005

People’s Republic of China—Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: 2004 Article
IV Consultation--Staff Report; Staff Statement; and Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the People’s
Republic of China—Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the following documents have been
released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on November 2, 2004, with the officials of People’s
Republic of China—Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on economic developments
and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff
report was completed on January 3, 2005. The views expressed in the staff report are those
of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of February 2, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its February 2, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA—HONG KONG
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE REGION
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation Discussions
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the Consultation Discussions Held in 2004
In Respect of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
Approved by Wanda Tseng and Juha Kähkönen
January 3, 2005
•

The consultation discussions were held in the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region of the People’s Republic of China during October 26–November 2, 2004. The
staff team comprised Mr. Prasad (Head), Messrs. Chamon and Leigh (all APD) and
Mr. Craig (MFD). Mr. Gruenwald (Resident Representative) and Ms. Liu (Resident
Representative’s office) also participated in the mission. Messrs. Wang, Sun and
Chen (OED) attended key meetings.

•

The mission met with Financial Secretary Henry Tang, Chief Executive of the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority Joseph Yam, Secretary for Financial Services and
Treasury Frederick Ma, Chairman of the Securities and Futures Commission Andrew
Sheng, and a wide range of other senior government officials, labor unions, academics
and private sector representatives.

•

In concluding the last Article IV consultation on May 16, 2003, Directors noted that the
authorities faced significant policy challenges in the period ahead, against the
background of a series of adverse shocks to the economy (including the outbreak of
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) and persistent deflation. They agreed that the
appropriate policy response would be to intensify structural reforms to bolster Hong
Kong SAR’s competitiveness and long-term growth prospects. Directors endorsed the
government’s medium-term fiscal consolidation plan—noting that it would foster
stability of the linked exchange rate system (LERS)—and expressed their support for
the authorities’ commitment to the LERS.

•

The authorities have indicated their intention, as in the past, to publish the staff report.

•

The principal author of this report is Lamin Leigh.

-2Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Background.............................................................................................................................4
A. Recent Developments ...............................................................................................4
B. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks ..........................................................................8
II. Report on the Discussions .....................................................................................................9
A. Macroeconomic Policies .........................................................................................10
B. Structural Policies ...................................................................................................16
C. Other Issues .............................................................................................................20
III. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................20
Boxes
1. Recent Appreciation Pressures on the Hong Kong Dollar...................................................7
2. The Impact of Developments in Mainland China on Hong Kong SAR ............................11
3. A Goods and Services Tax (GST) for Hong Kong SAR ...................................................14
4. Response of the Hong Kong SAR Government to Recommendations
of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) .......................................................18
Figures
1. Output and Demand, 1996–2004 .......................................................................................23
2. Prices and Exchange Rates, 1996–2004 ............................................................................24
3. Labor Markets, 1996–2004................................................................................................25
4. Financial Indicators, 1995–2004........................................................................................26
5. Fiscal Developments, FY1994/95–2004/05.......................................................................27
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002–2005 .................................................28
2. Consolidated Government Accounts, FY2000–FY2008 ...................................................29
3. Standard Vulnerability Indicators, 1998–2004 ..................................................................30
4. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 1999–2009..................................................31
5. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999–2009 .............................................................32
Annexes
I. Fund Relations ...................................................................................................................33
II. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................34

-3EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Background
•

Hong Kong SAR’s economic performance, which underwent a remarkable
turnaround in the second half of 2003, has strengthened and become more broadbased in 2004.
¾ Real GDP grew by 8¾ percent (year-on-year) in the first three quarters of 2004
(compared to 4½ percent in the second half of 2003), reflecting strong domestic
demand and exports. The recovery was spurred by a surge in Mainland tourism to
Hong Kong SAR, strong growth in the Mainland and a pick-up in global growth. CPI
deflation appears to have ended, mainly reflecting strengthened demand conditions.
The unemployment rate has fallen by almost 2 percentage points from its peak last
year, but remained relatively high at 6.7 percent at end-November 2004.
¾ The fiscal position has improved significantly—the consolidated fiscal deficit (before
bond issuance) for FY2004/05 is projected at 1¾ percent of GDP (3¼ percentage
points lower than budget) on account of buoyant revenues and continued expenditure
restraint. However, the structural deficit is likely to be higher at about 3¼ percent of
GDP.

•

Real GDP growth is expected to moderate to 4 percent in 2005 from 8¼ percent in
2004, reflecting a slowing in global growth and some easing of activity on the Mainland.
The risks to this central scenario are broadly balanced.

Key Issues and Policy Discussions
•

While the near-term outlook is positive, important policy challenges remain,
including those stemming from the ongoing integration with the Mainland. Thus,
the main focus of the mission’s discussions was on the measures needed to foster robust
and sustainable growth over the medium term.
¾ On fiscal policy, the staff urged the authorities to take advantage of the current
favorable macroeconomic environment and maintain continued expenditure restraint
to forcefully address the long-standing structural deficit problem. The staff also
encouraged the authorities to broaden and stabilize the revenue base through the
introduction of a goods and services tax (GST), and adopt a longer-term focus for
fiscal policy in light of Hong Kong SAR’s demographic trends.
¾ With regards to the exchange rate regime, the staff continues to support the
authorities’ commitment to the linked exchange rate system (LERS). The Hong Kong
Monetary Authority’s (HKMA) response to appreciation pressures on the Hong Kong
dollar over the past year has enhanced the resilience of the LERS.
¾ On structural policies, the staff noted that it is essential that Hong Kong SAR
continue to strengthen its financial infrastructure as well as its supervisory and
regulatory systems in order to maintain its position as a leading international financial
center. Coordination of supervisory activities between Hong Kong SAR and the
Mainland will become increasingly important as integration between the two
economies intensifies. Tackling the problem of high unemployment and the structural
weaknesses in the labor market remains a key policy priority.

-4-

I. BACKGROUND
A. Recent Developments
1.
After a period of prolonged weakness in economic activity, persistent deflation
and rising fiscal deficits, the macroeconomic outlook has improved significantly since
mid-2003. Following a sharp output decline and large capital outflows during the Asian
crisis, the economy went through intermittent waves of recovery followed by recession. The
recovery in late 2002 proved short-lived due to the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) in the second quarter of 2003. Domestic demand plunged, consumer price
deflation intensified, the fiscal deficit increased and the Hong Kong dollar came under
renewed depreciation pressures. The overall impact of SARS was short-lived, however, and
the economy rebounded sharply in the third quarter. Since then, deflationary pressures have
eased, the fiscal deficit has declined significantly and the Hong Kong dollar has been under
appreciation pressures.
2.
Real GDP grew by
3.2 percent in 2003 (up from
1.9 percent in 2002), led mainly by
strong exports. The turnaround in
the second half of the year was
initially driven by net exports, with
domestic demand picking up only in
the fourth quarter. The recovery was
spurred by a combination of
continued strong growth in the
Mainland, the package of policy
measures approved by the Mainland
authorities for Hong Kong SAR and
the global recovery.1

1

20

20

Real GDP Growth
15

15

year-on-year
percent change

10

10

5

5

0

0

quarterly percent change
(seasonally adjusted)

-5

-5

-10

-10
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

The Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA) was signed in mid-2003 and
includes the easing of restrictions on individual travel from some areas of the Mainland to
Hong Kong SAR. On January 1, 2004, about 90 percent of Hong Kong SAR’s direct exports
of goods to the Mainland became eligible for a zero-tariff treatment and Hong Kong SAR
obtained wider market access for services through the lowering of entry barriers in the
Mainland. The second phase of CEPA was signed on August 27, 2004, expanding the market
access under the first phase of CEPA.

-5-

3.
The growth momentum strengthened in 2004, underpinned by robust domestic
demand as well as continued strong export growth. Real GDP grew by an average of
8¾ percent (year-on-year) in the first three quarters of 2004 (compared to 4½ percent in the
second half of 2003). In particular, investment spending rose significantly, reflecting
improved business sentiment in part due to the CEPA free trade agreement with China.
Export growth strengthened in the first three quarters of 2004, driven largely by strong
growth in the Mainland and the associated improvement in intra-regional trade. Import
growth was also robust during the first three quarters of 2004 reflecting the pick-up in
economic activity. However, the pace of job creation remains modest—although the
employment rate has increased in 2004, with increased labor market participation the
unemployment rate has declined only marginally from its level in December 2003 (Figure 3).
Overall credit growth also remains sluggish despite the recovery.
4.
Consumer price deflation appears to have ended, reflecting strengthened
demand conditions, the stabilization of the overall property market and higher import
prices. After persistent price declines
for over 5 years, deflationary
10
10
Measures of Inflation
pressures eased rapidly from mid(Year-on-year percent change)
8
8
2003. The CPI index rose slightly
6
6
CPI
during July-November 2004, in line
4
4
with strengthened demand
2
2
conditions. Prices of retained imports
0
0
increased due to higher world
-2
-2
commodity prices and, to a lesser
-4
-4
extent, a weaker U.S. dollar.2 The
-6
-6
decline in the GDP deflator, which
-8
-8
GDP deflator
has lagged behind the recovery in the -10
-10
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
CPI index due to terms of trade
changes, has also moderated
significantly in 2004.
5.
Asset prices have recovered sharply but remain well below their peak. The
property market (especially the luxury end of the market) has picked up after mid-2003.
Residential property prices bottomed out in July 2003 and have soared by 40 percent since
then, but remain well below their peak in October 1997 (Figure 2). Commercial property
prices have also rebounded. After a protracted decline since 2000, the stock market has done

2

Staff estimates indicate that the exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices is low,
reflecting pricing-to-market adjustments in response to exchange rate changes.

-6-

better over the past year (Figure 4). The Hang Seng index has increased by about 70 percent
since its trough in April 2003. With the recovery of asset prices, both the banking and
household sectors’ balance sheets have improved.3
6.
The Hong Kong dollar has come under appreciation pressures since late
September 2003. Following the issuance of the G-7 Communiqué calling for greater
exchange rate flexibility in Asia on
12-Month Forward premium(+)/discount (-) (in percent)
September 22, 2003, the Hong Kong
2
dollar faced significant appreciation
1
pressures, resulting in its trading at a
Hong Kong dollar
4
0
discount in the forward market. On
-1
that day, the Hong Kong dollar spot
rate also experienced a small
-2
Renminbi
(1¼ percent) but virtually
(NDF)
-3
unprecedented appreciation relative to
-4
the linked rate (Box 1). Appreciation
-5
pressures dampened during April to
-6
September 2004, but reemerged in late
01 - 01 - 01 - 02 - 02 J-0 2 - 02 - 02 - 02 - 03 - 03 J-0 3 - 03 - 03 - 03 - 04 - 04 J-0 4 - 04 - 04
F A
F A
F A
O
D
O
D
O
D
A
A
A
A- O
October 2004 on account of renewed
speculation about a revaluation of the
renminbi.

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

7.
Hong Kong SAR’s overall external position remains strong. The current account
surplus rose to 10¾ percent of GDP in 2003, reflecting increases in the invisible trade surplus
and net external factor income. It narrowed to 4 percent of GDP in the first half of 2004 as
imports recovered. Official reserves increased by US$6½ billion in 2003 and rose further in
2004 to about $125 billion at the end of November 2004.
8.
The FY2003/04 deficit outturn was significantly better than targeted in the
budget. The overall fiscal deficit was HK$40 billion (3.2 percent of GDP) for the fiscal year
ending March 31, 2004, compared to the budget target of about HK$68 billion (5.3 percent of
GDP). This improvement is significant, especially in view of the additional temporary fiscal
measures that were taken during the year to mitigate the impact of SARS,
3

The average consolidated capital adequacy ratio stood at 15.9 percent at endSeptember 2004 and nonperforming loans fell to 2.7 percent of total loans. The number of
homeowners with negative equity fell to about 25,400 (which accounts for 5 percent of all
mortgage borrowers) at end-September 2004.
4

Between 2002 and August 2003, a rapidly growing Mainland and a deflationary
environment in Hong Kong SAR led some investors to take short positions on the
Hong Kong dollar and long on the renminbi, contributing to the negative correlation between
the 12-month forward rates. The release of the G-7 Communiqué resulted in appreciation
pressures on both currencies and a positive correlation between their 12-month forward rates.

-7Box 1. Recent Appreciation Pressures on the Hong Kong Dollar
Following a prolonged period of weak-side pressures on the Hong Kong dollar, significant
strong-side pressures emerged in the second half of 2003. Slow growth, rising budget deficits,
high unemployment and persistent deflation had resulted in downward pressures on the local
currency during most of the post-Asian crisis period. These factors were compounded by the
impact of the SARS outbreak in early 2003. Weak-side pressures began to ease with the
announcement of growth-enhancing measures from the Mainland in mid-2003 and the broadening
of the global recovery. The reversal of sentiment was complete following market reaction to the
G-7 Communiqué of September 2003, which called for upward flexibility in Asian currencies.
The HKMA responded to the burst of strong-side pressures by letting the spot rate
appreciate below the linked rate. Since the adoption of “technical” measures in September 1998
designed to strengthen the currency board, the spot rate for the Hong Kong dollar had never been
allowed to stray more than one basis point below the linked rate. While the measures included a
commitment by the HKMA to buy Hong Kong dollars at the linked rate, there was no such
commitment on the strong side—the currency board has the possibility of being “asymmetric.” In
the event, on September 22, 2003 the spot rate appreciated by 1¼ percent.
60

60

Aggregate Balance
(In billions of HK Dollars)

50

7.90

7.90

Spot and Forward Rates
50

40

7.85

7.85

12-month forward

40
7.80

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
2001

2002

2003

2004

7.80

Spot
7.75

7.75

7.70

7.70

7.65

7.65
2001

2002

2003

2004

There was some uncertainty in the market in the ensuing period, but the HKMA was
successful in gradually bringing the spot rate back to the linked rate. The market eventually
came to a fuller understanding of the potential asymmetry of the exchange rate regime, and the
volatility in the local foreign exchange market soon abated. The HKMA employed a strategy of
“randomized” sales of Hong Kong dollars while nursing the spot rate back to the link in order to
inject a degree of constructive ambiguity into the process. As a result of the sale of Hong Kong
dollars, the aggregate balance (the Hong Kong dollar counterpart of the U.S. dollars purchased by
the currency board) shot up to an unprecedented HK$55 billion. By April 2004, the spot rate had
returned to the linked rate, and the aggregate balance began to return to normal levels.
Significant strong-side pressures on the Hong Kong dollar re-emerged in late 2004, largely
as a spillover from heightened expectations of a revaluation of the Chinese renminbi. The
HKMA again allowed the spot rate to appreciate below the linked rate (albeit this time by less
than ½ percent) and, as a result, the aggregate balance once again began to climb. The 12-month
forward contract surged to an unprecedented discount of 15 basis points by end-November 2004,
implying expectations of about 2 percent appreciation of the currency.

-8-

and reflects broader expenditure restraint (including civil service wage cuts) and higher-thanexpected investment income from the fiscal reserves.
9.
The consolidated fiscal deficit for FY2004/05 is now projected at about
1¾ percent of GDP, compared with the budget target of about 5 percent of GDP. Data
for the first half of FY2004/05 show an overall budget deficit (before bond issuance) of about
HK$50 billion (which is about
Hong Kong SAR: Fiscal Reserves and Deficit
30 percent lower than the deficit
FY2004/05 represents staff's latest projections
figure for the corresponding
period for last year).5 The
Fiscal reserves
(in billions of HK dollars; left scale)
improvement relative to the
Fiscal balance
budget is on account of buoyant
(in percent of GDP; right scale)
revenue performance (reflecting
stronger growth and large
proceeds from land sales) and
continued expenditure restraint.
Structural balance
Fiscal reserves are projected at
(in percent of GDP; right scale)
about 13 months of expenditures
at the end of this fiscal year, well
above the budget target of 10 months.
3

600

2
1

500

0

-1
-2

400

-3
-4

300

-5
-6

200

-7

FY1999/00

FY2000/01

FY2001/02

FY2002/03

FY2003/04

FY2004/05

10.
The Fund’s policy advice to the Hong Kong SAR authorities has contributed to
the process of policy formulation. Since the 2003 Article IV consultation, Hong Kong SAR
has made significant progress on fiscal consolidation in line with the Executive Board’s
recommendations. The authorities’ concerted efforts at expenditure restraint have been in line
with staff advice, notwithstanding the low level of public support for these measures against
the backdrop of the prolonged weakness in economic activity and a deflationary
environment. The recent rapid growth that has been fueled by policy measures taken by the
Mainland seems to have allayed these public concerns. The authorities have also
implemented most of the recommendations of the 2003 FSAP report.
B. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks
11.
Real GDP growth is expected to moderate to potential in 2005, with the risks
broadly balanced. The staff projects that real GDP growth will decline to 4 percent in 2005,
reflecting a slowing in global growth and some easing of activity on the Mainland. CPI
5

In interpreting this half-year outcome, it should be noted that tax revenues in Hong Kong
SAR are lumpy as a large share of revenues from profits and salaries tax comes in the latter
part of the fiscal year. It should also be noted that the government issued bonds amounting to
about HK$26 billion (2 percent of GDP) in April and July of 2004 to finance capital
spending. Bond sales are counted by the government as revenues rather than as financing
items. The government does not have any immediate plans for another bond placement.

-9-

inflation is expected to remain subdued in 2005. With employment growth in the range
of 2-2½ percent in 2005, the unemployment rate should fall below 6 percent. The risks to the
outlook are mostly external. The downside risks are related to the durability of the global
expansion, including the possible effects of persistently high oil prices.6 On the upside, there
is some potential for stronger inbound tourism and more robust intra-regional trade.
12.
Sustained robust growth over the medium term will depend largely on the extent
to which Hong Kong SAR meets the challenges of integration with the Mainland.
•

CEPA is expected to foster deeper trade and investment linkages between the two
economies.7 In addition, the ongoing integration of the Mainland into the global
economy is likely to benefit Hong Kong SAR, given its position as a gateway for
foreign investors into the Mainland as well as for Mainland corporates venturing
abroad.

•

Competition from regions within the Mainland as well as from other financial centers
in Asia implies that Hong Kong SAR will need to continue to bolster its
competitiveness by complementing its traditional strengths—flexible product and
factor markets, and strong institutions—with sound macroeconomic policies and
productivity-enhancing reforms.

•

Assuming that these efforts are successful, the staff projects that medium-term GDP
growth in Hong Kong SAR will average about 4 percent. Inflation should remain low
and stable over the medium term, in part reflecting ongoing, modest deflationary
pressures stemming from continued integration with the Mainland.
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS

13.
Against the background of good near-term prospects, the main focus of this
year’s consultation discussions was on the measures needed to foster robust and
sustainable growth over the medium term. The authorities and the staff concurred that,
while the near-term outlook is positive, important policy challenges remain. These include
6

Higher oil prices are unlikely to directly derail the economic recovery given
Hong Kong SAR’s predominantly service-based economy and small manufacturing sector.
However, a persistent increase in oil prices could have a significant effect through its impact
on Hong Kong SAR’s major trading partners. The impact on consumer prices is likely to be
small as the weight of oil-related components in the CPI basket is only about 1 percent.
7

While the impact of the zero-tariff aspect of the CEPA agreement on merchandise trade by
itself is likely to be small given the size of Hong Kong SAR’s manufacturing sector
(4 percent of GDP), the direct and indirect impact of the service sector liberalization
component of CEPA (including tourism) is expected to become increasingly significant over
time.

- 10 -

the necessary strengthening of the public finances and managing the ongoing integration with
the Mainland.8 Deeper integration with the Mainland has already resulted in significant
changes in the structure of Hong Kong SAR’s re-export trade and its labor market (Box 2).
Adapting to these dynamic changes in its trade patterns and forcefully tackling the structural
weaknesses in the labor market will be critical to enhancing Hong Kong SAR’s external
competitiveness and ensuring continued strong growth over the medium term. The staff also
noted that it will be essential for Hong Kong SAR to continue strengthening its financial
infrastructure as well as its supervisory and regulatory systems in order to maintain its
position as a leading international financial center.
A. Macroeconomic Policies
Fiscal Policy
14.
The staff encouraged the authorities to take advantage of the current favorable
macroeconomic environment to forcefully address the long-standing structural deficit
problem. It now appears likely that, on a consolidated basis, budget balance can be achieved
well before the target date of FY2008/09.9 The staff projects that, if the expected overperformance in fiscal adjustment (on the consolidated balance) is realized in FY2004/05 and
“locked in,” the consolidated budget could be brought almost into balance in FY2005/06
(Table 2).10 However, the underlying structural fiscal deficit is projected to be about
1½ percent of GDP in FY2005/06.11 The staff stressed that eliminating the structural deficit
is essential as this would:
•
•
•

Facilitate Hong Kong SAR’s adjustment to cyclical shocks as well as structural shifts
related to the Mainland’s integration with the global economy;
Mitigate any future downward pressures on the linked exchange rate system; and
Help to accommodate future fiscal pressures that are related to demographic changes.

8

Chapter I of the Selected Issues Paper characterizes the rapid expansion of
Hong Kong SAR’s economic ties with the Mainland and analyzes the implications
of the growing linkages.
9

In the FY2004/05 budget, the authorities announced a two-year postponement of the target
date for balancing the budget in response to the uncertain macroeconomic environment in
early 2004 (the target date announced in the FY2003/04 budget was FY2006/07).
10

“Locking in” the gains made in FY2004/05 assumes that the total expenditures are kept
unchanged in nominal terms in FY2005/06.

11

The structural budget balance excludes investment income, land premium, asset-related
receipts, equity injections and cyclical effects.

- 11 -

Box 2. The Impact of Developments in Mainland China on Hong Kong SAR
The Hong Kong SAR and Mainland economies have become increasingly linked,
resulting in significant changes in the structure of Hong Kong SAR’s economy.
•

As manufacturing has moved to the Mainland over the last two decades, the share of
the manufacturing sector in Hong Kong SAR’s GDP has declined from about
24 percent in 1980 to about 4 percent now. Most of the manufacturing that has
migrated to the Mainland is largely labor intensive. This structural transformation of
Hong Kong SAR’s economy towards knowledge-based and high-value-added
activities has led to the erosion of the demand for low-skilled workers. As a
consequence, the unemployment rate has risen faster among low-skilled workers.

•

The structure of trade between Hong Kong SAR and the Mainland is changing
rapidly, reflecting China’s increased access to world markets. Thus, the share of
Hong Kong SAR’s entrepôt trade (as a ratio to China’s trade) has declined
significantly, and it is increasingly getting a share of “offshore” or “transshipment”
trade that takes advantage of its superior logistical services. However, the valueadded of this type of trade is significantly lower than that of traditional re-export
trade.

•

As China’s capital account is highly regulated and its capital markets are still
underdeveloped, fund raising by Mainland companies in Hong Kong SAR continues
to be significant. Hong Kong SAR’s cumulative investment in the Mainland
amounted to nearly 76 percent of Hong Kong SAR’s GDP in 2003. This data includes
FDI in China by foreign-owned firms incorporated in Hong Kong SAR. However, it
probably also includes FDI that is “round tripped” via Hong Kong SAR and back to
China to take advantage of the favorable tax treatment for foreign firms.

The growing integration of Hong Kong SAR and the Mainland has been reflected in
increasing correlation between their economic cycles. The correlation between the two
economies’ output as well as the components of output have increased since the mid-1990s,
which suggests that integration has advanced in many sectors of the two economies. Forward
exchange rates have become highly correlated and equity market developments in the two
economies have generally followed each other.
The increasingly close links between the Mainland and Hong Kong SAR imply that
macroeconomic fluctuations in China could have large spillover effects on
Hong Kong SAR. A sharp slowdown in growth on the Mainland could affect Hong Kong
SAR’s economy through a variety of channels including trade links, Mainland tourism and
investment earnings. The impact on Hong Kong SAR banks’ profitability and asset quality is
likely to be negligible as domestic banks’ direct exposure to Mainland entities is relatively
small. Staff analysis shows that a one-time 10 percentage point decline in China’s import
growth for domestic consumption due to a slowdown in domestic investment growth would
lower Hong Kong SAR’s growth in 2004 by about ½ percentage point after multiplier effects
are incorporated. The current account surplus would be reduced only marginally since both
imports and exports would be affected almost proportionally.

- 12 -

15.
The authorities concurred with the staff that eliminating the structural deficit as
soon as possible is a key policy priority. The FY2004/05 budget targets a deficit of
2¾ percent of GDP in FY2005/06. However, this is based on a conservative growth
projection compared to the current staff forecast, which suggests that revenue
overperformance is likely. The staff recommended that, consistent with the existing policy
rules, all overperformance on revenues (relative to the revenue targets in the FY2004/05
budget) be used to replenish fiscal reserves.12 The Financial Secretary (FS) signaled his
resolve to bolster the fiscal consolidation effort, including by further tightening expenditure
control in the context of the forthcoming FY2005/06 budget.13
16.
Expenditures will bear the brunt of the authorities’ medium-term fiscal
consolidation efforts. The staff commended the authorities for the expenditure restraint
shown last year and so far this year. The expenditure to GDP ratio in FY2003/04
(19½ percent excluding the temporary spending to mitigate the impact of SARS) was nearly
1 percentage point lower than budget and indications are that a similar performance is likely
in FY2004/05 (Table 2). Over the medium term, total expenditure is slated to decline to
about 16 percent of GDP, mainly through downsizing of the civil service. Rationalizing and
reforming social programs and holding the line on social spending will also be key to
achieving the medium-term objective. Expenditures on education, health, and welfare now
account for nearly 50 percent of total expenditures (Figure 5).14 In particular, welfare
spending has doubled over the last decade, in part due to a generous social transfer system.15
The authorities broadly concurred with the staff on the need to rationalize social spending. In
this respect, they considered that the recent welfare reforms instituted in the CSSA and
reforms to the education and health care systems would help to contain the rise in social
spending over the medium term. The government has recently revamped the fee structure of
its public health care services to contain rising health care costs, including the introduction of
a new charge for accident and emergency services. The authorities also plan to encourage the
provision of health care by the private sector.

12

The staff noted that alternative options to increase the level of fiscal reserves such as the
use of bond issuance, would implicity mean that the proceeds from bond sales would finance
current expenditures. This could reduce fiscal discipline and may not be viewed favorably by
the markets.

13

The FY2005/06 budget will be presented to the Legislative Council on March 16, 2005.

14

Staff analysis presented in IMF Occasional Paper No. 226 discusses various measures to
curb rising education and health spending.

15

The government has so far resisted recent calls to reverse the welfare reform measures that
were approved in 2003. These included adjustments in the standard payment rates for the
Comprehensive Social Security Assistance (CSSA) program to account for past deflation, as
well as a tightening of the eligibility requirements for the CSSA.

- 13 -

17.
The staff reiterated its recommendation to broaden the tax base and stabilize
revenues through the adoption of a goods and services tax (GST). Hong Kong SAR’s tax
base remains narrow by international standards. In addition, some important sources of
revenue, including asset sales and investment income, tend to be quite volatile. The staff
argued, on grounds of economic efficiency, that a GST remains the best option to reform the
tax regime and reduce over-reliance on volatile revenue sources. A GST would also lessen
the need to raise rates on salaries and profits taxes. As the government has relied on these
taxes for increasing revenues in the past few years, further increases in their rates could hurt
Hong Kong SAR’s competitiveness. The staff emphasized that preparations for the
introduction of a GST should start soon, given the long lead time required for its
implementation. In line with the recommendations of the IMF’s Technical Assistance report
that was prepared in May 2004, the staff underscored that the GST should be set up with
minimal exemptions (Box 3). In particular, the staff argued that the GST is an instrument for
revenue generation in the most neutral manner possible and is ill-suited to achieve other
economic and social objectives, for which superior instruments could be found.16
18.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the need to introduce a GST. The
Financial Secretary (FS) concurred that broadening the revenue base and shifting it towards
more stable sources was a high priority, and indicated his intention to introduce a GST over
the medium term. The FS indicated that the first step would be to engage in extensive public
consultations in order to build social consensus, but noted that planning for a GST could start
even before a formal decision was taken on its introduction. The FS expressed his
appreciation for the technical assistance provided by the IMF on the design of a GST that
would be best suited to Hong Kong SAR's needs and economic structure.
19.
The staff noted that demographic trends are likely to impose a burden on the
public finances over the long term. While Hong Kong SAR’s dependency ratio of about
35 percent is low compared to those of its neighbors, it is projected to double by 2030.
Hence, spending on health, longer-term care and welfare—which already account for a
substantial portion of government spending (about 25 percent of total expenditures)—are
likely to increase over time. The associated rise in pension liabilities is, however, not
expected to be a major source of fiscal pressures.17 Civil servants have a defined-benefit
16

A GST rate of 5 percent (the current rate in Japan and Singapore) would probably increase
the cost of the consumption basket of the poor by about 3.3 percent. A commensurate upward
adjustment in the benefits available under Hong Kong SAR’s CSSA could be an effective
means to protect the economically vulnerable segments of the population.

17

Staff analysis suggests that demographic changes would generate significant fiscal stress
over the longer run, with age-related spending peaking around 2050 at about 8 percentage
points of GDP higher than the level today. Of this increase, only about 1½ percentage points
would be due to higher pension expenditures. However, given the very low level of public
debt (2 percent of GDP), this does not raise any long-term fiscal sustainability issues.

- 14 Box 3. A Goods and Services Tax for Hong Kong SAR
In response to a request from the Hong Kong SAR authorities for further advice on policy and administrative
issues in introducing a goods and services tax (GST), staff from the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department visited
Hong Kong SAR in April 2004 and held extensive discussions with the authorities.
The main findings of this technical assistance (TA) mission’s report are as follows:
It would be desirable to broaden Hong Kong SAR’s tax base. Hong Kong SAR has one of the lowest tax
revenue/GDP ratios in the world (about 10.5 percent in FY2003/04), stemming largely from its extraordinarily
narrow tax base. About 60 percent of the tax revenue is usually derived from taxes on salaries and profits.
While low taxes bring obvious economic benefits, they also pose inevitable difficulties for the public finances:
the narrow tax base has proved problematic for addressing Hong Kong SAR’s long-standing structural budget
deficit problem.
The base of a GST would come conceptually very close to the combined base of Hong Kong SAR’s
existing salaries and profits tax. The estimated revenue yield of a broad-based GST (with minimal
exemptions and zero-ratings) in Hong Kong SAR would be about 0.37 percent of GDP for every percentage
point of the GST rate—a figure that is comparable to the observed performance of the GST in other countries
of the region. Thus, the report concludes that the argument for introducing a GST in Hong Kong SAR could be
based on the fact that having a GST would lessen the need to raise salaries and profits taxes for mobilizing
needed budgetary resources.
A GST is first and foremost an instrument of revenue generation in the most neutral manner possible; it
is ill-suited to achieve other economic and social objectives for which superior instruments could be found.
Hence, it would not be advisable to burden the GST with features largely designed to address equity concerns,
such as food exemptions. A commensurate upward adjustment in the benefits available under Hong Kong
SAR’s comprehensive social security assistance scheme could be an effective means to protect the vulnerable
segments of the population.
The treatment of financial services and immovable properties under a GST remain major issues under
deliberations, due to the importance of these two sectors in Hong Kong SAR’s economy. The TA report
recommends that the financial sector should either be zero-rated, or exempted but with provision of partial
input tax recovery. As regards immovable properties, the report reiterated the preferred GST treatment: the sale
and rental of commercial properties, whether new or existing, should be fully taxable, while only the sale of
new residential properties should be taxed. Residential rental payments should be exempt to preserve neutrality
between rental and owner-occupied housing services.
Concerns about possible revenue leakage of introducing the GST on the destination basis are valid since
Hong Kong SAR has no tariffs and its customs administration is not experienced in the collection of duties and
taxes on imports on a broad scale. However, the report also notes that these concerns should not be
exaggerated, as much of the value of imports destined for domestic consumption in Hong Kong SAR would be
recaptured in the tax base even if it escapes taxation at the import stage.
On tax administration aspects of the GST, the report notes that the GST is traditionally administered by the
same department that collects income taxes and that there is no reason why the Inland Revenue Department
could not handle the GST; structurally, at least in the medium term, setting up a separate GST division within
that department is a sensible approach. The liability of imports into Hong Kong SAR to pay the GST will
require a major change in the operations of the Customs and Excise Department. The TA report outlined the
type of new controls that will be needed to achieve a desirable balance between customs control and trade
facilitation.

- 15 pension system and pension outlays in the budget currently account for only 1 percent of GDP.
Moreover, the Mandatory Provident
Dependency Ratio 1/
Fund scheme, which came into
(In percent)
operation in December 2000 and is
privately managed, will also provide
a growing source of retirement
income by 2030. The staff
recommended that the authorities
develop an anchor to guide longerterm fiscal policy that takes into
account potential fiscal pressures
that are likely to arise from factors
such as changing demographics.
Such a fiscal anchor could focus on
Source: World Development Indicators Database , World Bank.
the government’s overall balance
1/ Defined as ratio of dependents to working-age population.
sheet and could include targeting a
higher level of fiscal reserves or net government assets.
120

120

Hong Kong SAR

100

100

Japan

Singapore

80

80

Korea

Thailand

60

60

Malaysia

40

40

20

20

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

2055

2060

2065

2070

2075

2080

2085

2090

20.
The authorities concurred that the fiscal implications of demographic trends
warranted further attention. They are in the process of conducting a formal intergenerational
analysis to identify the sources and potential magnitudes of these fiscal pressures. In addition,
they are taking steps to alleviate the likely pressures on the budget, including through better
control of health care costs and by facilitating the emigration of elderly CSSA recipients to
Guangdong and Fujian provinces.18
The Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS)
21.
The LERS has responded well to strong-side pressures on the Hong Kong dollar
over the past year and remains robust. Under the LERS, there is no explicit commitment by
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) to sell the Hong Kong dollar on the strong side
of the linked exchange rate. In response to the significant appreciation pressures on the
Hong Kong dollar that emerged in late September 2003, the HKMA used this asymmetry and
allowed a modest temporary appreciation (Box 1 provides a more detailed description of this
episode). The authorities argued that the potential risks associated with the use of this
flexibility were limited so long as the HKMA used its discretionary powers sparingly and
cautiously. The staff agreed that the HKMA’s response to appreciation pressures had enhanced
the resilience of the LERS.19

18

Such schemes would encourage retirees to emigrate to the Mainland while allowing them to
maintain some access to their retiree benefits in Hong Kong SAR.

19

Chapter II of the Selected Issues Paper analyzes this episode of strong-side pressures on the
Hong Kong dollar, including the efficacy of the HKMA’s policy response.

- 16 –
22.
The staff reiterated its support for the authorities’ commitment to the LERS.
A move towards greater exchange rate flexibility in the rest of Asia (especially Mainland
China) could induce some short-term speculative pressures on the Hong Kong dollar, but is
unlikely to pose significant challenges for Hong Kong SAR, given its strong internal and
external positions and the HKMA’s track record. Internal and external balance considerations
suggest that the real effective value of the Hong Kong dollar appears to be broadly consistent
with fundamentals.20
B. Structural Policies
23.
The financial system remains resilient to a variety of macroeconomic shocks.
Banks are well capitalized and their asset quality has improved as the share of non-performing
loans in total loans has declined following the economic recovery. The profitability of retail
banks improved in 2003 as the decline in net interest margins (due to intense competition and
weak demand for credit) was more than offset by lower provisioning charges and the increase
in non-interest income. A slowdown in the Mainland is not likely to have a major impact on
Hong Kong banks’ profitability and asset quality as domestic banks’ direct exposure to
Mainland entities is small.21 An increased holding of debt securities has made banks more
susceptible to bond market volatility, although the impact should be limited given better tools
to hedge interest rate risk.
24.
The staff noted that, while property loans have not proven riskier than other
loans, their share in total loans has increased and this concentration could represent a
more significant source of risk in the future.22 The authorities argued that banks’ increasing
concentration in the property sector was mainly due to weak credit demand by the other
sectors. They also noted that the loan-to-deposit ratio remains low by historical standards and
that the HKMA maintains a conservative prudential limit of 70 percent on the loan to value
ratio. The household sector’s overall debt burden remains manageable and is not likely to be
significantly affected by an increase in interest rates. The corporate sector’s balance sheet is
strong—most firms continue to register record profits and, at 40 percent, their leverage
(measured by the debt to net worth ratio) remains low.

20

The output gap is closed, the fiscal position has improved markedly, external
competitiveness remains adequate, and pressures in the foreign exchange market have in
general been quite mild.

21

However, banks also have some indirect exposure arising from the Mainland activities of
borrowers, although data to assess these activities are lacking.

22

Chapter III of the Selected Issues Paper discusses this and other aspects of the financial
system, including regulatory and supervisory structures, and how they may have an influence
on financial sector procyclicality in Hong Kong SAR.

- 17 –

25.
The authorities have made considerable progress in the implementation of FSAP
recommendations to strengthen financial sector regulation and supervision (Box 4). The
staff also commended the authorities for the recent passage of legislation to introduce a deposit
insurance scheme; its launch in 2006 will further strengthen the banking system.23 In addition,
preparations for the adoption of Basel II requirements by banks are proceeding well. The staff
noted that enhanced cross-industry supervisory coordination has become more important as
banks and other financial institutions expand the scope of their businesses due to intensifying
competitive pressures. Thus, banks are seeking to diversify into fee-based activities, including
by offering more complex financial products. Adjusting to this new business environment
represents a challenge for the banks.
26.
Progress has been made in improving cooperation with Mainland supervisory
counterparts in the banking, securities and insurance industries, but important
challenges remain. Banks incorporated in Hong Kong SAR can now open branches on the
Mainland under a lower asset requirement (US$6 billion from a previous requirement of
US$20 billion) as part of the CEPA agreement. Moreover, large Mainland banks are
increasingly using Hong Kong SAR as a financial center. The HKMA signed a memorandum
of understanding with the China Banking Regulatory Commission in August 2003 to
strengthen supervision of banks operating on both sides of the border (Box 4). A similar level
of cooperation exists between the Securities and Futures Commission in Hong Kong SAR and
the China Securities Regulatory Commission in the Mainland for supervision of the securities
industry. On the insurance front, the Insurance Authority of Hong Kong SAR entered into a
cooperative agreement with the China Insurance Regulatory Commission in November 2004.
However, a great deal of work remains to be done to enhance broader coordination of financial
sector regulation and supervision, especially given the substantial differences in legal
frameworks between the two economies. The authorities agreed that this would become
increasingly important as the integration of the two economies intensifies. Sustained efforts in
these areas will be necessary to deal with rising competition from aspiring financial centers in
the region.
27.
Tackling the problem of high unemployment, which partly reflects structural
factors, is a key policy challenge. The ongoing structural transformation of the Hong Kong
SAR economy towards knowledge-based and high value added activities has led to the erosion
of the demand for low-skilled workers. Thus, the unemployment rate has risen faster among
low-skilled workers and the wage premium commanded by high-skilled labor has increased.24
23

In May 2004, the Legislative Council passed a law to institute a deposit protection scheme
in 2006. The scheme will be managed by an independent statutory body, the Hong Kong
Deposit Protection Board, which was formed on July 1, 2004. The scheme is expected to be
established over a period of 18-24 months. In order to prevent moral hazard and ensure the
financial viability of the scheme, the amount of protection for each eligible claim is to be
capped at HK$100,000 and there will be a system of differential contributions by banks based
on their regulatory ratings.
24

At the same time, Mainland family-based immigration to Hong Kong SAR has contributed
to an increased supply of low-skilled workers (about ½ percent of the labor force per annum).

- 18 Box 4. Response of the Hong Kong SAR Government to Recommendations
of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
While the FSAP, which was concluded in 2003, found the financial system to be robust and fundamentally
sound, some improvements in financial sector supervision and regulatory governance arrangements were
recommended. This box outlines actions taken to date by the government in response to the main FSAP
recommendations, which appear in bold; the authorities’ actions appear in plain text.
Further strengthen regulatory governance arrangements and improve the transparency of institutional
and policy frameworks. The terms of reference of the Council of Financial Regulators and the Financial
Stability Committee were published in late June 2003. At the same time, the responsibilities delegated to top
finance officials, including the Financial Secretary and Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury were
clarified, with policy formation and execution responsibilities clearly separated. A formal statement of
monetary policy aims was also released, which made explicit that the operating mandate of the Hong Kong
Monetary Authority (HKMA) is to maintain exchange rate stability.
Enhance cross-industry supervisory coordination. The HKMA and Insurance Authority (IA) signed a
memorandum of understanding (MOU) in September 2003 outlining their respective responsibilities for
regulating banks’ insurance business. Under the MOU, the HKMA is responsible for the daily regulation of
banks’ insurance business. In cases of complaints of malpractice, the two regulators will share investigative
work and take disciplinary action as needed. With regard to the distribution of listing functions among the
statutory regulator—the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC)—and the market operator Hong Kong
Exchanges and Clearing (HKEx), the government announced its decision in March 2004 to let the HKEx
remain the frontline regulator to vet listing applications. It also announced its intention to give statutory
backing to major listing requirements (including financial reporting and other periodic disclosure, disclosure
of price-sensitive information and shareholders’ approval for certain notifiable transactions) which would be
enforced by the SFC. The relevant legislative amendments would be introduced to the Legislature in 2005.
Strengthen cross-border information sharing mechanisms and regulatory arrangements, in particular
with the Mainland. The HKMA signed a MOU with the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) in
late August 2003 to strengthen supervision of banks operating on both sides of the border. The MOU calls for
the HKMA and the CBRC to share supervisory information on banks operating in the Mainland and
Hong Kong SAR, and to ensure that a parent bank will exercise “adequate and effective” control over the
operations of its cross-border branches and subsidiaries. The two regulators will also meet twice a year.
Improve corporate governance by fostering shareholder participation, ensuring equitable treatment of
minority shareholders, improving the frequency and quality of reporting, and enhancing board
oversight. The Standing Committee on Company Law Reform concluded its comprehensive corporate
governance review in January 2004. The Companies Ordinance was amended in July
2004 to make it easier for investors to seek compensation for unfair connected transactions involving major
shareholders. Other proposals of the consultation paper include adding statutory backing to listing rules,
forcing companies to rotate their lead auditor partner every five years, and specifying the remuneration of
individual directors.
Establish an independent legal basis for the IA in order to bring Hong Kong SAR into line with
international practice and improve oversight of the insurance industry. The Hong Kong SAR
government has finished its consultation on the proposal to turn the IA into a self-funded independent
regulatory body. Opinions and views collected from the consultation are being examined by the Financial
Services and Treasury Bureau in Hong Kong SAR. The government’s aim is to develop a detailed proposal
for the establishment of the independent authority in consultations with relevant stakeholders in the next
12 months.
Enhance data collection and monitoring to better assess potential vulnerabilities to the financial system.
Policy notes have been issued on interest rate, liquidity and foreign currency risk assessment, and the HKMA
is helping banks to develop and put in place stress testing techniques.

- 19 -

Staff analysis shows that the overall degree of mismatch in the labor market has risen
(Figure 3) and so has the average duration of unemployment, leading to an increase in longterm unemployment. The staff supported the government’s proposed reforms to the education
system and its ongoing retraining and skills-upgrading programs (including plans to consider
support for private provision of education, which would help move toward a more efficient
investment in education). The staff noted that the social safety net also has an important role
to play in facilitating the movement of displaced workers to growing industries, although it
should minimize disincentives to seek employment. The staff noted that the high degree of
flexibility of Hong Kong SAR’s labor market has traditionally delivered good outcomes.
Therefore, maintaining this flexibility will be essential to facilitate adjustment to shifts in the
structure of the economy.
28.
The property market has rebounded, reflecting the economic recovery; the
government continues its efforts to reduce its direct involvement in this market. The
recovery in overall property prices appears to be broadly in line with improving economic
fundamentals, including better prospects for income growth. The government’s intervention
in the land market has contributed to movements in property prices. Over the past year, the
government has taken further steps to withdraw from active involvement in this market.
Effective January 1, 2004, government land is being sold only through the Application List,
which is a market-oriented system.25 Three land auctions were held between May-November
of 2004 using the Application List system. In June 2004, the Housing Authority announced
that it would release for sale up to 26,000 public rental flats by end-2004, while also
eliminating its loan scheme for low income home buyers in the private market. The staff
noted that continued provision of timely information about the government’s plans
concerning the supply of land would help reduce uncertainty and mitigate any associated
instability in property prices.
29.
Hong Kong SAR continues to maintain one of the most liberal trade regimes in
the world. The authorities noted that trade liberalization measures agreed under CEPA are
likely to be expanded in the future. The authorities indicated that they were open to exploring
free trade agreements with other trading partners, so long as these were consistent with WTO
principles and provisions and contribute to multilateral trade liberalization. The
government’s approach towards competition continues to be based on a sector-specific
approach rather than a comprehensive competition law. The government’s approach aims to
address high firm concentration in certain sectors, reduce barriers of entry, and encourage
business investment by local and foreign firms.

25

Under this system, the government announces in advance which lots will be available for
sale (by auction or tender) in the coming year. An interested party can trigger the auction of a
lot by submitting a price bid acceptable to the government. The land is then auctioned or
tendered publicly to the highest bidder.

- 20 -

C. Other Issues
30.
The authorities produce and disseminate a comprehensive set of economic
statistics. Hong Kong SAR provides data to the IMF on a timely basis for surveillance and
publication, and is fully compliant with the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standards
(SDDS). Since June 2002, the authorities have published data on the international investment
position and gross external debt. Hong Kong SAR has for the first time reported Government
Finance Statistics (GFS) data for publication in the 2003 GFS Yearbook. The authorities also
publish data on the direction of services trade, which is important given its growing
importance for economic activity.
31.
The staff noted that fiscal transparency could be enhanced as current practice is
not fully consistent with international best practices in some respects. The staff
commended the authorities for taking the initiative to move from a cash-based approach to an
accrual-based presentation of the fiscal accounts starting with the FY2002/03 fiscal data. The
staff encouraged the authorities to publish mid-year fiscal budget outturns with a
comprehensive breakdown of revenues and expenditures and an analysis of how the mid-year
estimates compare with the budget.
32.
The HKMA has put in place a good framework for Anti-Money Laundering.
The HKMA, SFC, and the Office of the Commissioner of Insurance have issued guidelines
(that do not require changes in legislation) to their respective regulated entities in
implementing international requirements for AML. The authorities plan to put the AML
guidelines into effect in 2005. Additional measures to comply with the 40 recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force that do need changes to legislation were discussed in the
Legislative Council in October 2004. A bill aimed at effecting related amendments is to be
introduced into the Legislative Council in the last quarter of 2005.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
33.
The economic recovery, in tandem with supportive policy measures, has fostered
good progress in strengthening Hong Kong SAR’s macroeconomic outlook. The
recovery became more broad-based in 2004, driven by the package of policy measures
approved by the Mainland authorities for Hong Kong SAR and the global recovery. CPI
deflation appears to have ended against the backdrop of robust domestic demand.
Expenditure restraint and revenue buoyancy have led to a significant decline in the fiscal
deficit. This progress on the macroeconomic front bodes well for continued strong growth in
the near term, although there remain risks to the outlook, stemming mainly from
uncertainties in the external environment.
34.
Sustaining strong growth over the medium term will depend crucially on
effectively meeting the challenges of integration with the Mainland. Eliminating
the long-standing structural deficit problem, tackling structural unemployment, and
managing the ongoing integration with the Mainland are key challenges. The ongoing
integration of the Mainland into the global economy is likely to benefit Hong Kong SAR,

- 21 -

given its position as a gateway for foreign investors into the Mainland as well as for
Mainland corporates venturing abroad. At the same time, competition from regions within
the Mainland as well as from other financial centers in Asia implies that Hong Kong SAR
will need to continue to bolster its competitiveness by complementing its traditional
strengths—flexible product and factor markets, and strong institutions—with sound
macroeconomic policies and productivity-enhancing reforms.
35.
The staff encourages the authorities to take advantage of the current favorable
macroeconomic environment to eliminate its long-standing structural deficit problem.
Fiscal performance in Hong Kong SAR has improved markedly over the past two years and a
relatively early attainment of budget balance on a consolidated basis seems likely. However,
the structural balance is expected to remain in deficit for a longer period. The staff urges the
authorities to take measures that would eliminate the structural deficit as soon as possible.
This would help bolster fiscal reserves, facilitate adjustment to shocks that the economy
might face and mitigate any future downward pressures on the LERS.
36.
Continued expenditure restraint is essential to ensure a credible and lasting
fiscal consolidation. The staff commends the authorities for their expenditure restraint in the
current upturn and advises locking in these gains in order to more rapidly reduce the
expenditure-to-GDP ratio, which would be consistent with Hong Kong SAR’s model of
small government. In particular, this will require careful monitoring of the civil service wage
bill and adequate control of social expenditures. The staff supports the maintenance of a
strong and well-targeted social safety net, with rules-based adjustments to benefits.
37.
Broadening the tax base and stabilizing revenues through the adoption of a GST
remains a key policy priority. The staff considers a GST as the best option for improving
the efficiency of the tax regime and reducing the reliance on volatile revenue sources. It
could also enhance revenue buoyancy in a non-distortionary manner. The staff welcomes the
authorities’ plans to engage in extensive public consultations in order to build social
consensus on the introduction of a GST. Given the long lead time required, however,
technical preparations for the implementation of a GST will need to get underway soon.
38.
The staff encourages the authorities to develop an anchor to guide longer-term
fiscal policy that accounts for demographic trends. In view of Hong Kong SAR’s rapidly
aging population, the government will need significant fiscal resources in the long run. Such
a fiscal anchor could consider targeting a higher level of fiscal reserves or net government
assets, which would further enhance the credibility of the LERS. More generally, it would be
useful if the authorities could emphasize this longer-term focus for fiscal policy in
subsequent budgets as public awareness of the issue appears limited.
39.
The HKMA’s response to appreciation pressures over the past year has
enhanced the resilience of the LERS. The LERS remains robust and the staff continues to
support the authorities’ commitment to it.

- 22 -

40.
The staff welcomes recent measures taken by the authorities to further enhance
the financial sector’s resilience to macroeconomic shocks. The passage of legislation to
introduce a deposit insurance scheme is a positive development; its launch in 2006 will
further strengthen the banking system. In addition, the staff welcomes progress made in the
preparations for the adoption of Basel II guidelines by banks. On the other hand, while
property loans have not proven riskier than other loans, their share in banks’ loan portfolios
has increased markedly and could therefore represent a more significant source of risk in the
future. The staff urges continued vigilance in monitoring bank lending to the property sector.
41.
It is important for Hong Kong SAR to continue strengthening its financial
infrastructure as well as its supervisory and regulatory systems in order to maintain its
position as a leading international financial center. The staff commends the Hong Kong
SAR authorities for implementing the recommendations of the 2003 FSAP report, including
the enhancement of regulatory and supervisory arrangements. Enhanced cross-industry
supervisory coordination has become more important as banks and other financial institutions
expand the scope of their businesses in response to intensifying competitive pressures. The
staff welcomes the progress that has been made in improving cooperation with Mainland
supervisory counterparts in the banking and securities industries. Coordination of supervisory
activities between the two economies will become increasingly important as their integration
intensifies. Sustained efforts in all of these areas will be necessary to deal with rising
competition from aspiring financial centers in the region.
42.
The progress made by the government in reducing its direct involvement in the
property market is welcome and these efforts need to continue. The introduction of the
Application List for land sales has resulted in a more market-based system. The staff
welcomes recent steps taken by the government to further limit its involvement in the
property market. Continued provision of timely information about the government’s plans
concerning the supply of land would help reduce uncertainty and mitigate any associated
instability in property prices.
43.
Tackling the high level of structural unemployment is a key policy priority. The
outsourcing of manufacturing and low-end service sector jobs to the Mainland has reduced
the relative demand for low-skilled workers in Hong Kong SAR. The staff supports the
government’s proposed reforms to the education system and its ongoing retraining and skillsupgrading programs. The social safety net has an important role to play in facilitating the
movement of displaced workers to growing industries, although it should also minimize
disincentives to seek employment. The staff encourages the authorities to maintain Hong
Kong SAR’s labor market flexibility, which has traditionally delivered good outcomes and
will help facilitate adjustment to further shifts in the structure of the economy.
44.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with the People’s
Republic of China in respect of Hong Kong SAR take place on a 12-month cycle.

- 23 -

Figure 1. Hong Kong SAR: Output and Demand, 1996-2004
...and the output gap is projected to close by end-2004.

After contracting significantly in 2003Q2 due to the impact of
SARS, real GDP growth rebounded in 2003H2 and strengthened
in the first three quarters of 2004...
20
15

20
Real GDP
(year-on-year percent change)

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

2004

10

0

0

-10

-10
Domestic demand
Net exports

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

16
Private Consumption and Private
Fixed Investment
(contributions to growth; in percent)

8

12
8

4

4

0

0

-4

-4

-8

-8

Private consumption
Private investment
Inventory accumulation

-12

-20

-12

-20 -16
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-16
1996

Export and import growth continue to be strong...
20

1998

16
12

10

1997

...as both consumption and investment spending
have rebounded.
20

Domestic Demand and Net Exports
(contributions to growth; in percent)

-10
1996

Net exports were the key driver of growth in 2003, but
domestic demand has led growth in 2004...
20

10
Output Gap
(in percent of potential output)

15

10

1996

10

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

...and services trade picked up in 2004.
40

Exports and Imports
(year-on-year percent change)

10

20

0

0

-10

40
30

40
Trade in Services
(year-on-year percent change)

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

-20
Trade balance (LH) 1/

-20

-40

Imports (RH)
Exports (RH)

-60
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

-10

Imports

-30
1996

Exports

-10

2003

2004

-20

-20
1996

1997

1998

1999

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Trade balance in percent of GDP.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

- 24 -

Figure 2. Hong Kong SAR: Prices and Exchange Rates, 1996-2004
After five consecutive years of price declines, deflation
appears to have ended ...
15

15

...driven by the recovery of non-housing prices, and
to some extent, housing prices.
20

20
CPI sub-index
(year-on-year percent change)

CPI inflation
(year-on-year percent change)

15

15
10

10

Housing
Non-housing

10
5

5

0

0

-5

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-5

-10

-10

1996

1998

2000

2002

The real effective exchange rate has
depreciated since the Asian crisis, driven more
recently by the weak U.S. dollar.
120

120

115

Effective Exchange Rates
(June 1997=100)

250

1998

2000

2002

2004

Both residential and commercial property
prices have recovered significantly from
their troughs in mid-2003.

250

Property Price Indices, (1999=100)

115

110

110

105

105

100

100

95

95
REER

90

-15

-15
1996

2004

90

Residential
Offices
Retail

200

200

150

150

100

100

NEER
85

85

80

80
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

50

50
1996

1998

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates.

2000

2002

2004

- 25 -

Figure 3. Hong Kong SAR: Labor Markets, 1996-2004
The unemployment rate reached its historic peak in
mid-2003 and the NAIRU increased as well but both
have declined since then.

Nominal and real wage growth have declined
until recently.

66 15

10

Participation rate
(right scale)

8

15

Real Wages and Labor Productivity
(year-on-year percent change)

Unemployment rate
(left scale)
64
10

10

Nominal
wages

62

6

4

Natural Rate of
unemployment (NAIRU)
(left scale)

2

60

58

Real
wages

5

5

0

0

56

0

-5
Employment rate
(right scale)

-2

-5

54

Productivity

52 -10

-4
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

-10
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

The structural transformation of the economy towards high value-added activities has led to erosion of the
demand for low-skilled workers and increased the overall degree of mismatch in the labor market.
1.4

1.4

Beveridge Curve for Unskilled Workers

1.2

1.2

1.0

1.0

97

0.8
00

96

0.6

04

0.4

98

01

99

02

Vacancy rate (% of labor force)

Vacancy rate (% of labor force)

Beveridge Curve for Skilled Workers

0.8

97

96

0.6
0.4

0.2

04
02

99

0.2

0.0

00

98

03

01

03

0.0

0.8

0.6

1.3

1.6

1.2

1.4

2.0

1.8

Unemployment rate (% of labor force)

Sources: CEIC database and staff estimates.

1.6

1.6

1.3

2.9

3.9

3.2

3.2

4.6

Unemployment rate (% of labor force)

5.3

4.8

- 26 -

Figure 4. Hong Kong SAR: Financial Indicators, 1995-2004
Liquidity in the financial system has increased and credit
growth has begun to recover.
210
Deposit to loans ratio
(LH; in percent)

180
150

The forward premium on the Hong Kong dollar switched to a discount
in late September 2003 and the discount has persisted in 2004.

40

2.6

30

1.8

20

1.0

1.0

10

0.2

0.2

0

-0.6

-0.6

-10

-1.4

-1.4

-20

-2.2

2.6

12-month Hong Kong Dollar Forward
Premium/Discount
(in percent)

1.8

120
90
60
30

Loans for use in Hong Kong
(RH; y/y percent change)

0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Nominal interest rates remain at very low levels...
3-month HIBOR and LIBOR
(percent per annum; end of period)

2001

2002

2003

2004

15

16
10

12

2000

...and real lending rates are declining.
20

20
16

-2.2

1999

15
Real Lending Rates
(prime rate less
inflation)

10

12

HIBOR
LIBOR

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

-4

5

5

0

0
Ex ante rate 1/
Ex post rate 2/

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

-5

30

30
Banking NPLs and CARs
(in percent of total loans and total assets
respectively)

25
20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

1999

2002

2003

2001

2003

800

800
700

Hang Seng Index and Nasdaq
(January 1995=100)

2004

700
Hang Seng
Nasdaq

600
NPLs
CARs

20

1997

The stock market has recovered significantly since
mid-2003, in line with global markets.

Bank capitalization has remained high and
nonperforming loans have declined.

25

-5

1995

600

500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100
0

0
1997

1998 1999 2000

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Using consensus forecast of inflation.
2/ Using 12-month CPI inflation.

2001 2002 2003

2004

- 27 -

Figure 5. Hong Kong SAR: Fiscal Developments, FY1994/95-2004/05
The consolidated fiscal deficit has declined significantly
in FY2003/04; a similar performance is likely in
FY2004/05.
8

8

Fiscal policy, which was somewhat countercyclical
until recently, now appears procyclical. 2/
8

6

6

Overall balance
Structural balance 1/

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

-8

-8
FY96/97

FY98/99

FY00/01

FY02/03

6

6
Output Gap
Fiscal impulse

4

FY94/95

8
(In percent of GDP)

(In percent of GDP)

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

FY04/05

-6
FY94/95

FY96/97

FY98/99

FY00/01

FY02/03

FY04/05

...and social expenditures have been rising until
recently.

Revenue continues to be volatile...
25

9

30

30
(In percent of total expenditure)

(In percent of GDP)

Education
Health
Social welfare

25
7
Direct
taxes
Revenue
(right scale)

20

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

5

3
15

Land

1
Investment
income
-1

10
FY94/95

FY97/98

FY00/01

FY03/04

0

0
FY94/95

FY97/98

FY00/01

FY03/04

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Excludes land premium, investment income, privatization receipts, equity injections, and the effects of
cyclical fluctuations.
2/ The fiscal impulse is based on the structural balance.

- 28 -

Table 1. Hong Kong SAR: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002-2005
Nominal GDP (2003): US$ 156.7 billion
Population (end-2003): 6.8 million
GDP per capita (2003): US$23,030

Q4

Q1

2004
Q2

Q3

-0.6
-3.9
-2.5
0.1
-1.4
0.0
3.3
-12.5
-7.7

4.0
-1.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
-1.2
5.1
-9.1
1.3

4.9
3.8
2.0
0.5
0.5
0.8
1.0
-6.1
5.2

7.0
6.9
3.4
0.6
1.4
1.5
0.0
1.8
7.8

12.1
12.0
6.5
0.0
3.2
2.2
0.1
1.0
15.7

7.2
3.7
2.7
-0.1
1.2
-0.1
3.4
...
6.7

8.2
6.2
4.1
0.2
1.9
0.0
2.1
...
...

4.0
3.6
2.4
0.1
1.1
0.0
0.4
...
...

29.8
23.3
6.5

29.2
22.8
6.4

34.6
21.6
13.1

33.6
23.7
9.9

29.1
26.1
3.1

29.5
26.6
2.9

34.7
22.2
12.6

33.3
23.5
9.8

33.3
23.8
9.5

-2.6
-5.2

-2.0
-4.4

-2.5
-5.8

-3.6
-6.0

-2.3
-4.8

-1.8
-4.1

-0.9
-2.6

0.8
-2.5

-0.3
-2.7

1.0
1.2

-0.6
7.3
1.3

-0.4
7.9
0.1

0.3
7.5
0.3

-0.2
8.6
-0.2

-1.6
8.3
0.7

-0.2
7.4
-0.3

0.8
7.2
0.2

2.6
6.9
-0.5

2.6
6.8
...

2.9
6.4
...

2.2
5.6
...

Government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
Consolidated budget balance
Fiscal reserves at March 31

14.0
19.0
-4.9
25.0

17.0
20.2
-3.2
22.3

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

18.0
19.7
-1.7
19.5

18.5
18.7
-0.2
18.4

Money and credit (percent change, end-period)
Narrow money (M1)
Broad money (M3)
Loans for use in Hong Kong SAR

14.6
-0.9
-2.6

39.8
8.3
-2.0

14.5
1.9
-3.5

19.8
2.4
-3.3

27.5
5.6
-3.0

39.8
8.3
-2.0

45.5
8.7
-1.4

39.3
6.9
0.4

27.4
6.4
2.3

...
...
...

...
...
...

5.0
1.5

5.0
0.1

5.0
1.3

5.0
1.1

5.0
0.8

5.0
0.1

5.0
0.1

5.1
0.4

5.0
1.5

...
...

...
...

9321
-18.2
-11.1

12576
34.9
-12.0

8634
-21.7
-15.0

9577
-9.6
-17.1

11230
23.8
-14.1

12576
34.9
-0.6

12682
46.9
17.3

12286
28.3
29.5

13120
16.8
29.5

...
...
...

...
...
...

8.6
7.8
1.2

14.0
12.8
-1.0

19.1
18.6
-0.7

14.2
10.6
-1.1

9.8
7.9
-0.9

14.2
15.0
-1.3

14.8
15.6
-1.4

18.0
19.9
-1.8

15.5
14.2
-2.0

16.8
15.3
-1.9

6.5
6.8
-0.8

-3.2
7.9

-3.7
10.7

-5.4
12.4

-4.9
5.7

-2.8
14.1

-5.4
10.4

-11.3
5.2

-9.5
2.4

-4.7
...

-5.5
9.8

-7.5
9.5

Foreign exchange reserves 2/
In billions of U.S. dollars, end of period
In months of retained imports
In percent of broad money (M3)

111.9
22.6
24.5

118.4
23.1
26.0

113.6
22.4
25.0

114.4
22.9
24.6

112.1
22.6
23.5

118.4
23.1
23.8

123.8
23.2
24.9

120.8
21.0
24.1

118.4
19.9
23.4

...
...
...

...
...
...

Exchange rate
Linked rate (fixed)
Market rate (HK$/US$1, period average)
Real effective rate (period average, 1990=100)

7.799
137.7

7.787
125.2

HK$7.80/US$1
7.799
7.798
7.794
130.1
126.5
123.6

7.756
120.6

7.777
117.2

7.796
117.4

7.799
116.4

...
...

...
...

2003

Q1

Real GDP (percent change)
Domestic demand (contribution)
Private consumption
Government consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Inventories
Net exports (contribution)
Industrial production
Retail sales

1.9
-0.8
-0.7
0.2
-1.3
0.9
2.7
-9.7
-2.6

3.2
0.0
-0.5
0.2
0.0
0.3
3.2
-9.2
-0.6

4.4
0.9
-2.0
0.1
1.1
1.7
3.5
-8.9
-1.1

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic saving
Gross domestic investment
Saving-investment balance

31.1
23.4
7.7

31.9
22.8
9.1

Inflation (percent change)
Consumer prices
GDP deflator

-3.0
-3.6

Employment (percent change)
Unemployment rate (percent)
Real wages

Interest rates (percent, end-period)
Best lending rate
Three-month HIBOR
Asset prices
Hang Seng stock index (July 31, 1964=100)
Hang Seng stock index (percent change)
Residential property prices (percent change)
Merchandise trade (percent change) 1/
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
External balances (percent of GDP)
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance

2003
Q2

Staff Proj.
2004
2005

Q3

2002

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
Staff projections are consistent with the latest WEO submission.
1/ Current month and previous two months compared with the same period of previous year.
2/ Includes Land Fund assets from 1997 (US$17.5 billion at end- 1997).

18.1
14.3
3.8
1.0
2.7
-1.9
-0.6
-4.5
33.4
193

7.8
3.3
1.3
0.8

17.5
9.7
5.7
0.8

18.8
15.4
3.4
0.6
2.8
-5.8
-5.0
-5.2
29.3
158

4.1
0.8
0.9
0.0

13.8
9.7
6.1
0.7

FY01/02
Actual

20.6
16.4
4.2
0.7
3.5
-3.6
-3.4
-6.5
25.9
128.8

7.3
2.8
0.2
1.3

17.2
9.9
5.9
0.9

Budget

FY02/03

19.2
15.6
3.6
0.5
3.1
-5.3
-4.9
-6.1
25.0
130.2

5.1
2.0
0.4
0.0

14.2
9.1
6.3
0.9

Actual

20.5
16.3
4.2
0.6
3.6
-6.1
-5.3
-7.4
18.7
91.5

5.5
0.6
0.9
1.6

15.2
9.7
...
...

Budget

FY03/04

20.2
16.4
3.8
0.7
3.1
-4.9
-3.2
-4.5
22.6
110.4

6.5
0.3
1.7
1.3

17.0
10.5
...
...

Est.

Sources: Data provided by the Authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year begins April 1.
2/ As presented in the FY2002/03 budget proposed in March 2002.
3/ Balance excluding investment income.
4/ Staff estimates. The "structural balance" is used by staff to measure the impact of fiscal policy on domestic demand.
It excludes asset-related transactions, land premium, investment income, privatization receipts, equity injections, and the impact of cyclical fluctuations.
5/ FY2004-08 are the staff's latest projections based on current policies.

Expenditure
Current
Capital
Equity injections
Other capital
Primary balance 3/
Overall Balance
Structural balance 4/
Fiscal reserves
(in percent of annual expenditure)

Nontax
of which: Land sales and Land Fund Revenue
Investment income 2/
Privatization and asset sales

Revenue
Tax
Earnings and profits tax
Stamp duties

FY00/01

20.8
16.7
4.1
0.7
3.4
-5.6
-4.9
-6.7
20.2
96.8

4.6
0.6
0.7
2.4

15.9
11.4
...
...

FY04/05
Budget

Table 2. Hong Kong SAR: Consolidated Government Account, FY2000-FY2008 1/
(In percent of GDP)

19.7
16.1
3.6
0.7
2.9
-1.9
-1.7
-3.2
19.5
99.1

4.6
1.1
0.2
2.3

18.0
13.4
...
...

FY04/05 5/
Proj.

18.7
15.8
2.9
0.5
2.4
-1.0
-0.2
-1.5
18.4
98.7

4.2
0.6
0.8
1.8

18.5
14.3
...
...

FY05/06
Proj.

17.3
14.8
2.5
0.4
2.2
-0.3
0.5
-0.4
17.9
103.6

4.2
0.5
0.8
1.5

17.8
13.7
...
...

FY06/07
Proj.

16.5
13.7
2.8
0.3
2.5
-0.1
1.0
0.2
18.1
109.4

4.0
0.5
1.2
1.1

17.6
13.6
...
...

FY07/08
Proj.

16.2
12.5
3.8
0.4
3.4
0.2
1.5
0.6
18.4
113.3

3.8
0.5
1.3
1.0

17.6
13.8
...
...

FY08/09
Proj.

- 29 -

- 30 -

Table 3. Hong Kong SAR: Standard Vulnerability Indicators, 1998–2004

Public Sector
Fiscal deficit (in percent of GDP)
Accumulated fiscal surplus (in percent of GDP)
External Sector
Total Export volume (percent change)
Domestic exports
Reexports
Total Import volume (percent change)
Current account (in billions US$)
Net equity inflow (in billions of US$)
Gross official reserves (in billions of US$)
In months of retained imports
In percent of monetary base
In percent of broad money 1/
In percent of Hong Kong dollar M3
Short-term debt (in billions of US$) 2/
In percent of gross reserves
1-yr forward exchange rate premium (in pips, annual average)
Real exchange rate (percent change)
Financial Sector
HIBOR(3M)-LIBOR (3M) (in basis points)
Hang Seng Index (percent change, end-year)
Residential property prices (percent change, end-year)
Banking Sector 3/
Deposit-loans ratio 4/
Domestic credit growth 5/
Real credit growth
Capital adequacy ratio 5/
Nonperforming loans (in percent of total loans) 6, 7/
Net interest margin (in percent of interest-bearing assets) 7/
Return on assets (post-tax) 7/
Net open spot position (in billions of US$)
Net open forward position (in billions of US$)
Contagion Indicator
HK$-Renminbi forward exchange rate correlation (daily)
Hang Seng-NASDAQ correlation (daily)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004-latest

-1.8
33.9

0.8
35.7

-0.6
33.4

-5.0
29.3

-4.9
25.0

-3.2
22.6

-2.2
19.9

Oct. 2004
Oct. 2004

-4.3
-7.9
-3.7
-7.1
2.5
6.4
89.6
17.1
360.6
22.3
37.7
...
...
3285
7.7

3.7
-7.2
5.4
0.2
10.3
30.0
96.3
19.8
318.3
22.1
38.6
...
...
1043
-6.9

17.1
7.6
18.5
18.1
7.1
29.3
107.6
18.0
388.7
23.0
41.9
...
...
-35
-3.5

-3.3
-10.2
-2.4
-2.0
9.9
-23.5
111.2
20.4
377.0
24.4
43.0
...
...
53
1.5

8.7
-11.2
11.0
7.8
12.6
-14.4
111.9
22.6
354.0
24.8
43.5
28.7
25.6
139
-4.2

14.2
-7.3
16.3
13.1
17.0
-3.0
118.4
23.2
314.6
24.2
43.4
31.2
26.3
34.0
-9.3

16.1
1.7
17.2
16.5
9.8
-12.7
125.0
20.4
337.2
22.8
43.1
38.6
30.9
-634.7
-7.7

Sep. 2004
Sep. 2004
Sep. 2004
Sep. 2004
Dec. 2004
June 2004
Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004
June 2004
June 2004
Nov. 2004
Oct. 2004

267.25
-6.3
-32.5

45.49
68.8
-8.5

-41.75
-11.0
-14.5

-17.51
-24.5
-9.8

-0.62
-18.2
-12.2

-26.0
34.9
0.9

-117.3
11.8
27.2

Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004

90.8
-3.8
-6.4
18.5
7.7
2.0
0.9
6.2
-3.6

115.6
-7.2
-3.3
18.7
10.1
2.1
0.9
12.4
-5.2

143.3
2.3
6.3
17.8
7.3
2.1
1.2
25.7
-18.7

155.9
-3.8
-2.3
16.5
6.5
2.0
1.0
24.7
-14.6

159.8
-2.6
0.4
15.7
5.0
2.1
1.2
18.2
-6.7

175.3
-2.0
0.6
15.3
3.9
1.9
0.0
15.9
-6.4

176.9
0.2
-0.1
15.9
3.0
1.7
0.0
21.3
-16.3

Oct. 2004
Oct. 2004
Oct. 2004
June 2004
June 2004
June 2004
June 2004
Oct. 2004
Oct. 2004

0.73
0.22

0.57
0.84

-0.06
0.74

0.12
0.92

-0.12
0.78

0.9
0.9

0.8
0.5

Nov. 2004
Nov. 2004

Sources: Hong Kong SAR authorities, BIS, and staff estimates.
1/ Broad Money refers to M2.
2/ Official statistics on Hong Kong SAR's external debt are available from the first quarter of 2002.
3/ For all authorized institutions, unless otherwise specified.
4/ Figures have been revised due to a change in the definition of customer deposits to include short-term Exchange Fund placements.
5/ For all locally incorporated authorized institutions.
6/ Refers to total loans classified as: "substandard", "doubtful" and "loss".
7/ For retail banks, which comprise all the locally incorporated banks plus a number of the larger foreign banks whose operations are
similar to those of the locally incorporated banks in that they operate a branch network and are active in retail banking.

- 31 -

Table 4. Hong Kong SAR: Medium-term Macroeconomic Framework, 1999–2009

Average
1988-97

Projections
2004 2005

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

5.2

3.4

10.2

0.5

1.9

3.2

8.2

6.8
3.8
0.5
2.4
0.0
-1.6

-4.0
0.8
0.3
-5.5
0.4
7.4

9.8
3.5
0.2
3.2
2.8
0.4

0.9
1.2
0.6
0.7
-1.5
-0.5

-0.8
-0.7
0.2
-1.3
0.9
2.7

0.0
-0.5
0.2
0.0
0.3
3.2

Output gap (in percent of potential)

1.4

-4.9

1.2

-1.7

-2.8

Growth rates
Real domestic demand
Private consumption
Government consumption
Gross fixed capital formation

6.9
6.3
5.0
9.0

-4.5
1.3
3.1
-16.6

10.3
5.9
2.0
11.0

1.0
2.0
6.1
2.6

n.a.
30.0
n.a.

31.7
25.3
6.4

32.4
28.1
4.3

Inflation (percent change)
Consumer prices
GDP deflator

8.9
7.8

-4.0
-5.9

Employment (percent change)
Unemployment rate (percent)
Real wages

1.7
2.0
1.2

Government budget (percent of GDP) 1/
Revenue
Expenditure
Consolidated budget balance
Accumulated fiscal reserves (end-year)
Merchandise trade (percent change)
Export volume
Domestic exports
Reexports
Import volume

Real GDP (percent change)
Contribution
Real domestic demand
Private consumption
Government consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Inventories
Net Exports

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross investment
Saving-investment balance

Export value
Import value
Terms of trade

External balances (in billions of US$)
Trade balance
In percent of GDP
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Current account
In percent of GDP
Foreign exchange reserves (end-year)
In percent of GDP

2006

2007

2008

2009

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

6.2
4.1
0.2
1.9
0.0
2.1

3.6
2.4
0.1
1.1
0.0
0.4

3.5
2.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.5

3.5
2.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.5

3.5
2.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.5

3.5
2.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.5

-3.1

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.0

-0.8
-1.2
2.5
-4.5

0.4
-0.2
1.9
0.1

6.7
7.4
2.0
7.4

4.0
4.3
1.0
4.5

3.9
4.0
1.0
4.7

3.9
4.0
1.0
4.7

3.9
4.0
1.0
4.7

3.9
4.0
1.0
4.7

31.8
25.9
5.8

31.3
23.4
7.9

33.1
22.8
10.3

33.3
23.5
9.8

33.3
23.8
9.5

33.3
23.9
9.4

33.4
24.1
9.4

33.3
24.2
9.1

33.3
24.2
9.1

-3.7
-6.2

-1.6
-1.9

-3.0
-3.6

-2.6
-5.2

-0.3
-2.7

1.0
1.2

1.1
1.3

1.2
1.7

1.4
2.1

1.5
2.3

-0.3
6.2
3.8

3.1
5.0
3.6

1.3
5.1
3.4

-0.5
7.3
1.3

-0.3
7.9
0.1

2.9
6.4
...

2.2
5.6
...

2.2
4.7
...

2.2
3.9
...

2.2
3.0
...

2.2
2.1
...

17.3
14.9
2.4
34.0

18.7
17.9
0.8
35.7

17.5
18.1
-0.6
33.4

13.8
18.8
-5.0
29.3

14.2
19.2
-4.9
25.0

17.0
20.2
-3.2
22.3

18.0
19.7
-1.7
19.9

18.5
18.7
-0.2
18.4

17.8
17.3
0.5
17.9

17.6
16.5
1.0
18.1

17.6
16.2
1.5
18.4

17.8
16.0
1.8
18.6

13.0
-0.3
19.3
13.9

3.7
-7.2
5.4
0.2

17.1
7.6
18.5
18.1

-3.3
-10.2
-2.4
-2.0

8.7
-11.2
11.0
7.8

14.2
-7.3
16.3
13.1

16.8
-4.0
18.4
15.3

6.5
-3.0
7.1
6.8

6.6
-2.0
7.1
6.8

6.7
-1.0
7.1
6.8

6.7
-1.0
7.1
6.8

6.7
-1.0
7.0
6.8

14.7
16.0
0.1

0.1
-2.5
-0.7

16.6
19.2
-0.9

-5.8
-5.3
0.9

5.5
3.4
1.2

12.0
12.0
-1.3

26.9
27.7
-1.9

7.9
9.0
-0.8

7.3
7.5
-0.1

8.1
8.2
-0.1

8.2
8.2
0.0

8.0
7.9
0.2

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
42.9
38.5

-3.2
-2.0
175
178
10.3
6.4
96.3
59.9

-8.2
-5.0
202
211
7.1
4.3
107.6
65.1

-8.3
-5.1
191
199
9.9
6.1
111.2
68.3

-5.1
-3.2
200
205
12.6
7.9
111.9
70.0

-5.8
-3.7
224
230
16.7
10.7
118.4
75.7

-9.1
-5.5
285
294
16.2
9.8
125.0
75.9

-13.0
-7.5
307
320
16.5
9.5
123.0
71.0

-14.8
-8.1
329
344
17.1
9.4
124.0
67.9

-16.5
-8.5
356
373
18.1
9.4
125.1
64.7

-18.1
-8.8
385
403
18.7
9.1
126.2
61.5

-19.0
-8.7
416
435
19.8
9.1
127.4
58.4

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The budget numbers refer to the fiscal year (April through March).

- 32 -

Table 5. Hong Kong SAR: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999–2009

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Projections
2006
2007

2008

2009

16.5
-13.0
25.6
6.1
-2.2
-13.6
-0.8
-12.8
13.2
-21.9
10.7
-16.8
2.0
-2.9

17.1
-14.8
27.8
6.5
-2.3
-15.0
-0.7
-14.3
11.9
-19.9
10.2
-15.5
-1.0
-2.1

18.1
-16.5
30.2
6.9
-2.5
-14.7
-0.7
-14.1
11.8
-19.9
10.6
-15.5
-1.0
-3.3

18.7
-18.1
32.8
6.7
-2.7
-14.4
-0.6
-13.8
11.6
-19.7
10.9
-15.4
-1.2
-4.3

19.8
-19.0
35.6
6.1
-2.9
-14.0
-0.6
-13.4
11.4
-19.5
11.2
-15.3
-1.2
-5.8

9.5
-7.5
14.8
3.5
-1.3
-7.9
-0.5
-7.4
7.6
-12.6
6.2
-9.7
1.1
-1.7

9.4
-8.1
15.2
3.5
-1.3
-8.2
-0.4
-7.8
6.5
-10.9
5.6
-8.5
-0.6
-1.2

9.4
-8.5
15.6
3.6
-1.3
-7.6
-0.3
-7.3
6.1
-10.3
5.5
-8.0
-0.5
-1.7

9.1
-8.8
16.0
3.3
-1.3
-7.0
-0.3
-6.7
5.6
-9.6
5.3
-7.5
-0.6
-2.1

9.1
-8.7
16.3
2.8
-1.3
-6.4
-0.3
-6.1
5.2
-9.0
5.1
-7.0
-0.5
-2.7

2005

(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account
Goods Balance
Services balance
Income Balance
Transfer balance
Capital and Financial Account
Capital Account
Financial Account
Net Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Financial derivatives
Net bank loans and other investment
Reserve assets (net change)
Net errors and omissions

10.3
-3.2
10.5
4.5
-1.5
-10.7
-1.8
-9.0
5.2
33.1
10.2
-47.5
-10.0
0.5

7.1
-8.2
14.1
2.8
-1.7
-7.4
-1.5
-5.9
2.6
24.5
0.2
-23.1
-10.0
0.3

9.9
-8.3
14.8
5.3
-1.8
-12.5
-1.2
-11.3
12.4
-41.3
5.1
17.2
-4.7
2.5

12.6
-5.1
17.4
2.1
-1.9
-19.4
-2.0
-17.4
-7.8
-38.8
6.6
20.2
2.4
6.8

16.7
-5.8
20.0
4.4
-1.9
-23.0
-1.0
-21.4
9.8
-34.0
10.2
-5.2
-1.0
6.0

Current account
Goods Balance
Services balance
Income Balance
Transfer balance
Capital and Financial Account
Capital Account
Financial Account
Net Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Financial derivatives
Net bank loans and other investment
Reserve assets (net change)
Net errors and omissions

6.4
-2.0
6.5
2.8
-1.0
-6.7
-1.1
-5.6
3.3
20.6
6.4
-29.6
-6.2
0.3

4.3
-5.0
8.6
1.7
-1.0
-4.5
-0.9
-3.6
1.6
14.8
0.1
-14.0
-6.1
0.2

6.1
-5.1
9.1
3.2
-1.1
-7.7
-0.7
-6.9
7.6
-25.4
3.1
10.5
-2.9
1.6

7.9
-3.2
10.9
1.3
-1.2
-12.1
-1.3
-10.9
-4.9
-24.2
4.1
12.6
1.5
4.2

10.7
-3.7
12.8
2.8
-1.2
-14.7
-0.6
-14.0
5.2
-21.7
6.5
-3.3
-0.6
3.8

16.2
-9.1
21.9
5.4
-2.0
-12.8
-0.9
-11.9
14.4
-23.7
11.0
-7.0
-6.6
-3.4

(In percent of GDP)

Sources: Hong Kong SAR authorities and staff estimates.

9.8
-5.5
13.3
3.3
-1.2
-7.8
-0.6
-7.2
8.7
-14.4
6.7
-4.3
-4.0
-2.0

- 33 -

ANNEX I

FUND RELATIONS
I.

Membership Status

As a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China, Hong Kong SAR is
not a member of the IMF. However, annual consultation discussions have been held with the
Hong Kong SAR authorities since October 1990, and the staff also holds discussions with the
authorities in connection with the IMF’s Global Financial Stability reports. STA has
provided Hong Kong SAR with technical assistance in the area of balance of payments
statistics and Hong Kong SAR officials have attended INS courses on balance of payments
and monetary statistics, and financial programming.
II.

Exchange Rate Arrangement

The Hong Kong dollar has been linked to the U.S. dollar under a currency board arrangement
since October 1983 at a rate of HK$7.8/US$1. There are no restrictions on current or capital
account transactions in Hong Kong SAR, and the Hong Kong dollar is freely convertible.
The People’s Republic of China has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2,
3 and 4 of the Articles of Agreement on December 1, 1996.
III.

Resident Representative

The Hong Kong SAR sub-office of the Beijing Resident Representative’s office was opened
on September 23, 2000. Mr. Paul Gruenwald has served as the Resident Representative since
August 2003.

- 34 -

ANNEX II

STATISTICAL ISSUES
Hong Kong SAR provides statistics to the Fund on a timely basis for surveillance and
publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS). Hong Kong SAR subscribes to the
SDDS and is fully compliant with its requirements.
In 2004, Hong Kong SAR published comprehensive international investment position
statistics for the reference periods 2002 and 2003. It also published quarterly External Debt
statistics for the reference period of the second quarter of 2004 according to the
recommendations given in the External Debt Statistics: Guide for Compilers and Users.
Hong Kong SAR has for the first time reported GFS data for publication in the 2003 GFS
Yearbook, but no data have been provided for publication in IFS. In January 2004, the
authorities published their preliminary version of the accrual-based fiscal accounts starting
with the FY2002/03 fiscal data, which does not strictly follow the Fund’s Government
Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM 2001).

D

C, N

E, M

C

Frequency of
publication

Source of data

Mode of
reporting

Confidentiality
C

E, M

N

M

M

C

E, R

N

D

D

C

E, M

N

M

M

C

E, M

N

M

M

M

11/2004

10/2004

Broad
money

C

E, M

C, N

D

D

D

12/13/2004

12/13/2004

Interest
rates

C

E, M

N

M

M

M

11/2004

10/2004

Consumer
price
index

Frequency of data: D – daily, M – monthly, Q – quarterly.
Frequency of reporting: D – daily, M – monthly, Q – quarterly, P – periodically (upon request).
Source of data: A – direct reporting by authorities, N – official publications and websites.
Mode of reporting: E – electronic data transfer, M – mail, F- fax, R – press report.
Confidentiality: C – unrestricted use, D – embargoed for a specific period, and for unrestricted use thereafter.

1/ The codes are explained below.

D

M

D

M

D

Frequency of
data

Frequency of
reporting

11/2004

12/2004

12/2004

10/2004

12/13/2004

12/2004

Date received

11/2004

12/13/2004

International
reserves

Central
Bank
balance
sheet

Date of latest
observation

Exchange
rates

Reserve/
base
money

As of December 13, 2004

C

E, M

N

M

M

M

11/2004

10/2004

Exports/
Imports

C

E, M

N

Q

Q

Q

9/2004

Q2/2004

Current
account
balance

Hong Kong SAR: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators

C

E, M

N

M

M

M

11/2004

9/2004

Overall
government
balance

C

E, M

N

Q

Q

Q

11/2004

Q3/2004

GDP/GNP

- 35 ANNEX II

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
February 2, 2005

1.
This statement contains information that has become available since the staff report
was circulated to the Executive Board on January 4, 2005. This information does not alter the
thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
Some indicators of economic activity point to a moderation of economic growth
in the fourth quarter of 2004, but it is difficult to draw firm conclusions prior to the release
of GDP data.1 The slowdown in retail sales growth, from an average of about 10 percent
(year-on-year) during January-October 2004 to 6¾ percent (year-on-year) in November, may
be attributable to the decline in spending by tourists from the Mainland. External trade has
also weakened—export growth slowed to about 13 percent (year-on-year) in December from
17 percent (year-on-year) in November. The consumer price index rose by 0.2 percent (yearon-year) in December 2004 (the same rate of increase as in November). The unemployment
rate fell to 6.5 percent in December 2004 (from 6.7 percent in November).
3.
The overall fiscal position continues to improve significantly. Following a good
performance in the fourth quarter, investment income from the fiscal reserves in 2004 was
HK$14.5 billion, HK$2.2 billion higher than projected in the FY2004/05 budget. As of endDecember 2004, fiscal reserves stood at about HK$273 billion (about 21 percent of GDP;
up from HK$253 billion at end-September), sufficient to cover about 13 months of
government expenditures.
4.
Significant strong-side pressures on the Hong Kong dollar have persisted,
although the discount in the one-year forward rate has eased in January 2005. The
forward discount—which implies expectations of an appreciation—has declined to about
1½ percent (compared to a record 2 percent in November 2004).

1

GDP data for the fourth quarter will be released in March 2005.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/25
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 21, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the People's Republic of
China—Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
On February 2, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the People's Republic of China—Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region.1
Background
After a period of prolonged weakness in economic activity, persistent deflation and rising fiscal
deficits, the macroeconomic outlook has improved significantly since mid-2003. The recovery
has gained significant momentum and become broad-based in 2004. The recovery was spurred
by continued strong growth in the Mainland—complemented by the package of policy measures
approved by the Mainland authorities for Hong Kong SAR—and the global recovery. The strong
growth in the Mainland has provided a boost to growth in regional economies and the
associated improvement in intra-regional trade has contributed to Hong Kong SAR’s higher
export growth. The easing of restrictions on individual travel from the Mainland to Hong Kong
SAR helped to bolster tourism and private consumption. Investment spending also rose
significantly as business sentiment improved. The unemployment rate has fallen by almost
2 percentage points from its peak last year, to 6.7 percent at end-November 2004.
Strong domestic demand has contributed to the rebound of the property sector and the end of
consumer price deflation. After five years of persistent price declines, the CPI index rose slightly
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2during July-November 2004. Residential property prices bottomed out in July 2003, and have
soared by about 40 percent since then, but remain below their peak in October 1997. The Hang
Seng index has increased by about 70 percent since its trough in June 2003. The external
current account surplus increased in 2003, in part due to the decline in domestic investment,
however, it has narrowed in 2004, reflecting the increase in private consumption and the rise in
domestic investment following the economic recovery.
The consolidated fiscal deficit for FY2004/05 (before bond issuance) is now projected at about
1¾ percent of GDP, compared with the budget target of about 5 percent of GDP. The
improvement relative to the budget is on account of buoyant revenue performance (reflecting
stronger growth and large proceeds from land sales) and continued expenditure restraint. Fiscal
reserves are projected at about 13 months of expenditures at the end of this fiscal year, well
above the budget target of 10 months.
The staff projects that real GDP growth will decline from 8¼ percent in 2004 to 4 percent in
2005, reflecting a slowing in global growth and some easing of activity on the Mainland. CPI
inflation is expected to remain subdued in 2005. The unemployment rate should fall below
6 percent in 2005, with employment growth in the range of 2 to 2½ percent. The risks to this
outlook are largely external. The downside risks are related to the durability of the global
expansion, including the possible negative effects of persistently high oil prices. On the upside,
there is some potential for stronger inbound tourism and more robust intra-regional trade.

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for their skillful macroeconomic management,
including their efforts to rein in the fiscal deficit. Directors noted that the economic recovery has
become more broad-based in 2004, driven by the authorities’ package of policy measures as
well as the global recovery. Consumer price deflation appears to have ended, mainly reflecting
robust domestic demand. Directors considered these achievements to be a testament to the
resilience and flexibility of the Hong Kong SAR economy, especially given the significant
external shocks of recent years.
Against the background of a promising near-term macroeconomic outlook, Directors noted that
sustaining strong growth over the medium term will depend crucially on effectively managing the
challenges of ongoing integration with the Mainland. In particular, Directors noted that Hong
Kong SAR will need to continue to bolster its competitiveness by complementing its traditional
strengths—flexible product and factor markets, and strong institutions—with sound
macroeconomic policies and productivity-enhancing reforms.
Directors commended the authorities for continued expenditure restraint which, together with
revenue buoyancy, has led to a significant decline in the fiscal deficit over the past two years.
They welcomed the likelihood that budget balance on a consolidated basis will be achieved
earlier than expected. Nevertheless, Directors encouraged the authorities to take advantage of
the current favorable macroeconomic environment to forcefully address the long-standing

-3structural deficit problem. They stressed that eliminating the structural deficit as soon as
possible would help bolster fiscal reserves and facilitate adjustment to shocks that the economy
might face. Directors welcomed the authorities’ continued commitment to expenditure restraint,
which will require careful monitoring of the civil service wage bill and adequate control of social
expenditures.
Directors stressed that broadening the tax base and stabilizing revenues remains a key policy
priority. They considered a goods and services tax (GST) as an appropriate instrument for
improving the efficiency of the tax regime and reducing the reliance on volatile revenue sources.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ plans to engage in extensive public consultations in order to
build consensus on the introduction of a GST. Given the long lead time required, Directors
emphasized that technical preparations for the implementation of a GST will need to get under
way without delay.
In addition, Directors encouraged the authorities to develop a longer-term focus for fiscal policy
that takes into account potential fiscal pressures that are likely to arise from Hong Kong SAR’s
aging population. Such a focus could include targeting a higher level of fiscal reserves or net
government assets.
Directors noted that the Hong Kong Monetary Authority has effectively managed pressures on
the Hong Kong dollar over the past year and that the linked exchange rate system (LERS)
remains robust. They reiterated their support for the authorities’ commitment to the LERS.
Directors commended the Hong Kong SAR authorities for implementing the recommendations
of the 2003 Financial Sector Assessment Program report, including the enhancement of
regulatory and supervisory arrangements. They noted that the passage of legislation to
introduce a deposit insurance scheme is a positive development—its launch in 2006 will further
strengthen the banking system. Directors stressed that it was important for Hong Kong SAR to
continue strengthening its financial infrastructure as well as its supervisory and regulatory
systems in order to maintain its position as a leading international financial center. Directors
welcomed the significant progress that has been made in strengthening the Anti-Money
Laundering framework, including the issuance of relevant guidelines for its implementation.
Directors welcomed the progress made by the authorities in improving cooperation with their
Mainland supervisory counterparts in the banking, securities, and insurance industries.
They noted that coordination of supervisory activities between the two economies will become
increasingly important as their integration intensifies.
Directors noted the progress made by the government in reducing its direct involvement in the
property market and encouraged the authorities to take further steps in this direction. In this
respect, they emphasized that continued provision of timely information about the government’s
plans concerning the supply of land will help reduce uncertainty and mitigate any associated
instability in property prices.

-4Directors emphasized that tackling structural unemployment is a key policy priority. They noted
that outsourcing of manufacturing and low-end service sector jobs to the Mainland has reduced
the demand for low-skilled workers in Hong Kong SAR. Directors expressed their support for the
government’s proposed education reforms and its ongoing retraining and skills-upgrading
programs. They encouraged the authorities to maintain Hong Kong SAR’s labor market
flexibility, which has traditionally delivered good outcomes and will help facilitate adjustment to
further shifts in the structure of the economy.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after
Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in
a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation with the People’s Republic of
China—Hong Kong Special Administration Region is also available.

-5-

People's Republic of China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region:
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
2005
Proj.

Real GDP (percent change)
Real domestic demand (contribution)
Foreign balance (contribution)

10.2
9.8
0.4

0.5
0.9
-0.5

1.9
-0.8
2.7

3.2
0.0
3.2

8.2
6.2
2.1

4.0
3.6
0.4

Inflation (percent change)
Consumer prices
GDP deflator

-3.7
-6.2

-1.6
-1.9

-3.0
-3.6

-2.6
-5.2

-0.3
-2.7

1.0
1.2

17.5
18.1
-0.6

13.8
18.8
-5.0

14.2
19.2
-4.9

17.0
20.2
-3.2

18.0
19.7
-1.7

18.5
18.7
-0.2

-8.2
-5.0
7.1
4.3

-8.3
-5.1
9.9
6.1

-5.1
-3.2
12.6
7.9

-5.8
-3.7
17.0
10.7

-9.1
-5.5
16.2
9.8

-13.0
-7.5
16.5
9.5

107.6
18.0

111.2
20.4

111.9
22.6

118.4
23.3

123.5
25.3

...
...

Government budget (percent of GDP) 1/
Revenue
Expenditure
Consolidated budget balance
External balances (in billions of US$)
Merchandise trade balance
In percent of GDP
Current account balance
In percent of GDP
Foreign exchange reserves
Foreign exchange reserves
(in billions of U.S. dollars, end of period)
(In months of retained imports)

Sources: Data provided by the Hong Kong SAR authorities; and IMF Staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year begins April 1.

