© 2009 International Monetary Fund

June 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/194

Togo: 2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Executive Director for Togo
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2009 Article IV
consultation with Togo and the second review under the three-year arrangement under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under
the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, prepared by
a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on February 25, 2009, with the
officials of Togo on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at
the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on April 8, 2009. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its April 21, 2009, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Togo.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Togo*
*Also included in Staff Report

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
TOGO
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the ThreeYear Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Michael Atingi Ego and Anthony Boote
April 8, 2009
•

Discussions: Article IV consultation and second review of the PRGF arrangement in Lomé,
February 11–25, 2009.

•

Staff team: Mr. Mills (head), Ms. Ocampos, Mr. Rosa, Mr. Dagher (all AFR), and Mr. Yao (resident
representative). Mr. Krueger (AFR) joined the mission for its last three days.

•

Interlocutors: President Gnassingbé, President of the National Assembly Bonfoh, Prime Minister
Houngbo, Finance Minister Ayassor, BCEAO National Director Adjahoto, and other senior officials.

•

Relations with the Fund: Togo’s three-year PRGF arrangement was approved in April 2008, in an
amount of SDR 66.06 million (90 percent of quota). An augmentation of access of SDR 18.35 million
(25 percent of quota) was approved in September 2008. The HIPC decision point was reached in
November 2008. The authorities have met all performance criteria and all but two benchmarks for the
second review. In the attached Letter of Intent, they request completion of the review.

•

Exchange arrangements: Togo has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4.
Togo shares a common currency (CFA franc), pegged against the Euro, with other WAEMU
members. The BCEAO conducts monetary and exchange rate policies for the region. Banks are
supervised by the WAMU Banking Commission.

•

Past advice: The previous Article IV consultation was concluded in June 2007. The IMF and the
authorities agreed that fiscal discipline and timely implementation of structural reforms were critical to
reviving and sustaining economic growth. Top priorities were financial sector and fiscal governance
reforms, especially those related to budget execution and public expenditure management.

•

Focus of the Article IV consultation: The discussions focused on (i) policies to accelerate economic
growth and preserve stability, given the global financial crisis; (ii) strategies to raise growth potential
and external competitiveness by investing in infrastructure, health, and education, improving the
business climate, and reforming state-owned banks and enterprises; and (iii) strengthening public
finances in terms of both management and sustainability.

• Outreach: A staff seminar with officials and representatives of civil society discussed the impact of
the global financial crisis and domestic debt management. The mission also met with representatives
of labor unions, employer associations, NGOs, donors, and the media.

• Economic statistics: Adequate for surveillance purposes, but weaknesses remain.

2

Table of Contents
Glossary...........................................................................................................................................4
Executive Summary.........................................................................................................................5
Staff Appraisal.................................................................................................................................6
I. Recent Economic Developments and PRGF Performance: Sluggish Growth Despite Good
Program Implementation .................................................................................................................7
A. Solid Fiscal Performance Tempered by Capacity Constraints........................................7
B. Good Progress on Structural Reforms for 2008/09.......................................................11
C. Program Monitoring and Risks.....................................................................................16
D. HIPC Process ................................................................................................................16
II. Article IV Consultation Discussions.........................................................................................17
A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Vulnerabilities: Moderate Impact of the Global Crisis
Expected; Vigilance Still Needed......................................................................................17
B. Strengthening Medium-Term Fiscal Policy: Crucial to Economic and Debt
Sustainability .....................................................................................................................20
C. Enhancing Productivity Growth and External Competitiveness: The Path to Higher
and Sustainable Economic Growth....................................................................................23
D. Raising External Competitiveness................................................................................24
Boxes
1.
2.
3.

Expected Transmission Channels of the Global Crisis in Togo........................................18
The HIPC Initiative to Bring Debt Indicators to Comfortable
Levels Even After Including Domestic Debt...............................................................20
REER: No Serious Misalignment Despite Recent Trend Toward Overvaluation............26

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.

Recent Macroeconomic Developments ...............................................................................8
Cotton and Phosphate Prices ............................................................................................. 17
Capital Investment in WAEMU Countries........................................................................ 21
Improving Competitiveness and Boosting Economic Growth .......................................... 25

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006-10......................................................28
Balance of Payments, 2007-14 ..........................................................................................29
Central Government Financial Operations, 2007-10.........................................................30
Monetary Survey, 2007-09 ................................................................................................32
Medium-Term Outlook, 2007-14 ...................................................................................... 33
Official External Debt, 2007-10 ........................................................................................34
Proposed Schedule of Disbursement Under PRGF Arrangement, 2008-11......................35
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2006-16 ..........................................................36

3
9.
10.
11.

Compliance with WAEMU Convergence Criteria, 2004-09.............................................37
Triggers for the Floating Completion Point ...................................................................... 38
Selected Indicators on the Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2007..........................39

Appendix I: Letter of Intent ........................................................................................................... 40
Table 1. Quantitative Performance Criterion and Indicative Targets ...............................49
Table 2. Structural Conditionality for 2008......................................................................50
Table 3. Structural Conditionality for 2009......................................................................51

4
GLOSSARY

BCEAO
BTCI
BIATogo
CEET
FEZ
GFS
PC
PIP
SB

Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of the West Africa)
Banque Togolaise Pour Le Commerce Et L’Industrie (Togolese Trade and Industrial
Bank)
Banque Internationale Pour L'Afrique Au Togo (International Bank for Africa-Togo)

Compagnie Energie Electrique du Togo (Electric Energy Company of Togo)
Free Economic Zone
Government Finance Statistics
Performance criterion
Programme d'Investissement Publique (Public Investment Program)
Structural benchmark
Système intègre de Gestion du Finance Publique (Integrated Budget Execution and
SIGFIP
Reporting System)
SNTP
Société Nouvelle des Phosphates du Togo (New Phosphate Company of Togo)
SOTOCO Société Togolaise de Coton (Cotton Company of Togo)
UTB
Union Togolaise de Banques (Banks' Union of Togo)
WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union

5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
After three years of solid reform implementation, Togo’s PRGF-supported economic
revival faces new risks due to the global recession. The global financial crisis is starting to
drag down growth just as it was poised to improve in response to the economic program. In
response, the authorities reiterated their commitment to the PRGF-supported program and aim
to accelerate growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Implementation of the PRGF-supported program was strong in 2008, despite lackluster
growth of 1.1 percent due to global price shocks and heavy flooding. All quantitative
targets and structural benchmarks were met—many with ample margins or in advance—with
the sole exceptions that the indicative target for social and investment spending was undershot
and there was an unavoidable delay in launching a study of the phosphate sector. Slow
implementation of emergency repairs after the floods highlighted capacity constraints. After
inflation peaked in August 2008, falling world oil and food prices helped bring it down to
8.4 percent by year-end and also mitigated deterioration in the terms of trade and the current
account deficit (6.6 percent of GDP).
As for the economic outlook for 2009 and 2010, the nascent recovery is expected to be
offset by the impact of the global recession on Togo. A rebound in subsistence agriculture
and rising public investment are expected to be offset by the adverse effects of the global
recession, even though these should be moderated by Togo’s less integrated financial sector and
already depressed exports. Nevertheless, the global recession’s impact on exports and
remittances is expected to keep growth to just 1.7 percent in 2009 and 2.1 percent in 2010.
Improving terms of trade in 2009 will narrow the current account deficit to about 6 percent.
Concerned about low growth, the authorities resolved to accelerate key reforms to
promote growth through the medium term. The main challenges are to (i) keep the economy
stable despite the global recession, supporting demand consistent with debt sustainability;
(ii) pursue fiscal policy reforms to improve budget execution, strengthen sustainability, and
support growth; and (iii) effectively tackle structural bottlenecks in the financial and export
sectors and utilities. In particular, addressing the liquidity and credit shortage in the private
sector is an immediate priority.
Despite notable progress so far, Togo’s modest economic outlook faces significant
economic and political risks. A worse global recession or a heavier impact could further
depress growth and revenues, as well as delaying private sector involvement in restructuring
state-owned banks and enterprises. Moreover, the run-up to the 2010 presidential elections
could create political uncertainty or complicate program implementation. The authorities,
however, stressed their determination to implement the program fully and to achieve the HIPC
completion point as early as possible in 2010.

6
STAFF APPRAISAL
Program performance has been commendable, especially considering the demanding
circumstances. Fiscal policy has been prudent in the face of exogenous shocks and slower than
expected growth, although this result is partly on account of underspending on emergency
repair projects which highlights worrisome weaknesses. The authorities rightly place high
priority on addressing the capacity constraints demonstrated by this underspending. The
authorities’ proposed adjustments to the fiscal framework—shifting unspent money for
emergency projects from 2008 to 2009 and increasing the share of domestic arrears cleared in
cash—are appropriate in light of slow growth and consistent with medium-term debt
sustainability.
Staff welcomes the authorities’ strong progress on the program’s structural reforms and
supports their determination to accelerate their implementation. Most program benchmarks
were achieved early—the only delay was again due to capacity constraints in procurement (in
this case for the strategic audit of the phosphate sector). The structural reforms rightly continue
to stress fiscal governance, financial sector restructuring and public enterprise reform, with an
increasing emphasis on measures with a more direct impact on growth.
Staff recommends completion of the second review of the PRGF arrangement and
revision of the end-June quantitative PCs, on the basis of the performance and assessment
discussed above.
The Article IV consultation discussions focused on efforts to achieve higher economic
growth. The authorities understandably expressed concern that major reforms were not yielding
the expected growth. The series of shocks hitting Togo’s recovery is offsetting part of the
growth impact, while some of the impact will take more time to materialize. Staff believes that
Togo’s policy priorities remain appropriate for managing the challenges of its economic
recovery and the global recession. On fiscal policy, the authorities’ medium-term goal is
suitably to increase the level and quality of public investment, while consolidating
sustainability through a prudent fiscal balance, HIPC relief and a reliance on concessional
financing. Their structural policies priorities discussed above are also well-targeted and
consistent with past Article IV discussions; the authorities’ emphasis on accelerating and
deepening reforms to achieve higher growth is therefore welcome.
The authorities’ fiscal and structural policies are also consistent with external stability.
Membership in the WAEMU currency zone continues to serve Togo’s economic interests,
providing a valuable anchor for stability. Togo remains broadly competitive, while the recent
trend toward overvaluation of the real effective exchange rate places a premium on rapid
implementation of fiscal and structural policies to promote growth and productivity.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Togo take place within
24 months, subject to the decision on consultation cycles in program countries.

7
I. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PRGF PERFORMANCE:
SLUGGISH GROWTH DESPITE GOOD PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
1.
Togo’s success in remaining on track with its PRGF arrangement has been
commendable, especially considering the severe flooding and global price shocks in 2008.
The flooding severely damaged vital infrastructure and agriculture, leading to an abrupt
slowdown in the latter part of the year and reducing estimated real GDP growth to 1.1 percent
(Table 1, Figure 1). Surging world food and oil prices pushed inflation up to 15.8 percent (on a
12-month basis) in August 2008, although it dropped back to an estimated 8.4 percent
(average) by year-end as oil and commodity prices fell. Money growth increased by 16
percent, comparable to other WAEMU countries, as delays in spending donor assistance for
emergency repairs temporarily pushed up net foreign assets. Credit to the nongovernment
sector fell slightly, however. Falling oil and food prices helped limit the deterioration of the
terms of trade by year-end and contain the upsurge in the current account deficit to 6.6 percent
(Tables 2 and 4).
2.
In 2009 Togo’s recovery will be dampened by the impact of the global recession.
Staff projects real GDP growth of about 1.7 percent in 2009, 1.3 percentage points lower than
previously expected. The expected rebound in subsistence production after the flood damage
and increased public investment (about 2 percentage points of GDP) are expected to be
counterbalanced by the crisis’ impact on trade and remittances. However, the decline in global
energy and food prices will reduce inflationary pressures, improve the terms of trade, and
narrow the current account deficit.
A. Solid Fiscal Performance Tempered by Capacity Constraints
3.
Fiscal performance was generally good in 2008, although overperformance on key
targets is partly due to underspending on emergency infrastructure repairs. Collection of
both taxes and customs revenues was higher than expected, reflecting improved management
and computerization. Spending was below budget because capital spending was underexecuted
while current spending was disciplined despite economic difficulties. In particular, complex
and cumbersome procurement procedures hampered the expedited start-up of priority repair
projects following flood damage. As a result, the domestic primary balance (a performance
criterion) amounted to +0.4 percent of GDP, compared with the program floor of −0.5 percent.
The target on net domestic financing (PC) was met by an ample margin (0.4 percent of GDP),
with a corresponding accumulation of government deposits in the banking system. On the
other hand, social and capital spending fell more than 1 percent of GDP short of the indicative
target (Table 3).

8
Figure 1. Togo: Recent Macroeconomic Developments
Togo's economic growth—already low for the
region—has been cut sharply by exogenous shocks in
2008 and 2009.

5.0

Real GDP Growth Rate (%)

4.0

2.0

... and per capita income is stagnating, falling
farther behind the regional average.

1.5

Per Capita Real GDP Growth rate (%)

1.0

3.0

0.5
0.0

2.0

-0.5
1.0

-1.0
-1.5

0.0
2005

2006

2007

Togo

12 month growth %

20

2008

2009

Togo

-2.0
2005

WAEMU average

Swings in oil and food prices pushed inflation up
and back down by end-2008...

16

50

Annual CPI inflation (yoy) monthly

40

12
SSA
8

30

4

20

Imports
(LHS)

Jan-07

Jan-08

2007

-5

20
10
-0.9

2.1

2.1

Primary balance
4.5

3.2

Revenue
-0.5

-1.1

0.2

0.4

-0.6

Primary spending
Other spending
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Est. Proj.

12 month growth, %

Grants

2008

2009

… while money growth has decelerated slightly.

Fiscal Indicators (Percent of GDP)
30

5

-10

Jan-09

Fiscal policy has remained prudent (and stronger than
expected in 2008) ...

15

0
CAD
(RHS)

0
Jan-06

20

10
Exports
(LHS)

10

Jan-05

-30

2009

WAEMU

-4

-20

2008

...and pushed up the current account deficit
(although less than expected at mid-year).

Togo

-10

2007

Trade (percentage of GDP)

0

0

2006

WAEMU average

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20

Money Growth - in percentage change

Broad
Money

Credit to the
Economy

Net Foreign Assets

8
7
6
5
8
7
6
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
/2
/2
/2
/2
/2
/2
/2
6
2
2
6
2
6
2
1
1
1
1
Sources: National authorities and Fund staff estimates.

9

4.
The 2009 budget strengthens the focus on priority spending and promoting
growth while preserving debt sustainability (Text Table 1). Even with some proposed
relaxation (see below), the budget targets a domestic primary deficit of only 0.6 percent of
GDP. Continued efforts to broaden the tax base and reduce tax rates are expected to be fiscally
neutral. The government intends to further increase the share of priority spending on social and
physical capital, in line with its poverty reduction strategy (PRS) objectives.
Text Table 1. Togo: Spending by priority sectors, 2007-12
2007

2008

2009
Budget

2010

2011
Proj.

2012

(Percent of GDP)
Primary spending (domestically and foreign financed )
Spending in priority sectors
Health
Education
Other social
Of which capital spending
Other spending
Of which capital spending

18.6
6.4
1.8
3.7
1.0
0.9
12.1
2.1

17.8
7.0
2.2
3.9
0.9
1.3
10.8
2.2

20.3
9.4
3.3
5.0
1.2
3.2
10.9
2.4

22.1
12.4
5.1
5.7
1.6
5.3
9.7
1.8

22.2
12.4
5.2
6.1
1.1
5.4
9.8
1.6

22.2
12.7
5.3
6.4
1.0
5.4
9.5
1.6

Source: Togolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections

5.
The authorities have also acted in 2008 and in the 2009 budget to help protect
vulnerable segments of the population. In 2008 they allowed full pass-through of rising
international food prices and sought to mitigate the social impact through targeted measures,
particularly subsidies for seeds and fertilizers to boost production; sales of food stocks;
accelerated payment of pension arrears; and an increase in the minimum wage. For 2009 the
budget increases the subsidies for agricultural inputs and cut personal and corporate taxes. For
petroleum products, the authorities limited the pass-through of world oil prices in 2007 and
2008 to mitigate their impact on real incomes; by the terms of a previous agreement, the
government incurred contingent liabilities equal to 1.5 percent of GDP to oil distributors as a
result of their reduced margins. With current world and domestic prices, however, margins
have become higher than normal, gradually reducing this contingent liability (LOI, ¶13).
6.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: In light of past over-performance and the
somber economic context both in Togo and globally, the authorities are determined to
make the best use of the limited fiscal leeway available, with the priority on addressing
slow project execution (LOI, ¶7). Delayed repair projects have prolonged the economic costs
of the damage from the 2008 floods, most notably to bridges and roads critical to agriculture,
transport, and related activities. Recognizing the role of increased investment spending in
supporting growth, the authorities have drawn up an action plan, with staff assistance, to
strengthen and streamline project execution and procurement processes, so that domestic and
donor resources are used in accordance with PRS objectives. Priority projects will be
expedited, a higher share of the annual budget will be available at the beginning of the fiscal

10
year, overlapping controls in the spending chain will be reduced, and training will be provided
for project execution. Staff welcomed these measures but noted the need for continued
spending controls and the risks capacity constraints still pose to project budget execution.
7.
The authorities plan to increase domestic investment spending in 2009 by the
amount of underspending on emergency repairs in 2008. They also concurred with staff
that it should favor priority investments. The authorities plan to submit a supplementary
budget to this effect. Due to stronger than expected revenue performance in 2008, the
authorities are maintaining revenue projections for 2009 despite somewhat slower projected
growth. As a result the floor on the 2009 fiscal balance falls relative to the previous 2009 fiscal
framework by the amount of carried over investment spending—about ½ percent of GDP.
Combined with rising foreign-financed investment, the resulting increase in public investment
is affordable, helps Togo cope with the impact of the global crisis, and supports growth.
8.
To increase liquidity for businesses, the authorities intend to increase the portion
of domestic arrears clearance to be settled in cash. Domestic arrears verified by an audit
conducted by KPMG 1 amount to nearly 3 percent of GDP. The budget already provides for
settling ½ percent of GDP in cash to smaller suppliers, based on a plan developed in
consultation with Fund staff. The rest was to be settled by issuing medium-term securities
directly to businesses, which would provide limited help for their pressing liquidity needs.
Representatives of the private sector and other observers highlighted the constraints on growth
posed by this shortage of liquidity for enterprises in an economy with anemic private sector
credit and a large stock of outstanding domestic government arrears. To help jump-start
private sector activity, the authorities prefer to increase the portion of settlements in cash, to be
financed both by grants from donors and by domestic financing of ½ percent of GDP. Staff
supports this measure, which is affordable and addresses pressing liquidity needs. The impact
on public finances would be small. Increasing the 2009 arrears cash clearance will not have an
impact on the primary balance, while the additional domestic financing required is limited to
about 0.3 percent of GDP, compatible with the government’s available deposits.
9.
Staff supported the authorities’ planned measures to help protect vulnerable
segments of the population, consistent with the budget, especially the increase in
subsidies for inputs for subsistence agriculture. The authorities also discussed options to
help the cotton sector, which is struggling due to the liquidation of the former state cotton
company and low world demand. 2 Using resources in the budget, the government intends to
1

A discount of 20 percent will be applied to the verified domestic arrears. Amounts not cleared in cash will be
settled with government securities with a maturity of 5 to 7 years at below-market interest rates.

2

The former publicly owned cotton ginning company, SOTOCO, was liquidated in 2008 after it was unable to
pay more than 250.000 farmers for their 2004/2005 crop. After the company was audited, farmers were paid off in
cash and its debt to domestic banks was securitized by government bonds. A new cotton ginning company, NSCT
(New Cotton Company of Togo) has been created as part of the reforms to the sector.

11
absorb the projected net operating losses (less than 0.1 percent of GDP). 3 The government also
intends to help the new cotton company obtain financing (either a domestic loan guarantee or a
direct loan) for fertilizer and seeds for the 2009/2010 season (projected at less than 0.2 percent
of GDP). Staff supported these efforts as interim measures, provided they remain consistent
with the program’s fiscal framework, but urged the authorities to draw up longer-term
arrangements for the cotton sector that minimize the need to resort to public money. Regarding
petroleum products, staff expressed serious concern about the current contingent liability and
future risks. The government is committed to maintaining a margin for distributors that will
eliminate the contingent liability within 20 months and to reviewing the pricing mechanism to
avoid such large liabilities in the future.
B. Good Progress on Structural Reforms for 2008/09
10.
The authorities have made good progress in achieving structural reforms, meeting
nearly all program benchmarks on or ahead of schedule (Text Tables 2 and 3, as well as
Appendix 1, Tables 2 and 3). There was a slight delay in initiating the strategic audit of the
phosphate sector. In 2009 the focus of structural reforms will expand from reinforcing public
finances and laying the groundwork for reform of state-owned banks and enterprises to
measures with more direct impact on growth. The program’s structural reform agenda has four
measures planned for completion before the next review; two structural benchmarks have
already been completed (initiating restructuring of BTCI and reducing tax exemptions), and
the other two measures concern reform of the Treasury (structural performance criterion 4) and
the preparation of development strategy for the phosphate sector (structural benchmark).
Advances on reforms to strengthen fiscal policy implementation
11.
After helping to restore fiscal discipline, public financial management reforms are
starting to address such medium-term needs as accounting, tax policy, and debt
management:

3

4

The net loss assumes the sale of the stock of unsold cotton, worth about 0.2 percent of GDP.

In the context of the transition to review-based structural conditionality decided by the Board, the Togolese
authorities chose to maintain the sole existing structural performance criterion on Treasury reform, to be
completed by the end of June 2009.

12

•

Treasury reform: Far-reaching reforms underway at the Treasury aim to strengthen its
credibility, lay the groundwork for effective cash and debt management, and ensure
accurate accounting of budget execution. The Treasury has been reorganized, and
planned accounting reforms (PC for June 2009) are on track. A General Finance
Inspectorate has been set up to monitor use of public resources. A framework for
regular Treasury bill auctions was established in September 2008 (SB, met three
months early).

•

Tax policy: The 2009 budget law has reduced tax exemptions and the fiscal
administration has been given more authority to control the Free Economic Zone (FEZ)
(SB for June 2009, met early).

•

Domestic arrears clearance and domestic debt: The government has established a
mechanism to monitor domestic debt, adopted the principles for an arrears clearance
strategy, and set up an intergovernmental committee to define concrete steps. The
authorities plan to initiate settlement well before year-end, as discussed above (SB for
end-2009).

Progress on bank restructuring and plans to accelerate it
12.
Three state-owned banks, including BTCI, were fully recapitalized with
government securities in December 2008 (March 2009 SB, met early) (LOI, ¶10). Drawing
on technical assistance from the Fund and the World Bank, the authorities issued securities in
exchange for the NPLs of three large undercapitalized public banks, representing about
27 percent of total loans (about 7 percent of GDP). This operation restored the banks’
compliance with the prudential indicators. The authorities intend, with the support of the
World Bank, to set up a mechanism for recovering and settling the NPLs now in their
possession; completion of the process has been postponed to December 2009 because of its
complexity and the need to procure advisory services (revised SB for December 2009). With
World Bank technical support, the authorities also plan to work with the BCEAO to help
develop a secondary market for the securities.

13
Text Table 2. Togo: Status of Structural Reforms Through 2008
Measures

Type

Date

Status

Fiscal governance
Create a General Inspectorate of Finance under
the responsibility of the Minister of Finance.

Performance criterion

August 2008

Done

Adopt a strategy and timetable for clearing
domestic arrears.

Performance criterion

December
2008

Done

Financial sector
Change management and oversight of BTCI
based on terms of reference prepared in
consultation with the WAMU Banking
Commission.
Adopt an action plan for introducing regular
Treasury bill auctions in 2009.
Public enterprises
Initiate an audit of the phosphate sector, based
on competitive selection of an audit company, in
consultation with the World Bank.
Prepare a review of the finances of the national
electricity company (CEET), in consultation with
the World Bank.

Prior action for PRGF
approval

Done

Benchmark

December
2008

Benchmark

October 2008

Benchmark

December
2008

Done

Done in
Jan. 2009

Done

13.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: Concerned with tight private sector credit
and liquidity, the authorities are determined to accelerate privatization of four stateowned banks. They hope to launch the initial call for bids much earlier than planned (SB for
December 2009). Staff strongly supported this ambitious goal and hoped that signs of interest
in the region hold up despite the global downturn. Staff also urged the authorities to expedite
the transfer of the management of bad loans from banks to a separate agency so that the banks
can focus on restarting the flow of credit to the economy. 5
14.
Staff underscored the importance of continuing strict management oversight of
state-owned banks after recapitalization and before privatization. While stressing their
preference for expeditious privatization, the authorities and the supervisory authorities
committed to maintain heightened oversight until its completion. If privatization were delayed
or unsuccessful, the banks would continue under state ownership but with this heightened
management oversight.

14
15.
Staff stressed that banking sector reform and the clearance of domestic arrears
needs to proceed together expeditiously. The domestic arrears clearance strategy is based on
the principle of cancellation of cross-obligations involving arrears of the government to private
suppliers, NPLs (now owned by the government) and unpaid taxes. The government agreed on
the need to closely coordinate the two operations (NPL recovery and arrears clearance) and to
avoid delays in establishing an NPL recovery mechanism. Completion of the operations will
re-establish normal financial relations among the government, banks, and enterprises, easing
the flow of credit and payments (LOI, ¶9 and 17).
Restructuring of state-owned phosphate and electricity enterprises in process
16.
SOE reforms have progressed but they need to continue until more concrete
results are achieved (LOI, ¶11 and 21). In January 2009 the government selected a
consulting company for the strategic audit of the phosphate sector (October 2008 SB, mildly
delayed due to procurement difficulties). The report is expected to be completed in April 2009.
Meanwhile, the government has begun to restructure the phosphate company’s operations. A
draft report reviewing the finances and operations of CEET, the electric company, was
submitted to the government and the World Bank for comments in December 2008 (SB).
Launch of a strategic and financial audit, in consultation with the World Bank, is planned for
May.
17.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The authorities concurred with staff that
lags in restructuring key economic sectors may jeopardize a recovery in growth. They
reaffirmed their resolve to finalize the preparatory work and act on the strategies developed,
while maintaining intensified oversight to avoid losses and mismanagement. Attracting the
interest of strategic investors to the sectors is a top priority.

5

The size of potential privatization receipts and their inclusion as revenue will have to be assessed as the process
is closer to the privatization stage (they are not included in 2009).

15

Text Table 3. Togo: Status of Structural Reforms Through 2009
Measures

Fiscal governance
Reduce tax and customs exemptions and
strengthen tax and customs control, including in
the Free Economic Zone (FEZ).

Type

Date

Status

Benchmark

June 2009

Done

Make operational a new Treasury structure based
on WAEMU directives.

Performance criterion

June 2009

On track

Start implementing the domestic arrears clearance
strategy by securitizing validated arrears to
suppliers and setting up a mechanism for
monitoring domestic debt.

Benchmark

December 2009

On track

Benchmark

March 2009

Set up a structure and mechanism for managing
the NPLs that have been exchanged against
government securities in the bank restructuring
process.

Benchmark

December 2009
(revised)

On track

Initiate the process of identifying strategic investors
for state-owned banks.

Benchmark

December 2009

On track

Benchmark

September 2009

On track

Financial sector
Initiate restructuring of BTCI, including by raising
its capital through issuance of government
securities.

Public enterprises
Phosphate sector: Prepare a development strategy
based on the results of the strategic audit.

Done

16

C. Program Monitoring and Risks
18.
The discussions culminated in understandings on revised quantitative and
structural indicators to monitor PRGF-supported program implementation through
2009 (Appendix I, Tables 1 and 3). The earlier established end-June quantitative PCs were
revised and understandings were reached on new PCs for end-December 2009. The
performance criteria on the domestic primary balance and net domestic financing reflect a
modest relaxation of the fiscal framework in 2009, as do the indicators for priority spending.
The continuous PCs on nonaccumulation of domestic arrears and the central government not
contracting or guaranteeing nonconcessional external debt are maintained. The structural PC
and benchmarks for the period June-December 2009 on strengthening public financial
management, the financial sector, and public enterprises remain unchanged except for the
revised timing on NPLs. 6
19.
The main near-term program risks are related to the global financial crisis and
the upcoming elections. If the financial crisis worsens or has more impact on Togo than
expected, it would jeopardize revenue performance and generate new spending pressures to
provide for vulnerable groups. Political uncertainty in the period leading up to presidential
elections in the first quarter of 2010 could complicate program implementation or weaken
economic confidence. Multiparty talks on organizing the elections have been contentious. The
authorities nevertheless expressed a commitment to forceful program implementation
throughout the electoral period.
D. HIPC Process
20.
Progress toward meeting the HIPC floating completion point triggers is good,
particularly with the completion of the final PRS by the end of April (Table 10). The
government officially adopted the PRS paper after extensive discussions with civil society,
representatives of the business community, development partners, and the National Assembly.
The strategy provides a comprehensive description of poverty-reducing policies, their costing,
and the expected domestic and external financing. Its macroeconomic framework is consistent
with the PRGF-supported program.
21.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The government stressed its determination
to fulfill the conditions for reaching the HIPC completion point as early as possible in
2010. In particular, the authorities noted that the Court of Auditors will begin operations in
June 2009, the Procurement Regulatory Agency is planned to be set by end April 2009, and

6

The Technical Memorandum of Understanding remains unchanged.

17
data on revenues received from and payments to the phosphate company are being published
regularly.
II. ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION DISCUSSIONS
A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Vulnerabilities:
Moderate Impact of the Global Crisis Expected; Vigilance Still Needed
22.
The impact of the global crisis, though evident, is expected to be moderate in 2009
and 2010, given Togo’s limited international financial integration and its already
depressed exports (Box 1) 7. The first signs of the crisis are emerging in declining export
prices and volumes (Figure 2). Country-specific factors are expected to mitigate the impact,
such as the rebound in production after the flood damage, increased public investment, and a
less internationally integrated banking system. Finally, the decline in energy and food prices is
expected to reduce inflationary pressures, improve the terms of trade, and narrow the current
account deficit.

Figure 2: Cotton and Phosphate Prices
( January 2003 - January 2009)
1400

90

1200

80
Cotton-African S.M..
Cents/lb (left scale)
70

1000

60

800

50

CottonNY Future
Cents/lb (left scale)

600
Diammonium
Phosphate Spot
US$/MT (right scale)

40

400

200

30

20
Jan-03

7

Jul-03

Jan-04

Jul-04

See also the Selected Issues Paper.

Jan-05

Jul-05

Jan-06

Jul-06

Jan-07

Jul-07

Jan-08

Jul-08

0
Jan-09

18

Box 1. Expected Transmission Channels of the Global Crisis to Togo 1
The global crisis is having or may have the following spillover effects on Togo:
• Lower demand and prices for exports: Lower global growth may adversely impact demand for traditional
commodity exports, such as cotton and phosphate. Their share in total exports declined from 50 percent at the end
of the 1990s to just 13 percent in 2008 and could fall further with the crisis. Cement exports, which represent about
20 percent of total exports, are expected to continue to increase, but declining regional demand should not be ruled
out.
• Decreasing trade-related activities: The activity of the Port of Lomé and the related transport sector may suffer
from lower transit and re-export of goods to Burkina Faso, Niger, and Mali. Early in 2009 there was no sign of
declining activity, but there may be a delayed impact.
• Lower remittances: If economic conditions worsen in host countries, particularly in continental Europe, remittances,
which make up 10 to 15 percent of GDP, could drop off sharply and jeopardize domestic demand (which is
particularly important for construction). As of December 2008, no drop-off was evident, however.
• Lack of interest of strategic investors: Togo is not highly dependent on private capital flows, but delays in attracting
strategic investors, which are key to finalizing restructuring of the banking and phosphate sectors, would constitute
lost opportunities to enhance growth. For example, low international demand for phosphate may delay investor
interest, which is crucial to obtain fresh capital and raise output.
• Lower aid flows: Togo is not heavily dependent on donors flows—its foreign-financed investment and social
spending are among the lowest in the WAEMU—but it is expecting an increase to support economic revival.
• Declining fiscal revenues: A greater than expected slowdown would likely reduce revenues below projections. The
resulting financing gap would pose policy challenges.
Togo’s exposure to the crisis may, however, be mitigated by the following country-specific factors:
•

Low international exposure of the financial sector: The banking sector is mostly publicly and regionally owned,
with low exposure to the most affected markets. Nonetheless, a recent pick-up in household credit could reverse, if
regionally owned private banks—the most active in this market—cut back lending in Togo to rebalance their
portfolios. While there is no evidence so far of disruptions in international trade finance or the interbank market,
banks are seeing more strict requirements from correspondent banks. Microfinance institutions, which represent
15 percent of total credits, have experienced decreasing funding from international institutions, however. Second
round effects (e.g., rising NPLs) are also expected to be moderate given the recent restructuring, but the authorities
are committed to heightened oversight to minimize the risks.

•

No major decrease in committed donor support: Public investment in 2009, financed in large part by donor
support, is expected to pick up due to new commitments. Togo is largely reliant on multilateral donors—the World
Bank, the EU, and the AfDB—whose disbursement is more stable and which together have committed budget
support of about 2 percent of GDP to help Togo meet its 2009 financing needs.

• Subsistence agriculture that accounts for about 25 percent of GDP might be an important shock absorber. Staff
projects a rebound in subsistence production following the floods in 2008.
• Declining energy and food prices are expected to reduce inflationary pressures, improve the terms of trade, and
narrow the current account deficit in 2009.
___________________
1

For further details see Selected Issues Paper.

19

23.
Given planned growth-enhancing reforms, the economy could achieve real GDP
growth of about 4 percent annually by 2011, with the fiscal position gradually improving
(Table 5). The main sources of medium-term growth are expected to be agricultural production
(especially food); construction fueled by higher public investment; a recovery in phosphate
production; the competitive cement industry; and a recovery in trade-related services
capitalizing on Togo’s role as a regional hub. Protracted delay in structural reforms, especially
restructuring state-owned banks and enterprises, would undermine this projection. The
domestic primary balance is projected to reach to 1 percent of GDP by 2011, which is the
medium-term target under the program and would be sustainable thanks to full HIPC relief.
With stepped-up concessional official assistance in priority sectors, the average overall deficit
(including grants) will rise to about 2.5 percent of GDP for 2009/11, before falling back to a
medium-term average of 1 percent (or about 5 percent excluding grants)—which serves as a
fiscal anchor consistent with debt sustainability. With increased donor support, this fiscal path
allows for increasing growth-enhancing priority spending (Text Table 1). In particular, the
envisaged fiscal loosening in 2009 is not expected to harm long-term debt indicators, given its
modest size, temporary nature, and pro-growth focus. Inflationary pressures are projected to be
moderate through the medium term.
24.
The external current account deficit is expected to improve in 2010 and beyond as
a result of export growth. An expected recovery in global demand, along with improved
productive capacity in Togo, is expected to lead to an increase in 2010 in the volume and
prices of main exports, such as phosphate and cement. Imports are also expected to grow in
value in 2010 (although less so than exports), due to a modest economic recovery in Togo and
higher prices for commodities such as oil and food. The terms of trade are expected to
strengthen strongly in 2009, after which part of the gains are expected to reverse in 2010.
25.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The authorities expressed concern that
major reforms were not translating into higher economic growth. Staff explained that
2009 and 2010 growth projections were prudent, given the uncertain but potentially large
impact of the global financial crisis. In this context, a modest acceleration in growth could be
considered a measure of success. Staff further noted that the global financial crisis posed
serious downside risks. Staff acknowledged that the impact of many reforms on growth was
still limited at this early stage and could be higher than projected in the future. Both staff and
the authorities agreed that Togo has potential for higher growth, which could be attained—
barring a deepening of the global crisis—by sustained economic stability and deeper structural
reforms, supported by the international community.
26.
An update of the DSA, including new data on domestic debt, indicated that
sustainability depends on faster growth and prudent fiscal policies, even after full HIPC
relief (Box 2). These conclusions are consistent with those from the LIC DSA conducted for

20
the HIPC decision point in November 2008. The mission urged the authorities to keep debt
sustainable by relying on concessional debt, limiting fiscal deficits to sustainable levels, and
concentrating on boosting growth. 8

Box 2. The HIPC Initiative to Bring Debt Indicators to Comfortable Levels
Even After Including Domestic Debt
The updated public debt indicators incorporated the revised macroeconomic framework and—for the first time—
the impact of domestic debt, including the bank recapitalization and domestic arrears clearance.
The analysis confirmed the earlier finding of a substantial reduction of the NPV of total (external and domestic)
debt over GDP to around 30 percent in the steady state. The PV of debt to revenue and the debt service-torevenue ratio would also stabilize at comfortably low level.
Sensitivity analysis confirmed that Togo’s debt dynamics are particularly vulnerable to substantial reductions in
official aid, the level of concessionality, and macroeconomic shocks, particularly a reduction in growth.

120

Togo: NPV of Total Debt-to-GDP
100

Domestic debt

External debt

T otal debt

80
60
40
20
0
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

B. Strengthening Medium-Term Fiscal Policy:
Crucial to Economic and Debt Sustainability
27.
Continued efforts to increase project spending and reinforce public expenditure
management will be critical to economic growth and stability, particularly given the
global crisis. Because Togo is a member of the WAEMU, sound fiscal policies are a primary
instrument for reinforcing growth and sustainability, both external and fiscal. Fiscal policy will
8

The DSA update was an interim partial update conducted by the staff. A full DSA will be prepared with Bank
staff towards end of 2009.

21
target a moderate domestic primary balance, refocus domestic spending towards priority
sectors, and increase overall outlays in health, education, and public infrastructure thanks to
increased external support. Fiscal policy, supported by increased external assistance, can also
be used temporarily to counter the decline in global demand and support long-term growth—
so long as it is well-targeted, implemented by sound institutions, and consistent with debt
sustainability.
Strengthening spending capacity and quality
28.
Togo’s public capital spending is among the lowest in the WAEMU and subSaharan Africa (Figure 3). Even though earlier progress in public financial management
contained spending pressures, staff emphasized fiscal policy needs to reallocate spending
toward public infrastructure and priority social spending to underpin long-term growth and
implement the government’s PRS. Togo’s progress toward the Millennium Development
Goals has accordingly been slow (Table 11).
29.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The authorities agreed that public
investment spending needs to be boosted, both for long-term development and to offset
the expected impact of the global crisis. For at least the medium term this boost in capital
and social spending is expected to be financed by higher external grants and highly
concessional loans. To ensure that development objectives are reached while preserving a
sustainable fiscal balance, the mission has encouraged the authorities to reduce the share of
nonpriority current spending (such as untargeted transfers) and increase outlays on both public
infrastructure and human capital (see below). The action plan discussed above to strengthen
project execution is an important element in this effort.

Figure 3. Capital investment in the WAEMU countries
(Percent of GDP - latest available data)
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
Niger

Burkina
Faso

Mali

Total

Benin

Senegal

Domestically financed

Cote
d'Ivoire

Foreign financed

WEMU

Togo

22
More active cash and debt management
30.
The Treasury is strengthening cash and debt management. It is implementing a
new template to assess cash needs on an ongoing basis and is testing a new Integrated Budget
Execution and Reporting System (SIGFIP) to track revenue and spending throughout budget
execution. To build its capacity to manage cash, the Treasury issued short-term bills on the
regional market for the first time in September 2008. Coordinated with the BCEAO, the
issuance of 0.8 percent of GDP was well received by domestic banks. The government is
planning additional issuances for 2009, in part to expedite clearance in cash of domestic
arrears. 9
31.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: Better real-time budget accounting and
oversight continues to be an agreed priority. Staff discussed steps to ensure better
coordination between line ministers and the Treasury on tracking priority spending. While the
introduction of SIGFID on a testing basis is welcome, staff noted that improvements will be
needed before it can become fully operational. The mission commended the authorities on
their plan to disseminate regular reports on budget execution in line with the GFS.
32.
It is important to pursue the significant institutional reforms underway to
consolidate debt management. Staff urged the authorities to improve and centralize debt data
and explicitly define a debt strategy that is coordinated with cash flow needs and minimizes
borrowing costs. Authority to contract debt on behalf of the government needs to be
centralized.
Growth-friendly tax policy
33.
A broad-based economic pick-up would benefit from a more business-friendly tax
environment. The tax system is complex and costly to administer, even by regional standards,
with an excessive number of rates and numerous exemptions.
34.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The authorities recognize the need to
streamline the tax system and further reduce rates, particularly for corporate and
income tax. They report that better management and computerization are reducing tax
evasion, though there is still considerable scope for progress. They also discussed their plans
to enhance communication with the business community.

9

See Selected Issues Paper on the principles for the design and implementation of a domestic debt management
strategy for Togo.

23
C. Enhancing Productivity Growth and External Competitiveness:
The Path to Higher and Sustainable Economic Growth
35.
To sustain its economic revival, Togo will have to boost productivity and improve
its external competitiveness. The policy priorities are to restructure state-owned banks and
enterprises, invest in public infrastructure and human capital, and create a more favorable
business environment.
Banking sector
36.
Despite forceful first steps to restructure state-owned banks, financial
intermediation needs to be deepened to contribute to growth. The high level of NPLs in
Togo has hamstrung intermediation for decades (Figure 2), though the microfinance sector has
partly compensated for this, particularly in rural areas. While securitization is a necessary step
to restore the flow of credit, further steps must also be taken to resume sound lending to the
private sector. In particular efforts are needed to tackle the structural impediments to
expanding lending to small and medium enterprises and households. Togo’s considerable
potential as a commercial hub and service provider cannot be fully realized if credit cannot
reach small businesses in the trade sector.
37.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: Staff has urged the authorities to complete
implementation of the strategy for recovery of the banking sector and identify further
steps to facilitate credit access. The agreed priorities are to (i) ensure that the
recommendations of the regional banking commission on management and oversight are
implemented; (ii) create a more predictable business environment; (iii) address bottlenecks to
a well-developed collateral market, particularly impediments to land and real estate property
rights; and (iv) improve creditor protection and credit information. Staff noted the continuing
need for technical cooperation with Fund and Bank staff, including a possible FSAP once the
restructuring process is complete.
SOEs: Electricity, water, telecommunications, and phosphate
38.
The quality of services provided by SOEs operating in noncompetitive markets is
low by regional standards, hampering growth and competitiveness. Leading examples are
the lack of a reliable energy and water supply, the low level of telecommunication services,
and poor indicators from business climate international surveys, such as those of the World
Bank. The near-term constraints on growth imposed by electricity shortages were relaxed
somewhat, by installing new generators in the past year, although shortages still jeopardize
growth over the medium term.
39.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: Staff encouraged the authorities to pursue
aggressively ways to increase the coverage and quality of electricity, water, and
telecommunication services. Staff welcomed the plans to increase the electricity supply in

24
2009 through an independent power producer. The authorities are also seeking to ensure other
sources of energy, such as gas from Nigeria. Staff discussed the government plan to improve
management of the CEET, whose rates are slightly below the cost of production and which has
large payment arrears from both the private and the public sector. The government outlined
ambitious plans to increase the supply of and access to electricity, as well as improve
telecommunication and Internet services. Staff urged consideration of comprehensive
strategies for these sectors that take full advantage of market-based approaches, such as private
investment and increased competition; mobile phone services in particular might benefit from
the entrant of a new provider to compete with the dominant state-owned provider.
40.
To boost production of Togo’s high-quality phosphate—now at less than a
quarter of potential capacity—the authorities plan to finalize a long-term reform
strategy on the basis of the World Bank-financed audit. The strategy would define the
financial and organizational conditions conducive to attracting strategic investors, which is
crucial to complete the restructuring process. Achieving full capacity could increase GDP by
as much as 2 percent.
41.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: Staff urged the authorities to move quickly
to rehabilitate the phosphate sector. Staff noted that the increase in phosphate production in
2008 and the improved managerial and financial situation of the SNPT are steps in the right
direction. It encouraged the government to continue to closely monitor the finances and
management of the phosphate company. The authorities intend to proceed rapidly once the
strategic audit is complete.
D. Raising External Competitiveness
42.
International comparisons highlight the importance of Togo’s priorities for
boosting productivity and growth—infrastructure and human capital, financial
intermediation, and a business friendly environment (Figure 4). Indicators of business
climate and infrastructure endowment show that Togo is positioned below its main regional
competitors. Surveys reflect perceptions that establishing a new company in Togo is complex
and costly, the judicial system ineffective, and the administration inefficient. The authorities
acknowledge these weaknesses and recognize that Togo’s relative positioning as a business
space compared with the other countries in the subregion has deteriorated. They also recognize
that increasing productivity in all sectors will require a substantial rehabilitation of public
infrastructure and an education system more focused on technical skills. Progress in these
areas will enable Togo to capitalize on its advantages as a regional hub with a well-educated
but relatively cheap workforce.

25

Figure 4. Togo: Improving Competitiveness and Boosting Economic Growth
Togo and WAEMU's terms of trade have been volatile, while
Togo's have also trended downward over the long term.
120

Terms of Trade: Togo and WAEMU, 1988 - 2008

110

Togo's real exchange rate has mirrored
WAEMU's trend, which has been appreciating
somewhat since 1994.

180

180

160

160
Togo Real Effective Exchange Rate,
1988 - 2009 (2000=100)

WAEMU

140

140
Togo

100

120

120

90

100

100

80

80

60

60

Competitiveness can benefit from low wages and better
education compared to other WAEMU countries.

Avg.Monthly Salary (USD) .

Education and Wages in WAEMU Countries

2008
200

400
BUR

300

140

MAL

200

TOGO

NIG

120
GNB

100

100

10

20

30

40

50

60

…pro-growth spending is low by regional
standards...

Starting a
Business

70

14
12

25

Public
Investment

Public
Investment

Getting Credit

Protecting
Investors

Paying Taxes

Nonperforming loans in Togo and WAEMU, 2008
30

10

Registering
Property

... and the financial system suffers from the highest share of
NPLs due to ailing public banks.

(In percent of GDP - 2008)

16

Public
Investment

Share of total loans

20

Share of GDP

15
10

Health

Health

Health

2
0

2006

160

Primary Completion Rate (%)

4

2004

SSA
SEN

0

6

2002

WAEMU

180

COT

500

2000

Togo

BEN

0

8

1998

The ease of Doing Business in Togo is low...
(low values = high performance - 2009 data)

700
600

1996

1988

1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

1994

TOGO
70

1992

80

1990

WAEMU

Education

Togo

Education

WAEMU

Education

SSA

5

0

n
ni
Be

a
in
rk
Bu

ire
au
ss
vo
Bi
d 'I
te
ea
Cô
uin
G

so
Fa

i
al
M

ge
Ni

r

l
ga
ne
e
S

To

go

26

43.
A variety of macroeconomic analyses of the balance of payments and the real
effective exchange rate (REER) suggest that Togo’s current account balance and
exchange rate are on balance broadly in line with fundamentals:
•

The REER has largely mirrored WAEMU-wide trends since devaluation. Econometric
estimates of the equilibrium real effective exchange rate (EREER) suggest that the real
exchange rate is not seriously misaligned despite a recent trend toward overvaluation
(Box 3).

•

The current account deficit is comfortably financed by inflows through the capital and
financial account, in particular project grants and concessional loans (Tables 2 and 5).

•

The macroeconomic balance approach suggests Togo’s projected current account
deficit would be in line with the norm for a low income African country that receives
aid inflows. Nonetheless, Togo’s ability to sustain the projected current deficits
(5-6 percent of GDP) over the medium-term depends on the expected increase in aid
inflows (consistent with donor pledges) or other, non-debt-creating inflows such as
FDI.
Box 3. Togo’s REER: No Serious Misalignment Despite Recent Trend Toward
Overvaluation
Togo’s real effective exchange rate
(REER) has been on an upward trend
since it plunged in 1994 following the
devaluation of the F CFA (Figure 3). This
appreciation has accelerated in recent
years with the continued strength of the
Euro.

180

160

140

120

The text figure compares the REER with
the estimated equilibrium REER
(EREER).1 The result of the estimation
suggests that most of the long-term
fluctuation has been explained by changes
in fundamentals.

100

80
1980

1985

1990

1995

EREER

2000

2005

REER

The results indicate a slight overvaluation
of the REER since 2005 that intensified in 2008. The recent widening in the gap between the REER and the
EREER is due to inflationary pressures in 2008 combined with the Euro appreciation against the dollar.
However, with the recent deceleration in inflation in Togo, Euro depreciation, and terms of trade
improvement, the REER is expected to revert toward its equilibrium.
___________________
1

To calculate the EREER the FEER approach was used with the following fundamentals: terms of trade, government
spending, openness, and real GDP per capita—all variables that are significantly correlated with the REER and share a
cointegrating relation.

27

44.
Policy Response and Authorities’ Views: The mission supported the authorities’
plans to boost competitiveness and growth potential as embodied in the PRS. Their
strategy appropriately focuses on three priorities: (i) rehabilitating transport infrastructure;
(ii) providing quality education to more of the population (following the advice of the World
Bank); and (iii) improving the business environment (through a new investment code,
corporate tax reform, easier business registration, better allocation and recording of property
rights, and—with the support of the EU—a more effective judicial system). Concerning
competitiveness, the current account and real exchange rate appear sustainable, despite a
recent trend toward real appreciation. Staff noted that Togo’s competitiveness benefits from its
low wage levels, especially considering educational attainment, relative to other WAEMU
countries (Figure 4). Staff advised out that membership in the WAEMU currency zone
continues to serve Togo’s economic interests as an anchor of stability; the emphasis should be
on the implementation of agreed fiscal and structural policies to promote growth and
productivity.

28
Table 1. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–10
2006

2007
Act.

2008
Prel.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income, prices, and exchange rates
Real GDP
Real GDP per capita
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (annual average)
GDP (CFAF billions)
Exchange rate CFAF/US$ (annual average)
Real effective exchange rate (annual average)
Terms of trade (deterioration = –)
Monetary survey
Net foreign assets 1

3.9
1.4
0.3
2.2
1,159.8
522.4
-1.4
5.0

1.9
-0.6
1.3
1.0
1,197.7
478.5
0.5
-10.5

1.1
-1.4
6.4
8.4
1,288.5
445.8
0.1
-2.3

1.7
-0.8
1.8
2.8
1,333.7
...
…
7.2

2.1
-0.4
2.0
2.1
1,389.6
...
…
…

19.2

1.4

8.0

0.0

4.7

Credit to government 1

-0.7

1.1

15.4

2.7

-0.3

Credit to the nongovernment sector 1
Broad money (M2)
Velocity (GDP/ end-of-period M2)

0.4
22.1
3.0

14.9
18.2
2.6

-2.5
15.9
2.4

6.8
10.0
2.3

7.1
10.0
2.2

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
Gross national savings
Government
Nongovernment
Government budget
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Total expenditure and net lending
Domestic primary expenditure
Overall balance (payment order basis)
Primary balance 2
Change in domestic arrears
External sector
Current account balance
Exports (goods and services)
Imports (goods and services)
External public debt
Of which: Arrears
External public debt service (percent of exports)
Gross international reserves (months of imports)

12.8
3.4
9.4
9.9
-0.4
10.3

12.1
2.0
10.1
8.2
0.1
8.1

12.2
3.5
8.7
5.5
2.5
3.0

15.8
5.6
10.2
9.7
2.4
7.2

16.6
7.1
9.5
10.7
5.1
5.5

18.3
16.9
22.1
18.0
-3.8

18.7
17.0
20.6
16.7
-1.9

18.7
17.1
19.7
16.7
-1.0

19.1
16.9
22.2
17.5
-3.1

21.9
17.6
23.9
17.0
-2.0

-1.1
-0.4

0.2
-0.8

0.5
0.0

-0.6
-0.9

0.6
-0.7

-2.9
24.7
37.2
83.9
29.5
8.9
3.4

-3.9
26.3
40.0
79.2
31.4
7.5
3.0

-6.6
23.5
41.0
56.6
0.0
5.6
4.4

-6.1
21.5
37.6
53.0
0.0
5.9
5.0

-5.9
26.7
42.6
30.5
0.0
4.5
4.7

Sources: Togolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
Percent of broad money at the beginning of the period.

1
2

Revenue minus expenditure, excluding grants, interest, and foreign-financed expenditure.

29

Table 2. Togo: Balance of Payments, 2007–14
2007

Current account balance
Trade balance ¹
Exports
Domestic exports
Of which: Cotton
Phosphates
Cement & clinker
Transit and Reexport
Imports, f.o.b.
Domestic imports
Of which: Petroleum products
Imports for transit and reexport
Of which: Petroleum products

2008
2009
Prel.
(Billions of CFA francs)
-47.2
-85.6
-81.4
-119.7
-178.1
-179.3
557.6
470.9
422.6
263.6
245.9
236.1
12.0
12.1
7.0
15.0
21.9
16.9
71.9
59.5
59.5
294.0
225.0
186.5

2010

2011
Proj.

2012

2013

2014

-82.2
-176.2
556.6
317.0
6.9
17.3
62.0
239.6

-74.8
-176.6
599.2
343.1
7.3
18.8
65.8
256.1

-82.6
-184.1
646.8
366.0
7.8
19.7
69.8
280.8

-92.8
-193.8
697.6
391.3
8.2
20.9
74.0
306.2

-100.1
-200.4
752.6
417.7
8.6
22.2
78.5
334.9

-677.3
-383.3
101.2
-294.0
-98.8

-649.0
-424.0
110.0
-225.0
-96.8

-601.9
-415.4
73.6
-186.5
-64.7

-732.8
-493.2
94.5
-239.6
-88.9

-775.7
-519.6
101.0
-256.1
-189.9

-830.9
-550.1
110.7
-280.8
-208.2

-891.4
-585.2
120.8
-306.2
-227.0

-952.9
-618.1
132.1
-334.9
-248.3

-65.1
-44.3
51.4
-95.7
-20.8
137.6
117.2
20.4

-54.2
-48.0
56.5
-104.4
-6.3
146.7
126.4
20.3

-44.5
-36.1
50.6
-86.6
-8.4
142.4
113.8
28.7

-51.7
-43.9
54.6
-98.5
-7.7
145.7
86.0
59.8

-47.0
-45.5
59.0
-104.4
-1.5
148.7
85.3
63.4

-50.0
-48.1
63.7
-111.8
-1.9
151.5
84.2
67.2

-53.0
-50.8
68.8
-119.6
-2.2
154.0
82.7
71.3

-56.0
-53.7
74.3
-127.9
-2.4
156.3
80.7
75.6

Capital and financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment, incl. bond
Other investment
General government
Disbursements
Amortization
Banks, net foreign assets ³
Other capital, errors, and omissions
Capital account
Long-term private capital
Other medium-and long-term investme
Short-term capital
Of which: Trade credit
Errors and omissions
Financial account (net)

34.9
30.1
3.2
1.6
-17.9
2.0
-19.9
13.4
6.1
0.0
20.7
-4.4
6.1
25.5
0.0
34.9

59.9
32.2
-8.2
35.9
-16.4
7.1
-23.5
-11.9
64.3
232.0
22.3
-4.4
-167.7
21.1
0.0
-172.0

31.5
46.7
0.0
-15.1
0.6
20.3
-19.6
0.0
-15.8
0.0
23.1
-0.3
-15.8
-14.1
0.0
31.5

71.5
62.5
-8.2
17.2
2.3
22.2
-20.0
0.0
14.9
267.2
24.0
-0.5
-252.3
-23.5
0.0
-195.7

84.2
59.0
0.0
25.2
20.3
22.1
-1.8
0.0
4.9
0.0
25.5
-0.5
14.2
0.0
0.0
118.5

90.0
62.6
0.0
27.4
19.9
23.5
-3.5
0.0
7.5
0.0
27.0
-0.5
15.9
0.0
0.0
125.0

88.9
66.3
0.0
22.5
19.6
24.9
-5.3
0.0
2.9
0.0
28.7
-0.5
13.4
0.0
0.0
127.5

123.0
70.4
0.0
52.6
19.8
26.4
-6.6
0.0
32.9
0.0
30.4
-0.5
44.9
0.0
0.0
165.0

Overall balance

-12.3

-25.7

-49.8

-10.7

9.4

7.4

-3.9

22.9

Financing
Central bank net foreign assets ³
Of which : Past use of Fund resources
Arrears, net change
Flow rescheduling
Clearance of debt/arrears ²
Debt/arrears cancellation ²
Debt and arrears rescheduling
Exceptional financing
PRGF financing
PRGF augmentation
Other committed financing
Unidentified financing

12.3
-18.9
-3.2
38.6
0.0
7.4
-7.4
0.0
0.0
...
...
...
0.0

25.7
-25.4
-0.8
0.8
21.9
403.4
-232.0
-171.5
32.3
15.3
6.5
10.5
-3.9

49.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
37.4
12.4
6.5
18.6
0.0

10.7
-28.0
0.0
0.0
12.6
267.2
-267.2
0.0
26.1
12.4
0.0
13.7
0.0

-18.7
-18.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0

-15.8
-15.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-6.6
-6.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-35.0
-35.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
9.3

0.0
8.5

0.0
10.5

0.0
12.1

-5.1
27.3
42.3
-12.0
3.0

-5.3
27.5
42.3
-11.8
3.0

-5.6
27.7
42.5
-11.7
3.0

-5.7
28.0
42.4
-11.4
3.0

Services and income (net)
Services (net)
Credit
Debit
Income (net)
Current transfers (net)
Private
Public

Memorandum items:
Current account balance
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Trade Balance
Gross int. reserves (months of imports)

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
-3.9
26.3
40.0
-10.0
3.0

-6.6
23.5
41.0
-13.8
4.4

-6.1
21.5
37.6
-13.4
5.0

-5.9
26.7
42.6
-12.7
4.7

Sources: Togolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
¹ The trade balance has been revised down from 2006 onwards, mostly by excluding from
domestic imports imports in transit to neighboring countries
² Assumes external debt and arrears rescheduling/relief in 2008–2010 in line with potential debt
³ Negative sign indicates increase.

30

Table 3. Togo: Central Government Financial Operations, 2007–10
2008

2007
Actual

Prog.

2009
Est.

H1-Prog.

1st. Rev.
223.7
203.3
195.9
89.7
106.2
7.4
20.4

232.8
209.8
198.7
86.2
112.6
11.0
23.0

241.0
220.7
211.2
91.2
120.0
9.4
20.3

Expenditures and net lending
Of which: Dom. primary expenditures

246.5
200.5

269.3
217.3

253.3
214.8

222.4
186.5
64.3
53.6
62.0
2.7
3.9
10.2
25.7
2.9
22.8

205.9
189.9
73.2
53.7
50.0
1.0
12.0
5.0
11.0
3.2
7.8

24.1
14.0

63.4
27.4
9.5
36.0

Public investment
Domestically financed
Additional costs for floodings
Foreign financed
Domestic primary balance

10.1

2010
Prog.

Proj.

1st. Rev.

Revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Tax administration (DGI)
Customs administration (DGD)
Nontax revenue
Grants (projects)

Current expenditures
Domestic primary current spending
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Transfers and subsidies
Other/unclassified
Bank and SOE restructuring, emergency spending
Foreign-financed current spending
Interest
Domestic debt
External debt

Proj.

(CFAF Billions)
128.0
108.0
103.0
44.0
59.0
5.0
20.0

278.4
228.4
215.4
97.5
117.9
13.0
50.0

254.3
225.7
215.4
97.5
117.9
10.3
28.7

304.3
244.6
233.4
105.7
127.8
11.1
59.8

154.9
118.7

312.1
228.4

296.2
233.5

331.5
236.2

208.2
192.5
69.1
58.6
49.1
3.7
12.0
4.8
10.9
4.6
6.3

103.9
93.7
33.7
27.5
25.0
0.0
7.5
4.5
5.7
2.0
3.7

218.2
197.5
78.0
56.0
48.0
0.0
15.5
7.0
13.7
5.3
8.4

221.9
196.6
78.0
55.0
48.0
0.0
15.5
11.6
13.8
5.3
8.4

232.9
208.4
83.2
59.8
50.5
0.0
15.0
11.1
13.3
5.6
7.7

44.9
22.3
4.5
22.6

51.0
25.0

93.9
30.9

98.7
27.8

26.0

63.0

74.2
36.9
5.0
37.3

70.9

2.8

-7.6

5.6

-10.7

0.0

-7.8

8.3

Overall balance, payment order basis
Change in arrears and treasury float
Domestic arrears and treasury float ¹
External interest arrears
Overall balance, cash basis

-22.8
11.3
-9.3
20.7
-11.4

-36.6
-2.8
-3.1
0.3
-39.3

-12.3
0.3
0.0
0.3
-12.0

-26.9
-12.6
-12.6
0.0
-39.5

-33.7
-6.0
-6.0
0.0
-39.7

-41.8
-12.6
-12.6
0.0
-54.4

-27.2
-9.7
-9.7
0.0
-36.9

Financing
Domestic financing (net) ²
Banking system
Nonbank financing
External financing (net)
Drawings
Amortization due
Arrears on amortization
Contingency for debt service
Debt flow relief (int. & amort.)
Clearance of debt & arrears stocks
Debt/arrears stock rescheduling
Debt/arrears stock cancellation

12.2
12.2
5.8
6.4
0.0
2.0
-19.9
17.9
0.0
...
...
0.0
0.0

7.0
-7.5
9.4
-16.9
14.6
18.0
-23.5
0.5
-2.3
21.9
-425.1
193.2
232.0

-16.4
-12.6
68.4
-80.9
-3.8
7.1
-23.5
0.5
0.0
12.2
-425.1
193.2
232.0

15.4
10.0
19.2
-9.3
5.4
7.7
-9.5
0.0
0.0
7.2
0.0
0.0
0.0

6.3
-6.5
-6.2
-0.3
12.8
20.0
-19.6
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

17.0
4.0
14.3
-10.3
13.0
20.3
-19.6
0.0
0.0
12.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

10.8
-4.0
-1.9
-2.1
14.9
22.2
-20.0
0.0
0.0
12.6
-267.2
0.0
267.2

Exceptional financing
PRGF-linked BCEAO credit
Other identified financing

0.0
0.0
0.0

32.3
21.7
10.5

32.3
21.7
10.5

24.1
12.7
11.5

28.0
18.8
9.2

37.4
18.8
18.6

26.1
12.4
13.7

Residual/unidentified financing

-0.8

0.0

-3.9

0.0

5.4

0.0

0.0
(cont.)

31
Table 3. Togo: Central Government Financial Operations, 2007–10 (concluded)
2007
Actual

2008
Prog.
1st. Rev.

2009
Est.

H1-Prog.

Proj.

2010
Prog.

Proj.

Revenue and grants
Total revenue
Grants (projects)

18.7
17.0
1.7

18.4
16.6
1.8

1st. Rev.
(Percent of GDP)
18.7
9.6
21.1
17.1
8.1
17.3
1.6
1.5
3.8

Expenditures and net lending
Of which: Dom. primary expenditures
Current expenditures
Domestic primary current spending
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Transfers and subsidies
Other/unclassified
Bank and SOE restructuring, emergency spending
Foreign-financed current spending
Interest
Domestic debt
External debt

20.6
16.7
18.6
15.6
5.4
4.5
5.2
0.2
0.3
0.9
2.1
0.2
1.9

21.3
17.2
16.3
15.0
5.8
4.2
4.0
0.1
0.9
0.4
0.9
0.3
0.6

19.7
16.7
16.2
14.9
5.4
4.5
3.8
0.3
0.9
0.4
0.8
0.4
0.5

11.6
8.9
7.8
7.0
2.5
2.1
1.9
0.0
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.1
0.3

23.7
17.3
16.6
15.0
5.9
4.3
3.6
0.0
1.2
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.6

22.2
17.5
16.6
14.7
5.9
4.1
3.6
0.0
1.2
0.9
1.0
0.4
0.6

23.9
17.0
16.8
15.0
6.0
4.3
3.6
0.0
1.1
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.6

2.0
1.2
0.8

5.0
2.2
2.8

3.5
1.7
1.8

3.8
1.9
1.9

7.1
2.3
4.8

5.6
2.8
2.8

7.1
2.0
5.1

Public investment
Domestically financed
Foreign financed
Domestic primary balance

19.1
16.9
2.2

21.9
17.6
4.3

0.2

-0.6

0.4

-0.8

0.0

-0.6

0.6

Overall balance, payment order basis
Domestic arrears and treasury float ¹
External interest arrears
Overall balance, cash basis

-1.9
-0.8
1.7
-1.0

-2.9
-0.2
0.0
-3.1

-1.0
0.0
0.0
-0.9

-2.0
-0.9
0.0
-3.0

-2.6
-0.5
0.0
-3.0

-3.1
-0.9
0.0
-4.1

-2.0
-0.7
0.0
-2.7

Financing
Domestic financing (net) ²
Banking system
Nonbank financing
External financing (net)
Drawings
Amortization due
Arrears on amortization
Contingency for debt service
Debt flow relief (int. & amort.)
Clearance of debt & arrears stocks
Debt/arrears stock rescheduling
Debt/arrears stock cancellation
Exceptional financing
PRGF-linked BCEAO credit
Other identified financing

1.0
1.0
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.2
-1.7
1.5
0.0
...
...
0.0
0.0
…
…
…

0.6
-0.6
0.7
-1.3
1.2
1.4
-1.9
0.0
-0.2
1.7
-33.6
15.3
18.3
2.6
1.7
0.8

-1.3
-1.0
5.3
-6.3
-0.3
0.5
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.9
-33.0
15.0
18.0
2.5
1.7
0.8

1.2
0.7
1.4
-0.7
0.4
0.6
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8
0.9
0.9

0.5
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
1.0
1.5
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.1
1.4
0.7

1.3
0.3
1.1
-0.8
1.0
1.5
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.8
1.4
1.4

0.8
-0.3
-0.1
-0.2
1.1
1.6
-1.4
0.0
0.0
0.9
-19.2
0.0
19.2
1.9
0.9
1.0

Residual/unidentified financing
Memorandum items

-0.1

0.0

-0.3

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.0

Social spending

³

Investment and social spending ³
Of which : foreign financed
Nominal GDP (CFAF billions)

6.4

7.7

6.4

5.8

9.9

9.9

12.5

8.5
2.2
1,198

11.1
3.6
1,264

9.4
4.5
1,288

7.7
2.0
1,334

14.0
5.7
1317

12.7
4.4
1,334

14.9
6.5
1,390

Sources: Togolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

¹ Includes, for 2009 a reduction of domestic arrears in cash to private suppliers (CFAF 12.6 bn). Additional reduction of arrears
will take place in 2009, in exchange of government's securities. The final amount will be decided during 2009.

² Including, for 2008, bank recapitalization and offsetting government assumption of NPLs for CFAF 88 bn.
³

Includes health and education (including salaries), and pension transfers.

32
Table 4. Togo: Monetary Survey, 2007–09
2007
Dec.

March

2008
June

2009
Dec
Proj.

Dec.
Prel.

(Billions of CFA francs)
Net foreign assets
BCEAO
Assets
Liabilities
Commercial banks
Assets
Liabilities

212.2
170.2
193.0
22.8
42.0
85.9
43.9

215.9
165.5
213.6
48.1
50.4
103.9
53.5

240.8
172.6
233.8
61.2
68.2
116.0
47.9

249.5
195.6
276.3
80.7
53.9
113.2
59.3

249.5
195.6
286.3
90.7
53.9
113.2
59.3

Net domestic assets ¹

252.3
14.0
-7.8
21.8
254.7

274.3
10.0
-19.9
29.8
251.6

240.5
3.4
-25.8
29.2
258.0

289.0
85.7
-15.5
101.2
242.9

342.8
100.0
-1.2
101.2
279.4

-16.4

12.7

-20.9

-39.7

-36.5

464.5
122.0
342.5

490.3
112.9
377.4

481.3
115.7
365.6

538.5
129.2
409.3

592.3
142.1
450.2

Credit to the government (net)
BCEAO
Commercial banks
Credit to the rest of the economy
Other items (net)

(1)

Money supply (M2)
Currency in circulation
Bank deposits

(Annual change, percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Net foreign assets
BCEAO
Commercial banks

1.4
4.8
-3.4

0.8
-1.0
1.8

6.2
0.5
5.6

8.0
5.5
2.6

0.0
0.0
0.0

Net domestic assets
Credit to the government (net)
Credit to the rest of the economy
Other items (net)

16.9
1.1
14.9
0.9

4.7
-0.9
-0.7
6.3

-2.5
-2.3
0.7
-0.9

7.9
15.4
-2.5
-5.0

10.0
2.7
6.8
0.6

Money supply (M2)
Currency in circulation
Bank deposits

18.2
5.6
12.7

5.6
-2.0
7.5

3.6
-1.3
5.0

15.9
1.6
14.4

10.0
2.4
7.6

2.6

2.3

2.4

2.4

2.3

Memorandum items
Velocity (GDP/ end-of-period M2)

Sources: Central Bank of West African States, and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1 Preliminary data for December 2008. Accounting of the securitization process is being revised by BCEAO staff.

33
Table 5. Togo: Medium-Term outlook, 2007–14 ¹
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

(Annual percentage change)
National accounts
Real GDP (percent change)
Primary sector
Secondary sector
Tertiary sector
Prices, period average
GDP deflator
CPI inflation
Terms of trade

1.9
2.2
-1.3
1.6

1.1
2.9
0.8
-0.1

1.7
2.3
2.8
0.9

2.1
2.6
1.9
2.4

4.1
5.4
3.4
3.5

4.0
5.3
3.1
3.5

4.0
5.3
3.1
3.5

4.0
5.3
3.1
3.5

1.3
1.0
-10.5

6.4
8.4
-2.3

1.8
2.8
7.2

2.0
2.1
-4.5

2.0
2.5
0.2

2.0
2.5
-0.2

2.0
2.5
-0.7

2.0
2.5
0.0

(Percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Investment (percent of GDP)
Government
Nongovernment
Savings (percent of GDP)
Government
Nongovernment

12.1
2.0
10.1
8.2
0.1
8.1

12.2
3.5
8.7
5.5
2.5
3.0

15.0
4.8
10.2
8.9
1.7
7.2

16.6
7.1
9.5
10.7
5.1
5.5

17.5
7.0
10.5
12.4
6.0
6.4

18.5
7.0
11.5
13.2
6.0
7.2

18.5
7.0
11.5
12.9
6.0
6.9

18.5
7.0
11.5
12.8
6.0
6.8

Government
Total revenue and grants
Revenues
Total expenditure
Domestic primary spending
Overall balance
Domestic primary balance
Change in domestic arrears

18.7
17.0
20.6
16.7
-1.9
0.2
-0.8

18.7
17.1
19.6
16.7
-0.9
0.5
0.0

19.1
16.9
22.2
17.5
-3.1
-0.6
-0.9

21.9
17.6
23.9
17.0
-2.0
0.6
-0.7

22.5
18.2
23.5
17.2
-1.0
1.0
-0.5

22.5
18.2
23.5
17.2
-1.0
1.0
-0.3

22.5
18.2
23.5
17.2
-1.0
1.0
-0.3

22.5
18.2
23.5
17.2
-1.0
1.0
-0.3

External sector
Current account balance
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
External public debt
Of which : external arrears
External assistance (gross; excl. debt relief)
External debt service due

-3.9
26.3
40.0
79.2
31.4
1.9
3.6

-6.6
23.5
41.0
56.6
0.0
2.1
-30.7

-6.1
21.5
37.6
53.0
0.0
3.7
1.2

-5.9
26.7
42.6
30.5
0.0
5.9
1.1

-5.1
27.3
42.3
5.0
0.0
5.8
0.2

-5.3
27.5
42.3
4.4
0.0
5.8
0.3

-5.6
27.7
42.5
3.7
0.0
5.8
0.4

-5.7
28.0
42.4
3.1
0.0
5.8
0.5

Sources: Togolese authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
¹ Assumes structural reforms, fiscal adjustment, higher donor support, and external debt and arrears rescheduling/relief
in 2009–14. Debt service projections are shown net of the impact of debt and arrears rescheduling/relief.

34
Table 6. Togo: Official External Debt, 2007–10
Debt service (proj.) ³
2009

Nominal
Stock

2007
Of which
arrears ¹

2,204.8

850.5

1,803.5

75.2

21.3

73.0

19.3

Multilateral
1,124.1
IDA
764.8
AfDF
148.2
IMF
1.7
IFAD
26.8
IsDB
39.5
BADEA
1.8
OFID
13.6
European Investment Bank
52.6
BOAD
74.5
FEGECE
0.7

199.1
129.1
19.0
7.5
0.0
10.5
32.6
0.4

783.2
511.7
89.7
1.6
19.9
26.9
1.6
13.2
47.8
70.1
0.6

39.9
21.7
2.3
1.7
0.7
1.7
0.4
0.4
2.3
8.6
0.0

10.7
4.7
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.6
0.1
0.1
0.2
3.9
-

39.5
22.3
2.9
0.7
2.0
0.2
0.4
2.3
8.5
0.0

9.8
4.6
0.9
0.2
0.6
0.0
0.1
0.2
3.3
-

39.5
22.7
3.0
0.7
2.3
0.2
0.4
1.5
8.6
0.0

8.9
4.4
0.9
0.2
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
2.7
-

Bilateral and commercial
Bilateral
Paris Club
Other official bilateral
Commercial
Post-cutoff date (only)
Pre-cutoff date

1,080.7
1,048.1
964.3
83.8
32.6
32.6
-

651.4
636.0
634.9
1.1
15.4
15.4
-

1,020.2
988.8
922.7
66.1
31.4
31.4
-

33.0
25.9
18.3
7.6
7.1
7.1
-

12.5
12.3
11.4
0.9
0.1
0.1
-

35.7
28.2
20.5
7.7
7.5
7.5
-

11.5
11.4
10.6
0.8
0.1
0.1
-

33.6
33.1
21.7
11.4
0.4
62.9
-

10.4
10.3
9.7
0.6
0.1
0.1
-

3.1
7.6
14.1
3.3
3.1
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.5

3.1
7.6
3.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.5

3.1
7.6
13.1
3.3
3.0
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.5

7.1
-

0.1
-

7.1
0.4
-

0.1
-

0.4
-

0.1
-

982.4

379.0

803.6

32.5

10.3

33.5

9.5

32.5

8.6

Multilateral

500.9

88.7

349.0

17.8

4.8

17.6

4.4

17.6

4.0

Bilateral and commercial
Bilateral
Paris Club
Other official bilateral
Commercial

481.6
467.0
429.7
37.4
14.5

290.3
283.4
282.9
0.5
6.9

454.6
440.6
411.2
29.4
14.0

14.7
11.5
8.2
3.4
3.2

5.6
5.5
5.1
0.4
0.1

15.9
12.6
9.1
3.4
3.3

5.1
5.1
4.7
0.4
0.1

15.0
14.8
9.7
5.1
0.2

4.6
4.6
4.3
0.3
0.1

Total

Arysta
Bayer
CBAO Senegal
Cotecna
Filtisac
Fortis Bank
Ivoirembal
Natexis
Sotico
Tema
Yara

2008
NPV of
Debt ²

Amort. Interest
(US$ Millions)
72.9
23.2

Amort. Interest

2010
Amort. Interest

(CFAF Billions)
Total

(Percent of GDP)
Total

82.0

31.6

67.1

2.6

0.8

2.5

0.7

2.3

0.6

Multilateral

41.8

7.4

29.1

1.4

0.4

1.3

0.3

1.3

0.3

Bilateral and commercial
Bilateral
Paris Club
Other official bilateral
Commercial

40.2
39.0
35.9
3.1
1.2

24.2
23.7
23.6
0.0
0.6

38.0
36.8
34.3
2.5
1.2

1.2
1.0
0.7
0.3
0.3

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.0

1.1
1.1
0.7
0.4
0.0

0.3
0.3
0.3
0.0
0.0

Total

1.2
0.4
0.9
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.0
(Percent of revenue)
395.3
15.5
4.9

483.3

186.4

14.7

4.2

13.2

3.5

Multilateral

246.4

43.6

171.7

8.5

2.3

7.7

1.9

7.2

1.6

Bilateral and commercial
Bilateral
Paris Club
Other official bilateral
Commercial

236.9
229.7
211.4
18.4
7.1

142.8
139.4
139.2
0.2
3.4

223.6
216.7
202.3
14.5
6.9

7.0
5.5
3.9
1.6
1.5

2.7
2.6
2.4
0.2
0.0

7.0
5.5
4.0
1.5
1.5

2.2
2.2
2.1
0.2
0.0

6.1
6.0
3.9
2.1
0.1

1.9
1.9
1.8
0.1
0.0

Sources: Togolese authorities; and IMF and World Bank staff estimates.
¹ Includes principal and interest in arrears as well as late interest before debt relief.
² Includes arrears.
³ Excluding debt service on the augmentation of PRGF access.

35

Table 7. Togo: Proposed Schedule of Disbursement Under PRGF Arrangement, 2008–11
Amount

Date

Condition for Disbursement

1

Original
program

Augmentation

SDR 13,260,000

13,260,000

0

April 30, 2008

Executive Board approval of the three-year arrangement under the PRGF arrangement (April
23, 2008)

SDR 17,975,000

8,800,000

9,175,000

September 22, 2008

Observance of performance criteria for end-June 2008 and other relevant performance criteria,
and completion of the first review under the PRGF arrangement

SDR 17,975,000

8,800,000

9,175,000

April 30, 2009

Observance of performance criteria for end-December 2008 and other relevant performance
criteria, and completion of the second review under the PRGF arrangement

SDR 8,800,000

8,800,000

October 31, 2009

Observance of performance criteria for end-June 2009 and other relevant performance criteria,
and completion of the third review under the PRGF arrangement

SDR 8,800,000

8,800,000

April 30, 2010

Observance of performance criteria for end-December 2009 and other relevant performance
criteria, and completion of the fourth review under the PRGF arrangement

SDR 8,800,000

8,800,000

October 31, 2010

Observance of performance criteria for end-June 2010 and other relevant performance criteria,
and completion of the fifth review under the PRGF arrangement

SDR 8,800,000

8,800,000

April 30, 2011

Observance of performance criteria for end-December 2010 and other relevant performance
criteria, and completion of the sixth review under the PRGF arrangement

Total

1

Other than the generally applicable conditions for the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).

36

Table 8. Togo: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2006-16 1/
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
Fund obligations based on existing credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

4.3
0.4

4.3
0.5

1.1
0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

1.3
0.2

6.3
0.2

6.3
0.2

6.3
0.1

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

4.3
0.4

4.3
0.5

1.1
0.4

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.5

1.3
0.5

8.0
0.5

12.5
0.4

16.0
0.3

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFAF
In percent of government revenue
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

4.8
3.7
1.9
0.7
8.9
0.3
6.5

4.8
3.5
1.7
0.6
8.2
0.3
6.5

1.5
1.1
0.5
0.2
3.6
0.1
2.1

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.4

0.4
0.3
0.1
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.5

0.5
0.3
0.1
0.0
9.6
0.0
0.6

0.5
0.3
0.1
0.0
6.0
0.0
0.6

1.8
1.3
0.4
0.2
16.9
0.1
2.5

8.5
6.0
1.9
0.7
66.5
0.3
11.6

12.9
9.0
2.7
1.2
95.0
0.5
17.5

16.3
11.5
3.2
1.4
129.9
0.6
22.2

Outstanding Fund credit 2/
In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFAF
In percent of government revenue
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

5.4
4.2
2.1
0.8
10.1
0.4
7.4

1.1
0.8
0.4
0.1
1.9
0.1
1.5

31.2
22.1
10.0
4.2
74.4
1.7
42.6

58.0
41.1
18.2
8.7
146.3
3.1
79.0

75.6
84.4
84.4
53.4
59.4
59.2
21.8
22.1
20.8
8.7
9.0
8.3
192.8 1,761.4 1,086.3
3.8
4.0
3.8
103.0 115.0 115.0

83.1
58.3
19.3
7.6
781.6
3.5
113.2

75.0
52.6
16.4
6.4
587.6
3.0
102.2

62.6
43.9
12.9
5.7
461.4
2.4
85.2

46.6
32.6
9
4
370
2
63.4

Net use of Fund credit (millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments and Repurchases

(4.3)
4.3

(4.3)
4.3

30.1
31.2
1.1

26.8
26.8
-

17.6
17.6
-

8.8
8.8
-

(1.3)
1.3

(8.0)
8.0

(12.5)
12.5

(16.0)
16.0

1,288
527
221
30

1,334
473
226
28

1,390
611
245
28

1,475
658
268
3

1,866
765
340
10

1,970
808
359
9

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of CFAF)
Exports of goods and services (in billions of CFAF)
Government revenue (in billions of CFAF)
Debt service (in billions of CFAF) 2/

1,160
506
196
41

1,198
609
203
43

-

1,564
710
285
5

1,658
766
302
7

1,759
827
320
9

Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including a PRGF augmentation of SDR 18.35 million (25 percent of quota) disbursed in two equal disbursements after completion of the first and
second review of the PRGF arrangement.
2/ Total debt service includes IMF repurchases and repayments.

37

Table 9. Togo: Compliance with WAEMU Convergence Criteria, 2004-09
(Ratios in percent, unless otherwise indicated)

Ratio

2004

2005

2006

2007

Primary criteria
Basic fiscal balance / GDP
Inflation (annual average percentage change)
Total nominal debt / GDP
Domestic arrears accumulation (in billions of CFA francs)
External arrears accumulation (in billions of CFA francs)

>=0
<=3
<=70
<=0
<=0

3.2
0.4
115.0
5.0
12.1

-1.0
6.8
110.8
20.7
21.8

-1.9
2.2
109.6
-5.2
21.2

-0.6
1.0
103.9
-9.3
20.7

0.1
8.4
77.2
0.0
0.3

-1.5
2.8
78.9
-12.6
0.0

Secondary criteria
Wages / fiscal revenue
Domestically financed investment / fiscal revenue
Current account deficit, excl. current official transfers / GDP
Fiscal revenue / GDP

<=35
>=20
<=5
>=17

32.1
1.9
1.5
15.8

30.4
8.4
-10.0
14.6

33.1
13.1
0.2
15.4

32.8
7.1
0.4
16.4

32.7
10.6
3.1
16.4

36.2
17.1
1.8
16.2

Sources: Togolese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

2008

2009
Proj.

38

Table 10. Togo: Triggers for the HIPC floating completion point ¹
Measure
PRSP
·
Prepare a full PRSP through a participatory process and implement satisfactorily its recommended
actions for at least one year, as evidenced by an Annual Progress Report submitted by the Government to IDA
and the IMF.
Macroeconomic stability
Maintain macroeconomic stability as evidenced by satisfactory performance under a PRGF-supported
·
program.
Public financial management
Adopt a mechanism to track public expenditures for poverty reduction on the basis of a functional
·
expenditure classification and publish quarterly reports on these expenditures executed over a period of at
least six months preceding the completion point.
Nominate and install the judges for the Cour des Comptes , and submit the draft of the Loi de règlement
·
and draft General Treasury Balance (Balance générale du Trésor) for a given fiscal year to the Cour des
Comptes and Parliament within the statutorily-specified period (9 months after the end of that fiscal year) for
at least one year immediately preceding the completion point.
Adopt a decree creating the Procurement Regulatory Authority in conformity with the WAEMU
·
Procurement Directives, nominate its managerial staff, and provide them with an adequate budget; and
monthly publication in a public procurement gazette or on a government website of all of the signed contracts,
including sole source contracts and public concessions, for at least six months immediately preceding the
completion point.
Governance
Regular public reporting of payments to, and revenues received by, the government for the phosphates
·
sector in line with the EITI criteria, including an annual report for at least the year immediately preceding the
completion point.
Debt Management
Consolidate external and domestic debt data under a single unit charged with all public debt management
·
tasks.
Publish an annual report on a government website providing accurate and complete data on external and
·
domestic public debt, including information on debt stocks, actual debt service, and new loans within six
months after the end of the year, for at least one year immediately preceding the completion point.
Social sectors
Increase domestically-funded health expenditures in the year prior to the completion point to at least 7.5
·
percent of actual domestic non-interest expenditures (the 2007 ratio was 5.7 percent).
Start implementation of the national education sector plan as evidenced by completing the training of at
·
least 500 new teachers and the remedial training of at least 4,000 existing teachers.
¹The first two triggers (PRSP implementation and satisfactory macroeconomic performance) are requirements for reaching the completion
point under the IMF PRGF-HIPC Trust Instrument.

39
Table 11. Togo: Selected indicators on the Millennium Development Goals 1990-2007
1990
1995
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)
Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Literacy rate, youth female (% of females ages 15-24)
Literacy rate, youth male (% of males ages 15-24)
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)
Total enrollment, primary (% net)
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Ratio of female to male primary enrollment
Ratio of female to male secondary enrollment
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under age 5 with fever)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (% of land area)
Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)
Improved water source (% of population with access)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports of G&S, excl. workers' remittances)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Other
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)
Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)
Trade (% of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators database

2000

2007

(2015 target: halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates)

..
..
21

65
54
..

64
53
23

63
51
..

(2015 target: net enrollment to 100)

..
..
35
..

..
..
39
..

64
84
61
78

..
..
67
80

(2015 target: education ratio 100)

5
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

1
78
44
76

7
86
51
..

(2015 target: reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds)

73
88
149

53
86
139

58
78
124

83
69
108

(2015 target: reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths)

..
31
34
..
43

..
..
..
..
..

108
49
26
..
73

92
62
17
510
89

(2015 target: halt, and begin to reverse AIDS, etc.)

..
327
..
..
..

..
345
..
..
13

60
364
..
..
11

48
389
2.4
3
19

(2015 target: various)

0.3
0.2
13
13
49

0.3
0.2
..
12
52

0.4
0.3
9
12
55

..
..
7
12
59

(2015 target: various)

65
11
0
0
0

42
5
0
0
0

13
5
2
1
1

12
2
5
18
1

6.4
380
1.5
26.6
58
..
4
78.8

6
280
1.3
16.1
58
..
4.5
69.8

5.5
270
1.5
17.8
58
53
5.4
81.5

4.9
360
2.4
18
58
..
6.6
82.1

40
APPENDIX I. LETTER OF INTENT
Lomé, April 1, 2009
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. Managing Director:
1.
Further to my letter dated September 12th, 2008, I wish to take the opportunity of the
second review of the program to report on the progress made in implementing this financial
program supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement. In
spite of the external shocks suffered during the first year of the program, we have remained
committed to pursuing economic reforms with a view to consolidating the results of the
actions undertaken over the last few years. We have made considerable progress, enabling us
to meet our objectives under the reform program and fulfill our commitments. We would also
like to explain our policy plans and commitments as the reform program shifts to a new phase
in an uncertain global environment.
Background
2.
Launched in 2006 as part of the government’s strategy to overcome the prolonged
social, political, and economic crisis, our economic recovery and poverty reduction program
aims to restore macroeconomic stability, rationalize the public finances, and boost economic
growth in order to raise living standards. Our major priority remains the implementation of our
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) which underpins the program. The
government’s program, supported by the PRGF arrangement, has achieved significant results
for the first two objectives despite difficulties beyond its control, such as the steep rise in
world food and oil prices and the severe flooding that took place in August 2008.
3.
Indeed, the program’s framework contributed to mitigating the effects of these shocks
on the public finances and to improving the macroeconomic situation. The government’s
financial situation has improved significantly. The program has also enabled us to normalize
relations with our external creditors and to reach the HIPC decision point in November 2008,
thus opening the way for significant debt relief and financial and technical support. Further
action and continuing vigilance remain necessary in pursuing these objectives. The program is
entering a phase that places greater emphasis on accelerating growth and reducing poverty.
Despite the efforts and sacrifices made in implementing the measures called for in the

41
program, the results in terms of growth have been mixed as a result of the difficulties
mentioned above. Moreover, the current global economic slowdown threatens to further delay
the pickup in growth that was much expected by the population of Togo.
Recent economic developments
4.
The Togolese economy and population were seriously affected by the global
environment and the floods in 2008. The expected economic recovery did not materialize and
the growth rate hovered around 1.1 percent, which is below the average for the last five years.
This poor performance is mostly attributable to the damage caused by the floods and to the
global hike in food and energy prices. In the wake of these shocks, inflation rose to a peak of
15.8 percent in August (year-on-year) before falling back to 8.4 percent at the end of the year
with the reversal of global price rises. Reflecting the deterioration of the economy, household
purchasing power has eroded.
5.
The current account of the external balance of payments has worsened as a result of
deteriorating terms of trade and the destruction caused by the floods. The current account
deficit is projected at 6.6 percent of GDP in 2008, compared to 3.9 percent in 2007. The
monetary situation has been characterized by an increase in foreign assets and slow growth in
domestic credit due to stagnation in the economy. These developments have led to a slower
expansion in the money supply, which rose by 16 percent.
Implementation of the PRGF-supported program
6.
The strict implementation of the PRGF-supported program has provided a flexible and
sound macroeconomic environment which has enabled Togo to deal with the impact of
external shocks, while contributing to the achievement of the program’s objectives. Despite
the difficulties, public finances improved during the year and structural reforms have remained
on track. All performance criteria and quantitative indicators for end-December 2008 have
been met, with the exception of the indicative target for the minimum level of domesticallyfinanced social and capital spending (see Table 1). Similarly, all structural benchmarks were
achieved on time, except for a three-month delay in the case of one benchmark (Table 2).
7.
The government’s good financial performance is attributable to strong mobilization of
domestic resources and solid control over recurrent expenditure. On the other hand, the rate of
execution of capital expenditure has been low. Specifically, repairs to infrastructure damaged
by the August floods were delayed by the country’s limited absorptive capacity. Revenue
collection was bolstered by the strengthening of the tax and customs administrations and the
progressive computerization of customs operations. As a result, the PRGF-supported program
ceilings for the primary fiscal balance and domestic financing were met by a comfortable
margin. The primary balance stands at 0.4 percent of GDP and the government’s net position
with the banking system has improved. Greater fiscal discipline has prevented the

42
accumulation of payment arrears and the government has neither issued nor guaranteed any
external debt on non-concessional terms.
8.
Significant progress has been made in implementing the structural reforms aimed at
enhancing public financial management, repairing the damage to the financial sector caused by
the prolonged social and political crisis, and creating the conditions for a return to financially
viable and healthy banks and industries (see Table 2).
9.

Significant progress has been made in public financial management reform:

•

A strategy for clearing Togo’s domestic arrears was adopted by the Council of
Ministers in December 2008 (meeting a performance criterion) and a national
commission to clear the country’s domestic debt has been set up. The clearance of
arrears will be carried out on the basis of the budget resources allocated for that
purpose. The combined impact of implementing the strategy and the financial sector
reform will strengthen the financial position of the enterprise sector and boost
economic activity.

•

With a view to limiting any distortions in economic incentives and broadening the tax
base, we have included in the 2009 budget some important measures to reduce tax and
customs exemptions in the Free Economic Zone, thus meeting a structural benchmark
six months ahead of the program schedule. The General Tax Code is being updated to
incorporate the amendments made in successive budget laws since 1998.

10.
Continuing the process of bank restructuring is key to economic stability and to effective
financial intermediation for raising growth potential:
•

In November and December, the government initiated a financial restructuring process
through the securitization of non-performing loans (NPLs) extended by banks to stateowned entities as well as those made by state-owned banks to the private sector. To
that end, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the government of
Togo and the banking pool (BTCI, UTB, BIA-TOGO, and ECOBANK-TOGO) for
securitizing NPLs validated as at December 31, 2007 (thereby meeting a structural
benchmark), with a 35 percent discount on government loans. The bonds amount to
7 percent of GDP and has enabled the three banks to meet the 8 percent minimum
coverage requirement for the risk-to-equity ratio. The bonds will be eligible for
refinancing by the Central Bank (BCEAO) and will be reimbursed over a period of
seven years, after a one-year grace period.

•

In addition, the government is exploring, in consultation with the World Bank, the
possibility of creating a structure and mechanism to recover the banks’ NPLs on behalf
of the government.

43
11.
We have made significant progress in reforming the state-owned enterprise sector to
restore the conditions for sustainable operations:
•

A strategic audit of the phosphate sector (structural benchmark) was launched with the
World Bank support in January 2009, three months later than originally planned. This
delay was due to the fact that only two firms responded to the initial call for
expressions of interest, and a second call had to be issued. The final report could be
available by the end of April 2009. The strategic audit will help determine the overall
restructuring of the sector and facilitate the search for a strategic partner.

•

In December 2008 the review of CEET’s financial situation to establish the projected
budget allocations was completed, and a performance-based contract between the
government and CEET was signed (meeting a structural benchmark). The strategic and
financial audit of CEET will begin in consultation with the World Bank.

•

For the cotton sector, pursuant to the recommendations from the strategic audit,
SOTOCO was liquidated, and a new cotton company was set up and will be rescaled to
ensure its financial viability. In addition, the recommended establishment of a
mechanism for indexing cottonseed producer prices to world prices has been endorsed
by the cotton sector and will be operational during the 2009/10 crop season.

12.
The measures taken by the government to alleviate economic hardship in 2008
remained consistent with program objectives. Despite rising prices for consumer goods, no
controls were placed on their domestic levels or on international trade in such goods.
However, in order to protect the most vulnerable segments of the society, the government
sought to mitigate the price impact through targeted measures, including subsidies on seeds
and fertilizers, swift payment of retirement pension arrears, and the sale of security stockpiles
of foodstuffs in the most affected areas. The government intends to refrain from any
interference with the prices of staple consumer goods. Lacking a social security system, the
government intends to mitigate international price fluctuations by stressing programs to
promote the domestic production and supply of consumer goods, especially staple foods. The
government also took fiscal steps to raise household purchasing power by issuing lump-sum
grants to civil servants for the last five months of 2008. That temporary step has been replaced
in the 2009 budget by a cut in the personal income tax (IRPP). In addition, the Guaranteed
Minimum Wage (SMIG, SMAG) was raised as of August 1, 2008. We have also reduced the
corporate tax rate by seven percentage points, and the maximum rate is 33 percent as of
January 2009.
13.
Retail fuel prices did not keep pace with rising world oil prices. A price adjustment
mechanism was in place between the government and the oil companies in order to keep prices
at the pump stable. By comparing the import price with the benchmark price range (changes
exceeding plus or minus 5 percent), surpluses or shortfalls are calculated vis-à-vis the oil

44
companies' operating margin, which is set at 35 CFA francs per liter. Generally speaking, at a
time of rising world oil prices, the oil companies suffer a shortfall, while in the case of falling
prices they realize a surplus. The mechanism of surpluses or shortfalls allows pump prices to
be kept unchanged, but requires compensation between the government and the oil companies.
Faced with rising inflation, and in order to avoid social unrest, the government had kept retail
fuel prices at their November 2006 level. As a result, the accumulated shortfall to the oil
distributors due to this mechanism has increased considerably. The government commissioned
an audit of the sector, which calculated that the net shortfalls incurred by fuel importers totaled
1.5 percent of GDP. Despite the recent turnaround in global oil prices, the government has
decided to keep the retail price above world levels. The resulting surpluses will be used to
clear the deficit to the oil companies within 20 months, in consultation with the companies.
The government intends to review the mechanism for setting the pump prices for oil products
in order to avoid creating a contingent liability for the government.
Macroeconomic outlook
14.
Togo’s growth in 2009 will be sluggish owing to the global economic slowdown.
Economic growth is projected at 1.7 percent. The crisis is expected to lead to a reduction in
migrants’ remittances, a decline in the demand for transit and warehousing services, and a
drop in phosphate, cement, and clinker exports. We are seeing the early signs of the crisis
through the fall in the value of our exports (cotton, phosphate, and clinker). We are closely
monitoring trends in development assistance and private transfers for possible declines. This
unfavorable development will be offset by an improvement in the terms of trade, renewed
confidence following the government’s reform measures, and a substantial boost in public
capital spending. In addition, the recent easing of externally induced inflationary pressures,
especially on fuel and food prices, should help bring the inflation rate below the 3 percent
threshold set in the WAEMU pact on convergence, stability, growth, and solidarity. A
significant improvement in the terms of trade will contribute to reducing the current account
deficit to about 6.1 percent of GDP, despite the sharp rise in capital spending.
Implementation of the PRGF-supported program in 2009
15.
In spite of these risks and difficulties, the government is determined to continue and
even accelerate its planned reforms under the PRGF-supported program in order to lay the
foundation for strong and sustained growth. We would also like to register our concern about
the vulnerability of our economy to external shocks and describe the actions we intend to take
to alleviate their adverse economic impact.
16.
The fiscal policy objective for 2009 is to preserve our achievements in macroeconomic
stabilization, improve the absorptive capacity of the economy, and support economic recovery.
In that context, government revenues are projected to be comparable to last year at
16.9 percent of GDP, as a result of continued fiscal reforms, mainly the broadening of the tax

45
base (including in the Free Economic Zone) and administrative capacity building. However,
the global crisis remains a downside risk to revenue projections. In view of this, the
government will continue to monitor growth and revenue trends closely.
17.
Expenditures are projected at 22.2 percent of GDP, i.e., up by 2.5 percentage points
from 2008. Despite the additional cost of loan securitization, recurrent expenditure will be
contained. The level and share of social expenditures will increase substantially and the food
production support program will continue. Investment spending financed both domestically
and externally will be boosted by one percentage point of GDP each. Part of this increase will
come from a supplementary budget (collectif budgétaire) that we plan to enact in the second
quarter to increase spending authority by the amount of the remaining emergency spending
from 2008, which will be used exclusively for funding priority infrastructure projects. As a
result, the primary fiscal balance should remain at a level equivalent to −0.6 percent of GDP.
We also plan an increase from 0.5 to 1.0 percent of GDP in the amount of arrears to be settled
in cash. In addition, we have approached our development partners to explore the possibility of
additional budget support to increase this amount. The deficit will be financed by budget
support expected from our partners, including the European Union (EU), the World Bank, the
African Development Bank, France, China, and other bilateral partners. In order to accelerate
the implementation of emergency repairs to infrastructure and of the clearance of domestic
arrears, we plan to issue in the first half of the year a six-month T-bill for about 1.3 percent of
GDP.
18.
The reforms envisioned in our program for the rest of 2009 aim to safeguard
macroeconomic stability, strengthen public finances and—increasingly—build the foundation
for stronger growth, and we are determined to implement and in some cases strengthen them
(Table 3).
19.

Key fiscal reforms will be focused on the following points:

•

Before the end of June 2009, the government will make operational the new Treasury
structure consistent with WAEMU directives (structural performance criterion). In July
2008, a start was made to reorganizing the Directorate General of Treasury and Public
Accounting, with the adoption of legislation creating three main central offices and
regional offices of the Treasury, and appointments to the relevant positions were made
in December. This new structure will strengthen the Treasury’s capacity to effect better
controls and provide more reliable information on revenues, expenditures, and
government cash management as well as avoid the accumulation of payment arrears.
The Treasury will complete the validation of entry items in the Treasury balance sheet,
and will start producing monthly treasury balances with a lag of one month, as of April.

46
•

The government will start implementing the strategy to clear domestic arrears by the
amount provided in the budget and the supplementary budget, and securitize the arrears
to suppliers validated by the KPMG audit by December 2009 (structural benchmark).

•

In order to preserve public debt sustainability, the government will ensure that its
financing needs are met through grants or highly concessional loans and are committed
to maintaining sustainable levels of debt. In this regard, a National Public Debt
Committee has been set up to develop, coordinate, and monitor the national policy for
the assumption and management of public debt (contributing thereby to achieving a
structural benchmark).

•

A plan of action has been launched to strengthen the capacity for quick and effective
project implementation in the short run, with a view to enhancing aid absorptive
capacity for implementation of the Emergency Program especially to repair flood
damage. We will ensure that these measures will be accompanied by reforms to
strengthen the cash management so as to ensure that resources are available.

•

In addition, public expenditure control will be enhanced by further reform of
government procurement, for which a new law will be passed in June 2009. This
reform is essential for guaranteeing the efficiency of public investment outlays.

•

Steps have been taken to complete the remaining structural reforms for June 2009,
including the enactment of the new law on the Court of Auditors, the appointment of
judges to this body, the preparation of the 2007 management accounts and the Loi de
règlement (budget reconciliation law) for 2007. These actions will also move Togo
toward the HIPC completion point.

20.
Further bank restructuring will enable Togo’s economy to improve quickly the financial
intermediation needed to support economic activity:
•

The initial call for proposals for strategic investors in the four major state-owned banks
will be completed before the end of the year, as planned (structural benchmark). With
support from the World Bank, the government intends to engage the services of one or
more investment banks for that purpose. In cooperation with the supervisory
authorities, the government will maintain close oversight of banks’ management
through to the end of the process.

•

By December, the government will set up a structure and mechanism for managing
NPLs that have been exchanged against government bonds (revised structural
benchmark). Given the complexity of this operation, which benefits from technical
assistance from the World Bank, the timetable has been extended by four months. The
mechanism will allow the government to recover some of the cost of recapitalizing the

47
banks and reduce the large stock of cross-debts, which will help revitalize credit
channels.
21.
Maintaining sound public finances and reviving growth will require reforms to stateowned enterprises so as to restore their financial health, guard against future losses, and
promote gains in production and productivity:
•

The government intends to assist the new cotton company to obtain the credit
necessary to complete its operations in its first year, but that assistance will remain
consistent with the current fiscal framework.

•

The government will prepare a development strategy for the phosphate sector based on
the strategic audit, no later than September 2009 (structural benchmark), as planned.
The final report could be available by the end of April 2009. The strategic audit will
help shape the overall restructuring of the sector and facilitate the search for a strategic
partner.

22.
In order to address external shocks and ensure economic recovery, we will need the
continued support of the development partners who agreed in Brussels in September 2008 to
mobilize resources in the context of the resumption of international cooperation and in
accordance with the principles of the Paris Declaration and the Accra Agenda for Action.
Beyond the resources required for the clearance of arrears and debt servicing, Togo needs
immediate new resources (in the form of grants or concessional loans) to finance the
investments that are essential to improve economic infrastructure, deliver social services,
reduce poverty, and more generally, to achieve the MDGs. We welcome our partners’ decision
to increase the level of aid and to ensure maximum flexibility in their procedures. For its part,
Togo is determined to meet its floating completion point triggers under the HIPC initiative as
early as possible in 2010.
23.
Work on preparing the full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper is far advanced. At the
heart of the process is the government’s will and commitment to a participatory approach
involving all segments of society. This participatory approach has allowed all the stakeholders
from the public and private sectors to take ownership of the PRSP process. Thematic studies
have been conducted with input from civil society organizations through consultations that led
to the production of a preliminary draft of the F-PRSP. Regional consultations on this draft
have been held and the document will be sent to the National Assembly for consideration
before submission for national validation and adoption by the Council of Ministers, no later
than April 30, 2009.
24.
Progress under our PRGF-supported program will be monitored against the revised
end-June PC and end-December 2009 quantitative PCs understandings on which have been

48
reached with the mission. We would like for the fourth review under the arrangement to be
completed by the end of April, 2010.
25.
To support our policies and in view of the remarkable progress achieved in
implementing the PRGF-supported program, we are requesting the completion of the second
review. We also request disbursement of the third loan, including the augmentation approved
by the IMF Board during the first PRGF review.
26.
The government is convinced that the measures and policies set out in this Letter of
Intent are sufficient to achieve the program’s objectives. It stands ready to take any additional
steps needed to achieve them. The government will consult with the IMF, at its own initiative
or at that of the Managing Director, in advance of any additional measure or revisions to the
policies set out in this Letter of Intent.
27.
The government authorizes the IMF to publish its staff report and the Letter of Intent
related to the discussions on the second review of the program.

Sincerely yours,

/s/
Adji Otèth AYASSOR
Minister of Economy and Finance

49
Table 1. Togo: Quantitative Performance Criterion and Indicative Targets
June 30, 2008 - December 31, 2009
2008

2009

June
Prog. ¹

June

Dec.
Prog. ²

Act.

Dec.
Prog.

Act.

(Billion CFA francs, cumulative from end of preceding year)
Performance criteria (for end-June, end-December 2008, and
end-June 2009; indicative targets otherwise)
Domestic primary fiscal balance (floor)
Nonaccumulation of external arrears

³

Net domestic financing (ceiling)
Central government contracting or guaranteeing of
nonconcessional external debt (ceiling)

-4.5

28.3

-7.6

5.6

-10.7

-7.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-3.1

-31.5

-7.5

-12.6

10.0

4.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

103.6

109.6

209.8

220.7

108.0

225.7

0.0

-3.1

-3.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

48.9

34.7

99.7

82.8

50.3

120.7

…

16.4

32.3

32.3

24.1

37.4

Indicative Targets
Total revenue (floor)
Domestic payments arrears, changes in stock (ceiling)
Domestically financed social and capital spending (floor)
Projected program financing
¹ Letter of Intent dated March 28, 2008.
² Letter of Intent dated September 12, 2008.
³

Continuous performance criterion.

50
Table 2. Structural Conditionality for 2008
Measures
Fiscal governance
Implement a new framework
for monthly monitoring of
budget execution and report
data for April-June 2008
based on a new template.

Date
Benchmark
August 2008

Macroeconomic rationale
To provide policymakers with a tool for
making timely and informed spending
decisions as they seek to achieve the
budget objectives and mitigate the risk
of fiscal slippages

Status
Done: July 2008.

Create a General Inspectorate of
Finance under the responsibility
of the Minister of Finance.

Performance
criterion
August 2008

To strengthen fiscal governance by
introducing oversight, control, and
transparency for all units handling public
resources

Done. Decree adopted on July
23. The Inspector General was
appointed on August 29.

Adopt a new strategy and time
table for clearing domestic
arrears.

Performance
criterion
December
2008

To restore supplier confidence, facilitate
the return to regular spending
procedures, and allow a gradual
reduction in the government's large
stock of domestic arrears

Done. Strategy approved on
December 9 2008.

Prior action
for
PRGF
approval

To prevent further erosion of BTCI's
capital and liquidity, to restore
confidence in Togo's largest bank, and
in the financial sector more broadly.

Done: February 2008.

Benchmark
December
2008

To develop the domestic securities
market, promote financial sector
development, improve Treasury
management, and avoid new budgetary
arrears.

Done. The Treasury has
agreed with the BCEAO on a
framework for issuing T-bills on
a regular basis in 2009,
following one initial issue this
year.

Benchmark
October 2008

To prepare the restructuring of Togo's
traditionally largest export sector
(currently operating at only one-third of
capacity), including by providing options
for attracting a strategic investor.

Benchmark
December
2008

To provide the information necessary for
preparing energy sector reforms and
deciding on 2009 budget allocations, as
rising oil prices and regionwide electricity
shortages have dampened economic
growth and led to increasing demands for
budget support to the energy sector

Done late. After a delay due to
the fact that only two firms
responded to the initial call for
expressions of interest, a
second call was issued. The
audit firm was selected and the
work is underway.
Done. The preliminary report
was submitted to the
authorities and the World Bank
in December 2008. The final
report was concluded on
February 12, 2009 and
submitted to the World Bank.

Financial sector
Change management and
oversight of BTCI based on
terms of reference prepared
in consultation with the
WAEMU Banking
Commission.
Adopt an action plan for
introducing regular Treasury
bill auctions in 2009.

Public enterprises
Initiate an audit of the
phosphate sector, based on
competitive selection of
an audit company, in
consultation with the World
Bank.
Prepare a review of the finances
of the national electricity
company (CEET) in consultation
with the World Bank

51

Table 3. Structural Conditionality for 2009
Measures
Fiscal governance
Reduce tax and customs
exemptions and strengthen
tax and customs control,
including enterprises licensed
in the Free Economic Zone.

Date

Macroeconomic rationale

Status

Benchmark
June 2009

To limit leakage of tax-exempt goods
into the domestic economy, which
distorts economic incentives and
reduces fiscal revenues

Make operational a new
Treasury structure based on
WAEMU directives.

Performance
criterion June
2009

To create a functioning Treasury that
has adequate control and information
on revenues, spending, and cash
management to ensure timely
payments, avoid arrears, and provide
for real-time consistent budget
execution data

Done. Tax exemptions
have been reduced in the
2009 budget law. Customs
and tax authorities have
the power to conduct
inspections in the Free
Economic Zone.
On track. The Treasury
reorganization began in
2008, based on World
Bank and IMF advice.

Start implementing the
domestic arrears clearance
strategy by securitizing
validated arrears to suppliers
and setting up a mechanism
for monitoring domestic debt
(see paragraph 19).

Benchmark
December
2009

To move toward a sustainable debt
position and prevent new arrears as
Togo regularizes its large stock of
domestic arrears, starts servicing longterm regional bonds, and initiates
short-term Treasury bill auctions

On track. The overall
strategy adopted in
November 2008, based on
IMF advice, and the
National Debt
Management Council were
instituted in January 2009.

Initiate restructuring of BTCI,
including by raising its capital
through issuance of
government securities.

Benchmark
March 2009

To support the financial rehabilitation
of Togo's largest bank, prepare it for
privatization, and set the conditions for
sound financial sector development

Set up a structure and
mechanism for managing the
NPLs that have been
exchanged against
government securities in the
bank restructuring process.

Benchmark
December
2009 (revised
from August)

To recover part of the budgetary cost
of securitizing NPLs and reduce the
large stock of state-owned enterprise
arrears and cross-debts

Initiate the process of
identifying strategic investors
for state-owned banks.

Benchmark
December
2009

To reduce risks to macroeconomic
stability caused by Togo's large lossmaking state-owned banks and
support expansion of financial
intermediation

Done. Remarkable
progress has been made
in preparing the exchange
of BTCI's NPLs against
government securities as
part of a broader multibank scheme
On track. Given the
complexity of the
operation, for which the
IMF and World Bank are
providing technical
assistance, the timetable
has been extended by four
months.
On track. The World Bank
is supporting government
efforts in this area.

Public enterprises
Phosphate sector: Prepare a
development strategy based
on the results of the strategic
audit.

Benchmark
September
2009

To promote transparency in the
restructuring of the phosphate sector,
which could generate additional
exports of up to 10 percent of GDP at
current world prices

Financial sector

On track. The World Bank
is supporting government
efforts in this area. The
strategic audit is
underway.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
TOGO
2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility—Informational
Annex
Prepared by the African Department
April 8, 2009

Contents

Page

I. Relations with the Fund............................................................................................................. 2
II. Relations with the World Bank ................................................................................................ 8
III. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................... 11

2
I. RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(as of February 28, 2009)
I.

Membership Status: Joined August 1, 1962; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR million

Percent of quota

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve Position

73.40
73.07
0.33

100.00
99.55
0.45

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR million
10.98
0.05

Percent of allocation
100.00
0.50

IV.

SDR million
Percent of quota
Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
PRGF Arrangements
31.24
42.55
Financial Arrangements:
Approval
Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn
Type
Date
Date
(SDR million)
(SDR million)
Apr 21, 2008
Apr 20, 2011
84.41
31.24
PRGF
Sep
16,
1994
Jun
29,
1998
65.16
54.30
PRGF
May 31, 1989
May 19, 1993
46.08
38.40
PRGF

V.

VI.

Projected Payments to the Fund11
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

1

2009

2010

2011

2012

0.20
0.20

0.22
0.22

0.22
0.22

0.22
0.22

2013
1.33
0.22
1.54

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount of such
arrears will be shown in this section.

3

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point data
Assistance committed
By all creditors (US$ Million) ¹
Of which: IMF assistance (US$
million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date
II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR
Million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income ²

Framework
Nov 2008
270.000
0.31
0.21
Floating

0.04
0.04
--0.04

Total disbursements
¹ Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the
decision point. Hence these two amounts can not be added.
² Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim
period.

VIII. Exchange Arrangement
Togo is a member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and has
no separate legal tender. The exchange system, common to all WAEMU countries, is free of
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions.
The union’s common currency, the CFA franc, is pegged to the euro at a rate of
CFAF 655.957 = EUR 1, consistent with the official conversions rate of the French franc to
the euro and the previous fixed rate of the CFA franc to the French franc of CFAF 100= F 1.
On April 28, 2006, the rate of the CFA franc in terms of SDR was CFAF 769.68 = SDR 1.0.
Effective January 1, 2007, the exchange arrangement of the WAEMU countries has been
reclassified to the category of conventional pegged arrangement from the category of
exchange arrangement with no separate legal tender. The new classification is based on the
behavior of the common currency, whereas the previous classification was based on the lack
of a separate legal tender. The new classification thus only reflects a definitional change, and

4
is not based on a judgment that there has been a substantive change in the exchange regime or
other policies of the currency union or its members
IX.

Safeguards Assessments

The Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) is the common central bank of the
countries of the West African Economic and Monetary Union, which includes Togo. The
most recent safeguards assessment of the BCEAO was completed on November 4, 2005. The
assessment indicated progress has been made in strengthening the bank's safeguards
framework since the 2002 assessment and identified some areas where further steps would
help solidify it. The BCEAO now publishes a full set of audited financial statements and
improvements have been made to move financial reporting closer to International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS). Furthermore, an internal audit charter has been put in place,
mechanisms for improving risk management have been established, and follow-up on internal
and external audit recommendations has been strengthened. The results of continuous
safeguards monitoring indicate that while certain vulnerabilities remain in internal control
systems and legal structure, there has been some progress in other areas, including through:
(i) improving the external audit process by adopting a multi-year audit program;
(ii) establishing an audit committee; (iii) expanding disclosures on financial positions of
WAEMU countries with the Fund in the notes to the annual financial statements; and
(iv) further strengthening of the effectiveness of the internal audit function.
X.

Article IV Consultation

Togo is on the standard 24-month Article IV consultation cycle. The Executive Board
completed the last 2007 Article IV consultation on June 8, 2007.

5
XI.

Technical Assistance

A.

AFRITAC West

Customs Administration
Dates
November 2005
January-February
2006
July 2006
November 2006
September-October
2007
March-April 2008

Objectives
Support the modernization and simplification of customs regulations
(implementation of simplified Kyoto Convention).
Organization of services to ensure value control and creation of an independent
data base at the Customs Administration
Modernization of the Customs Administration.
Regional workshop on ethics in fiscal and customs administration.
Launching Sydonia++
Assessment of control methods at Customs offices; optimization custom
controls; and reinforcement of controls after customs clearance.

Tax Administration:
Dates
October 2005
May-June 2006
November 2006
April 2007
June-July 2007
January 2008

Objectives
Follow-up progress in strengthening tax administration.
Assessment of tax administration reforms; modernization of tax
administration.
Regional workshop on ethics in tax and customs administration.
Help DGG to increase tax base and improve control services.
Support the elaboration of a research strategy and fiscal control.
Assessment of 2007 reports of Directorate General of Taxation; assist in
2008 fiscal control reports; improve reimbursement of VAT credits.

Public Expenditure Management:
Dates
September 2005
October-November
2006
September-October
2007
February 2009

Objectives
Assessment of needs to strengthen budgetary and accounting management.
Audit of government accounts in commercial banks, closure of accounts outside
Treasury, centralization of government expenditures; and assessment of budget
preparation, control, execution, and treasury management.
Support of public accounting management at the Directorate General of Treasury
and Public Accounting.
Review of the Treasury Accounting System

6
Debt Management and Financial Markets:
Dates
July-August 2006
December 2006
May-June 2007
November 2007

Objectives
Analysis of the information flows in debt management
Support the optimization of computerized tools for debt administration at the
Directorate of Public Debt (DPD)
Analyze contracts with principal donors; improve software applications for
debt management at DPD.
Verify data base; help prepare analysis of debt sustainability.

Macroeconomic Statistics
Dates

Objectives

September 2005
November-December
2005
March 2006
August 2006
September 2007
October 2007

Improve public finance statistics reports and publication of data.
Regional workshop on the 2001 public finance manual.
Prepare IMF questionnaire tables based on the 2001 manual of public finance.
Help prepare a response to IMF questionnaire on public finance.
Regional workshop on 2001 public finance manual.
Support the services in charge of the preparation of the tables of the
government’s financial operations (TOFE in French)

Real Sector Statistics
Dates
December 2007

Objectives
Assist Directorate General of Statistics and National Accounts in the
implementation of the 1993 National Accounting System (SCN 93in French).

Microfinance Supervision:
Dates
December 2005
May 2006
January 2007
April 2007
November 2007
January-February 2008

Objectives
Regulations for microfinance focused on the strengthening of microfinance
cells.
Support implementation of the systems to analyze authorization requests.
Support inspection missions in microfinance institutions.
Regional workshop on exchange of information.
Support and monitor unit on money control.
Support and monitor unit on inspection methods.

7
B.

Headquarters

___________________________________________________________________________
Department Type of Assistance Time of Delivery
Purpose
___________________________________________________________________________
FAD
MFD
FAD
TGS
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
FAD
XII.

Staff
Staff
Staff
Staff
Staff
Resident advisor
Resident advisor
Staff
Staff
Staff
Staff

December 2006
March 2006
January 2006
June 2001
July 2000
1997
July 1996
February 1995
September 1994
February 1992
November 1991

Tax administration
Financial Sector
Revenue Administration
Computerization of treasury
Public expenditure management
Tax administration
Customs administration
Tax reform
Public expenditure management
Tax reform
Budgetary reform

Resident Representative

In September 2005, Mr. Koffi Yao became resident representative for Benin and Togo.

8
II. RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK
(Updated March 25, 2009) 1
A.

Partnership in Togo’s development strategy

1.
Over the last decade and a half, Togo has been trapped in a cycle of political
instability, economic decline, rising poverty, and donor disengagement. Togo was in nonaccrual status with the International Development Association (IDA) from May 2002 to May
2008. During the non-accrual period, the Bank continued analytical and advisory activities
(AAA) on key aspects of socioeconomic development. Together with other partners, the
Bank also supported the Government’s efforts to prepare its I-PRSP and development
strategies in health, education, agriculture and rural development, and HIV/AIDS.
2.
Prior to the May 2008 re-engagement, the principal means for the Bank to provide
support to Togo was through grants under the Low Income Country Under Stress (LICUS)
Initiative. Since 2005, six grants have been provided. Three of these supported a communitydriven Emergency Program for Poverty Reduction (EPPR) with the aim of halting the decline
into extreme poverty and the deterioration of social indicators throughout the country.
3.
Three additional LICUS projects aimed to (a) reform and revive the key sectors as
well as create an environment for private sector-led growth (focusing on the sectors of
phosphate, cotton, coffee, cocoa, and energy as well as on public procurement reforms);
(b) preserve human capital (by minimizing the threat posed by Avian Influenza); and (c)
achieve quick visible results on the ground (through an urban poverty infrastructure grant).
4.
Successful implementation of initial political and economic reforms since 2005-06,
including good performance under an IMF Staff Monitored Program, laid the foundation for
strengthening donor assistance to support the process of clearing Togo’s arrears to IDA and
other major creditors and thereby of full resumption of the Bank’s operations in the country.
On May 29, 2008, the Bank’s Board discussed the Interim Strategy Note and approved a
development policy operation (the Economic Recovery and Governance Grant, ERGG) that
enabled Togo to clear its arrears to IDA and thereby normalize its relations with the Bank.
B.

World Bank Group strategy

5.
The Bank’s May 2008 Interim Strategy Note (ISN) sets out the Bank Group’s plan to
help Togo recover from its long period of instability and begin laying the foundations for
sustained, shared growth over the medium term. This would be achieved through support for
the normalization of relations with the World Bank Group through the clearance of arrears,
and assistance to address critical social needs on the ground. The ISN aimed to set realistic
expectations with regard to the progress and achievements that could be realized from June
1

This note is updated on an annual basis by World Bank staff, or as warranted by developments in the Bank’s
program.

9
2008 through FY10. ISN support is under three main pillars in line with the I-PRSP
priorities: (i) improve governance and transparency; (ii) promote the return to private sectorled growth; and (iii) provide for urgent social needs. The ISN builds on a Development
Policy Needs Review (DPNR) prepared and discussed with the Government in early 2008.
6.
The three pillars are supported through: (i) assistance for the clearance of Togo’s
arrears to IDA; (ii) investment projects, development policy operations and LICUS trust fund
grants to provide financial and technical support for the Government’s reform program under
the three pillars; and (iii) analytical and advisory activities to inform the policy dialogue and
the Government’s reform agenda, including preparation of the full PRSP. This support is
complemented by ongoing and new World Bank regional activities in the areas of transport
and transit facilitation, energy and mining.
7.
Under Pillar 1 (Improve Governance and Transparency), there is a particular focus on
supporting the Government’s own reform program to improve governance, transparency and
efficiency in public expenditure management as well as to advance structural reforms aimed
at improving governance and transparency in the key sectors of the economy (phosphates,
energy, cotton and financial sector). This approach would lead over time to strengthened
fiscal sustainability, enhanced transparency of State institutions and processes, improved
economic governance and increased economic growth. In addition to the first ERGG, support
is to be provided through two annual development policy operations and a Financial Sector
and Governance Reform Technical Assistance project. The latter will support banking, social
security and microfinance institutions restructuring and recovery. Ongoing analytical and
advisory work includes a Trust Fund grant for Statistical Capacity Building, support to
strengthen the country’s debt management capacity, and an updated Public Expenditure
Management and Financial Review (PEMFAR).
8.
Under Pillar 2 (Promote the Return to Private Sector-led Growth), private-sector
development will be critical to ensuring that Togo returns to a path of recovery and economic
growth. The Bank will support the government in identifying the challenges and obstacles to,
and the potential entry points for, private sector investment as a catalyst for growth in Togo
through a Country Economic Memorandum on the Sources of Growth, an Investment
Climate Assessment and a Diagnostic Trade Integration Study. Lending will include a
Support to Growth-inducing Sectors Project, which would focus on improving agricultural
productivity and diversification and port infrastructure, and an Emergency Infrastructure
Rehabilitation and Energy project, to provide energy investments and to upgrade roads and
sanitation systems in selected urban areas. Togo is also expected to participate in the regional
Abidjan-Lagos Transit and Transport Facilitation Project and a possible Adjarala
Hydroelectric Project. In the energy sector, the World Bank is providing ongoing advisory
assistance to the authorities in the context of support to the West Africa Regional Power
Pool.

10
9.
Under Pillar 3 (Provide for Urgent Social Needs), the strategy focuses on increasing
the supply of, and improving access to, basic social services for the most vulnerable groups,
thereby helping the Government deliver visible results to the population. Activities will help
rebuild the minimal effectiveness of local basic services delivery systems and improve access
to economic opportunities. This will be achieved by addressing urgent infrastructure
rehabilitation needs in the poorest areas of Lomé, the capital city, and by scaling up, under
the Community Development Project approved in June 2008, the approach implemented in
Togo since 2004 through successive LICUS grants. In October 2008, IDA approved an
additional US$7 million grant under the Global Food Crisis Response Program to
complement the Community Development Project, to support Togo’s efforts to manage the
global food price shocks.
10.
In addition, the Bank has supported the Government in strengthening its poverty
diagnosis, information systems, and statistical capacities. A Core Welfare Indicator
Questionnaire survey was carried out in 2006 to provide for up-to-date and more reliable
statistics. Recently, the Bank, in collaboration with the UNDP, conducted a background study
on the sources of growth as input to preparation of the full PRSP. The Bank is preparing a
Country Environmental Assessment Note to monitor the impact of activities included in the
ISN on the environment.
C.

IMF-World Bank collaboration

11.
In the course of the re-engagement process, the IMF and World Bank staffs have
established a collaborative relationship in supporting the Government’s macroeconomic and
structural reforms, in line with the guidelines for enhanced Bank-Fund collaboration. This
includes participation of Bank staff in the Fund’s program review missions, and IMF staff
participation in Bank internal review meetings on key operations or studies. The IMF takes
the lead in discussions on macroeconomic stabilization and the World Bank on social and
structural areas, with close collaboration on a few structural areas that have a critical impact
on macroeconomic stability (notably financial sector reforms). The Fund’s dialogue and
conditionality are consistent with the structural programs agreed with the Bank, and the
Bank’s policy framework with Togo is elaborated consistent with the Governments’
macroeconomic framework agreed with the Fund.
12.
The Bank has worked closely with the IMF on a regional Financial Sector
Assessment, and the two institutions have also cooperated in analysis of the debt situation
and in bringing Togo to the HIPC Decision Point in November 2008.
Contact person: Madani Tall, Country Director (225-22400401), and Philip English, Lead Economist (202-4736483).

11
III. STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
Data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance, but weaknesses in the quality and
timeliness of data hamper staff’s analysis. National accounts and balance of payments
statistics are compiled based on very limited information, with only few surveys and scarce
data on primary agriculture and private sector services. Moreover, government finance
statistics are derived from a weak accounting system, and monetary data are reported by the
BCEAO with a two-month lag.
2.
The country has participated in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS)
since November 2001. Metadata on the national statistical system, including plans for
improvement posted to the Fund’s Dissemination Standard Bulletin Board, were last updated
in December 2004.
National accounts and consumer price index (CPI)
3.
Like other West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) member states,
Togo had embarked in late 2002 on implementing the System of National Accounts 1993
(1993 SNA), using the ERETES software. The NA for the new base year (2000) were
completed in 2005 but since then due to a number of difficulties such as lack of staff,
material and financial resources, the program was suspended and the NA for 2001 was not
finalized. A West Afritac mission in March 2009 trained the staff into the 1993 SNA and the
structure of the ERETES database and emphasized the necessity to achieve, as soon as
possible, the 1993 SNA implementation process. As Togo only prepared the NA for the base
year (2000), the mission recommended to proceed with the compilation of the NA for 2007
and to prepare afterwards the NA series for the missing years as an abridged version. The
authorities demonstrated a stronger commitment to achieve the implementation of the 1993
SNA. The National Statistics Office (NSO) website has not been updated since June 2008.
There is no hard copy publication on NA.
External sector statistics
4.
Balance of payments statistics and international investment position data are compiled
based on bank reports, a survey of enterprises, and customs data. Statistics are compiled with
a six-month delay and are revised twice a year. A STA technical assistance mission in
balance of payments statistics visited Lomé in September 2008 and found that significant
progress had been made recently, in particular concerning informal trade, since the
subregional unit for the reconciliation of intra-WAMU trade was set up. Trade in services
seems to be well covered, as well as remittances. External trade on oil products had also
been subject of a thorough study by the BCEAO which led subsequently to important
revisions, and thereafter to a more appropriate reporting by the National Accounts
Directorate. Data provided by BCEAO headquarters on the treatment of regional banknotes
need to be reviewed at Headquarters level.

12

Government accounts and public debt data
5.
The Government finance statistics accounting system is undergoing important
improvements. The new WAEMU budget nomenclature now permits the economic and
functional classification of expenditure. The monthly TOFE (Table of Central Government
Financial Operations) is based on a mixture of administrative and accounting data and is sent
to AFR with a two-month lag. Inconsistencies in domestic arrears records held by different
units of the Ministry of Finance and the stock of domestic debt have been audited and a new
database is being set up. Comprehensive external debt data and projections on a loan by loan
basis are compiled regularly. Only budgetary central government data are reported for
publication in the Government Finances Statistics Yearbook (GFSY), government finance
high frequency data are not reported for publication in the IFS.
Monetary statistics
6.
Monthly data for Togo, along with data for other members of the West African
Monetary Union are regularly disseminated by the Central Bank of the West African
Monetary Union (BCEAO) with a lag of about two months. Data on lending and borrowing
rates, charged by domestic banks, are not compiled. In August 2006, as part of the
authorities’ efforts to implement the methodology in the Monetary and Financial Statistics
Manual, the BCEAO reported to STA monetary data for June 2006 for all member countries
(including Togo) using Standardized Report Forms (1SR-central bank, 2SR-other depository
corporations, and 5SR-monetary aggregates). In response to STA’s comments, the BCEAO
recently provided a revised 1SR and indicated that 2SR was being revised.

13

Togo: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of March 31, 2009)
Economic Variable

Date of latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency of
Data2

Frequency of
Reporting2

Frequency of
publication2

December
2008

February
2009

M

Q

Not published

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary
Authorities

December 2008

March 2009

M

Q

Not published

Reserve/Base Money

December 2008

March 2009

M

Q

Not published

Broad Money

December
2008

March 2009

M

Q

Not published

Central Bank Balance Sheet

December
2008

March 2009

M

Q

Not published

December 2008

March 2009

M

SA

Not published

Interest Rates

December 2008

March 2009

M

Q

Not published

Consumer Price Index

December 2008

February 2009

M

SA

Not published

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
and Composition of Financing –
1
General Government

December
2008

February
2009

M

M

Not published

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
and Composition of Financing–
Central Government

December
2008

February
2009

M

M

Not published

Stocks of Central Government and
Central Government-Guaranteed
Debt

December
2008

February
2009

M

M

Not published

External Current Account Balance

2007

August
2009

A

OM

Not published

Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

Dec 2008

February 2009

M

OM

Not published

2007

June 2008

A

OM

Not published

December
2008

February
2009

A

OM

Not published

2007

July 2008

Exchange Rates

Consolidated Balance Sheet of
the Banking System
2

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
International Investment Position3
1

The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra-budgetary funds, semi-autonomous
government agencies and institutions, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
2
Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Semi Annually (SA), Annually (A), on mission (OM).
3
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/55
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 12, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with Togo
On April 21, 2009, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Togo 1. The Executive Board also completed the second review of
Togo’s performance under its Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement.
Background
Since 2006 Togo has made significant strides in overcoming the effects of a protracted period of
political, social and economic crisis by embarking on a program of major political and economic
reforms. Implementation of the PRGF-supported program has been strong since its launch in
2008, despite the adverse impact of global price shocks and heavy flooding. With these
difficulties, growth reached only 1.1 percent in 2008. All quantitative targets and structural
benchmarks for the second review of the PRGF-supported program were met, many with ample
margins or in advance, with only two exceptions—the indicative target for social and investment
spending was undershot and there was an unavoidable delay in launching a study of the
phosphate sector. Priority spending fell below its target largely owing to slow implementation of
emergency repairs after the 2008 floods, which highlighted capacity constraints. After inflation
peaked in August 2008, it dropped back down to 8.4 percent by year-end thanks to falling world
oil and food prices, which also mitigated the deterioration in the terms of trade and the current
account deficit (6.6 percent of Gross Domestic Product).
A nascent recovery in Togo’s economy following three years of reforms is expected to be offset
in 2009 by the impact of the global recession. In response, the authorities have reiterated their
commitment to the PRGF-supported program and aim to accelerate growth-enhancing structural
reforms. A rebound in subsistence agriculture and rising public investment are expected to be
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

2
counterbalanced by the adverse effects of the global recession, even though these should be
moderated somewhat by the limited global integration of Togo’s financial sector and its already
depressed exports. Nevertheless, the global recession’s impact on exports and remittances is
expected to keep growth to just 1.7 percent in 2009 and 2.1 percent in 2010. Improving terms of
trade in 2009 will narrow the current account deficit slightly to about 6 percent.
As a near-term response to slow growth in the face of the global recession, the authorities have
appropriately placed high priority on increasing public investment spending, financed by growing
external assistance and by shifting unspent financial resources intended for emergency projects
in 2008 to 2009. The authorities are forcefully implementing plans to address capacity
constraints in project execution, with the support of development partners. At the same time, the
authorities are also aiming to accelerate implementation of structural reforms in the banking
sector, public finances, and state-owned enterprises. The planned increase in the share of
domestic arrears cleared in cash will support economic recovery by helping address the liquidity
and credit shortage in private sector.
For the medium-term, the authorities rightly emphasize structural and fiscal measures to
enhance the low growth observed recently, which has resulted in a stagnation in per capita
income and slow progress toward the Millennium Development Goals. Against the backdrop of
global economic instability, the main challenge will be the implementation of sustainable
macroeconomic policies and structural measures that support external stability, faster growth
and accelerate poverty reduction.
Despite notable progress so far, Togo’s economic outlook faces significant risks. A worsening of
the global recession or a heavier than expected impact could further depress growth and
revenues, as well as delaying private sector involvement in restructuring state-owned banks and
enterprises. The run-up to the 2010 presidential elections might also create political uncertainty
or complicate program implementation. The authorities, however, stressed their determination to
continue to implement the program fully and to achieve the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative (HIPC) completion point as early as possible in 2010.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the Togolese
authorities for their strong implementation of economic policy and reforms, despite the adverse
global and domestic circumstances. Fiscal policy remained prudent, revenue performance is
being strengthened, and good progress was made on growth-oriented structural reforms.
Directors observed that the economic recovery program is bearing fruit more slowly than
expected, and conditions are likely to remain difficult. With substantial downside risks remaining
due to the global recession, the near-term challenge will be to manage lower demand for Togo’s
export commodities. Over the medium-term, it will be important to persevere with the
implementation of sustainable macroeconomic policies and structural reform measures that
support external stability, faster growth and accelerated poverty reduction.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ prudent policy response to last year’s economic shocks and
their intention to continue to focus on targeted measures to mitigate the social impact of shocks
and on supporting agricultural production, especially of food. They encouraged the authorities to
maintain fiscal discipline in the run-up to 2010 elections.

3
Directors noted that public investment to rehabilitate infrastructure, including flood damage, will
be an important support for economic activity. They supported a modest fiscal loosening for
2009, including shifting unspent money intended for emergency projects from 2008 to 2009 and
increasing the share of domestic arrears cleared in cash. Noting that capacity constraints
hamper project spending, Directors encouraged the authorities to follow through on plans to
strengthen project execution and procurement processes, with the support of development
partners. It would also be important to review the oil pricing mechanism to avoid accumulation of
contingent liabilities by the public sector.
Directors supported the structural reform agenda’s emphasis on accelerating and deepening
reforms to encourage higher growth. They viewed reform priorities as appropriately focusing on
consolidating fiscal governance, reforming the state-owned phosphate sector following up on the
strategic audit, and restructuring the financial sector. Directors welcomed the recapitalization of
state-owned banks and the intention to attract strategic investors as quickly as possible.
Directors agreed that Togo’s membership in the West African Economic and Monetary Union
has provided an important anchor of stability. To safeguard external competitiveness and boost
productivity, they stressed the importance of improvements in the investment climate and
delivery of basic services, as well as of public investment in education, health and infrastructure.
Directors noted that the projected increases in external assistance are essential to sustainably
finance the needed increase in investment and social spending, and Togo’s economic recovery.
They observed that this will require the authorities’ continuing commitment to strengthen fiscal
policy, improve institutional capacity, and implement key structural reforms. In this connection,
Directors welcomed the authorities’ determination to fulfill the conditions necessary to achieve
the floating trigger points for the HIPC completion point as early as possible in 2010. They
underlined the importance of fiscal and financing policies, including a prudent debt management
strategy, that maintain robust debt sustainability over the medium term.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4
Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–10
2006

2007
2008
2009
Act.
Prel.
Proj.
(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)

National income, prices and exchange rates
Real GDP
Real GDP per capita
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (annual average)
GDP (CFAF billions)
Exchange rate CFAF/US$
(annual average)
Real effective exchange rate
(annual average)
Terms of trade (deterioration = –)
Monetary survey
Net foreign assets 1
Credit to government 1
Credit to the nongovernment sector 1
Broad money (M2)
Velocity (GDP/ end-of-period M2)

2010
Proj.

3.9
1.4
0.3
2.2
1,159.8

1.9
-0.6
1.3
1.0
1,197.7

1.1
-1.4
6.4
8.4
1,288.5

1.7
-0.8
1.8
2.8
1,333.7

2.1
-0.4
2.0
2.1
1,389.6

522.4

478.5

445.8

...

...

-1.4
5.0

0.5
-10.5

0.1
-2.3

…
7.2

…
…

19.2
-0.7
0.4
22.1
3.0

1.4
1.1
14.9
18.2
2.6

8.0
15.4
-2.5
15.9
2.4

0.0
2.7
6.8
10.0
2.3

4.7
-0.3
7.1
10.0
2.2

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
Gross national savings
Government
Nongovernment

12.8
3.4
9.4
9.9
-0.4
10.3

12.1
2.0
10.1
8.2
0.1
8.1

12.2
3.5
8.7
5.5
2.5
3.0

15.8
5.6
10.2
9.7
2.4
7.2

16.6
7.1
9.5
10.7
5.1
5.5

Government budget
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Total expenditure and net lending
Domestic primary expenditure
Overall balance (payment order basis)
Primary balance 2
Change in domestic arrears

18.3
16.9
22.1
18.0
-3.8
-1.1
-0.4

18.7
17.0
20.6
16.7
-1.9
0.2
-0.8

18.7
17.1
19.7
16.7
-1.0
0.5
0.0

19.1
16.9
22.2
17.5
-3.1
-0.6
-0.9

21.9
17.6
23.9
17.0
-2.0
0.6
-0.7

-6.6
23.5
41.0
56.6
0.0

-6.1
21.5
37.6
53.0
0.0

-5.9
26.7
42.6
30.5
0.0

5.6

5.9

4.5

4.4

5.0

4.7

External sector
Current account balance
-2.9
-3.9
Exports (goods and services)
24.7
26.3
Imports (goods and services)
37.2
40.0
External public debt
83.9
79.2
Of which: Arrears
29.5
31.4
External public debt service
(percent of exports)
8.9
7.5
Gross international reserves
(months of imports)
3.4
3.0
Sources: Togolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1
Percent of broad money at the beginning of the period.
2
Revenue minus expenditure, excluding grants, interest, and foreign-financed expenditure.

Press Release No. 09/135
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
April 21, 2009

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes Second Review under PRGF with Togo and
Approves US$26.6 million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the second
review of Togo’s economic performance under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. The completion of the review enables the immediate disbursement of an
amount equivalent to SDR 17.9 million (about US$26.6 million), bringing total disbursements to
SDR49.2 million (about US$72.9 million).
The Executive Board also concluded the 2008 Article IV consultation with Togo. Details of
the findings will be published in a Public Information Notice.
The three-year PRGF arrangement for Togo was approved by the Executive Board in April
2008 (see Press Release 08/90) in an amount equivalent to SDR 66.06 million (about
US$108.4 million). In September 2008, the Executive Board approved an increase in financial
support (see Press Release 08/216) by SDR18.3 million (about US$29 million).
Following the Executive Board's discussion, Mr. Murilo Portugal, Deputy Managing Director
and Acting Chair, stated:
“The Togolese authorities are to be commended for their continuing strong implementation of
economic reforms under the PRGF-supported program. Despite the adverse impact of the
global price shocks and heavy flooding last year, all quantitative fiscal performance criteria for
the second review were met by ample margins, and good progress was made on structural
reforms.
“External conditions are likely to remain difficult for Togo owing to the global recession. The
near-term challenge will be to manage the impact of the crisis on global demand for its
commodity exports such as phosphate and cotton. Public investment to rehabilitate Togo’s

2
infrastructure, especially to repair the damage caused by the flooding last year, will play a
major role in supporting economic activity.
“Against this background, the authorities’ plans for a modest fiscal loosening in 2009 are
appropriate. These plans include shifting unspent money intended for emergency projects from
2008 to 2009 and increasing the share of domestic arrears cleared in cash. Given capacity
constraints for project spending, it will be important to follow through on plans to address
slow project execution, with the support of development partners. The authorities also intend
to continue to focus on targeted measures to mitigate the social impact of shocks and on
support to agricultural production, especially food.
“Togo’s structural reform agenda for the remainder of 2009 focuses on consolidating fiscal
governance, reforming the state-owned phosphate sector, and restructuring the financial sector.
The authorities have completed the important recapitalization of state-owned banks and intend
to attract strategic investors for these banks as quickly as possible.
“Over the medium-term, the authorities remain firmly committed to sustainable
macroeconomic policies and structural reform measures that support external stability, faster
growth and accelerated poverty reduction. The projected increases in external assistance will
be vital to finance the increased investment and social spending in a sustainable fashion, and
to the success of Togo’s economic recovery,” Mr. Portugal said.

Statement by Laurean Rutayisire, Executive Director for Togo
and Kossi Assimaidou, Alternate Executive Director for Togo
April 21, 2009
On behalf of our Togolese authorities, we would like to express our appreciation to
Management for its continued support to Togo, and to staff for the quality of their advice and
collaboration. Encouraged by this support, our authorities continue to make progress towards
consolidating macroeconomic stability, paving the way for stronger growth and reducing
poverty. At this critical juncture characterized by an uncertain global environment, this support
will carry even more weight in helping Togo meet the requirements for debt relief under the
Enhanced HIPC Initiative and the MDRI.
Our authorities share the thrust of the staff appraisal regarding Togo’s performance under the
PRGF-supported program since the first review; the vulnerabilities of the economy to
exogenous shocks, including the current global recession; and the medium-term growth
challenges facing the country. Since the last review under the program in September 2008,
performance continues to be strong, with all quantitative and structural PCs and benchmarks
having been met, with the exception of a missed indicative target on net domestic financing
and a delay in initiating an audit of the phosphate sector, which were due, respectively, to
capacity constraints and a factor out of the authorities’ control.
That said, a protracted global recession may deteriorate the country’s growth projections and
debt profile, as they are sensitive to shocks, even though the HIPC Initiative would bring debt
indicators to comfortable levels. Already, growth in 2008 has been lower than initially
expected, reaching 1.1 percent. Other macroeconomic indicators have, however, behaved
satisfactorily: inflationary pressures have receded, while the current account deficit has been
contained, thanks to falling oil and food prices in the second half of the year.
Our authorities are fully aware that, over the medium term, they need to pursue fiscal and
structural policies that are well-targeted, aimed at raising the level and improving the quality
of public investment; boosting productivity; and creating conditions conducive to the
development of the private sector. In the meantime, they will also pursue their policy and
reform agenda set forth in their Letter of Intent, in the context of the PRGF-supported
program.
Based on the assessment made by staff, the authorities’ continued track record of good policy
performance, and their renewed commitments to sound policies and reforms going forward,
we seek the support of the Executive Board for completing the Second Review of the PRGF
program and for endorsing the modifications in the PRGF arrangement as laid out in the
proposed decision.

2

CONTINUING TRACK RECORD OF POLICY AND REFORM IMPLEMENTATION
The continuation of a prudent approach in macroeconomic policies, particularly fiscal policies,
since the last review—albeit the initial effects of the global financial crisis—attests of the
Togolese authorities’ strong commitment to sound policies and macroeconomic stability.
The maintaining of domestic primary balance of +0.4 percent of GDP, thanks to strong
revenue collection and improved fiscal management, helped meet another performance
criterion at end-December 2008—net domestic financing—with a wide margin. Moreover,
supported by greater fiscal discipline, the Togolese government continues to refrain from
accumulating any external arrears and from contracting or guaranteeing any external debt that
would not meet the concessionality criterion. The only missed indicative target—floor on
domestically-financed social and capital spending—was due to weak capacities in the
execution of investment projects. Our authorities envisage to remedy this underexecution by
reallocating the unspent capital budget of 2008 to 2009 through a supplementary budget, while
strengthening in the short term their capacity for more rapid and effective project
implementation.
The implementation of structural reforms under the program has also continued satisfactorily,
with all structural PCs and benchmarks at end-December 2008 having been observed on time,
with the exception of a delayed audit of the phosphate sector. Progress in this area since the
last review includes: (i) enhancement of public financial management, with the adoption of a
domestic arrears-clearing strategy, the creation of a national commission to this end, reduction
of tax and customs exemptions, and improvements in the general tax code; (ii) continuing
process of bank restructuring through securitization of NPLs owed by state-owned enterprises
(SOEs), as a cornerstone to effective financial intermediation and increased growth potential;
(iii) the adoption of an action plan for introducing regular Treasury bill auctions this year, with
the agreement of the regional central bank; and (iv) reform of SOEs in the cotton sector
(setting up of a new company following the liquidation of Sotoco) and in the electricity sector,
with the view to improving their performance and ensuring their financial viability.
The sole delay among the planned structural measures (audit of the phosphate sector) was
caused by the fact that an insufficient number of firms responded to the initial call for
expressions of interest. Ultimately, the benchmark was observed as a second call was issued
successfully and an audit firm selected in a competitive manner. The restructuring of this
important sector of the Togolese economy, with the view to attracting a strategic investor, is
now underway, with the support of the World Bank.
While our Togolese authorities have taken in 2008 targeted measures to protect the most
vulnerable segments of the society amid the economic hardship caused by exogenous shocks,

3
they remain committed to not interfering with the prices of basic consumer goods. Instead,
they intend to mitigate world price fluctuations by promoting domestic production and supply
of basic consumer goods. As for the oil bill, the government envisages to review the current
pump price mechanism (based on constant prices that generate surpluses or shortfalls for the
government vis-à-vis oil companies), in order to prevent the build-up of contingent public
liabilities.
PROGRAM AGENDA FOR 2009
In pursuing efforts to revive the economy, amid an unfavorable external environment, our
Togolese authorities remain determined to enhance fiscal soundness; continue prudent debt
management through external financing based on grants and highly concessional loans; and
advance structural reforms in key growth-oriented sectors, notably banks, cotton and
phosphates. They understand the critical importance of revitalizing these sectors.
The fiscal policy objective this year is to improve the absorptive capacity of the economy and
support the recovery, while preserving the gains achieved in macroeconomic stabilization. As
the global crisis is expected to have a greater toll on the domestic economy, our authorities
will continue to monitor growth and revenue trends carefully. Six-month T-bills will be issued,
amounting to about 1.3 percent of GDP, in order to accelerate the implementation of
emergency infrastructure repairs and the clearance of domestic arrears. Other key fiscal
reforms will aim at: (i) making operational the new Treasury structure, in conformity with the
WAEMU directives; (ii) enhancing the efficiency of investment outlays and, more broadly,
public financial management by further reform of government procurement; and (iii) making
operational the Cour des Comptes.
Regarding bank restructuring, efforts will be geared at completing the proposals for strategic
investors in the four major state-owned banks, while maintaining close oversight of their
management throughout the process. The government will also set up, with the technical
assistance of the World Bank and the Fund, a mechanism for managing the NPLs that have
been exchanged against government bonds.
Reforms of SOEs will also be pursued as scheduled, with a view to restore their financial
health and promote production and productivity gains. In the cotton sector, assistance will be
provided to the new company in obtaining credit to complete operations in its first year, and in
the phosphate sector, a development strategy, based on the strategic audit, will be prepared.
POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY AND HIPC PROCESSES
Togo is refining its poverty reduction strategy. The full PRSP is being prepared in a large
participatory process involving all segments of society, including the government, the civil

4
society, the business community, development partners and the National Assembly. It is
expected to be submitted for national validation and adoption by the Council of Ministers by
the end of this month.
Other requirements for the HIPC completion point are also advancing well. Among the
completion point triggers, the Procurement Regulatory Agency should be set by the end of
April 2009; the Cour des Comptes will be operational in June 2009 as hinted earlier; and an
annual report on the revenues from, and payments to, the phosphate company, in line with the
EITI criteria, will be published. These transactions are already being published regularly.
MEDIUM TERM CHALLENGES
Our Togolese authorities fully understand that the attainment of greater growth rates in the
medium run is predicated on their capacity to close the country’s infrastructure gaps; to boost
productivity by taking advantage of moderate wages and a competitive, well-educated labor
force; and to create a business-friendly environment. They acknowledge the weaknesses in
these areas, and agree with the recommendations of Fund staff. In fact, their approach,
embodied in the PRS, focuses on three pillars: (i) rehabilitating infrastructure; (ii) improving
the quality of education and making it more accessible; and (iii) addressing the factors that
impede a good business environment, notably the investment code, the corporate tax system,
the business registration, property rights, and the judicial system.
CONCLUSION
Togo continues to face capacity and infrastructural challenges. Nevertheless, our Togolese
authorities will do their utmost to meet soon the HIPC completion point requirements. These
include continuing a good implementation of the PRGF program, putting in place the full
poverty reduction strategy and meeting the trigger points under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
They will do so while promoting a climate of political and social stability, and peace. All the
efforts made and committed by the authorities, especially in the context of an unfavorable
environment, will require the continued support of the international community. Fresh
resources to finance investments and reforms are critically needed to achieve the objectives
laid out in the PRGF-supported program and the country’s PRSP.
Based on our authorities’ continued good track record and their renewed determination to
pursue sound policies and reforms going forward, we call on the Executive Board to support
the proposed decision.

