May 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/154

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Barbados: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Barbados
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with Barbados, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on February 12, 2004, with the officials of Barbados on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on April 7, 2004. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its May 3, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Barbados.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BARBADOS
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2004 Consultation with
Barbados
Approved by Markus Rodlauer and Juha Kähkönen
April 7, 2004

● Discussions: A staff team comprising A. Furtado (Head), C. Francis, S. Rizavi, and W. Samuel (all WHD)
held discussions in Bridgetown during January 29–February 12, 2004. The mission met with Senator Tyrone
Barker, Parliamentary Secretary for Finance and Economic Affairs; Ms. Marion Williams, Governor of the
Central Bank of Barbados; Mr. Grantley Smith, Director General of the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Affairs; other senior officials; and representatives of the private sector. Mr. Richard Campbell (OED) attended
the policy discussions.

● Economic and social background: Barbados has very favorable economic and social indicators by regional
standards. The mainstays of the economy are tourism and financial services. The population is about 275,000,
per capita income is about US$9,500, and the unemployment rate is slightly less than 11 percent. Poverty is low
and other social indicators are the best in the Caribbean region. The United Nations Development Program’s
Human Development Index ranked Barbados 27th among 175 countries in 2003.
● Political situation: Barbados, a parliamentary democracy, enjoys well-functioning political institutions. The
ruling Barbados Labor Party (BLP), led by Prime Minister Owen Arthur, has been in office since 1994. In May
2003, the BLP won its third consecutive election securing 23 of the 30 seats in the House of Assembly. The
main opposition party, the Democratic Labor Party (DLP), held office in 1989–94 and controls the remaining
seven seats. The next general election is due in 2008.
● Last Article IV consultation: At the conclusion of the 2002 Article IV consultation, on February 7, 2003,
Directors recommended a return to low fiscal deficits and continued implementation of structural reforms to
restore sustained economic growth. They emphasized the need for wage restraint in the public sector and
restraint in government spending on tourism projects. Directors encouraged privatization to boost efficiency
gains and help reduce the public debt, and stressed the need to strengthen supervision of nonbank financial
institutions and improve the regulatory framework for the offshore financial sector.
● Exchange system: Barbados has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains
an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions. The Barbados dollar has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at BD$2=US$1 since 1975.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary...................................................................................................................4
I.

Background and Recent Developments ............................................................................5
A. Recent Macroeconomic Developments .....................................................................5
B. Structural Reforms .....................................................................................................7

II.

Report on the Discussions..................................................................................................8
A. Growth Prospects .......................................................................................................9
B. Fiscal Policy...............................................................................................................9
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy.......................................................................11
D. Structural Policies ....................................................................................................12
E. Medium-Term Outlook............................................................................................14
F. Statistical Issues .......................................................................................................15

III. Staff Appraisal..................................................................................................................16
Text Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Comparison with Selected Caribbean Countries..............................................................18
Implementation of FSAP Recommendations ...................................................................19
Social Security and Pensions............................................................................................20
Barbados and the CARICOM Framework .......................................................................21
Income Policies ................................................................................................................22

Figures
1.
2.
3.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators....................................................................23
Real Effective Exchange Rate..........................................................................................24
Medium-Term Scenarios ..................................................................................................25

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators....................................................................26
Central Government Operations.......................................................................................27
Public Sector Financing Requirement and Debt ..............................................................28
Summary Monetary Survey..............................................................................................29
Summary Balance Sheet of the Central Bank of Barbados..............................................30
Bank Soundness Indicators ..............................................................................................31
Balance of Payments and External Debt ..........................................................................32
Indicators of External Vulnerability.................................................................................33
Medium-Tem Macroeconomic Scenarios ........................................................................34
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework .................................................................35
External Sustainability Framework ..................................................................................37

-3-

Appendices
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Fund Relations .................................................................................................................39
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank...................................................41
Relations with the Caribbean Development Bank ...........................................................42
Statistical Issues ...............................................................................................................43

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Recent developments
•

The economy has started to recover from the 2001–02 recession, but fiscal and
external imbalances are still sizeable. Real GDP grew by an estimated 2 percent in
2003, led by a recovery in the tourism sector. The central government deficit
remained high, at 6½ percent of GDP, and government debt stands at 75 percent of
GDP. The external current account deficit widened in 2003, as merchandise exports
declined for the third consecutive year and imports recovered from their low
recession level. The banking system remains generally sound, although profitability
indicators have weakened somewhat.

•

Over the past year, structural reforms have progressed well. Steps have been
taken to enhance the budget process, strengthen the national pension system, promote
transparency in the public sector, improve financial intermediation, and enhance the
supply responsiveness of the economy.

Policy discussions
•

The discussions centered on growth, fiscal consolidation, and structural policies
to enhance competitiveness. Real GDP is projected to grow by about 3 percent
in 2004. Over the medium term, achievement of higher growth rates than the
currently projected 2–2½ percent is necessary, but will depend on prudent
macroeconomic policies and supply-enhancing reforms.

•

The current medium-term fiscal outlook would imply continued high
government debt ratios and large, albeit declining, external current account
deficits. These trends could pose a risk to the fixed exchange rate anchor, especially
in the event of a decline in private capital inflows. The mission therefore
recommended a front-loaded reduction in the central government deficit to place the
government debt ratio firmly on a declining path. The authorities agreed on the need
for fiscal adjustment, but preferred a more gradual adjustment path.

•

The staff agreed with the authorities that fixed exchange rate regime remains
appropriate for Barbados, as long as it is supported by appropriate macroeconomic
financial and structural policies. In this context, the staff urged strengthened measures
to assure debt sustainability and deepened structural reforms.

•

The authorities intend to press ahead with structural reforms. The focus in the
period ahead will be on the budget, tax policy, government pensions, and measures to
enhance the supply response of the economy. The mission suggested that the central
bank liberalize deposit rates and move towards indirect monetary policy instruments.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
1.
Barbados’ economy did well in the 1990s, supported by prudent policies and a
favorable external environment. During 1993–2000, per capita real GDP growth averaged
2.5 percent per year, annual inflation was 2 percent or less, unemployment declined sharply,
and key social indicators improved further. The structure of the economy shifted from
agriculture to tourism and financial services. This performance was achieved in the context
of small fiscal deficits (less than 2 percent of GDP), a conservative monetary policy (which
resulted in a substantial accumulation of external reserves), and a range of market-oriented
reforms. These policies contributed to Barbados’ favorable position compared with other
countries in the region (Box 1).
2.
The economy shifted into a recession in 2001, reflecting the global slowdown,
which was exacerbated by the adverse impact of the September 11 events on the
tourism sector. Real GDP dropped by a cumulative 4 percent in 2001–02, reflecting declines
in tourism, manufacturing and agriculture (Table 1).
3.
To mitigate the recession, the government adopted a countercyclical fiscal
policy stance resulting in widening deficits and debt accumulation. In late 2001,
the government launched a national emergency program of public investment projects
aimed at promoting economic activity and upgrading the tourism and economic
infrastructure. In addition, wages of public servants were raised by an average of close to
3 percent in 2001–02. These measures contributed to an increase in the central government
deficit, from 2.3 percent of GDP in FY 2000/01 (April–March) to 9.5 percent of GDP in
FY 2002/03. This deficit includes extra-budgetary spending, mainly transfers to public
enterprises, which rose sharply, to about 4 percent of GDP.1 As a result, the central
government debt-to-GDP ratio rose from 63 percent in March 2001 to 76 percent in
March 2003 (Tables 2 and 3).2, 3
A. Recent Macroeconomic Developments
4.
Over the past year, the economy recovered partially from the 2001–02 recession,
but fiscal and external imbalances remain sizeable. Real GDP grew by an estimated
2 percent in 2003, led by a recovery in the tourism sector, which had a positive effect on
1

Over the same period the budget deficit rose from 1.9 percent of GDP to 5.4 percent of
GDP.
2

Over the same period, the total public sector debt, which includes government-guaranteed
debt of public enterprises, increased from 73 percent of GDP to 84 percent of GDP.
3

The increase in the public debt prompted a revision in August 2003 in Standard and Poors’
foreign and domestic currency outlook for Barbados, from stable to negative, as well as in its
long-term local currency sovereign credit rating, from AA- to A+, and the short-term local
currency sovereign credit-rating, from A-1+ to A-1.

-6-

trade, transport, and communications. However, performance in some sectors remained
weak, in particular agriculture and manufacturing, where output declined further. Inflation
remained low at 1.5 percent, reflecting the currency peg. Despite the improvement in
tourism, the external current account deficit widened in 2003, as merchandise exports
declined for the third consecutive year and imports recovered from their low recession levels.
5.
The central government deficit narrowed to 6.5 percent of GDP in FY 2003/04.
Tax revenue increased by 1¼ percent of GDP, on account of higher receipts from the valueadded tax, and capital expenditure declined by a similar amount. Extra-budgetary
expenditure—the bulk of which consists of transfers to public enterprises related to tourism
and infrastructure (for example, construction of a large hotel and airport expansion)4—is
estimated to fall slightly, to just below 4 percent of GDP. More than half of the government
deficit was financed through the use of privatization proceeds from the sale of government
shares in a large commercial bank.5 The remainder of the deficit was financed mainly by
drawdown of deposits at the central bank and borrowing from the National Insurance Scheme
(NIS). Reliance on deposits, rather than on additional debt, resulted in a marginal decline in
the government debt ratio, to 75 percent.6
6.
Broad money growth decelerated in 2003, although it was still faster than GDP
growth, and banks became increasingly liquid. The growth of M2 slowed to 6.5 percent,
from 10.4 percent in 2002, partly due to the easing of fiscal pressures (Table 4). Broad
money growth reflected continued drawdown of government deposits at the central bank7
(Table 5), and significant private capital inflows. Given sluggish growth of credit to private
sector,8 banks’ excess reserves rose sharply, from 9 percent of deposits in December 2001 to
21 percent in December 2003. With abundant liquidity, and limited options for alternative
4

The source of these extra-budgetary transfers is the Public Enterprise Investment Fund
(PEIF), a special government account at the Central Bank of Barbados, funded mainly by
privatization proceeds. On the basis of financing data, the combined deficit of the
nonfinancial public enterprises, after government transfers, is estimated at about 1 percent of
GDP in FY 2003/04, about the same as in the previous year. The Transport Board accounts
for about one-third of this deficit.
5

In July 2003, the government sold 57 percent of its shares in the Barbados National Bank
(BNB) to Republic Bank Limited, a Trinidad and Tobago bank, for the equivalent of
US$94.5 million.

6

About 32 percent of the government debt is external, of which 60 percent is commercial.

7

Such deposits mainly reflect proceeds from commercial borrowing in 2001
(US$150 million) and the BNB privatization in 2003 (US$94.5 million). Withdrawals were
equivalent to 8.4 percent of the initial stock of M2 in 2002, and 6.9 percent in 2003.
8

Attributable to weak loan demand, given excess capacity and the uncertain economic
outlook in the wake of the recession.

-7-

investments, the treasury bill rate declined from 1.5 percent in 2002 to 0.6 percent by end2003. Meanwhile, bank lending rates declined only slightly, to an average of about
10 percent. The apparent rigidity in lending rates reflects a combination of factors, including
high intermediation costs, possible oligopolistic practices, and the effect of the interest rate
floor (for saving and time deposits) on the cost of funds.
7.
The central bank eased monetary policy in an effort to stimulate economic
activity, and to unwind the excessive buildup of liquidity in the banking system. The
government securities ratio, which had become non-binding given the high level of excess
reserves, was reduced to 16 percent in November 2002, In December 2002, the central bank
reduced the minimum administered interest rate on time and savings deposits from 3 percent
to 2.5 percent, and discontinued setting a maximum indicative lending rates for banks on
selected loans.9 While the banking system remains generally sound, the ratio of
nonperforming loans to total loans increased to about 9 percent, and profitability indicators
weakened somewhat (Table 6).
8.
The current account deficit widened further in 2003, but privatization proceeds
and private capital inflows boosted net international reserves. Despite some recovery in
tourism, the current account deficit widened to just below 8 percent of GDP (Table 7).
Merchandise exports continued to decline, partly reflecting underlying weaknesses in the
agricultural sector, in particular lower sugar production. Merchandise imports recovered to
their pre-recession level. However, the financial account benefited from the BNB
privatization and private capital inflows. As a result, following a small deficit in 2002, the
balance of payments shifted back to surplus in 2003. Net international reserves stood at
US$751 million (six months of imports of goods and services) at the end of the year
(Table 8).
9.
The peg to the U.S. dollar has entailed a substantial real effective depreciation
over the last two years. After a long period of steady appreciation, the Barbadian dollar
depreciated by nearly 14 percent in real effective terms from April 2002 to December 2003.
This has fully reversed the appreciation that had taken place since 1995 (Figure 2).
B. Structural Reforms
10.
Over the past year, important progress was made in the area of structural
reforms. Steps have been taken to enhance the budget process, strengthen the national
pension system, promote transparency in the public sector, improve financial intermediation,
and enhance the supply responsiveness of the economy.
9

The elimination of the maximum average lending rate sought to remove any impediment to
banks using interest rates as a mechanism for pricing risk, which may have limited the
availability of credit. The government securities ratio was lowered again to 12 percent in
February 2004. With effect from March 15, 2004, the central bank reduced the minimum
administered interest rate on time and saving deposits from 2.5 percent to 2.25 percent.

-8-

•

Budget process. With the help of the Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance
Center (CARTAC), the government is setting up a system of accrual accounting and
multi-year budgeting aimed at strengthening fiscal policy formulation and
monitoring.

•

Pensions. In January 2003, the government adopted measures to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the NIS by reducing projected benefit payments and increasing
contributions. The reform comprised, inter alia, a change in the rate of accrual of
pension rights to a maximum 60 percent of final average earnings; a phased increase
in the retirement age over the period 2006–18, from 65 to 67 years; and a phased
increase in the contribution rate over four years, by 4 percentage points.

•

Transparency and accountability. The Public Accounts Committee, whose
membership has been expanded, has been given authority to review the financial
statements of all companies with majority state ownership, in addition to the
government accounts.

•

Financial sector reform. Progress has been made in implementing recommendations
of the December 2002 FSAP report (Box 2).

•

Supply side enhancements. Under a program aimed at reducing telecommunication
costs and enhancing competitiveness, the government has revoked the existing
monopoly license in the sector. Competition has already contributed to lower mobile
phone rates. Moreover, as a first step towards increasing the efficiency of the port
operations (key for competitiveness in a small open economy like Barbados), a law
has been passed by parliament corporatizing the Barbados Port Authority.
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS

11.
The economic policies in Barbados have generally been in line with Fund advice,
although at times the pace of implementation has varied. In recent years, the authorities
have followed the staff’s advice to reduce the fiscal deficit, introduce a value-added tax,
liberalize trade further, and implement FSAP recommendations. On the pace of fiscal
consolidation, they have chosen a more gradual pace mainly to avoid undermining the
economic recovery and to preserve existing wage and social policy commitments which they
view as essential to the social compact.
12.
The main themes of this year’s consultation discussions were the growth outlook,
fiscal consolidation and debt sustainability, and structural policies to enhance
competitiveness. The mission expressed concern that, despite the recent pick-up in growth,
the authorities have not yet fully reversed the expansionary fiscal stance adopted in late 2001.
Such a reversal is needed in order to safeguard the external position and medium-term debt
sustainability. The mission stressed that the fiscal discipline required to support the fixed
exchange rate regime—which has served Barbados well, by providing a strong anchor for
expectations, investor confidence, and monetary policy— warranted a further reduction in
the central government deficit. Given the buildup of liquidity in the banking system over the

-9-

last two years, and the risks that this poses for excessive credit expansion and banks’
profitability (given the floor on deposit rates), the mission suggested moving toward more
market-based monetary policy tools, and liberalizing deposit rates. The mission welcomed
recent steps in the structural area and encouraged the authorities to introduce additional
reforms to strengthen the medium-term growth prospects.
13.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the importance of enhancing
competitiveness, ensuring debt sustainability, and maintaining consistency between
financial policies and the currency peg. At the same time, they cautioned that, in a small
island economy with increasing exposure to foreign competition due to regional integration
and globalization, the impact of these reforms could be somewhat limited, especially early on
and in key sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing. Accordingly, they intend to base
their fiscal adjustment and debt sustainability policies on relatively conservative growth
assumptions. On macroeconomic policies, the authorities generally concurred with the broad
thrust of the mission’s views, but were concerned that rapid fiscal adjustment might
undermine the incipient recovery. They also noted that a policy of gradual adjustment was
consistent with the longstanding national practice of broad-based consultation among
government, trade unions, and the business sector, which has been key for social and political
stability.
A. Growth Prospects
14.
While the near-term outlook points to a continued recovery, sustained growth
over the medium term will depend on supply side enhancements and the global
environment. In 2004, real GDP is projected to grow by about 3 percent, assuming
continued recovery of the global economy and tourism. Over the medium term, growth could
potentially be in the range of 3–4 percent, reflecting the completion of ongoing infrastructure
projects, expansion of tourism facilities, and growth in the international business and
financial services industry. However, as growth in a very small and open economy such as
Barbados is also critically influenced by external demand factors, the mission based its
medium-term projections on more conservative growth rates of 2–2½ percent for the period
beyond 2004, in line with the authorities’ approach.
B. Fiscal Policy
15.
The discussions focused on the appropriate pace for reducing the central
government deficit, which remains high despite some adjustment in FY 2003/04. The
mission expressed concern that the countercyclical fiscal expansion in 2001/02 had been only
partially reversed, and in particular that substantial extra-budgetary spending was still
continuing (utilizing privatization proceeds). The mission recommended a further substantial
reduction in the central government deficit to reduce the government debt ratio to below
60 percent of GDP over the next five years. The mission encouraged the authorities to use
some of the privatization proceeds to retire government debt.
16.
The authorities stated that further fiscal adjustment and a reduction in the debt
ratio remained key objectives. To this end, they plan to lower, as soon as possible, the
central government deficit to around 2.5 percent of GDP. The authorities pointed out that the

- 10 -

budget deficit was already close to this level, and that extra-budgetary spending was expected
to fall sharply as a number of large infrastructure projects were reaching completion.10 The
authorities explained that privatization proceeds were being used to finance projects of high
priority for enhancing the growth potential of Barbados.
17.
A baseline scenario, based on these deficit targets, points to some decline in the
government debt ratio over the medium term. While the budget proposal for FY 2004/05
has not yet been finalized, staff projections based on the fiscal policy discussions point to a
narrowing of the government deficit to 4½ percent of GDP, and to further reduction in
subsequent years. Extra-budgetary spending is projected to decline by about 50 percent (to
around 2 percent of GDP) in FY 2004/05, and would cease by FY 2006/07. On this basis,
government debt would decline by 7 percentage points to about 69 percent of GDP by end2008.11 The mission took the position that these debt ratios would still constitute a serious
vulnerability especially in the event of an adverse external shock.
18.
The authorities’ medium-term deficit reduction plans are predicated solely on
expenditure containment. As no revenue-raising measures are being contemplated, the
revenue-to-GDP ratio is expected to remain broadly stable in the next two years, and would
probably decline thereafter as a result of import tariff reductions in the context of the
FTAA.12 On the expenditure side, the growth of transfers to public entities is expected to be
contained by capping about one-third of these transfers at their FY 2003/04 level. In addition,
capital expenditure is to be reduced further, reflecting a strategy to transfer some of the
responsibility for infrastructure investment to the public enterprises and to engage in joint
ventures with the private sector.
19.
The mission welcomed the direction of the authorities’ consolidation plans, but
favored a more ambitious fiscal adjustment, including through revenue measures. The
mission outlined a strengthened adjustment scenario that would eliminate the central
government deficit by FY 2006/07 and reduce the government debt ratio to below 60 percent
of GDP by 2008/09—and to about 50 percent of GDP two years later, if balance were
maintained. This would be based on: (i) revenue measures amounting to 0.8 percent of GDP
10

For example, a large new hotel and expansion of the airport.

11

The decline in the overall public sector debt would depend on the overall deficit of public
enterprises after transfers from the government. The staff’s baseline scenario assumes that
this deficit would rise to about 1½ percent of GDP in FY 2004/05 and stay at that level
during the projection period, reflecting reduced government transfers and somewhat higher
capital outlays (as envisaged by the authorities). On this basis, the overall public sector debt
would decline only marginally, from 83½ percent of GDP in FY 2003/04 to 81½ percent of
GDP in FY 2008/09.
12

Currently, import duties amount to almost 3 percent of GDP, and a high proportion of
imports originate from countries such as Canada, Mexico, and the United States. The staff’s
projections assume a decline of import duties by about ½ percent of GDP a year from 2006.

- 11 -

in FY 2004/05; (ii) limiting the growth of non-wage primary current expenditure to the rate
of inflation;13 (iii) reducing government transfers by a cumulative 1 percentage point of GDP
over the next five years, in tandem with an increase in the tariffs of public utilities;14 and
(iv) allocating one-half of the remaining and projected privatization funds to debt retirement.
Tax increases would be necessary in order to preserve social spending, as the scope for
additional expenditure cuts has become limited given the three-year wage contract and the
planned cuts in other nonwage outlays. Regarding specific measures, the mission suggested a
broadening of the VAT base through a reduction in the number of exempted items, with an
increase in the VAT rate if necessary, and possibly some increase in excises in line with FAD
recommendations.
20.
The authorities maintained that a more gradual fiscal adjustment path was
appropriate. Based on the experience since the early 1990s, the authorities viewed a deficit
in the range of 1–2 percent of GDP as sustainable, and an attempt to force fiscal balance
would undermine the longstanding social pact that had served the country well. They also
feared that more ambitious fiscal adjustment might jeopardize the economic recovery and
raise unemployment. Finally, they emphasized that the government debt was mainly held by
residents and in local currency, which mitigated the vulnerability associated with the rise in
the debt ratio in recent years.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
21.
The authorities and staff agreed on the continued appropriateness of the fixed
exchange rate regime for Barbados. The long-standing peg to the U.S. dollar, including
through a near crisis in the early 1990s when drastic fiscal adjustment measures were taken
to defend the currency, have imparted a high degree of credibility to the exchange rate
regime, anchoring price stability and investor confidence. The authorities acknowledged that
weak competitiveness had caused the traditional sectors of the economy—especially
agriculture and manufacturing—to decline over the last several years, partly as a result of
trade liberalization in the context of CARICOM’s common external tariff. However, they
saw this decline as a structural shift that could not be reversed through exchange rate action,
requiring instead appropriate structural policies to contain the decline in the affected sectors
and to develop new activities, notably in services, where Barbados has a comparative
advantage.
22.
The mission emphasized, however, the high demands on the policy framework
associated with the fixed exchange rate regime. In this regard, it noted that the adverse
effect of the recent fiscal expansion on the external position had been mitigated by capital
inflows, a situation that may not last. In particular, the government has been able to mobilize
13

With policies to moderate the increase in the wage bill following the expiration of the
current wage contract in 2006.
14

The tariffs of public enterprises (e.g., water rates and bus fares), which have not been
increased for several years, could be increased on a phased basis.

- 12 -

substantial foreign financing and privatization inflows. The authorities agreed with the
mission that a tighter fiscal stance and a slower growth of the central bank’s net domestic
assets was warranted in the period ahead to safeguard the external position under the
currency peg.
23.
The mission expressed concern about the rapid increase in the monetary base
over the last two years and the associated buildup of bank liquidity. As noted, the
injections of high-powered money—arising from the government’s use of foreign loans and
privatization proceeds—had effectively been sterilized as unremunerated excess reserves.
Besides the potential for excessive credit expansion, the mission noted the possible adverse
implications of this development on banks’ profitability, given the central bank’s policy of
maintaining a floor on the interest rate on savings/time deposits. The mission therefore
recommended that the central bank (i) reduce NDA growth; (ii) move towards indirect
monetary policy instruments to better manage liquidity; and, (iii) liberalize deposit rates.
24.
The authorities intend to move gradually toward more indirect monetary policy
instruments, and they did not think that the deposit rate floor had contributed to high
lending rates or had adversely affected bank profitability. They noted that bank
soundness and profitability indicators remained strong, the minimum deposit rate had been
substantially reduced over the last three years, and commercial banks had been reluctant to
avail themselves of the opportunity to invest abroad under the “second tier” reserves
arrangement.15 While lending rates had declined only marginally and credit to the private
sector had remained sluggish, they attributed the increase in excess reserves mainly to overly
conservative lending policies of commercial banks, and to the oligopolistic structure of the
banking system. Regarding the transition to indirect monetary policy instruments, the
authorities indicated that they are preparing the technical infrastructure for adopting open
market operations, which they envisage to undertake in the context of a continued gradual
opening of the capital account.
D. Structural Policies
25.
The authorities firmly believe that structural policies are key to enhancing
external competitiveness. They explained—and the staff concurred—that at this point the
exchange rate is not an issue for competitiveness, especially after the recent decline of the
U.S. dollar. Rather, Barbados’ growth and export outlook depends critically on reforms that
support the transformation of the economy, in line with its comparative advantage. The
mission welcomed the recent measures taken in pursuit of such reforms, including the reform
of the NIS; a new regulatory framework for private pension schemes; the corporatization of
the port authority; the privatization of BNB; increasing competition in the
telecommunications sector; and steps underway to gradually restructure and diversify the
15

The central bank’s policy of “second tier” of reserves is based on granting permission to
private sector entities to invest abroad with the undertaking that they would provide an
equivalent amount of foreign exchange on demand, if required by the central bank.

- 13 -

sugar sector.16 These structural policies have been supported by a multi-year phased lowering
of personal and corporate income taxes, and generally moderate wage increases broadly in
line with productivity growth. The mission also noted the actions that have already been
taken in response to the FSAP recommendations, and encouraged the authorities to expedite
implementation of the remaining recommendations. The authorities indicated that the focus
of structural reforms in the period ahead would be on the budget, tax policy, government
pensions, the financial sector, and measures to enhance the supply response of the economy.
•

Fiscal reforms. The authorities intend to begin implementing multi-year budgeting
on an accrual basis during the coming year, which will greatly improve the
framework for fiscal policy formulation and monitoring. In the tax policy area, they
aim to harmonize the domestic and offshore tax regimes, with technical assistance
from the Fiscal Affairs Department . Regarding pensions, the authorities are
considering options for reducing the cost of the unfunded pension plan for
government employees, which currently amounts to 2 percent of GDP, and is
projected to reach 3½ percent of GDP by 2015. Among the options being considered
are reforms to reduce the benefits, and to fully fund the pension plan17 (Box 3).

•

Financial sector reform. The authorities underscored their commitment to further
financial sector liberalization. As described in Box 2, they are making progress in
implementing the FSAP recommendations, and they intend to take further steps to
strengthen central bank oversight functions, and to enhance supervision of the
insurance industry. In addition, the government is expected to divest its 51 percent
share in the state-owned Insurance Corporation of Barbados.

•

Supply side reforms. The authorities expect to make further progress in the
telecommunications and infrastructure areas. Regarding telecommunications, new
licenses for fixed-line operators are to be issued, on a competitive basis, in 2004. In
the infrastructure sector, corporatization of the airport authority is expected in
FY 2004/05.

26.
The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to further regional integration and
trade liberalization in the context of the CARICOM, the WTO, and the envisaged
FTAA, and their intention to gradually liberalize the capital account. Following a phased
reduction in CARICOM import tariffs over the past decade, which Barbados has fully
implemented, CARICOM members are taking a number of initiatives to deepen regional
integration movement and prepare their economies for further international trade
liberalization (Box 4). The envisaged elimination of hemispheric import duties in the context
16

In the sugar sector, the authorities have closed down one factory and are seeking to
promote new products, including ethanol-based fuels, drinks, building materials, animal feed,
and waxes.
17

The government has requested technical assistance from the IDB in this regard.

- 14 -

of the FTAA, and the possible removal of sugar preferences by the EU, are expected to
adversely affect some of the traditional agricultural and manufacturing products of Barbados;
accordingly, the authorities’ structural reform agenda, as noted, is supportive of the
development of new productive activities, notably in services. Regarding the exchange
system, which is already free of restrictions on current transactions, the authorities envision
maintaining, for the foreseeable future, a three-pronged approach vis-à-vis the Organization
of Eastern Caribbean States,18 CARICOM, and the rest of the world. Capital flows have been
liberalized for the OECS, except for outward investment in government securities. For other
CARICOM members, capital outflows are restricted to private equity investment. Controls
remain in place vis-à-vis the rest of the world for all capital outflows; however, limited
investments abroad are now being allowed under the “second-tier” reserves arrangement
financial institutions.19 The mission took the view that the authorities’ gradual approach to
capital account liberalization was appropriate in view of the need to coordinate the removal
of controls with the ongoing strengthening of the financial sector and development of indirect
instruments of monetary policy.
27.
The mission inquired as to the scope for enhancing labor market flexibility. The
authorities responded that labor relations (including wage setting) were governed by the
“protocols” agreed among the government, labor, and employers (Box 5). The authorities
emphasized that these protocols have provided the framework for generally orderly, smooth,
and harmonious working relations among the above groups, with wage settlements broadly in
line with growth in productivity. This environment of industrial peace has been beneficial for
businesses, conducive to FDI, and a source of social stability.
E. Medium-Term Outlook
28.
The medium-term outlook was discussed on the basis of two macro-economic
scenarios prepared by the mission—a baseline scenario and an enhanced adjustment
scenario (Table 9).20.The fiscal adjustment incorporated in the baseline scenario would
contribute to a gradual improvement in the external current account, with international
reserves remaining broadly stable over the medium term. The current account deficit would
narrow from close to 8 percent of GDP in 2003 to 4 percent of GDP by 2008, owing to an
18

The OECS members are Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The British Virgin Islands,
Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the
Grenadines.
19

As of end-2003, “second-tier” reserves amounted to about US$50 million, or about
7 percent of the central bank’s international reserves.
20

The same growth assumptions are used in both scenarios because it is unlikely that the
stronger fiscal adjustment postulated in the staff scenario would reduce growth below the
conservative rates assumed by the authorities in the baseline scenario. Moreover, the external
environment and structural policies are assumed to be broadly the same under the two
scenarios.

- 15 -

increase in the ratio of tourism receipts to GDP and some decline in the import-to-GDP ratio.
Stronger tourism receipts would mitigate the secular decline in sugar exports expected to
result from the removal of trade preferences. The capital account surplus is projected to be in
the range of US$150–200 million per year, mainly on account of private inflows, including
direct investment in the tourism sector. On this basis, net international reserves of the central
bank would remain around US$750 million (7 months of imports) over the next three years,
and strengthen somewhat towards the end of the five-year projection period, to about
US$900 million (7.5 months of imports) by 2008. The external debt service of Barbados
would decline from 7.3 percent of current account receipts in 2003 to about 6 percent in
2008.
29.
A debt sustainability analysis anchored on the baseline scenario indicates that
the public debt ratio could rise markedly in the event of policy slippages or adverse
exogenous shocks. All the stress tests result in rising public debt levels, with some shocks
taking the debt ratio above 90 percent of GDP (Table 10). However, while the underlying
trends would be adverse, the staff does not see any significant risk of an imminent debt crisis
in the near term because the external position is strong, financial linkages with regional
economies are limited, and gross financing requirements—which are projected to be almost
fully met from domestic sources over the medium term (see Table 3)—appear manageable,
particularly in view of the abundant liquidity in the banking system. This view is also
supported by the external sustainability analysis, which shows that the external debt-to-GDP
ratio declines or remains roughly stable for all shocks except those to the exchange rate and
the current account (Table 11).
30.
The stronger fiscal stance assumed in the enhanced adjustment scenario would
significantly reduce vulnerability to external shocks. It would imply a smaller external
current account deficit, mainly on account of slower import growth, and somewhat stronger
private capital inflows, reflecting strengthened investor confidence.21 As a result, the net
international reserves would rise steadily, from US$750 million in 2003 to about
US$1.2 billion in 2008.22 The lower government debt ratio (less than 60 percent of GDP) and
higher international reserves would significantly reduce the vulnerability of the economy to
external shocks.
F. Statistical Issues
31.
The statistical information provided by Barbados is broadly adequate for
surveillance purposes, though some weaknesses remain. Data on money and banking, the
21

Most of the capital inflows are FDI-related, and therefore do not constitute a source of
vulnerability.
22

There is no significant difference in external debt service ratios between the two scenarios,
which reflects the assumption that the lower fiscal deficit in the enhanced scenario would be
fully reflected in lower domestic borrowing—i.e., external debt service obligations do not
change across scenarios.

- 16 -

budgetary operations, and the current account of balance of payments is comprehensive and
available on a timely basis. The main weaknesses are in the data on the operations of the
public enterprises and the capital account of the balance of payments. Also, the timeliness of
national income accounts needs to be improved. Barbados participates in the General Data
Dissemination System and its metadata and plans for improvement of the national statistical
system are posted on the Fund’s website.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
32.
Over the past year, the Barbadian economy has started to recover from the
2001–02 recession, led by the strong performance of the tourism sector and supported
by the countercyclical fiscal stance adopted in the downturn. However, this fiscal stance
has given rise to an increase in the government debt which must now be addressed
decisively. The decline in tourism receipts during the recession, and the large fiscal deficit
have also contributed to a widening external current account deficit, which has barely begun
to unwind. Nonetheless, the net international reserve position has strengthened over the last
three years, reflecting Barbados’ continued access to foreign financing and strong private
capital inflows.
33.
The macroeconomic outlook, and in particular debt sustainability over the
medium term, hinges critically on the government’s success in further reducing its
deficit and deepening reforms to boost growth. While the authorities should be
commended for the adjustment achieved in FY 2003/04, the current size of the deficit would
still imply continued high government debt ratios in the context of large, albeit declining,
external current account deficits. These trends could pose a risk to the fixed exchange rate
anchor, the central pillar of Barbados’s policy framework, especially in the event of a
turnaround in private capital flows. The staff, therefore, recommends that the fiscal deficit be
reduced quickly so as to ensure an adequate reserve cover, and that the government debt ratio
is placed on a firmly declining path. Fiscal adjustment should be complemented by growthenhancing structural reforms.
34.
While the government’s fiscal strategy appropriately aims at controlling
expenditure, there is a need to intensify the revenue effort. The staff encourages the
authorities, in particular, to consider measures to broaden the base of the VAT by reducing
exemptions, and increase the rate of the VAT and excises, as necessary to protect social
spending. On expenditure, the staff welcomes the projected winding down of extra-budgetary
spending, which remains high and has diminished the transparency of fiscal operations in
recent years. Privatization proceeds, which have been used to finance extra-budgetary
spending, should in the future be allocated mainly to the retirement of government debt. The
staff also encourages the authorities to review the tariffs of major public enterprises, in
particular water and bus fares, which have not been adjusted for more than 10 years.
Concurrently, government transfers to these entities should be reduced.
35.
The staff shares the authorities’ view on the continued appropriateness of the
fixed exchange rate regime for Barbados. The long-standing peg, supported by prudent
fiscal and monetary policies, has become a strong anchor of price stability and investor

- 17 -

confidence. To ensure long-term sustainability of the regime, it is crucial that the public debt
dynamics are returned to a sustainable position under robust economic policies, and reforms
to boost growth and competitiveness.
36.
The authorities are encouraged to move to more market-based mechanisms of
monetary control. In the absence of indirect monetary policy instruments, the control of
credit expansion may become difficult—especially given the high level of excess reserves—
and distort financial intermediation. The staff recommends that the authorities phase out the
administered minimum interest rate on savings and time deposits, and consider accelerating
the transition to market-based instruments of monetary control. Initial steps by the central
bank to prepare the technical infrastructure for open market operations are welcome.
Regarding broader financial sector reforms, the staff welcomes the actions taken to
implement most of the FSAP recommendations, and encourages full implementation of the
remaining recommendations. The staff supports the authorities’ sequenced approach to
capital account liberalization, in line with the ongoing strengthening of the financial sector
and the development of indirect instruments of monetary control.
37.
Given the fixed exchange rate regime, structural policies constitute the main
mechanism for enhancing external competitiveness. The staff welcomes the authorities’
recent structural reform achievements, which include the reform of the NIS; establishment of
a regulatory framework for private pension schemes; corporatization of the port authority;
privatization of the Barbados National Bank; and the move toward greater competition in the
telecommunications sector. Looking ahead, the staff supports the authorities’ focus on
reforms relating to the budget, tax policy, government pensions, and measures to enhance the
supply response of the economy. The authorities are to be commended for their continued
commitment to further trade liberalization in the context of the CARICOM, the WTO, and
the envisaged FTAA.
38.
The statistical information provided by Barbados is broadly adequate for
surveillance purposes, though some weaknesses remain. In particular, the flow and
coverage of data on the operations of the public enterprises and on the capital account of the
balance of payments would need to be improved.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Barbados be conducted on the
standard 12-month cycle.

- 18 -

Box 1. Barbados: Comparison with Selected Caribbean Countries
Barbados’s key economic and social indicators are more favorable than those of other
countries in the region with an important tourism sector. This reflects a history of strong
institutions and prudent policies, and more recently, a much better growth performance in the midto-late 1990s.
•

Barbados has traditionally been a well-managed economy. Benefiting from a strong
starting position at independence (in 1966, with a per capita income of about US$4,000,
the highest in the Caribbean), it has been able to sustain good economic performance in an
environment of political stability and strong consensus on the core elements of sound
economic management.

•

The growth performance and social indicators compare favorably with those of
competitors. During the second half of the last decade, growth in Barbados was much
better than in Jamaica and similar to that in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU).
Key social indicators are better than in those countries.

•

Barbados’ fiscal performance was also better over the same period. The fiscal deficit
averaged 1½ percent of GDP—significantly lower than Jamaica and the ECCU countries.
At the end of the decade, total public debt was around 60 percent of GDP, compared with
an average of 70 percent of GDP for the ECCU and over 130 percent for Jamaica.
Selected Caribbean Countries—Key Economic and Social Indicators

Economic indicators (1995–2000 averages, in percent)
GDP growth rate
Inflation
Fiscal deficit/GDP
Public debt/GDP (end-2000)
External current account balance/GDP
Social indicators
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars, 2002)
Adult literacy rate (2002)
Human Development Index (2003 rank)
Sources: Country authorities; and UNDP.

Barbados

Jamaica

ECCU

3.2
2.5
1.6
58.5
-1.8

-0.5
13.1
4.0
132.7
-3.5

3.3
1.1
3.4
69.6
-14.7

9,589
99.0
27

2,912
79.9
78

4,843
...
51–93

- 19 -

Box 2. Barbados: Implementation of FSAP Recommendations
The 2002 FSAP report concluded that the financial sector in Barbados was generally sound and
resilient to adverse shocks but identified weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory framework of
the financial system, particularly with respect to the nonbank financial sector. The report also cited a
few areas for strengthening the central bank’s oversight functions.
Actions taken
Over the last year, the authorities have followed the FSAP recommendations by instituting
legislative changes and improving supervisory norms designed to strengthen the financial sector.
•

The central bank has commenced work on a regulatory framework to provide market and
country risk standards for onshore and offshore banks. Staff training has commenced in this
area, and manuals are expected to be developed during 2004 with assistance from CARTAC.

•

A draft Act establishing the Deposit Insurance Scheme has been prepared. The proposed
Act, which is expected to be enacted this year, will provide a framework for license
revocation and distressed bank resolution.

•

Regarding the nonbank sector, CBB-assisted on-site examinations of the five large credit
unions have been completed, and follow up examinations are expected to be conducted each
quarter for at least one of these institutions.

•

Several initiatives have been undertaken to strengthen the supervisory and regulatory
framework of the insurance industry, with assistance from CARTAC and the Canadian
Financial Institution Regulatory Agency (OSFI).

Next steps
•

The Financial Institutions Act is to be amended to address the recommendations regarding
CBB’s independence, the imposition of aggregate limits on large exposure and connected
lending, and the need for CBB’s prior approval of the external auditor for licensees.

•

The allocation of resources to supervision of the insurance industry will be increased, and
its institutional capacity will be strengthened with assistance from CARTAC and OSFI.

•

The authorities intend to implement a more flexible and market-oriented monetary policy
framework in the context of a continued gradual liberalization of the capital account. The
CBB is preparing a move towards more indirect instruments of monetary policy, including
with the assistance of an overseas consultant to advise on an appropriate automated system
for open market operations.

- 20 -

Box 3. Barbados: Social Security and Pensions
The government has introduced reforms to address the challenges posed by the need to provide economic
security for an ageing population without undue pressures on the fiscal system. The age profile of
Barbados’ population is similar to that of developed countries, with the elderly (60 years of age and over)
representing about 20 percent of the population. Social security has been reformed, a framework for private
pensions has been introduced, and the government has started to consider a reform of civil service pensions.
•

The reform of the National Insurance Scheme (NIS) has been designed to ensure its long-term
sustainability. In January 2003, the NIS implemented a slate of reform measures which have postponed
the date by which NIS reserves would be exhausted, from 2030 to 2060. These reforms included:
(i) increase in the contribution rate by 1 percent per year, for four years, which will bring the rate to
17½ percent, shared equally between employers and employees; (ii) change in the structure for the accrual
of pension rights, which has been capped at 60 percent of final average earnings; (iii) calculation of
pension benefits based on the best five years of insurable income rather than the best three; and
(iv) increase in the retirement age, from 65 to 67 years, with six-month increases in the retirement age
every four years, starting during 2006–18. The impact of these reforms on the projected reserve ratio is
substantial (see table below).

•

The authorities have also passed legislation to expand the scope of, and better regulate, private
pension funds. The Occupational Pension Benefits (OPB) Act was passed in December 2003 and the
related Regulations should be in place in the second quarter of 2004. The purpose of the law is to
encourage the development of collective investment schemes and improve the regulation of private
pension funds. The law sets out minimum standards for the regulation of administration and trusteeship
of the schemes to ensure that the funds are available at retirement.

The NIS is generating significant surpluses and these should increase as the reforms take effect. However,
there is a shortage of high-grade local and regional investments and the NIS has invested largely in government
paper (56 percent of total investment) and has large deposits in banks (19 percent). Limited investment in
foreign securities is allowed. The NIS portfolio may need to be rebalanced to include more foreign investment
in the future which would allow for greater risk diversification.
The unfunded portion of government (civil service) pensions, which represents a contingent liability on
the Consolidated Fund, could increase fiscal pressures in the future. The non-contributory civil service
pension plan and social security were integrated in 1975. The pension benefits for civil servants employed after
September 1975 are reduced by the amount of benefits received from the NIS. Nonetheless, according to a 2002
study sponsored by the IDB, government expenditure on civil service pensions, which is currently around
2 percent of GDP is projected to peak at almost 3.5 percent of GDP in 2015, after which it would decline
gradually to around 2.5 percent of GDP by 2050. Proposals to address this problem include: (i) an increase in
the retirement age for the government pension plan; (ii) a change in the formula for calculating retirement
benefits from the best 3 years to the best 5 years preceding retirement, and (iii) transition from a defined-benefit
to a defined-contribution plan.

NIS: Reserve Ratio 1/

Before reforms
After reforms

2000

2010

2020

2030

5.0
5.0

5.9
7.1

3.9
7.7

0.4
6.0

Source: Barbados National Insurance Scheme.
1/ Ratio of total value of the retirement funds to annual expenditures.

- 21 -

Box 4. Barbados and the CARICOM Framework
The policy initiatives undertaken by Barbados in the trade area are guided by the agreed
objective of CARICOM members to create a Caricom Single Market and Economy (CSME). In
October 1992, the members agreed to a four-phase tariff reduction plan that lowered the maximum
rate on the common external tariff from 45 percent to 20 percent over four years, starting in January
1993. Tariffs on imports of agricultural goods, however, remained at 40 percent. Barbados is among
the countries that have completed all the four phases. Harmonization of other taxes is also being
discussed.
Regarding monetary integration, five criteria are used to evaluate convergence in the CARICOM:
•
•

•
•
•

The import cover criterion requires that the countries maintain at least three months import
cover for the last 12 months.
Under the exchange rate stability criterion, fluctuations in the exchange rate must remain
within a 1.5 percent band over a period of 36 months for countries with a floating exchange
rate regime, while the rate must remain unchanged over the same period for countries with a
fixed exchange rate regime.
The external debt criterion limits external debt service ratio to a maximum of 15 percent of
exports of goods and services.
The inflation criterion requires inflation rates to be within a 1.5 percent band around the
median inflation rate for the three countries with the lowest positive inflation rates.
The fiscal convergence criterion requires that the overall fiscal deficit not exceed 3 percent
of GDP.

Barbados has satisfied these criteria during most of the past decade and has set for itself stricter
targets on fiscal performance. The government has adopted a maximum fiscal deficit target of
2.5 percent of GDP and a debt-to-GDP target ratio of 60 percent of GDP, in addition to the external
debt service criterion. The table below shows the record of achievement of the targets for 1993–2002.
Compliance with Convergence Criteria by Selected CARICOM Countries, 1993–2002
(Number of Years of Compliance)
___________________________________________________________________________
Import
Exchange
Debt
Fiscal
cover
Stability
Service
Inflation
deficit
Bahamas
2
10
10
10
9
Barbados
7
10
8
9
7
ECCU
10
10
8
9
5
Guyana
10
1
3
1
5
Jamaica
7
0
1
0
4
Trinidad and Tobago
5
1
7
1
9
____________________________________________________________________________
Source: Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies.

- 22 -

Box 5. Barbados: Income Policies
Background. The severe economic difficulties and near foreign exchange crisis experienced in 1991–
92 were addressed, in large measure, through a negotiated restraint on wage increases to enhance
competitiveness while maintaining the exchange rate peg. This policy approach, formalized in
successive “protocols”—tripartite agreements involving government, labor, and private employers—
has evolved into an important feature of the economy of Barbados, providing the framework for labor
market relations in the country.
The four protocols. Coverage of the tripartite agreements has been broadened over time to include,
in addition to wage guidelines, to aspects related to the work environment. The highlights are:
•

The first protocol (1993–95) established an economy-wide wage freeze. The protocol also
required companies to abstain from price increases except those warranted by increases in
prices of imported inputs or changes in taxation.

•

The second protocol (1995–97) provided for a period of wage restraint in line with
productivity changes.

•

The third protocol (1998–2000) maintained productivity guidelines for wage increases, and
also emphasized issues of job security and training.

•

The fourth protocol (2001–04), which is currently in force, includes guidelines on workers’
health and safety, in addition to incomes policy issues. A fifth protocol is being negotiated
and an agreement is expected in the next few months.

Labor and business representation. Labor is represented in the protocols by the two main unions,
the Barbados Workers Union (BWU) and National Union of Public Workers (NUPW). The private
sector employer groups are represented mainly by the Barbados Employers’ Confederation (with
more than 300 members, including the Barbados Hotel and Tourism Association) and the Sugar
Producers Federation. Together, these cover around 50 percent of the private sector labor force and
close to one-third of the working population.
Institutional support. In order to facilitate the implementation of the guidelines on productivitybased wage arrangements, the government has established a National Productivity Council with the
aim of disseminating technical expertise to labor unions and employers in designing measures of
productivity on a company or industry basis.
Policy ownership. The protocols are considered by many in the country as an important reason for
the generally orderly and peaceful labor relations in Barbados. There appears to be a broad consensus
among the social partners—government, labor, and employers—that the benefits of industrial peace
as a result of the protocols far exceed the degree of inflexibility that they introduce in the labor
market.

- 23 -

Figure 1. Barbados: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999–2003
5

10

Growth and Tourism
(Percentage changes)

12

8

10

3

6

8

2

4

6

1

2

4

4

Tourist arrivals
(right scale)

90

Fiscal Deficit and Public Debt 1/
(In percent of GDP)

Public debt
(right scale)
80

Overall deficit

70

Extra-budgetary
expenditure

60
0
-1

Real GDP
(left scale)

-2

0

2

-2

0

-4

-2

50

40
-3
-4
1999

2000

2001

2002

-6

-4

-8

-6

2003
50

16
Liquidity and Interest Rates
(In percent)
Base money growth
(right scale)

14
M2 growth

30

8

2002

2003
1.0

Net international reserves
(US$ billions, right scale)

0.9

7
C/A deficit
(In percent of GDP)

35
T-bill rate

2001

External Sector

45
40

2000

8

12

10

30
1999

0.8

0.7

6

0.6

25
20

6

5

0.5

15
0.4

4
10
2

4
0.3

5

0

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0.2

3
1999

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data refers to fiscal year beginning April 1.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2002

2003

2004

Source: IMF Information Notice System.

95
2001

95
2000

100

100

1999

105

105

1998

110

110

1997

115

115

1996

120

120

1995

125

125

Figure 2. Barbados: Real Effective Exchange Rate
(Index 1990=100)

- 24 -

- 25 -

Figure 3. Barbados: Medium-Term Scenarios, 2003-2008
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
7

7

Overall Government Deficit 1/

6

6

5

5

4

4

80

80

Government Debt 1/

75

75

Baseline

3

70

65

65

3

Baseline

2

2

1

70

Enhanced adjustment

1

Enhanced adjustment

60
0

60

0

-1

-1

55

2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09
9

9

8

8

7

7

Baseline

1.3

1.3
Net International Reserves
(In billions of US$)

External Current Account Deficit

6

55
2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

1.2

1.2

1.1

1.1
Enhanced adjustment

6

1.0

1.0
5

5

4

4

0.9

0.9

3

3

Enhanced adjustment

2

2
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Baseline

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7
2003

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data refers to fiscal year beginning April 1.

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

- 26 -

Table 1. Barbados: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
2000

2001

2002

Prel.
2003

Proj.
2004

(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
Output and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (12-month increase)

2.4
1.3
2.4

-3.4
2.9
2.8

-0.4
1.5
0.2

2.1
1.5
1.5

3.0
2.0
1.5

Money and credit 1/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which : net credit to government
Broad money (M2)
Velocity (ratio of GDP to M2)

12.0
-4.2
-3.4
7.9
1.62

14.2
-8.6
-7.2
5.6
1.52

4.7
5.7
12.2
10.4
1.39

9.1
-2.7
1.8
6.5
1.44

0.0
4.5
1.9
4.5
1.36

4.5
5.3
4.1
6.0

-5.3
-1.2
-7.6
-1.3

-7.4
-7.9
0.1
-5.3

-8.9
6.0
7.6
-9.4

20.0
8.6
13.5
...

External sector
Exports of goods, f.o.b.
Tourism receipts
Imports of goods, f.o.b.
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) 2/

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Public sector (fiscal year basis) 3/
Government revenue
Government expenditure
Of which: off-budget
Government balance
Of which: budgetary balance
Public enterprise balance (after transfers)
Nonfinancial public sector balance
Government and government-guaranteed debt
Of which: government debt
External sector
Current account balance
Of which
Exports of goods, f.o.b.
Tourism receipts
Imports of goods, f.o.b.
Net international reserves
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
Exchange rate (BD$ per US$)
Nominal GDP (millions of Barbados dollars)

33.0
35.3
0.4
-2.3
-1.9
-0.8
-3.1
73.3
63.4

33.0
37.9
0.7
-4.9
-4.1
-0.4
-5.2
81.6
72.4

32.7
42.2
4.1
-9.5
-5.4
-0.9
-10.4
83.8
75.7

33.7
40.1
3.8
-6.5
-2.6
-1.0
-7.5
84.1
75.2

33.9
38.3
1.9
-4.4
-2.4
-1.3
-5.7
83.8
74.1

-5.6

-3.6

-6.6

-7.8

-6.3

11.0
27.9
39.8

10.6
27.8
37.1

9.7
25.3
36.7

8.5
25.9
38.0

9.7
26.8
41.1

484

707

683

751

752

2.00
5,182

2.00
5,140

2.00
5,197

2.00
5,391

2.00
5,664

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ In relation to money and quasi-money at the beginning of the period.
2/ End of period.
3/ Fiscal year begins on April 1.

- 27 -

Table 2. Barbados: Central Government Operations 1/
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

Est.
2003/04

Proj.
2004/05

(In millions of Barbados dollars)
Budgetary revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue

1,705
1,615
90

1,703
1,613
90

1,716
1,620
96

1,838
1,760
78

1,939
1,865
74

Budgetary expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries and NIS contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Transfers
Capital expenditure and net lending
Of which : net lending

1,803
1,502
626
187
219
471
300
11

1,917
1,571
630
203
253
486
346
12

1,997
1,672
666
211
274
521
325
6

1,982
1,732
603
197
264
668
250
2

2,080
1,826
633
222
280
691
254
2

-98

-214

-281

-144

-140

Budgetary balance
Float and extra-budgetary expenditure 2/

23

36

217

208

110

Overall balance

-120

-250

-498

-352

-250

Financing
Foreign financing (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Domestic financing
Banking system
Rest of financial system
National Insurance Scheme
Privatization proceeds

120
215
255
-40
-147
-109
8
-45
52

250
322
364
-42
-72
-108
-16
52
0

498
-19
58
-78
517
413
0
105
0

352
7
72
-65
157
117
0
40
189

250
43
119
-76
109
60
0
49
99

(In percent of GDP)
Budgetary revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue

33.0
31.2
1.7

33.0
31.3
1.8

32.7
30.9
1.8

33.7
32.2
1.4

33.9
32.6
1.3

Budgetary expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending

34.9
29.0
5.8

37.2
30.5
6.7

38.1
31.9
6.2

36.3
31.7
4.6

36.3
31.9
4.4

Budgetary balance

-1.9

-4.1

-5.4

-2.6

-2.4

0.4

0.7

4.1

3.8

1.9

-2.3
1.9

-4.9
0.1

-9.5
-4.3

-6.5
-1.6

-4.4
0.5

2.3

4.9

9.5

6.5

4.4

-0.8
-3.1
73.3
63.4
5,172

-0.4
-5.2
81.6
72.4
5,154

-0.9
-10.4
83.8
75.7
5,246

-1.0
-7.5
84.1
75.2
5,459

-1.3
-5.7
83.8
74.1
5,729

Float and extra-budgetary expenditure 2/
Overall balance
Of which: primary balance
Financing
Memorandum items:
Overall balance of rest of nonfinancial public sector 3/
Non-financial public sector overall balance
Government and government guaranteed debt
Of which: central government debt
Fiscal year GDP at market prices
Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Fiscal years (April–March). Ratios expressed relative to fiscal year GDP.
2/ Represents the difference between the budgetary deficit measured from above the line and the cash deficit measured on the basis of
identified financing flows. Includes statistical discrepancy.
3/ After government transfers, based on financing data. Excludes the NIS.

- 28 -

Table 3. Barbados: Public Sector Financing Requirement and Debt
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

Est.
2003/04

Proj.
2004/05

(In millions of Barbados dollars)
Gross financing requirement
Consolidated public sector deficit
Central government
Rest of the public sector 1/

162
120
42

269
250
19

544
498
46

407
352
55

324
250
74

Amortization payments on the public debt
Domestic
External

903
863
40

926
884
42

1,014
937
78

1,132
1,067
65

1,064
988
76

Gross financing requirement
Disbursements of domestic debt
Drawdown of deposits
Disbursements of external debt
Privatization proceeds

1,065
1,029
-271
255
52

1,195
1,004
-173
364
0

1,558
1,195
304
58
0

1,540
1,162
117
72
189

1,388
1,140
30
119
99

End-of-period public debt
Government and government-guaranteed debt
Central government
Rest of the public sector 1/

3,789
3,278
511

4,204
3,733
471

4,398
3,969
429

4,589
4,105
484

4,803
4,245
558

2,625
1,165

2,719
1,485

2,984
1,414

3,166
1,423

3,326
1,477

Domestic
External

(In percent of GDP)
Gross financing requirement
Consolidated public sector deficit
Central government
Rest of the public sector 1/

3.1
2.3
0.8

5.2
4.9
0.4

10.4
9.5
0.9

7.5
6.5
1.0

5.7
4.4
1.3

Amortization payments on the public debt
Domestic
External

17.5
16.7
0.8

18.0
17.2
0.8

19.3
17.9
1.5

20.7
19.5
1.2

18.6
17.2
1.3

Gross financing requirement
Disbursements of domestic debt
Drawdown of deposits
Disbursements of external debt
Privatization proceeds

20.6
19.9
-5.2
4.9
1.0

23.2
19.5
-3.4
7.1
0.0

29.7
22.8
5.8
1.1
0.0

28.2
21.3
2.1
1.3
3.5

24.2
19.9
0.5
2.1
1.7

End-of-period public debt
Government and government-guaranteed debt
Central government
Rest of the public sector 1/

73.3
63.4
9.9

81.6
72.4
9.1

83.8
75.7
8.2

84.1
75.2
8.9

83.8
74.1
9.7

50.8
22.5

52.8
28.8

56.9
27.0

58.0
26.1

58.1
25.8

Domestic
External

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes the National Insurance Scheme.

- 29 -

Table 4. Barbados: Summary Monetary Survey
2000

2001

2002

2003

Mar.
2004

(In millions of Barbados dollars)
End-of-period stocks
Net foreign assets

749

1,205

1,365

1,706

1,640

Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Central government
Rest of public sector
National Insurance Scheme
Credit to private sector
Other items (net)

2,456
193
471
-36
-242
2,518
-255

2,181
-67
242
-37
-272
2,508
-260

2,373
348
654
-22
-284
2,589
-564

2,273
481
723
154
-396
2,612
-820

2,314
565
759
157
-351
2,582
-833

Liabilities to the private sector (M2)
Currency in circulation
Demand deposits
Savings deposits
Time deposits

3,205
311
756
1,753
385

3,386
312
836
1,847
390

3,738
337
1,104
1,978
318

3,980
329
1,202
2,109
339

3,954
354
1,098
2,160
343

Fiscal year flows 1/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Central government
Rest of public sector
National Insurance Scheme
Credit to private sector
Other items (net)
Liabilities to the private sector (M2)

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

330

402

289

61

-82
-176
-109
6
-73
23
71

-166
-124
-108
18
-34
-8
-35

-106
448
413
59
-23
81
-636

215
215
117
154
-56
0
0

247

236

182

276

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period M2)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Of which: central government
Credit to private sector
Other items (net)
Liabilities to the private sector (M2)

12.0
-4.2
-4.3
-3.4
2.1
-1.9
7.9

14.2
-8.6
-8.1
-7.2
-0.3
-0.1
5.6

4.7
5.7
12.2
12.2
2.4
-9.0
10.4

9.1
-2.7
3.6
1.8
0.6
-6.8
6.5

1.5
5.4
5.4
2.9
0.0
0.0
6.9

Memorandum items:
Credit to private sector (12-month increase)
M2 velocity

2.6
1.62

-0.4
1.52

3.3
1.39

0.9
1.35

0.0
1.36

Sources: Central Bank of Barbados; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.

- 30 -

Table 5. Barbados: Summary Balance Sheet of the Central Bank of Barbados
2000

2001

2002

2003

(In millions of Barbados dollars)
End-of-period stocks
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Central government
Rest of public sector
National Insurance Scheme
Credit to commercial banks
Credit to rest of financial institutions
Other items (net)
Monetary base
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to commercial banks

969

1,414

1,366

1,501

-406
-466
-461
-6
0
0
9
51

-767
-765
-758
-7
0
0
9
-11

-458
-477
-474
-3
0
0
9
10

-416
-407
-405
-2
0
0
9
-18

563
311
252

647
312
335

908
337
571

1,085
329
756

Fiscal year flows 1/
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Central government
Rest of public sector
National Insurance Scheme
Credit to commercial banks
Credit to rest of financial institutions
Other items (net)
Monetary base

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

348

386

-124

-282
-268
-266
-2
0
0
0
-14

-235
-199
-200
1
0
0
0
-36

265
305
304
1
0
0
0
-40

63

151

141

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period monetary base)
Net international reserves
Net domestic assets
Of which: net credit to central government
Monetary base

71.0
-58.7
-53.4
12.3

79.1
-64.1
-52.8
15.0

-7.4
47.7
43.8
40.3

14.9
4.6
7.6
19.5

Memorandum item:
NIR (in millions of U.S. dollars)

484.4

707.0

683.2

750.7

Sources: Central Bank of Barbados; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.

- 31 -

Table 6. Barbados: Bank Soundness Indicators 1/
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

2000

2001

2002

Prel.
2003

Solvency indicators
Capital adequacy ratio 2/
Leverage (capital, percent of total liabilities) 2/ 3/

15.9
10.3

18.2
10.6

18.8
10.0

...
12.3

Off-balance sheet obligations, percent of liabilities

3.3

3.0

2.7

2.3

Liquidity indicators
Loan to deposit ratio 4/
Demand deposits, percent of total deposits
Excess liquid assets, percent of total assets 5/
Excess liquidity ratio 6/

66.4
30.5
5.8
7.7

62.1
29.5
7.4
8.9

56.6
39.0
12.3
17.9

53.0
37.9
14.5
21.0

Credit risk
Total assets, annual growth rate
Loans and advances, annual growth rate
Mortgage loans, percent of loans and advances 7/

3.6
3.8
10.8

10.3
0.7
13.6

15.7
6.5
15.9

8.7
-2.3
17.9

Nonperforming loans, percent of total loans
Loans classified as loss, percent of total loans and advances
Provisions for impaired assets, percent of assets

3.8
1.8
1.2

5.0
2.0
1.3

7.9
0.6
0.9

9.3
2.3
1.2

Foreign exchange risk
Open position in foreign exchange, percent of capital 8/
Deposits in foreign exchange, percent of deposits
Net foreign assets, percent of total assets

5.6
9.7
2.3

6.8
11.0
2.2

8.5
15.8
5.5

...
13.2
8.6

Profitability indicators
Profit before tax, percent of total assets 9/
Total non-interest expense, percent of total assets 9/
Interest rate spread 10/

2.5
4.0
7.0

2.2
3.7
8.0

2.7
3.0
7.7

2.0
3.2
7.5

Source: Central Bank of Barbados.
1/ Includes domestic commercial banks only, six as at end-2002.
2/ Excludes branches of foreign banks.
3/ Tier-I capital.
4/ Based on the authorities' classification of loans and advances, and deposits.
5/ Excess cash reserves plus excess securities as a ratio of total assets.
6/ Sum of the excess cash reserves ratio and the excess securities ratio.
7/ In 1999, a trust company transferred part of its mortgage loan portfolio to a commercial bank.
8/ Limits on open positions in foreign exchange refer to working balances only.
9/ Beginning 2002, data covers only five commercial banks.
10/ Spread between lending rates and deposit rates only, hence does not fully reflect the intermediation margin.

- 32 -

Table 7. Barbados: Balance of Payments and External Debt
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2000

2001

2002

Prel.
2003

Proj.
2004

-145
-744
286
1,030
603
723
-82
78

-94
-681
271
952
587
714
-93
94

-171
-702
251
953
546
658
-102
86

-210
-797
229
1,025
584
698
-96
99

-178
-890
274
1,164
711
758
-102
103

Capital and financial account
Long-term capital
Public sector
Central government
Government guaranteed
Private sector
Direct investment
Commercial banks
Short-term capital
Commercial banks
Other private (including errors and omissions)

324
287
123
104
20
164
156
8
37
9
27

317
277
152
165
-12
125
128
-3
40
2
37

147
13
0
2
-2
13
17
-4
134
0
134

278
102
-15
3
-19
117
121
-4
176
0
176

179
119
27
22
6
92
92
0
60
0
60

Overall balance 1/

178

223

-24

67

1

External debt
Public debt
Central government
Multilateral
Bilateral
Suppliers' credits
Bond placements
Other

583
519
231
14
8
266
63

743
679
245
13
10
411
63

707
665
243
13
8
401
42

712
664
247
12
9
396
48

738
685
...
...
...
...
53

External debt service
Amortization
Interest

59
24
36

72
27
45

83
33
50

106
55
52

99
44
55

Debt service ratio 2/

4.4

4.9

5.9

7.3

6.4

484
2,591

707
2,570

683
2,599

751
2,696

752
2,832

Balance of payments
Current account
Merchandise trade balance
Exports
Imports
Services (net)
Of which: travel (credit)
Investment income (net)
Transfers (net)

Memorandum items:
Net international reserves of the central bank
GDP (In millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Central Bank of Barbados; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ A surplus (deficit) implies an increase (reduction) in the net international reserves of the central bank.
2/ Public debt service as percent of current account receipts.

- 33 -

Table 8. Barbados: Indicators of External Vulnerability
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Financial indicators
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change, 12- month basis)
Three-month T-bill rate 1/
Three-month T-bill rate (real) 2/
External indicators
Exports of goods and services (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Imports of goods and services (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance
Gross official reserves (in US$ millions)
Gross official reserves in months of imports of goods and services
Gross official reserves to short-term debt 3/ 4/
Gross official reserves to short-term debt plus current account deficit 3/ 4/
Broad money to reserves
Total public external debt
Total external debt to exports of goods and services (percent) 3/
External interest payments to exports of goods and services (percent) 3/
External amortization payments to exports of goods and services (percent) 3/
External interest payments to total fiscal revenue (percent) 3/
External amortization payments to total fiscal revenue (percent) 3/
Exchange rate (per US$, end of period)
REER appreciation (12-month basis)
Real sector indicators
Tourist sector, percent of GDP
Travel receipts, percent of total exports of goods and services
Tourist and general services sectors, percent of GDP
Memorandum item:
Total revenue and grants (millions of BD$, calendar year)
Sources: Central Bank of Barbados; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Average rate of discount (end of period).
2/ T-bill rate adjusted for actual year-on-year inflation.
3/ Refers to public external debt.
4/ Maturity less than one year, defined on a residual maturity basis.

2000

2001

2002

Prel.
2003

7.9
2.6
3.9
1.5

5.6
-0.4
2.0
-0.8

10.4
3.3
1.5
1.3

6.5
0.9
0.6
-0.9

4.4
3.3
-5.6
12.5
484
3.7
18.0
4.0
3.3
23
46
2.8
1.9
4.2
2.8
2.0
6.0

-1.4
-4.9
-3.6
12.3
707
5.7
21.4
3.5
2.4
29
59
3.5
2.1
5.2
3.2
2.0
-1.3

-4.3
-4.7
-6.6
5.7
683
5.8
12.5
2.6
2.7
27
59
4.3
2.7
5.8
3.9
2.0
-5.3

3.6
8.1
-7.8
10.3
751
5.9
17.3
3.4
2.7
26
57
4.1
4.4
5.8
6.2
2.0
-9.4

16
56
74

15
57
74

15
54
74

17
56
78

1,681

1,711

1,716

1,776

- 34 -

Table 9. Barbados: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenarios
Est.
2003

2004

2005

Projections
2006

2007

2008

2.5
1.5
4.6

2.5
1.5
4.6

(Annual percentage changes)
Macroeconomic parameters 1/
Real GDP
Average CPI
Nominal GDP

2.1
1.5
3.6

3.0
1.5
5.1

2.5
1.5
4.6

2.5
1.5
4.6

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
I. Baseline Scenario
Public sector 2/
Government revenue
Government expenditure
Government balance
Of which: budgetary balance
Public enterprise balance (after transfers)
Nonfinancial public sector balance
Government debt

33.6
40.1
-6.5
-2.6
-1.0
-7.5
75.2

33.9
38.3
-4.4
-2.4
-1.3
-5.7
74.1

33.8
37.4
-3.6
-2.0
-1.3
-4.9
72.9

33.4
35.2
-1.8
-1.8
-1.3
-3.1
71.5

33.0
34.7
-1.7
-1.7
-1.3
-3.0
70.1

32.6
34.1
-1.5
-1.5
-1.3
-2.8
68.6

Banking system 3/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which: net credit to government

9.1
-2.7
1.8

0.0
4.5
1.9

-0.5
5.1
3.3

1.6
3.0
1.7

2.4
2.2
1.1

2.9
1.7
0.8

External sector
Current account balance
NIR of the central bank (in US$ million)

-7.8
751

-6.3
752

-5.5
741

-4.5
776

-4.1
832

-4.0
902

II. Enhanced Adjustment Scenario
Public sector 2/
Government revenue
Government expenditure
Government balance
Of which: budgetary balance
Public enterprise balance (after transfers)
Nonfinancial public sector balance
Government debt

33.6
40.1
-6.5
-2.6
-1.0
-7.5
75.2

34.6
36.6
-2.0
-1.0
-1.3
-3.3
70.9

34.6
35.8
-1.2
-0.4
-1.3
-2.5
68.2

34.2
34.2
0.0
0.0
-1.3
-1.3
65.3

33.8
33.8
0.0
0.0
-1.3
-1.3
62.4

33.4
33.4
0.0
0.0
-1.3
-1.3
59.7

Banking system 3/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which: net credit to government

9.1
-2.7
1.8

2.6
1.9
-0.7

2.9
1.7
-0.1

4.4
0.2
-1.1

4.9
-0.3
-1.4

5.2
-0.6
-1.5

External sector
Current account balance
NIR of the central bank (in US$ million)

-7.8
751

-5.1
804

-3.9
864

-3.2
960

-3.0
1,073

-3.0
1,196

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The same key parameters are used for simplicity in both scenarios.
2/ Data refer to fiscal years beginning April 1.
3/ Changes in percent of beginning-of-period liabilities to the private sector.

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)

0.9
6.4
4.3
0.0
2.1
10.5

20.6
532.7

Gross financing 5/
In millions of U.S. dollars

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions

222.2

5.2
-0.3
-1.5
33.0
31.4
2.2
2.2
2.8
-0.6
0.0
-1.0
-1.0
0.0
0.0
5.5

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (non-interest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
Of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2–3)

Public sector debt in percent of revenues 1/

73.3
22.5

Public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated

2000/01

-2.7
6.7
4.2
0.0
2.4
1.1

23.2
597.6

246.9

8.3
4.8
-0.4
33.0
32.6
5.1
5.1
3.2
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.5

81.6
28.8

Actual
2001/02
2003/04

2004/05

0.2
6.5
5.0
0.0
1.6
3.5

29.7
779.0

256.3

2.3
4.8
1.0
32.7
33.7
3.8
3.8
4.0
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.5

83.8
27.0

2.4
6.0
4.4
0.0
1.6
-1.4

28.2
769.8

249.7

0.2
-3.1
-1.2
33.7
32.5
1.6
1.6
3.5
-2.0
0.0
-3.5
-3.5
0.0
0.0
3.3

84.1
26.1

2.9
6.1
4.1
0.0
2.0
3.6

24.2
693.9

247.7

-0.2
-1.9
-1.1
33.9
32.7
0.9
0.9
3.2
-2.3
0.0
-1.7
-1.7
0.0
0.0
1.7

83.8
25.8

2.5
6.3
4.3
0.0
2.0
0.6

22.3
667.1

246.7

-0.3
-0.3
-1.8
33.8
32.1
1.4
1.4
3.4
-2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

83.5
24.6

2.5
6.2
4.2
0.0
2.0
1.1

20.4
638.8

248.2

-0.5
-0.5
-1.8
33.4
31.6
1.3
1.3
3.3
-2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

83.0
23.8

Projections
2005/06 2006/07

I. Baseline Medium-Term Projections

2002/03

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 10. Barbados: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, FY2000/01–FY2008/09—Baseline Scenario

2.5
6.2
4.2
0.0
2.0
0.9

21.2
695.5

249.3

-0.6
-0.6
-1.9
33.0
31.1
1.3
1.3
3.3
-2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

82.4
22.6

2007/08

2.5
6.1
4.1
0.0
2.0
0.9

21.5
735.4

250.0

-0.8
-0.8
-2.0
32.6
30.6
1.2
1.2
3.2
-2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

81.6
21.6

2008/09

- 35 -

1.9
2.6
0.6
1.6
1.7
1.3

Standard
Deviation

Actual
2001/02
2002/03

2004/05

83.7
86.4
88.9
86.7
89.0
96.1
93.8
88.9
308.3

84.1
84.1
84.1
84.1
84.1
84.1
84.1
84.1
249.7

324.9

93.6

89.8
94.5
96.0
93.7

93.8

88.6

83.3

278.9

93.3

89.4
91.9
95.7
93.3

93.2

88.2

83.0

Projections
2005/06 2006/07

II. Stress Tests

2003/04

280.9

92.8

88.9
89.2
95.3
92.9

92.5

87.7

82.6

2007/08

282.5

92.2

88.2
86.3
94.7
92.3

91.7

87.0

82.2

2008/09

1/ Includes central government only. Also whether net or gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; a = share
of foreign-currency denominated debt; and e = nominal exchange rate depreciation.
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
7/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Primary deficit
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Nominal interest rate (in percent) 6/
Real interest rate (in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Revenue to GDP ratio

Historical statistics for key variables (past 10 years)

1. Real GDP growth, real interest rate, and primary balance are at historical
averages in 2004/05–2007/08
2. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations
in 2004/05 and 2005/06
3. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations
in 2004/05 and 2005/06
4. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in
in 2004/05 and 2005/06
5. Combination of 2–4 using one standard deviation shocks
6. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004/05 7/
7. Ten percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004/05
8. Impact on debt-to-GDP ratio if revenue-to-GDP ratio is at historical average
minus two standard deviations in 2004/05–2005/06
8a. Impact on debt-to-revenue ratio if revenue-to-GDP ratio is at historical average
minus two standard deviations in 2004/05–2005/06

2000/01

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 10. Barbados: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, FY2000/01–FY2008/09—Baseline Scenario

- 36 -

Nominal GDP (local currency)
Nominal GDP (U.S. dollars)
Real GDP growth (in percent per year)
Exchange rate (LC per U.S. dollar)
Nominal GDP deflator (in U.S. dollars, change in percent per year)
External interest rate (percent per year)
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent per year)
Growth of imports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent per year)

Memorandum items: Key macro and external assumptions

2 External debt/GDP
3 Change in external debt/GDP
4 Net debt-creating external flows/GDP (5+9+12)
5
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments/GDP
6
Deficit in balance of G&S/GDP
7
Exports of G&S/GDP
8
Imports of G&S/GDP
9
Minus net non-debt creating capital inflows/GDP
10
Net foreign direct investment, equity/GDP
11
Net portfolio investment,equity/GDP
(r-g-(ρ+gρ))/(1+g+ρ+gρ))debt/GDP (14/13)
12
Adjustment factor: 1+g+ρ+gρ
13
(r-g-(ρ+gρ))debt/GDP (15+16+17)
14
15
r (interest rate) times debt/GDP
16
minus g (real GDP growth rate) times debt/GDP
17
minus (r + gr) (r = US dollar value of GDP deflator, growth rate) times
debt/GDP
18 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets/GDP (3–4)

1 External debt/exports of G&S

I. Baseline medium-term projections

5154
2577.1
-2.7
2.0
2.4
7.7
-1.4
-4.9

7.8

0.3

5172
2585.8
0.9
2.0
2.1
7.7
4.4
3.3

28.8
6.3
-1.5
1.9
8.6
49.0
57.6
-5.2
6.0
-0.9
1.8
1.0
1.8
1.7
0.6
-0.5

58.9

Actual
2001/02

22.5
4.1
3.8
4.2
10.9
49.5
60.4
-1.3
2.1
-0.8
0.8
1.0
0.9
1.4
-0.2
-0.4

45.5

2000/01

5246
2622.8
0.2
2.0
1.6
6.9
-4.3
-4.7

-3.8

27.0
-1.9
2.0
4.6
7.9
46.1
53.9
-4.0
4.9
-0.8
1.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
-0.1
-0.4

58.5

2002/03

5459
2729.6
2.4
2.0
1.6
7.3
3.6
8.1

5729
2864.4
2.9
2.0
2.0
7.7
6.4
9.2

-1.8

25.8
-0.3
1.5
4.3
11.9
46.5
58.3
-3.5
4.2
-0.8
0.7
1.0
0.7
2.0
-0.8
-0.5

26.1
-0.9
6.8
5.8
10.2
45.8
56.0
0.2
0.6
-0.8
0.8
1.0
0.9
2.0
-0.7
-0.4
-7.7

55.5

2004/05

56.9

2003/04

Table 11. Barbados: External Sustainability Framework, FY 2000/01–FY 2008/09

5990
2995.1
2.5
2.0
2.0
8.0
5.4
4.4

-3.1

24.6
-1.1
2.0
3.5
11.4
46.8
58.2
-2.3
3.1
-0.7
0.8
1.0
0.9
2.1
-0.6
-0.5

52.6

6263
3131.5
2.5
2.0
2.0
7.1
5.2
4.0

-2.6

23.8
-0.9
1.7
2.8
10.8
47.1
57.9
-1.6
2.3
-0.7
0.6
1.0
0.6
1.8
-0.6
-0.5

50.4

Projections
2005/06
2006/07

6550
3274.9
2.5
2.0
2.0
7.1
4.6
4.9

-2.5

22.6
-1.2
1.3
2.4
10.9
47.1
58.1
-1.7
2.4
-0.7
0.6
1.0
0.6
1.7
-0.6
-0.5

47.9

2007/08

6849
3424.4
2.5
2.0
2.0
7.0
4.6
6.9

-2.2

21.6
-1.0
1.2
2.4
12.2
47.1
59.4
-1.7
2.4
-0.6
0.5
1.0
0.5
1.6
-0.6
-0.5

45.7

2008/09

- 37 -

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Current account deficit, excluding interest payments (percent of GDP,
average of past 10 years)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments (percent of GDP,
standard deviation of past 10 years)
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (percent of GDP, average of past 10 years)
Interest rate (average of past 10 years)
Interest rate (standard deviation of past 10 years)
Real GDP growth rate (average of past 10 years)
Real GDP growth rate (standard deviation of past 10 years)
GDP deflator, U.S. dollar terms (average of past 10 years)
GDP deflator, U.S. dollar terms (standard deviation of past 10 years)

Memorandum items:

1. If interest rate, real GDP growth rate, US$ GDP deflator growth,
non-interest current account, and non-debt flows (in percent of GDP) in
2004/05–2008/09 are at average of past 10 years
2. If interest rate in 2004/05 and 2005/06 is average plus two standard
deviations, others at baseline
3. If real GDP growth rate in 2004/05 and 2005/06 is average minus two
standard deviations, others at baseline
4. If US$ GDP deflator in 2004/05 is average minus two standard deviations,
others at baseline
5. If non-interest current account (in percent of GDP) in 2004/05 and 2005/06
is average minus two standard deviations, others at baseline
6. Combination of 2–5 using one standard deviation shocks
7. One time 30 percent depreciation in year 2004/05 (-30 percent GDP deflator
shock), others at baseline.

II. Sensitivity analysis for external debt-to-GDP ratio

2000/01

Actual
2001/02
2002/03

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

38.0

26.1

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

31.4
27.3

26.1
26.1

5.4

26.4

26.1

5.4

27.5

26.1

-0.9

26.3

26.1

-0.9

22.8

2004/05

26.1

2003/04

Table 11. Barbados: External Sustainability Framework, FY 2000/01–FY 2008/09

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

5.4

-0.9

37.3

36.8
28.2

25.3

28.1

25.7

18.2

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

5.4

-0.9

36.7

36.2
27.4

24.4

27.3

24.9

13.9

Projections
2005/06
2006/07

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

5.4

-0.9

35.8

35.3
26.3

23.2

26.2

23.7

9.8

2007/08

1.0
7.0
1.5
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.7

5.4

-0.9

35.1

34.6
25.4

22.2

25.2

22.7

5.8

2008/09

- 38 -

- 39 -

APPENDIX I

Barbados—Fund Relations
As of March 31, 2004

I.
II.

Membership Status: Joined 12/29/1970; Article VIII
General Resources Account:

SDR million

Percent
of Quota

67.50
62.51
5.02

100.00
92.60
7.44

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

SDR Department:

SDR million
8.04
0.04

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings
IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

V.

Financial Arrangements:

VI.

None

Type

Approval
date

Expiration
date

Amount approved
(SDR million)

Amount drawn
(SDR million)

Stand-by
Stand-by

02/07/1992
10/01/1982

05/31/1993
05/31/1984

23.89
31.88

14.67
31.88

Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):
Overdue
09/30/2001
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

Percent of
Allocation
100.00
0.46

2003
-0.03
0.03

2004
-0.13
0.13

Forthcoming
2005
-0.13
0.13

2006
-0.13
0.13

2007
-0.13
0.13

Exchange Rate Arrangement:
The Barbados dollar has been pegged to the U.S. dollar since mid-1975 at BDS$2.00 =
US$1.00. On March 5, 2004, the official buying and selling rates per US$1 were
BDS$1.98 and BDS$2.04, respectively.

- 40 -

APPENDIX I

There are no restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions subject to approval under Article VIII. There are indicative
limits on some payments for invisibles, but bona fide transactions are approved. Most
capital outflows and certain capital inflows require approval. The authorities accepted
the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on November 3, 1993.
VIII.

Last Article IV Consultation
The 2002 Article IV consultation discussions were concluded by the Executive Board on
February 7, 2003. Documentation comprised the staff report (Country Report No. 03/44); the
statistical appendix (Country Report No. 03/45); and the Financial System Stability Assessment
(Country Report 03/35). Barbados is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle.

IX.

X.

Technical Assistance (1994–2004):
Department

Dates

Purpose

CARTAC

January 26–30, 2004

Development of Supply and Use Tables

FAD

July 3–18, 2003

Reform of indirect taxes

CARTAC

March 18–29, 2002

Balance of payments statistics

FAD

May 28−June 8, 2001

Uniform taxation of domestic and offshore
activities, and review of tax incentive regime

MAE/CARTAC

January 3–11, 2002

Technical assistance on a bank merger

STA

Jan. 25−Feb. 2, 1999

Development of the GDDS metadata

FAD

Nov. 6−17, 1995
Feb. 28−Mar. 12, 1996

Introduction of value-added tax

MAE

November 1995

Introduction of deposit insurance scheme

Resident Representative:
The resident representative post was closed in January 1995.

- 41 -

APPENDIX II

Barbados—Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank
I. Loans Active as of December 2003
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Approval
Date

Amount

Amount
Disbursed

Amount
Available

South Coast Sewerage
Global Pre-Investment
Bridgetown Roads

November 1992
December 1992
May 1993

51.2
7.0
18.5

36.5
6.9
9.4

14.7
0.1
9.1

Solid Waste Management Program
Education Sector Enhancement Program
Administration of Justice
Coastal Infrastructure

October 1998
December 1998
August 2001
January 2002

13.0
85.0
8.7
17.0

0.1
14.3
0.0
0.0

12.9
70.7
8.7
17.0

200.4

67.2

133.2

Purpose

Total

II. Net Cash Flow of IDB Resources and Balance Outstanding
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Repayments

7.4

7.9

7.3

7.5

8.1

7.3

7.3

8.1

7.7

Disbursements

7.1

29.0

15.1

17.9

5.8

10.4

24.2

15.8

14.4

Net loan flow

-0.3

21.1

7.8

10.4

-2.3

3.1

16.9

7.7

6.7

6.7

7.3

7.9

8.2

9.7

10.0

8.7

7.2

7.4

-7.1

13.8

-0.1

2.2

-12.0

-6.9

8.2

0.5

-0.7

102.0

123.1

133.5

143.9

141.6

127.0

143.9

151.6

158.3

Interest and charges
Net cash flow
Debt outstanding

Source: Inter-American Development Bank.

- 42 -

APPENDIX III

Barbados—Relations with the Caribbean Development Bank
The Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) approved US$214.3 million in loans, contingent
loans, equity and grants to Barbados between 1970 and 2002. This represents 9.9 percent of
total approvals to CDB’s borrowing member countries.
Of the total funds approved US$65.3 million or 30.5 percent were allocated to the productive
sectors which comprise agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, and mining. Within the
productive sectors, US$47.2 million or 22 percent of the total was allocated to the
manufacturing sector, while tourism accounted forUS$11.6 million, or 5.6 percent.
Economic infrastructure accounted for US$112.9 million or 52.7 percent of approved funds.
Of these funds, US$52.5 million (24.5 percent) were allocated to the transportation,
US$55 million (25.7 percent) to the education, and US$3.2 million (1.5 percent) to the health
sectors.
In July 2002, CDB approved a US$15 million loan to the Government of Barbados to be on
lent via the Industrial Credit Fund at the central bank. The loan seeks to stimulate output in
the export oriented sectors of the Barbados economy in light of the country’s recent
economic performance.
CDB Loans Approved to Barbados 1970−2002
Sector

US$ million

Percent

65.3
6.0
47.2
12.0

30.5
1.9
22.0
5.6

113.0
0.1
0.8
52.5
1.4
55.0
3.2

52.7
0.0
0.3
24.5
0.7
25.7
1.5

36.0

16.8

214.3

100.0

Productive sector
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Tourism
Economic infrastructure
Power and energy
Water
Transportation
Housing
Education
Health
Multisector
Total

Source: Caribbean Development Bank.

- 43 -

Barbados—Statistical Issues
1.
Barbados participates in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).
Information about Barbados macroeconomic statistics (metadata) and the authorities’ plans
for improving the statistical base are posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin
Board on the internet.
National accounts
2.
Compilation of the national accounts from the production side is hampered by lack of
reliable and current data on non-sugar agriculture, private construction, and non-tourism
service activities. On the expenditure side, the national accounts suffer from weaknesses in
the external trade and private investment data. The authorities are in the process of shifting
the base year of gross domestic product at constant prices from 1974 to 1994. The consumer
price index has been revised to reflect purchasing patterns from the April 1998–March 1999
household budget survey and a new reference base of July 2001 = 100. There are no
quarterly GDP estimates.
Nonfinancial public sector
3.
The coverage of data on the operations of the general government is comprehensive
and generally timely. There has been some improvement in the recording of financial
transactions, which has reduced the discrepancies between the overall balance recorded from
above the line and the financing data. The other factor contributing to discrepancies at the
level of nonfinancial public sector, which needs to be addressed, is the inadequate reporting
by public enterprises. Data provided by the public enterprises, such as government transfers
and capital expenditure, often differ from those provided by the Ministry of Finance (MoF).
4.
A recently completed project has centralized debt data compiled by the Central Bank
of Barbados (CBB) and the Accountant General’s Office using the Commonwealth
Secretariat’s Data Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS 2000+). The CBB, the
Accountant General’s Office, and the MoF share joint responsibility for updating the system.
The CBB’s Exchange Control Department updates private sector debt (governmentguaranteed and non-guaranteed), and the Research Department updates the guaranteed debt
of statutory bodies. The MoF updates information on public debt.
5.

No data are reported for publication in the GFS Yearbook or IFS.

Financial sector
6.
The overall quality, coverage, and timeliness of the monetary accounts is satisfactory.
One outstanding issue is that the concept of residency applied to the monetary statistics is not
consistent with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. The CBB classifies
some loans to and deposits of non-residents as credit to the private sector and part of broad
money, respectively, instead of as net foreign assets of commercial banks. Moreover, nonnationals are recognized as residents only after they have resided continuously in Barbados

- 44 -

for at least three years. There is also a need to extend the coverage of data to include offshore
bank accounts.
7.
The timeliness of data reported to STA for publication in IFS has significantly
improved. The lag in submitting monetary data decreased from about five months to about
three weeks for the central bank accounts, and to about six weeks for the monetary survey.
8.
Accounting conventions underlying monetary data compiled by the CBB need to be
reviewed. The CBB data are reported on a cash basis and do not include accrued receivables
and payables. Commercial banks’ positions are recorded on an accrual basis; however, the
accrued interest receivable and payable is classified under other assets and other liabilities,
respectively, rather than under the appropriate category of domestic credit. Marketable
securities are recorded at the acquisition cost and revalued to market value only on an annual
basis (as of December 31). Short-term zero-coupon securities (treasury bills) are recorded at
acquisition cost and are not revalued to market value until redemption at maturity. Positions
with the IMF (SDR holdings, Reserve Tranche Position, and SDR Allocation) are valued at
the IMF holdings rate rather than at the end-of-period market rate. These issues are being
addressed in the context of the general framework of the GDDS.
9.
The latest data published in the Balance of Payments yearbook correspond to 2001.
Lags in the compilation of merchandise trade data limit the timeliness of estimating the
external current account balance. No clear distinction is currently made between current
transfers and capital transfers. Estimates of the components of the investment account also
need to be strengthened. A mission by the IMF Multisector Statistics Advisor at the
Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre in March 2002 noted that the coverage of
foreign direct investment (FDI) is incomplete because the CBB does not include offshore
enterprises. Also, the surveys on FDI are deficient as the distinction between transactions and
positions are unclear in the survey reporting form. Quarterly balance of payments estimates
are not currently provided.

M

U

Monthly
Publication

A

M

M

3/3/04

1/31/04

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

M

U
M

U

A

M

M

3/3/04

12/31/03

Broad
Money

M

U

A

M

M

3/9/04

12/31/03

Interest
Rates

M

U

A

M

M

2/3/04

12/03

Consumer
Price
Index

M

U

A

Y

Y

2/3/04

12/03

Exports/
Imports

Y

Y

2/3/04

12/03

Current
Account
Balance

M

Y

Y

2/3/04

2/3/04
M

2003

GDP/
GNP

12/31/03

Overall
Govt.
Balance

Y

Y

2/3/04

12/31/03

External
Debt/
Debt
Service

Q

U

M

U

Q

U

M

U

A
A
A
A
Central Bank
Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Monthly
Annual
Internal
Monthly
Annual
Annual
Publication Publication Publication Publication Publication Document Publication Publication Publication
A

M

M

3/3/04

1/31/04

Reserve/
Base
Money

1/ Preliminary estimate. Actual data provided with a lag of two to three months.
2/ W - weekly, M - monthly, Q - quarterly, Y - yearly.
3/ A - direct, reporting by central bank, ministry of finance, or other official agency.
4/ U - for unrestricted use.

W

Monthly
Publication

Mode of
Reporting

Frequency of
Publication 2/

A

Source of
Update 3/

U

M

Frequency of
Reporting 2/

Confidentiality 4/

M

Frequency of
Data 2/

1/31/04

3/3/04

Fixed

Date Received

Date of Latest
Observation

Exchange
Rates

International
Reserves

(As of March 24 , 2004)

Barbados: Core Statistical Indicators

- 45 APPENDIX IV

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/56
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 14, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with Barbados
On May 5, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Barbados.1
Background
The mainstays of the economy are tourism and financial services. The population is
about 275,000, per capita income is about US$9,500, and the unemployment rate is
slightly less than 11 percent. The United Nations Development Program’s Human
Development Index ranked Barbados 27th among 175 countries in 2003.
Barbados’ economy did well in the 1990s, supported by prudent policies and a favorable
external environment. During 1993–2000, per capita real GDP growth averaged
2.5 percent per year, annual inflation was 2 percent or less, and unemployment declined
sharply. The structure of the economy shifted from agriculture to tourism and financial
services. This performance was achieved in the context of small fiscal deficits (less than
2 percent of GDP), a conservative monetary policy (which resulted in a substantial
accumulation of external reserves), and a range of market-oriented reforms.
The economy shifted into a recession in 2001, reflecting the global slowdown, and the
impact of the September 11 events on the tourism sector. Real GDP dropped by a
cumulative 4 percent in 2001–02. To mitigate the recession, the government launched a
national emergency program of public investment projects aimed at promoting economic
activity and upgrading the tourism and economic infrastructure. These and other
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions
with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and
financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments
and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the
basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the
Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive
Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities.

-2-

measures contributed to an increase in the central government deficit, from 2.3 percent
of GDP in FY 2000/01 (April–March) to 9.5 percent of GDP in FY 2002/03, including
extra-budgetary spending of about 4 percent of GDP. As a result, the central
government debt-to-GDP ratio rose from 63 percent in March 2001 to 76 percent in
March 2003.
Over the past year, the economy recovered partially from the 2001–02 recession, as
real GDP grew by an estimated 2 percent in 2003, led by a recovery in the tourism
sector. Inflation remained low at 1.5 percent, reflecting the currency peg. The external
current account deficit widened in 2003, as merchandise exports declined and imports
recovered from their low recession levels. The central government deficit narrowed to
6.5 percent of GDP in FY 2003/04, including extra-budgetary spending of close to
4 percent of GDP. Tax revenue increased by 1¼ percent of GDP, on account of higher
receipts from the value-added tax, and capital expenditure declined by a similar amount.
More than half of the government deficit was financed through privatization proceeds
resulting in a marginal decline in the government debt ratio, to 75 percent.
Notwithstanding widening of the current account deficit, the net international reserves
stood at US$751 million (six months of imports of goods and services) at the end of the
year.
Broad money growth decelerated in 2003, although it was still faster than GDP growth,
and banks became increasingly liquid. In an effort to unwind the excessive buildup of
liquidity, the central bank reduced the government securities ratio to 16 percent in
November 2002; in December 2002, the central bank reduced the minimum
administered interest rate on time and savings deposits, from 3 percent to 2.5 percent,
and discontinued setting maximum indicative lending rates for banks on selected loans.
While the banking system remains generally sound, the ratio of nonperforming loans to
total loans has increased to about 9 percent, and profitability indicators have weakened
somewhat.
Over the past year, important progress was made in the area of structural reforms, as
steps were taken to enhance the budget process, strengthen the national pension
system, promote transparency in the public sector, improve financial intermediation, and
enhance the supply responsiveness of the economy.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that Barbados’ economy has started to recover from the
2001–02 recession, led by the strong performance of the tourism sector and supported
by the countercyclical fiscal stance adopted in the downturn. However, this fiscal stance
gave rise to a substantial increase in the government debt, which must now be
reversed. Directors were encouraged by the improvement in the public finances in fiscal
year 2003/04 and stressed that, over the medium term, debt sustainability would
critically depend on the government’s success in further reducing its deficit and
deepening reforms to boost growth. They welcomed the strengthening of the
international reserve position over the last three years, which reflects Barbados’
continued access to foreign financing and strong private capital inflows.

-3-

Directors stated that, notwithstanding the improvement in fiscal year 2003/04, the
current level of the government’s deficit implied continued high government debt ratios
and has contributed to large, albeit declining, external current account deficits.
They cautioned that these factors could pose a risk to the fixed exchange rate anchor,
the central pillar of Barbados’ policy framework, especially in the event of a turnaround
in private capital flows. A number of Directors therefore recommended that the fiscal
deficit be reduced to ensure adequate reserve cover and a declining debt ratio, and that
gradual fiscal tightening be combined with growth-enhancing structural reforms. In this
regard, Directors also attached importance to anchoring the pace of fiscal adjustment on
Barbados’ longstanding framework of social consensus. At the same time, other
Directors, noting the size of the fiscal imbalance and the high debt level, urged the
authorities to build domestic consensus for a more rapid fiscal adjustment.
Directors agreed with the government’s focus on expenditure control and welcomed the
commitment to wage restraint and the projected reduction in extra-budgetary spending,
mainly transfers to public enterprises, which remains high and has diminished the
transparency of fiscal operations in recent years. But they also saw a need to intensify
the revenue effort, both to facilitate deficit reduction and to protect social spending.
Directors encouraged the authorities to consider, in particular, measures to reduce
exemptions from the VAT, as well as increases in the rates of the VAT and excises.
They commended the authorities’ proposals to harmonize the domestic and offshore tax
regimes and supported the proposed reduction of income tax rates. Directors
recommended that privatization proceeds, which have been used to finance extrabudgetary spending, should in the future be allocated mainly to the retirement of
government debt. They urged the authorities to review the tariffs of major public
enterprises, concurrently with a reduction in government transfers to these entities.
Directors encouraged the authorities to move to more market-based mechanisms of
monetary control, to enhance control of credit expansion and reduce distortions in
financial intermediation. Accordingly, they welcomed the initial steps by the central bank
to prepare the technical infrastructure for open market operations, and recommended
phasing out, in due course, the administered minimum interest rate on savings and time
deposits. Regarding broader financial sector reforms, Directors welcomed the actions
taken to implement most of the 2002 Financial Sector Assessment Program
recommendations, including improvement in the supervisory and regulatory frameworks
for the banking and insurance sectors. They encouraged rapid implementation of the
remaining recommendations, including increasing the independence of the central bank,
and the strengthening of efforts with regard to Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the
Financing of Terrorism issues. Directors supported the authorities’ sequenced approach
to capital account liberalization, in line with the ongoing strengthening of the financial
sector and the development of indirect instruments of monetary control.
Directors shared the authorities’ view on the continued appropriateness of the fixed
exchange rate regime for Barbados, although it was also suggested that the authorities
keep the current regime under review. They noted that the long-standing peg to the
U.S. dollar, supported by prudent fiscal and monetary policies, has acted as a strong

-4-

anchor of price stability and investor confidence. Directors emphasized, however, that
the long-term viability of the regime required that the public debt dynamics be returned
to a sustainable position, under robust economic policies and reforms to boost growth
and competitiveness.
Directors noted that the decline of agriculture and manufacturing in recent years
highlights the need to broaden the productive base. In this regard, they welcomed the
authorities’ recent structural reform achievements, which include the reform of the
National Insurance Scheme; establishment of a regulatory framework for private
pension schemes; corporatization of the Port Authority; privatization of the Barbados
National Bank; and the move toward greater competition in the telecommunications
sector. Looking ahead, Directors supported the authorities’ focus on reforms relating to
the budget, tax policy, government pensions, and enhancing the supply responsiveness
of the economy. Directors commended the authorities for their continued commitment to
further trade liberalization in the context of the CARICOM, the WTO, and the envisaged
FTAA, and recent initiatives to enhance labor market flexibility.
Directors noted that, while the statistical information provided by Barbados is broadly
adequate for surveillance purposes, there remains scope for substantial improvement,
particularly with regard to the operations of the public enterprises and the capital
account of the balance of payments.

Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board.

-5-

Barbados: Selected Economic Indicators
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

(Annual percentage changes)
Output and prices
Real GDP
Consumer prices (12-month increase)

0.5
1.6

2.4
2.4

-3.4
2.8

-0.4
0.2

2.1
1.5

Tourist arrivals
Unemployment (percent of labor force)

0.4
10.4

5.8
9.4

-6.9
9.9

-1.8
10.3

6.7
10.7

Money and credit 1/
Net domestic assets

7.8

-4.2

-8.6

5.7

-2.7

Public sector credit (net)
Private sector credit

-0.4
11.6

-4.3
2.1

-8.1
-0.3

12.2
2.4

3.6
0.6

Broad money

11.6

7.9

5.6

10.4

6.5

-1.2
-1.3

-3.1
-2.3

-5.2
-4.9

-10.4
-9.5

-7.5
-6.5

1.0
0.0

1.2
-0.8

1.6
-0.4

1.5
-0.9

1.5
-1.0

External current account balance

-6.0

-5.6

-3.6

-6.6

-7.8

Public external debt 3/

18.5

22.5

28.8

27.0

26.1

Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)

306

484

707

683

751

(In percent of GDP)
Public sector operations 2/
Nonfinancial public sector balance
Central government
Surplus of National Insurance Scheme
Public enterprises
External sector

Sources: Barbadian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money.
2/ Fiscal years (April–March).
3/ Refers to central government and government guaranteed debt.

Statement by Ian E. Bennett, Executive Director for Barbados
May 3, 2004
Key Points
•

The Barbadian economy appears to have returned to a sustainable growth path
following the 2001-02 recession.

•

The fiscal deficit, although declining, remains higher than desirable, and the authorities
are committed to reducing it, albeit at a pace more gradual than recommended by the
staff owing to the need to finance certain capital projects to strengthen tourism and other
productive sectors.

•

The main goals of monetary policy are to continue policies which will safeguard the
fixed exchange rate and maintain a stable environment conducive to economic growth.

•

The authorities are committed to continuing structural reforms in order to sustain
growth and competitiveness over the medium term.
1. My authorities wish to express their appreciation to the staff for their insightful
comments and comprehensive assessment of developments in Barbados and for their
constructive advice on tackling the challenges ahead. They believe that the economy
has returned to a sustainable growth path following the 2001-02 recession, but
acknowledge that some important challenges remain, particularly a further reduction
of the fiscal imbalances and enhancement of growth and competitiveness.

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook
2. Following eight consecutive years of growth, the Barbadian economy contracted in
2001 and 2002, a decline associated with the global economic slowdown and the
events of September 11. In 2003 economic activity recovered - expanding by 2.1
percent, largely related to a rebound in tourism and to a lesser extent, developments in
the non-traded sector. Temporary fiscal imbalances occasioned by the implementation
of counter-cyclical expenditure measures in 2001/02, have been reduced significantly,
but remain higher than desirable.
3. On the external account, the current account deficit widened as the performance of
the foreign exchange earning sectors - apart from tourism - was weak. Nevertheless,
the level of reserves remained high - at eight months of imports at the end of
December 2003 - strengthened by foreign inflows from privatization proceeds.
4. My authorities are encouraged that their economic reform efforts appear to be
meeting with some success as evidenced by further increases in tourism output, and
real GDP growth (4 percent) during the first quarter of 2004. Continued progress
coupled with positive developments in the international economy, will translate into a
positive medium term outlook for Barbados.

-2Fiscal Policy and Debt
5. The authorities acknowledge that the fiscal deficit, although declining, remains higher
than desirable. They are committed to reducing it to a more manageable level around 1-2 percent of GDP at the earliest opportunity. With the recession over, and
many of the large capital projects completed, the target deficit would ordinarily be
achievable by reducing discretionary spending, rationalizing capital expenditure, and
continuing tax reform. However, my authorities have elected to strengthen
infrastructure in the tourism sector, particularly with a view to upgrading our capacity
to co-host the Caribbean’s premier sports tourism event of the decade - the 2007
Cricket World Cup. With respect to taxes, my authorities requested and received a
Technical Assistance mission from the Fund in the recent past to suggest measures to
help reduce the disparity between the domestic and offshore tax regimes. My
authorities are of the view that full convergence is difficult and are continuing to
review options. Nevertheless, they are continuing their strategy begun in 2002 of
phasing in a substantial reduction in the corporation and personal tax rates in the
medium term. For example, the corporation tax rate is being reduced from 45 percent
to 25 percent over a five year period.
6. As part of its policy on expenditure restraint, non-wage current expenditure growth
will be limited to a rate not exceeding the rate of inflation while wage increases will
be linked to productivity gains as part of an agreement with its social partners.
Transfers to public enterprises (PEs), particularly those which carry out quasi
commercial functions, will be contained by capping transfers at their FY 2003/04
level. Public enterprises will also be required to finance more of their own operations
through greater cost recovery and efficiency gains. With respect to capital
expenditure, increased use will be made of public/private sector partnerships and
build operate-lease arrangements to carry out major investments.
7. Total public sector debt, at 83.8 percent of GDP in FY 2002/03 is high. My
authorities agree with the staff on the importance of reducing debt levels and the need
to contain debt service costs. In this regard, they are committed to reducing the debt
level over the medium term to 60 percent of GDP by pursuing a prudent debt
management strategy - a key element of which is a commitment not to raise any new
commercial loans on the international market during 2004.
8. My authorities and the staff agree on the need for adjustment to achieve fiscal
consolidation and ensure debt sustainability, but disagree on the pace of this
adjustment. They intend to pursue a more gradual adjustment over the medium term
than recommended by the staff, owing to the need to refurbish and expand the airport
and other tourism related facilities. They also believe that given the large share of
domestic debt in the overall debt composition, there is reduced vulnerability than
normally associated with a high debt ratio, and, therefore, there is less urgency to
reduce debt as aggressively as the staff have recommended.

-3Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
9. The main objectives of monetary policy are to safeguard the fixed exchange rate and
create a stable environment conducive to economic growth. The authorities differed
with the staff on the assessment that the fixed exchange rate could be at risk under
some scenarios in the medium term. They point to the high level of reserves – at $US
750 million, or eight months of imports at the end of March 2004, to support the
currency and note, that even in the baseline scenario, the level of reserves remains
high. Further, my authorities are confident that ongoing reforms should facilitate
higher private capital inflows.
10. The authorities acknowledge the limitations of their existing array of available
monetary policy instruments, and have begun the necessary preparations to enable the
Bank to conduct open market operations. At the same time, they also intend to pursue
a gradual liberalization of the capital account, particularly to facilitate regional
transactions under the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME). Under this
strategy, the CBB will, on a pilot basis and subject to continuing review, delegate
more selected capital account transactions to commercial banks, and substantially
increase the value limits of these transactions.
Growth and Competitiveness
11. One of the principal challenges facing the authorities is to fine-tune the policy
framework which enhances growth and competitiveness in the economy. A
significant part of this involves re-tooling and retraining in some of the weaker
tradeable sectors, particularly manufacturing and agriculture, while at the same time,
developing the services sector. The establishment of the Enhanced Guarantee Scheme
and the Enterprise Growth Fund should provide resources to undertake some of these
tasks and thereby strengthen threatened sectors.
12. My authorities believe that there already exists significant capacity and export
earning potential for many services and will, therefore, be seeking to promote
development in these areas. In particular, there will be focus on some professional
services, cultural services, entertainment services and health tourism services, with
efforts made to have full access for these in Barbados’ trading partners’ markets, and
where possible, attract investment in these areas.
13. Continuation of ongoing structural reform efforts will be key to sustaining growth and
competitiveness over the medium term. My authorities’ track record in implementing
structural reforms has been good as evidenced by the recent initiatives to corporatize
key public enterprises, privatize the Barbados National Bank (BNB), and liberalize
telecommunications and diversify agriculture.
14. The sugar industry has been engaged in a long process of rationalization and
restructuring in response to the expected loss of preferential arrangements. As the
economy has gradually shifted to services, sugar production has declined from about

-4200,000 tonnes in the mid-nineteen sixties to a more sustainable level of about 40,000
tonnes at present. Efforts are also underway to further develop non-sugar agriculture,
in areas where there is significant domestic demand, and where niche markets and
linkages with other sectors can be established. In this area, there has already been a
noticeable increase in cotton production over the last two years.
15. Improvements in labor market flexibility are also important to enhance growth
prospects. Recognizing this, and consistent with efforts to establish the CSME, the
authorities have already enacted legislation in respect of the free movement of
university graduates. Legislation covering the other categories of skilled labor
identified under the revised treaty of Chaguaramas was presented to Parliament in
2003, and is expected to be passed in 2004.
Conclusion
16. Following a difficult economic period recently, the Barbadian economy has returned
to a positive growth path. The prospects for the economy, to a significant extent, are
tied to the international economy, and the recent performance in this area is welcome.
At the same time, my authorities also acknowledge the important role that a
supporting domestic economic environment plays, and in this regard, are resolved to
implement appropriate fiscal, monetary, and structural policies.

