August 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/319

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

July 10, 2006
May 19, 2006

July 31, 2006
2006
July 27, 2006

Indonesia: 2006 Article IV Consultation and Fifth Post-Program Monitoring
Discussions—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Indonesia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2006 Article IV
consultation with Indonesia and the fifth post-program monitoring discussions, the following
documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the combined 2006 Article IV consultation and Fifth Post-Program
Monitoring Discussions, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that
ended on May 19, 2006, with the officials of Indonesia on economic developments and
policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on July 10, 2006. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff supplement of July 27, 2006 updating information on recent economic developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN), summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 31, 2006 discussion of the staff report on issues related to the
Article IV consultation and the post-program monitoring discussions.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Indonesia.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
INDONESIA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation and
Fifth Post-Program Monitoring Discussions
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
(in consultation with other departments)
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Adnan Mazarei
July 10, 2006
•

A staff team visited Jakarta during May 8–19 to conduct the 2006 Article IV
Consultation and Fifth Post-Program Monitoring discussions. The team comprised
Milan Zavadjil (head), Nita Thacker, Geremia Palomba, Hiroko Oura (all APD),
Amine Mati (FAD), Steven Seelig and Andre Santos (MFD), and Matthew Jones
(PDR). Stephen Schwartz, Senior Resident Representative, and R. Armando Morales,
Deputy Resident Representative, participated in the mission. Made Sukada (Alternate
Executive Director) attended the meetings. The mission also liaised with the World
Bank and key donors.

•

The mission met with Vice President Jusuf Kalla, Coordinating Minister for Economic
Affairs Boediono, Coordinating Minister for Social Affairs Aburizal Bakrie, Minister
of Finance Sri Mulyani Indrawati, Bank Indonesia Governor Burhanuddin Abdullah,
Minister of Planning Paskah Suzetta, Minister of Trade Mari Pangestu, Minister of
Labor Suparno, Minister of Energy Purnomo Yusgiantoro, Minister of State-owned
Enterprises Sugiharto, and other senior officials, parliamentarians, and private sector
representatives.

•

Indonesia’s extended Fund arrangement expired on December 31, 2003. Following
early repayment of one-half of its obligations at end-June 2006, Indonesia’s
outstanding obligations to the Fund were reduced to SDR 2.47 billion (119 percent of
quota). Indonesia’s outstanding credit would remain above 100 percent of quota until
November 2006.

•

The authorities and the Fund have continued to work closely following the expiration
of the Fund arrangement. The staff has been supportive of the authorities policy
priorities and strategies in most areas, and the majority of recent Fund policy
recommendations have been implemented (Table 1).

•

Indonesia has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, and maintains an exchange
system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international
transactions. Indonesia’s exchange rate regime is a managed float with no preannounced path for the exchange rate.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Introduction....................................................................................................................5

II.

Background ....................................................................................................................5

III.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................8

IV.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................10
Overall Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks................................................................10
Macroeconomic Policy Challenges..............................................................................13
External Competitiveness and Exchange Rate Policy .................................................15
Financial Sector Vulnerabilities and Policies ..............................................................16
Enhancing Growth Prospects and Strengthening Institutions......................................18
Other Investment Climate Reforms .............................................................................19

V.

Other Issues................................................................................................................200

VI.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................21

Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Tsunami Reconstruction Effort and the 2006 Yogyakarta Earthquake .......................24
Contingent Claims Estimates and Evolution of Indonesia's Sovereign Credit Risk....25
Corporate Sector: Financial Performance and Underlying Vulnerabilities .................26
Exchange Rate Developments and Competitiveness...................................................27
Indonesia's Public Enterprises and Fiscal Risks ..........................................................28

Figures
1.
Recent Financial Market Developments......................................................................29
2.
Financial Market Shallowness .....................................................................................30
3.
Doing Business ............................................................................................................31
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

The Authorities’ Response to Recent Fund Policy Advice .........................................32
Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06......................................................................33
Selected Vulnerability Indicators, 2002–06.................................................................34
Summary of Central Government Operations, 2004–07 .............................................35
Selected Social Indicators, 2001–04 ............................................................................36
Balance of Payments, 2002–06....................................................................................37
Monetary Survey, December 2003–December 2006...................................................38
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2004–11................................................39
Indicators of Debt Service to the Fund, 2004–11 ........................................................40

3
Annexes
I.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................41
II.
World Bank Relations..................................................................................................43
III.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................47
IV.
Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................48
V.
Medium-Term Outlook Under Alternative Assumptions and Public and
External Debt Sustainability ........................................................................................52

4
Executive Summary
•

Macroeconomic vulnerabilities have been reduced and growth reached its highest
level in nine years in 2005. Public finances have been placed on a sustainable path, with
the debt-to-GDP ratio halved during 2000–05 and projected to decline further over the
medium term. Banking sector performance has improved and corporate vulnerabilities
have been reduced. Gross international reserves have increased to record levels, enabling
Indonesia to make early repayments to the Fund.

•

However, Indonesia has lagged Asia’s most dynamic economies and unemployment
has risen. Foreign direct investment remains low compared with other Asian countries.

•

Moreover, the economy remains susceptible to shifts in investor sentiment and
occasional asset market volatility, triggered by concerns about domestic policy slippages
or developments in global financial markets.

•

In 2006, inflationary pressures are receding, but growth has slowed as a result of the
fuel price and interest rate adjustments implemented last fall to restore market
confidence. Growth is expected to pick up in the second half of the year, though there are
downside risks, notably if the tightening in global financial markets continues or
international oil prices increase further.

Key Issues and Policy Recommendations
•

Fiscal policy is appropriately geared to further reducing the public debt burden,
while supporting activity in 2006. To avoid a repeat of the spending shortfalls of 2005,
the authorities need to address spending bottlenecks and are considering extending the
fuel price cash compensation program. The implementation of a mechanism for
automatic adjustments of energy prices would depoliticize price adjustments and remove
the risk of higher subsidies.

•

Further interest rate reductions should be possible in 2006, but the pace and timing
will need to be cautious and take into account global financial market conditions.

•

Nonperforming loan problems at state banks need to be resolved quickly. A
medium-term privatization strategy should be adopted for public banks that do not have a
public policy objective.

•

The early approval of one or two key economic laws should be pursued to remove
skepticism about the implementation of the government’s impressive structural agenda.

5
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The 2006 Article IV consultation mission coincided with the first week of the
global financial market turmoil that started in mid-May. The sell-off in emerging
markets was felt significantly in Indonesia, and illustrated the country’s continued
susceptibility to shifts in investor sentiment. The authorities were concerned that despite
sound macroeconomic policies, the strong capital inflows of early 2006 might be reversed,
with implications for growth and inflation.
2.
The other main concern of the authorities was that improving macroeconomic
fundamentals were not being translated into higher living standards. Growth has
slowed in early 2006 and unemployment has been edging up. Recognizing the need to
improve the business climate and boost growth, the economic team that took office in
December 2005 has announced a comprehensive reform package, and is now focusing on
implementation.
3.
But building political consensus for reforms remains a challenge. The
segmented nature of the governing coalition suggests that strong political leadership will be
needed to ensure approval of key economic laws. Efforts to combat corruption, the signing
of the peace accord in Aceh, and the effective response to natural disasters have all
enhanced President Yudhoyono's popularity. However, approval of the government's
handling of the economy has been adversely affected by the sharp October 2005 domestic
fuel price increase despite the adoption of a comprehensive cash compensation scheme (see
Box 1 in IMF Country Report 06/85, February 2006) and efforts to reform the labor law.
4.
The authorities have recently had to deal with the consequences of the tragic
earthquake in Yogyakarta and Central Java. The earthquake has caused substantial
damage and the government is gearing up for a large-scale reconstruction effort with
assistance from donors (Box 1). Meanwhile, the reconstruction of Aceh following the
tsunami in December 2004 is proceeding, with the pace picking up in 2006.
5.

In light of the concerns raised by the authorities, the discussions focused on:

•

Macroeconomic risks stemming from the recent tightening of global liquidity and high
international oil prices, and the appropriate stance of monetary and fiscal policy in light
of these risks.

•

Policies to address the recent weakening of growth and reduce unemployment and
poverty over the medium term, in particular, the government's efforts to strengthen
financial intermediation, fiscal management, and the investment climate.
II. BACKGROUND

Over the past few years, macroeconomic indicators have improved substantially, but
Indonesia has not fully benefited from the investment and export boom experienced by some
of the region's fastest growing economies.

6

6.
Activity, macroeconomic fundamentals, and sovereign credit ratings have
strengthened (see Chart, Box 2, Tables 2 and 3).
•

•

Growth has recovered gradually and
reached its highest rate in nine years
in 2005.
Public finances have been placed on
a sustainable path, with the debt-toGDP ratio halved during 2000–05.
Non-oil revenues, though still low
by regional standards, have
increased by 2 percent of GDP
during the same period as a result of
tax administration reforms and a
broadening of the tax base (Table 4).

Public Debt, Reserves, and GDP Growth
(In percent)
200

8
Public debt/GDP
Reserves/short term debt
GDP growth (RHS)

150

6

100

4

50

2

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and Indonesian authorities.

•

Corporate profitability has improved, accompanied by a reduction in leverage and other
vulnerabilities (Box 3).

•

Bank profitability and financial soundness indicators suggest that the health of the overall
banking system has improved considerably since the crisis, though intermediation is still
lower than in other major Asian countries.

•

Following years of current account surpluses, mainly as a result of the sharp drop in
investment following the crisis, external viability has been restored. Reserves reached
record levels in mid-2006, enabling early repayments to the Fund.

7.
•

•

Notwithstanding these achievements, major challenges remain.
While output growth has been about
5 percent over the past 2–3 years (in
line with other ASEAN-4 countries),
it has been considerably lower than
in Asia’s most dynamic economies,
notably the People’s Republic of
China, India, and Vietnam (see
Chart), as well as in Indonesia before
the Asian financial crisis.
Unemployment has risen to over
10 percent in 2005, though there has
been some improvement in poverty
indicators (Table 5).

Real GDP Growth
(In percent)
15
10
5
0
-5

India
China
Vietnam

-10

Indonesia
Asean-4

-15
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook .

7

•

Foreign investment, though rising, remains low compared with regional averages (see
Chart).

•

Indonesia’s share in both world exports and intra-Asian trade remains below the 2000
level, although there was a modest improvement in 2005 driven largely by commodity
prices (see Chart). Despite an open trade regime, the share of foreign trade in the
economy declined by 9 percentage points during 2000–05 to 63 percent of GDP, in
contrast to the rising trend in most Asian countries.
Share of World Exports
(In percent)

Foreign Direct Investment
(In percent of GDP)

3

23

Asia

1.00
Indonesia (RHS)

22

2
Asia excl. China

1
0

0.95

Asia

21

0.90

20

0.85

19

-1

18
-2

0.80
Indonesia non-oil (RHS)

17

-3

Indonesia

0.75
0.70

Asia excl. China

16

-4

0.65

15
2000

2001

2002

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook .

2003

2004

2005

0.60
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics database.

8.
As discussed in earlier Article IV consultations, some key impediments to
accelerating growth need—and have started—to be addressed.
•

Long-standing weaknesses in tax and customs administration and the regulatory
environment, as well as labor market inflexibilities, which have discouraged job-creation.
The government has recently approved and begun to implement an ambitious reform
agenda to address these issues.

•

Legal uncertainty and a multitude of often conflicting regulations between central and
local governments. Efforts are underway to reform the legal system and resolve the
conflicts in regulations.

•

Aging infrastructure, partly reflecting the lack of public investment. Steps are being taken
to address this through public-private partnership projects, and an increase in
development spending is targeted.

•

Several business disputes, mostly with foreign investors, have added to the uncertainties.
The recent resolution of the dispute between ExxonMobil and Pertamina over the Cepu
oilfield has been a positive step and efforts to resolve other disputes are continuing.

9.
Sustained implementation of sound macroeconomic policies is also needed to
further reduce vulnerability and limit asset market volatility:

8
•

The experience of last August–September 2005, when investors cashed out from local
bond and equity markets, bond yields rose substantially, and the rupiah dropped sharply,
illustrated Indonesia’s susceptibility to changes in investor sentiment, caused in this case
by concerns about delays in tightening monetary policy and adjusting fuel prices.
(Figure 1). In Indonesia’s shallow asset markets, relatively modest shifts in capital flows
can generate large swings in asset prices (Figure 2).

•

More recently, the surge in portfolio inflows during October–April and their modest
reversal in May–June demonstrated Indonesia’s susceptibility to global financial
developments, as discussed in the next section.
III. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

Volatility in capital flows, and the impact of international oil prices on the
macroeconomy, have dominated economic developments in Indonesia over the past year.
•

Financial markets have been on a roller-coaster:

Jun-06

Apr-06

May-06

Mar-06

Jan-06

Feb-06

Dec-05

Oct-05

Nov-05

Sep-05

Jul-05

Aug-05

Jun-05

Apr-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Feb-05

¾ Against a background of ample
Foreigners Purchases in 2005 - 06
(Billions US$, cumulative since 2005)
global liquidity and “search for
12
yield,” capital inflows surged
10
from late-2005, after strong
Central Bank Paper Purchases
Govt Bond Purchases
8
policy actions last fall—an
Stock Purchases
6
increase of 425 basis points in
4
Bank Indonesia’s (BI’s)
benchmark policy rate and a
2
more than doubling in
0
domestic fuel prices—together
with the appointment of the
Sources: Bloomberg; and Fund staff calculations.
new economic team in
December restored market confidence.1 Cumulative inflows into the local bond
and equity markets and central bank paper exceeded $6.4 billion during
September–April (see Chart), with Indonesian corporations issuing another
$1.2 billion in foreign currency bonds. Foreign exchange reserves rose by
$12 billion during this period to $44 billion and the rupiah strengthened against
the dollar by 11 percent from January to mid-May.

¾ However, Indonesia did not escape the emerging market sell-off in May and June,
triggered by expectations of interest rate increases in major industrial countries.
The impact of the market correction on Indonesia was somewhat larger than in
other countries in the region, but was broadly in line with the relatively larger
losses in other markets that had seen higher run-ups in prices. Moreover, the
modest widening of spreads on Indonesian foreign currency debt compared with
other emerging markets reinforces the view that global rather than Indonesia
1

See IMF Country Report 06/85, February 2006 for details about last year’s financial market turbulence.

9
specific factors were at play. The authorities responded to the pressures by not
reducing interest rates in June (a decrease had been expected before the turmoil
started) and intervening, on a very limited scale, in the foreign exchange market
to smooth intra-day volatility—foreign exchange reserves remained broadly
unchanged between mid-May and late June (before the early repayment to the
Fund).
•

An inevitable side effect of the policy actions taken last fall to restore market
confidence has been a slowdown in economic activity.
¾ Although real GDP growth reached a nine-year high of 5.6 percent in 2005, the
economy had already started to slow in the second half of the year. Growth
slowed further to 4.6 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2006, down from
4.9 percent in the last quarter of 2005, as domestic demand decelerated further
due to rises in interest rates and domestic fuel prices.
¾ Net exports helped offset some of the decline in private demand in the last quarter
of 2005, as oil imports plummeted by over one-quarter in value terms. However,
the deceleration in exports in early 2006 weakened this effect. That said, the
current account remained in surplus in the first quarter of 2006 and the surplus is
expected to remain at the 2005 level of 0.3 percent of GDP for the year as a whole
(Table 6).
¾ Accelerated fiscal spending in the last quarter of 2005 also helped prop up
domestic demand, although for the year as a whole spending fell well short of the
budget, with the overall deficit at
Interest Rates and Inflation
only 0.3 percent of GDP. Data
Inflation
through May 2006 suggest that
(m/m growth, s.a.)
9
while spending has accelerated
8
7
somewhat in 2006 from the very
6
low 2005 level, the intended
5
Headline
Core
4
frontloading of expenditures to
3
boost domestic demand has not been 2
1
achieved.
0

•

Inflationary pressures have been easing.
¾ After peaking at 18 percent in
October 2005 because of the fuel
price hike, inflation has moderated,
as the tighter monetary stance
slowed domestic demand (see
Chart). Core inflation is currently
about 5 percent (three-month
annualized basis) although
year-on-year it remains high.

-1
Jan-04

Apr-04

Jul-04

Oct-04

Jan-05

Apr-05

Jul-05

Oct-05

Jan-06

Apr-06

Source: CEIC Database

Interest Rates and Inflation
(In percent)
20
18
16
CPI inflation, y/y

14
12
10
8

SBI rate, eop
Core inflation, y/y

6
4
2
0
Jan-04

Fed Funds rate, eop

Apr-04

Jul-04

Oct-04

Jan-05

Apr-05

Jul-05

Oct-05

Sources: Indonesian authorities;CEIC database; and Fund staff calculations.

Jan-06

Apr-06

10
Headline inflation is even lower and well below BI’s end-year target of
7–9 percent.
¾ With inflationary pressures continuing to abate, BI reduced its policy rate (SBI)
by 25 basis points in both May and July to 12¼ percent. BI had refrained from
lowering the rate further in June because of heightened market volatility and
concerns about the inflationary impact of the rupiah depreciation in May.
IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
In light of weakening inflationary pressures and slowing growth, the discussions
focused on the scope for an easing in monetary and fiscal policies, and the risks from
developments in international financial and oil markets. The discussions also focused on
structural policies which could enable Indonesia to attract longer-term capital inflows, boost
export and GDP growth rates to match those achieved by Asia’s most dynamic economies,
and reduce unemployment.
Overall Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks
Outlook: The authorities’ medium-term strategy aims to accelerate growth and reduce
vulnerabilities through prudent macroeconomic policies and the implementation of a reform
agenda.
•

Growth is projected to reach
5.2 percent in 2006 as the effects of
the domestic fuel price increase wear
off, interest rates decline, and budget
execution picks up. A number of
indicators, including capital goods
imports and construction activity, as
well as composite indicators
constructed in the context of a staff
study (see Charts and Chapter V of
Selected Issues paper) suggest that a
recovery in growth should begin in the
second half of the year. Over the
medium term, productivity gains from
improvements in infrastructure and
increased investment could generate
growth rates in the range of 6–
7 percent as increased domestic
demand is reinforced by improved
competitiveness and export growth
(Table 8).

Selected Economic Activity Indicators
(QoQ growth, in percent)
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10

Consumer expectations
Cement consumption
Capital goods import (US$)

-15
-20
2005Q1

2005Q2

2005Q3

2005Q4

2006Q1

2006Q2

Source: CEIC

Consumption Leading Indicator 1/
(In percent)
1.6

1.6

1.2

1.2

0.8

0.8

0.4
0.0
2002Q1

Composite
2002Q4

0.4

Consumption

2003Q3

2004Q2

2005Q1

2005Q4

0.0
2006Q3

1/ QoQ growth, seasonally adjusted. Composite index is a simple average of standarlized
growth rates for cretail sales index, consumer confidence present index, and real 1-month
SBI rate.
Source: CEIC database and Fund staff estimates.

11

•

Inflation is projected at 7 percent at end-2006, as the recovery in demand is expected to
be gradual (see also section on monetary policy). Given inflation inertia (see Chapter VI
of Selected Issues paper), BI intends to reduce inflation gradually over time, to 6 percent
in 2007, and over the medium term to about 3 percent, close to the rate prevailing in
many trading partner countries.

•

Under the medium-term fiscal framework, public debt is targeted to decline to about
30 percent of GDP by 2010, accompanied by improvements in other debt sustainability
indicators (see also Annex V for details). This would imply keeping the overall budget
deficit at under 1 percent of GDP in the medium term, underpinned by: (i) improvements
in tax administration that help compensate for lower oil and gas revenues; and (ii) lower
interest and subsidy costs, that would allow increased resources to be channeled toward
social and development spending.

•

The current account is expected to be broadly in balance in the next few years, with a
deficit projected thereafter as strong domestic demand, including investment-related
spending, leads to higher imports. However, the deficit is expected to remain modest at
around 1 percent of GDP. On the capital account, it is assumed that the market turmoil
experienced in May–June is temporary and that moderate inflows resume in the second
half of the year, though at a rate far lower than in the first quarter (the impact of possible
lower capital inflows is discussed below). Encouraged by improvements in the
investment climate, capital inflows would pick up over the medium term. With the recent
early repayments to the Fund, international reserves are expected to end the year at just
over $40 billion, and rise moderately over the medium term.

Risks: Downside risks relate to the possible further tightening in global liquidity conditions
and an increase in oil prices, as well as the lack of progress in implementing structural
reforms. The risks were discussed with the authorities in the context of illustrative scenarios,
as described below.
•

Possible further tightening of global liquidity conditions with a reversal of recent
capital inflows (about $8 billion during September–April): while such outflows should
be manageable given the recent accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, the reduced
scope for lowering domestic interest rates and some associated rupiah depreciation could
lower growth (by 0.6 percentage points compared with the baseline in 2007) and raise
inflation (by 1 percentage point). Reserves would decline to about $34 billion at end 2006
(equivalent to 110 percent of short-term debt).

•

Possible further large increase in international oil prices: given the government’s
intention to keep administered fuel prices unchanged for the time being in order not to
further undermine domestic demand, a jump in oil prices to, for example, $100 a barrel
would substantially increase fuel subsidy costs. Not only would subsidies increase as a
direct result of the increased price differential, but the larger gap between domestic fuel
prices and international oil prices could make smuggling profitable again, and raise sales
of subsidized products in Indonesia; such smuggling was widespread prior to the October

12
2005 domestic price increase. Staff estimates suggest that the overall deficit and
associated financing requirements would rise by 2 percent of GDP in 2007 compared to
the baseline;2 interest rates and inflation are projected to increase by 1 percentage point
each in 2007; and growth would be reduced by 1 percentage point.
•

Structural reforms proceed slowly: delays in implementation of the government’s key
structural measures, including approval of customs, tax and investment laws, would
further undermine investor confidence. Under this scenario, growth is projected to remain
in the 5 percent range (similar to that seen in the last few years), with unemployment
continuing to trend upward. Pressure to pursue more accommodative monetary and fiscal
policies to sustain this growth would lead to higher deficits of between 1½–2 percent of
GDP and inflation is likely to accelerate over the medium term, reflecting a slower
growth in potential output. The debt-to-GDP ratio would be modestly higher under this
scenario than in the baseline and foreign reserves would be significantly lower at about
$35 billion, making Indonesia more vulnerable to shocks. Vulnerability would increase if
the rupiah were to depreciate significantly, as both public and external debt indicators are
sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.

Authorities’ Views: The authorities broadly agreed with the staff projections for the medium
term, but they are more optimistic on near-term growth.
•

For 2006, they project growth at 5.9 percent as private demand recovers due to lower
interest rates in the second half of the year, complemented by increased fiscal spending
(see below). For 2007, growth is projected at 6.4 percent with lower interest rates and
structural reforms delivering a stronger recovery in investment and exports.

•

On the risks from possible global liquidity tightening and market volatility, the
authorities stressed that the best response was to maintain the current macroeconomic
policy mix which was geared toward further reducing vulnerabilities, together with
timely policy responses to external developments. The authorities agreed that a large
increase in international oil prices (to say $100 per barrel) could have a substantial fiscal
impact if not accompanied by domestic price increases, especially given possible
increases in domestic purchases of subsidized products as a result of smuggling.
However, they felt that increases (from current levels) in the range of $5 or $10 per
barrel—which were more likely—would not lead to an increase in smuggling and would
be manageable.

2

If no change in domestic fuel sales as a result of smuggling is assumed, a $10 per barrel increase in
international oil prices would only raise the overall deficit by 0.2 percent of GDP.

13
Macroeconomic Policy Challenges
Fiscal Policy
Outlook: Fiscal policy is expected to be suitably balanced between continued reduction of
the public debt burden over the medium term and providing support to aggregate demand in
2006.
•

The deficit target for 2006 is set at 1.2 percent of GDP to help boost domestic demand by
accommodating carryover spending from 2005, higher electricity subsidies due to the
postponement of the earlier planned tariff increase, and spending on rehabilitation of the
Yogyakarta region (Text
Central Government Fiscal Aggregates
Table).3 Budget resources are
2005
2006
2007
also expected to help finance
Prel. Act.
Proj.
Proj.
infrastructure under the
(In percent of GDP)
public-private partnership
Revenues and grants
18.1
19.1
18.8
framework and as a start
Of which: Oil and gas revenues
5.1
5.7
5.5
Rp 3 trillion (0.1 percent of
Non-oil and gas revenues
13.0
13.2
13.2
GDP) has been set aside in
Expenditure and net lending
18.5
20.3
19.7
the 2006 budget for such
Of which: Subsidies
4.4
3.3
2.3
Of which: Fuel
3.5
2.0
0.9
spending. Despite the rise in
Of which: Development expenditures
2.3
2.4
3.3
the deficit, the public debt
Of which: Transfers to regions
5.5
6.9
6.6
ratio will be reduced by
Overall balance
-0.3
-1.2
-0.9
another 6 percentage points
Sources: Data provided by the Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
to about 41 percent of GDP.

•

For 2007, the authorities are targeting a budget deficit of 0.9 percent of GDP. The target
takes into account planned reductions in corporate and personal income tax rates, and
further improvement in tax administration through the roll-out of the medium-size
taxpayers’ offices, along with a higher budget execution rate.

Risks: The government’s capacity to implement the budget and possible financing
constraints, if the external environment worsens, are the main risks.
•

In the short run, the planned fiscal stimulus may not materialize. Continued delays due to
lengthy procurement procedures, slow project implementation, and caution by managers
resulting from the government’s anti-corruption campaign have resulted in less than
15 percent of the budgeted capital spending being spent in the first five months of 2006.
Moreover, large transfers to sub-national governments, resulting from higher oil prices,
are not being spent, reflecting mostly capacity constraints, and this could further frustrate
the central government’s efforts to support growth.4

3

The deficit target of the central government is taken to represent the fiscal stance. Fiscal planning on a general
government level is impossible because of long delays in reporting by subnational governments.

4

Rp 20 trillion in deposits have been accumulated in regional development banks in the first two months of the
year with the local government surplus expected to reach 1.6 percent of GDP in 2006.

14

•

At the same time, although a large part of the financing requirement for 2006 has already
been met, the budget could face financing constraints (or at least higher funding costs) if
the current market turmoil continues and domestic bond yields continue to rise.
Moreover, further increases in international oil prices would raise financing requirements
to meet increased fuel subsidy costs, as discussed above.

Authorities’ views: Steps are being taken for fiscal policy to support growth.
•

The authorities agreed that so far this year fiscal policy had not been supportive of
growth and that efforts to provide a stimulus had not been successful. Efforts are
underway to address spending bottlenecks by simplifying procurement guidelines and
budget execution procedures.

•

In addition, measures to prevent the further erosion of consumer purchasing power are
being taken. First, subsidized fuel and electricity prices will not be adjusted in 2006, as
increases could further undermine weak demand and the inflation outlook. Second, the
extension of the fuel cash compensation program (that is set to expire in the third quarter)
to more low-income families by expanding eligibility for cash transfers, as well as linking
transfers to education and health indicators, is being considered.

•

The authorities did not see a problem in financing the budget, short of major changes in
investors’ risk appetite, given that recent bond issues have been oversubscribed.

Monetary policy
Outlook: With inflationary pressures subdued, further cuts in interest rates should be
possible.
•

Inflation at the end of 2006 is projected to be near the lower end of BI’s 7–9 percent
target range. The depreciation of the rupiah in May/June will put some upward pressure
on prices, but these pressures should not raise underlying inflation substantially, given
still weak domestic demand and the delay in the planned increase in domestic electricity
prices.

•

The downward trend in inflation has created room for reducing the policy rate. A
cautious approach to further reduction will help maintain BI’s credibility, especially
given the recent shift out of emerging market assets.

Risks: Downside risks relate to unfavorable global liquidity and oil price developments, as
noted above.
•

Higher international interest rates and/or an excessively rapid decline of domestic rates,
would put additional pressure on the rupiah, and given the importance of the exchange
rate as a channel of transmission, undermine the achievement of the inflation target.

15
•

If a substantial increase in international oil prices were to occur, it may at least partly
need to be passed on to the consumer.

Authorities’ views: BI is committed to maintaining price stability in the context of the
inflation-targeting framework.
•

BI reiterated its commitment to meeting the inflation target in 2006 and gradually
reducing inflation thereafter. BI officials agreed that any further reduction in interest rates
would have to take into account developments in international financial markets, as an
excessively rapid decline in domestic rates could exacerbate pressures on financial
markets and undermine the credibility of monetary policy.

•

The authorities were pleased that, following the adoption of the new inflation-targeting
framework and the switch from base money to the 30-day SBI rate as the key
intermediate target, markets have gradually focused on this rate to assess the monetary
policy stance. BI has been making efforts to improve clarity and consistency in
statements by its officials when signaling its policy intentions.

External Competitiveness and Exchange Rate Policy
Background: The rupiah has shown
considerable volatility in both nominal and
real terms over the past year.
•

After coming under pressure in August
(volatility peaked at 22 percent),5 the
rupiah appreciated strongly in the wake
of higher domestic interest rates and
resulting capital inflows (see Chart). By
early May 2006, the real effective
exchange rate (REER) had reached its
strongest level in five years, which gave
rise to concerns about competitiveness,
before the global market correction
caused it to depreciate and volatility to
again increase.

Exchange Rate Developments
8400

140
REER,
Jan.3, 2005 = 100

130

8800

IDR/US$ (RHS)

120

9200

110

9600

100

NEER,
Jan. 3, 2005 = 100

10000

90

10400

80

10800

Jan-05 Feb-05 Apr-05 Jun-05 Aug-05 Oct-05 Dec-05 Jan-06 Mar-06 May-06
Sources: Bloomberg and Fund staff calculations.

Exchange Rate Volatility and Reserve Assets

25

48

Annualized Volatility (%)

20

44

15

40
Reserve Assets (bill. US$, RHS)

•

5

Reserves have increased steadily since
their low point in September, reflecting
stronger oil and gas receipts, an
international bond issue, and some
foreign exchange intervention.

10

36

5

32

0
Dec-04

28
Apr-05

Aug-05

Sources: Bloommberg and Fund staff calculations.

Defined as the standard deviation of daily percentage (log) changes, annualized.

Dec-05

Apr-06

16
Risks: Export performance has been modest, but the rupiah does not appear to be out of line
with its estimated equilibrium value.
•

Moderately declining export shares in recent years, decelerating exports in early 2006,
and the cumulative lack of investment in the export sector suggest that, in the absence of
significant improvements in structural policies, Indonesia may face competitiveness
challenges going forward.

•

Real effective exchange rate indicators give a mixed picture, but econometric analysis of
Indonesia’s equilibrium exchange rate suggests that the rupiah may still be somewhat
undervalued (Box 4).

•

As noted in earlier Article IV reports, the apparent conflict between the results of the
econometric analysis and modest export performance may arise because Indonesia’s
equilibrium exchange rate moves in line with commodity prices, which have recently
risen and helped to maintain favorable macroeconomic balances.

Authorities’ views: There was limited scope for enhancing competitiveness through
macroeconomic policies.
•

Some leaders of the business community were concerned that the recent real appreciation
of the rupiah, as well as its volatility, had adversely affected exports, especially in the
manufacturing sector. These concerns have eased with the rupiah’s recent depreciation.
While mindful of competitiveness issues, BI officials felt that even at its peak in
mid-May, the rupiah had not reached the point of becoming overvalued.

•

BI officials also noted that there is limited scope for macroeconomic policy to address the
level of the real exchange rate in the context of the inflation-targeting framework. BI’s
policy is to intervene only to smooth fluctuations and limit volatility in the rupiah.
Structural reforms are needed to improve competitiveness.

Financial Sector Vulnerabilities and Policies
Background: Since the crisis, Indonesia has made progress toward establishing a strong and
Banking Indicators
competitive private banking sector,
(In percent)
although the two largest state banks
5
30
have still weak governance and large
Credit growth (LHS)
Return on assets
4
nonperforming loans (NPLs).
25
•

Banking sector performance
improved steadily through 2004
when profitability peaked and NPLs
were at their lowest level. However,
banks’ return on assets declined
from 3.3 percent in 2004 to
2.7 percent in 2005, reflecting
largely reduced net interest margins,

3
20
2
15

10
Jan-04

1
0
Jul-04

Source: Bank Indonesia.

Jan-05

Jul-05

Jan-06

17
though returns recovered again in early 2006 despite slowing credit growth. The average
capital adequacy ratio stood at about 20 percent at end-2005. Strengthened corporate
sector balance sheets, including reduced reliance on external financing, have also reduced
risks to banks (see Chapter II of Selected Issues paper).
•

NPLs at the two largest state-owned banks rose to an average of over 20 percent of
assets, respectively, at end-2005. This compares with an average of 3.4 percent for
private banks. As a result, lending and profitability at these two banks has declined
sharply. On July 5, the authorities released a financial sector package that, among other
things, allows state banks to give haircuts on loan principal.6 In addition, governance and
internal controls are weak at these banks, and private shareholders do not have voting
rights.

•

On the institutional side, bank supervision has improved to bring it closer to Basle
standards, and risk-based supervision has been introduced. The blanket guarantee
scheme, introduced in the aftermath of the crisis, has been replaced by a financial safety
net and a limited deposit guarantee scheme.

Risks: The overall banking sector is resilient to most risks, but NPLs at state banks and the
slowing economy pose challenges going forward.
•

Stress tests indicate that the overall banking sector is resilient to interest rate, exchange
rate, liquidity, and credit risks.7

•

The increase in NPLs at the two largest state-owned banks, if left unresolved, could pose
problems, especially as these two banks constitute almost one-third of the banking sector.

•

At private banks, risks are more limited, though aggressive competition for consumer and
business lending may have led to weaker underwriting standards (albeit accompanied by
higher interest rates charged on riskier loans). The increase in restructured loans at
private banks suggests that some consumer loans already have had to be restructured.

Authorities’ views: Problems at state banks need to be addressed, while supervision
continues to be strengthened.
•

6
7

The seriousness of the NPL problems at the two largest state-owned banks was
recognized. A number of options to resolve these loans will be considered. The
privatization of the two major state banks is not politically feasible at this stage. The
authorities noted that a third state bank had played a useful public policy role by
providing microfinance in remote areas.

Details will be provided in a forthcoming Staff Supplement.

Sensitivity analysis performed by staff on the 15 largest banks individually and collectively (63 percent of
system assets) suggest that most of the banks could readily withstand shocks arising from a 40 percent
depreciation of the rupiah, a 400 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve, a downgrading of 50 percent of the
loan portfolio, and a withdrawal of 15 percent of deposits.

18

•

In addition, BI is continuing to enhance bank supervision, including through the further
development of a risk-based approach and improving coordination between on-site and
off-site supervision.

Enhancing Growth Prospects and Strengthening Institutions
The new economic team has stepped up efforts to improve the business climate and is taking
a comprehensive approach to address long-standing structural problems and strengthen
public institutions.
Fiscal Reforms
Background: A key element of the reform agenda is the development of fiscal institutions
that will improve governance and support private sector development.
•

Pilot tax offices have been set up for large, medium, and small tax payers over the past
few years but continued inefficiency and governance problems at the tax collection
department are seen as a major impediment to doing business.

•

A sound legal and administrative framework to improve transparency (as noted in the
accompanying findings of the ROSC mission) has been established but reporting is weak.
Improvements are needed in the following areas to assess fiscal risks: (i) monitoring of
State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) operations,8 (ii) reporting of quasi-fiscal and extra
budgetary activities, such as foundations; and (iii) monitoring contingent liabilities.

•

The existing fiscal decentralization framework makes fiscal management difficult due to
a number of factors, including: (i) increased revenue-shares for local governments have
not been accompanied by higher expenditure responsibilities; (ii) expenditure
assignments remain vague; and (iii) subnational fiscal reporting is incomplete and
untimely.

•

Public expenditure management has improved following the restructuring of the Ministry
of Finance and the adoption of the laws on state finances, treasury, and audit. However,
the absence of a Single Treasury Account and the existence of a multitude of bank
accounts outside the control of the Ministry of Finance undermines fiscal management.

Recent progress:
•

8

A revised tax package aimed at addressing the business community’s concerns has been
submitted to Parliament. While some provisions are still missing,9 the most recent
proposals improve taxpayers’ safeguards by: (i) restricting the rules on arrests/detainment
of taxpayers, and (ii) modifying the procedures on the objection process. At the same

See also Chapter IV of Selected Issues paper and Box 5 for a discussion of fiscal risks related to public
enterprises.
9
Notably those granting standard enforcement powers to the tax agency.

19
time, a new management team at the tax department is pushing for quick implementation
of the modernization strategy, including an evaluation of existing pilot tax offices.
•

The Ministry of Finance is introducing a fiscal policy office with the principal task of
assessing fiscal risks, including those stemming from SOEs (Box 5), and a risk
management unit has been established to monitor contingent liabilities, including those
arising from public-private partnerships.

•

In late 2005, a number of regulations aimed at improving revenue-sharing mechanisms
and financial reporting by regional governments were issued. A revised regulation on
expenditure assignments is expected to be issued in 2006.

•

A census of commercial bank accounts has been conducted and a new regulation on cash
management, which would help in establishing a Single Treasury Account, is expected to
be approved soon.

Authorities’ views:
•

The authorities are hopeful that the tax package will be approved by Parliament by endyear.

•

They also expect the implementation of revised decentralization regulations to improve
the regional reporting system, including by applying sanctions to non-compliant regions.

•

A comprehensive census of all military foundations will be conducted, with a view
toward expanding it to other off-budget foundations.

Other Investment Climate Reforms
Background: The government has adopted a time-bound plan to address weaknesses in the
business climate (Figure 3), several of which have been on the policy agenda for some time
but have been either delayed or implemented in a way that has not fully resolved the
underlying problems.
•

The new economic team unveiled a package of reforms, developed in consultation with
local and foreign investors—the Policy Package for Improvement in the Investment
Climate targets—which sets out a list of time-bound measures to remove obstacles to
investment and boost growth, with clear delineation of responsibility between different
ministries to establish accountability. Key areas are:
¾ Facilitating investment by streamlining procedures to issue new business licenses
and giving equal treatment to foreign and domestic investors.
¾ Simplifying customs procedures.

20
¾ Revising the Labor Law to increase the role of employer-employee negotiations
in wage-setting; modify severance pay and outsourcing regulations; and ease
procedures for foreigners to work in Indonesia.
Recent Progress:
•

A draft Investment Law has been submitted to Parliament and implementing regulations
are being prepared.

•

A draft Labor Law modifying several provisions, most notably those relating to
severance pay, outsourcing, and minimum wage-setting, was prepared by the Ministry of
Labor. However, it has had to be put on hold due to widespread protests by labor unions
in early 2006 ahead of its submission to Parliament.

Authorities’ views:
•

Preliminary indications suggest that there is support in Parliament for the draft
Investment Law. The authorities are optimistic that it will be approved by year-end.

•

With regard to the labor issues, the President has asked the business community and labor
unions to discuss directly possible changes to the framework for business-labor relations,
and make recommendations. The authorities are hopeful that some progress toward
reaching an agreement can be made before the end of the year, and have noted that some
changes could be made through revisions in regulations.
V. OTHER ISSUES

•

Capacity to Repay the Fund: With the early repayment of SDR 2.55 billion completed
at end-June, prospective debt service to the Fund has dropped significantly, and is
projected to amount to less than 1.5 percent of exports of goods and services over the
next two years (Table 9). Under the revised schedule, Indonesia will complete repayment
by 2008, two years ahead of schedule, though payments may be accelerated further, if
circumstances permit.

•

FSAP: The authorities reiterated their interest in an FSAP, but did not want to commit to
a specific timetable, indicating that this would depend on completion of the ongoing
reforms aimed at strengthening the banking system.

•

Data Issues: Indonesia subscribes to the SDDS, although data weaknesses remain,
especially in national accounts and sub-national government statistics. The authorities are
making efforts to implement the recommendations provided in the context of the statistics
ROSC last year.

21
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
10.
Despite security risks and some major natural disasters, Indonesia has
continued to make steady economic progress in recent years. Growth has recovered and
sovereign creditworthiness has improved. Strides have been made in establishing a
competitive banking system. The current government is making a serious attempt to tackle
corruption and improve governance. The authorities have a sound medium-term
macroeconomic policy framework in place, as well as an impressive reform agenda, that
should help to accelerate growth and reduce vulnerabilities.
11.
Recent sound macroeconomic management has calmed inflationary pressures,
though financial markets remain volatile. Sharp increases in domestic fuel prices and
interest rates in the fall of 2005 to address rising subsidy costs and inflationary pressures
restored market confidence and triggered large portfolio inflows. However, these inflows
also made Indonesia more vulnerable to global financial developments. Indeed,
expectations of further interest rate rises in major industrial countries in May 2006
triggered a limited reversal of the inflows and considerable market volatility.
12.
In the short term, activity should regain momentum but there are downside
risks. A recovery in activity depends on global growth not being affected substantially by
recent financial market turmoil and interest rate increases, and that the latter do not prevent
a further easing in domestic interest rates. The projected recovery also assumes that the
government succeeds in accelerating spending and that implementation of structural
reforms begins to restore investor confidence.
13.
There is scope for fiscal policy to support activity in 2006, while still firmly
pursuing reduction of the public debt burden over the medium term. In this context,
overall deficit targets of 1.2 percent and 0.9 percent of GDP in 2006 and 2007,
respectively, are appropriate. To avoid the spending shortfalls of 2005, staff supports the
government’s intention to remove spending bottlenecks and to extend the fuel price cash
compensation program. While recognizing the difficulties of raising energy prices at a time
of weak demand, staff recommends the implementation of a mechanism for automatic
adjustments of energy prices to depoliticize fuel price adjustments and remove the risk of
higher subsidies. Indonesia’s 2006 financing requirements are being successfully met so
far, but the current financial turmoil calls for domestic and international bond markets to be
monitored closely to ensure that the remaining financing requirements can be met.
14.
Further interest rate reductions should be possible in 2006, though the pace
and timing will need to be cautious and take into account global market conditions.
Inflation has been trending down and still weak demand should limit the impact of the
recent depreciation of the rupiah on price pressures. However, BI needs to be careful that
rate decreases do not undermine its credibility, all the more given the recent volatility and
possible further interest rate increases abroad. The clarity and consistency of statements by
BI officials when signaling the central bank’s policy intentions has improved and is
essential to maintaining credibility.

22
15.
Standard real exchange rate indicators and econometric analysis do not
suggest that the rupiah is significantly out of line with fundamentals. While export
performance has been modest, this problem needs to be addressed through structural
measures that reduce costs and enhance productivity. BI appropriately took advantage of
the rupiah appreciation earlier in the year to enhance reserve coverage. Staff supports BI’s
policy of intervening symmetrically to smooth fluctuations in the exchange market and
limit volatility in the rupiah, which tends to undermine investor confidence.
16.
The authorities have done much to reduce macroeconomic vulnerabilities in
recent years. Most vulnerability indicators show improvements. Nevertheless, financial
markets continue to experience bouts of volatility, triggered by either global developments
or policy slippages, and exacerbated by the shallowness of domestic markets. The strong
capital inflows experienced in early 2006 have heightened the risk of a sudden reversal, as
demonstrated by market turmoil in May/June. Increased foreign exchange reserves should
help the authorities to cope with any additional outflows and volatility in the foreign
exchange market. Timely policy responses are also essential. Implementation of the
policies envisaged under the authorities’ medium-term macroeconomic framework should
help reduce vulnerabilities further, as will the reform of state banks and the improvement of
the business climate to encourage investment.
17.
The two largest state banks represent the major vulnerability in the banking
sector. In these banks, NPLs are high and governance is weak. On the other hand, private
banks are well capitalized, and seem to have weathered well the recent weakness in the
economy and rising interest rates. Staff welcomes that state banks will be provided
authority to undertake haircuts and recommends that the NPL problem be resolved
promptly, as delays could further erode bank capital. Medium-term privatization strategies
should be adopted for public banks that do not have a clear public policy objective. In the
meantime, governance could be improved by allowing private shareholders to participate in
their management. As regards private banks, supervisors will need to remain vigilant to a
deterioration in credit quality. Staff encourages the authorities to participate in an FSAP, as
this could help to identify areas for further improvement in the financial system.
18.
The government is proceeding on a broad range of fiscal reforms. Adoption of
the tax package now before Parliament, along with modernization of the tax department,
will help enhance revenue collection while restoring investor confidence. Staff supports the
government’s recent agreement with the business community on amending the tax law and
making it more taxpayer friendly. The government’s intention to better manage potential
risks stemming from the operations of public enterprise and private-public partnerships is
welcome.
19.
To improve the business climate and boost growth, the government has
prepared an impressive reform agenda. Given the business community’s concerns about
implementation, some major early reform successes are needed to increase confidence that
the entire package will be implemented. For example, the customs, investment, and tax
laws should not be too contentious and early approval of at least one or two of them should
be pursued, which apart from the signaling effect would also bring immediate benefits for
trade and investment.

23
20.
Staff supports the authorities’ intention to press ahead with the preparation of
a balanced framework for labor-business relations, despite the political difficulties.
The new framework needs to protect the rights of workers and be more business friendly.
More flexible labor markets will help Indonesia become more competitive vis-à-vis
neighboring countries and should encourage employers to make hiring decisions more
freely.
21.
In sum, the authorities need to maintain sound macroeconomic policies, while
implementing more forcefully structural reforms. Without this, Indonesia could be
caught in a circle of faltering growth and macroeconomic volatility, with pressures for
more populist economic policies becoming more difficult to resist. Strong political
leadership is now needed to implement structural reforms promptly, especially to guide key
laws through Parliament. With elections still three years away, and relatively favorable
short-term economic prospects, this is an opportune time to press ahead with reforms.
22.
It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Indonesia take
place on the standard 12-month cycle.

24
Box 1. Tsunami Reconstruction Effort and the 2006 Yogyakarta Earthquake
Tsunami Reconstruction Effort
The pace of reconstruction in the tsunami-affected areas has picked up markedly in
recent months. The government’s reconstruction agency estimates that, as of February 2006,
$4.7 billion has been allocated to specific projects (covering 80 percent of estimated needs) and
$1.5 billion disbursed, with the rate of disbursement increasing substantially, to about
$200 million per month in early 2006. The bulk of the funds has gone towards housing and the
health and education sectors. One third of the destroyed houses and 90 percent of damaged
health facilities have been rebuilt. If momentum continues, more than half of reconstruction
needs could be met by the end of the year.
Indicator
Housing
Schools
Teachers
Health facilities
Roads
Bridges
Fishing boats

Selected Progress Indicators (April 2006)
Needs
Recovery
120,000 units
42,000 units
2,006 units
524 units
2,500 died
2,430 replacements
127 units
113 unit
3,000 Km
490 Km
120
41
7,000 units
6,160 units

Progress
35%
26%
96%
89%
16%
34%
88%

Source: Aceh and Nias Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Agency.

The 2006 Yogyakarta Earthquake
The earthquake in Yogyakarta and Central Java inflicted a huge death toll and
significant damage, but is likely to have limited economic and fiscal impact at the national
level. The death toll has reached about 5,700 with another 38,000 people injured. Preliminary
estimates put reconstruction costs at about $2.8 billion (0.7 percent of GDP), about one third of
the Tsunami reconstruction costs, with damage concentrated in private housing and with
comparably smaller damage in the social and infrastructure sectors. Despite the magnitude of
the human toll and the economic damage, the economic and fiscal impact at the national level
is likely to be modest. The Yogyakarta region accounts for a little more than 1 percent of the
country’s GDP and most of the infrastructure of the region has remained intact. On the fiscal
side, the government has committed Rp 8 trillion (about 0.3 percent of GDP), including
immediate cash transfers to the affected population. The authorities expect to receive another
$300 million from donors.
Yogyakarta Earthquake Damages
(as of June 12, 2006)
Dead
5,722
Injured
37,924
Homes heavily damaged or destroyed
294,425
Source: Provincial Coordinating Body for Disaster Management.

25
Box 2. Contingent Claims Estimates and Evolution of Indonesia’s Sovereign Credit Risk
Indonesia’s sovereign credit risk has improved markedly over the past five years, in line with improving
fundamentals and favorable market conditions. Declining debt levels, higher reserve coverage, improvements
in financial sector health, and favorable balance of payments developments have all contributed to a reduction in
spreads on Indonesian debt (see Chart). Rating agencies have all upgraded Indonesian debt (see Chart), in line
with declining spreads on emerging market debt more generally (see Chart).
Credit Ratings 1/

Macroeconomic Fundamentals
1.0

BB+ 11

Public Debt to GDP

BB-

0.5

NPL to Loans

ST Debt to
Reserves

0.0

13

B

15

CCC+
2001
2003
2005
External Debt to GDP

17

CCC19
Mar-01

Nov-02

Jul-04

Mar-06

1/ Average of Moody's, S&P, and Fitch Ratings, using S&P scale.
Source: Bloomberg.

Source: Fund staff calculations.

Sovereign Default Probability
(1-Year Risk-Neutral)

Credit Spreads
(Basis points)

10

500
IDN Spreads
EMBIG Spreads

400

8
6

300

4
200

2

100
May-04

Oct-04

Mar-05

Jul-05

Dec-05

May-06

0
Dec-99

Dec-00

Dec-01

Dec-02

Dec-03

Dec-04

Dec-05

Source: Fund staff calculations.

Source: Bloomberg.

Bank Default Probability and Assets Distribution 1/
(In percent)

Expected Banking Sector Losses 1/
(1 year horizon, in millions of US$)

100

600

Cummulative share of assets

800

Private
State

400
200

80
60

2005
2004
2003

40
20
0
0

0
Mar-01

Dec-01

Sep-02

Jun-03

Source: Fund staff calculations.
1/ Sample of 9 private and 3 public banks.

Mar-04

Dec-04

Sep-05

20

40

60

80

Default probability
Source: Fund staff calculations.
1/ Sample of 9 private and 3 public banks.

A variety of risk-adjusted balance sheet indicators, compiled using the contingent claims approach,1
confirm the improving outlook for sovereign credit risk. Default probabilities for the sovereign have declined
steadily since 2001, leading to a decline in spreads (see Chart). For the banking system, default probabilities for
12 of the largest banks have all declined steadily since 2001, leading to a reduction in expected losses (see
Chart). The distribution of risks in the banking system has also improved steadily since 2003, with the riskiest
banks accounting for a progressively smaller share of banking assets (see Chart).
__________________
1

The contingent claims approach uses option pricing formulae to infer asset values and probabilities of default. See Chapter
III of Selected Issues paper for further details.

26
Box 3. Corporate Sector: Financial Performance and Underlying Vulnerabilities
The corporate sector in Indonesia has been recovering from its weak financial situation following the financial crisis of
1997–98. Based on a sample of nonfinancial listed companies, indicators show declining leverage; strengthened capacity to
repay obligations, especially for larger firms; and improved profitability accompanying the overall improvement in
macroeconomic conditions of recent years (see Chart).
Corporate Financing Composition
The decline in leverage through 2004 is broadly in line
(In billions of US$)
with regional standards. Currency mismatches on bank
70
lending to the corporate sector have also declined
Domestic bank loan
External debt
Corporate bonds
NFCS Stock mkt cap
substantially. Corporate bond financing, although still
60
moderate, has doubled in the last four years, reaching
50
$6 billion in 2005.
40

The recent improvement in corporate financial
indicators has taken place in the context of improved
corporate governance regulations and practices (see
Chart). Widespread bank-corporate ownership ties that
had undermined governance were broken after the crisis
as a result of bank restructuring and the removal of
restrictions to bank ownership structure. Financial
reporting has become more transparent following the
adoption of basic international financial reporting
standards. The excessive degree of ownership
concentration observed prior to the crisis—when
10 families controlled more than 50 percent of large
firm assets—has moderated significantly.
Improvements in the corporate governance environment
have also been helped by better banking regulation and
supervision and by the government’s ongoing anticorruption drive.
At the same time, however, the composition of
corporate financing also reflects underlying
vulnerabilities. First, the number of listed companies
has increased very slowly from 269 to 279 between
2001–05, partly explained by the reluctance of nonlisted firms to comply with more stringent governance
requirements. Second, bank lending has again become
the main source of corporate financing in 2005, for the
first time since the crisis, in the face of modest stock
market capitalization, a reduction of external
borrowing, and still limited resort to corporate bond
financing. Third, the availability of bank financing to
the domestic traditional corporate sector—defined as
those companies that survived the 1997–98 crisis—has
remained limited, since increased caution in bank
lending decisions following improvements in banking
regulation and supervision and increased risk aversion
has become incompatible with uncertainties regarding
the effectiveness of domestic courts to ensure the full
exercise of creditor rights if need arises.

30
20
10
0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sources: Indonesian authorities; CEIC Database; and Fund staff calculations.

Corporate Financial Indicators
(In percent)
18

450

16

400

14

350

12

300

10

250

8

200
150

6
4

100

ROA
Distance to default
Debt to equity (RHS)

2

50
0

0
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Sources: IMF, Corporate Vulnerability database and Fund staff calculations.

Leverage and Liquidity Ratio by Ownership
(In percent)
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
-100
-200

2000

2005

Debt to Equity
Interest Coverage Ratio

Indonesia
Corp

Foreign Corp

Widely
held/Public

Indonesia
Corp

Foreign Corp

Widely
held/Public

Partly as a result of the above developments,
Source: Worldscope database.
traditional corporate groups appear to be in a
relatively more difficult financial situation to face the ongoing slowdown in economic activity. Recent information for the
top 100 listed companies through 2005 show the less benign financial situation of domestic traditional corporate groups relative
to the rest of the corporate sector. While for the sample as a whole, financial trends show continuous de-leveraging, higher
preference for liquidity and declining profitability, firms belonging to traditional corporate groups show higher-than-average
leveraging (due to long-unsettled obligations); lower liquidity, and slightly lower profitability (see Chart).

27
Box 4. Exchange Rate Developments and Competitiveness
Developments in Fundamentals: Measures of competitiveness based on the CPI and unit labor costs (ULC) both
show continued real appreciation since early 2001, with ULC rising more rapidly than the CPI-based measure (see
Chart).1 The REER (CPI-based) is still around 5 percent below its pre-crisis levels.
Fund staff estimates using the adjusted PPP approach suggest that the appreciation of the REER in 2005 has
brought it close to its estimated long-run equilibrium value (see Chart). This method relates the REER to
productivity developments, commodity terms of trade, and net foreign assets for a panel of 39 countries. At the end
of 2005, the REER was estimated to be between 13 percent and 42 percent below its long-run equilibrium value
(27 percent ± 1 standard deviation). Since then the REER and the equilibrium exchange rate have continued to
appreciate, supported by stronger commodity prices, current account surpluses, and continuing high domestic
interest rates (see Chart). Sustainability of the external position does not appear to be a problem, with small but
declining current account surpluses likely to give way to moderate but sustainable deficits over the medium term, as
external debt ratios continue to improve.
Alternative Measures of The REER
(Jan. 1995 = 100)

Long-Run Equilibrium Exchange Rate
(Jan. 1980 = 100)
140

140

150

100

100

Long Run Equilibrium ER

60

REER: CPI Based

60

20

Source: Fund staff calculations.

Trade Share Developments
(In percent)
3.0

15
14

IDN share of its top 15 export markets

13
12

Emerging Asia share of
World Exports (RHS)

1.0

11
10

IDN share of World Exports

0.0
2000
2001
2002
Source: Direction of Trade database.

9
2003

2004

2005

90
Dec-04

140

60
Total

Apr-05

Aug-05

Dec-05

Apr-06

Export Volumes and Partner Country Demand
(Index 2000 = 100)

130

40

2.0

Real Commodity Prices
REER

Source: Fund staff calculations.

Growth in Export Values
(Y/Y growth, in percent )
50

110
100

0
Jan-80 Jan-84 Jan-88 Jan-92 Jan-96 Jan-00 Jan-04

0
Jan-95 Jul-96 Jan-98 Jul-99 Jan-01 Jul-02 Jan-04 Jul-05

1.5

REER

20

REER: ULC Based

130
120

40

40

Long Run Equilibrium ER

140

80

80

0.5

160

120

120

2.5

Development of Fundamentals in 2005
170

30

120

Trading Partner Import Volumes

20
10

110

0
-10

Non-oil and gas

100

Indonesia Export Volume

-20
-30
Dec-99

Dec-01

Source: CEIC database.

Dec-03

Dec-05

90
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Sources: Direction of Trade database and Fund staff calculations.

Trade performance: Indonesia’s declining trade shares were reversed modestly in 2005 on the strength of surging
commodity prices and stronger export volumes (see Chart). The modest export performance through 2004 reflects
the dearth of investment in export-oriented industries since the crisis, with cumulative investment during 2000–05
at around half of the level prior to the crisis, concentrated in industries with the lowest share of overall exports. As a
result, Indonesia’s export volumes have remained weak, and have not fully capitalized on surging import demand
from its main trading partners. Recent data show steadily decelerating export growth rates (see Chart).
___________________
1

ULC is based on manufactured output of the small formal sector, so it is a partial indicator that may not be
representative of broader trends in labor costs.

28
Box 5. Indonesia’s Public Enterprises and Fiscal Risks1

A preliminary assessment of fiscal risks for Indonesia’s public enterprises, with a
particular emphasis on the largest State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), was undertaken
using the criteria developed by the Fund’s Fiscal Affairs Department (see Public
Investment and Fiscal Policy – Lessons from the Pilot Country Studies, www.imf.org).
The five areas of risk examined are as follows:
•

Managerial independence: While Boards of Directors are largely free to define
employment and compensation policies, the government sets prices in the energy
and transport sectors.

•

Relations with the government: All SOEs are subject to the same taxes as private
firms. Delays and shortfalls in subsidy payments to state-owned oil and electricity
companies have led to some inter-enterprise arrears and quasi-fiscal operations.

•

Transparency and governance: Law 19/2003 provides regulations on audit
committees and compulsory audits of financial statements. However, annual reports
are not available for all companies (24 out of 151 SOEs still have not had their
2004 financial accounts audited).

•

Financial conditions and sustainability: While financial conditions of SOEs vary
by sector, overall profit transfers to the central government have been about
0.3 percent of GDP in the last four years and income tax payments have been
rising. Most SOEs are not leveraged, as reflected in relatively low debt ratios.

•

Other factors affecting risks: Some SOEs need to introduce a foreign risk
management strategy to hedge currency fluctuations, as a large part of input costs
are in foreign exchange.

Overall, the solid financial health of the public enterprise sector and the sound
corporate governance framework limit short-run fiscal risks. However, continuing
losses in some enterprises (such as the electricity company) will have to be addressed
to avoid draining SOE reserves, allow investment plans to go ahead as scheduled, and
increase profit transfers to the government.
__________________________
1
See Chapter IV of Selected Issues paper for more details.

29
Figure 1. Recent Financial Market Developments
155

125

Stock Market Index
(Local currency, Jan. 3, 2005 = 100)

145

120

Exchange Rates
(National currency/US$, Jan.3, 2005 = 100)
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand

115

135

MSCI Asia Pacific excl. Japan
Jakarta Composite Index

110

125
105
115

100

105

95

95
Jan-05
620

Apr-05

Jul-05

Oct-05

Feb-06

May-06

90
Jan-05

May-05

Sep-05

Jan-06

May-06

20

EMBI Global
(Stripped spreads, bps)

Government Bonds Yield
(In percent, 10-Year Bonds)

18

520

16

Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
Composite

420

14
12

320

10

Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand

8

220

6

120

4

20
Jan-05

May-05

Sep-05

Jan-06

May-06

2
Jan-05

Apr-05

Changes in Stock Market Indices
(In percent, since end of 2005)

Jul-05

Oct-05

Feb-06

May-06

Exchange Rate Changes
(US$/NC, in percent, since end of 2005)
Brazil

Brazil

Colombia

Colombia
India

27-Jun-06

India

Indonesia

11-May-06

Indonesia

Korea

Korea

Malaysia

Malaysia

Mexico

Mexico

Philippines

Philippines

Thailand

Thailand

Turkey

Turkey
-25

-15

Source: Bloomberg.

-5

5

15

25

35

27-Jun-06
11-May-06

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

30
Figure 2. Financial Market Shallowness
200

35

Foreign Currency Debt Markets
(In percent of GDP)

30

175

Local Currency Debt Markets
(In percent of GDP)

150

25

125

20
100

15

Govt

Corp

Fin Inst

75

10

50

5

25

0
C
hi
na
Ja
p
a
In
do n
ne
s
Vi ia
et
na
Th m
ai
la
nd
Ko
re
H
on Ma a
l
a
g
Ko ysi
ng a
SA
Si
ng R
ap
Ph
o
ilip re
pi
ne
s

0

60

50

ia
m
es
na
nd AR ore rea ysia pan
na nes Chi pin aila
S
t
ap Ko ala
Ja
e
ip Th
l
ng ing
i
Vi Indo
M
o
h
S
K
P
ng
Ho

600

Annual Bond Market
(Turnover Ratio)

40

500

Equity Market Capitalization
(In percent to GDP)

400

30

300
Corp Bonds
200

0

0
C
hi
na
In
do
ne
si
Th a
ai
la
nd

100

In
do
ne
si
a
Th
ai
la
nd
C
hi
na
1/
M
al
ay
si
a
Si
ng
ap
or
e
Ko
re
a
H
J
ap
on
an
gk
on
g
SA
R

10

Ja
Ph pan
ilip
pi
ne
s
M
al
ay
si
Si
a
ng
H
ap
on
o
gk
on re
g
SA
R

Govt Bonds

Ko
re
a

20

1/ 2004 data.
Sources: CEIC Database; Asian Bond Online; IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and Fund staff
calculations.

31
Figure 3. Doing Business

Indonesia. Key Governance Indicators, 2004
(Percentage of countries that are below Indonesia)
Rigidity of
Employment
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Time to Export

Control of
Corruption
East Asia Region

Starting a
business

Indonesia
Rule of Law

Investor
Protection

Taxes

Regulatory
Quality

Indonesia
East Asia and Pacific
ASEAN-4

Government
Effectiveness

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Indonesia. Doing Business Indicators
100

Regulatory Quality (2004)
(Percentage of countries below the selected
country)

90
80

Hours required to
enforce contracts

70
Hours required to
pay taxes

60
50
40

Difficulty firing
index

East Asia and Pacific
Indonesia

30
20
Days required to
start a business

10

a
In
di

a

na
hi
C

es
i

do
n

ne
s
In

illi
pi

Ph

ai
la
nd

ys
ia

Th

a
Ko
re

al
a
M

Si

ng
ap

or
e

0

Source: World Bank, Cost of Doing Business , 2005

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

32
Table 1. The Authorities’ Response to Recent Fund Policy Advice
Advice from the 2005 Article IV Discussions
Actions Taken
Monetary and Fiscal policy
BI increased its policy rate by 450 percentage points in the last
12 months to counteract inflationary pressures.

Increase interest rates as inflationary pressure rises
Move toward a full-fledged inflation-targeting framework

In July 2005, BI moved to formal inflation targeting and adopted the
one-month interest rate as an intermediate target.

Maintain prudent fiscal policy to reduce debt

In 2005, the primary surplus increased to 2.2 percent of GDP
(1.3 percent of GDP in 2004), largely because of spending delays
Debt to GDP ratio decreased by 8 percentage points of GDP to
47 percent of GDP.

Strengthen tax administration and preserve non-oil revenue

A tax administration reform program has been designed and new
management has been appointed at the collection agency. A tax bill
to balance taxpayers’ rights and tax authorities’ powers is in
Congress. However, it includes reductions in income tax rates.

Reduce fuel subsidies and increase social spending

Domestic fuel prices were more than doubled.

Introduce treasury and debt management reforms

A new cash management system has been designed and is ready for
implementation. The creation of a single debt unit is in the pipeline.

Ensure that decentralization reforms do not weaken fiscal
discipline

Little progress has been made in clarifying expenditure assignments
and the borrowing framework for sub-national governments. Some
implementing regulations to the decentralization law have been
issued.
Financial sector
No progress has been made.
Development of a medium-term strategy for state-owned
banks
Support the consolidation process in the banking sector
with appropriate legal framework

BI has issued regulations on minimum capital requirements and
corporate governance, and started implementing risk-based
supervision.

Implement a financial sector safety net

The financial sector safety net is operational and the blanket
guarantee has been replaced by a deposit insurance scheme.

Resolve outstanding investor disputes

Improve flexibility in the labor market

Structural reforms
The standoff with Exxon on developing the Cepu oil fields has been
solved with presidential intervention, but other cases remain.

A reform bill opposed by unions was recently withdrawn before
submission to Parliament.

33
Table 2. Indonesia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06
2002

2003
Act.

2004

2005

2006
Proj.

Real GDP (percent change)
Domestic demand
Of which:
Private consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in stocks 1/
Net exports 1/
Statistical discrepancy 1/

4.5
2.4

4.8
6.0

5.1
5.2

5.6
4.4

5.2
5.2

3.8
4.7
-2.0
0.8
1.5

3.9
0.6
2.2
1.8
-2.4

5.0
14.6
-1.4
-2.2
2.5

4.0
9.9
-1.2
-0.5
2.1

3.0
6.0
0.4
0.8
-0.3

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross investment 2/
Gross national saving
Foreign saving

21.3
25.3
-4.0

22.5
26.0
-3.5

22.8
23.4
-0.6

22.5
22.9
-0.3

23.1
23.4
-0.3

Prices (12-month percent change)
Consumer prices (end period)
Consumer prices (period average)

9.9
11.8

5.2
6.8

6.4
6.1

17.1
10.5

7.0
13.3

Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Central government balance
Primary balance
Central government debt

16.5
18.0
-1.6
3.4
65.4

16.7
18.7
-2.0
1.6
58.3

17.9
19.3
-1.4
1.4
55.7

18.1
18.5
-0.3
2.2
46.5

19.1
20.3
-1.2
1.4
40.9

Money and credit (12-month percent change; end of period)
Rupiah M2
7.9
Base money
8.3
Private sector credit
25.1
One-month SBI rate (period average)
15.1

9.8
19.8
22.1
10.1

10.0
20.4
30.4
7.5

13.0
21.9
19.7
9.1

17.9
15.8
15.9
12.1

Balance of Payments (in billions of US$)
Oil and gas (net)
Non-oil exports (f.o.b)
Non-oil imports (f.o.b)
Current account balance
Foreign direct investment
Overall balance

6.2
46.3
-29.0
7.8
0.1
5.0

7.4
48.9
-31.7
8.1
-0.6
3.7

5.1
54.5
-39.5
1.6
-1.5
1.0

4.0
66.2
-47.9
0.9
1.8
-0.5

6.8
74.9
-54.8
1.0
2.1
11.1

Gross reserves
In billions of US dollars (end period)
In months of imports
As a percent of short-term debt 3/

32.0
6.8
117.3

36.3
6.1
134.5

36.3
5.0
137.4

34.7
4.1
113.7

40.8
4.4
138.7

Total external debt
In billions of US dollars
In percent of GDP

131.3
67.2

135.4
57.7

137.4
54.0

133.8
47.6

136.9
39.0

Exchange rate (period average)
Rupiah per US$
Nominal effective exchange rate (Jan. 2000=100)

9,314
94.2

8,575
95.0

8,933
87.0

9,705
79.3

...
...

Memorandum items:
Oil production (000bcpd)
Indonesian oil price (US$/bbl)
Nominal GDP (in trillions of Rupiah)
Nominal GDP (in billions of US$)

1,260
24.1
1,822
196

1,200
28.8
2,014
235

1,040
37.8
2,273
254

999
50.8
2,730
281

1,000
64.0
3,253
351

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth (percentage points).
2/ Includes changes in stocks. Computed on real basis.
3/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis, before rescheduling, and including IMF repurchases.

34
Table 3. Indonesia: Selected Vulnerability Indicators, 2002–06
2002

2003

2004

2005 1/

2006 1/

Latest
observation

5.1
6.1
7.4
244
9,285

5.6
10.5
12.8
269
9,830

4.6
15.5
12.5
220
9,263

Mar-06
Jun-06
Jun-06
Jun-06
Jun-06

0.3
0.7
19.7
124.8
34.7
113.7
47.6
5.9
43.8
51.5
135.1
23.7

0.3
0.6
14.9
132.8
40.8
138.7
39.0
5.2
48.7
45.9
120.3
25.0

Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
May-06
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.

Key Economic and Market Indicators
Real GDP growth (in percent)
CPI inflation (in percent)
Short-term (ST) interest rate (in percent, end of period)
EMBI secondary market spread (bps, end of period)
Exchange rate NC/US$ (end of period)

4.4
11.8
12.9

4.8
6.8
8.3

8,950

8,425

External Sector
Exchange rate regime
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Net FDI inflows (percent of GDP)
Exports (percentage change of US$ value, GNFS)
Real effective exchange rate (End, period; Jan. 2000=100)
Gross international reserves (GIR) in US$ billion
GIR in percent of ST debt at remaining maturity (RM)
Total gross external debt (ED) in percent of GDP
o/w ST external debt (original maturity, in percent of total ED)
ED of domestic private sector (in percent of total ED)
ED to foreign official sector (in percent of total ED)
Total gross external debt in percent of exports of GNFS
Gross external financing requirement (in US$ billion) 2/

3.9
0.1
4.6
119.9
32.0
117.3
65.7
1.1
43.3
54.7
200.1
30.8

3.4
-0.3
5.3
120.0
36.3
134.5
56.8
1.7
40.2
57.8
195.8
19.8

Public Sector (PS) 3/
Overall balance (percent of GDP)
Primary balance (percent of GDP)
Gross PS financing requirement (in percent of GDP) 4/
Public sector gross debt (PSGD, in percent of GDP)
Of which : Exposed to rollover risk (in percent of total PSGD) 5/
Exposed to exchange rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 6/
Exposed to interest rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 7/

-1.6
3.4
6.7
65.4
3.7
45.9
18.9

-2.0
1.6
8.4
58.3
7.0
44.0
18.6

-1.4
1.4
5.5
55.7
3.9
50.8
17.0

-0.3
2.2
3.0
46.5
6.0
51.1
15.9

0.2
1.0
...
...
...
...
...

Apr-06
Apr-06
Dec-05
Dec-05
Dec-05
Dec-05
Dec-05

20.1
6.8
130.0
19.0
18.2
24.0
43.4
25.1

22.3
6.3
137.5
19.2
16.6
20.4
35.9
22.1

20.6
4.5
138.1
25.4
11.5
18.7
29.7
30.4

19.6
10.3
60.1
17.5
13.1
16.0
26.4
19.7

...
...
...
...
13.6
...
...
15.6

Dec-05
Dec-05
Dec-05
Dec-05
Mar-06
Dec-05
Dec-05
Mar-06

Financial Sector (FS) 8/
Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)
NPLs in percent of total loans 9/
Provisions in percent of NPLs
Return on equity (in percent)
FX deposits (in percent of total deposits)
FX loans (in percent of total loans)
Government debt held by FS ( percent of total FS assets)
Credit to private sector (percent change)

Managed Float
0.6
-0.6
19.7
109.4
36.3
137.4
54.0
3.0
41.0
55.3
166.0
22.1

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Staff estimates, projections, or latest available observations as indicated in the last column.
2/ Current account deficit plus amortization of external debt.
3/ Public sector covers central government.
4/ Overall balance plus debt amortization.
5/ Short-term debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt, domestic and external, excluding external debt to official creditors.
6/ Debt in foreign currency or linked to the exchange rate, domestic and external, excluding external debt on concessional terms.
7/ Short-term debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt at variable interest rates, domestic and external.
8/ Financial sector includes largest 12 banks by assets.
9/ Loans are gross of any allowance for losses.

35
Table 4. Indonesia: Summary of Central Government Operations, 2004–07
2004

Act.

2005
Revised
Budget

2007

2006

Est.

Budget

IMF Staff
Proj.

IMF Staff
Proj.

(In trillions of rupiah)
Revenues and grants
Oil and gas revenues
Non-oil and gas revenues
Tax revenues
Nontax revenues 1/
Grants

407.8
108.2
299.3
257.9
41.4
0.3

540.2
175.8
356.9
314.8
42.1
7.5

495.4
138.7
355.4
311.8
43.6
1.3

625.2
183.8
437.9
378.8
59.1
3.6

620.0
186.2
430.4
378.0
52.3
3.4

687.1
201.8
482.7
430.5
52.2
2.6

Expenditure and net lending
Central government expenditure
Current expenditure
Personnel
Subsidies
of which fuel subsidies
Interest
External 2/
Domestic
Other
Development expenditure 3/
Transfers to regions
Statistical discrepancy 4/

439.4
309.7
245.0
54.2
85.5
69.0
62.3
22.8
39.6
43.0
61.7
129.7
3.0

575.0
421.6
336.9
61.1
119.1
89.2
71.0
28.7
42.3
85.7
84.7
153.4
0.0

503.8
369.0
306.6
55.6
120.7
95.7
67.7
24.2
43.5
62.6
62.4
150.5
-15.7

647.7
427.6
327.7
79.9
79.5
54.3
76.6
28.0
48.6
91.7
99.9
220.1
0.0

659.6
436.6
357.1
79.6
108.6
63.6
84.8
23.4
61.4
84.1
79.6
223.0
0.0

719.9
476.9
356.2
94.0
84.1
33.5
78.9
25.5
53.4
99.1
120.7
243.0
0.0

Overall balance 3/

-31.6

-34.8

-8.4

-22.4

-39.6

-32.8

Financing
Domestic
Bank financing
Net issuance of government securities
Recovery of bank assets
Privatization of nonfinancial assets
Other 5/
External

31.6
46.0
28.5
-1.7
15.8
3.5
0.0
-14.4

34.8
20.4
4.3
11.8
5.1
3.5
-4.2
14.4

8.5
-17.4
-16.2
-2.1
6.1
0.0
-5.2
25.9

22.4
40.6
23.0
14.6
2.4
1.0
-0.4
-18.2

39.6
33.4
4.6
27.2
2.4
1.0
-1.8
6.2

32.9
38.4
22.6
13.8
0.0
2.0
0.0
-5.5

Revenues and grants
Oil and gas revenues
Non-oil and gas revenues
Tax revenues
Nontax revenues 1/
Grants

17.9
4.8
13.2
11.3
1.8
0.0

20.4
6.6
13.5
11.9
1.6
0.3

18.1
5.1
13.0
11.4
1.6
0.0

20.6
6.0
14.4
12.5
1.9
0.1

19.1
5.7
13.2
11.6
1.6
0.1

18.8
5.5
13.2
11.8
1.4
0.1

Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Personnel
Subsidies
of which fuel subsidies
Interest 2/
Other
Development expenditure 3/
Transfers to regions

19.3
10.8
2.4
3.8
3.0
2.7
1.9
2.7
5.7

21.7
12.7
2.3
4.5
3.4
2.7
3.2
3.2
5.8

18.5
11.2
2.0
4.4
3.5
2.5
2.3
2.3
5.5

21.3
10.8
2.6
2.6
1.8
2.5
3.0
3.3
7.2

20.3
11.0
2.4
3.3
2.0
2.6
2.6
2.4
6.9

19.7
9.7
2.6
2.3
0.9
2.2
2.7
3.3
6.6

Overall balance 3/

-1.4

-1.3

-0.3

-0.7

-1.2

-0.9

Financing
Domestic
External

1.4
2.0
-0.6

1.3
0.8
0.5

0.3
-0.6
0.9

0.7
1.3
-0.6

1.2
1.0
0.2

0.9
1.0
-0.2

1.4
-1.1
37.8
1.040

1.4
...
54.0
1.075

2.2
-0.2
50.8
0.999

1.8
...
57.0
1.050

1.4
0.3
64.0
1.000

1.3
-0.6
67.3
1.000

(In percent of GDP)

Memorandum items:
Primary balance
General Government balance
Crude oil price (US $ per barrel)
Oil production (mbpd)

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ From 2004 onward, deposit insurance premia are treated as nontax revenues.
2/ Interest on a due basis (Paris Club moratoria is shown as a financing item).
3/ In 2005, comprises capital spending and social assistance spending.
4/ 2005 monetary and fiscal data are still to be reconciled.
5/ Includes capitalization of deposit insurance fund in 2005.

36
Table 5. Indonesia: Selected Social Indicators, 2001–04
2001

2002

2003

2004

Education
Elementary school net enrollment ratio, percent of relevant aged group
Population > 10 yr old not completed primary school (in percent)
Population > 10 yr old finished primary and Junior high school (in percent)
Population > 10 yr old finished high school and college (in percent)
Adult literacy rate

92.9
34.4
47.6
18.0
89.3

92.6
31.3
49.2
19.5
90.7

92.6
30.8
47.1
11.5
90.9

93.0
29.4
49.9
20.7
90.5

Health
Life expectancy rate
Fertility rate, births per woman
Children < 5 yr old that have good nutrition (in percent)
Children < 5 yr old that had been immunized (in percent)

66.2
2.3
69.1
89.9

66.2
2.3
71.9
90.6

66.2
2.3
69.6
..

68.6
2.3
74.4
92.1

Housing and Sanitation
Household with access to piped water (in percent)
Household with electricity (in percent)

18.3
86.3

19.7
87.6

18.9
87.9

18.0
89.0

Poverty and inequality
Number of people under poverty line (in millions)
Population under poverty line (in percent)
Gini Coefficient

37.1
18.4
0.32

38.4
18.2
0.33

37.3
17.4
0.32

36.1
16.7
0.33

Employment
Total labor force (in millions)
Labor participation rate
Unemployment rate

99
68.6
8.1

101
67.8
9.1

100
65.7
9.5

104
67.6
9.9

Sources: World Bank; and CEIC database.

37
Table 6. Indonesia: Balance of Payments, 2002–06
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
2002

2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

I. Current Account
A. Goods, Net (Trade Balance)
1. Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: Oil and Gas
Non-oil and Gas
2. Imports, f.o.b.
Of which: Oil and Gas
Non-oil and Gas
B. Services, Net
C. Income, Net
D. Current Transfers, Net

7.8
23.5
59.2
12.9
46.3
-35.7
-6.7
-29.0
-9.9
-7.0
1.3

8.1
24.6
64.1
15.2
48.9
-39.5
-7.8
-31.7
-11.7
-6.2
1.5

1.6
20.2
70.8
16.3
54.5
-50.6
-11.2
-39.5
-8.8
-10.9
1.1

0.9
22.3
86.2
20.0
66.2
-63.9
-15.9
-47.9
-10.8
-11.8
1.3

1.0
26.8
100.7
25.8
74.9
-73.8
-19.0
-54.8
-14.0
-13.0
1.2

II. Capital and Financial Account
A. Capital Account
B. Financial Account
1. Direct Investment, net
2. Portfolio Investment, net
3. Other Investment 1/

-1.1
0.0
-1.1
0.1
1.2
-2.5

-0.9
0.0
-0.9
-0.6
2.3
-2.6

2.5
0.0
2.5
-1.5
4.4
-0.3

-2.5
0.3
-2.8
1.8
6.1
-10.7

8.9
0.3
8.6
2.1
8.1
-1.6

6.7

7.2

4.1

-1.6

9.9

IV. Errors and Omissions

-1.7

-3.5

-3.1

1.1

1.2

V. Overall Balance (III+IV)

5.0

3.7

1.0

-0.5

11.1

-5.0
0.0
-4.0
...
-1.0
1.4
-2.4

-3.7
0.0
-4.3
...
0.6
2.0
-1.4

-1.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
-1.0
0.0
-1.0

0.5
0.0
1.6
1.6
-1.1
0.0
-1.1

-11.1
0.0
-6.0
-6.0
-5.1
0.0
-5.1

32.0
6.8
117.3
3.9
0.9
-2.1
0.2

36.3
6.1
134.5
3.4
-6.7
-3.4
-0.1

36.3
5.0
137.4
0.6
0.2
10.8
-0.9

34.7
4.1
113.7
0.3
15.5
15.4
1.1

40.8
4.4
138.7
0.3
12.4
7.1
-3.1

III. Total (I+II)

VI. Reserves and Related Items
Changes in Reserve Assets
Of which: Transactions
Use of Fund Credit and Loans
Purchases
Repurchases
Memorandum items:
Reserve Assets Position (eop)
in months of imports of goods and services
in percent of short-term debt
Current account (percent of GDP)
Non-oil and gas exports, volume growth
Non-oil and gas imports, volume growth
Terms of trade, percent change (excluding oil)
Sources: Bank Indonesia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For 2005, includes unrecorded private capital outflows.

38
Table 7. Indonesia: Monetary Survey, December 2003-December 2006
(In trillions of rupiah, unless otherwise indicated, end of period) 1/

2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

Mar.

2005
Jun.
Sep.

Dec.

2006
Dec.
Proj.

Net foreign assets
(in US$ billions)

218.3
31.2

193.1
27.6

188.2
26.9

179.9
25.7

184.3
26.3

218.2
31.2

318.5
45.5

Net domestic assets
Net claims on government
Claims on business sector
Rupiah claims
Foreign exchange claims
Other items (net)

713.8
482.0
450.6
370.9
79.7
-218.8

807.0
499.0
587.6
501.1
86.4
-279.5

796.1
462.0
609.3
521.9
87.3
-275.2

851.2
475.0
652.3
563.3
89.1
-276.1

904.7
499.4
696.3
607.8
88.4
-290.9

930.6
501.8
703.4
615.6
87.7
-274.5

1042.0
533.6
815.3
727.6
87.7
-306.9

Broad money (M2)
Rupiah M2
Currency in circulation
Deposits
Foreign exchange deposits

932.2
816.5
94.5
722.0
115.6

1000.2
897.9
109.3
788.7
102.2

984.2
881.0
98.6
782.5
103.2

1031.1
922.6
106.1
816.5
108.5

1089.1
958.4
115.0
843.5
130.6

1148.8
1014.3
124.3
890.0
134.5

1360.5
1195.8
142.2
1053.6
164.7

Net international reserves

169.4

170.8

173.3

163.8

141.5

173.9

263.5

Net domestic assets 2/ 3/
Net claims on government
Claims on business sector
Claims on DMBs
Open market operations
Other items (net)

-3.8
175.4
8.5
-91.1
-136.5
-96.6

28.6
226.6
39.6
-101.6
-144.5
-136.0

11.6
192.2
39.0
-87.9
-130.8
-131.7

34.7
204.1
39.7
-72.5
-115.1
-136.6

82.9
219.5
39.7
-19.4
-61.9
-156.9

69.3
240.9
25.9
-92.8
-121.2
-104.7

18.1
245.5
25.9
-148.6
-177.1
-104.7

Base money
Currency in circulation
DMBs
Nonbank deposits

165.6
94.5
70.4
0.7

199.4
109.3
89.7
0.5

184.9
98.6
85.6
0.7

198.4
106.1
91.7
0.6

224.4
115.0
109.0
0.5

243.2
124.3
118.5
0.4

281.6
142.2
139.0
0.4

24.2
4.9
12.2
2.5

24.4
4.5
11.9
2.6

24.8
4.8
13.6
2.9

23.4
4.6
13.3
2.9

20.2
4.3
12.5
2.9

24.8
4.2
12.1
2.9

37.6
4.2
11.6
2.8

9.2
9.8
19.8
22.1

7.3
10.0
20.4
30.4

8.2
11.1
29.6
32.6

10.0
11.5
27.6
25.0

14.2
13.2
28.0
26.3

14.9
13.0
21.9
19.7

18.4
17.9
15.8
15.9

Monetary Survey

Bank of Indonesia

Memorandum items:
NIR of BI (in billions of US$)
Money multiplier (rupiah M2)
Base money velocity 4/
Rupiah broad money velocity 4/
Annual percentage change:
Broad money (constant exchange rate)
Rupiah broad money
Base money
Private sector claims
Sources: Bank Indonesia; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ All foreign currency denominated components are valued at a constant exchange rate.
2/ The introduction of a 9-digit system of accounts at BI in May 2004 resulted in a reclassification of some
government accounts from other items net to net claims on government.
3/ As part of the BLBI resolution, BI's net claims on government were reduced by Rp 20.2 trillion (reflected
in the figure for 2003). BI's capital reserves (under other items net) have been reduced by a corresponding amount.
4/ Calculated using end-period quarterly GDP, annualized.

39
Table 8. Indonesia: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2004–11 1/

2004
Act.

2005

2006

2007

2010

2011

5.1

5.6

5.2

6.0

6.6

6.7

6.7

6.7

22.8
23.4
-0.6

22.5
22.9
-0.3

23.1
23.4
-0.3

23.5
24.2
-0.7

24.2
24.6
-0.4

25.1
25.3
-0.2

25.9
25.8
0.1

26.7
26.4
0.4

Prices (12-month percent change)
Consumer prices (end period)
Consumer prices (period average)

6.4
6.1

17.1
10.5

7.0
13.3

6.0
6.1

4.5
4.9

3.5
3.6

3.0
3.0

3.0
3.0

Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Central government balance
Primary balance
Central government debt

17.9
19.3
-1.4
1.4
55.7

18.1
18.5
-0.3
2.2
46.5

19.1
20.3
-1.2
1.4
40.9

18.8
19.7
-0.9
1.3
37.3

18.3
18.9
-0.6
1.1
34.5

18.1
18.6
-0.5
0.9
31.9

18.3
18.8
-0.5
0.6
29.8

18.1
18.5
-0.5
0.5
27.7

Balance of Payments (in billions of US$)
Oil and gas (net)
Non-oil exports (f.o.b)
Non-oil imports (f.o.b)
Current account balance
Direct foreign investment
Overall balance

5.1
54.5
-39.5
1.6
-1.5
1.0

4.0
66.2
-47.9
0.9
1.8
-0.5

6.8
74.9
-54.8
1.0
2.1
11.1

6.0
82.8
-59.9
2.8
3.0
3.7

4.5
90.3
-65.4
1.6
3.7
3.8

3.5
98.9
-72.3
1.0
4.3
2.7

2.4
109.0
-81.4
-0.5
5.0
4.9

1.3
121.8
-91.9
-2.0
6.1
3.1

Gross reserves
In billions of US dollars (end period)
In months of imports
As a percent of short-term debt 3/

36.3
5.0
137.4

34.7
4.1
113.7

40.8
4.4
138.7

42.9
4.3
139.2

45.3
4.2
144.9

48.0
4.1
146.5

52.8
4.1
154.4

56.0
4.1
153.9

Total external debt
In billions of US dollars
In percent of GDP

137.4
54.0

133.8
47.6

136.9
39.0

132.1
34.5

131.2
31.3

130.6
28.5

128.2
25.5

125.1
22.6

Memorandum items:
Oil production (000bcpd)
Indonesian oil price (US$/bbl)
Nominal GDP (in billions of US$)

1,040
37.8
254

999
50.8
281

1,000
64.0
351

1,000
67.3
383

1,000
66.0
419

1,050
65.0
459

1,155
64.3
504

1,155
63.5
553

Real GDP (percent change)
Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross investment 2/
Gross national saving
Foreign saving

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ National accounts figures (and ratios to GDP) are based on the revised national accounts (2000 prices).
2/ Includes changes in stocks. Computed on real basis.
3/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis, before rescheduling, and including IMF repurchases.

2008
2009
Proj.

40
Table 9. Indonesia: Indicators of Debt Service to the Fund, 2004–11
(in billions of U.S. dollars)

Debt service to the Fund 1/
Charges
Repurchases 2/
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of total nonfinancial public sector debt service
In percent of reserves of Bank Indonesia 3/
Outstanding Fund credit 1/ 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of nonfinancial public debt
In percent of reserves of Bank Indonesia 3/
In percent of quota

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0.8
0.2
0.5

2.1
0.3
1.8

5.2
0.3
4.9

1.7
0.1
1.6

1.4
0.1
1.4

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.9
8.7
2.1

2.1
19.5
6.1

4.6
35.6
12.7

1.4
15.6
4.0

1.1
13.3
3.0

0.0
0.1
0.0

0.0
0.1
0.0

0.0
0.1
0.0

9.6

7.8

2.9

1.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.8
11.2
26.5
300.0

2.8
10.0
22.5
262.7

0.8
4.0
7.2
95.8

0.4
1.9
3.2
44.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

10.5
3.4

10.9
3.8

12.8
4.1

8.8
2.9

8.1
2.6

6.5
2.0

5.6
1.7

4.6
1.4

Total non-financial public sector debt service
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of GDP

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Obligations basis.
2/ Using end-period exchange rates.
3/ End of period reserves.

41

ANNEX I. INDONESIA: FUND RELATIONS
(As of June 30, 2006)
Membership Status: Joined February 21, 1967; Article VIII

I.

II.
General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Millions
2,079.30
4,407.01
145.50

Percent of Quota
100.00
211.95
7.00

III.

SDR Department

SDR Millions

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

238.96
11.67

Percent of
Allocation
100.00
4.88

SDR Millions
2,473.21

Percent of Quota
118.94

IV.
Outstanding Purchases and Loans
Extended arrangements
V.
Financial Arrangements
Approval Date
Type

Expiration Date

EFF
EFF
Stand-by

Dec. 31, 2003
Feb. 04, 2000
Aug. 25, 1998

VI.

Feb. 04, 2000
Aug. 25, 1998
Nov. 05, 1997

Amount
Approved
(SDR Millions)
3,638.00
5,383.10
8,338.24

Amount Drawn
(SDR Millions)
3,638.00
3,797.70
3,669.12

Projected Payments to Fund (expectations basis)
(SDR Millions; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Forthcoming
2006
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total
VII.

2007

2008

2009

2010

573.63 1,359.70
82.53
84.37
661.00 1,442.23

536.88
19.51
556.39

8.45
8.45

8.45
8.45

Exchange Arrangements

The rupiah has floated since August 14, 1997. The market exchange rate was Rp 9,263 per
U.S. dollar on June 30, 2006. Indonesia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and
transfers for current international transactions.

42
VIII.

Article IV Consultation

The last Article IV Consultation report (IMF Country Report 05/326, September 2005) was
discussed by the Executive Board on July 18, 2005.
IX.

Safeguards Assessments

Under the Extended Arrangement, BI was subject to the transitional procedures under the
Fund’s safeguards assessment policy. This required a review of BI’s external audit mechanism,
which was completed on March 15, 2002. The assessment recommended remedial actions to
address a number of vulnerabilities. The main recommendations have been implemented,
including the establishment of an independent audit committee at BI and the publication of BI’s
audited financial statements.

43
ANNEX II. INDONESIA: WORLD BANK RELATIONS
(As of June 20, 2006)
For questions relating to this annex, contact Bill Wallace, at (+62-21) 5299-3000 or Preeti
Ahuja at 202 473-1657
Indonesia Country Assistance Strategy
The World Bank’s CAS (FY04-07) for Indonesia is focused on areas most crucial to
poverty reduction: (i) a weak investment climate; and (ii) the lack of quality service delivery
to the poor. Both of these challenges arise from the same fundamental cause – weak
governance. Designed to use all of the Bank’s instruments to advance good governance for
improved poverty reduction outcomes, the CAS provides a fully relevant strategic framework
for the period ahead. In addition to implementation of the two focal areas noted directly
above, over the past 18 months there has been a significant redeployment of Bank resources
to support the post-tsunami recovery of Aceh. The Bank team is now mobilizing to
appropriately support the reconstruction needs in Yogyakarta and Central Java. This
adjustment is represented in the CAS framework via the addition of a substantial work
program on the enhanced management of disasters. A CAS update extending the present
CAS cycle through FY08 is under finalization, and will be presented to the Bank’s Board in
early FY07. The Bank coordinates the policy dialogue across key areas with the IMF.
World Bank Engagement: Selected Highlights
Improving the climate for high quality investment: The Bank’s policy dialogue in this
area is buttressed by the on-going Development Policy Lending (DPL) program and were
underpinned by analytical and diagnostic work (see below). Now in the last phase of a cycle
of three annual operations, the DPL program supports policy and institutional reforms to
improve macroeconomic stability and the investment climate, in addition to public financial
management and anti-corruption, and improved delivery of public services. The reforms are
an integral part of the government’s own reform program and selected based on their
criticality and potential for achieving the government’s medium-term objectives. In the
former two areas, reforms supported by the DPL have helped improve Indonesia’s
creditworthiness; strengthen the country’s macroeconomic framework; improve
competitiveness, diversification, and efficiency of the financial sector; and create a better
business climate.
The World Bank has also supported government efforts to increase and improve
investments in infrastructure. Specifically, the Bank has focused on (i) development of a
strategic framework for infrastructure; (ii) developing core large-scale infrastructure for
growth; and building sub-national and community level infrastructure to support income
opportunities for poorer households. Besides the DPL program, which is helping to promote
greater public-private partnerships (PPP), the Bank is preparing a dedicated program loan
supporting reforms in the infrastructure regulatory framework. The Bank’s portfolio also
includes an on-going Private Participation in Infrastructure TA loan to leverage private
investment in infrastructure; a Java-Bali power sector strengthening project; and several
regional transportation and water and sanitation interventions. Complementing these efforts

44
at the community level is a series of Community Driven Development (CDD) programs,
which seek to improve access to essential social and economic infrastructure, including
tertiary physical infrastructure for targeted communities (including the urban poor). These
include the long-running, successful Kecamatan Development (KDP) and Urban Poverty
Programs (UPP), as well as the recent Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas Program
(SPADA).
Making Service Delivery Responsive to the Poor: Bank efforts have strongly supported
improvements in quality and relevance of, and equitable access to education, water and
sanitation (WSS), and health services. Activities have focused on strengthening capacity and
systems, and changing the way services are managed and delivered top-to-bottom to improve
results. Financial support in education targets the full range of issues from early childhood
development (ECD) to tertiary education. The Bank has supported an education sector
review and, more recently, the development of a comprehensive national medium-term
strategy (RENSTRA) covering all levels of education, formal and non-formal. A series of
Provincial Health Projects (PHPs) were designed to help clarify the roles of different levels
of government. Interventions have also aimed at district health administrations’ capacities
and making service planning and delivery more participatory and accountable. The focus is
on areas where indicators lag behind neighboring countries: maternal and child health, and
nutrition. CDD approaches in WSS and the GEG program seek to inculcate a more sanitary
and healthier environment.
Addressing the Core Issue of Governance: The World Bank recognizes governance as the
most critical cross-sectoral issue and, hence, has positioned it at the core of the Bank’s work
program. The DPL program and particularly the Government Financial Management and
Revenue Administration Program (GFMRAP) are designed to improve public administration,
particularly in the area of public financial management. Two local government-level projects
were approved in 2005: (1) Urban Sector Development and Reform project (USDRP), which
seeks to make urban local governments more efficient and effective in meeting the needs of
their citizens in the context of the new decentralization laws; and (2) Initiatives for Local
Governance Reform project (ILGRIP) that provides pilot support to 40 local governments
(LGs) in improving transparency, accountability and public participatory practices and in
undertaking reforms in financial management and procurement. In addition, the communitybased projects are above all, a vehicle for improving sub-sovereign governance. Bank
interventions are underpinned by analytic work which have included a report providing
sectoral perspectives on corruption, a study on justice and the poor, as well as the Public
Expenditure Review and Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes.
Program for the Recovery of Aceh and Nias: The Bank is deeply engaged in the recovery
of Aceh and Nias, with a focus on post-tsunami reconstruction, institution building,
analytical support and monitoring of progress. Using all its available instruments, over the
past 18 months, the Bank mobilized an Aceh reconstruction program substantial in scope and
objectives. The Bank has played a vital role in putting in place key elements for the
management of the reconstruction effort and coordinating the response of the international
community. Immediately after the tsunami in partnership with the Netherlands, the Bank
established a multi-donor office in Banda Aceh, and made the facilities available to all

45
donors working in Aceh. With a relatively modest Bank contribution of $25 million in grant
resources from IBRD net income, the Bank’s country team has leveraged and mobilized
significant donor support. The Bank has mobilized over $600 million for reconstruction,
including the Multi-Donor Fund (MDF) with 15 donors (in the amount of some $547 million
in grants), restructured ongoing community driven (CDD) operations and added Aceh
focused activities in new IDA projects, donor co-financing of IDA projects and JSDF grants.
The Bank’s CDD platform and facilitators in Aceh have been invaluable in delivering
projects and financing for the reconstruction of Aceh. Most Bank and MDF infrastructure
projects deliver assistance through an extensive community-based network of facilitators and
volunteers reaching every village in Aceh and Nias. An integrated approach that includes
land titling, housing, infrastructure, and building social capital is being employed, with a key
role played by communities in reconstruction and rehabilitation. The Aceh and Nias
Reconstruction Agency (BRR) has recently proposed a comprehensive strategy for utilizing
the remaining resources from the MDF to develop a joint BRR-MDF mechanism to plan,
design, finance, and oversee the construction of infrastructure by engaging LGs in their own
infrastructure needs, within a strong oversight, planning and management framework. The
Bank has also delivered a very considerable TA program to the BRR, and supported a large
analytical program and monitoring framework for all activities in Aceh. The community
based housing approach deployed by the Bank in Aceh under the MDF housing project, has
been indicated by the Government of Indonesia as the model for the massive housing
reconstruction program in Yogyakarta and Central Java, following the May 27 earthquake.
New Lending Operations: As of June 30, 2006, the Bank’s active portfolio comprised 31
projects with a total net commitment of $2.7 billion, including US$ 686 million in loan
resources committed this fiscal year. A second Development Policy Loan (DPL2) was
approved for a loan amount of US$400 million on December 19, 2005. DPL2 also enjoyed
financial support from Japan and AsDB. Second in a series of three annual, single tranche
loans, it built on reforms supported by the first DPL—and deepened cross-cutting reforms in
the core policy areas of (i) macroeconomic stability and creditworthiness; (ii) improved
investment climate; and (iii) improved public financial management and anti-corruption. The
operation also marked the starting point for policy dialogue on pro-poor service delivery—a
policy area that the government is keen on making an integral part of the DPL program—
starting with DPL 3. This new policy area is in line with the government’s focus on reducing
poverty and reaching ambitious medium-term development goals linked to the MDGs, as
articulated in the government’s medium-term development plan, or RPJM. Approved in
FY06, the Domestic Gas Project aims at expanding the use of natural gas in the West Java
market. This project involves expansion of the gas distribution system in West Java and
capacity building activities for the utility company, PGN. The proposed Early Childhood
Education and Development II, seeks to improve poor children's development and readiness
for further education. The proposed Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low-Income
Communities seeks to improve delivery of water supply and sanitation to the eastern
kabupatens. These projects will be presented to the Bank’s Board on June 27, 2006.
Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA)

There is sustained Bank engagement in policy dialogue with GOI, on the direction and
substance of its economic, structural, and institutional reform agenda. The AAA program has

46
been organized around five “breakthrough” themes: (1) investment climate, (2) reducing
poverty, (3) improving decentralized service delivery, (4) improving governance and the
more recently introduced, and (5) progress and constraints in the recovery of Aceh and Nias.
The “flagship reports” in related areas, the stand-alone policy notes and think pieces, and day
to day informal dialogue between Bank staff and government counterparts, are providing
support to GOI in making informed policy choices and in defining the shape of supporting
Bank programs.

47

ANNEX III. INDONESIA: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK1
(As of June 20, 2006)
Asian Development Bank (AsDB) cumulative loans to Indonesia reached over $20.7 billion at
end-December 2005. In 2005, the AsDB approved a total of $1,145.7 million or 19.8% of the total
loans approved by the institution for the year. The assistance provided financing for six projects and
two programs in Indonesia. In addition to public sector projects and programs in community water
supply and sanitation, rural infrastructure, road rehabilitation, and development policy reforms and
local government public financial management reforms, the AsDB also approved its first
infrastructure project financed through the private sector window since the Asian financial crisis. The
$350 million Tangguh Liquefied Natural Gas Project plays a catalytic role as part of a larger
$6.3 billion private sector investment.
During the course of 2005, AsDB has continued to support the post-tsunami reconstruction in Aceh
and Nias out of its $290 million Earthquake and Tsunami Emergency Support Project and other
support totaling about $43 million including a $10 million contribution to the Multi-Donor Trust
Fund. With the second disaster striking in Yogyakarta and Central Java in May 2006, AsDB has
committed a new grant of $10 million for the affected regions by way of immediate response, which
could be supplemented by up to $50 million through reprogramming of ongoing projects financed
under its Asian Development Fund window. The scope of AsDB’s assistance and further steps will be
based on the recent damage and loss assessment findings and the reconstruction strategy.

Table 1. Loan Approvals and Disbursements to Indonesia1
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Loan approvals
1,108.8 1,836.0 1,020.0 800.0 500.0
767.2
261.6 225.0 1,145.69
Loan disbursement
676.6 1,079.0 1,329.4 748.4 686.0 1,000.5
442.9 593.5 1,014.99
Undisbursed balance at the
beginning of the year2
3,957.3 3,902.0 4,503.4 3.899.3 3.085.6 3,135.6 2,367.2 1,892.8 1,724.0
Source: Asian Development Bank, 2005 Annual Report, and AsDB staff.
1
Include loans to private sector without government guarantee but excludes equity investments.
²At the end of the year.
Table 2. Cumulative Lending to Indonesia
(As of December 31, 2005)
Sector

No of
$ Million
In
Loans
percent
Social infrastructure
40
3,175.4
15.3
Agriculture and natural resources
100
4,156.6
20.1
Energy
31
3,781.1
18.2
Transport and communication
33
2,713.9
13.1
Finance
17
3,261.1
15.7
Multisector
33
1,945.6
9.4
Industry
14
665.7
3.2
Others
7
1,029.2
5.0
Total
279
20,728.50 100.0
Source: Asian Development Bank, 2003 Annual Report, and AsDB staff.
1

Prepared by AsDB staff.

48

ANNEX IV. INDONESIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES1

1.
Indonesia has subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) since
September 1996. Indonesia’s macroeconomic statistics and statistical base are broadly
adequate to conduct effective surveillance.
Real Sector

2.
Annual national accounts data are based on a 2000 base year. Quarterly GDP data are
published in a timely manner for both expenditure and production sides. The estimates are
based on a limited set of indirect indicators of uncertain quality. Although some sectors are
influenced strongly by seasonality, seasonally adjusted data are prepared but not published,
and no survey of nonfinancial services is conducted. An economic census of businesses is
undertaken every 10 years, but not updated in the intervening periods. The household budget
survey does not cover higher income households. There are inconsistencies with BI in
imports and exports; and, possibly with MoF with regard to local government figures. The
five-yearly input-output tables remove the statistical discrepancy, but this is not done for
intervening years, creating large discrepancies. The staff have recommended:
(i) development of a system to continuously update the census of businesses; (ii) introduction
of comprehensive annual establishment surveys for nonfinancial services industries; (iii)
publication of annual GDP estimates, including a time series of at least 20 years; (iv)
development of a set of annual supply and use tables (SUTS) starting from 2000; (v)
expedited conversion to the 1993 System of National Accounts; and (vi) enhancing the
convergence exercise on trade data with BI.
3.
Labor market data, including wages and employment, are available, albeit reported
with some delay, through the annual labor market survey (Sakernas) published by the Bureau
of Statistics. Data are also available on minimum and maximum wages for the formal sector.
Quarterly data are available on industrial wages, again with some delay.
Public Finance

4.
Comprehensive public sector finance data are generally not available, and the data
that are available are of questionable quality in terms of definition, coverage and timeliness.
Subnational government fiscal data are available with a lag of two years, and the quality is
variable. Data on the central government budget become available with a one month lag.
5.
The statistical discrepancy between financing and above the line categories has
increased in 2005, reflecting either a double counting of expenditures or additional revenues
that have not been accounted for. The coverage and timeliness of public debt statistics is
generally adequate; however, only limited information on contingent liabilities is available.
There are a large number of extra-budgetary funds, resulting in non-transparent and
unaccountable activities not included in budget reports. A new expenditure classification has
1

The section is based on a Detailed Assessment of Indonesia’s observance of the IMF’s Data Quality
Assessment Framework, prepared by STA in March 2005.

49

been introduced in the 2005 budget, which is generally consistent with the GFSM 2001
economic codes (but on a cash accounting basis). The authorities are considering the
adoption of the GFS standards as their general reporting framework by 2008
6.
In this context, the Fund staff have recommended in the short term: (i) establishment
of a register of all central government public sector units, classified by sector; and (ii) the
amendment of accounting regulations to ensure that general government units report all
transactions and balances over which they exert control. Over the medium-term, priority
should be given to (i) establishing arrangements to obtain timely preliminary data for local
government statistics; and (ii) developing Government Financial Statistic Manual 2001
operating statements, statements of sources and uses of cash, and partial balance sheets, all of
which should be published on the MOF websites. The latter should lead to the adoption of a
full accrual accounting basis for all budget transactions. Further TA from the Fund is likely
to be provided in this area if there have been tangible signs of progress on implementing
short-term recommendations.
Monetary Accounts

7.
Good quality monetary statistics are compiled by the BI on a timely basis. With STA
assistance BI has developed an integrated database from which alternative presentations of
monetary statistics can be drawn to meet the needs of BI and the Fund. Further work,
however, is needed to expand the coverage of depository corporations to include mutual
funds (REKSA DANA), which report data to BAPEPAM—the supervisory agency overviewing the nonbank financial institutions. To this end, BI is currently developing
institutional data-sharing arrangements that would enable it to access the register of—and
data on—mutual funds.
8.
In order to strengthen monetary statistics Fund TA missions have recommended to:
(i) collect source data on mutual funds in a format that meets statistical requirements; (ii)
expand the coverage of the monetary statistics to include mutual funds; and (iii) harmonize
reported interbank positions between the BI and commercial banks.
Balance of Payments

9.
Indonesia’s balance of payments statistics are broadly adequate to conduct effective
surveillance, but certain weaknesses remain. In general, there are some deficiencies in the
recording of financial transactions of the private sector.
10.
With respect to merchandise trade data, while customs sources utilized by BI are
considered generally reliable, there is believed to be under-coverage in selected areas. When
the online reporting system for exports and imports was introduced in 2004, the historical
series were reconstructed only as far back as 2003. Therefore, prior to 2003, balance of
payments statistics are not entirely consistent with the national accounts estimates. Data on
services suffer from outdated surveys and weak methodologies. BI adjusts the customs data
to cover exports and imports of Batam and other bonded zones. Adjustments are also made to

50

data on compensation of employees and workers remittances to cover professional workers,
legal workers not reported to the Ministry of Manpower, and illegal workers.
11.
For the capital and financial account, the methodological basis for the compilation of
FDI data needs substantial improvement. Inflows are currently calculated based on loan
disbursements to companies that have foreign equity and the application of a fixed ratio to
the loan disbursements data to estimate equity inflows. Surveys conducted by BI to collect
FDI data have a low response rate and the directory of enterprises requires enhancement in
terms of its coverage. Other areas that need improvement include the recording of trade
credits and the assets data for portfolio investment and other investment transactions. The
magnitude of the errors and omissions item has been significant and appears to be related to
the methodology used, for instance, for unrecorded assets in the financial account. Financial
transactions data have not been reconciled with changes in the International Investment
Position (IIP).
12.
BI has proposed a range of measures to address these weaknesses. On trade-related
data, a working group has been established to reconcile differences between BI and customs
data. BI is planning to collect and publish data on goods imported for processing, goods
procured in ports by carriers, and transactions with the oil and gas sector. On the financial
account, BI is planning to collect and publish data on direct investment abroad, portfolio
investment assets, other investment assets, and trade credits, to help address some of the
identified shortcomings in the recording of private financial flows.
13.
An annual IIP is compiled, but the underlying data are weak in several areas, notably
for FDI. External debt statistics have improved considerably with the introduction of a
External Debt Information System (EDIS) in 2002. The system records external debt of
government and over 800 other entities that report to the BI on a monthly basis. The data that
this system generates for public sector external debt and debt service, as well as those for
private banks, are considered reliable. However, improvements are still needed with respect
to components of private corporate sector data, particularly in distinguishing between
scheduled and actual debt service, in estimating the accumulation/reduction of private sector
payments arrears, and in estimating rescheduling and debt reductions being received by the
private sector from external creditors.

51

Indonesia: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of June 20, 2006)
Date of
latest
observation

Frequency
of
5
Data

Frequency
of
5
Reporting

Frequency
of
5
publication

Exchange Rates

6/19/06

6/20/06

D

D

W/M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

6/19/06

6/20/06

D

D

W/M

Reserve/Base Money

6/19/06

6/20/06

D

D

W/M

Broad Money

3/06

5/15/06

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

3/06

5/15/06

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

3/06

5/06

M

M

M

5/06

5/06

D

D

W/M

Consumer Price Index

5/06

6/06

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central; Government

4/06

5/06

M

M

...

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

4/06

5/06

M

M

...

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/05

5/06

...

...

...

External Current Account Balance

3/06

3/06

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

4/06

6/05

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

2006Q1

5/06

Q

Q

Q

12/05

3/06

Q

Q

A

Interest Rates

2

4

Gross External Debt
1

Date
received

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
Including currency and maturity composition.
5
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); NA: Not Available
2
3

52

ANNEX V. INDONESIA: MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK UNDER ALTERNATIVE ASSUMPTIONS
AND PUBLIC AND EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
This annex compares the medium-term outlook under the baseline scenario discussed in the
staff report text with three alternative scenarios based on: (i) possible further tightening in
global liquidity conditions; (ii ) a possible further increase in oil prices; and (iii) slower
progress on the ambitious structural agenda planned by the authorities. It also analyzes the
impact of several exogenous shocks on the sustainability of public sector debt and external
debt.
I.

ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS

A: Possible further tightening of liquidity conditions resulting in the reversal of recent
portfolio inflows (about $8 billion is estimated to have come in between
September 2005-April 2006)
Policy response: BI is assumed to keep the policy rate unchanged at its current level in an
effort to keep Indonesian assets attractive. In addition, BI is likely to intervene to smooth
volatility in the exchange rate, although the rupiah would depreciate as capital flows out.
Projections: The outflows would have a direct impact on reserve holdings as foreign
investors withdraw their dollar investments and BI intervenes to smooth volatility. Staff
projections indicate that reserves at end-year 2006 would be about $34 billion equivalent to
about 110 percent of short-term debt (see Chart). Continued high costs of borrowing would
constrain both consumption and investment spending and adversely affect growth. Growth
would decline by 0.4 percentage points in 2006 and an additional one percentage point in
2007. The fiscal deficit would increase for two reasons - first, the depreciation in the rupiah
would raise subsidy costs and second, interest costs would be higher than in the baseline
(spreads on government bonds are assumed to be higher by an additional 200 basis points) –
creating additional financing requirements in an already tight environment. The current
account surplus would increase as the slowdown in the economy lowers imports.
B. Oil prices increase to $100 per barrel in 2006:Q3 and stays at that level through end2007
Policy response: Administered prices of subsidized fuel products and electricity tariffs are
kept unchanged in line with the government’s current intentions, and the increased cost of
fuel subsidies is accommodated by raising the deficit.
Projections: An increase in oil prices will have important implications for the budget given
that some domestic fuels are still subsidized. Staff estimates indicate that the jump in oil
prices by $30 per barrel would increase the cost of fuel subsidies (including for electricity) to
about 5 percent of GDP in 2006, compared to 3.3 percent of GDP in the baseline scenario.
For 2007, subsidy costs will be even higher, requiring additional financing of up to 2 percent
of GDP.

53
At the same time, the increase in prices of nonsubsidized fuels (mainly industrial fuels)
would rise as these prices are adjusted to market prices, leading to higher inflation, higher
production costs and a slowdown in real growth. The jump in international oil prices would
also lead to a weakening in external demand (assuming the oil price jump reflects supply side
factors) and cause a slowdown in exports. Accounting for these various factors, staff
estimates suggest real GDP growth would slow by 0.4 and 0.6 percentage points,
respectively, in 2006 and 2007. The current account surplus is expected to increase,
reflecting a positive net impact of higher oil prices on the balance of payments (gas prices are
assumed to rise in tandem).
C. Lack of progress on the structural agenda
Policy response: Government relaxes fiscal and monetary policies (though modestly so
that it does not threaten macroeconomic stability) to support growth.
Projections: Indonesia would be stuck in the 5 percent growth range over the medium-term,
even as the region continues to grow, as lack of investment slows productivity gains,
including in the oil sector. Macroeconomic policy implementation could also weaken, as the
government could relax monetary and fiscal policy to stimulate growth. On the fiscal side,
the overall fiscal deficit is expected to go to about 1½ percent of GDP as the government
relaxes spending to stimulate growth, only slightly raising the public debt ratio in the
medium term. With slower growth and less foreign investment, both the current and capital
accounts would be negative over the medium term and reserves lower, which would increase
vulnerability.
II.

DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS UNDER THE BASELINE SCENARIO

A. Public debt
The public sector debt ratio has steadily declined from 75 percent of GDP at
1.
end-2001 to an estimated 46.5 percent of GDP at end-2005 (Figure 2). This reflects the
government’s fiscal consolidation policy, declining interest rates, and sustained growth in
real GDP. About half of the total outstanding public debt is owed to foreign creditors, mainly
multilateral institutions.
Under the projected baseline scenario, the public sector debt ratio is expected to
2.
decline gradually to below 28 percent by 2011. In terms of public sector revenues, public
debt will decline from 256 percent to 153 percent over the 2005-2011 period. These results
are based on the assumptions underlying the baseline medium-term scenario in the staff
report, specifically that: (1) real GDP growth rebounds to 6–7 percent over the medium term;
(2) primary surplus averages 1 percent of GDP over the period; and (3) average nominal
interest rates on public debt remain in the 5–7 percent range.

54
3.
The standard sensitivity analysis shows that the trajectory of the debt ratio is
particularly sensitive to changes in
Public Sector Debt
(In percent of GDP)
real interest rates and exchange
80
rates (Figure 2). A temporary upward
shock in 2006 and 2007, equivalent to
one standard deviation in the real
One-time exchange rate
60
shock
interest rate above its historical
Real interest rate
Baseline debt
shock
average raises the debt ratio by about 7
percent of GDP over the medium-term.
40
A one-time 30 percent real
depreciation of the exchange rate
Real growth shock
Primary balance shock
immediately raises the debt ratio by 16
20
percentage points of GDP with the
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
impact over the baseline being slightly
reduced in the medium term.

80

60

40

20

External debt
Indonesia’s external debt has also declined steadily since the crisis, from over
4.
80 percent of GDP in 2001 to around 48 percent in 2005 (Figure 1). External debt as a
percent of exports has also declined from 209 percent in 2001 to 135 percent in 2005.
External debt dynamics are sustainable under the baseline scenario, with the
5.
debt-to-GDP ratio declining to less
External Sector Debt
than 25 percent by 2011. However, the
(In percent of GDP)
100
favorable trend in the external debt
burden could be reversed if the
90
One-time exchange
envisaged foreign direct investment and
rate shock
80
equity inflows, and growth fail to
70
materialize, or if the associated
60
Baseline debt
Current account
investment does not generate growing
shock
50
export receipts.
40
30

Real growth shock

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30

Nominal interest rate shock
External debt sustainability is
6.
20
20
most vulnerable to shocks to the
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
exchange rate. A one-time shock of a 30
percent depreciation of the exchange rate in 2006 raises the debt ratio immediately by about
35 percent of GDP with the impact declining gradually over the medium term to 25 percent
of GDP by 2011.

55

Figure 1. Alternative Scenarios
(In percent)
20

7
Real GDP Growth

Inflation (end-period)

16

6

12
5
8
Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

4

3

Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

4
0

2004
7

2005

2006

2004

2007

2005

2006

2007

0.0

Subsidies/GDP

Overall Fiscal Balance/GDP

6

-0.5

5

-1.0

4

-1.5

3
2

-2.0

Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

1

Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

-2.5
-3.0

0
2004
1.6

2005

2006

2004

2007
200

Current Account/GDP

1.2

180

0.8

160

0.4

140

2005

2006

2007

Reserves
(in terms of short-term debt)

120

0.0
Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

-0.4

Baseline
Oil Price $100 per barrel
Capital outflows
No structural reforms

100
80

-0.8
2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: CEIC Database and Fund staff estimates.

2004

2005

2006

2007

56
Figure 2. Country: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and historical scenarios
65
60

Interest rate shock (in percent)
9 65

Gross financing need under
baseline (right scale)

8 60
55
7
50

55
50

Baseline

6 45

45
Historical

40

5 40

35
28

30
25

21

4

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

65

Baseline: 6.5
Scenario: 5.6
Historical: 4.7

60
55
50
45

45
Growth
34
shock

40
35

Baseline

25
20

20

21
No policy change

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
65

65

60

60

55

55

50

50

30 %
depreciation

41

45

45

25

Baseline 28

15

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

30

30

PB shock

35
25

28

Baseline: 0.9
Scenario: 0.4
Historical: 1.9

40
30

30

35

28

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

65

40

Baseline

25

Growth shock (in percent per year)

50

35

30
3

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

55

i-rate shock

35

2 20

20

60

Baseline: 0.4
Scenario: 3.1
Historical: -3.1

Combined
shock
32
Baseline

40
35

contingent
liabilities shock
36

30
28

20

25

Baseline

28

20

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data.Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks.
Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being
presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2006,
with real depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local
currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

57
Figure 3. Indonesia: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
90

16

Gross financing need
under baseline (RHS)

75

14

60

12

Baseline,
23

45

10

0
2001

Historical
scenario,
14
2003

2005

2007

Baseline: 3.5
Scenario: 4.2
Historical: 4.3

75
60
45

30
15

90

8
6
2011

2009

i-rate , 24

30
15
0
2001

Baseline, 23

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Non-interest current account shock (% of GDP)

Growth shock (in percent per year)
90

90

Baseline:
Scenario:
Historical:

75
60

6.3
5.4
4.7

60

Growth
shock

45

Baseline

0
2001

2003

2005

2007

33
24

30

23

15

2009

2011

0
2001

Combined shock 2/

Baseline

2003

2005

2007

2009

23

2011

Real depreciation shock 3/

90

90

75

75

60

30 %
depreciation

60
Combined
shock

45

1.3
-0.8
5.4

CA shock

45

30
15

Baseline:
Scenario:
Historical:

75

47

45
29

30

30
Baseline

15
0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

23

2011

Baseline

15
0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

23

2011

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures
in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being
presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2006.

422.8

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

3.6
39.7
-2.5

4.5
-12.8
-3.4

6.8
0.0

396.8

-11.6
-13.3
-3.4
16.5
13.1
-7.1
-2.5
0.6
-3.1
-4.6
-2.8
-2.8
0.0
0.0
1.6

65.4
29.8

2002

4.8
21.8
-1.6

8.3
0.0

349.0

-7.1
-7.1
-1.6
16.7
15.1
-3.8
-2.2
0.7
-2.8
-1.7
-1.7
-1.7
0.0
0.0
0.1

58.3
27.6

Actual
2003

5.1
15.8
-1.4

4.6
0.0

309.5

-2.7
-3.3
-1.4
17.9
16.6
-1.1
-3.7
-1.1
-2.6
2.6
-0.8
-0.8
0.0
0.0
0.6

55.7
28.2

2004

5.6
2.8
-2.2

2.4
0.0

256.2

-9.0
-7.2
-2.2
18.1
16.0
-4.8
-6.3
-3.7
-2.6
1.4
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-1.8

46.5
23.7

2005

42.4
41.9
41.4
41.8
56.7
51.3

40.9
41.4
41.3

5.2
19.2
-1.4

4.6
0.0

214.5

-5.6
-5.3
-1.4
19.1
17.7
-3.8
-3.8
-1.8
-2.1
...
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.3

40.9
19.3

2006

40.1
39.3
38.2
39.1
52.7
47.3

35.6
36.7
38.9

6.0
4.6
-1.3

3.9
0.0

198.8

-3.6
-3.9
-1.3
18.8
17.5
-2.6
-2.6
-0.4
-2.2
...
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.3

37.3
17.5

2007

38.4
37.5
35.8
37.0
49.4
43.9

31.7
32.5
37.1

6.5
4.1
-1.1

3.2
0.0

188.7

-2.9
-3.3
-1.1
18.3
17.1
-2.2
-2.2
0.0
-2.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

34.5
15.4

37.0
36.1
33.6
35.2
46.5
40.9

28.0
28.4
35.5

6.7
7.2
-0.9

2.8
0.0

176.1

-2.5
-2.9
-0.9
18.1
17.2
-1.9
-1.9
0.2
-2.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

31.9
13.4

Projections
2008
2009

35.8
35.2
31.9
33.7
43.9
38.3

24.5
24.6
32.1

6.7
9.5
-0.6

2.5
0.0

162.8

-2.1
-2.4
-0.6
18.3
17.7
-1.7
-1.7
0.2
-1.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

29.8
11.4

2010

34.7
34.5
30.1
32.2
41.4
35.7

21.1
21.0
28.9

6.7
6.3
-0.5

2.2
0.0

153.2

-2.1
-2.3
-0.5
18.1
17.6
-1.7
-1.7
0.1
-1.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

27.7
9.9

2011

1/central government debt (gross debt).
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/2 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006 10/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

B. Bound Tests

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005-09
A. 2. Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
A. 3. Alternative Scenario

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

7.3
0.0

-16.5
-11.8
-2.5
18.2
15.7
-7.4
-10.5
-7.7
-2.8
3.2
-1.9
-1.9
0.0
0.0
-4.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

77.0
34.9

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2001

Table 1. Indonesia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

-1.2
-1.7
-1.8
-1.4
-2.4
-2.1

-1.3
-1.6

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
-1.6

58

4.5
10.0
16.5
2.6
4.6
4.1
5.7
1.8

30.1
15.4

-14.5
-20.3
-5.7
-7.0
33.6
26.6
-1.8
-12.9
1.7
-3.0
-11.6
5.9
200.1

67.2

2002

4.8
8.6
14.6
2.8
5.3
8.2
5.0
1.1

19.0
8.1

-9.5
-15.8
-5.0
-5.5
29.4
24.0
-1.1
-9.6
1.6
-2.7
-8.5
6.3
195.8

57.7

Actual
2003

5.1
-4.0
3.2
2.7
19.7
26.9
2.0
1.3

21.8
8.6

-3.6
-6.4
-2.0
-4.5
32.5
28.1
-1.3
-3.0
1.4
-2.7
-1.8
2.7
166.0

54.0

2004

5.6
-8.0
4.7
3.5
19.7
22.5
2.0
1.5

23.3
8.3

-6.4
-7.0
-2.0
-4.1
35.2
31.1
-1.5
-3.5
1.7
-2.7
-2.4
0.6
135.1

47.6

2005

4.7 7/
-8.5
0.6 7/
4.3
7.2
6.0
5.4
1.1

10-Year
Historical
Average
1.9 7/
26.0
29.0 7/
1.3
13.1
18.3
4.1
0.9

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

2008

6.0
-3.0
2.9
3.5
9.4
9.1
2.0
1.0

21.7
5.7

-4.5
-4.9
-2.0
-3.7
32.5
28.8
-1.0
-2.0
1.3
-2.1
-1.1
0.5
106.1

34.5

6.6
-2.1
2.7
3.6
6.5
7.5
1.5
1.0

24.5
5.9

-3.2
-4.4
-1.5
-3.4
31.6
28.2
-1.0
-1.9
1.1
-2.1
-0.9
1.2
98.9

31.3

6.7
-0.9
2.7
3.5
7.3
8.3
1.2
1.1

25.8
5.6

-2.9
-4.0
-1.2
-3.1
31.0
27.9
-1.1
-1.7
1.0
-1.9
-0.8
1.1
91.8

28.5

6.7
-0.2
2.8
3.4
8.0
9.5
0.8
1.1

28.9
5.7

-3.0
-3.5
-0.8
-2.6
30.5
27.9
-1.1
-1.6
0.9
-1.7
-0.8
0.5
83.4

25.5

Projections
2009
2010

I. Baseline Projections

2007

39.3
39.4
41.0
40.3
73.0

43.0
40.0

35.0
35.2
38.5
37.1
66.4

36.6
35.8

32.0
32.2
37.1
35.0
61.6

31.3
32.8

29.3
29.6
36.0
33.3
57.1

26.0
30.2

26.4
26.8
34.7
31.3
52.0

19.9
27.3

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

5.2
4.7
18.6
3.6
14.9
15.3
1.7
0.9

24.7
7.0

-8.6
-10.6
-1.7
-3.7
32.4
28.8
-0.9
-8.1
1.4
-2.0
-7.5
2.0
120.3

39.0

2006

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
4/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
5/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.
7/ Excluding 1998, which was an extreme outlier due to the depth of the crisis in Indonesia. Including 1998 reduces average real GDP growth to 3.2 percent
with a corresponding standard deviation of 6.1 percent; and the average growth of the GDP deflator in U.S. dollars to 5.4 percent with a standard deviation of 17.7 percent.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations 7/
B3. Non-interest current account is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/4 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2006-10 4/
A2. Alternative Scenario

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Exchange rate appreciation (US dollar value of local currency, change in %)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

3.6
-18.1
-6.4
4.7
-11.0
-9.6
8.5
0.9

25.9
16.1

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 3/
in percent of GDP

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

-4.0
-2.6
-8.5
-8.0
39.1
31.1
-0.9
6.8
4.2
-3.2
5.8
-1.4
208.9

81.6

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3)
External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

External debt

2001

Table 2. Indonesia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2001-2011
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

23.7
24.0
33.3
29.3
46.7

13.6
24.3

6.7
0.0
3.0
3.4
9.1
10.4
0.4
1.2

32.0
5.8

-2.9
-3.1
-0.4
-2.3
30.3
28.0
-1.2
-1.5
0.8
-1.6
-0.7
0.3
74.6

22.6

2011

-2.5
-2.5
-3.2
-2.8
-5.0

-1.2

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/

6.3
-0.3
5.4
3.5
9.2
10.0
1.3
1.0

Projected
Average

current account 6/
-2.6

non-interest

Debt-stabilizing

59

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
INDONESIA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation and
Fifth Post-Program Monitoring Discussions
Supplementary Information
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Carlo Cottarelli
July 26, 2006
This supplement provides an update on developments since the issuance of the staff report.
The thrust of the staff appraisal remains unchanged. Following the earlier release of the
infrastructure and investment climate policy packages, the financial sector reform package
announced on July 7 represents a useful attempt to consolidate financial sector reform
efforts, with a focus on accelerating implementation.
Recent developments
1.
After being significantly affected by
the global market turmoil in May/June,
Indonesia’s financial markets have been
recovering. In the period since mid-June,
which has seen both a rebound and a greater
differentiation between emerging markets by
investors, capital inflows to Indonesia appear
to have resumed. The rupiah has recovered
somewhat more strongly than other emerging
market currencies, though stock prices have
lagged (see Table). Foreign exchange
reserves have edged up since end-June, when
Indonesia repaid early one-half of its
obligations to the Fund, and now amount to
about $41 billion.

Financial Market Developments
(As of July 25, 2006)
Change in percent
Indonesia
Emerging
markets 1/
Foreign Exchange
Peak to trough
Trough to today

-8.1
3.8

-6.2
2.2

Stocks
Peak to trough
Trough to today

-20.5
6.0

-19.8
11.4

Sources: Bloomberg; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Simple average of currencies and stock indices of Brazil, Hungary,
Mexico, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and Indonesia.

2.
Some recent indicators suggest that growth could begin to pick up in the second
half of 2006. The consumer confidence index improved further in June reaching its highest

2

level since September 2005 (see
Chart). Motorcycle sales have
stabilized in the last three months,
albeit at a lower level than last
summer, and retail sales also show
signs of a recovery in May. After a
decelerating trend in the first part of
2006, export growth picked up in
May (exports in May were 16 percent
higher than a year earlier). However,
credit growth remains slow.

160

Consumer Confidence Index
140

120

100

80

60

Consumer Confidence Index
Present Economic Condition
Consumer Expectation

40

20
Jan-03

Jul-03

Jan-04

Jul-04

Jan-05

Jul-05

Jan-06

3.
Preliminary information
through end-June shows a cumulative overall fiscal deficit of about 0.1 percent of GDP,
compared to a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP for the same period last year. There has been
some pickup in spending recently. For example, capital expenditures in January–June
reached 20 percent of the amount budgeted for the whole year, compared with only
15 percent in January–May. Current expenditures in January–June reached 34 percent of the
amount budgeted for the year. If the current pace of spending continues, staff’s projections of
spending for 2006 could materialize; a shortfall in spending was seen as a significant risk in
the staff report.
Financial sector policy package
4.
As expected, the government unveiled a financial sector policy package (FSP) on
July 7, aimed at strengthening financial intermediation and enhancing stability. To this end,
the FSP includes a series of measures to: (i) address nonperforming loans at the state banks;
(ii) improve and strengthen management performance at the state banks; (iii) foster the
development and deepening of the nonbank financial sector, including the merger of the
Jakarta and Surabaya stock exchanges, and encourage the government debt market;
(iv) improve banking supervision, in particular with respect to the introduction of risk-based,
consolidated supervision; (v) develop a medium-term privatization strategy; (vi) strengthen
the financial safety net through the submission of the long-awaited Financial Sector Safety
Net Law to parliament; and (vii) improve the functioning of the credit bureau.
5.
While details in some areas have yet to be specified, the package addresses a number
of long-standing issues, and includes many of the measures that have been recommended by
Fund staff in the past. It was drafted with input from several key stakeholders. To ensure
accountability, the FSP clearly identifies the different government agencies that will be
responsible for each of the measures.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/91
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 7, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation and Fifth
Post-Program Monitoring Discussions with Indonesia
On July 31, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
2006 Article IV consultation and the fifth post-program monitoring discussions with Indonesia.1
Background
Over the last few years, Indonesia has continued to make steady economic progress, despite
some major natural disasters. In 2005, growth reached its highest level in nine years while
macroeconomic vulnerabilities have been declining. The debt-to-GDP ratio has been halved
since 2000, banking sector performance has improved, and corporate vulnerabilities have
been reduced. S&P recently upgraded Indonesia’s external and local currency debt ratings up
one notch to BB- and BB+, respectively. The government’s key objective is to accelerate
growth to 6–7 percent and reverse the rising trend in unemployment.
In early 2006, economic activity slowed as a result of fuel price and interest rate adjustments
implemented in the fall of last year in order to restore financial market confidence. After
peaking at 18 percent in October 2005, inflation has moderated as the tight monetary stance
has constrained domestic demand growth. High interest rates also triggered significant capital
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with all
member countries, usually every year. Post-Program Monitoring provides for frequent consultations
between the Fund and members whose Fund arrangements have expired but who continue to
have substantial Fund credit outstanding. Particular focus is placed on policies that have a bearing
on external viability. For both purposes, a staff team visits the country, collects economic and
financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and
policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for
discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during the July 31, 2006 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.

2
inflows in early 2006 leading to substantial accumulation of international reserves and enabling
Indonesia to make early repayments to the Fund. While Indonesia was initially hard hit by the
turmoil in emerging markets in May/June, the rupiah and stock prices have recently recovered
a part of their losses.
Real GDP is projected to pick up in the second half of the year and reach 5.2 percent in 2006,
supported by an expected gradual reduction in interest rates and an acceleration in
government spending from the very low levels of 2005; the central government’s deficit is
budgeted to rise by 1 percentage point to 1.2 percent of GDP. At the same time, inflation is on
track to reach the lower bound of Bank Indonesia’s 7–9 percent target range. The current
account is expected to remain in surplus in 2006, partly as a result of lower oil imports
following the fuel price increase.
That said, there are some short-term downside risks to this generally favorable outlook.
Further tightening in global financial markets could prevent the planned easing in domestic
interest rates and the government needs to substantially accelerate spending in support of
domestic demand. Higher international oil prices could also have an unfavorable impact on the
budget, growth and inflation.
In the banking sector, performance has been on a steadily improving trend and private banks
appear to have weathered the recent slowdown in growth and rise in interest rates quite well.
Banks are on average well capitalized. However, nonperforming loans (NPLs) at the two
largest state-owned banks rose substantially in 2005 and governance remains weak.
To address weaknesses in the financial system, the government released in July a package of
financial sector reforms that will help resolve state banks’ NPLs, foster improvements in
banking supervision, and facilitate the development of the nonbank financial sector.
For the medium term, the government has adopted a comprehensive reform agenda to
strengthen public institutions, improve the business climate and boost growth. If implemented,
these reforms will remove some of the main obstacles to private investment, and contribute to
a more flexible labor market and more efficient public administration, thus contributing to an
acceleration in growth.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors expressed their deepest sympathies to the people of Java and Sumatra who
have suffered recently from earthquakes and tsunamis.
Directors commended the authorities on Indonesia’s considerable achievements since the crisis.
They noted that real GDP has returned to pre-crisis levels, public debt is on a declining trend,
and creditworthiness has improved. The bold policy actions taken last fall and continued sound
macroeconomic management have helped to reestablish policy credibility and resulted in large
capital inflows with reserves reaching record highs. While Indonesia did not escape the sell-off in
global financial markets in May/June, asset prices have been recovering in recent weeks.
Looking ahead, Directors considered that the key challenge facing the country remains to boost
economic growth in order to make further progress in alleviating poverty and reducing
unemployment. To this end, they encouraged the authorities to accelerate the implementation of
their structural reform agenda that aims to enhance investor confidence and promote private-

3
sector led growth. Directors also noted that continued pursuit of prudent macroeconomic policies
will remain essential to further reduce vulnerabilities.
Directors saw some scope for a cautious easing of macroeconomic policies in 2006 to support
growth. Accordingly, they noted that, after a slowdown in late 2005 and early 2006, economic
activity is expected to regain momentum in the second half of this year, with interest rates likely
to decline and government spending likely to accelerate in the coming months. Nevertheless,
they drew attention to some downside risks. A tightening in global liquidity conditions and higher
international oil prices could prevent the planned easing in domestic interest rates and slow the
recovery in domestic demand.
Directors commended Bank Indonesia for its cautious approach in cutting interest rates.
They agreed that—while there is scope for further reduction in interest rates in the coming
months, given that inflation has been trending down and domestic demand remains relatively
subdued—the pace and timing of these cuts would also need to take into account developments
in global financial markets. Directors also praised Bank Indonesia for its efforts to improve clarity
and consistency in conveying its monetary policy intentions, which have helped to strengthen the
credibility of its inflation-targeting framework among market participants.
As regards the exchange rate, Directors noted that, despite some real appreciation recently,
the rupiah seems broadly in line with fundamentals. While agreeing that Bank Indonesia had
appropriately taken advantage of the rupiah appreciation earlier in the year to enhance reserve
coverage, Directors emphasized that intervention should continue to be limited, in a symmetric
way, only to smooth fluctuations in the exchange market and thus reduce volatility.
Directors noted that there is scope for fiscal policy to support activity in 2006, while firmly
pursuing fiscal prudence. They agreed that the overall deficit targets for 2006 and 2007 are
appropriate. Directors welcomed the government’s efforts to avoid the spending shortfalls that
had occurred in 2005 by simplifying procurement and budget execution procedures.
The planned expansion of the fuel cash compensation program should also help support
domestic demand. Directors suggested that these actions must be accompanied by
improvements in expenditure management and monitoring systems to ensure the quality of
outlays and prevent corruption, as well as in project implementation skills at the regional and
local levels. They also recommended that, as domestic demand strengthens sufficiently, the
authorities should consider reintroducing a mechanism for automatic adjustments of energy
prices to depoliticize these adjustments and remove the risk of higher subsidies in the future,
while taking into account the need to establish an adequate safety net for vulnerable groups.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intentions to address banking sector vulnerabilities and
strengthen financial intermediation in the context of the recently announced financial sector
reform package. In particular, they stressed the importance of dealing with the problems at the
two largest state banks, where NPLs have risen considerably in the past year and governance
remains weak. They commended the authorities on their intention to allow state banks to take
haircuts on NPLs, which would give the banks the necessary tool to resolve NPLs, and
recommended that this problem be addressed promptly.
Directors supported the medium-term privatization of state banks that do not have a public
policy objective. In the meantime, governance could be improved by allowing private
shareholders to participate in their management. As regards private banks, Directors were

4
encouraged that these banks have weathered relatively well the current slowdown in activity
and the rise in interest rates. Nevertheless, they stressed that bank supervisors will need to
remain vigilant to any deterioration in credit quality. Directors encouraged the authorities to
participate in a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), as this could help identify areas
for further improvement in the financial system.
Directors commended the authorities for putting together an impressive reform package to
improve the business climate and boost growth. However, they emphasized that it is essential
to implement these measures in a forceful manner, to jump start investment. In particular, early
approval of one or two laws currently under consideration would bring immediate benefits for
trade and investment and help restore business confidence. In this context, they also stressed
the need to modernize the legal framework.
Directors also underscored the importance of speedy implementation of fiscal reforms
currently under consideration. Adoption of the tax package now before parliament, along with
modernization of the tax department, will help enhance revenue collection while restoring
investor confidence. The government’s intention to better manage the potential risks stemming
from the operations of public enterprise and private-public partnerships was also welcomed by
Directors.
While acknowledging the political difficulties, Directors emphasized that the authorities need to
press ahead with establishing a balanced framework for labor-business relations. Such a
framework should protect the rights of workers but also be more business-friendly. More
flexible labor markets would help Indonesia become more competitive vis-à-vis neighboring
countries and should encourage employers to hire new labor more freely.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5
Table 1. Indonesia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–06
2002

2003

2004

2006

5.1
5.2

5.6
4.4

Proj.
5.2
5.2

3.9
0.6
2.2
1.8
-2.4

5.0
14.6
-1.4
-2.2
2.5

4.0
9.9
-1.2
-0.5
2.1

3.0
6.0
0.4
0.8
-0.3

21.3
25.3
-4.0

22.5
26.0
-3.5

22.8
23.4
-0.6

22.5
22.9
-0.3

23.1
23.4
-0.3

Prices (12-month percent change)
Consumer prices (end period)
Consumer prices (period average)

9.9
11.8

5.2
6.8

6.4
6.1

17.1
10.5

7.0
13.3

Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Central government balance
Primary balance
Central government debt

16.5
18.0
-1.6
3.4
65.4

16.7
18.7
-2.0
1.6
58.3

17.9
19.3
-1.4
1.4
55.7

18.1
18.5
-0.3
2.2
46.5

19.1
20.3
-1.2
1.4
40.9

Money and credit (12-month percent change; end of period)
Rupiah M2
Base money
Private sector credit
One-month SBI rate (period average)

7.9
8.3
25.1
15.1

9.8
19.8
22.1
10.1

10.0
20.4
30.4
7.5

13.0
21.9
19.7
9.1

17.9
15.8
15.9
12.1

Balance of Payments (in billions of US$)
Oil and gas (net)
Non-oil exports (f.o.b)
Non-oil imports (f.o.b)
Current account balance
Foreign direct investment
Overall balance

6.2
46.3
-29.0
7.8
0.1
5.0

7.4
48.9
-31.7
8.1
-0.6
3.7

5.1
54.5
-39.5
1.6
-1.5
1.0

4.0
66.2
-47.9
0.9
1.8
-0.5

6.8
74.9
-54.8
1.0
2.1
11.1

Gross reserves
In billions of US dollars (end period)
In months of imports
As a percent of short-term debt 3/

32.0
6.8
117.3

36.3
6.1
134.5

36.3
5.0
137.4

34.7
4.1
113.7

40.8
4.4
138.7

Total external debt
In billions of US dollars
In percent of GDP

131.3
67.2

135.4
57.7

137.4
54.0

133.8
47.6

136.9
39.0

Exchange rate (period average)
Rupiah per US$
Nominal effective exchange rate (Jan. 2000=100)

9,314
94.2

8,575
95.0

8,933
87.0

9,705
79.3

...
...

Memorandum items:
Oil production (000bcpd)
Indonesian oil price (US$/bbl)
Nominal GDP (in trillions of Rupiah)
Nominal GDP (in billions of US$)

1,260
24.1
1,822
196

1,200
28.8
2,014
235

1,040
37.8
2,273
254

999
50.8
2,730
281

1,000
64.0
3,253
351

Real GDP (percent change)
Domestic demand
Of which:
Private consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in stocks 1/
Net exports 1/
Statistical discrepancy 1/

4.5
2.4
3.8
4.7
-2.0
0.8
1.5

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross investment 2/
Gross national saving
Foreign saving

Act.
4.8
6.0

2005

Sources: Indonesian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth (percentage points).
2/ Includes changes in stocks. Computed on real basis.
3/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis, before rescheduling, and including IMF repurchases.

Statement by Made Sukada, Alternate Executive Director for Indonesia
July 31, 2006

1.
On behalf of the Indonesian authorities, we would like to thank Executive Directors
and Management for their continued support for Indonesia. The authorities would also like to
express their appreciation to staff for the constructive policy discussions in Jakarta during the
recent Fund mission and for the balanced report and useful Selected Issues paper.
2.
The authorities are in general agreement with the staff’s assessment of the challenges
faced and the policy initiatives to revive the economy and create job opportunities in the
immediate future. They are particularly pleased to note that the staff are supportive of the
government’s policy priorities and the medium-term economic strategy which is aimed at
promoting high and sustainable growth led by the private sector, as well as reducing
unemployment and combating poverty in line with the Medium Term National Development
Plan (RPJMN 2005-2009).
Recent Developments and Prospects for 2006
3.
Despite experiencing several external shocks in 2005, Indonesia’s economy recorded
its highest growth in 9 years with GDP growth of 5.6 percent, achieving a sustainable path of
public finance, a continued current account surplus with a healthy build up in international
reserves, and further improvement in the banking sector. Inflation trended downwards, but
remains high due to pass-through of the domestic fuel price adjustment last year.
4.
Macroeconomic fundamentals continued improving over the first half of 2006, albeit
with growth moderating in recent quarters. The recent earthquake and floods in some parts of
the country have had minimal impact on the Indonesian economy. Inflationary pressures
continued receding while fiscal sustainability has been maintained. The balance of payments
has improved, reflecting strong growth in exports as well as a capital account surplus. This
has contributed to a significant increase in international reserves and modest exchange rate
appreciation which is nevertheless in line with economic fundamentals as reflected in the
continued increase in non-oil and gas exports. The banking sector is profitable and well
capitalized, and has gradually resumed its financial intermediation role. Although the loan to
deposit ratio (LDR) is still low, bank financing to the small and medium scale enterprises,
which absorb a large portion of the labor force, has increased steadily in recent years. The
authorities are pleased that Indonesia’s sovereign as well as banking and corporate sector
vulnerabilities have been declining over time as also pointed out in the Selected Issues paper.
5.
Going forward, maintaining macroeconomic stability, accelerating the
implementation of structural reforms, and improving the investment climate, including
concerted efforts against corruption, will continue to be of the highest priorities for the current
government. The main goals are to revive and sustain growth, further reduce inflation,
expedite budget execution, and strengthen the banking sector while improving its financial
intermediation. The authorities, however, recognize the risks and uncertainties surrounding
the global financial markets and international oil prices as well as the formidable challenges

2
ahead in allocating resources for emergency assistance and reconstruction in the aftermath of
the tsunami and the recent natural disasters.
6.
Against this backdrop and coupled with the authorities’ full commitment to
implement the reform agenda, growth is expected to accelerate in the second half of the year,
resulting in an annual GDP growth forecast close to 6 percent for 2006. This growth forecast
is underpinned by a cautious easing of monetary policy, timely budget execution, the
dissipating impact of the domestic oil price hikes as well as continued non-oil and gas export
growth. This growth outlook is shared by staff, although the authorities are slightly more
optimistic. Growth is projected to exceed 6 percent for 2007. As inflationary pressures recede,
BI is confident that inflation towards end-2006 will be within the target range of 8 percent (+/1 percent) and further reduced to 6 percent (+/- 1 percent) in 2007. The positive prospects for
Indonesia’s economy are also shared by investors and rating agencies as reflected in the recent
improvement of ratings for Indonesia by Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s. Over the medium
term, the economy is expected to achieve its growth potential and be more resilient to external
shocks given the structural reforms that have been put in place.
Fiscal Policy
7.
The authorities are fully committed to maintaining prudent fiscal policy while
recognizing the need for moderate fiscal stimulus in 2006, and increased growth generating
expenditures and social spending over the medium term. To this end, the government has
recently submitted a revised budget to the Parliament comprising an increase in the central
government deficit from the initial target of 0.7 percent to 1.2 percent of GDP for 2006,
including the carry over spending of the 2005 unspent budget of about 0.3 percent of GDP.
This will enable the government to allocate more resources for education, the reconstruction
of places affected by the recent earthquake, floods and tsunami, in addition to the larger
expenditures needed for the increase in interest payments and fuel subsidies. Nonetheless,
even with the envisaged increase in the deficit, the public debt to GDP ratio is expected to
decline further to about 40 percent in 2006 and 30 percent by 2010.
8.
The 2006 budget will be financed from domestic sources, mainly through the
issuance of government bonds while net-foreign financing is targeted to be negative with
debt re-payments exceeding new borrowings so as to reduce external debt vulnerability. The
authorities are thankful to the Consultative Group on Indonesia and other development
partners for their continued support, including the concessional financing for reconstruction
in the hard-hit natural disaster areas. The 2007 budget that is being finalized for submission
to the Parliament in August will remain prudent with the central government deficit capped
below 1 percent of GDP.
9.
On the expenditure side, the government has taken steps to address the obstacles of
budget execution, both at the central and local government levels, by streamlining the
procurement procedures and improving the capacity of local governments while maintaining
proper governance, transparency, and accountability. The existing cash transfer scheme that
has successfully targeted the poor is being further improved to sharpen its focus. The new
scheme will directly link the cash transfer with the needs of the beneficiary for education and
health expenses. As discussed in the staff report on the Observance of Standards and Codes

3
(ROSC) Fiscal Transparency Module, Indonesia has taken impressive steps in recent years to
improve fiscal transparency and further actions in this direction are well underway. The
recent establishment of a fiscal policy office and a new debt management unit are expected to
further strengthen the assessment of fiscal risks and public debt management. On the revenue
side, the implementation of modern tax offices is to be expanded to medium and small tax
payers’ offices. The tax and customs reforms that are expected to be passed by the Parliament
by end-2006, will help expand the tax base and enhance revenue collection over the nearand-medium term.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
10.
The overriding objective of BI in the conduct of monetary policy is to contain
inflation. Monetary policy was significantly tightened towards end-2005 and remained so
until Q1-2006 so as to limit the second-round effects of the sharp increase in domestic fuel
prices. As inflationary pressures eased, BI cautiously reduced the SBI rate by 25 bps in May.
BI is nevertheless well aware that an excessive decline in the domestic interest rate could
undermine the credibility of monetary policy, and in this connection, although inflationary
pressures clearly receded in June, BI only cut its rate in early July by another 25 bps to 12.25
percent to take into account the developments in international financial markets. BI will
continue to be cautious and interest rates will be reduced only when inflationary pressures
show clear signs of abating. Furthermore, BI has intervened in the foreign exchange market
to smooth abrupt movements in the exchange rate without targeting any specific exchange
rate level. The authorities also concur with the view, as expressed in the Selected Issues
paper, that exchange rate stability needs to be maintained in order to support the convergence
process of lowering inflation to regional levels.
11.
BI has made considerable progress to further strengthen the implementation of the
inflation targeting (IT) framework. Its communication strategy and analytical capabilities are
being improved, while policy coordination with the government continues to be
strengthened. For transparency, the monetary policy stance is announced to the public every
month. BI has also strengthened its coordination with the Central Bureau of Statistics to
improve the quality of statistics, including the contribution of administered and nonadministered commodity prices to inflation, and key inflation indicators like core inflation, so
as to enable BI to conduct effective inflation surveillance and monitoring. The authorities
concur with the staff that the flexible exchange rate system has served the economy well.
They are committed to maintaining the system which is supportive of the IT framework.
Financial Sector Policy
12.
BI has made further progress in strengthening banking supervision and prudential
regulations to comply with international best practices. Early this year, BI issued a banking
regulation package, including the provisions on promoting governance and enhancing
customer protection. To facilitate the banking consolidation process in line with the
Indonesian Banking Architecture (API), BI plans to introduce a single-presence-policy that
will bar a single shareholder from owning a dominant stake in more than one bank. A major
shareholder who already has a “controlling interest”, as defined by BI, in more than one bank

4
will be given options to merge the banks, reduce the stake, or set up a special holding
company in Indonesia. The policy is expected to encourage mergers and enhance effective
banking supervision. While agreeing on the policy to privatize state-owned banks, the
authorities, at this time however, attach greater priority on improving the performance of the
state banks before contemplating a specific time frame for privatization. To further
strengthen the banking infrastructure, BI has improved the existing Debtor Information
System (DIS) so that all borrowers of banks as well as a large number of nonbank financial
institutions are now covered under the new system. The authorities have also made progress
through the introduction of retail bond transactions, beginning this month as part of the
overall strategy to develop the domestic bond market.
Structural Reforms
13.
The authorities are intensifying their structural reform agenda to further improve the
investment climate, increase public infrastructure, and strengthen the financial sector
intermediation that are necessary for improving efficiency of the economy and accelerating
growth. A time-bound investment policy package was introduced in February this year,
which involves a series of measures and actions to improve the investment climate. Key
elements of the package include strengthening service institutions, synchronizing regional
and central regulations, and improving customs, taxes, and labor regulations. Towards this
end, a draft investment law has been submitted to the Parliament in March. Furthermore,
there is increasing clarity on the proposed tax law, including key revisions to the initial draft
to redress the balance between taxpayer’s rights and the retention of power with the tax
officer. The new management teams installed recently in the tax and customs offices,
together with the modernization of the tax and customs laws, unequivocally reflect the
willingness of the authorities to address private sector concerns. The problem of illegal local
tax is also being addressed through a plan to move from an open to a closed system, which
will curtail local governments’ imposition of illegal taxes and levies. Steps have also been
taken to streamline various regulations on trade licensing, delegating more authority to the
regional governments for business licensing, and simplifying the immigration procedures for
foreign investors and workers. A preliminary draft of the revised labor law designed to
increase labor market flexibility ran into opposition from labor groups and is currently being
re-examined in consultation with the business community and labor unions.
14.
Two other policy packages covering infrastructure and the financial sector were
issued as an integral part of the investment policy package. The authorities are well aware of
the need for the smooth implementation of infrastructure projects with active participation
from private investors. In this connection, the government has further improved the
regulation on the risk sharing mechanism for infrastructure projects under the umbrella of
public-private partnerships (PPP). The new regulation clearly specifies the criteria for
financial support that can be provided by the government for PPP investment projects while
avoiding unfunded liabilities for the budget. The new guidelines complement the existing
regulations on electricity toll roads, water piping systems, and land acquisitions for public
use issued last year and are expected to provide sufficient incentives for private investors to
participate in the PPP schemes.

5
15.
The government and BI has jointly launched a financial sector package early this
month aimed at improving policy coordination and advancing the regulation and supervision
of both banks and non-bank financial institutions. The policy package covers time-bound
initiatives to strengthen financial system stability and banking institutions, including specific
action plans to address the NPLs of state-owned banks by allowing these banks to give
haircuts on loan principal, reforming the non-bank financial institutions, and improving the
efficiency of capital markets.
Regional Cooperation
16.
Efforts to strengthen trade and investment cooperation are being intensified.
Indonesia has made commitments in the framework of the ASEAN + 31 to reduce import
tariffs so as to further enhance regional cooperation. In May, Indonesia signed Preferential
Trade Agreements (PTAs) with the D-8 member countries2 aimed at promoting trade through
the reduction of tariffs to the predetermined rates within a 4 to 8 year time frame. Indonesia
also recently signed a Framework Agreement on Economic Cooperation with Singapore
aimed at developing Special Economic Zones (SEZs) in the Indonesian islands of Batam,
Bintan, and Karimun. It is expected that the SEZs will facilitate FDI and improve the
country’s international competitiveness. Intensive bilateral negotiations with major trading
partners are also being pursued to revitalize trade activities going forward.
Conclusion
17.
Despite experiencing several external shocks in recent years, Indonesia has made
significant progress in strengthening its economic fundamentals. The authorities are well
aware of the remaining challenges and are strongly committed to intensifying the reform
agenda while maintaining macroeconomic stability. The goal is to enhance the country’s
international competitiveness through improvements in efficiency and economic productivity,
which are essential for private sector-led growth, ultimately leading to a reduction in
unemployment and poverty. The authorities would also like to thank Management and
Executive Directors for the technical assistance provided to Indonesia in various areas that has
helped the country make significant progress in recent years. Finally, the Indonesian
authorities remain committed to transparency and consent to the publication of all staff
reports, with necessary deletions of market sensitive information.

1

The ASEAN+3 are the 10 ASEAN member countries plus China, Japan, and South Korea.

2

The D-8 countries are Egypt, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Turkey.

