May 2005
Corrected
IMF Country Report No. 05/149

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

Gabon: 2005 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement,
and Review of Financing Assurances—Staff Report; Public Information Notice and
Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Gabon
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV
consultation with Gabon, third review under the Stand-By Arrangement, and review of financing
assurances, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the combined consultation and 2005 Article IV consultation, third review
under the Stand-By Arrangement, and review of financing assurances, prepared by a staff
team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on February 19, 2005, with the officials of
Gabon on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of
these discussions, the staff report was completed on March 16, 2005. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its March 28, 2005, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for of Gabon.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Gabon*
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*May also be included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
GABON
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Stand-By
Arrangement, and Review of Financing Assurances
Prepared by the African Department
(in consultation with other departments)
Approved by David Nellor and Juha Kähkönen
March 16, 2005
•

•

•

•

•
•

Discussions on the 2005 Article IV consultation and the third review under the Stand-By
Arrangement were held in Libreville during February 5-19. The mission team comprised
Mr. Nord (head), Mr. Melhado, Mr. Geiregat (all AFR), Mr. Di Bella (PDR), and Mr. Saadi
(FAD). The mission was assisted by Mr. Randriamaholy, the Fund’s Resident Representative
in Gabon. Mr. Nguema-Affane (OED) attended most meetings. The mission met with
President Bongo Ondimba; the Minister of State in Charge of Finance, Mr. Toungui; the
Minister of State in charge of Planning, Mr. Oyé Mba; the Central Bank National Director,
Mr. Andzembé; and other senior officials. It worked closely with World Bank and African
Development Bank staff on forestry issues, private sector development, and the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors commended the
Gabonese authorities for moving to break with their past uneven record and embarking on a
program of prudent fiscal policies and far-reaching structural reforms. Directors emphasized
that the expected progressive contraction of the oil sector and related government revenues
lends urgency to the need to diversify the economy and bolster non-oil growth. Directors
underscored that Gabon’s medium-term prospects are subject to the risks posed by its heavy
debt burden, requiring a strong program to stimulate growth and place debt on a more
sustainable path.
In support of the authorities’ program, and following a staff-monitored program covering
September-December 2003, the Executive Board approved a 14-month stand-by arrangement
on May 28, 2004, in the amount of SDR 69.44 million (45 percent of quota). The first and
second reviews were concluded on September 20 and December 22, 2004, respectively.
In the attached letter dated March 14, 2005, the authorities report on developments under the
program through end-2004 and formulate objectives and policies for 2005. In view of the
strong balance of payments position, they declare that they will treat the arrangement as
precautionary.
Data provision is adequate for surveillance purposes. The database is fairly comprehensive,
key information relevant for surveillance is generally compiled in accordance with
international standards and is provided to the staff on a timely basis.
Gabon has accepted the obligations of Article VIII and maintains an exchange system free of
restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Introduction........................................................................................................................5

II.

Recent Economic Developments and Performance Under the
Stand-By Arrangement ...................................................................................................6

III. Policy Discussions ...........................................................................................................12
A.
Macroeconomic Outlook and Policies and Prospects for the Oil Sector ...............12
B.
Medium-Term Challenges .....................................................................................15
C.
Structural Reforms to Boost Non-Oil Growth .......................................................16
D.
Poverty Reduction Strategies.................................................................................19
IV. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................19
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-07 ..........................................................................23
2. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2003-05 ..................................................24
3. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2000-07 ..................................................26
4.. Quarterly Monetary Survey, 2003-05 ..............................................................................28
5. Monetary Survey, 2000-07 ..............................................................................................29
6. Balance of Payments, 2001-07 ........................................................................................30
7. External Debt Outstanding and Scheduled Debt Service, 2001-07 .................................31
8. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2003-07 ................................................33
9. Income and Social Indicators, 1980-2002 .......................................................................34
10. Millennium Development Goals......................................................................................35
11. Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 2000-09 ...............................................37
12. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1999-2004 .............................................................38
13. Sources of Growth, 2003-08 ............................................................................................39
14. Banking Sector Soundness Indicators, 1998-2004 ..........................................................40
Boxes
1.
Policy Implementation Under Fund-Supported Programs—What Changed? ..................6
2.
The Oil Sector in Gabon ...................................................................................................8
3.
Competitiveness and Non-Oil Growth in Gabon..............................................................9
4. Managing Oil Revenues in Gabon—A Role for the Fund for Future Generations? ......11
5.
The Public Sector Wage Bill and the New Civil Service Law .......................................14
6.
Medium-Term Sustainability—Debt Burden and Fiscal Constraints.............................16

-3-

Contents

Page

Appendices
I.
Letter of Intent ................................................................................................................41
Annex: Technical Memorandum of Understanding ..................................................51
II. Relations with the Fund ..................................................................................................60
III. Relations with the World Bank.......................................................................................62
IV. Assessing External and Public Sector Debt Sustainability .............................................66
V. Bank of Central African States: Safeguards Assessments..............................................76
VI. Statistical Issues ..............................................................................................................77

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The 14-month stand-by arrangement approved in May 2004 remains broadly on track. All
quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2004 were met, as were most structural
benchmarks. However, there were delays in some areas, notably the introduction of the new
civil service law, which promised a better structural grip on the wage bill, and in fiscal
transparency. And while oil production remained level in 2004 – and is expected to remain so
in 2005 – its steady medium-term decline is expected to resume.
The 2005 budget targets an ambitious reduction in the non-oil primary deficit of 2 percentage
points of GDP. The targeted adjustment remains appropriate and is evenly divided between
reducing expenditure (notably on wages) and raising non-oil revenue. However, there are risks
on the revenue side, particularly if non-oil growth fails to pick up.
Gabon has so far saved the significant oil windfall revenue, using it to reduce debt levels, pay
back domestic arrears, and increase government deposits, including in the Fund for Future
Generations. The oil revenue windfall represents an opportunity to address decisively the
legacy of past fiscal slippages and to place the public finances on a much sounder footing. The
government should seize this opportunity to reduce debt levels and hence Gabon’s
vulnerability to future swings in oil prices.
The key medium-term challenge for Gabon is to diversify its economy and prepare for the
post-oil era, while reducing its high external debt burden. To that end, the government has
initiated a far-reaching structural reform program, including the privatization of key public
enterprises. However, a significant agenda remains to create an attractive environment for
private sector development and make progress in reducing poverty. Work is underway to
prepare a full PRSP articulating the government’s medium-term strategy, which should be
ready by August 2005.
Preparing Gabon for the post-oil era requires strengthening the efficiency of the public sector
and providing a framework for private sector development to raise the productivity of the
Gabonese economy. In the public sector, improving expenditure management especially of
public investment is essential. Private sector development requires acting on the many solid
recommendations by the recent report by the World Bank Group’s Foreign Investment
Advisory Services. Key elements among these are streamlining the regulatory framework and
improving the transparency and predictability of the legal environment. Gabon’s adherence to
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and its timetable for meeting its
requirements in the coming months are welcome.
Gabon remains keen to seek a multi-year follow-up program after the expiration of the standby arrangement this coming June. The staff is open to such a request, provided performance
under the stand-by arrangement remains satisfactory and the foundations for a medium-term
program—articulated in a high-quality PRSP—are in place.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
During the past ten years, Gabon’s economic performance has been uneven. Oil
booms and political cycles resulted in a ratcheting up of public expenditure, followed by
painful adjustment periods when oil prices fell. Poor public expenditure management led to
the repeated accumulation of arrears, both domestic and foreign, and social indicators have
remained poor despite Gabon’s rich endowment in natural resources. Oil production has
fallen by one third since 1997 as oil fields have matured, although progress in extraction
technology and recent high oil prices have boosted investment in existing oil fields and
stabilized production temporarily. Although per capita income is high by sub-Saharan
African standards (US$5,439 in 2004), available information suggests that income
distribution remains highly uneven. Moreover, with oil production stagnant, real per capita
income in CFA franc has declined each year since 1999.
2.
Against the background of declining prospects for the oil sector, the authorities
put in place a far-reaching economic reform program in 2003. Anchored by fiscal
consolidation, notably strict control of the wage bill, and ambitious structural reforms aimed
at boosting non-oil growth, the authorities’ program received support from the Fund through
a staff monitored program during September–December 2003 and a 14-month stand-by
arrangement approved in May 2004 in an amount of SDR 69.4 million. Official bilateral
creditors agreed to reschedule outstanding arrears and debt falling due during the period
covered by the Fund arrangement, providing debt relief totaling US$849 million (Paris Club).
3.
Past implementation of Fund policy advice has been mixed. During the past
decade, Gabon has had two Fund arrangements prior to the current one, an EFF (1995–98)
and a stand-by arrangements (2000–01), both of which went off track (Box 1).
4.
Implementation of the government’s current Fund-supported program has been
satisfactory. The first two reviews under the 2004–05 stand-by arrangement were completed
and Gabon has made three equal purchases, for a total amount of SDR 41.7 million. In the
letter of intent for the third review, the authorities describe progress in economic policy
implementation so far and specify their policies for the remainder of the 2005 (Appendix I).
Summaries of Gabon’s relations with the Fund and World Bank appear in
Appendices II and III. Appendices IV, V, and VI contain an assessment of external and
public sector debt sustainability, a safeguard assessment for the Bank of Central African
States (BEAC), and a summary of statistical issues, respectively.

-6-

Box 1. Policy Implementation Under Fund-Supported Programs—What
Changed?
The current stand-by arrangement is the third arrangement supported by Fund resources in
Gabon since 1995.
The EFF approved in November 1995 went off-track in the second half of 1997, after two
reviews had been completed, primarily as a result of fiscal slippages in 1998 related to the
electoral calendar, which amounted to over 16 percent of GDP. No further reviews were
completed under the EFF. In October 2000, the authorities requested an 18-month stand-by
arrangement. Significant steps were taken to correct the 1998 fiscal slippages, through
strengthened expenditure control and monitoring, increased transparency in government
financial operations, and changes in the government, including a reorganization of the Ministry
of Finance. However, after completing the first and second reviews, with some delay, in July
2001, this program also went off-track as a result of repeated fiscal slippages in the face of a
very high debt service burden.
Gabon’s poor track record led to some delay in putting in place the current stand-by
arrangement, which was preceded by a four-month staff-monitored program from SeptemberDecember 2003. Since the approval of the 14-month SBA in May 2004, two reviews have been
completed and all quantitative performance criteria through end-December 2004 have been
observed. Two key factors may have contributed to the improvement in performance:
•

First, the decline in oil production, which started in 1997, starkly revealed the need for
adjustment in Gabon. The current high levels of oil prices are perceived as a welcome,
but temporary palliative to ease the adjustment path.

•

Second, ownership of the reform program is strong at both the highest political levels
and at the technical level. A particularly strong technical team that includes both the
Presidency and the Ministry of Finance, is able to play a valuable coordinating role in
implementing the far-reaching reform program and maintaining fiscal discipline
despite significant windfall revenue from oil.

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PERFORMANCE UNDER
THE STAND-BY ARRANGEMENT
5.
GDP growth is estimated to have reached 1½ percent in 2004 (Table 1, Chart 1).
Non-oil growth of 2¼ percent benefited from rising output in manganese mining and timber
processing, while activity in construction, electricity, and cement production has picked up in
the second half of the year, spurred by the acceleration in the execution of public investment.
However, despite a broadly unchanged level of oil production, a drop in refinery activity and
oil exploration led to a decline of 1 percent in oil GDP. Moreover, prospects for the oil sector
are for a resumption of a steady decline in output, although government revenues will
continue to be buoyant while the current high prices prevail (Box 2).

-7-

8
6

Real GDP Growth Rates, 1999–2007
(In percent change)
Proj.

6.
Inflation declined to ½ percent in
4
2004, reflecting wage moderation and the
2
monetary discipline imposed by the fixed
0
exchange rate regime. The real exchange
-2
rate depreciated slightly in 2004, partly
-4
offsetting the sharp appreciation that took
-6
Total
place in 2003 when the euro appreciated
-8
Oil
significantly against the U.S. dollar (Chart
-10
Non-oil
2). However, competitiveness is estimated to -12
have remained relatively strong, not least as
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
a result of wage moderation (Box 3). The
Sources: Gabonese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
external position remained strong, the
current account surplus reached 10½ percent
of GDP, and Gabon’s contribution to the BEAC’s external assets more than doubled in 2004.
7.
Developments in monetary
Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates, January 1993–December 2004
aggregates in 2004 were marked
120
by the strength of the external
accounts and a high level of
100
domestic liquidity. Broad money
rose by 11½ percent in 2004. But
80
despite this increase in liquidity, net
domestic assets fell sharply, as a
60
result of the programmed decline in
net credit to government and further
Nominal effective exchange rate (left scale) 1/
40
drop in credit to the private sector.
Real effective exchange rate (left scale) 1/
Banks reduced their exposure to the
Exchange rate CFA francs per U.S. dollar (right scale)
20
domestic enterprise sector, reflecting
both additional prudence by banks
0
and more self-financing by
Jan-93
Jan-94
Jan-95
Jan-96
Jan-97
Jan-98
Jan-99
Jan-00
Jan-01
Jan-02
Jan-03
Jan-04
enterprises whose financial positions
Source: IMF, Information Notice System (INS).
were boosted by the government’s
1/ Index 1990=100. A decrease means a depreciation of the CFA franc.
settlement of domestic arrears.1
Banks were also constrained by the stricter prudential standards imposed by the COBAC,
which caused non-performing loans to rise from 13.8 to 15.8 percent of banks’ portfolios, but
banks remained adequately provisioned (Table 14).
1

In the context of the Club de Libreville, the government agreed to reschedule
CFAF 38.9 billion in domestic arrears in 2004. Suppliers were provided with negotiable
securities in the amount of their claims, carrying an interest rate of 7 percent and a maturity
of 18 months. However, several suppliers sold their securities to domestic banks (at a
negotiated discount) providing them with immediate liquidity. The government rescheduled a
further CFAF 17.4 billion in January 2005.

900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

-8-

Box 2. The Oil Sector in Gabon
The Gabonese oil sector operates largely on mature oil fields. Technological advances
and significant investments during the past years have helped maintain production in
2005 at an expected 98 million barrels. One oil company specializes in the operation
of marginal fields that the larger companies no longer find attractive, which has also
contributed to sustain overall production levels. Nevertheless, barring any new
discoveries of oil, production is expected to decline gradually over the next decade to
59.4 million barrels in 2010 (based on projections made by the Direction Générale des
Hydrocarbures).
Production
Millions
of barrel

Oil Revenues
CFAF Billion

Oil Revenues
Percentage
of GDP

Oil Price
Average
Brent

Year
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

138.1
114.2
99.4
94.8
91.7
98.6
99.5
98.1
88.7
80.2
70.1
62.3
59.4

498.3
368.6
814.7
752.9
609.0
570.2
600.0
702.4
618.5
525.6
440.7
386.1
335.3

18.8
12.8
22.5
21.8
17.7
16.2
15.7
16.9
15.5
13.6
11.7
10.3
9.0

12.7
17.7
28.3
24.5
25.0
28.9
38.3
48.0
45.3
42.5
41.3
40.5
40.0

Sources: Gabonese authorities, and IMF staff estimates.
Oil companies in Gabon work under two types of contracts: either concession
agreements or production sharing agreements (Contrats d’exploration et de partage
de production, CEPP). Under a concession agreement, the company pays royalties
and income taxes on profits, and investment expenditures are put in cost through
gradual amortization. The company obtains the title over the exploration and
production, and government oversight is rather limited. In contrast, CEPP is designed
as a partnership between the government and the oil company. The government
retains ownership over the land and the installations, and is regularly informed about
aspects of exploration, production and planning. The oil company does not pay
income taxes; instead, net production (production after deducting royalties) is split
into a “cost oil” and “profit oil” component. The cost oil component allows the oil
company to recuperate operating costs and investment spending (up to a maximum
percentage of the net production per period), and the profit oil component is shared
among the partners, including the government and the oil company.

-9-

Box 3. Competitiveness and Non-Oil Growth in Gabon
Gabon’s economy continues to face major challenges, including a secular decline in oil
production, lack of economic diversification, and weak non-oil growth. In order to fully
mobilize Gabon’s growth potential and attract new investment, it is necessary to understand
what the key constraints are for the non-oil sector to grow (See Chapter II in the accompanying
Selected Economic Issues paper).
In spite of the recent appreciation of the CFA franc, the profitability for Gabon’s
traditional non-oil exports seems to have been preserved. The prices of the country’s main
non-oil export commodities have risen sharply since 2001, when expressed in U.S. dollars,
more than offsetting the appreciation of the CFA franc vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. Indeed, the
profitability of these sectors has recently attracted a number of new, mainly foreign, investors.
However, the high levels of public sector employment and wages may be constraining the
competitiveness of non-oil tradable sector. Average wages for Gabon’s civil servants are
high by regional standards, setting the reservation wage at a level that may hamper private
sector development. Moreover, a significant share of the most qualified workers is absorbed by
the government. More generally, the high public sector expenditure is translated into levels of
effective fiscal pressure that results in elevated levels of informality. The activities that remain
formal are those that seem to be most efficient. Indeed, during the last fifteen years, labor
productivity growth in the formal private sector has been positive and unit labor costs have
decreased in real terms.
The composition of non-oil GDP and its growth indicate that, indeed, domestic relative
prices may be discouraging tradable activities. The proportion of tradable activities in nonoil GDP has decreased from approximately one third in the early 1980s to one quarter in recent
years. Moreover, non-oil export growth has been relatively modest (2.5 percent, on average,
during 1990–2003), extremely volatile, and strongly concentrated in timber (80 percent of total
non-oil exports) and manganese
(15 percent).
This underscores the need of sustaining fiscal discipline and the structural reform effort
in the medium term. Sustaining the current fiscal and structural reform efforts is essential to
liberate resources for private sector development, reduce fiscal pressure, and change the current
structure of price/cost incentives, all factors that are key to promoting non-oil growth. These
efforts are even more relevant given the fixed peg of the CFA franc against the euro.

- 10 -

Gabon: Oil Production and Ratio Oil Revenues / Oil Exports

8.
The fiscal stance in
100%
160
2004 remained tight. The
overall budget surplus was
90%
Oil Production in Millions of
140
Barrels (Left scale)
maintained at 7½ percent of
80%
GDP, while the non-oil primary 120
70%
deficit fell by ½ percentage
100
60%
point to 7¾ percent of non-oil
GDP in 2004, reflecting both
50%
80
an improvement in non-oil
40%
60
revenue and expenditure
30%
restraint, notably on wages and
40
Oil Revenues / Oil Exports
salaries. The government’s
20%
(Right scale)
20
share of oil revenues has
10%
declined in recent years as a
0
0%
result of the shift to production1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
sharing agreements that allow
oil companies to recoup investment costs more quickly (Chart). Nevertheless, high oil prices
resulted in significant oil windfall revenue, which was used primarily to reduce foreign and
domestic debt and increase deposits in the Fund for Future Generations (Text table, Box 4).
Gabon: Projected Uses of Oil Revenue Windfall, 2004-05
(In billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)
2004
Prog.
World oil price (Brent, U.S. dollars per barrel)
Exchange Rate (CFAF/US)
Oil production (in million tons)
Oil government revenue
Projected oil revenue windfall
Uses

2005
Prel.

Prog.

30.0

38.2

27.0

532.6

528.3

Rev. Prog.

Proj. 1/

44.2

48.1

530.9

488.4

13.3

13.6

11.5

13.1

13.5

508.1

600.0

412.7

670.0

702.4

0.0

91.9

0.0

257.3

289.7

0.0

91.9

0.0

257.3

289.7

0.0

26.7

0.0

48.2

66.4

Fund for Future Generations 2/

0.0

-26.7

0.0

48.2

66.4

Other BEAC deposits

0.0

35.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

Commercial Bank deposits

0.0

17.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

Repayment of BEAC's statutory advances

0.0

17.2

0.0

74.6

102.2

Lower recourse to external debt rescheduling 3/

0.0

34.1

0.0

96.1

96.1

Reduction in arrears

0.0

10.0

0.0

38.4

25.0

Treasury float (exc. FER)

0.0

17.0

0.0

13.4

0.0

FER arrears

0.0

-3.8

0.0

25.0

25.0

0.0

-3.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

Government deposits

Wages
Others (net)
Sources: Authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Oil windfall projections for 2005 based on latest WEO oil price projections.

2/ For the 2004 preliminary, it represents a slower accumulation than targeted, not a decline in FFG deposits. For 2005 deposits reflect
the application of the FFG law, which stipulates that 10 percent of the government oil revenues plus 50 percent of any windfall over
the level projected in the government budget should go to the FFG.
3/ For 2004, this represents the agreement with Paris Club creditors to reduce the amount of rescheduled debt in case of an oil
revenue windfall, net of any unsigned bilateral agreements. For 2005, it reflects the amount of debt service to Paris Club creditors
in the second half of 2005.

- 11 -

Box 4. Managing Oil Revenues in Gabon—
A Role for the Fund for Future Generations?
Every country that has exhaustible natural resources faces specific macroeconomic challenges.
In the short and medium term, fiscal revenues are often highly volatile and unpredictable,
increasing the need for prudent planning and precautionary saving. A seemingly endless inflow
of foreign exchange from the “enclave sector” may exacerbate governance problems and may
put pressure on the exchange rate and prices, impeding the development of other sectors. Over
the long term, issues of intergenerational equity must be addressed, especially when society is
financing current spending from exhaustible oil wealth. Each generation must first decide how
much of extracted oil wealth will be consumed and saved. This saving could be in the form of
an increase in financial wealth (including productive investments), paying down debt, or both,
and the proportions of each should optimally depend on risk-return characteristics.
Several economies with natural resource revenues have set up funds aimed at helping
governments achieve stabilization or savings objectives. In 1998, the Gabonese authorities
passed a law to set up a Fund for Future Generations (FFG). Under the law, the FFG should
receive (1) 10 percent of projected oil revenues, (2) 50 percent of any windfall revenues, and
(3) accumulated interest revenues, up to a minimum capital of CFAF 500 billion. Once the
minimum capital is reached, contributions would continue from (1) half of any windfall
revenue, and (2) 25 percent of the interest income. The FFG is held in a special account at the
central bank (BEAC), and since January 2005 is remunerated at 1.7 percent.
In the accompanying selected economic issues paper, staff estimates the potential impact of a
FFG on present and future generations, using different scenarios. Any FFG cannot be seen in
isolation of other government operations—an accumulation of FFG deposits does not
necessarily represent net government savings. However, if fiscal and debt sustainability criteria
are met, an FFG would leave future generations better off than if oil revenues were
immediately consumed or directed to unproductive investments. This holds even with a low
return on the FFG. However, under current circumstances the 1998 law does not achieve
intergenerational equity in Gabon: the consumption of present generations far exceeds a
“permanent income” concept. Moreover, once it is taken into account that the effective interest
rate on the stock of debt is higher than the current remuneration of the FFG, then future
generations would be better off if priority were given to using oil revenues to pay off some
debt obligations, at least the stock of advances from the BEAC.

9.
Performance under the stand-by arrangement remained broadly on track. All
quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2004 were observed. Most structural
benchmarks at end-December were also met, although there are delays in some areas, notably

- 12 -

the introduction of the new civil service law, which promised a better structural grip on the
wage bill, and in fiscal transparency (Table 2 attached to the LOI).2
10.
Looking ahead, the critical challenge facing Gabon is managing the transition
from an economy highly dependent on oil—accounting for 45 percent of GDP,
80 percent of exports, and over half of government revenue in 2004—to a diversified
economy that harnesses private sector initiative and makes progress in poverty
reduction. Compounding the difficulty of this task is Gabon’s high level of external debt and
its vulnerability to swings in oil prices. This will require maintaining the hard-won fiscal
discipline—and indeed deepening the fiscal consolidation in preparation for a decline in oil
revenues—while accelerating the structural reform program aimed at boosting private
investment and economic diversification.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
11.
Against this background, discussions were structured around four broad themes: the
macroeconomic outlook and policies for 2005, and prospects for the oil sector in particular;
medium-term challenges for fiscal and debt sustainability; structural reforms to boost non-oil
growth; and poverty reduction strategies.
A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Policies
and Prospects for the Oil Sector
12.
In 2005, non-oil real GDP growth is expected to rise to 3 percent, and further to
an average of 3½ percent during 2006–08. The authorities noted that the non-oil sector is
expected to benefit from a continued positive outlook for manganese, a further rise in timber
processing, and recent investments in agro-processing. Oil production, on the other hand, is
likely to stagnate at best. The authorities’ conservative projections are for an unchanged level
of production in 2005, followed by a average decline of 10 percent per year through 2010
(Box 2). Most private sector oil companies are slightly more optimistic and expect to be able
to maintain production at current levels for maybe a few more years. But all agree that absent
major new discoveries—which are not on the horizon—the decline in oil output in Gabon
will resume.
13.
Against this background, macroeconomic policy has an important role to play in
maintaining stability and preparing the economy for a post-oil environment. Fiscal
policy must take center stage. The 2005 budget is ambitious, targeting a reduction in the non-

2

The government recently reached agreement with a large foreign mining company to extend
certain tax and other privileges. While the agreement has not yet become effective, the
authorities are discussing with staff the implications for the observance of the continuous
benchmark limiting the granting of tax exemptions not provided for under the Mining Code.

- 13 -

oil primary deficit of 2 percentage points of non-oil GDP (para. 8 of the LOI).3 On the
revenue side, non-oil revenue is projected to increase, principally as a result of better tax
administration, including in collecting outstanding tax arrears.4 On the expenditure side,
transfers are budgeted to decline mainly as a result of the progress in restructuring ailing
public enterprises, including Gabon Poste and Air Gabon. Continued tight control of the
wage bill, which was reduced in nominal terms in 2004 and is set to remain broadly
unchanged in 2005, is a cornerstone of expenditure discipline.
14.
The mission expressed support for the fiscal adjustment targeted in 2005, but
pointed to a number of fiscal risks. Notably, the delay in the implementation of the new
civil service reform has reduced the scope for a structural reform of the wage bill in 2005
(Box 5). On the revenue side, the reliance on primarily administrative measures, including
the collection of significant amounts of tax arrears, raises concerns. The mission welcomed
the formal establishment of the large tax payer unit (LTU), but urged the authorities to ensure
that it becomes effective as soon as possible. The authorities shared the mission’s view that
the delay in the civil service reform is regrettable. To compensate for the delay, they
identified a set of short-term measures to eliminate remaining distortions in civil service
salaries (including notably further cleanup of payroll records and better management of
fixed-term employees), which will maintain the wage bill at its 2004 level without incurring
wage arrears. On the LTU, the authorities agreed to accelerate its effective operation by
transferring some tasks to it during this fiscal year (para. 7 of the LOI).
15.
A comprehensive social security system and a trend toward political
decentralization puts pressure on public finances. A variety of benefits, including health
care and retirement benefits, are provided to employees and the self-employed through a payas-you-go system to which both employers and employees contribute. However, both the
National Social Security Fund (CNSS) and the National Social Guarantee Fund (CNGS) have
been beset by financial difficulties, reflecting both inadequate contributions (especially by
3
4

All references are to paragraphs of the Letter of Intent of March 14, 2005, in Appendix I.

In 2004, the government introduced a major reform of forestry taxation with technical
support from the World Bank and in close cooperation with the private sector. The main
thrust of the reform was to reduce a cumbersome system to three main taxes: an export tax,
an area tax, and a stumpage tax. The rate of export tax was reduced from 22 to 17 percent,
while the rates for the area and stumpage taxes were raised. This resulted in a shift away
from export taxes to domestically-based taxes, although total tax revenue from the forestry
sector remained broadly unchanged in 2004. A further lowering of export taxes is possible
with better domestic tax administration; currently, tax arrears remain significant both for the
area tax and, especially, the stumpage tax, reaching CFAF 18.1 billion in 2004. As a result,
the government is reinforcing its efforts to collect forestry taxes, including through
mandatory withholding of a presumptive stumpage tax at the processing level and by
threatening to revoke the forestry permits of those not paying the area tax.

- 14 -

Box 5. The Public Sector Wage Bill and the New Civil Service Law
The public sector comprises about 48,000 employees, of which 44,000 are civil servants
(fonctionnaires) and the remainder are on contract. Average salaries are higher than in most
other sub-Saharan African countries and the size of the wage bill, expressed as a ratio of
non-oil GDP, places Gabon among African countries with the most expensive civil service.
Table: Wage Bill and Civil Service Salaries
Gabon 1/
Cameroon Senegal Ghana
Kenya
Number of civil servants
48,113
165,972
67,429 324,494 429,810
Average salary (CFAF/month)
392,000
216,500
252,000 68,500 112,000
Wage bill (% of GDP)
6.2
5.8
5.5
8.7
6.9
Wage bill (% of non-oil GDP)
10.6
6.2
---1/
Data for Gabon are for 2004, for other countries the data are for the last year available.

Namibia
85,000
399,000
14.7
--

During 2004, the government prepared a new civil service law. Two key objectives were to
reduce wage drift through a merit-based promotion system rather than automatic
advancements and a better control of fixed-term employees in the public sector. However,
Parliament introduced numerous amendments when the law was adopted in January. In
particular, the law provides for the creation of five separate statutes (central government,
local government, health care sector, education sector, and Parliament), raising concern that
increased independence of parts of the public sector could reduce incentives for wage
moderation. As a result, the government is reviewing the entire law to assess its budgetary
impact before adopting the necessary implementing legislation. Key parts of the law are
already effective, however, in particular the merit-based promotion system, meaning that
civil servants currently at the top of their grade can no longer advance without a promotion
decision.
public enterprise employers) and the high cost structure of the CNSS and the CNGS
themselves. The government is providing financial assistance to both funds; in return, they
have embarked on a comprehensive restructuring plan to reduce their costs (para. 9 of the
LOI).5 The mission expressed support for the restructuring of the CNSS, but underscored that
any fundamental reform would need to take into account its long-term viability, including by
examining the levels of benefits (which, on paper, are quite generous by international
standards). The political decentralization that was initiated in 1996 has led to an expansion in
5

In January 2005, the government assumed CFAF 20 billion of debt, primarily of parastatal
enterprises, owed to the CNSS, and it is envisaged that it will assume a further
CFAF 2 billion owed to the CNGS later this year. These debts will be repaid to the CNSS
and the CNGS during 2005–06.

- 15 -

the scope and size of local governments. However, their revenue base remains narrow and
many are in financial difficulties. Work is underway to put local authority finances on a
sounder footing, including by strengthening the basis for assessing and collecting property
tax. Progress has been made in Libreville and Port Gentil and the authorities intend to
accelerate efforts to attribute permanent land titles, which has the dual benefit of broadening
the tax base and promoting access to financial services for small and medium-sized
enterprises (para. 10 of the LOI).
16.
Monetary and exchange rate policy are formulated at the level of the CEMAC
zone. Nevertheless, common policies have an impact at the national level. The authorities felt
that the exchange rate peg, and the resulting appreciation of the exchange rate in recent years,
had not had a negative impact on competitiveness. Other factors, notably high transport costs,
lack of access to credit and a burdensome regulatory framework play a more important role
in determining Gabon’s competitiveness. By the same token, the authorities did not feel that
the BEAC’s relatively tight monetary stance had disproportionately constrained economic
growth in Gabon. In fact, the high level of liquidity in the banking system in Gabon, as in the
CEMAC zone more broadly, had limited the relevance of the BEAC’s base rate. In their
view, the reason for the banks’ weak lending activity was the lack of lending opportunities
rather than the interest rate environment. The mission agreed that the common monetary
policy only had an indirect impact on the behavior of Gabonese banks. At the same time, it
expressed concern about the sharp increase in liquidity and the risks that it posed. Both the
BEAC and the COBAC, responsible for prudential supervision, need to remain vigilant in
particular regarding the rapid accumulation by commercial banks of foreign assets held
abroad.6
17.
The government continues to make good progress on external debt
restructuring. It has concluded bilateral agreements with the majority of Paris Club
creditors in the context of the June 2004 debt rescheduling; remaining agreements are
expected to be finalized before end-April. Outside of the Paris Club, Gabon is pursuing
negotiations with Saudi Arabia, China and Libya. Finally, with respect to commercial
creditors, the authorities indicated that a draft agreement has already been finalized with the
London Club and should be signed in the coming weeks (para. 5 of the LOI).
B. Medium-Term Challenges
18.
Fiscal restraint coupled with high oil prices has improved Gabon’s fiscal and
debt sustainability (Box 6 and Appendix IV). Under the current (conservative) assumptions
for oil production that underlie the baseline scenario, Gabon faces no financing gaps in 2005
and 2006. But projections are very sensitive to oil price assumptions: a drop by 20 percent

6

The forthcoming regular discussions with the CEMAC authorities will address in depth the
monetary and exchange rate policies at the level of the monetary union.

- 16 -

Box 6. Medium-Term Sustainability—Debt Burden and Fiscal Constraints
The medium-term outlook in Gabon is highly sensitive to the development in oil production
and oil prices. Current projections by the Gabonese authorities are that after remaining flat in
2005, oil production will resume its decline, falling by an average of 10 percent per year
through 2010.
Staff projection examine two broad scenarios: the baseline scenario is based on the authorities’
conservative outlook for oil production and extends the average rate of decline through 2025.
A second, more optimistic scenario assumes that oil production will remain at current levels
until 2007 (reflecting the views of the major oil companies active in Gabon) and declines
thereafter at the same rate as in the baseline.
Medium-term fiscal simulations illustrate the importance of saving the current windfall from
oil revenue (see Chapter III of the accompanying Selected Economic Issues paper for details).
Assuming the government continues to save the full windfall—defined as all revenue above
US$35 per barrel of Brent—and it exercises wage restraint, the fiscal scenarios are sustainable.
However, should the full windfall be spent and/or wage restraint fail to be maintained,
significant fiscal gaps begin to emerge.
The standard external debt sustainability analysis reveals similar conclusions (Appendix IV).
The baseline yields a steadily declining debt-to-GDP ratio and no financing gaps through 2014.
However, the stress tests reveal that Gabon’s debt sustainability remains extremely sensitive to
shocks to non-oil output growth, to changes in the production and the price of oil, and to the
degree of fiscal discipline. Similarly, should the oil windfalls resulting from the current price
levels be spent rather than saved, debt dynamics quickly turn unsustainable and require forceful
fiscal adjustment measures. These results highlight the importance of prudent fiscal policies
and of fostering the development of the non-oil economy by encouraging private sector
development and the diversification of Gabon’s economic base.

relative to the current outlook opens up significant unfinanced gaps starting in 2006. The
scenarios illustrate that the current high oil prices represent an opportunity to reduce
decisively Gabon’s debt burden. For example, under baseline assumptions, if all oil windfall
revenue is applied to debt reduction, the external debt/GDP ratio falls by half by 2010. If, on
the other hand, windfall revenue is spent in its entirety, external debt/GDP remains broadly
unchanged, financing gaps reemerge, and the government is faced with the need for severe
fiscal measures to avoid accumulating debt-service arrears.
C. Structural Reforms to Boost Non-Oil Growth
19.
Raising economic growth in the face of declining oil production requires
structural reforms aimed at promoting investment and economic diversification.
Against this background, discussions focused on four key areas: financial sector reforms,
including the development of microfinance institutions; measures to improve the investment

- 17 -

climate, including strengthening governance and transparency; public enterprise restructuring
and privatization; and the ongoing reforms in two critical sectors, forestry and mining, in
which the World Bank is becoming increasingly engaged.
20.
The 2002 Financial Sector Stability Assessment found that Gabon’s financial
sector was stable and profitable.7 At the same time, it concluded that the financial sector
remains under-developed compared to other countries with a similar economic structure. It
also noted that banks are vulnerable to even small macroeconomic shocks. The authorities
underscored that they had made progress in improving bank soundness (para. 15 of the LOI).
The COBAC had tightened prudential standards, resulting in an increase in the proportion of
loans classified as nonperforming. But it felt that provisions were adequate and no bank in
Gabon was classified below “a good financial situation,” the second-highest level.
Microfinance institutions remain embryonic in Gabon compared to other countries in the
region. But the authorities emphasized that they have encouraged their development and
believe that they could play an important role, particularly in providing finance to small
enterprises. They also intend to strengthen the role of the FODEX (Fund for the
Development and Expansion of SMEs) to support the microfinance sector.
21.
The World Bank Group’s Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) recently
conducted a review of Gabon’s investment climate. Key constraints identified include the
lack of sources of financing for small and medium-size enterprises; the high cost of utilities,
harbor services, and transportation; a heavy regulatory environment, particularly for the
establishment of new businesses; and a cumbersome judicial system, including for the
settlement of commercial disputes. In February, the government organized a workshop with
private sector participation to discuss the report (para. 17 of the LOI). Participants reinforced
the conclusions of the report and agreed that a joint public-private action plan would be
drawn up to implement some of the key recommendations. A follow-up study on
streamlining the regulatory environment is envisaged. The mission welcomed the initiatives
underway but suggested that this was not the time to design yet another grand strategy.
Rather, the focus should be on measures that can be put in place relatively quickly and that
would pay immediate dividends for private sector development, including by accelerating
land titling, further strengthening governance and transparency, and ensuring that public
sector investment provides the public goods necessary to catalyze private investment,
including reliable infrastructure. Steps can also be taken immediately to improve the
functioning of the Investment Promotion Agency (APIP) and focus it on the assistance to the
small and medium-sized enterprise sector, which is truly in need of support.
22.
The government remains committed to increase transparency and strengthen
governance. In December 2004, the new anti-corruption commission released its first report
(para. 13 of the LOI). The commission’s work program for 2005 has two main components:
promoting the observance of the financial disclosure rules that came into effect on
7

Gabon—Financial Sector Stability Assessment (Country Report No. 02/98, May 2002).

- 18 -

February 4, 2005, and continuing with its outreach effort within Gabon to make its mission
better understood and accepted.8 The mission welcomed the steps taken to date and urged
that the Commission move ahead and accelerate the implementation of the financial
disclosure regime, with active support from the government. The Commission noted that its
report will be published in the official gazette, and on its web site once it has been
established, and welcomed further Fund support to strengthen its activities. The new public
procurement code is beginning to play a positive role; however, its procedures are not always
observed and the institutional capacity to enforce it remains weak. The mission underscored
that the ongoing audits of the arrears of the Road Fund and of expenditures related to the
independence celebrations (fêtes tournantes) will be important to strengthen public
procurement procedures and, thereby, improve the quality of public spending (para. 12 of the
LOI). The authorities underscored that they remained committed to increasing transparency
in the extractive industries, notably the oil and mining sector. They have established a
program that would allow them to introduce fully the EITI’s principles of transparency and
participation in the oil sector by September 2005 (see para. 14 of the letter of intent in
Appendix I). Moreover, they plan to use the experience gained in the oil sector to extend the
principles to the mining sector by 2006. The authorities expressed a strong commitment to
strengthen accountability by reinforcing the role of the public procurement office (para. 12 of
the LOI). They also requested that the Fund prepare a fiscal ROSC, with emphasis on
revenue from natural resources, in the course of FY 2006.
23.
Public enterprise restructuring and privatization is proceeding (para. 19 of the
LOI). Significant progress has been made in recent months to prepare Gabon Télécom for
sale, and the authorities are confident that a successful bidder can be chosen by the end of
April 2005. Air Gabon, however, remains in a fragile financial state. Steps are underway to
reduce its costs and prepare it for partial privatization; a tender is expected to be launched by
September 2005.9
24.
Significant reforms are underway in the forestry sector (para. 18 of the LOI).
Following the decree issued in December abolishing the monopoly of the timber marketing
board (SNBG), the government has formed a steering committee to prepare the transition to a
new role and structure for the SNBG. The objective is to downsize the marketing board,
8

Financial disclosure of both income and wealth is required for the President, the
government, and all civil servants in a position of financial decision making. By law, all
persons required to disclose must do so within three months of February 4, 2005, or within
three months of their appointment, should they have been more recently appointed, and every
three years thereafter.

9

The 2005 budget provides for restructuring costs for Gabon Télécom of CFAF 11.9 billion,
for Agrogabon of CFAF 6.8 billion, and for Gabon Poste of CFAF 1 billion. However, it
does not provide for any cost related to Air Gabon given the uncertainty of its privatization
timetable.

- 19 -

which has weighed heavily on the cost structure of the forestry sector, and instead give it a
control function within the Ministry of Forestry. The authorities are expecting a report by an
outside consultant to prepare for the final decision regarding the SNBG’s future role. The
mission welcomed the elimination of SNBG’s monopoly as well as the recent publication of
a full list of forestry permit holders. But it also emphasized that it will be important to ensure
that the new agency does not reintroduce some of the costs that the restructuring aims to
reduce. The World Bank is currently preparing a lending operation in this area. Its
discussions with the government are ongoing, with an expectation to conclude in the third
quarter of 2005. In the mining sector, steps to finalize the standard mining concession
agreement are underway and are now expected to be completed by mid-2005.
D. Poverty Reduction Strategies
25.
Despite three decades of oil wealth, poverty remains wide spread. The most recent
information dates back to 1993 and suggests that over 60 percent of the population lives
below the poverty line (Table 9). Other social indicators, including infant and maternal
mortality, compare favorably to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa, although they remain
weak in comparison by the standard of upper-middle income countries. In 2003, the
Government of Gabon prepared an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, which
provided a basic framework for preparing a full PRSP.10 Work on the full PRSP is ongoing,
starting with a poverty survey that will update available information on the incidence and
structure of poverty in Gabon (para. 20 of the LOI). It is expected that the survey will be
finished, and its results evaluated by June 2005, as a basis for preparing the sectoral poverty
reduction strategies. The whole process is expected to be completed by August 2005. The
mission welcomed the ongoing work and encouraged the authorities to continue their
consultations throughout Gabon to ensure participation by the population in the preparation
of the PRSP. At the same time, it noted the importance of ensuring that the PRSP provide a
direct link to sectoral spending priorities to ensure that the 2006 investment budget is well
targeted.
26.
The mission discussed with the authorities their desire for a follow-up
arrangement with the Fund when the current stand-by arrangement expires. The
mission underscored that a successor arrangement would require continued satisfactory
performance under the stand-by arrangement and the foundations for a medium-term
economic program, articulated in a high-quality PRSP.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
27.
Since 2003, the Gabonese economy has recovered sharply from the stark
financial imbalances of the early years of the decade. The government introduced a farreaching program of economic and structural reforms. Aided by high oil prices and external
10

Gabon—Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (www.imf.org).

- 20 -

debt rescheduling, the external position strengthened markedly. This in turn contributed to a
sharp improvement in the fiscal accounts, helped also by better tax administration and
expenditure discipline. Performance under the SBA, which supports the government’s reform
program has been broadly satisfactory.
28.
Gabon now faces a dual challenge. First, to consolidate and extend the gains of
macroeconomic stabilization. Second, and no less importantly, to reinforce the ongoing
reform process aimed at building the foundations for the diversification of the Gabonese
economy, raising the growth rate of the non-oil sector, and vigorously addressing poverty
reduction efforts. In both areas, strengthening economic institutions, including financial
management in the public sector, will need to play an important role in establishing a sound
basis for future success.
29.
In the short term, oil prices are likely to remain close to historical highs
providing both opportunities and risks for Gabon. The revenue windfall for the
government provides the opportunity to address decisively the legacy of past fiscal slippages
and to place the public finances on a much sounder footing. Also, by applying the bulk of the
additional oil revenue to reducing government debt—to external and domestic creditors, as
well as to the BEAC—Gabon can set in motion a virtuous circle that significantly reduces the
weight of debt service on public finances and the vulnerability of the economy to swings in
oil prices. At the same time, high oil prices can present a risk of complacency and the
misleading impression that financial constraints no longer apply. That would be regrettable.
Even if oil prices remain buoyant for several years to come, the absence of new discoveries
means that oil production will resume its decline.
30.
The 2005 budget is rightly ambitious, aiming to reduce the non-oil primary deficit,
including grants, by close to 2 percent to 5¾ percent of non-oil GDP. Importantly, it
preserves the windfall revenue from oil to further reduce public debt and build up the Fund
for Future Generations. It will be important that these objectives are met to ensure that Gabon
remains on the path towards durable sustainability. However, there are several risks to the
2005 fiscal program. Control of the wage bill is a cornerstone of fiscal discipline in Gabon,
and it is regrettable that the new civil service law has been delayed. While compensatory
measures should help in the short term, it will be important that its final implementation
ensure improved structural control of wage spending. On the revenue side, the reliance on
administrative measures is also a concern. The authorities need to remain vigilant during
2005 to ensure that its hard-won fiscal discipline, which is essential for Gabon’s mediumterm sustainability, is not jeopardized.
31.
Preparing Gabon for the post-oil era requires reforms of both the public sector
and of the environment for private sector development. Gabon has a history of a strong
public sector, facilitated not least by the availability of the means to sustain it. At the same
time, the dominance of the public sector together with the abundance of oil resources, has
inhibited the development of a vibrant private sector. Strengthening the efficiency of the
public sector and providing a framework for private sector development are the cornerstones

- 21 -

for raising the productivity of the Gabonese economy. They are also prerequisites for making
decisive progress in poverty reduction.
32.
Raising the quality of public expenditure is an essential element of public sector
reform. The PRSP which is currently under preparation will provide an opportunity for the
government to determine its strategy for economic development and poverty reduction in
Gabon. A high-quality PRSP is essential to provide a solid foundation for a medium-term
economic program. But for the PRSP not to remain an empty document it needs to be
anchored by a carefully-costed public expenditure framework. This requires progress in
public expenditure management, including in budget preparation, budget execution, and
maintaining sound public accounting practices. It also requires continued improvement in
public sector transparency to provide incentives and accountability for good public sector
management.
33.
Significant steps have been taken to improve the environment for private sector
development, but an important agenda remains. Gabon’s competitiveness in its traditional
sectors remain adequate, despite the sharp nominal appreciation in recent years of the euro to
which the CFA franc is pegged. Nevertheless, the high costs of labor, transport, and utilities
represent a drag on private investment. The government has made progress in recent years in
introducing structural reforms to make the economy more productive and the environment
for the private sector more attractive. But as confirmed by the study conducted by the World
Bank’s Foreign Investment Advisory Services, numerous constraints remain. This is not the
time to formulate another grand strategy. Rather, what is needed is steady progress on several
fronts where the needs are well-known, including accelerating land titling, further
strengthening governance and transparency, including by adhering to the principles of the
EITI, and by ensuring that public sector investment provides the public goods necessary to
catalyze private investment, including reliable infrastructure. Finally, scope remains to
strengthen the legal and regulatory framework, especially its consistent application. A
comprehensive review will take time and a follow-up FIAS study would represent a valuable
starting point. But meanwhile there are steps that can be taken immediately, including by
improving the functioning of the Investment Promotion Agency (APIP) and focusing it on
the assistance to the small and medium-sized enterprise sector, which is truly in need of
support.
34.
Cross-border integration represents an opportunity to seize the potential offered
by regional markets. Work remains to be done, including through completing regional trade
liberalization and dismantling the significant non-tariff barriers that remain in place For
Gabon, taking advantage of a larger regional market presents many benefits, and the
increased pursuit of economic policy in a regional context needs to be a priority in years to
come.
35.
Gabon has made significant progress toward improving its economic and
financial health and preparing for the far-reaching adjustment that lies ahead. Current
high oil prices and the temporary surge in production represent an opportunity that must not

- 22 -

be squandered to put in place a durable base for economic development. This is the basis of
the government’s program supported by the Fund. Against that background:

36.
.

•

In view of the authorities’ good faith efforts in negotiating with non-Paris Club and
London Club creditors, and the substantial progress made in these negotiations, the
staff recommends completion of the financing assurances review; and

•

In view of the satisfactory performance through end-2004, observance of all
quantitative performance criteria and progress in achieving the structural benchmarks
for end-2004, the staff recommends that the third review of the stand-by arrangement
be completed.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the 24-month cycle.

- 23 -

Table 1. Gabon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–07
2000

2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004
Prog.

2005

2006
Projections

2007

Prel.

(Annual percent change)
GDP at constant prices
Oil

-1.9
-10.2

2.0
-5.7

0.0
-1.4

2.4
6.6

2.0
-0.6

1.4
-1.0

2.0
-0.6

0.2
-8.6

0.7
-8.0

Non-oil
GDP at current prices
GDP deflator

2.1
26.0
28.5

5.3
-4.7
-6.6

0.6
0.0
0.0

0.8
2.0
-0.4

3.0
-3.9
-5.8

2.3
8.5
7.0

3.0
8.8
6.7

3.5
-3.7
-3.9

3.5
-3.2
-3.8

Oil
Non-oil
Consumer prices

77.5
3.0

-12.7
2.2

1.0
-0.2

-3.4
0.5

-16.0
2.2

16.6
1.1

14.7
1.6

-5.2
1.3

-6.5
1.2

Yearly average
End of period

0.5
1.8

2.1
0.9

0.2
0.4

2.1
3.5

2.0
2.0

0.4
-0.6

1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0

External sector
Exports, f.o.b. (CFA francs)
Of which: oil

53.7
65.4

-19.0
-19.6

-7.0
-6.5

3.7
8.2

-4.3
-3.8

21.5
15.9

13.9
14.8

-8.8
-13.5

-8.7
-13.9

Imports, f.o.b. (CFA francs)
Export volume
Import volume

1.4
32.8
-13.9

9.3
-13.9
3.8

4.9
-1.8
9.2

-7.0
-4.1
7.1

4.6
0.3
11.5

19.3
29.1
28.8

7.7
6.6
14.6

-0.2
-10.2
-1.8

0.6
-9.6
-1.1

-1.6
-2.5
-2.9

-10.6
1.9
1.1

-1.5
4.5
2.5

24.7
4.0
5.7

-4.7
...
...

1.6
1.8
-1.0

13.7
...
...

-0.1
...
...

-0.6
...
...

Terms of trade (deterioration - )
Nominal effective exchange rate (- = depreciation)
Real effective exchange rate (- = depreciation)
Central government finance
Total revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Total expenditure
Current
Capital

48.4

-2.8

-7.3

-3.6

-2.6

6.0

13.2

-4.5

-5.5

121.0
-11.7
0.8

-7.6
7.1
35.1

-19.1
13.8
-8.7

-6.4
0.0
-18.6

-10.9
7.2
7.2

5.2
6.8
4.8

17.1
8.6
-1.6

-11.9
4.8
1.6

-15.0
4.7
-1.5

2.1
-11.6

27.5
55.7

-20.1
-16.5

-10.7
-4.4

3.5
24.3

2.3
22.4

-4.5
3.1

0.4
4.9

-3.8
4.6

(In percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise indicated)
Money and credit
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Central government
Credit to the economy
(annual percentage change)
Broad money
Velocity of broad money (non-oil GDP)

-31.5
-33.7

42.6
38.8

-2.1
-1.4

-8.8
-4.9

-4.2
-3.3

-23.8
-22.1

-28.4
-28.4

-16.9
-16.2

-8.2
-7.3

-39.6
8.3
11.7

27.7
11.8
17.4

-9.1
6.4
8.7

2.0
-7.1
-9.4

-8.2
4.9
7.1

-13.6
-6.5
-9.3

-32.0
3.5
6.3

-20.7
4.5
7.8

-13.7
6.4
10.8

18.0
3.8

7.5
3.7

5.7
3.4

-1.2
3.4

5.3
3.4

11.6
3.4

4.6
3.3

4.9
3.3

4.7
3.3

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Gross national savings
Government
Private sector

41.5
14.6
27.0

36.8
8.0
28.8

31.3
7.5
23.8

36.0
11.1
24.9

31.5
10.3
21.1

34.8
11.7
23.1

35.7
14.8
21.0

34.5
13.8
20.7

32.5
13.1
19.4

Gross domestic savings
Government
Private sector

58.1
19.7
38.4

51.8
15.9
35.9

43.6
10.9
32.7

48.1
8.0
40.1

49.1
7.4
41.6

49.4
9.3
40.1

51.1
12.8
38.3

48.6
11.9
36.7

45.3
11.5
33.8

Gross fixed investment
Government
Private sector

21.8
2.9
18.9

25.8
4.7
21.0

24.4
4.0
20.5

24.0
3.7
20.2

25.7
4.8
20.9

24.3
4.2
20.1

22.0
4.0
18.0

22.3
4.3
17.9

22.2
4.7
17.5

3,618.3

3,448.5

3,448.9

3,518.9

3,382.3

3,818.0

4,154.8

3,999.9

3,872.5

Primary budget balance (commitment basis)
Non-oil primary balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl. grants)

17.5
-9.8
11.6

12.0
-16.9
3.2

7.9
-16.8
3.4

11.4
-8.2
7.4

10.3
-7.5
5.2

11.5
-7.7
7.4

13.8
-5.8
10.7

12.3
-5.4
9.4

10.4
-5.0
8.3

Overall balance (cash basis)
Domestic bank financing
Net external financing

4.0
-4.9
4.4

4.8
4.2
-6.2

3.5
-1.5
-2.2

6.4
0.5
-3.7

0.1
-1.4
-9.6

2.4
-2.3
2.5

9.5
-5.1
-2.2

9.5
-3.6
-4.5

8.4
-2.6
-4.7

Financing gap
External current account balance (including official transfers)
External current account balance (excluding official transfers)

0.0
19.7
20.0

0.0
11.0
10.8

0.0
6.8
7.5

0.0
12.0
12.8

13.9
5.8
5.5

0.0
10.5
10.4

0.0
13.7
13.6

0.0
12.2
12.1

-0.1
10.2
10.1

External public debt (including the Fund and gap financing)
Total public debt (including the Fund and gap financing)

57.1
71.3

63.1
81.1

62.8
82.8

56.0
73.0

58.6
67.9

49.6
61.9

43.0
48.8

40.1
43.1

36.5
38.4

Nominal GDP (in billions of CFA francs)
Central government

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Financing

-205.7
32.5
32.5
0.0
-191.7
-56.5
2.0
8.0
0.0

134.9
-291.1

Overall balance (on a cash basis)

External (net)
Drawings
Project financing
Program financing
Amortization
Arrears on principal (reduction -)
Debt rescheduling and deferral
Debt cancellation
Advance external debt payments

-83.4
-25.5
-57.9
-3.3
-46.7
0.0
-2.9
-5.0

Change in payments arrears
External (on interest payments)
Domestic
Arrears on interest on domestic debt
Float (unpaid payment orders at the treasury)
Float at the Road Maintenance Fund (FER)
Other float at the treasury 2/
Compensation for political violence

44.5

-130.7
8.7
8.7
0.0
-198.6
46.1
2.0
11.1
0.0

-224.9

224.9

-36.4
32.4
-68.8
1.3
-42.6
-8.3
-14.0
-5.2

261.3
402.8

57.0
218.3
355.4

789.0
647.5
613.5
229.0
124.8
10.8
9.5
104.5
118.3
18.1
100.1
141.5
30.4
111.1
130.7
0.3

1,050.3
1,049.1
570.2
478.9
122.6
109.6
200.3
171.2
29.1
46.4
1.2

Est.

815.8
678.7
603.8
223.0
126.8
11.2
9.5
106.1
116.9
18.5
98.4
137.1
27.1
110.1
155.0
0.0

1,034.1
1,030.2
526.6
503.6
136.5
113.8
204.0
176.7
27.3
49.3
3.9

Overall balance, incl. grants (on a payments order basis)
Primary balance, incl. grants (on a payments order basis)

Road Maintenance Fund (FER) and special funds

Total expenditure and net lending
Total expenditure, excluding interest payments
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Purchases of goods and services
Water and electricity
Telephone services
Other (petrol, transport, travel, etc. )
Transfers
Public enterprises
Other
Interest payments
Domestic
External
Capital expenditure
Net lending (including equity participation)

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Taxes on international trade
Import taxes
Export taxes
Other revenue
Foreign grants

2003
Dec.
Prog.

-27.7
2.5
2.5
0.0
-60.1
29.9
0.0
0.0
0.0

-66.9

66.9

-17.5
11.7
-29.2
-3.2
-22.3
0.0
-2.8
-0.9

84.4
114.1

11.4

186.7
156.9
143.7
55.4
27.9
2.7
2.1
23.1
30.7
4.7
26.0
29.7
6.2
23.5
31.6
0.0

271.1
271.1
146.6
124.5
43.1
23.4
42.9
37.3
5.6
15.1
0.0

Mar.
Est.

114.9
9.5
9.5
0.0
-103.7
-186.6
395.4
0.3
0.0

18.2

-18.2

-187.0
-139.5
-47.5
-3.2
-39.9
0.0
-2.2
-2.2

168.8
224.2

19.9

361.0
305.7
283.3
110.1
55.2
5.4
4.2
45.6
62.7
7.6
55.1
55.4
11.7
43.7
57.8
0.0

529.8
529.8
284.5
245.3
77.8
53.6
89.2
77.2
12.0
24.7
0.0

Jun.
Est.

(In billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)

80.4
13.4
13.4
0.0
-165.6
-186.6
419.0
0.3
0.0

-36.6

36.6

-190.9
-139.5
-51.3
-3.1
-36.7
-2.2
-6.3
-3.0

227.5
326.2

31.3

574.2
475.4
443.8
168.3
85.2
8.1
6.1
70.9
91.5
10.8
80.7
98.7
20.2
78.6
99.1
0.0

801.7
801.7
439.7
362.0
101.6
80.7
140.2
121.0
19.1
39.5
0.0

-325.3
65.0
20.0
45.0
-201.6
-186.6
-2.0
0.0
0.0

-474.2

2.7

-181.1
-139.4
-41.7
-4.6
-25.9
-6.0
0.0
-5.2

183.8
347.4

48.0

845.6
681.9
635.1
226.0
124.5
11.2
9.5
103.7
121.0
16.6
104.5
163.6
26.9
136.7
162.5
0.0

1,029.4
1,021.5
508.1
513.4
145.3
115.2
217.5
185.5
32.0
35.4
7.9

2004
Sep.
Prel.
Prog.

Table 2. Gabon: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2003–05

95.2
65.0
20.0
45.0
-204.8
-186.6
421.7
0.0
0.0

-103.5

103.5

-198.1
-139.4
-58.7
-4.6
-42.9
-6.0
0.0
-5.2

301.6
456.6

48.0

837.9
682.9
627.4
226.0
125.5
11.2
9.5
104.7
121.0
16.6
104.5
155.0
28.7
126.2
162.5
0.0

1,139.5
1,131.6
618.2
513.4
145.3
115.2
217.5
185.5
32.0
35.4
7.9

Dec.
Rev.

93.9
59.9
17.8
42.1
-208.2
-185.8
425.4
2.6
0.0

-92.8

92.8

-193.7
-140.4
-53.3
-2.7
-28.0
-2.2
-14.8
-5.6

286.5
437.3

39.3

827.1
676.3
627.8
226.3
125.1
10.8
8.4
105.9
125.6
14.5
111.1
150.8
31.4
119.4
160.0
0.0

1,113.6
1,111.5
600.0
511.5
137.3
115.1
200.5
172.9
27.6
58.7
2.1

Prel.

-7.7
6.7
6.7
0.0
-60.8
0.0
45.7
0.7
0.0

-86.1

86.1

-21.3
0.0
-21.3
0.0
-20.0
0.0
0.0
-1.3

107.4
139.8

12.3

199.5
167.2
149.3
56.2
30.0
3.9
2.4
23.7
30.7
4.1
26.5
32.4
5.6
26.7
38.0
0.0

306.9
306.2
189.0
117.2
33.6
28.0
41.8
37.8
4.0
13.8
0.8

Mar.
Prog.

-7.2
15.4
15.4
0.0
-99.2
0.0
75.3
1.3
0.0

-165.6

165.6

-42.5
0.0
-42.5
0.0
-30.0
-10.0
0.0
-2.5

208.1
272.6

24.5

404.5
340.1
300.8
112.5
60.3
7.0
4.7
48.6
63.6
8.3
55.3
64.4
14.2
50.2
79.2
0.0

612.7
610.7
350.1
260.6
80.5
56.9
90.6
79.2
11.3
32.7
2.0

2005
Jun.
Prog.

-64.4
20.8
20.8
0.0
-162.5
0.0
75.3
2.0
0.0

-285.8

285.8

-48.8
0.0
-48.8
0.0
-25.0
-20.0
0.0
-3.8

334.5
436.2

36.8

594.5
492.9
454.5
168.7
95.7
10.5
7.2
78.0
88.5
12.4
76.1
101.6
20.3
81.3
103.2
0.0

929.1
925.3
532.5
392.8
107.5
82.9
156.3
134.5
21.8
46.1
3.8

Sep.
Prog.

-89.5
32.0
32.0
0.0
-200.8
0.0
76.6
2.6
0.0

-395.5

395.6

-53.5
0.0
-53.5
0.0
-23.5
-25.0
0.0
-5.0

449.1
574.6

49.0

813.6
688.1
599.6
225.0
131.1
15.7
9.5
105.9
118.0
16.6
101.5
125.5
23.6
101.9
165.0
0.0

1,262.7
1,257.7
702.4
555.4
146.3
123.7
216.6
184.3
32.3
68.8
5.0

Dec.
Prog.

- 24 -

-11.6
-7.8
-7.8
0.0
1.0
-31.5
-6.2
-1.9
0.0
-1.4
-13.5
-8.6

-22.1
-11.3
-11.3
0.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
...
0.0
0.0

10.9
-8.2
77.1
...

11.4
-8.2
84.7
30.0

0.0

-4.8

-7.0

156.2

-94.2
15.8
15.8
0.0
-110.0
-60.1
0.0
-55.3
-19.8
-35.5
0.0

-85.5
7.1
20.5
-13.4
-92.6
-62.2
0.0
-55.2
-19.8
-35.4
0.0

Est.

3.0
-1.5
62.4
16.5

0.0

-16.1
-1.5
-1.5
10.1
0.0
6.3
-2.9
3.1
0.0
-0.5
1.1
5.5

-3.4

-39.1
-22.4
-19.2
-3.2
-16.7
-15.5
0.0
-11.6
-4.1
-7.5
-0.6

Mar.
Est.

5.9
-2.9
44.8
51.5

0.0

-13.0
-4.5
-4.5
10.1
0.0
2.9
-1.9
1.5
0.0
-0.5
-0.8
4.6

-5.7

-96.7
-61.4
-38.4
-23.0
-35.3
-30.8
0.0
-22.8
-7.5
-15.3
-2.3

Jun.
Est.

8.5
-5.4
48.0
55.0

0.0

-12.3
-7.3
-7.3
14.1
0.0
-18.3
-5.7
1.0
0.0
-0.7
-7.2
-5.7

-7.6

-117.1
-48.5
-23.1
-25.4
-68.6
-44.8
0.0
-33.4
-10.6
-22.8
-3.9

10.3
-7.5
58.8
81.7

471.5

-13.6
-14.5
-14.5
0.0
11.9
-13.7
-5.0
-1.0
0.0
-1.4
-6.3
0.0

-20.0

-148.9
-48.6
-32.7
-16.0
-100.3
-70.4
0.0
-50.4
-16.3
-34.1
0.0

2004
Sep.
Prel.
Prog.

12.5
-7.6
41.8
142.1

0.0

-14.7
-18.5
-18.5
10.1
11.9
-15.9
-7.2
-1.0
0.0
-1.4
-6.3
0.0

-20.0

-198.7
-98.6
-82.6
-16.0
-100.1
-73.0
0.0
-49.6
-16.3
-33.3
-3.4

Dec.
Rev.

11.5
-7.7
56.7
55.0

0.0

-15.4
-15.2
-15.2
10.1
1.7
-13.0
-6.9
1.4
0.0
-2.0
-4.7
-0.8

-16.8

-186.7
-86.0
-52.1
-33.9
-100.7
-68.8
0.0
-46.5
-15.0
-31.5
-5.5

Prel.

3.4
-2.2
36.7
81.7

0.0

-1.2
-5.9
-5.9
0.4
0.0
-6.0
-3.2
-1.5
0.0
-0.3
-1.0
0.0

-8.0

-78.4
-40.9
-37.5
-3.5
-37.5
-24.8
0.0
-15.5
-5.2
-10.3
-1.3

Mar.
Prog.

6.6
-3.5
26.7
108.4

0.0

-1.9
-15.3
-15.3
0.4
0.0
-4.2
-5.5
-1.5
0.0
-0.6
-2.0
5.5

-12.0

-158.4
-92.9
-86.0
-6.9
-65.5
-44.5
0.0
-30.0
-10.4
-19.6
-2.5

2005
Jun.
Prog.

10.5
-4.4
31.7
135.1

0.0

-1.9
-18.7
-18.7
0.4
0.0
-12.2
-6.7
-1.5
0.0
-1.0
-3.0
0.0

-12.0

-221.4
-129.3
-118.9
-10.4
-92.1
-59.7
0.0
-44.0
-15.6
-28.4
-3.8

Sep.
Prog.

13.8
-5.8
33.2
162.6

0.0

-1.9
-19.7
-19.7
0.4
18.2
-11.0
-4.0
-1.5
0.0
-1.4
-4.0
-0.1

-18.6

-306.0
-211.3
-197.8
-13.4
-94.7
-80.7
0.0
-57.2
-20.0
-37.3
-4.9

Dec.
Prog.

1/ The original program targets for end-September and end-December 2004 have been revised to take into account the planned uses of the oil windfall, and an upward adjustment in current spending (by CFAF 1 billion) for end-December 2
2/ "Other float at the treasury" includes mainly variations in consignments and operations with autonomous bodies.
3/ Including old debt repayments to Société d'Eau et d'Energie de Gabon (SEEG), National Social Security Fund (CNSS), and Office des Postes et Télécommunication (OPT), as well as debt service on new
debt agreements with Gabon Télécom, Gabon Poste, Air Gabon's suppliers, and CNSS. During the last quarter of 2003, there was a deferral of debt obligations amounting to some CFAF 11 billion.
4/ The data excludes CFAF 7.8 billion of securitized commercial agreements bought by a local commerical bank from private nonbank creditors during the first nine months of 2004. It therefore differs from the monetary survey data.
5/ Restructuring costs refer to social costs of privatization and voluntary departures. During 2002, the government also took over suppliers' credit to Air Gabon and debt owed by public enterprises to CNSS,
for CFAF 31 billion and CFAF 36 billion, respectively.
6/ Local authorities consist of variations in local entities' account balances with the treasury.

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Primary fiscal balance, incl. grants (in percent of GDP)
Non-oil primary balance, incl. grants (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Stock of unpaid payments orders at the treasury
Fund for Future Generations (balance)

Memorandum items:

Financing gap

Domestic (net)
Banking system
Bank of Central African States (BEAC)
Commercial banks 4/
Nonbank sources
Domestic debt
Oil company advances (net)
Debt Accounting Department (DGCP)
Securitized commercial agreements
Other (divers) 3/
Debt at the treasury ("Libreville Club")
Regularization of civil servants' salaries
(rappels)
Change in domestic arrears (on principal,
– reduction)
Restructuring cost 5/
Social costs
Domestic debt rescheduling/deferral
Privatization proceeds
Other
Treasury correspondents, incl. pensions
Local authorities 6/
Cancellation of domestic debt
Development Bank of Gabon (BGD)
Other, including transactions between local and central treasury
Errors and omissions

2003
Dec.
Prog.

(In billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 2. Gabon: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2003–05 (concluded)

- 25 -

- 26 -

Table 3. Gabon: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2000–07
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Rev.

Prel.

2005 2006
Projections

2007

(In billions of CFA francs)
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Taxes on international trade
Import taxes
Of which
VAT
Export taxes
Other revenue
Foreign grants
Total expenditure (including
net lending)
Total expenditure (excluding
interest payments)
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Purchases of goods and
services
Transfers
Interest payments
Domestic
External (excluding IMF)
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
investment
Foreign-financed investment
Net lending (including equity
participation)
Restructuring cost of public enterprises 1/
Road Maintenance Fund (FER) and special funds 2/
Overall balance, incl. grants (on a
payments order basis)
Primary balance, incl. grants (on a
payments order basis)
Change in arrears
External (on interest payments)
Domestic
Overall balance (on a cash basis)
Financing
External (net)
Drawings
Project financing
Program financing
Amortization
Arrears (on principal)
Foreign exchange effect on arrears
Debt rescheduling and deferral
Debt cancellation
Advance external debt payment
Domestic (net)
Banking system
Bank of Central African States
Of which : IMF
Repayment statutory advances
Commercial banks

1,207.6
1,207.6
814.7
392.9
81.9
80.2
214.7
186.7

1,173.6
1,173.6
752.9
420.8
96.6
70.8
218.4
187.8

1,089.9
1,088.0
609.0
479.0
134.2
83.5
210.0
180.9

1,050.3
1,049.1
570.2
478.9
122.6
109.6
200.3
171.2

1,139.5
1,131.6
618.2
513.4
145.3
115.2
217.5
185.5

1,113.6
1,111.5
600.0
511.5
137.3
115.1
200.5
172.9

1,262.7 1,206.0 1,140.8
1,257.7 1,200.8 1,135.3
702.4
618.5
525.6
555.4
582.3
609.6
146.3
159.1
164.9
123.7
135.6
144.4
216.6
239.6
252.1
184.3
207.4
217.2

83.6
28.0
16.1
0.0

92.0
30.6
35.0
0.0

88.6
29.1
51.3
1.9

83.9
29.1
46.4
1.2

90.9
32.0
35.4
7.9

82.6
27.6
58.7
2.1

90.3
32.3
68.8
5.0

101.6
32.2
47.9
5.2

106.4
34.9
48.2
5.5

786.1

1,061.9

969.2

789.0

837.9

827.1

813.6

826.6

814.2

574.1

758.2

817.9

647.5

682.9

676.3

688.1

712.6

736.8

674.8
216.6

860.4
219.6

687.4
220.6

613.5
229.0

627.4
226.0

627.8
226.3

599.6
225.0

602.1
226.9

579.3
228.5

128.3
117.8
212.0
27.8
184.2
105.1

177.0
160.1
303.7
34.3
269.4
163.6

156.7
158.8
151.3
33.7
117.6
136.6

124.8
118.3
141.5
30.4
111.1
130.7

125.5
121.0
155.0
28.7
126.2
162.5

125.1
125.6
150.8
31.4
119.4
160.0

131.1
118.0
125.5
23.6
101.9
165.0

137.5
123.7
114.0
15.9
98.2
173.1

143.9
129.5
77.4
11.4
66.0
181.1

82.4
22.7

154.3
9.3

117.0
19.6

122.0
8.7

142.5
20.0

142.2
17.8

133.0
32.0

139.5
33.6

146.0
35.1

6.2
0.0
...

37.9
0.0
...

17.1
67.5
60.5

0.3
0.0
44.5

0.0
0.0
48.0

0.0
0.0
39.3

0.0
0.0
49.0

0.0
0.0
51.4

0.0
0.0
53.8

421.5

111.7

120.7

261.3

301.6

286.5

449.1

379.4

326.6

633.5
-276.1
-201.3
-74.9

415.4
54.7
26.2
28.5

272.0
1.1
81.1
-79.9

402.8
-36.4
32.4
-68.8

456.6
-198.1
-139.4
-58.7

437.3
-193.7
-140.4
-53.3

574.6
-53.5
0.0
-53.5

493.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

404.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

145.4

166.4

121.8

224.9

103.5

92.8

395.6

379.4

326.6

-145.4

-166.3

-121.8

-224.9

-103.5

-92.8

-395.5

-379.4

-323.9

160.2
22.7
22.7
0.0
-242.1
-271.6
-9.3
649.5
17.0
-5.9
-305.7
-175.6
-59.1
5.4
0.0
-116.5

-213.1
9.3
9.3
0.0
-309.7
35.0
0.0
29.4
17.0
5.9
46.8
144.7
109.5
-8.1
0.0
35.2

-76.9
17.7
17.7
0.0
-243.6
135.8
0.0
1.3
11.9
0.0
-44.9
-51.5
-92.9
-9.1
0.0
41.4

-130.7
8.7
8.7
0.0
-198.6
46.1
0.0
2.0
11.1
0.0
-94.2
15.8
15.8
-11.8
0.0
0.0

95.2
65.0
20.0
45.0
-204.8
-186.6
0.0
421.7
0.0
0.0
-198.7
-98.6
-82.6
19.1
0.0
-16.0

93.9
59.9
17.8
42.1
-208.2
-185.8
0.0
425.4
2.6
0.0
-186.7
-86.0
-52.1
17.6
0.0
-33.9

-89.5
32.0
32.0
0.0
-200.8
0.0
0.0
76.6
2.6
0.0
-306.0
-211.3
-197.8
-12.6
-77.7
-13.4

-179.7
33.6
33.6
0.0
-213.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-199.7
-143.1
-137.0
-3.5
-71.7
-6.1

-183.3
35.1
35.1
0.0
-218.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
-140.6
-99.2
-79.5
-1.0
0.0
-19.7

- 27 -

Table 3. Gabon: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government, 2000–07 (concluded)

2000

Nonbank sources
Domestic debt
Oil company advances (net)
Debt Department (DGCP)
Debt at treasury
Regularization of civil servants'
salaries (rappels )
Change in domestic arrears (on
principal, – reduction)
Restructuring cost
Debt rescheduling
Privatization proceeds
Other 3/
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Total revenue (excluding grants)
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Total expenditure
Total expenditure, excluding interest
Current expenditure
Wage bill
Other current spending
Interest
Capital expenditure
Net lending
Road fund and special funds
Defense expenditure 5/
Primary balance, incl. grants (on a
payments order basis)
Overall balance, incl. grants (on a
payments order basis)
Overall balance (on a cash basis)

-130.1
-115.0
-36.4
-72.1
0.0

2001

2002

2003

2004
Rev.

Prel.

(In billions of CFA francs)
-110.0
-100.1
-100.7
-60.1
-73.0
-68.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
-55.3
-49.6
-46.5
0.0
-3.4
-5.5

-97.9
-80.7
0.0
-72.9
0.0

6.6
-75.4
0.0
-69.1
0.0

-6.5

-7.8

-6.3

-4.8

-2.0
-5.5
0.0
4.0
-11.6
0.0

6.1
-5.6
0.0
3.4
-21.1
0.0

14.1
47.9
39.6
1.8
-21.4
0.0

-11.6
-7.8
0.0
1.0
-31.5
0.0

33.4
22.5
10.9
21.7
15.9
18.7
6.0
6.8
5.9
2.9
0.2
...
1.8

34.0
21.8
12.2
30.8
22.0
25.0
6.4
9.8
8.8
4.7
1.1
...
1.9

31.5
17.7
13.9
28.1
23.7
19.9
6.4
9.1
4.4
4.0
0.5
1.8
1.9

17.5

12.0

7.9

11.4

12.5

11.5

11.6
4.0

3.2
4.8

3.5
3.5

7.4
6.4

8.2
2.8

7.5
2.4

-20.0
-14.7
-18.5
10.1
11.9
-15.9
0.0

-16.8

2005 2006
Projections

2007

-94.7
-80.7
0.0
-57.2
-4.9

-41.4
-28.2
0.0
-28.2
0.0

-18.6

-15.4
-15.2
10.1
1.7
-13.0
0.0

-56.6
-44.4
0.0
-28.2
0.0
-16.2

-1.9
-19.7
0.4
18.2
-11.0
0.0

--

0.0
-10.6
0.0
0.0
-1.6
0.0

0.0
-17.4
0.0
0.0
4.2
-2.7

30.0
15.5
14.6
20.7
17.8
15.1
5.7
6.5
2.9
4.3
0.0
1.3
1.5

29.3
13.6
15.7
21.0
19.0
15.0
5.9
7.1
2.0
4.7
0.0
1.4
1.5

13.8

12.3

10.4

10.8
9.5

9.5
9.5

8.4
8.4

25.3
31.3
10.2
-5.8

25.3
30.9
9.8
-5.4

25.3
30.5
9.5
-5.0

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
29.8
30.9
29.1
30.3
16.2
16.9
15.7
16.9
13.6
14.0
13.4
13.4
22.4
22.8
21.7
19.6
18.4
18.6
17.7
16.6
17.4
17.1
16.4
14.4
6.5
6.2
5.9
5.4
6.9
6.7
6.6
6.0
4.0
4.2
3.9
3.0
3.7
4.4
4.2
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
1.3
1.0
1.2
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.4

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Non-oil revenue
Primary expenditure
Wage bill
Non-oil primary balance, incl. grants

21.2
30.9
11.7
-9.8

21.1
37.9
11.0
-16.9

23.9
40.8
11.0
-16.8

23.6
31.9
11.3
-8.2

24.2
32.2
10.6
-7.6

24.3
32.2
10.8
-7.7

(In billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)
Oil prices (in U.S. dollars/barrel) 6/
GDP at market prices
Non-oil GDP at market prices
Fund for Future Generations (stock)

28.2
3,618
1,857
...

24.3
3,448
1,998
...

25.2
3,449
2,006
70.4

28.9
3,519
2,033
30.0

37.3
3,667
2,123
142.1

38.2
3,818
2,102
55.0

48.1
4,155
2,199
162.6

45.3
4,000
2,305
224.5

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including Air Gabon's suppliers' debt and debt of public enterprises to National Social Security Fund (CNSS) taken over by the government during 2002.
2/ In the 2004 budget, outlays of the Road Maintenance Fund (FER) are in an annex to the budget. Other special funds are recorded off budget.
3/ Includes treasury correspondents, local governments, checks written but not yet cashed, and errors and omissions.
4/ Financing gaps during the program period are expected to be covered by debt rescheduling.
5/ Defense spending is partly included under current expenditure and partly under capital spending.
6/ The corresponding national oil prices are US$1-2 lower.

42.6
3,873
2,413
302.9

601.5
119.1
232.8
249.6

Broad money
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits
Time deposits

3.7
-4.3
-0.5
-0.6
1.1
-0.6

595.3
117.2
225.2
253.0

537.0
649.3
187.0
216.4
167.3
49.0
1.5
-30.9
462.4
-112.3

58.3
36.1
22.2

2003
Jun.
Actual

591.8
124.2
220.9
246.7

510.2
623.0
210.2
231.9
146.5
85.4
6.2
-27.9
412.8
-112.8

81.6
66.9
14.6

Dec.
Prel.

Jun.

591.8
113.4
223.6
254.7

449.6
585.6
183.9
209.5
127.3
82.2
6.6
-32.2
401.6
-136.0

142.2
87.8
54.4

625.0
116.6
251.3
257.1

425.7
549.7
145.7
170.6
108.1
62.4
6.6
-31.5
404.1
-124.1

199.4
119.0
80.3

(In billions of CFA francs)

Mar.
Est.

625.5
118.9
244.9
261.7

498.9
611.7
159.9
181.6
110.1
71.5
6.2
-27.9
451.8
-112.8

126.6
111.9
14.6

Prog.

2004
Sep.

6.2
-10.0
-1.1
5.6
-5.5
-3.7

7.6
-8.8
-4.9
2.0
-7.1
-1.2

10.2
-10.2
-6.3
-3.8
-1.9
--

7.6
-1.9
-1.9
-8.5
6.6
5.7
(Annual percent changes)

19.9
-14.3
-12.4
-10.4
-1.5
5.6

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)

576.6
120.1
211.2
245.3

503.2
645.6
223.2
253.5
171.5
82.0
1.3
-31.6
422.4
-142.4

73.3
61.8
11.6

Sep.

23.9
-20.4
-10.5
-6.9
-3.4
3.5

612.7
120.2
233.7
258.8

389.7
560.8
167.9
191.3
123.4
67.8
6.4
-29.8
392.9
-171.0

222.9
130.3
92.6

Rev.

9.5
-4.2
-3.3
-8.2
4.9
5.3

622.8
130.7
232.5
259.6

485.2
603.6
161.6
183.3
113.8
69.5
6.2
-27.9
442.0
-118.4

137.7
123.0
14.6

Prog.

Dec.

35.5
-23.8
-22.1
-13.6
-6.5
11.6

660.6
138.7
250.5
271.5

369.3
492.0
117.5
151.5
94.3
57.2
4.1
-38.2
374.5
-122.7

291.4
165.2
126.2

Rev.

8.0
-5.4
-5.4
-6.2
0.8
2.6

677.6
145.7
255.5
276.5

333.3
456.0
76.5
110.5
56.8
53.7
4.1
-38.2
379.5
-122.7

344.4
215.2
129.2

Mar.

12.6
-8.8
-8.8
-14.1
5.3
3.8

685.7
133.8
260.5
291.5

311.4
434.1
24.6
58.6
8.3
50.3
4.1
-38.2
409.5
-122.7

374.4
240.2
134.2

2005
Jun.
Prog.

Credit to the economy
10.0
6.1
-1.4
-9.4
-9.6
-12.6
6.9
-7.0
7.1
-9.3
-5.5
1.3
Broad money
2.3
-2.2
-3.7
-1.2
-1.6
5.0
8.5
6.3
5.3
11.6
14.5
9.7
Sources: BEAC; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The data for September 2004 differs from the one in the government finance table, which excludes CFAF 7.8 billion of securitized commercial agreements bought by a local commercial bank in 2004.

Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Credit to the economy
Broad money
6.8
-6.4
-5.8
-3.2
-1.9
0.4

524.6
617.5
173.2
200.8
128.9
71.9
3.3
-30.9
444.3
-92.9

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the public sector
Net credit to the Government
Central bank
Deposit money banks 1/
Post office savings
Claims on public agencies, net
Credit to the economy
Other items, net

Memorandum items:

76.9
62.3
14.6

Net foreign assets
Central bank
Deposit money banks

Mar.

Table 4. Gabon : Quarterly Monetary Survey, 2003-05

4.2
9.3

15.6
-14.3
-14.3
-19.6
5.3
1.3

669.3
112.4
265.5
291.5

275.0
397.7
-11.8
22.2
-24.6
46.8
4.1
-38.2
409.5
-122.7

394.4
260.2
134.2

Sep.

6.3
4.6

33.0
-28.4
-28.4
-32.0
3.5
4.6

690.9
145.0
261.9
283.9

181.4
304.1
-93.8
-59.7
-103.5
43.8
4.1
-38.2
397.9
-122.7

509.5
373.3
136.2

Dec.

- 28 -

- 29 -

Table 5. Gabon: Monetary Survey, 2000–07
2000

2001

2002

Stocks

2003
Est.

2004
Prog.

2005
Rev.

2006
Projections

2007

(In billions of CFA francs)

Net foreign assets

177.2

-8.1

36.1

81.6

137.7

291.4

509.5

660.0

753.1

Central bank

72.8

-46.0

46.0

66.9

123.0

165.2

373.3

518.8

588.9

Assets

136.5

9.9

90.1

104.9

181.3

216.2

411.8

553.8

622.9

Liabilities

-63.7

-56.0

-44.1

-38.0

-57.0

-51.1

-38.5

-35.0

-34.0

104.4

37.9

-9.9

14.6

14.6

126.2

136.2

141.2

164.2

Deposit money banks
Assets

169.0

98.5

72.5

86.6

86.6

193.7

203.7

208.7

231.7

Liabilities

-64.6

-60.6

-82.5

-71.9

-71.9

-67.5

-67.5

-67.5

-67.5

350.1

574.8

562.9

510.2

485.2

369.3

181.4

64.4

5.3

455.6

660.2

652.3

623.0

603.6

492.0

304.1

192.0

139.3
-336.1

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the public sector

98.6

241.0

196.7

210.2

161.6

117.5

-93.8

-236.9

125.0

271.3

219.8

231.9

183.3

151.5

-59.7

-202.9

-302.1

114.2

223.6

130.7

146.5

113.8

94.3

-103.5

-240.5

-320.0

157.3

248.2

231.5

196.8

215.8

197.2

106.9

33.8

32.7

Statutory advances

94.5

194.4

189.2

166.4

166.4

149.1

71.5

1.8

1.8

Use of IMF credit

62.8

53.8

42.2

30.4

49.4

48.0

35.5

32.0

31.0

Net credit to the government
Central bank
Claims
Of which

Deposits
Deposit money banks
Post office savings
Claims on public agencies, net
Credit to the economy
Other items, net
Broad money

43.2

24.6

100.8

50.3

102.0

102.8

210.4

274.3

352.8

10.9

47.7

89.1

85.4

69.5

57.2

43.8

37.7

17.9

3.9

2.3

2.5

6.2

6.2

4.1

4.1

4.1

4.1

-30.3

-32.6

-25.5

-27.9

-27.9

-38.2

-38.2

-38.2

-38.2

356.9

419.2

455.6

412.8

442.0

374.5

397.9

429.0

475.5

-105.4

-85.4

-89.4

-112.8

-118.4

-122.7

-122.7

-127.6

-134.0
758.4

527.3

566.7

599.0

591.8

622.8

660.6

690.9

724.4

Currency outside banks

116.2

128.2

132.0

124.2

130.7

138.7

145.0

152.1

159.2

Demand deposits

204.3

204.0

214.7

220.9

232.5

250.5

261.9

274.6

287.5

Time deposits

206.9

234.5

252.3

246.7

259.6

271.5

283.9

297.7

311.7

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Credit to the economy
Broad money

49.5

-35.1

7.8

7.6

9.5

35.5

33.0

21.8

12.9

-31.5

42.6

-2.1

-8.8

-4.2

-23.8

-28.4

-16.9

-8.2

-33.7

38.8

-1.4

-4.9

-3.3

-22.1

-28.4

-16.2

-7.3

-39.6

27.7

-9.1

2.0

-8.2

-13.6

-32.0

-20.7

-13.7

8.3

11.8

6.4

-7.1

4.9

-6.5

3.5

4.5

6.4

18.0

7.5

5.7

-1.2

5.3

11.6

4.6

4.9

4.7

(Annual percent changes, unless otherwise indicated)
Credit to the economy

11.7

17.4

8.7

-9.4

7.1

-9.3

6.3

7.8

10.8

Broad money
Of which : currency outside of banks

18.0

7.5

5.7

-1.2

5.3

11.6

4.6

4.9

4.7

10.4

10.3

3.0

-5.9

5.3

11.7

4.6

4.9

4.7

Non-oil GDP

3.8

3.7

3.4

3.4

3.4

3.4

3.3

3.3

3.3

Total GDP

7.4

6.3

5.9

5.9

5.4

6.1

6.1

5.7

5.1

5.1

7.6

0.4

1.4

5.3

3.4

4.6

4.9

4.7

Memorandum items:
Velocity

Non-oil GDP growth
Total GDP growth

26.0

-4.7

Credit to the economy/non-oil GDP

19.2

21.0

Source: Bank of Central African States (BEAC).

0.0
22.7

2.0

-3.9

8.5

8.8

-3.7

-3.2

20.3

20.7

17.8

18.1

18.6

19.7

- 30 -

Table 6. Gabon: Balance of Payments, 2001–07
(in billions of CFA francs unless otherwise indicated)
2003

2004

2001

2002

379.3

235.6

423.5

194.8

400.7

571.2

488.3

396.6

Exports, f.o.b.
Oil sector
Other sectors
Imports, f.o.b.
Oil sector
Non-oil private sector

1,916.0
1,535.9
380.1
-621.2
-214.1
-407.0

1,781.2
1,435.4
345.8
-651.7
-163.3
-488.3

1,847.1
1,553.6
293.4
-605.9
-124.3
-481.5

1,800.6
1,442.3
358.3
-658.3
-210.8
-447.5

2,244.7
1,800.9
443.7
-722.5
-216.3
-506.1

2,556.2
2,066.9
489.2
-778.3
-231.8
-546.4

2,331.8
1,787.3
544.5
-776.9
-200.5
-576.3

2129.4
1538.8
590.6
-781.3
-184.9
-596.3

Trade balance

1,294.8

1,129.5

1,241.2

1,142.2

1,522.1

1,777.8

1,554.9

1348.1

-858.1

-802.5

-712.6

-900.8

-1,019.9

-1,104.6

-975.6

-871.8

-263.0
-132.9

-118.9
-201.3

-114.7
-202.7

-138.7
-230.7

-122.1
-272.5

-108.3
-335.9

-99.1
-294.4

-87.9
-259.4

-57.4

-91.4

-105.1

-46.6

-101.5

-102.1

-90.9

-79.6

-576.3

-374.1

-477.2

-282.8

-407.0

-440.9

-342.8

-326.7

Prel.
Current account (including transfers)

Services (net)
Of which
Interest on public debt (gross) 1/ 3/ 4/
Profits (net)
Current Transfers (net)
Capital Account
Capital Transfers (net)

2005

2006

2007

Proj.

Prel.

1.9

1.8

25.1

0.0

2.7

2.6

3.0

3.4

Medium- and long-term capital
Public sector 3/ 4/
Drawings (gross)
Project
Other (excluding IMF)
Amortization (gross) 2/
Direct investment and portfolio investment (net)
Other capital inflows (net)
Oil sector
Non-oil sector

-286.4
-268.3
9.3
9.3
0.0
-277.5
-67.6
49.4
22.4
27.0

-213.7
-226.5
17.7
17.7
0.0
-244.1
42.1
-29.4
-3.5
-25.8

-189.6
-190.4
15.4
8.7
6.7
-205.7
10.0
-9.2
22.5
-31.7

30.9
-139.9
65.0
20.0
45.0
-204.9
116.7
54.1
23.5
30.6

-67.6
-154.9
59.9
17.8
42.1
-214.8
118.5
-31.2
-8.4
-22.8

-88.5
-175.3
32.0
32.0
0.0
-207.3
115.1
-28.2
-6.4
-21.8

-96.1
-181.0
38.0
33.6
4.4
-219.0
106.5
-21.5
-3.0
-18.5

-107.4
-184.7
40.0
35.1
4.9
-224.7
98.8
-21.5
-8.0
-13.5

Short-term capital
Oil sector
Non-oil sector
Errors and omissions

-291.8
-69.3
-138.1
-84.3

-162.2
2.0
-67.6
-96.7

-312.7
-55.2
-162.5
-95.0

-313.7
-84.4
-229.3
0.0

-342.1
-104.3
-237.8
0.0

-355.0
-66.3
-288.7
0.0

-249.7
-67.4
-182.2
0.0

-222.7
-39.8
-182.8
0.0

Overall Balance

-197.0

-138.5

-53.7

-88.0

-6.3

130.3

145.5

69.9

Financing
Central Bank, net foreign
assets (- = increase)
IMF Liabilities (- = increase)
Other net assets (- = increase)
Debt rescheduling 4/
Debt cancellation (and other) 4/
Arrears net (- = reduction)
Other exceptional financing 4/ 5/
Financing gap 6/

197.0

138.5

53.7

-383.4

6.3

-130.3

-145.5

-67.5

119.1
-7.1
126.1
0.0
17.0
60.9
0.0
0.0

-92.0
-13.5
-78.5
1.3
11.9
217.4
0.0
0.0

-20.9
-11.8
-9.0
0.0
11.1
63.5
0.0
0.0

-57.4
19.0
-76.4
0.0
0.0
-326.0
0.0
471.5

-97.7
19.2
-116.9
254.1
2.7
-326.9
174.1
0.0

-208.1
-12.6
-195.5
249.3
2.6
0.0
-174.1
0.0

-145.5
-3.5
-142.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-70.1
-5.1
-65.1
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.0
-2.4

Memorandum items:
Current account (including official transfers)
Oil
Non-oil
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Capital account
Overall balance
Gross official reserves (in billions of CFA francs)
In months of imports of GNFS
World oil price (U.S. dollars/barrel)
National oil price (U.S. dollars/barrel)
Oil production (in million tons)
Exchange rate CFA francs per U.S. dollar (average)

11.0
27.2
-16.2
10.8
-16.7
-5.7
9.9
0.1
24.3
22.6
13.0
732.4

6.8
26.2
-19.4
7.5
-10.8
-4.0
90.1
0.9
25.2
24.2
12.6
695.4

12.0
34.3
-22.3
12.8
-13.6
-1.5
104.9
1.2
28.9
27.6
13.5
580.1

5.8
21.6
-15.9
5.5
-8.4
-2.6
181.3
1.9
30.0
28.9
13.3
532.6

10.5
27.7
-17.2
10.4
-10.7
-0.2
104.9
0.9
38.2
35.6
13.6
528.3

13.7
29.7
-15.9
13.6
-10.6
3.1
300.4
2.6
48.1
44.3
13.5
488.4

12.2
27.5
-15.2
12.1
-8.6
3.6
442.4
4.0
45.3
42.7
12.1
...

10.2
24.5
-14.2
10.1
-8.4
1.8
507.4
4.7
42.6
40.6
11.0
...

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ In 2004, it excludes late interest for approximately CFAF 4 billion that remains to be reconciled with the French Treasury
2/ In 2003, it includes (cumulated) debt cancellation by Agence Francaise de Developemment and Banque de France for 2004-13.
3/ It includes both direct and guaranteed debt.
4/ For 2004-06, it may change after bilateral agreements with Paris Club, Bilateral and London Club creditors will be concluded
5/ In 2004-05, it includes the deferral of 50 percent of arrears on principal and 35 percent of arrears on interest with Paris Club Creditors. The reschedulin
of such arrears will only become effecive provided the second review under the SBA is completed.
6/ The financing gap for the program period was covered in part by a debt rescheduling.

- 31 -

Table 7: Gabon: External Debt Outstanding and Scheduled Debt Service, 2001-07 1/
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Projections

2007

(in billions of CFA francs)
Total medium- and long-term debt

2,176.5

2,166.1

1,969.6

1,894.5

1,785.5

1,604.0

1,415.2

Debt Outstanding (as of December, 2004)
Of which arrears 2/

2,176.5
61.1

2,166.1
278.3

1,969.6
326.9

1,391.1
--

1,182.5
--

969.9
--

754.5
--

362.3
308.5
1,697.9
1,646.8
51.1
83.7
26.8
5.8

320.5
276.2
1,711.2
1,669.3
41.9
86.9
21.1
26.3

242.3
210.6
1,636.3
1,594.5
41.8
41.5
18.6
31.0

192.0
174.9
1,169.3
1,136.8
32.5
29.8
---

153.3
148.8
1,006.7
976.4
30.2
22.5
---

118.0
116.9
835.8
808.1
27.6
16.2
---

86.7
86.7
653.0
628.0
25.0
14.8
---

--------

--------

--------

503.4
32.2
65.0
398.7
-7.5
--

603.0
32.3
97.0
473.8
-6.9
6.8
--

634.1
32.4
135.0
473.8
-11.9
4.8
--

660.7
28.3
175.0
473.8
-16.8
2.8
-2.5

548.4
--

403.2
--

318.8
156.2

347.5
151.3

325.6
153.1

318.6
156.5

314.2
159.3

306.3
242.1

244.7
158.5

206.8
112.0

225.2
122.3

217.3
108.3

219.5
99.1

226.4
87.9

99.6
88.7
10.9

64.2
51.8
12.3

58.1
49.0
9.1

64.8
51.2
13.6

50.1
37.0
13.1

47.9
44.1
3.7

41.4
40.2
1.2

383.7
378.8
272.4
8.8
---26.4
100.0
152.8
44.1
67.4
4.9
49.7
15.5

269.2
263.2
184.2
5.2
----91.4
52.8
27.2
48.2
6.0
59.4
10.5

233.8
231.8
180.4
1.8
----90.9
52.7
35.1
51.4
2.1
18.1
8.8

231.8
229.0
178.3
1.8
----88.0
54.4
34.1
50.7
2.9
11.6
4.2

230.0
227.6
186.8
1.7
----93.5
55.5
36.2
40.8
2.4
7.9
--

229.2
226.5
194.4
0.8
----95.8
57.2
40.6
32.1
2.7
6.3
--

230.4
227.7
201.5
0.8
----97.1
58.8
44.9
26.3
2.7
1.4
--

--

--

--

31.0

--

--

--

--------

--------

--------

4.1
1.9
--2.1
1.5
0.3

37.6
8.7
--28.9
23.8
0.7

35.3
7.0
--28.3
21.6
0.7

41.0
11.0
-4.0
30.1
21.6
0.7

Multilateral
Of which non-IMF
Bilateral
Paris Club
Other bilateral
Debt diverse
London Club
Unpaid Interest on arrears (IDR) 3/
New Debt 4/
IMF
Project-Program
Paris Club VIII (2004)
London Club
Other bilateral
Remaining gap financing
Total debt service due (including IMF) 5/
Of which reschedulable
Principal
Interest
Multilateral
Non-IMF
IMF Outstanding
Bilateral
Paris Club
Paris Club pre-cutoff
Never rescheduled (NPRD)
Paris Club I
Paris Club II (1987)
Paris Club III (1988)
Paris Club IV (1989)
Paris Club V (1994)
Paris Club VI (1995)
Paris Club VII (2000)
Paris Club post-cutoff (PCOD)
Other bilateral (Non guarranteed credit)
Debt Diverse (Non PC creditors)
London Club
Interest on arrears (IDR) 3/
New debt (includes residual gap filling)
Principal
Of which Paris Club VIII (2004)
Of which IMF
Interest
Of which Paris Club VIII (2004)
Of which IMF

- 32 -

Table 7. Gabon: External Debt Outstanding and Scheduled Debt Service, 2001-07 1/ (concluded)
2001

2002

Debt cancellation 6/
Debt outstanding
Arrears

34.0
17.0
17.0

23.8
11.9
11.9

Change in arrears (-=reduction)
Principal
Interest
Other

95.4
60.9
34.5
--

354.4
217.4
137.1
--

95.9
63.5
32.4
-3.1

-326.9
-186.6
-140.3

-----------

2.6
2.6
1.3
1.3
-------

-----------

493.9
266.3
227.6

190.1
150.1
40.0

274.3
202.7
71.6

Debt rescheduling/deferral 6/
Debt service rescheduling
Principal
Interest
Arrears rescheduling
Principal
Interest
Deferred payments 9/
Principal
Interest
Debt service paid (including IMF)
Principal
Interest

2003

2004

2005

(In billions of CFA francs)
19.1
--11.1
--8.0
---

2006
Projections

2007

----

----

----

-----

-----

428.2
101.6
65.7
35.9
152.6
98.8
53.7
174.1
120.9
53.2

75.2
75.2
51.1
24.0
174.1
120.9
53.2
-174.1
-120.9
-53.2

-----------

-----------

----

----

----

----

(In percent)
Memorandum items:
External public debt/GDP
Including IMF
Excluding IMF

63.1
54.2

62.8
54.8

56.0
50.0

49.6
44.2

43.0
38.6

40.1
36.4

36.5
33.6

106.7
91.6

117.7
102.6

103.3
92.2

82.2
73.2

68.3
61.3

67.1
60.8

64.6
59.4

Debt-service ratio 7/ 6/
Due (before relief)
Principal
Interest
Paid
Principal
Interest

26.9
15.0
11.9
24.2
13.1
11.2

21.9
13.3
8.6
10.3
8.2
2.2

16.7
10.8
5.9
14.4
10.6
3.8

15.1
9.8
5.3
----

12.4
8.3
4.1
----

13.3
9.2
4.1
----

14.4
10.3
4.0
----

Debt service/government revenue 8/ 6/
Due (before relief)
Paid

46.7
40.0

37.1
16.2

30.4
23.4

34.0
--

29.3
--

33.0
--

27.2
--

Debt service/non-oil GDP 6/
Due (before relief)
Paid

27.4
24.7

20.1
9.5

15.7
13.5

16.5
--

14.8
--

13.8
--

13.0
--

External public debt/exports 7/ 6/
Including IMF
Excluding IMF

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ End-of-period data; public and publicly guaranteed debt.
2/ Arrears through end-2002 were due to multilateral and bilateral creditors, and to commercial banks. By end-2003, CFAF 321 billion
correspond to reschedulable debt. The rest correspond to CFAF 4.8 billion of arrears on nonreschedulable debt that were cleared
during the first quarter of 2004. It excludes possible arrears with Libya and Iran that are in the process to be reconciled.
3/ In 2003-04, it excludes late interest for approximately CFAF 4 billion that remains to be reconciled with the French Treasury
4/ Includes residual gap filling.
5/ Debt service is net of cancellation.
6/ For 2004-06 it may change after bilateral agreements with Paris Club, other Bilateral and London Club creditors will be concluded.
7/ In percent of exports of goods and services.
8/ Government revenue, excluding grants.
9/ Triggered after the succesful completion of the second review under the SBA.

- 33 -

Table 8. Gabon: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2003-07
(In billions of CFA francs)
2003
Est.

2004

2005

2006
2007
Projections

1. Gross financing requirements

293.9

-270.4

153.4

121.6

101.7

External current account deficit (excl. official transfers)

449.9

398.6

566.2

483.1

391.1

-198.6
-198.6
-172.0
-31.8
0.0
-140.2
-8.5
-18.1
0.0

-212.1
-212.1
-196.3
-34.7
0.0
-161.6
-4.1
-11.6
0.0

-204.7
-204.7
-190.5
-26.1
0.0
-164.4
-6.9
-7.3
0.0

-216.1
-216.1
-204.8
-31.9
0.0
-172.9
-5.0
-6.3
0.0

-219.3
-220.3
-214.0
-30.2
1.0
-184.8
-5.0
-1.4
1.0

63.5
-9.0
-11.8

-326.9
-116.9
-13.1

0.0
-195.5
-12.6

0.0
-142.0
-3.5

0.0
-65.1
-5.1

-406.8

270.4

-153.4

-121.6

-99.7

10.0

118.5

115.1

106.5

98.8

Debt financing from private creditors
Medium- and long-term financing
To public sector
Of which: balance of payments financing 3/
To commercial banks
To corporate private sector
Short-term financing
Of which: balance of payments financing 3/

-321.8
-9.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-9.2
-312.7
0.0

-373.3
-31.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-31.2
-342.1
0.0

-383.3
-28.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-28.2
-355.0
0.0

-271.2
-21.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
-21.5
-249.7
0.0

-244.2
-21.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
-21.5
-222.7
1.0

Official creditors 4/
Multilateral 1/
Of which: balance of payments financing 3/
Bilateral
To public sector
Of which: balance of payments financing 3/
To private sector

-11.1
-0.4
-3.9
-10.6
-10.6
-15.8
0.0

62.0
50.1
42.9
11.9
11.9
1.3
0.0

37.0
14.8
2.0
22.2
22.2
3.0
0.0

43.2
19.9
6.5
23.3
23.3
3.1
0.0

45.5
21.1
7.1
24.4
24.4
3.3
1.0

0.0

32.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

11.1

430.9

77.8

0.0

2.6

Financing gap

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-2.4

Other flows 5/

-95.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-8.7

507.4

82.8

9.6

10.6

Debt amortization
Medium and long-term debt
Public sector
Multilateral 1/
Bonds and notes
Bilateral
Commercial banks
Corporate private sector
Short-term debt 2/
Repayment of arrears
Gross reserves accumulation
IMF repurchases and repayments
2. Available financing
Foreign direct investment (net)

IMF
Debt rescheduling, deferral and cancellation

Memorandum item:
Total balance of payments financing 3/
1/ Excluding the IMF.

2/ Original maturity of less than 1 year. Stock at the end of the previous period.
3/ Includes those transactions that are undertaken for the purpose of financing a balance of payments deficit or an increase in reserves.
4/ Includes both loans and grants.
5/ Includes all other net financial flows, and errors and omissions.

- 34 -

Table 9. Gabon: Income and Social Indicators, 1980–2002
1980–85

1990

Gabon
2000

2001

2002

0.8
3.3
65.2
4.5

0.9
3.0
68.1
4.8

1.2
2.3
81.5
4.5

1.3
2.2
82.0
4.2

1.3
2.2
82.9
4.1

702.6
2.6
34.0
5.3

647.0
1.3
76.0
2.7

…

62.0 2/

…

…

...

…

…

3,900.0
76.0
76.0

4,470.0
72.5
72.5

3,327.7
105.3
104.8

3,100.0
109.3
…

3,060.0
109.5
...

450.0
131.0
130.5

5,407.0
122.0
…

…
5.0

2.0
…

…
…

…
…

1.9
2.4

4.0
4.1

5.5
5.0

172.0
43.0
6.0

168.0
50.0
7.0

…
…
…

151.0
54.0
…

150
53
...

78.0
25.0
3.0

107.0
64.0
14.0

Access to improved water source (in percent
of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

58.0
75.0
34.0

60.0
77.0
33.0

77.2
93
35.2

86.0
...
...

...
...
...

58.2
…
…

…
…
…

Immunization rate (in percent of
children under 12 months)
Measles
DPT

58.0
24.0

78.0
76.0

...
...

55.0
37.0

55.0
38

57.0
59.0

78.0
75.0

Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total
Male
Female

49.0
47.0
51.0

51.0
49.0
53.0

...
...
...

52.7
51.0
54.0

52.9
...
...

45.8
46.0
48.0

66.0
65.0
69.0

112.0
194.0

69.0
96.0

57.0
...

64.0
87.0

63.0
85.0

92.0
174.0

54.0
78.0

474.0
387.0
600.0

425.0
360.0
500.0

342.0
281.0
519.0

…
…
420.0

…
…
…

499.0
453.0
917.0

221.0
170.0
…

Population
Total population, midyear (millions)
Growth rate (annual average, in percent)
Urban population (in percent of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Poverty (in percent of population)
National head count index 1/
Income
GNP per capita (U.S. dollars)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
Social indicators
Public expenditure (in percent of GDP)
Health
Education
Gross school enrollment rates
(in percent of age group)
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)

Same Region/Income Group
Sub-Saharan Upper-middle
Africa
income

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators , 2003; UN Statistics Division (2003); and Gabon's Demographic and Health Survey (2000).
1/ Defined as the share of the population with per capita consumption of less than two-thirds of the national average.
2/ As of 1993.

- 35 -

Table 10. Gabon: Millennium Development Goals
1990

1995

2001

2002

2015
Target

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose
income is less than one dollar a day.
Population below $1 a day (percent)
Poverty gap at $1 a day (percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20percent

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

Target 2: . Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger.
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent)

...
11

...
9

11.9
7

...
...

...
5.5

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be
able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (percent)
Youth literacy rate (percent ages 15-24)

...
...
...

...
59.3
...

78.3
102.1
...

...
...
...

102.6
...
43.2
...

96.2
...
...
6

96
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

100

96
69
76

91
67
57

87
64
55

85
63
55

32

500
...

...
...

420
85.5

...
...

125

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Target 7: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Prevalence of HIV, female (percent ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS

...
...
...

...
...
...

4.7
32.7
8600

...
...
...

Target 8: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the incidence of malaria
and other major diseases.
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (percent)

...
...

...
...

192
...

248.4
72.9

Goal 3: Promote gender equality
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education
preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (percent ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (percent)
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five
mortality rate.
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Target 6: Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal
mortality ratio.
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)

- 36 -

Table 10. Gabon: Millennium Development Goals (concluded)
1990

1995

2001

2002

85.1
...
3.7
7

...
2.8
4.2
3.4

84.7
2.8
4.7
2.8

...
2.8
...
...

Target 10: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access
to safe drinking water.
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)

60

...

86

...

Target 11: By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of
at least 100 million slum dwellers.
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (percent of population)

...
...

...
...

53
...

...
...

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Targets 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country
policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)

Goal 8: Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Targets: Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the Special Needs
of the Least Developed Countries. Address the Special Needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states.
Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and international measures in order to make
debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent
and productive work for youth.
In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs in developing countries. In cooperation
with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
...
...
...
...
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
21.7
33.5
234
239.7
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
...
5.6
15.8
19.2

Sources: World Bank; World Development Indicators 2004; and www.developmentgoals.org

2015
Target

93

13.2
7.4

5.8

10.4
9.7
0.8
0.4
0.5
0.3
6.7

68.4
63.6
5.3
2.6
3.1
1.8
44.3

1/ At end of period; assuming drawings under the Stand-By Arrangement in 2004-05.

Sources: IMF, Finance Department, Gabonese authorities, and staff estimates and projections.

Purchases
Repurchases

Net use of Fund credit
(in millions of SDRs)

In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFAF
In percent of government revenue and grants
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services (f.o.b.)
In percent of external public debt including the Fund
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

Repurchases and charges due

In millions of SDRs
In billions of CFAF
In percent of government revenue and grants
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services (f.o.b.)
In percent of external public debt including the Fund
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

Outstanding use of Fund credit 1/

2000

-8.7

-8.7

11.7
10.9
0.9
0.5
0.5
0.3
7.6

59.6
53.8
4.6
2.6
2.5
1.6
38.7

2001

-10.1

-10.1

11.8
10.7
1.0
0.6
0.5
0.3
7.7

49.5
44.3
4.1
2.4
2.0
1.3
32.1

2002

-10.1

-10.1

11.2
9.1
0.9
0.5
0.5
0.3
7.3

39.4
31.7
3.0
1.7
1.6
0.9
25.6

2003

Table 11. Gabon : Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 2000-09

41.7
16.7

24.9

18.2
14.3
1.3
0.6
0.8
0.4
11.8

64.4
48.5
4.4
2.1
2.6
1.3
41.7

2004

27.8
16.7

11.1

19.4
14.6
1.2
0.6
0.8
0.4
12.5

75.4
56.8
4.5
2.2
3.2
1.4
48.9

2005

-4.6

-4.6

7.1
5.4
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.1
4.6

70.8
53.3
4.4
2.2
3.3
1.3
45.9

Projections

2006

-6.6

-6.6

9.0
6.8
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.2
5.8

64.2
48.3
4.2
2.2
3.4
1.2
41.6

2007

-29.5

-29.5

31.5
23.7
2.2
1.2
1.9
0.6
20.4

34.7
26.1
2.4
1.3
2.1
0.7
22.5

2008

-29.5

-29.5

30.5
23.0
2.1
1.2
2.2
0.6
19.8

5.2
3.9
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.1
3.4

2009

- 37 -

- 38 -

Table 12. Gabon: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1999–2004

Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Terms of trade (percent change, 12-month basis)
Current account balance, incl. grants (in percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods
and services of the following year) 1/
Gross reserves of the banking system (in millions of
U.S. dollars) 1/
Gross reserves of the banking system (in months of
imports of goods and services of the following year) 1/
Central bank short-term foreign liabilities (in millions of
U.S. dollars) 1/
Official reserves/broad money (M2) (in percent) 1/
Total public and publicly guaranteed debt (in millions
of U.S. dollars)
Total external debt to exports of goods and services
(in percent)
External interest payments to exports of goods and
services (in percent)
External amortization payments to exports of goods
and services (in percent)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, end of period)
Net foreign assets of commercial banks (in millions
of U.S. dollars)

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

31.2
-21.6
37.9
8.4
22.8

33.1
-12.2
-1.6
19.7
191.2

-21.4
6.0
-10.6
11.0
13.8

-2.1
10.5
-1.5
6.8
136.9

24.3
11.4
24.7
12.0
194.1

33.4
30.9
1.6
10.5
214.4

0.1

1.4

0.1

1.0

0.9

0.9

101.7

428.1

150.9

247.2

354.3

837.9

0.6

3.2

1.1

1.8

1.7

3.5

90.8
3.2

89.2
25.9

77.9
1.8

67.0
15.0

70.3
17.7

105.5
32.8

3717.1 2894.7 3029.6 3292.0 3644.3 3872.3
130.4

82.9

106.7

117.7

103.3

82.2

10.1

7.7

11.9

8.6

5.9

5.3

12.2
614.9
619.5

9.3
710.0
713.5

15.0
732.4
718.4

13.3
695.4
658.0

10.8
580.1
540.5

9.8
528.3
489.2

-3.1

146.3

52.8

-15.1

27.1

257.9

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Gabon is a member of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) and
of its regional central bank (BEAC). Gross reserves in the table are BEAC's gross reserves imputed to Gabon.

- 39 -

Table 13. Gabon: Sources of Growth, 2003-08
(Annual percentage changes)
Sectoral
2003
2004
share of
Est.
GDP (%)
in 2003

2005

2006
Projections

2007

2008

Real GDP Growth
Oil sector
Non-oil sector
Of which
Agriculture, Fishing and Agro-Industry
Logging activities and Wood Industry
Mining (excluding oil related activities)
Services, Transport and Commerce
Construction, Water, Electricity, and other industries

100.0
28.2
71.8

2.4
6.6
0.8

1.4
-1.0
2.3

2.0
-0.6
3.0

0.2
-8.6
3.5

0.7
-8.0
3.5

0.4
-10.3
3.5

8.7
2.9
1.4
30.9
27.8

1.5
4.2
3.6
1.2
0.0

2.0
-0.1
22.9
1.4
2.3

2.8
4.9
12.5
3.1
2.2

4.7
5.6
11.1
3.2
2.8

5.0
5.6
8.0
3.7
2.3

4.0
5.6
7.0
4.9
1.3

Contribution to Non-Oil GDP Growth
Agriculture, Fishing and Agro-Industry
Logging activities and Wood Industry
Mining (excluding Oil related activities)
Services, Transport and Commerce
Construction, water, electricity, and other industries

100
12.1
4.0
2.0
43.1
38.8

0.8
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.0

2.3
0.2
0.0
0.5
0.7
0.9

3.0
0.3
0.2
0.3
1.3
0.9

3.5
0.6
0.2
0.3
1.3
1.1

3.5
0.6
0.2
0.2
1.5
0.9

3.5
0.5
0.2
0.2
2.0
0.5

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 40 -

Table 14. Gabon: Banking Sector Soundness Indicators, 1998-2004
(Ratios in percent)
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

24.5
4.5

23.0
3.1

13.2
2.4

17.2
7.3

17.6
4.5

19.9
7.8

17.8
5.9

Assets quality
NPLs to total gross loans
NPLs to total capital
NPLs provisions to total NPLs

8.9
32.3
37.2

9.4
36.7
36.1

6.6
35.0
64.7

8.6
35.2
63.0

11.4
52.9
66.5

13.8
59.4
78.8

15.8
66.8
78.4

Earnings and profitability
Interest margin to gross income
Return on equity
Return on assets

184.7
28.8
5.6

182.6
31.2
5.4

159.8
60.2
6.2

173.8
36.8
5.6

187.1
35.3
5.2

206.0
30.9
4.7

...
...
...

Liguidity
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities

127.0

134.6

125.4

128.8

134.0

185.3

219.5

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Ratio of total loans larger than 15 percent
of capital to eight times capital 1/

Source: Bank of Central African States (BEAC).
1/ According to COBAC prudential regulations, the total of large loans (defined as those exceeding 15 percent of capital) should not
exceed eight times banks' capital.

- 41 -

APPENDIX I

Libreville, March 14, 2005

Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
Dear Mr. de Rato:
1.
This letter supplements the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies of
May 6, 2004 as well as the pertinent letters of intent dated September 8 and December 10,
2004. It describes the next major steps in the implementation of our program for 2005.
2.
The macroeconomic policies and structural reforms implemented by the government
continue to bear fruit. Real economic growth reached 1.4 percent in 2004, while growth in
non-oil GDP was 2.3 percent, reflecting an increase in activity in the mining sector
(manganese), timber processing, and construction. Rising oil prices have stimulated oil
production, which remained at the same level as in 2003. Wage restraint and monetary
discipline attributable to the exchange regime contributed to a decline in inflation, which fell
from 2.1 percent at end-2003 to 0.4 percent at end-2004. Budget performance was in line
with the program, and the non-oil primary budget deficit decreased from 8.2 percent of nonoil GDP to 7.7 percent of non-oil GDP in 2004. The current account continued to register a
large surplus. Activity in the export sectors was stimulated by the high prices of oil and
manganese and Gabon’s contribution to the BEAC’s net foreign assets was more than double
its level at end-2003.
3.
Performance under the program supported by the Stand-By Arrangement remains
satisfactory. All the quantitative and structural criteria for end-December 2004 were met.
Five structural benchmarks were also met by the scheduled date. However, it has not been
possible to integrate all the earmarked revenues into the 2005 budget law as anticipated: there
are now plans for the special accounts of the National Housing Fund (FNH) and of the local
governments to be integrated into the budget during through the year through a supplemental
budget law. The new general civil service law was adopted, but the implementing decrees
(structural benchmark) are still pending (see paragraph 8). The adoption of the implementing
legislation for the Mining Code has also been delayed pending completion of work on a
standard concession agreement for the mining sector, scheduled for the second quarter of
2005.
The macroeconomic framework for 2005
4.
The macroeconomic outlook remains favorable for 2005, characterized by
accelerating growth in the non-oil sector, a less-pronounced decline in oil production, and

- 42 -

APPENDIX I

continuing high price levels for oil and manganese. Non-oil real GDP is projected to increase
by 3 percent in 2005, reflecting the continued investment in recently privatized sectors of
agroindustry, the expanded timber processing capacities, the upturn in manganese
production, and fresh initiatives in the housing sector. Oil production is expected to reach
13.5 million tons, significantly in excess of the initially anticipated level of 11.5 million.
Thanks to a prudent fiscal policy, inflation is not expected to exceed 1 percent. Given the
projected high prices for oil and manganese, the external position is expected to remain
strong, with a current surplus amounting to 13.7 percent of GDP and rising foreign exchange
reserves. Accordingly, the external debt/GDP ratio is anticipated to decline from 50 percent
at end-2004 to 43 percent at end-2005. Of course, these projections will continue to be
heavily dependent on oil prices.
5.
Since the debt rescheduling agreement concluded with Paris Club creditors on
June 11, 2004, negotiations of bilateral agreements have been completed with the majority of
creditors and are continuing with the rest. To ensure that the latest agreements can be
concluded, the Secretary General of the Paris Club has granted an extension through endMarch 2005 on the signing date for bilateral agreements. With respect to its debt to non-Paris
Club bilateral creditors, Gabon is pursuing negotiations with Saudi Arabia, China, and Libya.
The agreement with the London Club of commercial creditors has been drafted and the
convention is expected to be signed during the first semester of 2005.
Principal elements of the budget law for 2005
6.
The 2005 budget law approved by Parliament in December is in line with the program
supported by the Stand-By Arrangement. It aims to reduce the non-oil primary budget deficit
by 2 percentage points to 5.8 percent of non-oil GDP. This adjustment will be based on an
increase in non-oil revenues (by 1 percent of non-oil GDP) and a reduction in current
expenditure (by 1 percent of non-oil GDP). As envisaged in the program, we have expedited
the implementation of appropriations for the 2005 budget, which became effective on
February 22 (structural benchmark).
7.
Total budget revenues (including grants) are expected to reach CFAF 1,263 billion in
2005 (30.4 percent of GDP), of which CFAF 702.4 billion are oil revenues and CFAF 555.4
billion are non-oil revenues, including grants. Several measures are expected to boost non-oil
revenues in 2005. In particular, these include the computerization of customs services, more
effective tracking of the collection of tax arrears, and strengthened control of value-added tax
(VAT) reimbursements. Furthermore, in the area of forestry taxation, we have introduced a
withholding (précompte) system designed to boost stumpage tax collection. Finally, the new
Large Enterprise Directorate (DGE) has been set up. Its contribution to tax collection should
make itself felt as of FY 2006. In the meantime, it is expected that the DGE select thirty large
companies and perform the tax assessment and calculations and notify the companies in
question before end-September 2005.
8.
The effort to control current expenditures—particularly the wage bill, which will be
brought down to CFAF 225 billion in 2005 (5.4 percent of GDP)—is continuing. This

- 43 -

APPENDIX I

objective will be achieved primarily by pursuing strict management of the payroll, in
particular, further cleanup of personnel records, better management of fixed-term employees,
the non-establishment of the evaluation committees in order to postpone the process of merit
advancement until the new civil service law is analyzed, the non-replacement of the fixedterm staff scheduled to retire, and a reduction in the number of daily workers. At the same
time, any accumulation of wage arrears (other than those generated by normal delays in
updating payroll records) will be avoided. The new civil service law, promulgated in early
February, is being evaluated to determine its impact on the wage bill. In the meantime, steps
have been taken to better control the wage bill during the preparation of the implementing
decrees before end-2005. With regard to nonwage expenditure, the government is planning to
make savings on several fronts. Sovereignty expenditures will be reduced by CFAF 2 billion
relative to 2004, and subsidies for public enterprises will decline, particularly transfers to
Gabon Poste and Air Gabon. The investment budget will be maintained at its level of around
4 percent of GDP in 2005.
9.
The government and the social security administration (CNSS) have jointly taken
steps to improve the financial situation of the CNSS. The government has assumed a portion
of the debt of public enterprises vis-à-vis the CNSS thereby ensuring that many separated
employees can receive their pension. Furthermore, the CNSS has embarked upon a
restructuring program, in particular by reducing its wage bill. With the support of the AfDB,
the CNSS has also launched an actuarial study to assure the long-term viability of the social
security system in Gabon.
10.
The action plan to improve the financial status of local governments is currently
being prepared. The plan is focused on strengthening the tax base for the property tax,
rigorous management of personnel costs, and an equitable mechanism for allocating transfers
to the local authorities. In particular, property surveys in Libreville and Port-Gentil have
helped determine the tax base and update property tax records. There are plans to expedite
the process of registering permanent real estate titles in 2005, with the goal of doubling the
number of permanent title deeds registered in Libreville and Port-Gentil by end-September
2005.
11.
As a consequence of this fiscal policy and the rescheduling agreement with Paris
Club creditors covering the first half of 2005, no deficit financing is envisaged for 2005.
Transparency and good governance
12.
The government is continuing its efforts to enhance efficiency and transparency in
fiscal management. Thus, the audit of expenditures for the independence celebrations
(fêtes tournantes) will be completed by end-August 2005. With respect to the Road
Maintenance Fund (FER), an audit of its arrears is expected to be finished by end-June. The
results of this audit will also serve to enhance the management of the road maintenance
expenditures envisaged in the second-generation FER, scheduled for establishment in 2005.
The government confirms its intention to strictly enforce the public procurement code. In

- 44 -

APPENDIX I

particular, all public expenditures associated with the FER will be subject to the procedures
set forth in the procurement code.
13.
The government is committed to further strengthening governance and the fight
against corruption. The National Commission Against Unlawful Enrichment (CNLEI)
submitted its first annual report in December 2004, which will be published in the official
gazette and on the Commission’s website once it is established. In 2005, the Commission
will continue its work on asset disclosure procedures and in other areas, surveys and
education campaigns, for example. The government is grateful to the IMF for the technical
assistance which the Fund has provided in this area, and trusts that this close cooperation will
continue.
14.
The government remains committed to transparency through its participation in the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). A working group comprising the Office
of the President, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Hydrocarbons, and the CNLEI has been established. This group has already begun the
technical work required to reconcile the financial flows between the oil companies and the
government. The working group will submit a report to the interest group, which comprises
representatives of the oil companies and civil society, as well as the government. The interest
group will be formed during the month of April and is expected to receive the first report
from the working group before end-June 2005. This will be followed by an audit of the
reconciliation by an independent audit firm by end-September 2005, which will assure its
publication. The intention is for the independent audits to be carried out at least
semiannually. On the basis of results achieved in the petroleum sector, the government plans
to expand this initiative to the mining sector in 2006. The government requests the IMF’s
assistance in preparing an assessment of fiscal transparency, which could focus in particular
on natural resource revenue transparency.
Financial sector
15.
The banking sector will continue to face considerable excess liquidity in 2005,
against the background of further balance of payments surpluses. The government anticipates
an upturn in credit to the economy in 2005, resulting from the revival in the construction and
public works sector and the initiative currently being prepared in the urban housing sector
(the National Real Estate Company’s project for 2000 medium-standard housing units in
Libreville). The government believes that microfinance institutions can play an important
role in developing private enterprise in Gabon. An association of microfinance institutions
has been formed at the initiative of the private sector. For its part, the government intends
to strengthen the role of the FODEX (Fund for the Development and Expansion of SMEs).
Structural reforms
16.
The government is committed to building upon the current structural reforms, which
are key to stimulating growth in the non-oil sector and encouraging diversification of
the economy.

- 45 -

APPENDIX I

Investment climate
17.
A workshop, held in Libreville in February 2005, examined the findings of a report
by the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) of the IFC. The government shares
its main recommendations: (i) improve access to financing for SMEs; (ii) reduce factor costs,
particularly the very high costs of port and transport operations; (iii) streamline
the administrative procedures required to establish a new business, simplify taxation, and
effectively eliminate parafiscal taxes; (iv) boost the supply of skilled labor by modernizing
the vocational training centers; and (v) strengthen the administrative environment by
improving the functioning of the courts and encouraging the use of arbitration to settle
business disputes. On the basis of these recommendations, the government in the coming
months intends to implement a package of measures aimed at minimizing regulatory and
administrative requirements as the basis for an effective investment promotion policy.
Forestry reforms
18.
The government has launched a major reform of the forestry sector. It has decided
to end the monopoly of the timber marketing board (SNBG) effective January 1, 2006.
A steering committee has been set up to examine and validate the conclusions of the study
entrusted to an international private firm assisted by local experts, and monitor
the restructuring measures during the transition period; its report is scheduled for endMarch 2005. The government has initiated a policy of transparency in the forestry sector:
publication as of February 21, 2005 of the list of holders of forest permits, the list of
currently valid permits and those which have reverted to the government, and maps showing
the distribution of forestry permits and national parks. Furthermore, the first awards of
forestry permits by public auction are planned as soon as the current pilot project is
completed.
Public enterprises
19.
The government remains firmly committed to privatizing certain public enterprises.
In the context of the privatization of Gabon Télécom, the government has adopted the
regulatory framework for the Agence de Régulation des Télécommunications (ARTEL) and
the conditions are in place for a successful bidder to be chosen by end-April 2005.
The restructuring of Air Gabon is in progress, but its financial situation remains fragile.
Steps have been taken to reduce expenditure, particularly outlays on personnel. A timetable
for partial privatization is being prepared with the aid of a consultant hired to assist
the government in privatizing the company. By end-April 2005, the consultant will submit
a thorough diagnostic assessment of the economic and financial performance of Air Gabon,
including the documentation to select pre-qualified bidders (structural benchmark); the tender
for the partial privatization will be launched by end-September 2005. With respect to Gabon
Poste, an analytical report is being prepared, to examine the measures that need to be taken in
order to reduce costs and increase revenue, with the aim of reducing the annual budget
subsidy and improving the quality of service.

- 46 -

APPENDIX I

PRSP preparation
20.
The government is working in close collaboration with the main donors and with civil
society to finalize the PRSP by end-August 2005. Accordingly, a flash survey (questionnaire
on core welfare indicators—CWIQ) was launched in February 2005. Its results will become
available in June and will help update poverty indicators as well as other social indicators.
The review of the results of the General Population and Housing Census, undertaken with
donor assistance, is currently in progress. Consultations with civil society and the private
sector are currently being conducted with financial and administrative assistance from UNDP
and the World Bank. The government is working in close conjunction with several donors to
prepare a public expenditure framework compatible with the PRSP and which will provide
an assessment and prioritization tool allowing the public investment program to be better
designed in the preparation for the 2006 budget.
21.
The government intends to treat the present arrangement as precautionary and will
continue to keep appropriate balances in the SDR accounts that it holds with the IMF in order
to allow for the programmed repayments.
Sincerely yours,
/s/
Paul Toungui
Minister of State, Minister of Economy, Finance,
Budget, and Privatization

0.0
83.6
9.6
146.6
0.0
0.0

0.0
147.4
36.7
284.5
395.4
0.0

245.3
110.1
296.2
17.2

233.6

116.6
124.5
55.4
154.5
7.2

0.0
0.0
5.5
0.0

9.5

2.5
0.0
0.0
14.1
0.0

-61.4

-22.4

Jun.
Act.

0.0
244.2
57.5
439.7
419.0
0.0

362.0
168.3
462.0
25.8
0.0

339.6

0.0
0.0
5.5
0.0

13.4

52.9
331.1
83.1
618.2
421.7
1.9

44.2
327.6
83.4
600.0
425.4
1.7

511.5
226.3
658.5
35.2
-67.4

453.0

468.7
450.5
513.4
226.0
662.9
33.1
-74.1

0.0

1.9

-8.7
-3.5
-1.4
-18.2
3.7
-0.2

-1.9
0.3
-4.4
2.1
6.7

2.5

0.0
0.0

-36.1

-1.2

0.0
0.0

59.9

-86.0

Dec.
Prel. Deviation

0.0
0.0
1.9
1.9

96.0

-98.6
-84.8

Prog. 11/

2004

-48.5

Sept.
Act.

0.8
96.3
17.3
181.5
46.4
0.0

116.2
56.2
160.5
8.0
-39.3

137.2

0.0
0.0
0.0

32.0

-20.2

Mar.
Prog.

2.0
149.4
46.7
350.1
75.3
0.0

260.6
112.5
324.8
20.0
-54.5

285.9

0.0
0.0
0.0

32.0

-92.9

Sep.

3.8
243.8
68.1
532.5
75.3
0.0

392.8
168.7
472.1
30.0
-60.8

453.2

0.0
0.0
0.0

32.0

-129.3

Indicative

2005
Jun.

Sources: Gabonese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Indicative targets for end-March 2004, end June, end September, and end-December 2005. Targets for end-June, end-September, end-December 2004, and end-March 2005 are performance criteria under the SBA.
2/ The performance criterion will be adjusted upward/downward for any lower/higher oil revenues, larger/lower payment of external debt service (net of nonproject external financing disbursements), larger/smaller
net reductions in domestic arrears, and smaller/larger privatization proceeds, relative to program targets. The performance criterion will be adjusted downward for unprogrammed rescheduling/deferment on domestic debt.
3/ This performance criterion applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt,
adopted by the IMF Executive Board on August 24, 2000, but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not been
received. Excluded from this performance criterion are rescheduling arrangements and purchases from the Fund. For purposes of this performance criterion,
the term "nonconcessional" means that the debt has a grant element of less than 35 percent, calculated on the basis of currency-specific discount rates that
are based on the OECD commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs).
4/ Excluded from this performance criterion are rescheduling arrangements, purchases from the Fund, and normal import-related credits.
5/ The nonaccumulation of new external payments arrears will constitute a continuous performance criterion.
6/ As defined in paragraph 10 of the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU). The ceiling on bank financing will be adjusted downward/upward for unprogrammed rescheduling/deferrals.
7/ The performance criterion on the primary fiscal balance will be adjusted upward/downward for any higher/lower-than-programmed oil revenue. For end-December 2004, the original program target has been revised
to reflect the higher oil revenue and the upward adjustment in current spending by CFAF 1 billion.
8/ Noninterest spending excluding foreign-financed investment.
9/ Including the reduction of arrears on the wage bill and the payment of compensations for social violence.
10/ These amounts represent rescheduled end-April 2004 stock of arrears and the obligations falling due during May-December 2004 and January-June 2005, in line with the Paris Club agreed minutes of June 11, 2004.
11/ As revised in IMF Country Report No. 05/5.

Memorandum items:
Nonproject external financing disbursements (excluding IMF)
External debt service due (excluding IMF)
Domestic debt service due
Oil revenue
Rescheduling of external debt 10/
Privatization proceeds

Indicative targets:
Floor on non-oil central government revenue
Ceiling on the central government wage bill on a payments order basis
Ceiling on total noninterest domestic expenditure of the central government, on a payments order basis 8/
Floor on current expenditure for the sectors of education, health and social assistance.
Floor on the net reduction of unpaid payments orders at the treasury 9/

owed or guaranteed by the central government 4/
Ceiling on the accumulation of external payments arrears by the central government 5/
Stock of arrears on domestic debt of the central government 6/
Adjusted target 6/
Floore on the primary fiscal balance of the central government, excl. grants and foreign-financed investment
(on a payments order basis) 7/
Adjusted target 7/

Performance criteria
Ceiling on the net claims of the banking system on the central government 2/
Adjusted target 2/
Ceiling on the contracting or guaranteeing of new
nonconcessional external debt with maturity of over 1 year
by the central government 3/
Ceiling on outstanding stock of new nonconcessional
external debt with original maturity of one year or less

Mar.
Act.

Table 1. Gabon: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets Under the Stand-By Arrangement, 2004-05
(In billions of CFA francs; end-period data; cumulative flows from January 1st) 1/

5.0
302.7
85.7
702.4
76.6
18.2

555.4
225.0
656.1
40.0
-72.1

601.6

0.0
0.0
0.0

32.0

-211.3

Dec.

- 47 APPENDIX I
ATTACHMENT

- 48 -

APPENDIX I
ATTACHMENT

Table 2. Gabon: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
Under Stand-By Arrangement, 2004–05
Measures

Structural performance criteria
Forestry sector
Adoption of time-bound action plan to streamline
SNBG, on the basis of World Bank-financed study.

Implementation
Period

Status of
Implementation

End-November 2004

Done in early
December.

Structural benchmarks
Civil service reform
Harmonization of the civil service and payroll rosters, End-December 2004
based on the computerized civil service management
system (ANITA).

Adoption of implementing decrees on the new wage
structure and promotion system, on the basis of the
new law on the general civil service statute.

Fiscal policy
Integration in the 2005 government budget of all
special funds.

No granting of exemptions to any company beyond
those already provided for under the mining, forestry,
and investment code, and no renewal of existing
exemptions.

Met in November,
with the introduction
of a unified
personnel roster
(fichier unique de
référence – FUR).

End-December 2004

Draft law approved
by parliament in
January 2005.
Implementing
decrees delayed until
the law is assessed.

End-December 2004

Not met.
Special accounts of
the National Housing
Fund and the local
authorities will be
integrated through a
supplementary
budget in 2005.

Continuous
benchmark

Met.

- 49 -

APPENDIX I
ATTACHMENT

Table 2. Gabon: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
Under Stand-By Arrangement, 2004–05
Measures

Implementation
Period

Status of
Implementation

Finalization of taxable base for local real estate
taxation for Libreville and Port-Gentil.

End-December 2004

Met.

Establishment of detailed budgetary appropriations
for the investment expenditures, according to the
budgetary classification, in the 2005 Budget Law
submitted to parliament.

End-December 2004

Met.

Entry into effectiveness of budgetary credits for the
2005 budget before end-February 2005.

End-February 2005

Met.

End-May 2005
Adoption of an action plan on scholarships based on
additional recommendations by a commission chaired
by the Deputy Prime Minister.
Good governance
Preparation of the first report on the operations of the
Commission Against Illicit Enrichment.

End-December 2004 Met.
End-December 2004

Met.

End-September 2004

Has been delayed to
March 2005, to
accommodate newly
interested investors.

Adoption of the implementation regulations for the
mining code.

End-December 2004

Delayed to the
second quarter of
2005.

No recourse to price control measures, and no
widening of the list of products subject to the price
surveillance regime at end-December 2003.

Continuous
benchmark

Met.

Inclusion in the 2005 budget of an adequate
operational budget for the National Commission
Against Illicit Enrichment.
Development of the private sector
Selection of the successful bidder for Gabon
Télécom.

- 50 -

APPENDIX I
ATTACHMENT

Table 2. Gabon: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
Under Stand-By Arrangement, 2004–05
Measures

Implementation
Period

Status of
Implementation

Achievement of a surplus in 2004 in the operational
results of Air Gabon, before depreciation.

End-December 2004

Operational result
has improved, but
surplus was not
reached in 2004.

Preparation by the consultant in charge of the
privatization of the documentation to select
prequalified bidders.

End-April 2005

Public enterprises

Trade reform
Removal of import surcharges on poultry and
cigarettes.

End-December 2004

Met.

- 51 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

GABON
Technical Memorandum of Understanding
1.
This memorandum spells out the understandings for the monitoring of program
implementation, and the reporting requirements for the period May 2004–June 2005. In this
context, it defines (a) the quantitative performance criteria; (b) the structural performance
criteria and benchmarks; (c) the quantitative indicative targets; (d) the adjusters for the
quantitative performance criteria; and (e) the key assumptions used in the formulation of the
program for 2004-05 presented in the Memorandum for Economic and Financial Policies
(MEFP) of the government of Gabon attached to the letter from the Minister of Economy,
Finance, Budget, and Privatization to the Managing Director of the International Monetary
Fund dated May 6, 2004. The key assumptions of the program, in particular those related to
oil revenue, have been modified by the letter of the Minister of Economy, Finance, Budget,
and Privatization of March 14, 2005.
A. Monitoring of Program Implementation
2.
Monitoring of the implementation of the program will be made on the basis of (i) an
assessment of the observance of quarterly quantitative performance criteria as well as of the
structural performance criteria and benchmarks at specified dates; and (ii) observance of
quarterly quantitative indicative targets.
B. Quantitative Performance Criteria, Quantitative Indicative Targets, and Adjusters
Quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets
3.
The quantitative performance criteria are specified in Table 1 of the letter of the
Minister of Finance of March 14, 2005. The quantitative performance criteria are the
following:
•

a ceiling on the net claims of the banking system on the central government;

•

a ceiling on new nonconcessional external debt with original maturity of more than
one year contracted or guaranteed by the central government;

•

a ceiling on the outstanding stock of new nonconcessional external debt with original
maturity of up to (and including) one year owed or guaranteed by the central
government;

•

a zero limit on the accumulation of external payments arrears by the central
government (a continuous performance criterion);

•

a ceiling on the stock of domestic payments arrears of the central government (as
defined in paragraph 9) ; and

- 52 -

•

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

a floor on the primary fiscal balance of the central government, on a payments order
basis (excluding foreign-financed investment, FINEX, cumulative from January 1).

4.
The program includes adjusters for the quantitative performance criteria as specified
in paragraphs 19-21 below and in footnotes 2, 6, and 7 of Table 1 of the letter of the Minister
of Finance of March 14, 2005.
5.

The quantitative indicative targets (cumulative from January 1) are as follows:

•

a floor on central government non-oil revenue;

•

a ceiling on the total central government wage bill, on a payments order basis;

•

a ceiling on total noninterest expenditure, on a payments order basis;

•

a floor on current expenditure for the sectors of education, health and social
assistance, as defined in paragraph 16; and

•

a floor on the reduction of the float at the treasury, wage arrears (rappels) and
obligations resulting from political violence.

Definitions and computation
6.
The outstanding amount of the net claims of the banking system on the central
government is measured in accordance with the accounting practice at the central bank, the
BEAC, along the lines of the IMF format, excluding deposits of the postal checking account
system11 and net of the securitized commercial agreements bought by commercial banks in
the context of the Libreville Club in 2004.12 As of December 31, 2003, this outstanding
amount was CFAF 231.9 billion, and its breakdown was as follows:

11

The deposits of the postal checking account system are excluded since they are not at the
disposal of the treasury.

12

Total securitized debt bought by a local commercial bank amounted to CFAF 5.7 billion at
end-2004.

- 53 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

Net Claims of the Banking System on the Central Government
(In billions of CFA francs)
Statutory advances from the BEAC
Plus: CFA franc counterpart of use of Fund resources
Plus: consolidated advances
Minus: deposits at the BEAC
Of which: Account for Future Generations
Plus: net borrowing from the commercial banks1
Total

165.2
30.4
1.2
50.3
30.0
85.4
231.9

1/ Excluding private nonbank claims on the government
bought by commercial banks.

7.
The Account for the Fund for Future Generations (AFFG) at the BEAC will be
fed in 2005 by 10 percent of oil revenue and oil revenues in excess of the programmed levels
(based on program baseline assumptions detailed in para. 23). The AFFG is part of the net
claims of the banking system on the central government.
8.
The performance criteria on nonconcessional external debt are ceilings on new
nonconcessional external debt. The performance criterion on the contracting and
guaranteeing of new nonconcessional debt with maturity over one year by the central
government applies not only to debt as defined in point 9 of the Guidelines on Performance
Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt, adopted by the IMF on August 24, 2000, but also to
commitments contracted or guaranteed for which no value has yet been received. Excluded
from this performance criterion are rescheduling arrangements and purchases from the IMF.
The performance criterion on the outstanding stock of nonconcessional external debt,13
with an original maturity of up to one year (one year included) excludes rescheduling
arrangements, purchases from the IMF, and normal import–related credits. The
concessionality of debts will be calculated on the basis of the reference interest rates for the
specific currencies of denomination used, as established by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD). A debt is deemed to be on concessional terms if, at
the time of the initial disbursement date, the ratio between the present value of the loan
calculated on the basis of the reference interest rates, on the one hand, and the face (nominal)
value of the loan, on the other hand, is less than 65 percent (i.e., a grant element of at least
35 percent).
13

The term “debt” has the meaning set forth in point 9 of the Guidelines on Performance
Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision number 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000).

- 54 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

9.
The accumulation of external payments arrears by the central government which
is a continuous performance criterion with a zero limit, is calculated as the difference
between (a) the gross amount of all the maturities falling due on account of contractual
external debt-service obligations (interest and principal, including moratorium and
late/penalty interest, where applicable); and (b) the amount of actual payments made during
the period under consideration. Arrears resulting from the nonpayment of the debt service for
which a rescheduling agreement is sought are excluded from this definition.
10.
The stock of domestic payments arrears of the central government corresponds to
the stock of payments arrears on: (i) interests on treasury debt, securitized commercial
agreement, “other” debts, and bank debt; (ii) the principal on securitized commercial debt
agreements and “other” debts.14 At end-December 2004, the stock of domestic payments
arrears amounted to CFAF 1.9 billion.
11.
The treasury float consists of the “payment orders at the treasury”, float at the Road
Maintenance Fund (FER) and the “other treasury float.”15 The “payment orders at the
treasury” corresponds to the difference between the cumulative payment orders
(ordonnancements)16 and the cumulative actual payments (checks encashed—cash basis). At
end-December 2003, the central government’s domestic payments arrears amounted to
CFAF 94 billion, comprising CFAF 84,7 billion in outstanding treasury float and CFAF 9.3
billion in “other treasury float.” The net reduction of the treasury float is defined as the
reduction in the float existing at end-2003, less the accumulation of new float during 2004.17
For 2005, the net reduction of the treasury float is defined as the reduction in the float
existing at end-2004, less the accumulation of new float during 2005.
12.
Total central government revenue is measured on a cash basis and includes
offsetting revenue and expenditure operations, including private sector tax obligations offset
against central government obligations to the private sector. Tax receipts are specified in the
14

The nonbank domestic debt includes the outstanding amounts of (a) securitized
commercial agreements as validated by the Ministry of Economy, Finance, Budget, and
Privatization as at end-December 2003; (b) the debt of the treasury; and (c) “other” debts,
consisting of amounts due to the SEEG, CNSS, Gabon Telecom, Gabon Poste and Air
Gabon’s supplier debt taken over by the government in 2001/2002.

15

The “other treasury float” includes the accounts on “subsidies,” “consignments,”
“accounting agencies,” including “transfers between accounting offices” related to budgetary
operations, and “installments to be allocated.”

16
17

As defined below in paragraph 13.

Under the program, payments for wage arrears (“rappels”) and compensation for political
violence are considered as a reduction in the float at the treasury.

- 55 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

Table of central government financial operations (Tableau des opérations financières de
l’Etat–TOFE), including all earmarked revenues (Road Fund and special funds).
13.
Total central government expenditure include spending on payment order basis
(ordonnancements), and treasury advances (avances à régulariser), and outlays on special
funds and earmarked revenues. The quantitative indicative target on total noninterest
expenditure excluding foreign-financed investment (FINEX) is calculated on the basis of this
definition.
14.
The primary fiscal surplus, on a payment order basis (ordonnancements), is defined
as the difference between (a) total central government revenue (excluding grants) on a cash
basis; and (b) total noninterest current expenditure plus investment expenditure (excluding
foreign-financed investment), net lending, and outlays of the Road Fund and on earmarked
revenues.
15.
The indicative target on the central government wage bill is defined on a
commitment basis (engagements) for all personnel (whether on a permanent or a temporary
basis) of the civil service and the security and defense forces. The wage bill consists of all
remunerations, including indemnities, social contributions, housing allowances, and other
allowances.
16.
The wage arrears (rappels) correspond to the unpaid financial impact of
advancement promotion of civil servants at end-2002 (line 1281 of the budget).
17. Expenditure for the education and health sectors correspond to spending on
goods and services for education, health and social affairs services. Under the
quantitative indicative target for 2004, the following outlays will be monitored: (i)
expenditures on goods and services for the Ministries of Education, Health, Social solidarity,
social affairs and well-being, Family and child protection (title 5, chapters 81, 82, 84, 91, 93,
and 94); and (ii) transfers and subsidies in favor of private education and social safety nets
of the Ministries of National solidarity and Family (lines 6421 and 6511 under chapters 81,
93, and 94).
18.
The restructuring costs posted as “financing” represent the social costs relating
to the public enterprises to be liquidated or privatized in the context of the central
government’s divestiture of its productive sector holdings, the operating costs (consultants,
etc.) of the Secretariat of the Privatization Committee, and the costs of voluntary departures
in the context of the administrative reform. The other expenditures, intended in particular for
maintaining the activity of the other public enterprises included in the privatization program,
are posted under “transfers and subsidies.”
19.
The financial operations specified in the Table of central government financial
operations (Tableau des opérations financières de l’Etat–TOFE) relating to treasury
correspondents (correspondants du Trésor), local governments (collectivités locales), and
other treasury operations correspond to the change from period to period in the balance of

- 56 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

these accounts. The government will provide information on the balance of all these
accounts on a monthly basis to the IMF.
Adjustments to quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets
20.
A specific contingency mechanism for oil revenue is established for 2004-05, given
the importance of oil for the Gabonese economy and the uncertainties regarding oil prices
and output. If oil revenue is above the baseline projections in a given quarter, the surplus will
be deposited in the Account of the Fund for Future Generations with the BEAC, with a
corresponding downward adjustment in the ceiling on net credit from the banking system to
the central government and an upward adjustment in the floor for the primary fiscal balance.
If oil revenue in CFA franc terms is lower than programmed (because actual oil prices, the
exchange rate and/or output are lower than projected in the baseline scenario), the shortfall
could be offset by additional net bank credit—with an upward adjustment in the ceiling on
net credit from the banking system to the central government, and a downward adjustment in
the floor on the primary fiscal balance. The cumulative ceilings to the adjustor are
CFAF 17.0 billion for end-June, CFAF 25.5 billion for end-September, and CFAF 45.0
billion for end-December 2004. The cumulative ceilings to the adjustor are CFAF 50.0
billion for end-March 2005, and CFAF 100.0 billion for end-June 2005. If the oil revenue
shortfall exceeds the maximum adjustor, the quarterly fiscal targets will be reassessed in
consultation with Fund staff.
21.
The program also includes (downward/upward) adjusters for the benchmarks on net
credit from the banking system to the central government for (i) lower/higher-than
programmed external debt service effectively paid18 (net of nonproject external financing
disbursements); (ii) lower/higher-than-programmed net reduction of domestic arrears; and
(iii) lower/higher-than-programmed net reduction in the float at the treasury.
22.
The program also includes a symmetric (downward/upward) adjuster for the net bank
credit to the central government for privatization proceeds higher/lower than projected in the
program.19 The program’s assumptions related to oil revenues, external and domestic debt
service, disbursements on external nonproject financing, expected external debt rescheduling,
and privatization proceeds are indicated in Table 2 of the letter of the Minister of Finance of
March 14, 2005.
18

External debt service due minus any accumulation of external arrears minus debt relief
obtained. The programmed amounts of debt service, payments arrears, debt relief, and
nonproject external financing are calculated in CFA franc terms based on currency-specific
exchange rates. The actual amounts are calculated in CFA franc terms based on the actual
transactions in foreign currency and the exchange rates published by the Fund.

19

For end-March and end-June 2005, the adjuster will apply to privatization proceeds, net of
the restructuring cost of public enterprises.

- 57 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

C. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
23.
The structural performance criteria and benchmarks are specified in Table 2 of the
MEFP attached to the letters of May 6, 2004, September 8, 2004, December 10, 2004, and
March 14, 2005.
D. Key Assumptions of the 2004-05 Program
24.

The main assumptions of the program are the following:
2004

2005

World Brent oil prices (U.S. dollar per barrel)
Gabonese export oil prices (U.S. dollar per barrel)
Oil output (in millions of metric tons)20
Exchange rate (CFA francs per US$1, annual average)

39.2
36.9
13.6
534.4

48.1
44.3
13.5
488.4

Government oil revenue (in billions of CFAF)

640.0

702.4

E. Reporting Requirements
25.
To facilitate monitoring of program implementation, the Government of Gabon will
prepare and send to the IMF monthly reports within four weeks following the end of the
preceding month. In addition, the Technical Support Unit of the Interministerial Committee
for Monitoring the Structural Adjustment Program will communicate to the IMF’s African
Department, within the four weeks following the end of period, by fax or by e-mail the data
required to monitor the implementation of the program. Such data will include (but are not
limited to) the following:
(a) the comprehensive monetary survey, the central bank balance sheet, and the
consolidated balance sheet of the commercial banks;
(b) the net financial position of the central government with the BEAC (PNG) and net
credit from the banking system to the central government, with a separate line for the
Account of the Fund for Future Generations;
(c) central government financial operations (opérations financières de l’Etat) on a
payment order basis (ordonnancements), identifying any discrepancy between the
fiscal deficit and changes in domestic and external arrears, on the one hand, and total
net domestic bank/nonbank and net external financing, on the other;
(d) the detailed breakdown of petroleum receipts by nature (royalties, profit tax, and
other) and by company, and the underlying basis when available (e.g. production,
20

The average conversion rate is 7.3 barrels per metric ton.

- 58 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

prices, turnover, costs, etc.), as well as the detailed breakdown of non-oil receipts (by
type of tax) and nontax revenue;
(e) the detailed breakdown of total central government expenditure, on an adjusted
commitment basis, adjusted payment order basis, and cash basis as presented in the
Tableau Intégré produced by the Statistical Committee (Comité statistique).
(f) the details for domestic and external debt-service obligations, on a contractual and
actual payments basis, respectively, with a breakdown into interest and principal and
by creditor, as well as any possible accumulation of domestic or external arrears
(electronic file);
(g) the details on the stock of external and domestic debt at the end of each month
(electronic file);
(h) the details for the outstanding stock of domestic arrears (month to month) and the
cumulative flows from January 1, 2004: the net accumulation of new arrears during
2004 as defined in paragraph 11 by the difference between payment orders
(ordonnancements) and payments made (cash basis), as well as the repayment of pre2004 arrears, with both items to be broken down by wages and salaries, goods and
services, transfers and subsidies, interest, capital expenditure, and net lending; any
stock-flow adjustment not consistent with flows should be explained (electronic file).
(i) the amount of new external debt contracted or guaranteed by the central
government, with the detailed information (electronic file) on the original terms and
conditions (currency of denomination, interest rate, grace period, and maturity);
(j) actual disbursements on nonproject-related external financing, including on newly
contracted loans, and the amounts of debt relief granted to Gabon by external
creditors (electronic file);
(k) monthly information on the oil sector: export prices, effective exchange rate,
production per oil field, exports, based on data from the Direction Générale des
Hydrocarbures (electronic file);
(l) indicators and other statistical data on recent economic developments, such as the
household consumer price index, merchandise imports and exports (in value and
volume terms) by major categories on the basis of customs data, log production and
exports (in value and volume terms), as well as the quarterly reports on economic
activity prepared by the General Directorate of the Economy and the Interinstitutional
Committee on Statistics;
(m) a status report on the implementation of the structural reforms specified in
Table 2 attached to the letter of March 14, 2005;
(n) quarterly data on the finances of local authorities; and

- 59 -

APPENDIX I
ANNEX

(o) Quarterly financial data of Air Gabon.
The Technical Support Unit of the Interministerial Committee for Monitoring the Structural
Adjustment Program will provide the African Department of the IMF with any other
information that the latter may deem necessary or that may be requested by the staff of the
IMF for the effective monitoring of the program.

-

- 60 -

APPENDIX II

Gabon: Relations with the Fund
(As of January 31, 2005)
I. Membership Status: Joined: September 10, 1963; Article VIII
II. General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
154.30
216.83
0.18

%Quota
100.00
140.53
0.12

III. SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
14.09
2.38

%Allocation
100.00
16.89

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Extended arrangements
Stand-by arrangements

SDR Million
16.09
46.62

%Quota
10.43
30.21

V. Latest Financial Arrangements:

Type
Stand-by
Stand-by
EFF

Approval

Expiration

Date
May 28, 2004
Oct 23, 2000
Nov 8, 1995

Date
June 30, 2005
Apr 22, 2002
Mar 7, 1999

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)
69.44
92.58
110.30

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
41.66
13.22
60.67

VI. Projected Payments to Fund (Obligations Basis)
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total
VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

2005
15.07
2.12
17.18

2006
4.60
1.79
6.38

2007
6.59
1.63
8.22

2008
20.83
1.27
22.10

Not Applicable

VIII. Safeguards Assessments:
Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of Central African States
(BEAC), of which Gabon is a member, is subject to periodic full safeguards assessments.

-

- 61 -

APPENDIX II

An updated safeguards assessment of the BEAC was completed on August 30, 2004 and
found that the BEAC has implemented a number of measures to strengthen its safeguards
framework since the 2001 safeguards assessment, but further progress needs to be made in
key areas. A summary of the recommendations of the 2004 assessment were reported in
Country Paper No. 05/3.
IX. Exchange Rate Arrangement:
Gabon’s currency is the CFA franc, which is pegged to the euro at a fixed rate of
CFAF 655.957= €1.
Gabon’s exchange system is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions.
X.

Last Article IV Consultation:

(a)

Consultations with Gabon are on the 12-month cycle.

(b)

The last consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on November 7, 2003.

XI. FSAP Participation:
Gabon participated in the FSAP and, in this connection, a joint Fund/World Bank
mission visited Libreville in June and July 2001. The FSSA report was discussed by the
Executive Board in March 2002.
XII. Technical Assistance:
Department
Purpose
FAD
Budget management
FAD
Tax policy and administration
LEG
Law against illicit enrichment
FAD
STA
FAD

Budgetary procedures and expenditure control
Multisector statistics mission
Value-added tax administration issues

Time of Delivery
March 2004
November 2003
June, July, and
October 2003
November 2000
May 1998
August 1997

XIII. Resident Representative:
The Fund maintains a resident representative office in Libreville. The current resident
representative, Mr. Richard Randriamaholy, assumed his post in October 2003.

- 62 -

APPENDIX III

Gabon: Relations with the World Bank
(Updated as of February 28, 2005)
1.
Gabon is a resource rich country with a small, highly urbanized population. As one
of Africa’s few IBRD countries, Gabon’s GDP per capita is estimated at US$4,675 in 2003,
well above the sub-Saharan African (SSA) average. Oil is Gabon’s key economic sector and
the principal driving force of its economic growth. However, the country’s oil revenues are
projected to decline over the next few years, and the government has started exploring the
country’s potential for economic diversification. The Bank is working closely with the IMF
team to support structural measures, particularly in improving the environment for the
development of the private and forestry sectors, and is assisting in the development of the
local private sector in urban areas.
The Bank Group strategy and lending operations
2.
As of July 1, 2004, all Bank projects were completed. A Forestry and Environment
Sector development and a follow-up to the Pilot Community Infrastructure Project are
currently under preparation. The findings and recommendations of the diagnostic study on
the business climate in Gabon, conducted by the FIAS in 2004, as well as follow-up work on
improvement of the legal and regulatory environment in the mining sector, could serve as
input for the preparation of a future Diversification and Private Sector Development
operation. Future Bank assistance to Gabon will be more clearly defined within the context
of a new Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) which will be presented to the Board in
FY2005.
3.
The two Bank Projects which closed on June 30, 2004 were (i) US$5 million urban
learning and innovation loan (LIL) which tested new procurement methods, supported the
implementation of pilot urban works in poor urban neighborhoods, and conduct urban public
expenditure reviews; and (ii) US$10 million privatization and regulatory capacity-building
technical assistance loan, expected to contribute to the growth of private investment and
increase the participation of non-oil private sector in the country’s economy.
IMF—World Bank collaboration
4.
Overall, the IMF and World Bank staff maintain a close collaborative relationship in
supporting reforms to foster economic diversification and in coordinating their policy advice
to the Gabonese authorities. In view of the structural measures envisaged under the medium
term program, successful implementation of the reform program hinges on complementary
action by the World Bank, especially in the areas of business climate improvements, poverty
reduction policies, and nonrenewable resource management, as well as the identification and
development of sources of growth in the non-oil sector.

- 63 -

APPENDIX III

Table 1. Bank/Fund Collaboration
Area of Structural Reform

Lead Institution

1. Fiscal area
Civil service reform
Expenditure monitoring and control
Priority Expenditure Tracking under PRSP
Medium-term public expenditure review
Tax administration

IMF
IMF
World Bank
World Bank
IMF

2. Governance
Anticorruption law implementation
Code of ethics for government officials
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)

IMF
IMF
World Bank/IMF

4. Private sector development
FIAS study of the business climate
Diversification and non-oil sector development

World Bank/IFC
World Bank

5. Other
Price controls
Forestry and environment
PRSP
External trade
Transport
Urban development

IMF
World Bank
World Bank/IMF
IMF
World Bank
World Bank

IMF—World Bank collaboration in specific areas
Areas in which the World Bank leads and there is no direct IMF involvement
5.
A Poverty Assessment (PA), initiated in late 1994, was finalized in March 1997 and
discussed with a broad range of Gabonese stakeholders in July 1997. The main conclusion of
the report is that the relative inefficiency and low quality of public expenditures, particularly
in the social sectors, constitute major impediments to poverty alleviation. The Bank is
supporting the preparation of the government’s poverty reduction strategy, and in that
context, will continue to provide support for strengthening the statistical capacity and
assisting the NSO (National Statistical Office) to undertake key household surveys along the
lines of the Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire (CWIQ), and to update key social
indicators to be monitored on an annual basis. The Bank also plans to assist the NSO in
putting together a monitoring and evaluation system for the poverty reduction strategy.

- 64 -

APPENDIX III

Areas in which the World Bank leads and its analysis serves as input for the IMF
6.
In June 2002 the Bank completed a US$22.5 million ten-year project that aimed to
improve the management and protection of Gabon's forestry and environmental resources.
The project was to strengthen the planning and operational capacity of government
institutions and local environmental nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). A new project
in the same sector is being prepared for Board presentation in FY2006. This project builds on
the lessons learned during the implementation of the previous project, focusing on
transparency and law enforcement. It is suppose to help the Gabonese authorities design and
implement governance reform programs and empowering local communities in managing
their natural resources. The project outcomes are expected to be broaden to reaching a larger
number of beneficiaries, attracting investments in the forestry, fishing and environment
sectors, and thus assisting the government in its efforts to diversify the Gabonese economy
and reduce its dependence on the oil sector.
7.
The FIAS (a joint facility of the World Bank and International Finance Corporation)
is providing advisory services to help improve the investment climate in Gabon. This
technical assistance consists of three studies that would identify constraints to private
investment, particularly foreign direct investment, and provide inputs to a governmental
program of reforms aimed at alleviating impediments to private sector development. The
diagnostic of the investment climate, including identification of priorities for reform and
concrete recommendations, was presented in September. The second and third studies would
consist of a more detailed review of administrative barriers to investment and an in-depth
review of the tax and incentive regime with an objective of proposing additional and
complementary concrete reforms. FIAS will confirm each study based on action on the
previous one.
8.
The Bank is also preparing an Infrastructure Framework Report (IFR), which will
present a comprehensive overview of the country's general environment for private
participation and the main opportunities for investment in infrastructure. The report will also
outline recommendations and an action plan to assist the government in putting in place the
laws, policies, and institutions needed to create an enabling environment for enhanced
private-sector participation. This study covers transport infrastructure (railways, air transport,
and maritime transport), telecommunications, water, and power.
9.
Starting in July 2005 the Bank will also assist in carrying out a public expenditure
review aimed at assessing expenditure effectiveness, particularly in the social sectors.
Areas of shared responsibility
10.
While the Bank has taken the lead in privatization and in structural reforms impacting
the environment for the private sector, the IMF has a strong interest in the same area from a
macroeconomic perspective. The IMF’s primary focus is on good governance, particularly in
the fiscal area, and on the promotion of transparency in both the public and the private
sectors. Additional concerns for the Bank include efficiency of the resulting market

- 65 -

APPENDIX III

structures and improved enterprise operation. The Bank and the IMF are also working closely
together in the financial sector, for which a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
was jointly prepared by the two institutions during 2002. While the FSAP indicated that the
financial sector in Gabon is overall profitable and stable, it also identified certain structural
weaknesses and risks in Gabon’s financial sector, including lack of bank portfolio
diversification and underdevelopment of nonbank financial institutions.
11.
Areas where the Fund takes the lead role and its analysis serves as input into the
World Bank–supported program are in the dialogue on fiscal matters, which sets the
overall envelope for public expenditures. The IMF is also providing technical assistance in
the area of governance and anticorruption.
12.
The IMF leads the dialogue on policies to contain various expenditures in the public
sector. These include policies regarding the wage bill in the public sector and the definition
of the ceiling for public investment expenditures. In these areas, the Bank takes into account
the policy recommendations of the IMF and ensures that its own policy advice is consistent.
13.
In addition, the IMF is monitoring the implementation of the Uniform Acts of the
Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA) and trade
liberalization measures being taken at the CEMAC (regional) level. This supplements a
significant on-going program of work by the Bank to support regional integration among
CEMAC countries. These measures should improve the business climate and will
complement work by the Bank (in conjunction with the IFC) in the area of facilitating
investment.
14.
Areas in which the IMF leads and there is no direct World Bank involvement
relate to the dialogue on monetary policy, interest rates, the exchange rate, the balance of
payments, and related statistical and measurement issues.

- 66 -

APPENDIX IV

Gabon: Assessing External and Public Sector Debt Sustainability
This appendix updates the external and public sector debt sustainability analysis that was
carried out for the second review of the current Stand-By. The baseline scenario has been
updated to incorporate the latest oil production and price forecasts. In addition to the
standard stress tests, this appendix also considers the effect of further shocks to the baseline
scenario and their impact on external and public debt sustainability: higher oil production
and exports; lower growth in non-oil GDP and non-oil exports; a lower oil price; a lower
growth in timber-related exports; a higher public sector wage bill; spending rather than
saving the oil windfall; and the combined effect of a higher wage bill and oil revenues.21 The
baseline external sustainability scenario during the period 2005-2014 shows that the
external debt-to-GDP ratio declines steadily and financing gaps disappear. Similarly, the
results of the public sector debt baseline analysis indicate that virtually all outstanding
domestic public debt, including the float at treasury and that with the regional central bank,
will be eliminated by 2010. However, the stress tests reveal that Gabon’s debt sustainability
remains extremely sensitive to shocks to non-oil output growth, to changes in the production
and the price of oil, and to the degree of fiscal discipline. These results highlight the
importance of prudent fiscal policies and of fostering the development of the non-oil
economy by encouraging private sector development and the diversification of Gabon’s
economic base.
External Public Debt Sustainability22
1.
The updated baseline debt sustainability analysis indicates that 2005-2007, the
external debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decrease by 13.1 percentage points to 36.5 percent
of GDP (see Table 1 and Figure 1). Oil receipts are projected to remain significant, on
account of high prices and a slower-than-anticipated decline in production), and continued
fiscal discipline is expected to avoid the emergence of financing gaps.23 After 2007, the
baseline scenario projects an further decline in the external debt-to-GDP ratio to 14.1 percent
by 2014, mainly reflecting (i) continued buoyant oil revenues; (ii) steady growth of non-oil
output; (iii) debt amortization in excess of new borrowing; and (iv) continued fiscal
21

For a more detailed description of these alternative scenarios and their implications for
fiscal policy and debt sustainability, see Medium-term Fiscal Constraints in Gabon: A
Scenario Approach, Gabon – Selected Economic Issues (forthcoming).

22

The calculations in the DSA assume that, from 2005 on, the accumulation of deposits in
the Fund For Future Generations is done according to the law (i.e., 10 percent of oil revenues
plus 50 percent of excess oil revenues with respect to that in the budget).

23

For the first half of 2005, approximately CFAF 75 billion of debt service with Paris Club
creditors were rescheduled in the context of the agreement reached in June 2004.

- 67 -

APPENDIX IV

discipline. Reflecting the repayment schedule under earlier rescheduling agreements, the
debt-service ratios peak in 2009, reaching 18 percent for the debt service-to-exports ratio and
31.6 percent for the debt service-to-revenue ratio, and again in 2012, reaching 14.6 percent
and 22.9 percent respectively. Financing gaps remain minor through 2014 and could easily
be covered by drawing on government deposits at the regional central bank.24
2.
Gabon’s vulnerability to external shocks remains high as shown by the standard
sensitivity tests (Table 1, bottom panel and Figure 1).25 In each of the tests, which assume
extreme adverse shocks to each key parameter individually and jointly, the debt ratio rises
faster and to higher levels than in the baseline:26
•

Setting real GDP growth rates and nominal interest rates at their historical averages
results in a continuously decreasing debt-to-GDP ratio; the paths observed are similar
to that in the baseline, although the ratio decreases in both cases at a slower pace.

•

Should the U.S. dollar depreciate sharply, proxied by a temporary shock to the U.S.
dollar deflator, the debt ratio rises sharply initially (32.1 percentage points by 2006),
and decreases slowly thereafter to reach 66.3 percent of GDP by 2014.

•

The long-term effects of a shock to the non-interest current account balance are
significant in the medium-term (the debt ratio increases to 58.4 percent by 2006), but
not so in the longer term, with the debt ratio decreasing to 32.9 percent by 2014.

•

A combined shock leads to unsustainable external debt levels, as the result is
dominated by the deflator shock (an increase in debt ratio by 66.2 percentage points
by 2014).

4.
The analysis includes four additional sensitivity tests, namely a temporary shock to
oil production, a long-term shock to non-oil output growth, a long-term shock to Gabon’s
second export commodity, timber, and a long-term shock to the price of oil. Should oil
production be higher than anticipated in 2006 and 2007—which is consistent with the view
expressed by the largest oil companies that they would likely maintain production at current
levels for the next few years – debt sustainability improves even more sharply; indeed,
24

Financing gaps are assumed to be covered on commercial terms.

25

The test that combines the effect of setting all key variables at their historical values is not
presented, since the relatively large average non-interest current account surpluses are the
dominating effect. Thus, the results obtained would not be realistic given the steady
decreases in oil production projected in the baseline scenario.

26

These sensibility analyses consider adverse shocks of one standard deviation, lasting two
years (i.e., transitory shocks) for each key parameter.

- 68 -

APPENDIX IV

external debt would be fully repaid by 2013. All other shocks lead to varying degrees of
deterioration of the external current account. The negative effect of the lower oil price (25
percent lower than the baseline oil price over the medium term) leads to a steady increase of
the debt ratio; similarly, the effect of lower growth in the tradable non-oil sector causes debt
ratios to turn unsustainable. Clearly, given the still large size of oil exports, the effect of a
lower oil price has a severe impact in the short-term whereas the effect of lower growth in
the non-oil tradable sector is felt more in the medium to long-term. The impact of lower
timber-related exports is reflected in a debt-to-GDP ratio that decreases at a slower pace than
in the baseline. The unsustainable paths for the debt-to-GDP ratio in the cases of a lower oil
price and lower non-oil tradable GDP growth underscore (i) the importance for Gabon to
adopt macroeconomic policies that promote economic diversification, (ii) the strong
dependence of the baseline scenario on the higher (expected) oil prices; and (iii) the need to
maintain strong fiscal discipline.
Public Sector Debt Sustainability
5.
Under the baseline projection, Gabon’s total public sector-to-GDP ratio is projected
to decrease from 61.9 percent in 2004 to 38.5 percent in 2007 and further to 19.3 percent in
2012, where it is assumed to be fully repaid.27 The key assumptions underlying this result
are (i) non-oil GDP growth rises to approximately 3.5 percent, on average, in 2005-2011; and
(ii) the government maintains control of the wage bill; and (iii) the government is able to
maintain its non-oil revenues constant as a proportion of non-oil GDP (see Table 2 and
Figure 2).
6.
Gabon’s public debt sustainability vulnerabilities are underscored when considering
the stress test that uses the primary balance as the shock variable. A one-standard deviation
shock on the primary balance in 2005-06 results in a public debt-to-GDP that decreases only
to about 40 percent by 2014. This is the result of lower domestic debt being retired and more
foreign borrowing needed to cover the resulting financing gaps.
7.
Not surprisingly, the results obtained for the sensitivity tests that consider temporary
shocks to other key parameters (Table 2, bottom panel and Figure 2) resemble those
described for the external debt.

27

The domestic debt declines due to (i) the government’s reimbursement of domestic debt to
suppliers and public contractors; (ii) the repayment by the government of public enterprise
debt to the social security system, wage bill arrears and to suppliers (assumed by the
government in recent years in the context of the restructuring of such enterprises); (iii) the
repayment to commercial banks of domestic debt; (iv) the repayment of virtually all unpaid
float at the treasury; and (v) the repayment of statutory advances to the central government
by the regional central bank. All these debts have relatively short maturities.

- 69 -

APPENDIX IV

8.
The public debt sustainability analysis includes three additional sensitivity tests,
namely (i) a higher wage bill than in the baseline; (ii) a higher level of transfers financed by
the oil windfall; and (iii) the combined effect of a higher wage bill and oil revenues. The first
shock assumes that the wage bill remains constant as a percentage of non-oil GDP (instead of
remaining constant, in real terms, at its 2005 level). Given the high oil prices, such a policy
may be sustainable in the short to medium term, i.e. through 2014. In the long run, however,
the higher wage bill generates unsustainable debt dynamics (see Chapter III of the
accompanying Selected Economic Issues paper). The second shock assumes that the oil
windfall is spent rather than saved, beginning in 2005.28 The effect of this shock is
immediate, and long-lasting: under this scenario, the public debt-to-GDP ratio would be
approximately 40 percent by 2014. Moreover, the debt dynamics caused by the higher
expenditures make public debt unsustainable. Finally, the third test considers both higher oil
revenues (on account of higher oil production) and, at the same time, a wage bill that remains
constant as percentage of non-oil GDP. Although the effect of the higher oil revenues
dominates through 2014, the public debt-to-GDP ratio increases in the second half of the
next decade. The implicit dynamics in this case also suggest that, if this wage bill policy is
sustained, public debt would finally turn unsustainable. These results underscore that (i) a
main factor in Gabon’s debt sustainability is the ability to maintain fiscal discipline, even in
the presence of higher oil production and prices; and (ii) the need to sustain steady growth in
the non-oil sector through diversification and to translate this growth into higher non-oil
fiscal revenues.

28

The oil windfall is defined as the difference between fiscal revenues in the baseline
scenario and the fiscal revenues that would result if Brent prices were US$35 per barrel.

- 70 -

APPENDIX IV

Figure 1. Gabon: External Public Debt Sustainability, 2004–2012
(In percent of GDP)
Baseline Debt/GDP

20

1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation in 2005 and
2006
2 Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and
2006
3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2005 and 2006

00
80
60
40
20
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2010

2011

2012

2010

2011

2012

80

4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006

60

5. Combination of 1-4 using one standard deviation shocks
6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

40

Baseline Debt/GDP
20
00
80
60
40
20
0

2004

2005

100

2006

2007

2008

2009

Baseline Debt/GDP

90

7. Non-oil real growth is 2 percentage points lower than in baseline

80

8. Oil Price is 25 percent lower than in baseline beginning in 2005
9. Wood-related exports are 2 percentage points lower than in baseline

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.

2008

2009

- 71 -

APPENDIX IV

Figure 2. Gabon: Total Public Sector Debt Sustainability, 2004–2012
(In percent of GDP)
70
60
50
40
Baseline Debt/GDP

30

1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus one standard
deviation in 2005 and 2006
2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2005 and 2006
3. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2005 and 2006

20
10
2004

2005

150

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2010

2011

2012

2010

2011

2012

4. Combination of 1-3 using one standard deviation shocks
5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 7/

125

6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005
Baseline Debt/GDP

100
75
50
25
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

100
Baseline Debt/GDP

90

7. Wage Bill remains constant as percentage of non-oil GDP (at the level of 2005)

80

8. The Oil windfall is spent beginning in 2005

70

9. Oil Production is higher and Wage Bill remains constant as percentage of non-oil
GDP

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.

2008

2009

1 External debt
57.1

-14.4
-5.2
8.0
1.5
3.7

Historical
Average

2.0
5.3
-3.0
24.6
-0.2
12.7
-20.6
-16.0
-6.1
-5.2

-0.1
-1.8

106.7

6.0
-18.1
-18.9
-26.0
59.1
33.1
8.3
-2.0
-6.3
-7.5
5.7
-0.9
-12.3
24.2

63.1

2001

2003

2004

2005

2.4
0.8
19.9
19.8
19.6
6.2
24.1
4.5
7.4
12.6

-0.3
-5.6

103.3

-6.8
-11.6
-15.2
-24.1
54.2
30.1
4.6
0.2
-4.8
-0.9
3.2
-1.2
-2.8
4.7

56.0

1.4
2.3
9.8
9.4
10.4
5.1
32.7
57.0
39.8
24.5

-0.4
-4.9

82.2

-6.4
-6.4
-12.9
-25.1
60.4
35.2
5.8
3.1
-8.9
0.7
2.6
-0.7
-1.2
0.0

49.6

2.0
3.0
8.2
15.8
9.4
4.8
22.8
18.0
13.2
14.6

-0.7
-8.8

68.3

-6.6
-13.3
-15.8
-29.1
63.0
33.9
5.6
2.8
-8.3
-3.1
2.0
-0.8
-4.3
6.6

43.0

8.4
6.2
2.0
4.3
29.3

Standard
Deviation

-9.7
-1.5
3.8
1.3
0.8

Average
2003-10

49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6
49.6

49.7
49.4
65.1
52.4
76.1
43.0
43.4
47.9
43.0

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

0.0
0.6
5.3
-1.6
7.6
5.8
-4.9
-13.1
8.9
21.4

0.0
0.5

117.7

-0.3
-1.2
-10.3
-19.2
53.4
34.2
1.8
1.3
-3.0
7.3
3.8
0.0
3.6
0.9

62.8

I. Baseline Medium-Term Projections

2002

47.8
47.4
81.7
58.4
116.2
37.1
41.1
49.8
40.2

0.2
3.5
0.0
6.7
1.6
4.3
-8.6
10.1
-4.9
3.0

-0.6
-6.7

67.1

-2.9
-12.1
-14.1
-26.3
59.8
33.5
3.1
2.7
-5.7
-1.0
1.7
-0.1
-2.7
9.2

40.1

2006

42.8
42.3
79.5
54.2
116.9
31.1
38.3
51.2
36.7

0.7
3.5
0.1
-3.9
1.4
4.1
-8.4
7.7
-3.2
1.2

-0.4
-4.4

64.6

-3.6
-5.9
-12.0
-23.1
56.5
33.4
2.9
2.6
-5.5
3.1
1.7
-0.3
1.6
2.4

36.5

2007

39.1
38.6
78.6
51.4
118.8
24.9
35.4
52.0
33.0

0.4
3.5
0.0
-3.8
1.2
3.9
-9.2
5.4
-3.5
0.4

-0.1
-1.8

62.1

-3.9
-6.2
-9.6
-19.6
52.6
33.1
0.6
2.5
-3.1
2.8
1.5
-0.1
1.5
2.3

32.7

2008

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.

Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)

Historical Statistics for Key Variables (past 10 years)

1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
5. Combination of 2-5 using one standard deviation shocks
6. Oil Production is higher in the short-run than in the baseline (beginning in 2006)
7. Non-oil real growth is 2 percentage points lower than in baseline
8. Oil Price is 25 percent lower than in baseline beginning in 2005
9. Wood-related exports are 2 percentage points lower than in baseline

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Real non-oil GDP growth (in percent)
Exchange rate appreciation (US dollar value of local currency, change in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Non-oil GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of non-oil exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of non-oil private imports (US dollar terms, in percent)

-1.9
2.1
-13.4
3.2
-10.2
7.1
30.3
-6.3
-40.2
-9.0

-0.7
-12.8

Key Macroeconomic and External Assumptions

82.9

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 3/
in percent of GDP

-22.5
-12.5
-24.9
-36.3
68.8
32.6
15.7
-1.3
-14.3
-3.3
5.6
1.5
-10.4
-10.0

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+11)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments (- = surplus)
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services (- = surplus)
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (- = inflows)
9
Net foreign direct investment, equity
10
Net portfolio investment,equity, and other private capital flows
11
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
12
Contribution from nominal interest rate
13
Contribution from real GDP growth
14
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
15 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3)

2000

Table 1. Gabon: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2014
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

34.7
34.2
76.7
47.8
119.6
17.9
31.7
51.3
28.4

1.3
3.8
0.0
-2.8
1.8
3.6
-6.1
5.4
-3.0
1.1

0.0
-0.5

56.0

-4.8
-6.9
-8.6
-17.4
49.7
32.3
0.0
2.4
-2.4
1.7
1.2
-0.4
0.9
2.1

27.9

29.7
29.2
73.6
43.3
118.2
11.9
29.3
51.5
24.9

1.4
3.9
0.0
-2.0
1.1
3.4
-6.5
4.8
-2.9
1.1

-0.2
-2.2

51.6

-3.8
-5.9
-7.6
-15.2
46.7
31.5
0.6
2.2
-2.8
1.1
0.9
-0.4
0.6
2.1

24.1

Projections
2009
2010

25.6
25.1
71.1
39.8
117.5
6.5
27.5
52.0
21.9

1.9
3.9
0.0
-1.8
0.7
3.2
-6.4
4.7
-0.5
1.1

0.0
-0.3

47.4

-3.4
-5.2
-5.9
-12.4
43.8
31.4
-0.1
2.2
-2.1
0.7
0.8
-0.5
0.4
1.8

20.7

2011

23.4
22.9
70.5
38.1
118.4
3.0
28.2
53.9
20.8

2.2
4.0
0.0
-2.0
0.7
3.1
-5.5
4.4
-0.5
1.0

0.1
0.9

46.9

-1.5
-4.4
-4.4
-10.1
41.1
31.0
-0.6
2.3
-1.7
0.6
0.6
-0.5
0.4
2.9

19.3

2012

20.4
19.8
68.6
35.4
117.7
0.0
27.8
54.4
18.6

2.5
4.0
0.0
-1.6
0.8
2.6
-3.7
4.1
-0.6
0.8

-0.1
-1.5

42.6

-2.7
-4.0
-3.6
-8.6
38.9
30.3
-0.7
2.1
-1.5
0.3
0.5
-0.5
0.3
1.3

16.6

2013

17.7
17.2
66.3
32.9
115.8
0.0
28.1
55.0
16.7

2.7
4.0
0.0
-0.8
0.8
2.4
-3.8
4.0
0.1
1.5

-0.1
-0.7

38.4

-2.5
-3.8
-2.5
-7.0
36.8
29.8
-1.5
2.1
-0.6
0.1
0.4
-0.4
0.1
1.4

14.1

2014

- 72 APPENDIX IV

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

-8.3
1.5
7.9
-0.6
8.5
30.4

Historical
Average

-1.9
7.4
-21.1
713.5
15.2
28.5
-23.4

2.0
11.8
18.4
718.4
0.7
-6.6
41.4

6.5
0.3

238.2

9.8
0.4
-12.0
34.0
12.2
22.0
12.5
12.3
13.8
-1.5
0.1
1.0
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
9.4

81.1

Actual
2001
2002

2003

2004

2005

2.4
5.0
5.3
540.5
-17.9
-0.4
-20.5

4.9
0.3

244.5

-9.8
-12.2
-11.4
29.8
13.6
18.4
-0.7
2.4
4.3
-2.0
-3.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.4

73.0

61.9

1.4
5.8
-1.2
489.2
-9.5
7.0
-2.4
-7.7
-4.3

11.3
0.8

212.3

-11.0
-15.1
-11.5
29.2
13.4
17.7
-3.2
-1.8
-0.9
-0.9
-1.4
1.1
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
4.1

48.8

2.0
5.3
-1.4
488.3
-0.2
6.7
-4.6
-5.8
-3.1

-1.0
-0.1

160.5

-13.2
-15.8
-13.8
30.4
13.4
16.6
-2.0
-2.0
-0.9
-1.1
0.0
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.7

6.2
4.3
2.5
17.9
18.8
3.6

Standard
Deviation

-8.3
1.3
4.8
6.2
-1.4
28.8

Average
2003-10

61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9
61.9

59.4
51.0
60.4
74.5
56.0
58.8
48.8
53.1
48.8

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

0.0
5.4
5.4
658.0
-8.4
0.0
7.9

6.2
0.3

261.9

1.7
-5.1
-7.9
31.6
13.9
23.7
2.8
4.4
4.4
0.0
-1.6
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.8

82.8

I. Baseline Medium-Term Projections

59.5
46.3
66.0
90.2
51.1
54.1
43.4
51.4
40.3

0.2
5.6
9.6
488.2
0.0
-3.9
7.8
-5.4
-3.1

-0.6
-0.1

143.0

-5.7
-7.6
-12.3
30.1
14.6
17.8
4.7
4.7
4.8
-0.1
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.9

43.2

2006

56.2
41.0
63.2
86.9
47.0
50.3
39.2
50.3
33.6

0.7
4.7
8.6
487.9
-0.1
-3.8
7.5
-5.0
-3.2

-0.7
-0.1

130.4

-4.7
-6.9
-10.4
29.4
15.7
19.0
3.5
3.5
3.8
-0.3
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

38.5

2007

52.7
35.8
60.3
83.4
42.9
46.4
35.4
48.6
27.5

0.4
4.6
7.4
487.7
0.0
-2.8
7.0
-4.7
-3.2

1.0
0.1

117.1

-4.7
-5.7
-8.5
28.8
17.0
20.3
2.8
2.8
2.9
-0.1
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0

33.8

2008

48.5
30.2
56.5
78.5
38.2
41.9
31.4
45.9
21.2

1.3
4.5
6.5
487.5
0.0
-2.0
5.8
-4.3
-3.1

1.9
0.1

100.4

-5.2
-5.4
-7.2
28.4
17.9
21.2
1.8
1.8
2.2
-0.4
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

28.6

45.4
25.6
53.8
74.5
34.5
38.4
28.7
44.1
16.4

1.4
4.6
6.4
487.5
0.0
-1.8
5.4
-4.0
-3.0

-0.1
0.0

86.9

-4.2
-4.5
-6.0
28.0
18.9
22.0
1.4
1.4
1.8
-0.4
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

24.4

Projections
2009
2010

1/ Public debt is defined as gross debt held by the general government.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
7/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Primary deficit
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Nominal interest rate (in percent) 6/
Real interest rate (in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Revenue to GDP ratio

Historical Statistics for Key Variables (past 10 years)

1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation in 2005and 2006
2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
3. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006
4. Combination of 1-3 using one standard deviation shocks
5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 7/
6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005
7. Wage Bill remains constant as percentage of non-oil GDP (at the level of 2005)
8. The Oil windfall is spent beginning in 2005
9. Oil Production is higher and Wage Bill remains constant as percentage of non-oil GDP

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Exchange rate (Local currency per US dollar, end of period)
Nominal depreciation of local currency (CFA franc per dollar)
GDP deflator (in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Non-Oil Primary Balance / Non-Oil GDP
Non-Oil Primary Balance / GDP

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

5.9
0.3

213.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: Non-oil revenue
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Denominator = 1+g+π+gπ
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3)

Gross financing need 5/
in billions of U.S. dollars

71.3
-28.3
-29.7
-17.5
33.4
10.9
15.9
-12.0
-14.7
-16.2
1.5
2.7
1.3
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
1.5

Public sector debt 1/

2000

Table 2. Gabon: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2014
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

42.8
21.7
51.5
71.0
31.4
35.5
27.2
42.5
12.7

1.9
4.3
6.3
487.5
0.0
-2.0
5.7
-3.7
-2.9

1.1
0.1

75.2

-3.5
-3.7
-4.8
27.6
19.8
22.8
1.1
1.1
1.6
-0.5
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

20.8

2011

42.1
19.9
51.1
69.1
30.3
34.5
27.9
42.4
11.4

2.2
4.4
6.0
487.5
0.0
-1.6
5.3
-3.4
-2.8

1.8
0.1

70.6

-1.5
-3.0
-3.8
27.3
20.6
23.5
0.8
0.8
1.2
-0.5
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.5

19.3

2012

39.9
17.0
49.2
65.3
27.9
32.2
28.0
41.0
9.5

2.5
4.0
4.8
487.5
0.0
-0.8
4.5
-3.1
-2.6

-0.7
-0.1

61.4

-2.7
-2.6
-3.0
27.0
21.2
24.0
0.4
0.4
0.9
-0.5
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

16.6

2013

37.9
14.3
47.4
61.7
25.7
30.0
28.8
39.7
8.3

2.7
4.0
4.9
487.5
0.0
-0.8
4.6
-2.8
-2.4

-0.4
0.0

52.8

-2.5
-1.9
-2.3
26.7
21.8
24.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
-0.4
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

14.1

2014

- 73 APPENDIX IV

112.0
112.0
0.0
2003
56.0
46.7
9.3
103.3
86.1
17.1
187.7
156.6
31.2
16.7
16.7
0.0
30.4
30.4
0.0

Total interest payments
interest payments on current debt
interest payments due to new borrow

DSA ratios:

Ratio of total debt / GDP:
ratio current debt/ GDP
ratio new debt & arrears clearance / GDP

Ratio of total debt / exports of goods & NFS
ratio current debt/exports
ratio new debt & arrears clearance / exports

Ratio of total debt / revenues:
ratio current debt/revenues
ratio new debt & arrears clearance / revenues

Ratio debt service / exports:
ratio current debt service /exports
ratio new debt service / exports

Ratio of total debt service/ revenue:
ratio current debt service/revenue
ratio new debt service / revenue
2,304.5
2,556.2
1,111.5
3,818.0

31.3
30.9
0.4

15.1
14.9
0.2

170.4
125.2
45.3

82.2
60.4
21.8

49.6
36.4
13.2

2004

122.3
120.2
2.1

225.2
223.2
1.9

347.5
343.4
4.1

2004
1,894.5
1,391.1
503.4
0.0

2,616.0
2,331.8
1,257.7
4,154.8

25.9
22.9
3.0

12.4
11.0
1.4

142.0
94.0
47.9

68.3
45.2
23.1

43.0
28.5
14.5

2005

108.3
79.4
28.9

217.3
208.6
8.7

325.6
288.0
37.6

2005
1,785.5
1,182.5
603.0
0.0

2,391.7
2,129.4
1,200.8
3,999.9

26.5
23.6
2.9

13.3
11.8
1.5

133.6
80.8
52.8

67.1
40.6
26.5

40.1
24.2
15.9

2006

99.1
70.8
28.3

219.5
212.6
7.0

318.6
283.3
35.3

2006
1,604.0
969.9
634.1
0.0

2,189.3
1,928.2
1,135.3
3,872.5

27.7
24.1
3.6

14.4
12.5
1.9

124.7
66.5
58.2

64.6
34.5
30.2

36.5
19.5
17.1

2007

87.9
57.8
30.1

226.4
215.4
11.0

314.2
273.2
41.0

2007
1,415.2
754.5
660.7
0.0

1,988.0
1,805.8
1,092.8
3,777.1

30.4
24.0
6.3

16.7
13.2
3.5

112.9
49.1
63.8

62.1
27.0
35.1

32.7
14.2
18.5

2008

76.8
44.7
32.1

255.0
217.8
37.1

331.8
262.5
69.2

2008
1,233.6
536.7
696.9
0.0

Sources: Gabonese authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Financing gaps are assumed to be covered by 8-year external debt with 3 years of grace and 5.5 annual interest rate.
2/ Out of the stock of arrears at end-2003, approximately CFAF 320 billions was in reschedulable debt.

1,907.0
2,244.7
1,049.1
3,518.9

206.8
206.8
0.0

Total Amortization
Amortization on current debt
Amortization due to new borrow

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and NFS
Exports of goods
Fiscal revenues excluding grants
Nominal GDP

318.8
318.8
0.0

2003
1,969.6
1,642.6
0.0
326.9

Total Debt service
Debt service due outstanding debt
Debt service on new borrowing

Total Stock of debt
Stock of outstanding (excluding arrears)
Stock of new borrowing
Stock of arrears 2/

1,865.7
1,685.3
1,065.0
3,750.6

31.6
23.9
7.7

18.0
13.6
4.4

98.2
30.3
67.9

56.0
17.3
38.8

27.9
8.6
19.3

2009

64.7
30.8
33.9

272.0
223.7
48.3

336.7
254.5
82.2

2009
1,045.4
322.3
723.2
0.0

1,745.2
1,573.2
1,033.5
3,734.3

21.6
14.2
7.4

12.8
8.4
4.4

87.2
20.8
66.3

51.6
12.3
39.3

24.1
5.8
18.4

2010

53.9
19.9
34.0

169.5
127.0
42.5

223.4
146.8
76.5

2010
900.7
215.3
685.5
0.0

1,633.0
1,483.3
1,000.7
3,730.7

23.3
15.3
8.0

14.3
9.4
4.9

77.3
9.0
68.3

47.4
5.5
41.9

20.7
2.4
18.3

2011

46.1
13.1
33.1

187.0
140.1
46.9

233.2
153.2
80.0

2011
773.6
90.1
683.5
0.0

Table 3. Gabon: Baseline Debt Sustainability Analysis 2004-2023 1/
(In CFAF billion, unless otherwise noted)

1,543.2
1,426.7
981.2
3,755.2

22.9
13.8
9.1

14.6
8.8
5.8

73.7
2.7
71.0

46.9
1.7
45.2

19.3
0.7
18.6

2012

39.3
5.7
33.6

185.5
130.2
55.3

224.8
135.9
89.0

2012
723.5
26.5
697.0
0.0

1,486.6
1,369.9
979.8
3,819.0

11.6
1.5
10.0

7.6
1.0
6.6

64.6
2.4
62.2

42.6
1.6
41.0

16.6
0.6
16.0

2013

32.2
1.9
30.2

81.4
13.2
68.2

113.5
15.1
98.4

2013
633.0
23.8
609.2
0.0

1,404.7
1,374.0
1,146.8
5,329.9

3.5
0.0
3.4

2.8
0.0
2.8

31.4
1.4
30.1

25.7
1.1
24.6

6.8
0.3
6.5

2023

16.4
0.0
16.3

23.6
0.5
23.1

40.0
0.5
39.5

2023
360.7
15.5
345.2
0.0

2,125.9
2,031.8
1,118.2
3,828.3

28.2
24.2
3.9

14.9
12.8
2.2

132.1
77.9
54.2

69.4
40.4
29.0

38.7
23.0
15.7

90.6
66.9
23.7

224.0
204.4
19.6

314.6
271.3
43.2

1,481.1
876.9
563.3
326.9

2003-2010

1,408.7
1,333.5
1,036.4
4,337.9

9.6
2.6
6.9

6.7
1.7
5.0

44.7
2.4
42.3

32.0
1.7
30.3

11.0
0.6
10.4

22.9
1.9
21.0

73.9
24.5
49.5

96.8
26.3
70.5

457.2
24.6
432.6
0.0

2011-2023

1,691.6
1,607.8
1,068.6
4,112.2

17.5
11.9
5.5

10.3
6.5
3.7

83.5
37.6
45.9

49.3
20.2
29.1

23.5
11.2
12.3

52.0
30.9
21.0

136.6
100.3
36.4

188.6
131.2
57.4

907.2
419.2
460.5
302.6

2003-2023

- 74 APPENDIX IV

13.5
28.9

Oil production (million tons)
WEO oil prices (US dollar/barrel)

-407.0

1241.2
-712.6
-105.1
-477.2
25.1

Trade balance

Services (net)

Transfers (net)

Capital account

Transfers (net)

1907.0
350.0
-1057.5
-772.0

3.6
-12.8
-10.4
-6.1
3.7
-15.1
-7.0
-1.4

Exports of GNFS
of which non-oil
Imports of GNFS
of which non-oil

Growth Rates
Exports of GNFS
of which non-oil
Imports of GNFS
of which non-oil

Exports
of which non-oil
Imports
of which non-oil

Sources: Gabonese authorities and Fund staff estimates.

1049.1

-8.2

Memorandum items:
Net IMF purchases (+ = net drawing)

Fiscal revenues excluding grants

-6.3

-53.7

Overall balance

21.5
51.2
19.3
5.1

20.8
42.9
27.3
13.4

2304.5
500.3
-1345.8
-875.4

1111.5

-12.6

-67.6
59.9
-214.8
118.5
-31.2
-342.1

2.7

-1019.9

1522.1

-189.6
15.4
-205.7
10.0
-9.2
-312.7

Medium and Long term
of which Government drawings
Amortization
Foreign Direct Investment
Other Private Medium and Long Term
Short-term Flows (including E&O)

-101.5

1847.1
-605.9

Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.

2244.7
-722.5

423.5
12.0

400.7
10.5

13.6
38.2

1.4
2.3
8.5
3818.0
1715.5
2102.5

2004

Current Account (including transfers)
Current Account in % of GDP

2. Balance of Payments

2.4
0.8
2.0
3518.9
1485.9
2033.0

2003

Sector projections
1. Real Sector
Real GDP growth rate
of which: Non-oil GDP growth
Nominal GDP growth rate
Nominal GDP levels
of which: oil GDP
non-oil GDP

13.9
10.3
7.7
8.0

13.5
9.1
4.6
5.9

2616.0
545.8
-1407.8
-927.3

1257.7

-11.7

130.3

-88.5
32.0
-207.3
115.1
-28.2
-355.0

2.6

-440.9

-102.1

-1104.6

1777.8

2556.2
-778.3

571.2
13.7

13.5
48.1

2.0
3.0
8.8
4154.8
1956.1
2198.7

2005

-8.8
11.3
-0.2
5.5

-8.6
10.1
-4.9
3.0

2391.7
601.0
-1338.8
-955.0

1200.8

-3.5

145.5

-96.1
38.0
-219.0
106.5
-21.5
-249.7

3.0

-342.8

-90.9

-975.6

1554.9

2331.8
-776.9

488.3
12.2

12.1
45.3

0.2
3.5
-3.7
3999.9
1694.6
2305.4

2006

-8.7
8.5
0.6
3.5

-8.5
7.7
-3.3
1.1

2189.3
647.1
-1295.0
-965.7

1135.3

-5.1

69.9

-107.4
40.0
-224.7
98.8
-21.5
-222.7

3.4

-326.7

-79.6

-871.8

1348.1

2129.4
-781.3

396.6
10.2

11.0
42.6

0.7
3.5
-3.2
3872.5
1459.0
2413.5

2007

-9.5
5.8
-0.7
2.5

-9.2
5.3
-3.6
0.4

1988.0
681.6
-1248.8
-969.6

1092.8

-16.1

56.3

-125.6
40.0
-242.2
94.7
-18.1
-130.3

3.4

-252.5

-69.1

-774.4

1152.3

1928.2
-775.9

308.8
8.2

9.6
41.3

0.4
3.5
-2.5
3777.1
1237.5
2539.6

2008

-6.3
5.8
-0.6
2.8

-6.2
5.3
-3.0
1.0

1865.7
717.9
-1211.4
-979.7

1065.0

-12.1

29.9

-148.4
40.0
-262.6
88.9
-14.6
-104.5

2.7

-250.1

-58.1

-696.3

1034.5

1805.8
-771.3

280.0
7.5

8.6
40.5

1.3
3.8
-0.7
3750.6
1086.6
2664.0

2009

-6.7
5.2
-0.4
2.9

-6.5
4.8
-2.9
1.1

1745.2
752.6
-1176.7
-990.7

1033.5

0.0

80.1

-51.6
40.0
-165.0
83.1
-9.6
-118.1

2.0

-167.7

-47.1

-622.2

917.1

1685.3
-768.2

247.8
6.6

7.5
40.2

1.4
3.9
-0.4
3734.3
946.3
2788.1

2010

-6.7
5.1
2.0
2.9

-6.4
4.7
-0.5
1.1

1633.0
787.7
-1170.6
-1002.0

1000.7

0.0

36.8

-61.9
40.0
-179.7
82.5
-4.6
-93.9

2.4

-153.4

-36.1

-563.0

789.3

1573.2
-783.8

190.2
5.1

6.7
38.8

1.9
3.9
-0.1
3730.7
811.0
2919.7

2011

Table 4. Gabon: Macroeconomic Projections for the Baseline DSA 2004-2023
(In CFAF billion unless otherwise specified)

-5.7
4.7
1.4
2.8

-5.5
4.4
-0.5
1.0

1543.2
822.4
-1164.3
-1012.4

981.2

0.0

11.6

-53.2
40.0
-175.0
86.4
-4.6
-78.3

3.0

-128.5

-35.1

-513.3

688.5

1483.3
-794.9

140.1
3.7

5.9
37.5

2.2
4.0
0.7
3755.2
696.5
3058.7

2012

-3.8
4.4
1.3
2.6

-3.7
4.1
-0.6
0.8

1486.6
856.1
-1157.4
-1020.6

979.8

0.0

97.6

48.1
40.0
-63.9
81.6
-9.6
-69.9

0.0

-21.8

-34.1

-468.1

621.6

1426.7
-805.1

119.4
3.1

5.2
36.2

2.5
4.0
1.7
3819.0
614.6
3204.5

2013

1.9
4.0
2.0
2.6

1.8
3.8
2.0
2.4

1404.7
1241.2
-1293.4
-1236.8

1146.8

0.0

36.8

88.8
40.0
16.4
86.1
-53.6
-11.8

0.0

77.0

-30.4

-403.7

393.9

1344.8
-950.9

-40.2
-0.8

1.7
30.3

3.6
4.0
4.3
5329.9
184.4
5145.5

2023

-0.1
10.4
2.3
3.6

-0.1
9.1
0.5
2.5

2125.9
599.5
-1260.2
-929.4

1118.2

-8.7

56.5

-109.3
38.2
-217.7
89.4
-19.3
-229.4

5.6

-333.1

-81.7

-847.2

1318.5

2066.0
-747.5

389.6
10.1

11.2
40.6

1.2
3.0
1.1
3828.3
1447.7
2380.6

2003-2010

-1.7
4.2
1.7
2.6

-1.6
3.9
0.7
1.7

1408.7
1003.1
-1198.5
-1098.3

1036.4

0.0

50.6

43.6
40.0
-44.5
81.5
-33.4
-27.9

0.4

16.1

-32.1

-424.0

490.4

1348.8
-858.4

34.4
1.0

3.7
32.8

3.0
4.0
2.8
4337.9
405.6
3932.2

Averages
2011-2023

-1.1
6.5
1.9
3.0

-1.0
5.9
0.6
2.0

1681.9
849.4
-1222.0
-1034.0

1067.6

-3.3

52.8

-14.6
39.3
-110.4
84.5
-28.0
-104.7

2.4

-116.9

-51.0

-585.2

805.9

1622.0
-816.2

169.7
4.5

6.5
35.8

2.3
3.6
2.1
4143.7
802.6
3341.1

2003-2023

- 75 APPENDIX IV

- 76 -

APPENDIX V

Bank of Central African States: Safeguards Assessments
The Bank of the Central African States (BEAC) is the regional central bank of the Central
African States, of which Gabon is a member. A subsequent safeguards assessment of the
BEAC completed on August 30, 2004 found that the BEAC has implemented a number of
measures to strengthen its safeguards framework since the 2001 safeguards assessment, but
further progress needs to be made in key areas.
The main recommendations of the assessment were reported in Country Report No. 05/5.
Other priority recommendations of the assessment, but of a country specific nature, were:
(i) the BEAC should clarify with its member countries that hold foreign reserves outside the
BEAC the statutory basis and circumstances for doing so, to avoid an apparent conflict with
the BEAC statutes and to ensure full transparency of reporting of reserves by the member
country; (ii) the BEAC and its member states are encouraged to establish a mechanism to
prevent IMF overdues and facilitate timely payments through advance acquisitions of SDRs
and an authorization to debit the SDR account of the member; and (iii) the BEAC should
cooperate with its members to reconcile and confirm the treasury balances to ensure that the
balances reported by the BEAC in respect of credit to government as reflected in the
accounts of the Treasuries are in agreement with the BEAC.

- 77 -

APPENDIX VI

Gabon: Statistical Issues
1.
Gabon’s economic database is fairly comprehensive. While data are generally
compiled in accordance with international standards, consistency between sectors is poor,
raising questions about the quality of the data. Detailed economic and financial statistics,
including long historical time series, are published in the Tendances de l’Economie, issued
on a semiannual basis by the General Directorate of Statistics and Economic Studies
(DGSEE) of the Ministry of Planning. More recent sectoral developments are described in
detail in the Tableau de Bord de l'Economie, issued on a quarterly basis by the General
Directorate for the Economy (DGE) of the Ministry of Economy, Finance, Budget, and
Privatization.
2.
Gabon is a participant in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Metadata
regarding Gabon’s national statistical systems, including plans for improvement, were first
posted to the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board on October 1, 2002, but have
not been updated. The authorities do not report any real sector statistics for publication in
International Financial Statistics (IFS), nor fiscal data for publication in the IFS or
Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook.
National accounts
3.
The base for the calculation of national accounts aggregates at constant prices was
changed from 1989 to 1991. The coverage of developments in the oil and other key export
sectors is based on a range of indicators that may not fully capture the profits generated by
these sectors. Despite recent improvements in collecting and processing oil sector statistics,
significant inconsistencies remain between national accounts and the balance of payments
statistics. In addition, more frequent household surveys are required, to improve the quality
and quantity of data available on income distribution and consumption. Efforts to establish a
more consistent database need to be strengthened.
Employment and unemployment
4.

Data on unemployment and the total labor force are not systematically available.

Prices
5.
Monthly consumer price indices for low- and middle-income households are available
only for the capital city of Libreville. Significant parts of the population live in other urban
areas such as Port Gentil.These indices are based on an outdated family expenditure survey
of 1975 and attach a large weight to prices of food and basic consumer goods.
Government accounts
6.
A key shortcoming of macroeconomic statistics is the limited coverage of fiscal data,
as no estimates of the consolidated general government are reported to STA. This hampers a
full understanding of general government expenditure priorities. Moreover, the social

- 78 -

APPENDIX VI

security operations are not yet included in government finances. In addition, the audited
accounts of oil sector operations are not published with adequate periodicity (at least
quarterly), which prevents adequate monitoring of key fiscal and activity indicators. Other
needed improvements relate, inter alia, to the statistical treatment of oil companies’ tax
advances, recording in the budget accounts government investment financed by oil
companies, and the recording of government domestic payment arrears.
Monetary statistics
7.
Monthly monetary data for Gabon, as well as for the other members of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC), are reported on a regular basis,
although with some delays. The data are reported in electronic form by the regional central
bank (BEAC) and published in IFS. The institutional coverage of the monetary statistics is
comprehensive, but accuracy is affected by cross-border movements of currency among
CEMAC member countries. In the case of Gabon, however, the magnitude of imported notes
is smaller than in other countries in the region. About 94 percent of notes in Gabon are
nationally issued; the remaining are from Cameroon, the Republic of Congo, and Equatorial
Guinea. Gabon exports about 18 percent of its notes, most of which go to Cameroon
(12 percent) and to the Republic of Congo (4 percent).
8.
The monetary and financial statistics mission that visited BEAC headquarters (May
2001) provided technical assistance in addressing the main shortcomings pertaining to
coverage, methodology, compilation procedures, and timeliness of monetary statistics. The
mission discussed an action plan for the implementation of the Monetary and Financial
Statistics Manual (MFSM) and for the introduction of an area-wide page in IFS for CEMAC.
Following the 2001 mission, a regional workshop on monetary and financial statistics was
organized by the BEAC in Libreville (Gabon) in May 2002 to support the implementation of
the MFSM in CEMAC countries. The new page for CEMAC was published in the January
2003 issue of IFS.
External public debt
9.
There are comprehensive data on the outstanding stock of external public debt and its
composition, together with detailed projections on debt service due These data are provided
(usually to Fund missions) by the General Directorate of Public Debt and Accounting
(Direction générale de la comptabilité publique) of the Ministry of Economy, Finance,
Budget, and Privatization.
Balance of payments and trade statistics
10.
Balance of payments data are disseminated with considerable delays, and the most
recent data refer to 2001. As in most other countries of CEMAC, balance of payments data
are compiled and disseminated by the national agency of BEAC for Gabon. The compilation
process involves a close cooperation between BEAC headquarters and the national agency
for Gabon since BEAC headquarters calculates the national contribution in the international
reserves it holds and manages on behalf of all six countries. The headquarters also validate

- 79 -

APPENDIX VI

the draft results and run consistency checks against the guidelines adopted for the whole
monetary union.
11.
Since 1995, the dissemination of balance of payments statistics has been in
accordance with the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5). Source data are primarily
reported through (i) surveys of enterprises by the central bank (main source of data);
(ii) reports from banks and the postal administration on foreign exchange transactions of
other enterprises, retailers, and private individuals; and (iii) BEAC reports on banknotes
issued by Gabon and returned by other BEAC countries.
12.
External trade data are mostly based on estimates, which are not cross-checked with
customs data. The reliability of other items of the current account is poor due to the low
response rate to the enterprise surveys, in spite of partial correction through adjustments.
Foreign direct investment in the financial account is likely to be underestimated owing to the
insufficient detail of the oil sector survey. The overall magnitude and detailed breakdown of
private capital flows, particularly those related to the short term, suffer from a lack of
comprehensiveness.
Public enterprise sector
13.
While a fairly good database exists on the operations of public enterprises,
information is communicated to the staff on an ad hoc basis, notably during Fund missions.
At present, data provided cover the wholly owned and mixed enterprises in which
government equity participation is at least 25 percent.

- 80 -

APPENDIX VI

GABON: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF MARCH 8, 2005
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
6
publication

Exchange Rates

2/24/05

2/25/05

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Broad Money

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index

1/31/05

2/16/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

12/31/04

2/16/05

A

I

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

I

GDP/GNP

12/31/04

2/16/05

A

I

A

Gross External Debt

12/31/04

2/16/05

M

M

A

1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

- 81 -

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/55
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
April 26, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with
Gabon
On March 28, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Gabon.29
Background
Since 2003, the Gabonese economy has recovered sharply from the financial
imbalances of the early years of the decade. The government introduced a far-reaching
program of economic and structural reforms. Aided by high oil prices and external debt
rescheduling, the external position strengthened markedly. This in turn contributed to a
sharp improvement in the fiscal accounts, helped also by better tax administration and
expenditure discipline.
GDP growth is estimated to have reached 1½ percent in 2004. Non-oil growth of
2¼ percent benefited from rising output in manganese mining and timber processing,
while activity in construction, electricity, and cement production picked up in the second
half of the year, spurred by the acceleration in the execution of public investment.
Meanwhile inflation declined to ½ percent, reflecting wage moderation and the monetary
discipline imposed by the fixed exchange rate regime. The external position remained
strong, with the current account surplus reaching 10½ percent of GDP and external
29

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions
with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and
financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments
and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the
basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the
Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive
Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities.

- 82 -

debt falling by 13 percentage points of GDP to under 50 percent of GDP at end-2004.
The real exchange rate depreciated slightly in 2004, and competitiveness is estimated to
have remained relatively strong, not least as a result of wage moderation.
The fiscal stance in 2004 remained tight. The overall budget surplus was maintained at
7½ percent of GDP, while the non-oil primary deficit fell by ½ percentage point to
7¾ percent of non-oil GDP in 2004, reflecting both an improvement in non-oil revenue
and expenditure restraint, notably on wages and salaries. High oil prices resulted in
significant oil windfall revenue, which was used primarily to reduce foreign and domestic
debt and increase deposits in the Fund for Future Generations.
Structural reforms in recent years have aimed at improving the management of public
resources and promoting private investment and economic diversification. The
government has launched a comprehensive reform of the forestry sector, simplifying
forestry taxation, improving transparency in the allocation of forestry permits, and
announcing the elimination of the monopoly on the export of logs of the timber
marketing board effective 2006. Progress has been made in the privatization and
restructuring of public enterprises, reducing their drag on the public finances. Steps
were taken to strengthen the public procurement process, with the objective of raising
the quality of public spending. A diagnostic study of the constraints facing the
investment climate is helping the Government formulate a reform program in this area.
Steps are already underway to strengthen governance and transparency following the
release of the first report of National Commission Against Illicit Enrichment and the
formation of the Government Working Group to implement adherence to the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative.
Looking ahead, the critical challenge facing Gabon is managing the transition from an
economy highly dependent on oil—accounting for 45 percent of GDP, 80 percent of
exports, and over half of government revenue in 2004—to a diversified economy that
harnesses private sector initiative and makes progress in poverty reduction.
Compounding the difficulty of this task is Gabon’s still-high level of external debt and its
vulnerability to swings in oil prices.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Gabonese authorities for the progress in
macroeconomic stabilization and the successful initiation of structural reforms under
Gabon’s economic program. These policies, aided by higher oil revenues, have resulted
in positive growth, low inflation, and a significant strengthening of the fiscal and external
positions. Nevertheless, Directors underscored that, with prospects for the oil sector
continuing to decline, a high external debt burden, and widespread levels of poverty,
Gabon faces a dual challenge going forward: first, to consolidate and extend the gains
of macroeconomic stabilization in order to ensure a durable basis for future growth; and
second, to reinforce the ongoing structural reform process so as to establish the
foundations for the diversification of the Gabonese economy, raise the growth rate of the
non-oil sector, and vigorously address poverty reduction efforts.

- 83 -

Directors welcomed the government’s decision to save the 2004 oil revenue windfall.
Directors noted that, by continuing to apply the bulk of the oil revenue windfall to paying
down government debt, Gabon can set in motion a virtuous cycle that significantly
reduces the weight of debt service on the public finances and the vulnerability of the
economy to swings in oil prices. They urged the authorities to seize this opportunity to
address the legacy of past fiscal slippages and to place the public finances on a much
sounder footing.
Directors welcomed the successful execution of the 2004 budget, which reduced the
non-oil primary deficit by raising non-oil revenue and, in particular, by controlling
expenditure. They considered that the 2005 budget is rightly ambitious in targeting a
further reduction in the non-oil primary deficit. In ensuring its successful implementation,
Directors underscored the importance of steadfast implementation, notably through a
strict control of the government wage bill, the cornerstone of fiscal discipline in Gabon.
Strengthening the finances of the social security funds and local governments was
regarded as another key component of expenditure restraint.
Directors noted several fiscal risks in 2005. Notably, they regretted that the new civil
service law is delayed. While compensatory measures can help to maintain spending
discipline in the short term, Directors urged the authorities to make progress in
improving structural control of the wage bill. In this regard, several Directors urged the
authorities to accelerate the review of the law and ensure its early implementation. The
importance of wage restraint for boosting competitiveness in the non-oil sector was also
noted. Directors expressed concern at the reliance on administrative revenue measures
and encouraged the authorities to remain vigilant and ensure that the hard-won fiscal
discipline, which is essential for Gabon’s medium-term sustainability, is not jeopardized.
Directors welcomed progress in preparing a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP),
which is an opportunity for the government to strengthen its strategy for economic
development and poverty reduction. They underscored that a high-quality PRSP, which
is well anchored in a carefully costed and prioritized public expenditure framework, will
raise the quality of public expenditure and provide a solid foundation for a medium-term
expenditure program. Directors noted that this requires progress in budget preparation
and execution, as well as in maintaining sound public accounting practices and further
improving public sector transparency.
Directors underscored that a vigorous implementation of the structural reform agenda is
essential to stimulate higher private sector-led non-oil growth and to accelerate
economic diversification. They noted that competitiveness remains satisfactory, but the
high costs of labor, transport, and utilities represent a drag on private investment.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to implement the recommendations of the
Foreign Investment Advisory Services in order to strengthen the business environment.
Directors attached particular importance to reinforcing governance and transparency,
developing micro-finance institutions, and making progress in the privatization program.
Directors also saw scope to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework, especially its
consistent application.

- 84 -

Directors noted the progress made in the area of governance and transparency, notably
the publication of the first report of the National Commission Against Illicit Enrichment.
They encouraged the authorities to ensure that the Commission has the means to
exercise its functions and that all concerned public officials comply with its rules.
Directors welcomed Gabon’s decision to adhere to the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), which will strengthen transparency and accountability in a
critical sector of the economy, and supported the authorities’ request for a report by IMF
staff on fiscal transparency with a focus on resource revenue transparency.
Directors welcomed the progress in reforming the forestry sector. They expressed
support for the authorities’ decision to eliminate the export monopoly of the timber
marketing board and restructure the company, so that it can operate in a fully
competitive environment. Directors underscored the importance of persevering with the
reform process, notably by pursuing sustainable forestry development, introducing pilot
auctions for forestry concessions, and establishing greater overall transparency in
forestry management.
Directors noted that cross-border integration represents an opportunity for Gabon to
seize the benefits of a larger regional market. They urged the authorities to implement
its regional commitments, notably by dismantling the significant non-tariff barriers that
remain in place.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

- 85 -

Gabon: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001-04

2001

2002

2003

2004

(Annual changes in percent)
Domestic economy
Real GDP growth rate
Of which: oil
Non-oil
Consumer prices (annual average)

2.0
-5.7
5.3
2.1

0.0
-1.4
0.6
0.2

2.4
6.6
0.8
2.1

1.4
-1.0
2.3
0.4

(In percent of GDP)
Gross fixed investment
Gross national savings
External sector
Exports f.o.b.
Imports f.o.b.
Current account

25.8
24.4
24.0
24.3
36.8
31.3
36.0
34.8
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2,616.2

2,561.5

3,183.8

4,248.6

-848.2
517.9

-937.2
338.8

1,044.3
730.0

1,367.6
758.5

Current account balance (in percent of GDP)

11.0

6.8

12.0

10.5

External public debt (in percent of GDP)
Real effective exchange rate (in percent change)

63.1
1.1

62.8
2.5

56.0
5.7

49.6
-1.0

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Financial variables
Central government revenues

34.0

31.5

29.8

29.1

Of which: non-oil
Total expenditure

12.2
30.8

13.9
28.1

13.6
22.4

13.4
21.7

-16.9

-16.8

-8.2

-7.7

3.2
7.5

3.4
5.7

7.4
-1.2

7.4
11.6

Non-oil primary balance 1/
Overall balance (commitment basis)
Change in broad money (in percent)

Source: Gabonese authorities.
1/ As a percent of non-oil GDP.

- 86 -

Press Release No. 05/68
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 29, 2005

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes Third Review and Financing Assurances Review Under
Gabon’s Stand-by Arrangement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today concluded the third review of
Gabon's economic performance under a 14-month SDR 69.4 million (about US$104.9 million)
Stand-By Arrangement to support the country's economic program (see Press Release No. 04/277).
The Board also approved a review of the country’s financing assurances.
Total drawings under the Stand-By Arrangement have amounted to SDR 41.7 million (about US$
63.0 million). Completion of the third review makes available an amount equivalent to
SDR 13.9 million (about US$ 21.0 million). However, because of a strong balance of payments
position, the authorities are now treating the arrangement as precautionary and a disbursement is
not contemplated at this time.
Following the Executive Board's discussion on March 29, 2005 on Gabon's economic performance,
Ms. Anne O. Krueger, First Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Gabon’s implementation of the program supported by the stand-by arrangement continues to be
satisfactory. All quantitative performance criteria and the majority of structural benchmarks for endDecember 2004 were met. The authorities’ strong ownership of the program is welcome.
“With the economy still highly dependent on a declining oil sector and with continuing widespread
poverty, Gabon now faces a dual challenge: first, to consolidate and extend the gains of
macroeconomic stabilization in order to ensure a durable basis for future growth; and second, to
reinforce the ongoing structural reform process so as to establish the foundations for the
diversification of the Gabonese economy, raise the growth rate of the non-oil sector, and vigorously
address poverty reduction.

- 87 -

“By continuing to apply part of the oil revenue windfall to paying down government debt, Gabon
can set in motion a virtuous cycle that significantly reduces the weight of debt service on the public
finances and the vulnerability of the economy to swings in oil prices. Gabon should seize this
opportunity to address the legacy of past fiscal slippages and place the public finances on a
permanently sounder footing.
“A vigorous implementation of the structural reform agenda is essential to stimulate private sectorled non-oil growth and accelerate economic diversification. With the aim of reinforcing
competitiveness, it will be important to improve the investment climate. To this end, a key role falls
to strengthening governance and transparency. The establishment of the National Commission
Against Illicit Enrichment and Gabon’s adherence to the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) are welcome, and can make a valuable contribution to increasing transparency and
accountability. These objectives are equally important in the far-reaching reforms in the forestry
sector currently under way. Making progress in the privatization program, strengthening the legal
and regulatory framework, and developing micro-finance institutions will also be essential for
strengthening the business environment,” Ms. Krueger said.
A Stand-By Arrangement is a decision of the IMF by which a member is assured that it will be able
to make purchases (drawings) from the General Resources Account up to a specified amount and
during a specified period of time, normally between 12 and 18 months, provided that the member
observes the terms of the arrangement.

- 88 -

Statement by Damian Ondo Mañe, Executive Director for Gabon
March 28, 2005

I would like to reiterate my authorities’ appreciation to Management and staff for their continued
support to Gabon in its adjustment efforts to address its daunting challenges namely the decline in
oil production, high external debt and weak social indicators. Discussions held in Libreville
between the Gabonese authorities and the staff have been useful and productive. The staff report is
a good reflection of these discussions and describes well the progress achieved in the
implementation of the authorities’ program.
My authorities find the issues developed in the Selected Issues Paper (SIP) well targeted given their
importance in the country’s strategy. The findings in this paper support the authorities’ views on
the need to reduce the country’s oil dependency through, notably the diversification of the
economy, and improve the social conditions of its population. On the latter, the issue of the use –
spending vs. saving in the Fund for Future Generations – of the oil windfall, which is an important
element of discussion between the authorities and the staff, should be addressed against the
important investment, in particular infrastructure, and social needs of the country. The finalization
of the PRSP will be an important input to deepen this analysis.
Recent Economic Developments and Performance under the SBA
Macroeconomic performance at end-2004 has been broadly consistent with the projections made
during the 2nd review of the program, thanks to continued strong policy implementation on the part
of the authorities, the continued firmness of oil prices and increased output in manganese mining.
For 2004, real GDP is estimated to have grown by 1.4 percent, as oil output was slightly higher than
in 2003. It is to be noted that the increase in oil production is due mainly to higher investment in
mature fields, made possible by the higher oil prices. Non-oil GDP growth is estimated to have
reached 2.3 percent, mostly driven by a strong public demand. Inflation remained subdued, below
target at ½ percent. As a result, performance under the SBA has been satisfactory with all
quantitative and structural performance criteria for end-December 2004 observed.
The continued high level of oil prices in the last quarter of 2004 and improved expenditure
management throughout the year enabled the fiscal sector to record a surplus above target. Oil
revenues were lower than expected mainly because of the shift from concession to productionsharing agreements in the upstream sector, which allow for a quicker cost recovery. Expenditures,
and particularly the wage bill, have been contained within limits. Non oil primary balance decreased
from 8.2 percent to 7.7 percent of GDP. As programmed, oil revenues surpluses in 2004 were used
to reduce foreign and domestic debt, and increase deposits in the Fund for Future Generations. An
agreement has been reached with the regional central bank, effective since January 2005, to
remunerate the fund at a rate of 1.7 percent par annum.

- 89 -

In the external sector, the current account surplus doubled from 5.5 percent of GDP in 2003 to 10.4
percent of GDP in 2004, which led to a significant increase in Gabon’s contribution to the regional
central bank NFAs in 2004. As envisaged, external debt declined from 56.0percent of GDP at end2003 to 49.6 percent at end-2004 and, should the oil prices remain firm, it is expected to decline
further by end-2005. Following the Paris Club agreement in June 2004, most of the bilateral
agreements have been completed. However, to ensure that the latest agreements can be concluded,
the Secretary General of the Paris Club has granted an extension through end-March 2005 on the
signing date for bilateral agreements. Discussions are still ongoing with non-Paris Club creditors
and an agreement with the London Club is expected to be signed during the first semester of 2005.
There has also been progress in the implementation of structural reforms although the pace has
been less than envisaged, resulting in the non-observance of some structural benchmarks. The new
law on the general civil service statute has been adopted by the parliament in late 2004 but its
content has been modified from its original draft by Parliament. As a result, the government
decided to postpone the adoption of implementing decrees until the relevance and budgetary impact
of these modifications are assessed. Moreover, the remaining special accounts to be integrated in
the budget will be through a supplemental budget in 2005. The adoption of the implementation
regulations for the mining code has been delayed pending the completion of work on a standard
concession agreement for the mining sector, which is now scheduled for the second quarter of 2005.
In the forestry sector, where an important reform is being undertaken with the assistance of the
World Bank, the government made public the list of holders of forest permits, the list of currently
valid permits, the list of permits reverted to the government and the maps showing the distribution
of forestry permits and national parks since February 200530. In addition, it launched the pilot
project for public auction of forestry permits. No forestry permits will be awarded outside this pilot
project and before its completion. As noted in the SIP, the reform of the forestry taxation in 2004
did not meet the expectations as tax arrears occurred despite the simplification of the tax structure.
As a result, the government decided to introduce a withholding system to ensure a better tax
collection and stop tax arrears accumulation. The government will withdraw forestry permits in case
of non-payment of taxes.
The anti-corruption commission (CNLEI) released its first annual report in December 2004. The
report will be published in the Journal Officiel and on the Commission’s website once it is
established. The Commission’s working program for 2005 includes, among others, the promotion of
the observance of the financial asset disclosure procedures and, surveys and educational campaigns
on its mission.
Macroeconomic Outlook and Policies for 2005
30

All these documents can be consulted on Internet at http://www.finances.gouv.ga/fiscforet.htm.

- 90 -

As indicated in my previous Buff statement, the outlook for 2005 remains positive; helped by the
favorable environment in the oil sector, and an increased interest in investment in sectors such as
mining, agro industries, wood processing and housing by foreign investors. Non-oil activity is
therefore expected to grow by 3.0 percent in real terms. My authorities remain committed to their
adjustment program as they consider the recent developments in the oil sector as transitory. Policies
in 2005 will aim at pursuing the adjustment efforts with the strengthening of the public finance
management and the promotion of the activity in non-oil sectors through the implementation of
structural measures. The 2005 budget law approved by the Parliament last December is in line with
the current Stand-By Arrangement.
More specifically, in the fiscal sector, the 2005 budget targets a reduction in the non-oil primary
budget deficit by 2.0 percent of GDP through an increase of non-oil revenue and a reduction in
primary expenditures. The increase in non-oil revenue is expected from a better tax administration
through notably the computerization of customs services, improved collection of tax arrears and
strengthened control of VAT reimbursements. My authorities will accelerate the implementation of
the Large Enterprise Directorate (DGE) for its full operationalization in 2006.
On the expenditure side, efforts to contain non-essential current spending will be pursued. However,
as noted above, delay in the application of the new civil service law reduces the scope for further
contraction of the wage bill. My authorities will therefore continue to implement administrative
measures to contain the wage bill. Nonwage expenditures such as transfers and subsidies to public
enterprises are also expected to decline.
In addition, measures are underway to reduce pressures on public finances on many fronts. The
restructuring plans of the two social security funds will be continued and will help to reduce their
costs, notably their wage bills, and restore their financial viability. The action plan to strengthen the
finances of local governments is being elaborated with a particular focus on developing new sources
of revenues such as the property tax, and containing personnel costs. Likewise, an analytical report
is under preparation to examine the measures needed to reduce costs and increase revenue in Gabon
Poste.
The investment budget will be maintained at its level at around 4 percent of GDP in 2005.
Nevertheless, my authorities will pursue their efforts to enhance efficiency and transparency of the
public investment spending and it is expected that the audit of expenditures for the independence
celebrations and that of the arrears of the Road Maintenance Fund (FER) will be completed by endAugust and end-June respectively. In addition, the government intends to fully enforce the
provisions of the public procurement code, in particular to the expenditures related to the FER.
Monetary policy will continue to be conducted at the regional level by the BEAC, consistent with
the fixed exchange rate regime that has served the country well. Credit to the economy is projected
to increase as new projects, notably in the housing sector, are expected to start in 2005. The
monetary authorities recognize the risks posed by the high liquidity in the banking system; situation

- 91 -

that is also common to almost all countries in Central Africa. In collaboration with the regional
banking commission COBAC, they will continue to monitor credit developments and strengthen the
prudential supervision to ensure the well functioning of the financial sector.
My authorities intend to pursue the implementation of their reform agenda that aims at improving
the business climate, promoting the private sector through economic diversification, as well as
improving its competitiveness. In this regard, a workshop was held in Libreville in February 2005 to
examine the findings of the FIAS report on the constraints to private sector investment in Gabon.
On the basis of this report, my Gabonese authorities intend to implement a package of measures
aimed at minimizing regulatory and administrative requirements as the basis for an effective
investment promotion policy.
As regards the privatization/restructuration of public enterprises, my authorities adopted the
regulatory framework for the Agence de Régulation des Télécommunications (ARTEL), which
constituted the last obstacle to the selection of a successful bidder for Gabon Telecom. The
selection process is expected to be completed by end-April of this year. Despite some technical
problems related to its aircrafts, Air Gabon managed to improve its financial situation although no
surplus has been reached in its operational results in 2004 as anticipated. In the context of its partial
privatization, the consultant hired to assist the authorities in this process will submit a diagnostic
assessment of the economic and financial performance of Air Gabon, including the documentation
to select pre-qualified bidders by end-April 2005.
As regards transparency in the oil sector in the context of the EITI, a working group comprising the
Office of President, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of
Hydrocarbons, and the CNLEI has been established and has started the technical work required to
reconcile the financial flows between the oil companies and the government. The report on this
technical work will be transmitted by end-June 2005 to an interest group to be formed in April 2005
and which will comprise representatives of the oil companies, the civil society and the government.
An independent audit firm will then conduct an audit of the reconciliation by end-September 2005.
It is my authorities’ intention to conduct such audits on a semiannual basis. In light of the results of
this exercise in the oil sector, my authorities plan to expand the initiative to the mining sector in
2006. In conjunction with this exercise, my authorities are requesting that the Fund prepare a fiscal
ROSC in the course of 2006, which will focus particularly on natural resource revenue
transparency.
My authorities remain committed to finalize a high-quality PRSP, which will lay the foundations
for its development strategy. To this end, they are implementing the needed actions to its
finalization. It is worth noting that, following an internal review of the progress achieved in the
preparation of this document in late 2004, several measures, including the appointment of a new
team to conduct this process, have been taken to ensure that the document be ready as soon as
possible. Since then, the acceleration of the process has been visible with notably the preparation of
sectoral strategies and the conduct of regional consultations with the civil society and the private
sector, in the context of participatory process. The finalization of the PRSP is pending the

- 92 -

completion of the ongoing poverty survey. Moreover, the government is working closely with
several donors to prepare a public expenditure framework compatible with PRSP. This framework
will help design the public investment program during the preparation of the 2006 budget.
Conclusion
My authorities have continued to demonstrate their commitment to and ownership of their
adjustment program. As noted in my previous statements, my authorities are fully aware of the
structural changes in the economy and the challenges this situation entails. It is their intention to
pursue their adjustment policies to address these challenges, namely the decline in oil production,
high external debt and weak social indicators.
In this context, my authorities reiterate their willingness to continue their close relationship with the
Fund through a successor arrangement that will help the country achieve its economic and social
objectives. I would like to recall that the initial request of my authorities was for an EFF. However,
in order to build the necessary track record, my authorities agreed to an SMP, which was followed
by the current SBA. Their understanding was always that, after the successful implementation of the
SBA, it will be followed by a multiyear arrangement.
My authorities remain of the view that the SBA has helped to set the foundation for such a multi
year arrangement, which is best suited to support the country’s far-reaching structural reforms and
the implementation of its poverty reduction strategy, especially in view of the expected decline in
its oil production as of 2006, and its vulnerability to swings in oil prices. Therefore, they are
requesting that the discussions on such an arrangement start as soon as possible. I would ask
Directors for their support for my Gabonese authorities’ request.

