August 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/292

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

Ghana: 2005 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility, and Request for Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria
and Extension of the Arrangement—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public Information
Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the
Executive Director for Ghana
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV
consultation with Ghana, third review under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and request
for a waiver of nonobservance of performance criteria and extension of the arrangement, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the combined 2005 Article IV consultation, third review Under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility, and request for waivers of nonobservance of performance
criteria and extension of the arrangement, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following
discussions that ended on April 14, 2005, with the officials of Ghana on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on June 8, 2005. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

•

a staff statement of June 20, 2005 updating information on recent economic developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its June 20, 2005, discussion of the staff report on issues
related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Ghana.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Ghana*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of Ghana*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*May also be included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
GHANA
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility, and Request for Waiver of Nonobservance of
Performance Criteria and Extension of the Arrangement
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Saul Lizondo and Juha Kähkönen
June 8, 2005
•

The 2005 Article IV consultation and third review under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement discussions were held in Accra during March 29-April 14, 2005. Ghana’s economic
team was led by Finance and Economic Planning Deputy Minister A. Akoto-Osei, and the mission met
with Senior Minister J.H. Mensah, Finance and Economic Planning Minister K. Baah-Wiredu, Bank of
Ghana Governor P. Acquah, and other ministers. The mission met with H.E. President Kufuor to review
developments, and with representatives of the private sector and nongovernmental organizations.

•

The staff team comprised Messrs. Itam (head), Maehle, York, Ms. Chivakul (EP), Mrs. Ellis (staff
assistant) (all AFR), Mr. Kinoshita (FAD), and Mr. Zhan (PDR), and was assisted by Mrs. Muttardy
(Resident Representative). The mission liaised with teams from the World Bank and the Multi-Donor
Budget Support Group.

•

Ghana’s three-year PRGF arrangement was approved on May 9, 2003 in the amount of
SDR 184.5 million (50 percent of quota). The second review of the program was completed on July 9,
2004 and, at that time, Ghana reached the completion point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative. Upon completion of the third review, Ghana will be eligible to draw an amount
equivalent to SDR 26.35 million (7.1 percent of quota). Ghana is requesting waivers for the
nonobservance of three quantitative and one structural performance criteria. Also, the authorities are
requesting a six-month extension of the current PRGF arrangement to October 31, 2006, so that the sixth
and final review (based on June 2006 test date) and all disbursements under the arrangement could be
completed.

•

Ghana maintains a managed floating exchange rate regime, with no pre-announced path for the exchange
rate. Ghana has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles
of Agreement.

•

President Kufuor was reelected for a second term in December 2004, and his party increased its
parliamentary majority.

•

Ghana’s relations with the Fund are summarized in Appendix I, IMF-World Bank collaboration and
Ghana’s financial relations with the World Bank Group in Appendix II, and statistical issues in
Appendix III. This report is accompanied by a Letter of Intent, with attached Memorandum of Economic
and Financial Policies for 2005 and Technical Memorandum of Understanding (www.imf.org), and a
Statistical Appendix.

•

The authorities have agreed to publish the staff report, Letter of Intent, and the Statistical Appendix. The
principal authors of the report are Samuel Itam and Robert York.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary .............................................................................................................4
I.

Retrospective ..............................................................................................................6

II.

Recent Developments and Performance Under the Program............................... ......7

III. Policy Discussions ....................................................................................................12
A. Macroeconomic Objectives ...............................................................................12
B. Fiscal Policy .......................................................................................................12
C. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies.............................................................15
D. External Policies ................................................................................................16
E. Structural Reforms..............................................................................................18
IV. Medium-Term Prospects and Risks ..........................................................................19
V.

Program for 2005 ......................................................................................................20

VI. Staff Appraisal ..........................................................................................................22
Text Boxes
1. Fund Relations....................................................... ...............................................7
2. Progress in Financial Sector Reform ..................................................................10
3. The Petroleum Sector and Product Pricing.........................................................11
4. Summary of Discussion on Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy................................14
Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.

Interest Rate Developments, January 2002–April 2005 .....................................24
Exchange Rate Developments, January 1999–March 2005 ...............................25
Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2004–23 .............26
Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-23 ......................27

Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–05 ......................................28
2. Private Remittances and Other Foreign Exchange Flows, 2000–04 ..................29
3. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks,
PRGF Arrangement, 2004 ..............................................................................30
4. Balance of Payments, 2001–05...........................................................................31
5. Monetary Survey, 2001–05.................................................................................32
6. Bank of Ghana and Deposit Money Banks, 2001–05.........................................33

-3-

Contents

Page

7. Summary of Central Government Budgetary Operations
and Financing, 2001–05...................................................................................34
8. Central Government Revenues, 2001–05 ...........................................................35
9. Central Government Expenditures, 2001–05......................................................36
10. Central Government Financing, 2001–05.........................................................37
11. Status of Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
for the Third Review of the PRGF Arrangement............................................38
12 Progress in Implementing Key FSAP Recommendations ..................................39
13 Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector, 2000–04 .....................41
14. Progress in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals.................................42
15. Country Profile, Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2003.........................43
16. Illustrative Projections of Central Government Budgetary Operations
and Financing, 2005-08 ..................................................................................44
17. IMF, World Bank and Donor Structural Conditionality....................................45
18. Medium- and Long-Term Projections and Assumptions...................................46
19. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 2005–09 .................................................47
20. Revised Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF
Arrangement, 2003–06 ...................................................................................48
Appendices
I. Relations with the Fund.......................................................................................49
II. IMF-World Bank Relations.................................................................................53
III. Statistical Issues..................................................................................................60
IV. Work Program..... ...............................................................................................66

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Overview and recent developments
•

For the second consecutive year, real GDP growth outpaced program projections, and the
buildup in international reserves was faster than envisaged. While inflation remained
above the central bank’s target, it declined by one-half by the end of 2004 from
23.6 percent at end-2007.

•

Macroeconomic policies continued to be broadly appropriate. However, three fiscalrelated quantitative performance criteria for the third review were not observed, because
of fiscal slippages, although technical factors contributed.

•

Progress in structural reform was satisfactory, but the pricing mechanism for petroleum
products was adopted about a week past the deadline, and the establishment of the
associated oversight body is pending (resulting in the nonobservance of a structural
performance criterion).

Policy discussions and economic policies in the period ahead
•

The ratio of domestic debt to GDP remains the nominal fiscal anchor, and the
government’s aim for 2005 is to achieve the medium-term target of reducing this ratio to
half the level at end-2002. With achievement of the domestic debt objective close at
hand, the discussions centered on the appropriate fiscal stance going forward. The
authorities are concerned that a further substantial reduction in domestic debt may be
undesirable, given the resources needed to meet the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). While the staff recognizes this need, it stressed the benefits of a further bold
reduction.

•

The staff agreed that the central bank’s main objectives will continue to be the reduction
of inflation by maintaining a firm monetary policy and building international reserves to
provide a further cushion against shocks. Discussions centered on measures to ensure the
smooth functioning of financial and exchange rate markets, and to safeguard stability.

•

The authorities are aware of the need to accelerate growth to combat poverty, and the
discussions on structural policies centered on the measures to encourage the private
sector to lead growth, including removal of impediments and the role of the public sector
in creating conducive conditions.

•

The program for 2005 focuses on further consolidation of Ghana’s gains in
macroeconomic stability and intensification of structural reform in key areas. Growth is
projected to continue at the current strong pace, and inflation should be well contained
(inclusive of the impact of a recent petroleum price adjustment).

-5-

•

Regarding structural policies, the authorities are intent on reforming the public sector and
strengthening the financial sector. Public sector reform will involve restructuring the civil
service to improve service delivery and improving the financial and operating
performance of state-owned enterprises. Removing rigidities that impinge on the
availability and cost of credit will be the focus of measures designed to enhance
intermediation in the financial sector.

Main issues raised in the staff appraisal
•

Macroeconomic performance remains broadly satisfactory, with most of the program
objectives being achieved. Nonetheless, macroeconomic stability is still fragile.
Economic prospects are still largely driven by the export of a few commodities, which
together with high oil prices, contributes to the vulnerability of the economy.

•

A fiscal challenge is to prevent further slippages that would undermine the market’s
confidence in Ghana’s policies and have adverse macroeconomic effects. Increasing
fiscal space is a high priority to provide room for growth-enhancing and povertyreducing expenditures aimed at achieving the MDGs. In this context, further sizeable
reduction in the ratio of domestic debt to GDP is desirable, primarily through cuts in lowpriority expenditures and in the public sector wage bill relative to GDP.

•

The central bank’s inflation target is within reach, but vigilance is required. The
credibility of the Bank of Ghana has been bolstered recently, as refinements to its
instruments have increased the efficacy of monetary policy. However, a firm stance will
be needed to avoid an upward shift of inflation in light of high world oil prices.

•

The intensification of structural reform in key areas will help support the relatively robust
pace of growth. The government’s commitment to follow through with petroleum sector
deregulation is welcome. In this regard, the critical element is to ensure the automatic and
independent adjustment of petroleum product prices and to eliminate government
involvement. Enhancing financial intermediation—together with reform of the civil
service and public enterprises—will support private sector development.

•

Staff supports the authorities’ request for (i) waivers for nonobservance of three
quantitative and one structural performance criteria, (ii) completion of the third review,
and (iii) extension of the PRGF arrangement.

-6-

I. RETROSPECTIVE
1.
Since the early 1980s, Ghana has experienced relatively strong economic growth
and poverty reduction, which compare favorably with other countries in sub-Saharan
Africa. Real GDP growth averaged almost 4½ percent a year over two decades, in spite of
myriad external shocks and the adverse effects of stop-and-go policies through much of the
past that buffeted the economy. Poverty has declined from more than half of the population
to an estimated 35 percent, and recent data suggest that the link between growth and poverty
reduction has strengthened.1 However, despite the robust economic expansion, per capita
income remains low at about US$435.
2.
Economic reform began in earnest in the 1980s. The reforms were ushered in by a
series of devaluations that reversed Ghana’s deteriorating international competitiveness, the
gradual removal of price controls, and the liberalization of trade and investment. Further
market–oriented and financial sector reforms, including an ambitious divestiture program,
were implemented in the latter part of the 1990s. However, Ghana experienced serious
imbalances and volatile inflation during the 1990s. This originated partly from weak
macroeconomic policies, especially a lax fiscal stance, and a significant deterioration in the
external terms of trade (from rising world oil prices and depressed prices for cocoa and gold)
near the end of the decade.
3.
Economic performance has improved further since 2000, with the economy
growing at its fastest pace in more than a decade. Underpinning this performance has been
a marked improvement in macroeconomic management—as noted in recent Executive Board
discussions on Ghana (Box 1)—and a generally favorable external environment. Although
inflation remains high, it is being reduced through a firm monetary policy; total public debt
has declined substantially as a result of debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative and fiscal prudence; gross international reserves have reached a
record-high level, and the exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and in real effective terms
has remained relatively stable since the substantial adjustment in late 1999. Structural
reforms have begun to yield some benefits, particularly in agriculture. Also, private sector
activity is strengthening, with a consequent broadening of the economic base.

1

The implied poverty-income (per capita) elasticity for Ghana has risen recently and is now higher
than in other countries in the region.

-7-

Box 1. Fund Relations
At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in May 2003, Executive Directors endorsed Ghana’s
Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS) as a sound basis for promoting growth and reducing poverty.1 At the
time of the second review of the PRGF arrangement in July 2004, Directors commended the authorities
for strengthening macroeconomic management, but regretted the decision to leave petroleum prices
unchanged ahead of the elections in December 2004.
Ghana has generally been receptive to the Fund’s policy advice within the context of both Fundsupported programs and surveillance. In this regard, it has made important strides in recent years with
respect to macroeconomic stability and has pushed forward an ambitious structural reform agenda.
Strong program ownership is also being demonstrated, and, in most cases, delays have been due more to
a lack of capacity than to reticence. In the case of adjusting domestic petroleum prices, however, the
authorities were somewhat reluctant owing to what they perceived as a difficult socio-political
environment that threatened the durability of such reform, if they were to proceed with it before the
elections.
_______________
1
See www.imf.org/external/country/GHA/index.htm.

II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM
4.
Real GDP growth in Ghana reached 5.8 percent in 2004, more than a percentage
point higher than the average during 2001–03 (Table 1). Agriculture continued to be the
main contributor to growth, with productivity improvements in the cocoa sector leading to
record-high production. A strong pickup in the service and construction sectors─helped by
increased bank credit and private inward remittances (mainly from the United States,
Canada, and United Kingdom)─also made a significant contribution to overall economic
growth.2
5.
Inflation declined sharply in 2004, falling by half to 11.8 percent from the end2003 rate. Following increases in the prices of petroleum products that averaged 50 percent
in late-February 2005, inflation accelerated to around 16½ percent in March-April. However,
the Bank of Ghana’s core measure of inflation (excluding energy and utilities) has remained
broadly stable. This stable inflation, together with stable interest rates and nominal exchange
2

Private remittances in 2004 amounted to the equivalent of 15 percent of GDP (Table 2). Flows of
private remittances now constitute one of the largest sources of external finance for developing
countries. For Ghana, private remittances are larger than the combination of official transfers, official
capital, and private capital inflows. In 2004, such remittances amounted to about US$1.3 billion or
15 percent of GDP, compared with about US$600 million in official flows. Part of the increase in
remittances is probably due to improvements in data coverage and reporting by commercial banks.
Remittances to Ghana are attributable mainly to the relatively large diaspora, estimated at about 3
million, or 15 percent of the resident population. Preliminary data for 2004 show that about half of
these inflows originate in the United States and Canada, with one fourth from the United Kingdom.

-8-

rate for the cedi vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, suggests that inflation expectations may be well
contained (Figures 1 and 2).
6.
The external sector experienced some improvement in 2004. The buildup in gross
international reserves to US$1.8 billion (equivalent to 3.7 months of imports) by the end of
the year was significantly above the target included as performance criterion in the program
(Table 3). Private remittances, expanding export receipts from cocoa and gold, and increases
in donor support helped in this regard (Table 4). The external current account (after official
transfers) moved from surplus into deficit (2.7 percent of GDP) in 2004, reflecting a
significant increase in capital imports tied to donor inflows, and a larger oil import bill (by
nearly 2½ percentage points of GDP) as a result of higher world oil prices. The volume of
exports expanded rapidly in 2004 reflecting higher cocoa and gold exports, and continued
growth in nontraditional exports. The real effective exchange rate for the cedi remained
relatively stable.
7.
Satisfactory policy implementation helped consolidate macroeconomic stability
in 2004, although favorable supply shocks and higher-than-programmed inflows from
donors contributed. Monetary policy remained firm and the monetary aggregates were in
line with the program targets and performance criteria (Table 5). The monetary stance has
not changed so far in 2005, with growth in reserve money being maintained at the same rate
as in 2004 (about 17 percent). However, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank
of Ghana lowered its policy-controlled interest rate by 200 basis points to 16½ percent after
its meeting in May, signaling its intention to ease the policy stance since the indirect effects
of petroleum price deregulation have largely been absorbed.
8.
The execution of fiscal policy improved in 2004, although there were some
slippages (Table 7). The overall budget deficit narrowed by 0.8 percentage points of GDP to
3.6 percent in 2004, but this was 2 percentage points of GDP larger than programmed. Total
revenue and grants were higher than projected, with domestic resource mobilization (ratio of
tax revenue to GDP) reaching its highest level of 23.8 percent of GDP. This improvement
reflects strong economic growth, some new tax measures, more efficient revenue
administration, and a significant rise in grants. However, the additional resources were more
than offset by unanticipated capital outlays, increased subsidy for petroleum products as
world oil prices rose, and an overrun in wages. Partly as a consequence of these
developments, the envisaged repayment of domestic debt did not transpire. Thus, the
programmed reduction in the ratio of domestic debt to GDP was achieved only as a result of
faster GDP growth.
9.
Three fiscal-related quantitative performance criteria were not observed by the
end-December 2004 test date (Table 3).
•

Net domestic financing of the budget. The limit was exceeded by about 1 percent of
GDP, mainly because of higher expenditure for poverty reduction and infrastructure in
key areas, petroleum-related subsidies, and a wage overrun for subvented agencies

-9-

(resulting from a failure to account fully for all such employees in the program and weak
monitoring).
•

Credit to the state-owned Tema Oil Refinery (TOR). The limit on the stock of net
domestic banking sector credit to TOR was exceeded because of a delay in subsidy
transfers from the government (to offset the under recovery of costs). The transfer was
effected in early 2005, after verification of the subsidy amount. The problem was a
technical one, and subsidies to TOR have ended as a result of petroleum sector
deregulation.

•

Contracting or guaranteeing of medium- to long-term nonconcessional external
debt. The zero ceiling was breached with a US$40 million loan from Nigeria to finance
Ghana’s participation in the World Bank-supported West African Gas Pipeline. The
authorities had mistakenly expected concessional financing and could not make
alternative arrangements in time to avoid a US$25 million (0.3 percent of GDP) penalty.3

10.
Some progress was made in structural reforms, with a majority of the structural
performance criteria and benchmarks being met (Table 11). The financial sector has
strengthened considerably since the late 1990s, which is reflected in commercial banks’
balance sheets (that is, banks are generally liquid, meet prudential requirements, and many
are highly profitable). Their improvement is partly the result of regulatory and legislative
reforms, in line with the recommendations of the Financial Stability Assessment Program
(Box 2), implementation of reform measures, and the incipient macroeconomic stability.

3

Although this project is economically important, the authorities did not consult with the
Fund staff in a timely manner. To prevent such failures in the future, mechanisms have been
instituted for regular meetings between government officials and the Resident Representative
on program monitoring.

- 10 -

Box 2. Progress in Financial Sector Reform
A financial stability assessment program (FSAP) for Ghana was undertaken in 2000–01, followed by an
update (published) in December 2003. The main conclusion from the FSAP is that, in the past,
macroeconomic instability undermined the functioning of the financial sector, and this partly explained
the low level of intermediation. The FSAP identified a number of shortcomings that have inhibited
financial sector development, and proposed measures to improve corporate governance, strengthen laws
and prudential regulations, private property rights, and timely payment of the government’s obligations.
During the past few years, the authorities have made significant progress in addressing these concerns,
and nearly all of the key FSAP policy recommendations have now been completed (Table 12).
In 2003, the Bank of Ghana underwent a safeguards assessment, which revealed vulnerabilities in the
central bank’s financial, audit and internal controls areas. All but one of these weaknesses have since
been addressed; the outstanding measure concerns the quality of external audit controls.
A strengthening of macroeconomic policy implementation and structural reforms have helped establish a
more propitious environment for financial sector development. During the past two years, indicators of
financial soundness for the banking sector have improved (Table 13). All commercial banks meet the
capital adequacy requirement of 6 percent, and most are above 10 percent, the ratio of nonperforming
loans to total loans has fallen to 16.1 percent from a peak of 22.7 percent in 2002, and the provisioning
for bad loans has increased. Interest rate margins are wide, but are expected to narrow due to increased
bank competition for private-sector borrowers (following the recent decline in the public sector
borrowing requirement), and for funds (following the entry of two foreign-owned banks in the market).

11.
Public expenditure and financial management has been enhanced (with help from
FAD technical assistance). A cash management and commitment control system is fully
functioning; the budget and public expenditure management system is operating in 10 of 38
ministries; the reporting of internally generated funds, grants and loans by ministries,
departments, and agencies is done regularly; and the implementation and enforcement of
several key pieces of legislation (Financial Administration, Procurement, and Internal Audit
Agency Act) have advanced. All these efforts are intended to reduce fragmentation of the
budget over the medium term. The reform of public enterprises is ongoing, with full costrecovery pricing for public utilities (a quarterly structural performance criterion), and the
settlement of all cross-debts between the state-owned enterprises.
12.
However, measures to deregulate the pricing mechanism for petroleum
products—a structural performance criterion─have not been adopted as scheduled.
One of the elements involves implementing an automatic adjustment mechanism to ensure
the full recovery of all costs, taxes and levies, and appropriate margins for the importers and
distributors (Box 3). This mechanism was established and petroleum prices were adjusted on
February 23, 2005, which was about a week later than envisaged. The other element concerns
an independent oversight body to monitor the pricing mechanism, which is expected to be
established in June 2005 after parliament passes the enabling legislation.
13.
After Ghana reached the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative
in July 2004, all multilateral creditors agreed to offer it debt relief. Most of the creditors

- 11 -

have now signed stock cancellation agreements, and the agreements with the remaining Paris
Club creditors are to be completed shortly. Ghana has also received additional debt relief
beyond the enhanced HIPC Initiative from most bilateral creditors.

Box 3. The Petroleum Sector and Product Pricing
In the past, the state-owned Tema Oil Refinery (TOR) was the only sanctioned importer of petroleum
products. This restriction was lifted in 2004, and oil-marketing companies and market traders are now
free to participate in competitive tenders for the import of both crude oil and refined products.
Until recently, the government was involved in pricing petroleum products. After 2002, these prices were
to be determined by an automatic and independent formula defined to ensure full cost recovery for TOR.
The basis of the formula was the import-parity price for crude oil, to which TOR’s shipping, insurance,
and refining costs were added to establish the ex-refinery price. The retail price was then calculated by
adding taxes, levies, and distributor margins. The formula was to be monitored by the National
Petroleum Tender Board (NPTB).
However, for the most part, the government did not allow the pricing formula to function as intended.
Instead, it made infrequent adjustments that did not cover all the elements mentioned above and provided
budget subsidies to TOR for the under recovery.
In 2004, the required subsidies to TOR amounted to 2.2 percent of GDP. TOR also borrowed to finance
its operations, and its outstanding debt to Ghana Commercial Bank amounts to nearly 1 percent of GDP.
In mid-2004, the government committed to deregulating the petroleum sector, and to remove itself from
petroleum product pricing.
Deregulation of petroleum product pricing has several key elements.
•

Maximum retail prices for refined petroleum products will be determined by adding all applicable
taxes, levies, and adequate distributor margins to the ex-refinery price. The ex-refinery price is the
c.i.f. import price of refined products, which also sets an upper limit for the price TOR can charge
for its refined products (derived from imported crude).

•

The supply of refined products or crude oil will be determined by a competitive tender. Tenders will
occur as needed, and retail price adjustments will be automatic but implemented with a lag,
reflecting the time it takes for the new supplies to reach the market (about six to eight weeks after
the tender).

•

Application of the new pricing mechanism will be monitored by the National Petroleum Authority
(NPA), which will also assume responsibility for operating the tender process and for ensuring,
through ex post assessment, that the maximum price is observed. The NPA will include
representatives from the government, the private sector, and nongovernmental organizations.

•

The NPA will use a three-month moving average of Mediterranean Platt prices (published in the
Platt’s Oilgram) as a benchmark to gauge anticompetitive or unfair behavior. Pricing above this
benchmark will have to be justified by the retailer before being accepted by the NPA.

- 12 -

III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
A. Macroeconomic Objectives
14.
The foundation for the recent improvement in economic conditions was laid out
in the GPRS in early 2003. The broad macroeconomic goals in the three-year PRGF
arrangement (covering the period 2003–05) included raising real GDP growth to an average
of 5 percent a year, reducing inflation to single digits, building gross international reserves to
three months of import coverage, and reducing domestic debt as a share of GDP. Measured
against these objectives, Ghana’s performance under the program has been broadly
satisfactory. The main challenges now facing Ghana include accelerating growth so that
poverty can be reduced at a faster pace, bringing down inflation closer to the rate in its major
trading partner countries, containing the civil service wage bill to release resources for
productive public expenditure, intensifying structural reforms to enhance the environment for
faster economic growth, and improving the overall management of public enterprises.
15.
The authorities informed the staff that Ghana is updating the GPRS against the
backdrop described above. The GPRS will cover 2006-09 and be better aligned with the
MDGs, most of which Ghana is on track to reach. However, progress is lagging in certain
areas—including health (Tables 14 and 15)─and more resources will be required to achieve
all of the MDGs.4 The authorities are aware of the difficulty of securing additional resources,
and they realize, rightly, that although they will need foreign assistance, they must first try to
find resources at home.5
16.
Accordingly, the discussions focused on the appropriate macroeconomic policy
stance—particularly with respect to fiscal, monetary, and external policies—and on the key
structural reforms to achieve the medium-term macroeconomic objectives.
B. Fiscal Policy
17.
Fiscal policy discussions centered on the appropriate medium-term level of
domestic debt and the scope for increasing fiscal space, raising the quality of public
expenditures, and further enhancing governance in the use of public resources. The
authorities indicated that the ratio of domestic debt to GDP remains the anchor of the fiscal
4

The revised GPRS, together with the Annual Progress Report, is to be completed around midyear.
The revised GPRS will recommend measures to address problem areas, such as health, where a
combination of actions are needed to achieve progress. In addressing infant mortality, for example,
treatment will combine immunization, provision of insecticide treated bed nets, using antidehydration therapy, and correct application of anti-malaria drugs.

5

Recent estimates by both the Ghanaian authorities and the UNDP suggest additional amounts of
US$2.5 billion (28 percent of GDP) annually over the next 10 years for public investment and outlays
in critical areas, such as health, education, and infrastructure.

- 13 -

strategy, but a further reduction significantly beyond the level targeted for 2005 may not be
desirable, given the resources Ghana will need to meet the MDGs (Box 4). While
recognizing this need, the staff urged them to reduce the relative size of the domestic debt
substantially beyond the 2005 target because government current spending and domestic debt
service are still relatively high, and potential future liabilities from the operations of public
enterprises are significant. Moreover, further reductions in the ratio of debt to GDP would
(i) enlarge the durable fiscal space for additional priority spending and growth-enhancing tax
cuts; (ii) enhance the potential for lower interest rates and for a “crowding-in” of private
sector investment; and (iii) provide room to borrow against unpredictable disbursements of
external assistance. Nonetheless, both the staff and the authorities agreed with the need to
balance these prospective benefits from a further debt reduction against the opportunity cost
of scaling up productive capital and poverty-related spending.
18.
The potential for additional domestic resource mobilization appears
circumscribed. The tax burden has risen sharply over the past several years, and is higher
than in other countries in the region. Nonetheless, there is scope for Ghana to increase tax
revenue at the margin by broadening the tax base, eliminating exemptions and loopholes, and
strengthening tax administration—particularly in areas where efficiency gains have not been
exhausted, such as customs and the informal sector.
19.
The staff recommended that the focus be on containing expenditure and making
it more productive by shifting its composition toward productive investment. There has
been some shift toward high priority expenditures during the past several years, but the staff
observed that further prioritization would make the environment more conducive to private
sector-led growth. Explicit linkages should be established between the GPRS, the mediumterm expenditure framework, and the annual budget. The authorities indicated that the trend
of shifting expenditure to priority areas would continue in the medium term, but recognized
that the associated recurrent expenses will increase as well (particularly for infrastructure
maintenance, health, and education).
20.
The authorities agreed with the staff that the civil service wage bill—at around
9 percent of GDP—may be high, given the pressing demands to fight poverty. However,
they argued strongly that recent wage increases were needed to begin to attract and retain
qualified personnel. The staff pointed out that the wage bill has risen significantly in the
recent period and is high relative to that in other countries in the region.6 The staff urged the
authorities to roll back the wage bill to about 8½ percent of GDP over the medium term,
noting that they could do so in the context of the proposed civil service reform.

6

For more details, see the attachment in the Statistical Appendix accompanying this report.

- 14 -

Box 4. Summary of Discussion on Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy
The fundamental premise of the medium-term fiscal strategy is to maintain sustainability and to provide
enduring “fiscal space” for productive and pro-poor spending (aligned to meet the Millennium
Development Goals). More specifically:
• The domestic debt-to-GDP ratio should remain the nominal fiscal anchor.
• Low priority current expenditure needs to be reduced to free up resources. Removing government’s
involvement in petroleum pricing and ensuring full cost recovery pricing is a prime example of
eliminating inefficient and ineffective public spending.
• The focus should be on increasing productive capital spending, particularly on health, education and
infrastructure, to accelerate the progress toward achieving the MDGs.
Based on this premise, the mission presented illustrative projections (Table 16). The scenario suggests
that by reducing debt sharply, domestic debt service will be lowered significantly helping to create room
for other spending. The scenario allows for a gradual increase in the level of capital spending. Moreover,
the projections assume: the ratio of revenue to GDP will gradually decline, reflecting some reduction in
tax rates; and recurrent expenditure as a share of GDP declines, reflecting a lowering of both the wage
bill and domestic debt service.
In the authorities’ view, the path of the domestic debt-to-GDP ratio in the mission’s illustrative scenario
is too aggressive. Instead, the authorities viewed the level of debt envisaged at end-2005 as fiscally
sustainable, and it could be reduced more gradually over the medium term. They also suggested that
raising expenditure was urgently required to achieve the MDGs. At the same time, the authorities
acknowledged that, in assessing sustainability, fiscal risks including unpredictability of external
assistance and contingent liabilities stemming from noncommercial activities of public enterprises,
should be taken into consideration. Accordingly, the authorities proposed an alternative illustrative
scenario that implies a gradual decline in the domestic debt-to-GDP ratio. The authorities’ scenario
assumes that:
• The revenue to GDP ratio remains constant, implying no room for reducing the overall tax burden.
• The ratio of recurrent expenditure to GDP declines only modestly, and the wage bill to GDP ratio
remains constant (9 percent of GDP).
• Capital expenditure including “additional productive expenditure” relative to GDP increases more
substantially.

• “Other payments” including arrears clearance and the float remain large.
The implications from the two sets of projections are as follows:
• As part of “other payments” include arrears clearance, the authorities’ projections suggest the urgent
need to improve public expenditure and financial management as a key to raising the “quality” of
spending.
• By not reducing the domestic debt to GDP ratio aggressively, relief from debt service is limited,
which is an important source of fiscal room in the mission’s projections.
• While there are differences in the current expenditure profiles and the implications for debt service,
both sets of projections have a similar view about the desirability of increasing productive capital
expenditure.
The authorities and the staff, in close consultation, will continue to review these issues, weighing the
associated costs and benefits, in light of reforms in the public sector—including civil service reform,
measures to enhance public expenditure and financial management—and overall economic
developments.

- 15 -

21.
The authorities indicated that the main objective of the civil service reform will
be to enhance the delivery of services to the public. In this regard, the government is to
determine the appropriate size and structure of the civil service to deliver on this goal, and
design the transition from the current size and structure to the appropriate one. Until the
design and costing of this reform are completed, the authorities are not prepared to set an
explicit target for the wage bill over the medium term.
C. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies
22.
Monetary policy is mainly focused on reducing inflation to single digits over the
medium term. The authorities described their monetary policy framework as a “variant’’ of
an inflation targeting regime—in which they use open market operations to achieve the
desired growth of the monetary aggregates, consistent with the inflation objective. In an
environment with strong foreign exchange inflows, the Bank of Ghana is vigilant on the
challenges of managing such inflows in a manner that balances monetary expansion and
competitiveness. The Bank of Ghana’s instruments for liquidity management have been
refined with the introduction of central bank bills. This, together with improvements in
liquidity forecasting and the regular and candid economic assessments provided by the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), has strengthened credibility, which supports the
effectiveness of the policy-controlled interest rate in signaling the direction of monetary
policy. As such, market interest rates have begun to track the central bank’s prime rate more
closely.
23.
The staff expressed some concern about the secondary reserve requirement,
which is set at 35 percent of banks’ deposits and directs banks’ assets toward
government securities.7 The authorities argued that this instrument should not cause
concern because the banks currently hold excess reserves, secondary reserves are fully
remunerated, and there is limited opportunity to expand the banks’ loan portfolios at this
time. The staff acknowledged these factors, but observed that not all banks were holding
excess reserves, and noted that this requirement potentially inhibited economic efficiency
and prevented some banks from taking full advantage of market opportunities. The
authorities agreed with this assessment, but were concerned about their capacity to control
the potential short-term impact on liquidity of this reform. They also indicated that the
secondary reserve requirement would be reexamined when there was firmer control over
liquidity and low inflation. It is in this context also that the steps required for a full-fledged
inflation targeting regime will be assessed.

7

The primary reserve requirement is 9 percent of banks’ deposits. The secondary reserve requirement
was initially adopted in September 1996 (at 52 percent) as a temporary measure to mop-up liquidity
and address prudential concerns. It has been at 35 percent since April 1997. Banks must meet the
secondary reserve requirement by holding various government (and central bank) securities.

- 16 -

24.
The Financial Sector Strategic Plan continues to provide the medium-term
direction for financial sector reform. In this regard, more than 20 pieces of legislation
(bills)—intended to support the legal and regulatory framework, strengthen governance, and
increase access to, and reduce the cost of, credit—are in various stages of preparation. The
authorities feel that these measures will set the ground for an expansion in private sector
credit, which is a key element of the overall development strategy. At present, banks are
wary of extending credit to small and medium-size enterprises and consumers, given the lack
of information on the creditworthiness of borrowers, and weak in-house capacity to assess
risks.
25.
An important objective of Ghana’s financial policies is to increase competition
and efficiency in the banking sector. In this regard, the licensing of two well-capitalized
foreign banks, the raising of the capital requirements, and the introduction of real-time gross
settlement and central security depository systems are steps in the right direction.
26.
The authorities indicated that the financial sector is generally sound. However,
the operations of the Ghana Commercial Bank (GCB)—the largest commercial bank with
about 20 percent of the sector’s financial assets—may need further strengthening. The staff
pointed out that GCB’s exposure to TOR is a source of concern. Although the petroleum
sector deregulation will reduce TOR’s financing needs henceforth, the current stock of
TOR’s debt to GCB must be reduced in a timely manner.
D. External Policies
27.
Ghana remains committed to maintaining a managed floating exchange rate
regime, with no preannounced path for the exchange rate. Under this regime,
intervention in the foreign exchange market aims only to smooth short-term exchange rate
fluctuations and achieve the targeted level of international reserves, a key program objective.
In the past, the authorities took advantage of strong inflows by accumulating reserves at a
faster pace when the opportunity presented itself. The staff pointed out that while the build
up of international reserves has provided a larger cushion against shocks, a result has been
the relative stability of the nominal exchange rate (Figure 2). A slower pace of reserve
accumulation would have led to some appreciation that would have further dampened
inflation. Nevertheless, given the overall good progress on dis-inflation, the staff concurred
with the authorities’ accelerated reserve accumulation.
28.
In the authorities’ view, the current exchange rate regime has served Ghana
well, and the level of the exchange rate is appropriate. Gross international reserves are at
a record-high level, the exchange rate of the cedi and Ghana’s price competitiveness do not
appear to be under any pressure, and nontraditional exports have continued to expand
strongly. The real effective exchange rate depreciated by about 50 percent in late 1999,
reaching a low in mid-2000. Since then, it has remained relatively stable, appreciating by

- 17 -

only 11 percent over the five-year period. Also, according to the World Economic Forum’s
growth competitiveness index, Ghana is well placed among countries in the region.8
29.
There was some discussion concerning the surrender requirement for foreign
exchange and the reasons for the delay in implementing a computerized real-time foreign
exchange trading system. The central bank is unwilling to abolish the surrender requirement
(which applies to a limited number of enterprises) for the time being, judging that the release
of foreign exchange into the market by a small number of enterprises that have significant
foreign exchange earnings would introduce foreign exchange market volatility. To enhance
the effective functioning and deepen the interbank foreign exchange market, the staff urged
the authorities to continue with the development of a computerized real-time foreign
exchange trading system. The introduction of this system has been delayed out of concern
over the institutional capacity of both market participants and the central bank to operate the
system effectively and without undue risk to exchange rate stability.
30.
Expanding access to regional and global markets is an important policy goal
enunciated in the government’s National Trade Policy launched in December 2004. The
authorities believe that such expansion would bolster domestic competition, encourage
export growth, and accelerate the transfer of technology. The staff agrees with the main
elements of the National Trade Policy but expressed some uneasiness about the potential
conflict in the focus on both export promotion and import substitution. However, the
authorities assured the staff that the intention is to foster domestic competition—not
protection—through multilateral trade liberalization, create a level playing field for both
imports and exports, and protect consumers and producers (including intellectual property
rights). In particular, the government has ruled out the use of high tariffs to protect domestic
industries, noting that experience in most developing countries indicates that such policies do
not work.
31.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the desirability of continued reliance on
external financing on concessional terms for Ghana’s development efforts. However,
they considered that accessing international capital markets would send a positive signal to
potential investors and thereby increase foreign direct investment. In this regard, the
authorities pointed out that several international investment banks were ready to assist Ghana
and that the government would wish to capitalize on Ghana’s B+ sovereign rating. They
argued that eventual access to the international capital markets would (i) supplement
available external financial assistance from traditional official sources and development
partners; (ii) submit the whole economy to more vigorous market discipline; (iii) increase
growth and employment generating potential investment; and (iv) establish a market

8

This index takes account of both quantitative and survey data (on trade, governance, corruption,
infrastructure, and technology) in assessing competitiveness. For sub-Saharan Africa, Ghana ranks
only behind South Africa, Botswana, Mauritius, and Namibia.

- 18 -

benchmark and a signal for Ghanaian corporates and investors. This, the authorities
observed, would lay the groundwork for Ghana to graduate from the PRGF arrangement.
32.
The staff, consistent with recent ICM recommendations following a technical
assistance mission, reiterated that Ghana should first exhaust current avenues for
concessional borrowing. Furthermore, efforts should be made to strengthen its debtmanagement capacity to design and assess loan proposals; and establish a longer track record
of good macroeconomic performance after reaching the enhanced HIPC Initiative completion
point to obtain better financing terms that would not jeopardize debt sustainability. The
authorities undertook to observe the zero ceiling on nonconcessional debt but requested the
Fund’s future reconsideration of this conditionality, which, they suggested, had been needed
under economic circumstances vastly different from those under which the economy now
operates.
E. Structural Reforms
33.
The GPRS update is being refocused to highlight the importance of creating
conditions for the private sector to lead economic growth. In this regard, priority is being
accorded to financial sector development and enhancing the performance of public sector
activities through the reform of the civil service and state-owned enterprises.
34.
The discussions centered on the motivation, objectives, and action plan for civil
service reform. The government explained that this reform had been elusive in the
past─because of a lack of ownership─but that current efforts are being supported at the
highest level. The authorities stressed the need to form a “professional” civil service. While
they do not perceive Ghana as being “over administered,” they recognize that productivity is
low and service delivery is poor. The staff encouraged the government to proceed
expeditiously, once a comprehensive strategy is developed by midyear.
35.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) account for a sizable share of economic activity,
and the government recognizes that enhancing their performance will have positive
macroeconomic implications. The staff reviewed the operations of several SOEs and found
a lack of comprehensive and timely information for most of them.9 The authorities are aware
of the need to address this situation and agreed to undertake a number of actions, including
developing the necessary capacity to monitor the financial and operating performance of all
SOEs and ensuring that commercially oriented entities maintain or adopt pricing policies that
reflect full cost recovery. It was agreed that the authorities should strengthen a monitoring

9

Recent Fund staff analysis (www.imf.org) suggests that extending the fiscal coverage to include
SOEs would worsen the public debt burden but the extent is uncertain because of data limitations.
Available preliminary details on the financial performance of a few SOEs are provided in an
attachment to the Statistical Appendix accompanying this report.

- 19 -

unit in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning before developing meaningful
quantitative indicators to track performance.
36.
Ghana’s provision of data to the Fund is adequate for program monitoring and
surveillance purposes. However, the quality and timeliness of the data need to be improved
and the Fund has been providing Ghana with technical assistance toward that end. Further
improvement in economic statistics would mainly involve building the capacity of Ghana’s
Statistical Service, for which adequate budgetary provision would be required. Given the
importance of statistics, the staff encouraged the authorities to take the necessary steps to
finance this activity. In addition, Ghana should complete the process for participation in the
GDDS, as a framework for the needed improvements.
IV. MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS AND RISKS
37.
With the broad policy framework sketched above, Ghana’s macroeconomic
prospects over the medium term appear promising. Growth is projected to continue at the
current relatively high rate, as macroeconomic stability becomes more entrenched with fiscal
sustainability, inflation declines further, and the government perseveres with structural
reform (Table 17). Annual growth of about 6 percent is projected under the medium-term
baseline scenario (Table 18), supported by continued strong private-sector investment, and
the concentration of public investment on vital infrastructure. After an initial rise in 2005
because of the deregulation of the prices of petroleum products, headline inflation is
expected to decline significantly over the medium term to about 6 percent in 2008.
38.
The external current account deficit (after official grants) is projected to widen
to about 5 percent of GDP a year over the medium term. This partly reflects higher
payments for oil imports and the increases in imports of capital and intermediate goods
associated with higher levels of investment (Table 19). Gross international reserves are to
rise gradually to the equivalent of 4.1 months of imports, providing a larger cushion for
shocks. The authorities pointed out that even if Ghana received the expected amount of
foreign assistance included in this baseline scenario, it would still be unable to achieve all the
MDGs. They argued that for a more pronounced impact on poverty, real GDP growth would
have to be much faster, at about 8–10 percent a year. Hence, they saw an urgent need to scale
up the resources available to tackle the impediments to faster economic growth.
39.
A risk to this scenario is a further increase in world oil prices that may retard
growth, lead to a larger external current account deficit, and delay the achievement of
single-digit inflation. Moreover, while the current level of gross international reserves is
more than twice the value of a year’s worth of oil imports, a drawdown will reduce the
cushion that exists to safeguard stability. The authorities indicated that, indeed, higher world
prices for oil posed the most important risk and, coupled with a deterioration in commodity
prices, could undermine Ghana’s recent macroeconomic gains. In addition, diversification of
the export base would help reduce the country’s vulnerability, and improved productivity in
agriculture would contribute significantly to poverty alleviation.

- 20 -

40.
The staff indicated that further fiscal slippages would also endanger the
established macroeconomic stability. In this regard, the staff urged the authorities to be
vigilant and to strengthen fiscal discipline over the medium term.
41.
Debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative has led to an improvement in
Ghana’s debt service indicators, which are projected to remain at manageable levels
(Table 19). An updated debt sustainability analysis shows that Ghana’s external and public
debt is sustainable over the projection period (Figures 3 and 4). Although debt will gradually
build up by approximately US$350 million a year, new loans are expected to be on
concessional terms. A sensitivity analyses shows that Ghana’s external debt sustainability
would be robust to most shocks that are not persistent, such as a temporary decline in the rate
of growth or low cocoa prices. However, a temporary reduction in grants would lead to a
sharp increase in the net present value of the debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium term. Thus,
Ghana’s long-term debt sustainability could be jeopardized by a sustained deterioration in
key economic variables, and most importantly, by a significant reduction in grants as a
source of financing.
V. PROGRAM FOR 2005
42.
It is within the above medium-term framework that the authorities developed
their program for 2005. The program—detailed in the associated Memorandum of
Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP; see www.imf.org)—focuses on further
consolidating Ghana’s gains in macroeconomic stability and intensifying structural reform in
key areas. The macroeconomic objectives are to maintain real GDP growth at 5.8 percent,
contain inflation at about 14 percent (inclusive of the impact of petroleum price adjustment)
by year end, and build international reserves to about four months of projected imports of
goods and services. Policy measures will be consistent with these objectives. In particular,
•

fiscal policy will aim to achieve the targeted reduction in the ratio of domestic debt to
GDP (11½ percent by year-end);

•

monetary policy will aim to contain the expansion of reserve money and broad money at
about 18 and 23 percent, respectively, consistent with achieving the inflation and
international reserves targets;

•

structural reforms will aim to enhance the conditions for private sector development and
deepening financial intermediation; and

•

economic governance will be strengthened through reform of the civil service and stateowned enterprises.

43.
The 2005 budget targets a sharp increase in the domestic primary surplus to
about 2½ percent of GDP, consistent with a net domestic repayment that would yield
the targeted reduction in the ratio of net domestic debt to GDP. Total revenue is
expected to rise ½ percentage point of GDP to 30½ percent, mainly on account of higher
indirect taxes on imports of goods and petroleum (driven mainly by administrative
improvements), and the full-year impact of the health levy introduced in 2004. This increase

- 21 -

helps offset both a decline of grants (by about ½ percent of GDP), and a reduction of
corporate income taxes (to spur investment) and an increase in the personal income tax
threshold (to help reduce the tax burden facing low-income earners).10 Total expenditure will
decline by 1½ percentage points of GDP to below 32 percent, mainly on account of lower
domestic debt service and outlays for goods and services, and the elimination of TOR
subsidies. These expenditure cuts amount to about 2¾ percentage points of GDP, and more
than offset a slight increase in capital and poverty-related spending, and measures to cushion
the impact of the higher petroleum prices on vulnerable households. The latter includes
increased grants for education and health services, expanded rural electrification, and
extended public transportation to less developed areas.
44.
The budget also calls for an increase in the wages of government employees. The
wage bill is projected to rise to 9.1 percent of GDP—including 0.2 percent of GDP in
payments that were due in 2004 but paid this year—compared with 8.7 percent last year. The
authorities are mindful of the slippage in wages that occurred in 2004 and the program,
therefore, includes a limit on total wages and salaries (inclusive of all allowances) in 2005
that will be monitored quarterly (quantitative performance criteria are detailed in Table I.1 of
the MEFP). Also, the government is to create comprehensive and computerized personnel
and payroll databases that cover all employees of the government and subvented agencies (a
structural performance criterion, which is detailed in Table I.2 of the MEFP).
45.
The goal of the central bank will continue to be the reduction of inflation. By
maintaining a firm monetary policy, the central bank should be able to deliver on its inflation
objective, even in an environment of high oil prices. Combined with ongoing fiscal
consolidation, the envisaged expansion of broad money should also allow for a further
expansion in bank credit to the private sector.
46.
In the area of structural policies, the program heightens the focus on reforming
SOEs and the civil service, and strengthening the financial sector to enhance
intermediation. As a start, the program includes measures to enhance the monitoring of
SOEs’ financial and operating performance, increase their accountability, and press them to
adopt pricing policies (where appropriate) that recover costs in full.11 Cabinet is to approve
the final plan for the civil service reform by year’s end (a structural performance criterion),
and the plan’s implementation is slated to begin in January 2006. With regard to the financial

10

The program no longer includes an adjuster for program loans and grants since the harmonization
of donor flows through the Multi-Donor Support Group is making these inflows, which are
conservatively estimated more predictable. Also, the TMU was amended to clarify that the mediumand long-term debt performance criterion does not apply to any obligations arising from the
settlement of a dispute between Ghana and a foreign investor in Ghana Telecom.
11

The staff will continue to review and monitor, in particular, the pricing of petroleum products and
utilities to safeguard the budget. However, in light of petroleum sector deregulation and satisfactory
operation of utility pricing mechanisms, conditionality is no longer required in these areas.

- 22 -

sector, the program is designed to remove structural rigidities that impinge on the availability
and cost of credit while safeguarding stability.
47.
The authorities have requested an extension of the current PRGF arrangement
to October 31, 2006, so that the sixth and final review and all disbursements under the
arrangement could be completed. A prospective phasing of the remaining disbursements
under the arrangement is shown in Table 20.
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
48.
Ghana’s macroeconomic performance continued to be broadly satisfactory in
2004, with the achievement of most of the program objectives. This performance has
boosted business confidence further and resulted in increased foreign inflows. These inflows
included a substantial rise in private inward remittances, and combined with record-high
cocoa exports to provide strong support for aggregate demand.
49.
Nevertheless, fiscal slippages and insufficient vigilance led to the nonobservance
of three quantitative and one structural performance criteria. The authorities have since
reviewed the factors that contributed to their nonobservance, and have put measures in place
to ensure that they achieve the original program objectives. These measures include (i) a
ceiling on total public sector wages and salaries (a performance criterion), (ii) the creation of
comprehensive and computerized public-sector personnel and payroll databases (a structural
performance criterion), and (iii) the establishment of an independent body to oversee the
petroleum product pricing mechanism as a prior action for Executive Board consideration of
the third review under the PRGF arrangement.
50.
The near-term outlook remains favorable but macroeconomic stability is still
fragile. Economic prospects are still largely driven by the export of a few commodities. This
narrow economic base, together with high world oil prices, contributes to the vulnerability of
the economy. In this context, the staff agrees with the authorities’ preference to be cautious
about eliminating the requirement for foreign exchange surrender and banks’ secondary
reserves and to weigh in favor of stability.
51.
It is against this background that the 2005 program was designed. The program
aims at maintaining the pace of real GDP growth, containing inflation, and accumulating
further international reserves to strengthen the buffer against shocks. Also, the program
includes structural reforms to improve the environment for private sector-led growth, bolster
productivity, and strengthen competitiveness, especially of nontraditional exports. The main
challenge in the implementation of the program is the execution of the budget as envisaged
and avoidance of further fiscal slippages, which would undermine the market’s confidence in
government policies and have adverse macroeconomic effects, slow the realization of the
“fiscal dividend” in terms of a further decline in short-term interest rates, and crowd out the
flow of resources to the private sector.

- 23 -

52.
Increasing fiscal space is a high priority, and the staff endorses the strategy of
retaining the ratio of domestic debt to GDP as the fiscal anchor. The staff urges the
government to reduce this ratio further in a bold manner over the medium term, primarily by
cutting low-priority expenditures and reducing the wage bill relative to GDP. The staff
understands the need to establish a professional and productive civil service, although the
cost of doing so should be well contained and, indeed, should lead to prospective fiscal
savings. The demand for these savings to fund poverty-reducing and pro-growth activities is
very high.
53.
The inflation target is within reach, but vigilance is required. The credibility of
the Bank of Ghana has recently been bolstered, as refinements to it instruments have
increased the efficacy of monetary policy. However, a firm stance will be needed to avoid an
upward shift of inflation in light of high world oil prices and high foreign exchange inflows.
54.
The staff notes that the managed floating exchange rate regime has served
Ghana well. A managed float continues to be an effective buffer against shocks. As such, the
authorities should move ahead with measures to increase the depth and effective functioning
of the interbank foreign exchange market.
55.
The intensification of structural reform in key areas will help support the
relatively robust pace of growth. The government’s commitment to follow through with
petroleum sector deregulation is welcome. In this regard, it will be critical to ensure the
automatic and independent adjustment of petroleum product prices and to avoid government
involvement. Enhancing financial intermediation will foster private sector activity, while
reform of the public enterprises should improve overall economic performance. Meanwhile,
civil service reform, once completed, should safeguard scarce resources and make certain
that public expenditure is not only transparent and accountable, but efficient and effective as
well.
56.
There is room to improve the quality and timeliness of economic data. In this
regard, the government should make the necessary budgetary provision to strengthen the
operation of the Ghana Statistical Service and hasten Ghana’s participation in the GDDS.
57.
The staff supports the authorities’ request for (i) waivers for the nonobservance
of three quantitative and one structural performance criteria, (ii) the completion of the
third review, and (iii) the extension of the current PRGF arrangement to October 31,
2006. This support is in view of the remedial actions taken to deal with the slippages in 2004,
and the strength of the authorities’ program for 2005.
58.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held in accordance with the
decision on consultation cycles approved on July 14, 2002.

- 24 -

Figure 1. Ghana: Interest Rate Developments, January 2002 - April 2005
(In percent)
40

35

30

25

20

15

Interbank weighted average
T-bills interest rate equivalent (91 days)
Bank of Ghana prime rate
Bank of Ghana bills, 28-day discount rate

10

Jan-02 May-02 Sep-02

Jan-03 May-03 Sep-03

Source: Ghanaian authorities.

Jan-04 May-04 Sep-04

Jan-05

- 25 -

Figure 2. Ghana: Exchange Rate Developments, January 1999 - March 2005
14,000
12,000

Cedis per U.S. dollar

Cedis per euro

10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

240
220

Real effective exchange rate index based on the overall CPI; 2000 =100 1/
Nominal effective exchange rate index; 2000 =100 1/

200

Terms of trade, goods; 2000=100 2/

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Sources: IMF, African Department and Information Notice System.
1/ An increase in the index denotes an appreciation.
2/ An increase in the index denotes an improvement in the terms of trade.

2004

2005

- 26 -

Figure 3. Ghana: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2004-23
(In percent)
50
45

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

40
35
30
25
20

Baseline

15

Low growth

10

Low grants
Low cocoa prices

5
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
180
160
140

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

120
100
80

Baseline

60

Low growth
Low grants

40

Low cocoa prices

20
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
12

Debt service-to-exports ratio
10
8
6
4

Baseline
Low growth
Low grants

2

Low cocoa prices
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: IMF staff projections and simulations.
Notes. In all three cases except the baseline, temporary shocks are applied to the period 2005-08, after
which all variables are assumed to revert to baseline values. In the low-growth and low-grants cases,
the real growth rate and foreign grant disbursement (in terms of GDP) during the shock period are
assumed to be 4 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively, which are one standard deviation below their
corresponding 10-year historical averages. In the case of low cocoa prices, the average cocoa price
during the shock period is assumed to be US$1,383 a metric ton (the average of 2000-04), which is
14.6 percent lower than the World Economic Outlook projected price.

- 27 -

Figure 4. Ghana: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-2023 1/
(In percent)

60
NPV of public debt-to-GDP ratio
50
40
30
Baseline

20

Low growth
Low grants

10

Low cocoa price
0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

NPV of public debt-to-revenue ratio 2/

200

150

100
Baseline
Low growth

50

Low grants
Low cocoa price

0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

25
Public debt service-to-revenue ratio 2/
20
Baseline
Low growth

15

Low grants
Low cocoa price

10

5

0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Source: IMF staff projections and simulations.
1/ Public sector debt is NPV of external public debt and central government net domestic debt.
In all cases except for baseline, temporary shocks are applied to the period of 2005-2008.
2/ Revenue including grants.

- 28 -

Table 1. Ghana: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004
Prog. 1/

2005
Proj.

Est.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)

National accounts and prices
Real GDP
Real GDP per capita
Nominal GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (annual average)
Consumer price index (end of period)

4.2
1.6
40.2
34.6
32.9
21.3

4.5
1.9
28.3
22.8
14.8
15.2

5.2
2.6
35.4
28.6
26.7
23.6

5.2
2.6
18.9
13.0
10.8
7.7

5.8
3.2
20.7
14.1
12.6
11.8

5.8
3.2
21.5
14.8
14.3
14.1

External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Nominal effective exchange rate (avg.)
Real effective exchange rate (avg.)
Cedis per U.S. dollar (avg.)
Cedis per U.S. dollar (end of period)

-3.6
2.6
-1.3
10.0
4.8
-24.0
0.6
7,179
7,322

10.2
-4.1
-2.1
-6.8
9.4
-11.7
-0.6
7,944
8,439

20.1
20.1
-6.8
6.9
14.8
-17.7
1.4
8,681
8,852

8.1
11.0
10.8
5.7
-7.0
…
…
…
…

12.7
31.9
14.5
13.9
-15.0
-10.1
-1.0
9,021
9,054

5.2
9.3
3.1
0.6
-6.1
…
…
…
…

Government budget
Domestic revenue (excluding grants)
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending

43.5
65.5
50.5
95.7

27.5
2.4
28.8
-38.7

56.2
49.3
34.4
97.8

32.3
17.5
15.1
22.3

38.2
39.7
27.2
67.2

25.9
16.4
12.5
23.0

Money and credit
Net domestic assets 2/
Credit to central government 2/
Credit to public enterprises 2/ 3/
Credit to the private sector 2/ 3/
Broad money (excluding foreign currency deposits)
Reserve money
Velocity (GDP/end-of-period broad money)
Treasury bill yield (in percent; end of period)

13.5
0.0
11.0
14.2
48.4
31.3
4.8
28.9

-15.6
30.7
-9.5
18.2
49.6
42.6
4.1
28.1

7.2
-8.2
11.2
16.4
40.9
33.4
4.0
18.1

2.4
11.4
-2.5
17.7
19.2
20.5
4.0
…

1.1
29.9
6.6
10.1
26.6
18.8
3.8
16.4

15.9
-0.1
1.9
22.1
23.1
18.0
3.8
…

Investment and saving
Gross investment
Private 4/
Central government
Gross national saving
Private 4/
Central government

26.6
13.8
12.8
21.3
18.2
3.1

19.7
13.6
6.1
20.2
17.6
2.6

22.9
14.0
8.9
24.6
18.4
6.2

23.1
13.8
9.3
23.5
15.7
7.8

27.9
15.5
12.4
25.2
14.4
10.8

29.6
17.1
12.5
25.6
13.7
11.9

Government budget
Total revenue
Grants
Total expenditure
Overall balance (excluding grants) 5/
Overall balance (including grants) 6/
Domestic primary balance
Divestiture receipts
Net domestic borrowing 7/
Net foreign financing 8/
Discrepancy/financing gap
NPV of total government debt 9/
Domestic debt (net) 10/
NPV of external debt outstanding 9/

18.1
6.9
32.7
-14.6
-9.0
4.8
0.0
2.3
5.5
2.3
95.4
20.9
74.5

18.0
3.1
26.1
-8.1
-6.8
2.4
0.0
4.7
0.9
1.1
88.0
23.9
64.1

20.8
4.7
28.8
-8.0
-4.4
2.3
0.6
0.6
3.3
-0.2
89.8
18.3
71.5

23.1
4.3
28.6
-5.5
-1.6
1.6
0.5
-1.1
2.6
-0.4
50.9
14.8
36.1

23.8
6.4
33.3
-9.5
-3.6
0.7
0.4
0.1
3.3
-0.1
50.5
15.2
35.3

24.6
5.8
31.9
-7.3
-2.6
2.6
0.4
-1.1
3.4
0.0
43.5
11.4
32.1

External sector
Current account balance 11/
NPV of external debt outstanding
(percent of exports of goods and services) 9/
(percent of government revenue) 9/
External debt service due, including to the Fund
(percent of exports of goods and services)
(percent of government revenue)

-5.3

0.5

1.7

0.3

-2.7

-4.0

161.4
452.4
8.5
18.9
34.1

157.4
363.6
7.8
18.4
37.1

175.7
351.0
5.9
14.5
23.2

93.5
160.5
6.3
14.1
18.8

89.6
148.9
6.4
16.2
21.2

92.3
132.5
4.7
13.5
15.4

Current account balance 11/
Overall balance of payments
Change in external arrears (decrease -)
Gross international reserves (end of period)
(in months of imports of goods and services)

-283
296
34
340
1.2

30
40
-61
632
1.9

127
506
0.0
1,427
3.2

24
-138
0.0
1,541
3.9

-236
-10
0.0
1,816
3.7

-417
-4
0.0
1,971
3.9

38,071
5,303
7,972

48,862
6,151
11,690

66,158
7,621
12,089

78,650
...
11,654

79,865
8,854
12,133

97,018
10,531
11,019

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)

Nominal GDP (billions of cedis)
(in million of U.S. dollars)
Domestic debt (net; billions of cedis) 10/

Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.
2/ In percent of broad money at the beginning of the period.
3/ Credit from deposit money banks to public enterprises and the private sector, respectively. The historical series
have been revised to ensure consistency with the new banking supervision reporting form introduced in July 2003,
which uses a residency rather than currency definition of foreign assets and liabilities.
4/ Including public enterprises.
5/ Before domestic arrears clearance.
6/ After domestic arrears clearance.
7/ Including "net savings due to inflation-indexed bonds."
8/ Including exceptional financing.
9/ Figures for 2003 and onwards are based on an updated DSA, with additional information received from
creditors and a reconciliation of external debt to end-2003.
10/ Excluding non-interest-bearing perpetual BoG revaluation stocks and bonds issued in 2004 for recapitalization
of BoG and TOR, and including deferred interest payment (cumulative) on inflation-indexed bonds.
11/ Including official grants.

- 29 -

Table 2: Ghana: Private Remittances and Other Foreign Exchange Flows, 2000-04
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Private remittances (net)
Private capital (net)
Official transfers (net)
Official capital (net)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

496
65
154
97

600
88
263
104

680
50
221
-115

801
75
393
86

1,287
332
544
52

Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

0

25
25
0
0
32
727

-17
6,479
3,621
16
1,049

0

23

0

-110

519
-344
1,433

...
...
...
...
...

0

75

0

-256

1,269
320
949

-994
793
-192

0

75

0

-197

-60
6,886
8,358
5
2,751

578
6,836
12,688
0
4,414

(In billions of cedis)

0

66

0

-141

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

410
1,456
...

...
...
...
...
...

0

75

0

-248

-594
1,259
...

57
70
19
0
31
313

...
...
...
...
...
...

65
49
0
0
34
626

227
88
31
8
31
320

...
...
...
...
...
...

##

0

75

0

100

212
95
0
0
36
625

##
95
##
##

255
122
45
15
30
300

780
## 1,253
7,069 ## 9,270
13,263 ## 18,187
5
0
4,339
5,466

0

58

0

-59

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

0

75

0

112

-1,167
440
...

299
124
32
0
38
614

534
9,136
18,994
0
6,123

0

27

40

186

-257
-1,838
1,056

End-December
Performance criterion
Adj.
Prog. Prog. 2/ Act.

-171 ## -1,101
-1,087 ##
548
733
521

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)

158
6,964
7,911
11
2,534

0

75

0

-262

522
1,511
-48

End-September
Benchmark
Adj.
Prog. Prog. 2/ Act.

(In billions of cedis)

End-June
Benchmark
Adj.
Prog. Prog. 2/ Act.

Sources: IMF Country Report No. 04/210; and Ghanaian authorities.
1/ Definitions of line items and terminology are elaborated in the technical memorandum of understanding (TMU) of IMF Country Report No. 04/210 is the source of all program data.
2/ After application of adjusters, as indicated in the TMU.
3/ Value at end of month indicated. Program targets adjusted for cumulative differences between actual and projected amounts of program support, public and publicly
guaranteed debt service paid, and divestiture receipts with an upside cap of US$75 million, as explained in the TMU. The actual data have also been adjusted to reflect the repayment
of inflation-indexed bonds (GGILBs), which the program had not earlier accounted for.
4/ Based on a fixed exchange rate of 9,012 cedis per US$1, the rate prevailing at end-March 2004.
5/ Value at end of month indicated. Program targets adjusted for cumulative differences between actual and projected amounts of program support, public and publicly
guaranteed debt service paid, and divestiture receipts with an upside cap of US$75 million, and for higher-than-programmed oil prices, with an upside cap of US$30 million, as explained in the TMU.
6/ Program targets adjusted for cumulative differences between actual and projected amounts of program support, public and publicly guaranteed debt service paid, and
divestiture receipts with a downside cap of -US$75 million, and for higher-than-programmed oil prices, with a downside cap of -US$30 million, as explained in the TMU.
7/ This performance criterion applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted by
Decision 12274-(00/123) of August 24, 2000, but also to commitments or contracted for which value has not been received, as specified in paragraph 15 of the TMU.
8/ The term "debt" has the meaning set forth in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted by Decision 12274-(00/123)
of August 24, 2000, as specified in paragraph 14 of the TMU.
9/ This is a continuous criterion. The TMU stipulates the precise program definition of payment arrears.
10/ Debt service to be paid by Ghana after projected 2004 HIPC relief.
11/ Average from beginning of 2004 to end of month indicated, as explained in the TMU.

41
33
9
0
32
192

0

Stock of external payment arrears (ceiling) 9/

Memorandum items:
External program support (loans and grants)
Paid public and publicly guaranteed debt service (after debt relief) 10/
Divestiture receipts
Of which : in foreign exchange
Average petroleum spot price (APSP in U.S. dollars/barrel) 11/
Petroleum subsidy (in billions of cedis)

23

Outstanding stock of external debt with original maturity of less than one year
owed or guaranteed by the government or the Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 8/

-626
6,180
3,686
22
1,049

0

0

Indicative benchmarks
Government domestic primary balance (floor)
Reserve money stock (ceiling)
Government revenue, excluding grants and divestiture proceeds (floor)
Stock of government road sector arrears (ceiling)
Poverty related expenditures (floor)

-119

-110

Net international reserves of the Bank of Ghana (floor) 6/
The contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt with
original maturity greater than or equal to one year by the government or the
Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 7/

23

711
-561
...

629
-644
1,389

Performance criteria
Net domestic financing of government (ceiling) 3/
Net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 4/ 5/
Stock of net domestic banking sector credit to TOR (ceiling)

End-March
Benchmark
Adj.
Prog. Prog. 2/ Act.

(Cumulative flows from beginning of calendar year 2004 to end of month indicated, unless otherwise indicated)

- 30 -

- 31 -

Table 4. Ghana: Balance of Payments, 2001-05
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)
2001

2002

2003

2004
Mar.

Exports f.o.b.
Cocoa beans and cocoa products
Gold
Timber and timber products
Others
Imports, f.o.b.
Non-oil
Oil
Trade balance
Services (net)
Of which : interest payments
Private transfers (net)
Current account balance,
excluding official transfers
Official transfers (net)
Of which: HIPC grants
Current account balance,
including official transfers
Capital account
Official capital (net)
Medium- and long-term loans
Inflows
Amortization
Private capital
Of which: divestiture receipts
Other capital and errors and omissions
Of which : change in net foreign assets of deposit money banks
: errors and omissions
Overall balance
Change in arrears
Financing
Debt deferral
Net international reserves (negative is increase)
Of which: Use of Fund credit
Disbursements (PRGF)
Repayments (PRGF)
Exceptional financing
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross international reserves
End of period (millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of imports of goods and services
Cocoa exports
Volume (in thousands of tons)
Price (in U.S. dollars per ton)
External debt service paid
In percent of exports of GNFS
In percent of government revenue
GDP (in U.S. dollars)
Sources: Bank of Ghana; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Cumulative from Janauary 2005.
2/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.

Prog. 2/

Est.

2005 1/
June
Sept.
Proj.

Dec.

1,867
381
618
169
699
-2,831
-2,314
-517
-964
-182

2,057
463
689
182
723
-2,714
-2,206
-508
-657
-214

2,471
818
830
174
649
-3,259
-2,696
-563
-788
-280

2,672
927
929
184
632
-3,617
-2,955
-662
-944
-304

2785
1071
840
212
662
-4297
-3522
-775
-1513
-554

634
150
231
56
196
-887
-721
-166
-254
-139

1,267
300
463
112
393
-1,890
-1,569
-321
-622
-278

1,876
425
694
168
589
-3,067
-2,321
-746
-1,192
-418

2,929
995
925
224
785
-4,696
-3,701
-995
-1,767
-557

-106
600

-124
680

-110
801

-124
875

-167
1287

-37
323

-75
646

-112
968

-150
1,291

-546
263

-190
221

-266
393

-372
396

-779
544

-70
102

-255
300

-641
546

-1,033
616

0

62

81

113

109

30

66

100

126

-283
192
104

30
-65
-115

127
161
86

24
43
-26

-236
384
52

32
96
8

45
161
-17

-95
334
68

-417
506
151

391
-288
88

195
-309
50

370
-284
75

319
-345
69

402
-350
332

72
-65
89

158
-175
178

319
-252
266

474
-323
355

0
387

0
75

25
218

15
-205

0
-159

0
-23

0
-47

0
-70

0
-93

-77

-18

-73

-140

-95

-6

-11

-17

-22

444
296
34
-330
150
-479

33
40
-61
21
-35
-158

102
506
0
-506
-35
-679

0
-138
0
134
-35
-100

24
-10
0
10
-35
-186

0
106
0
-106
0
-132

0
159
0
-159
-17
-217

0
169
0
-169
-17
-283

0
-4
0
4
-35
-130

1
67
-65
0
0

54
68
-14
214
0

53
74
-21
208
0

-5
39
-44
269
5

-5
39
-44
231
0

-11
0
-11
27
0

12
40
-28
76
0

2
40
-38
132
0

25
80
-55
169
0

-10.3
-5.3

-3.1
0.5

-3.5
1.7

-4.3
0.3

-8.8
-2.7

...
...

...
...

...
...

-9.8
-4.0

340
1.2

632
1.9

1,427
3.2

1,541
3.9

1,816
3.7

1,673
3.5

1,611
3.3

1,535
3.2

1,971
3.9

370
1,021

367
1,266

403
1,950

560
1,650

665
1,589

...
...

...
...

...
...

645
1,518

17.7
44.2

10.2
24.1

5.2
10.2

5.4
9.0

5.6
9.3

...
...

...
...

...
...

5.6
8.0

5,303.4 6,151.5 7,621.0 8,727.7 8,853.6

...

...

...

10,530.9

10,188
3,090
7,098

Broad money (M2+) 2/
Currency
Deposits 2/

2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.
Mar.
Proj.

2005
Jun.
Sept.
Proj.
Proj.

27,933
6,660
21,273

15,379
27,625
12,617
15,008
-12,246

12,554
1,350
16,860
28,077
12,492
15,585
-11,217

12,151
1,290
16,651
31,151
12,368
18,784
-14,501

16,308
1,709

25,850
23.1
18.0
23.5
17.8
2.9
3.8
2.40
3.06
2.75
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.3
45.6
1,114
…

27,176
6,459
20,717

14,060
27,196
12,742
14,454
-13,136

13,116
1,429

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
11,783
16,598
21,005
20,463
21,386
22,617
50.7
40.9
26.6
28.0
25.3
27.4
42.6
33.4
18.8
24.8
20.7
22.1
50.5
38.1
26.0
27.9
24.2
24.6
48.2
34.8
17.8
23.3
19.2
21.8
3.2
3.1
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.2
4.1
4.0
3.8
4.1
4.1
4.1
2.0
2.16
2.30
2.53
2.57
2.62
2.7
2.75
2.92
3.36
3.36
3.36
2.4
2.45
2.62
2.94
2.96
2.98
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
31.5
34.7
21.4
33.3
26.9
21.6
483
798
984
852
767
701
8,439
8,852
9,054
9,177
…
…

26,686
7,303
19,383

12,596
26,001
12,866
13,135
-13,405

14,090
1,556

32,959
8,704
24,254

21,174
6,338
14,836

10,599
17,784
7,433
10,351
-7,185

10,575
1,195

Dec.
Proj.

29,010
6,812
22,198

15,336
4,672
10,664

8,733
15,775
8,402
7,373
-7,043

6,604
783

(In billions of cedis, unless otherwise specified; end of period)

2002
Dec.

Sources: Table 6, Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ TOR debt swap moved 1,421 billion cedis from credit to public enterprises to government in December 2002.
2/ Including foreign currency deposits.
3/ Excluding foreign currency deposits.
4/ Including deposit money banks' foreign currency reserves with Bank of Ghana.
5/ Credit from deposit money banks to the private sector.

7,818
48.4
31.3
41.4
32.7
3.7
4.9
1.9
2.5
2.4
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.3
18.6
242
7,322

8,692
12,310
5,989
6,321
-3,618

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 1/
Claims on non-government 1/
Other items, net (assets +)

Memorandum items:
Broad money (M2) (in billions of cedis) 3/
Broad money (M2) 3/
Reserve money (RM)
Broad money (M2+) 2/
Reserve money (RM+) 4/
Velocity (GDP/end-of-period M2+)
Velocity (GDP/end-of-period M2)
Reserve money multiplier (M2/RM)
Reserve money multiplier (M2+/RM)
Reserve money multiplier (M2+/RM+)
Bank reserves-to-deposits ratio 3/
Foreign currency deposits to total deposits
Currency-to-deposits ratio 2/
Currency/M2+ ratio
Credit to the private sector 5/
Net international reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
Exchange rate (cedis per U.S. dollar, e.o.p.)

1,496
204

Net foreign assets
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

Monetary survey

2001
Dec.

Table 5. Ghana: Monetary Survey, 2001-05

- 32 -

-688
10,333
3,913
6,420
1,825
4,547
-4,553
7,075

Net claims on Bank of Ghana 1/
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 3/
Claims on nongovernment 3/
Public enterprises (PE) 3/
Private sector
Other items, net (assets +) 2/

Total deposits

10,625

375
12,637
5,535
7,102
965
5,980
-4,718

1,056

1,275
151

5,767
4,672
1,056
273
783
40

438
2,867
-375
271
-2,325

5,329
631

2002
Dec.

14,740

4,412
15,400
4,907
10,493
2,148
8,052
-8,317

1,259

1,985
224

7,693
6,338
1,259
342
917
96

-897
2,525
-4,412
-142
1,132

8,590
970

2003
Dec.

19,247

7,127
19,657
6,338
13,319
2,902
9,778
-12,120

1,697

2,885
240

9,136
7,303
1,697
371
1,327
135

-2,783
6,528
-7,127
-184
-2,000

11,919
1,316

2004
Dec.

20,570

7,934
20,032
6,178
13,854
2,902
10,765
-11,127

1,480

2,251
245

8,087
6,459
1,480
307
1,173
147

-2,778
6,564
-7,934
600
-2,009

10,865
1,184

Mar.
Proj.

21,212

8,406
20,461
6,053
14,408
2,902
11,150
-11,579

1,592

2,332
251

8,313
6,660
1,592
291
1,301
61

-1,908
6,564
-8,406
600
-667

10,222
1,099

22,137

8,379
20,913
5,928
14,985
2,902
11,727
-11,330

1,760

2,415
256

8,633
6,812
1,760
277
1,483
61

-1,102
6,564
-8,379
600
113

9,736
1,033

2005
Jun.
Sept.
Proj.
Proj.

Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Starting January 2003, includes holding of T-bills issued for monetary liquidity purposes, and starting September 2004, BOG bills.
2/ A large part of the deposit money banks' net foreign assets for 1998-2003 were reclassified as net domestic assets to ensure consistency
with the new banking supervision reporting form introduced in July 2003, which uses a residency rather than currency definition of
net foreign assets.
3/ TOR debt swap moved 1,421 billion cedis from credit to public enterprises to government in December 2002.

1,011

Reserves

Net foreign assets 2/
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

972
133

4,044
3,090
932
195
736
23

Reserve money (RM)
Currency outside banks
Bank reserves
Cash
Deposits
Nonbank deposits

Deposit money banks

3,521
2,076
787
-100
758

524
72

Net domestic assets
Claims on government (net)
Claims on deposit money banks 1/
Claims on rest of the economy
Other items, net (assets +)

Net foreign assets
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

Bank of Ghana

2001
Dec.

(In billions of cedis, unless otherwise specified; end of period)

Table 6. Ghana: Bank of Ghana and Deposit Money Banks, 2001-05

24,193

8,301
23,667
5,484
18,184
3,310
14,234
-12,285

2,011

2,499
262

10,777
8,704
2,011
396
1,615
61

-3,033
6,884
-8,301
600
-2,216

13,810
1,447

Dec.
Proj.

- 33 -

- 34 -

Table 7. Ghana: Summary of Central Government Budgetary Operations and Financing, 2001-05 1/
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prog.

Est.

Q1
Proj.

Q2
Proj.

2005
Q3
Proj.

Q4
Proj.

Year
Proj.

(In billions of cedis)
Total revenue and grants
Revenue 2/ 3/
Grants

9,532
6,904
2,627

10,333
8,800
1,533

16,862
13,743
3,119

21,537
18,187
3,350

24,073
18,994
5,080

6,337
5,061
1,276

6,973
5,586
1,388

8,295
6,240
2,055

7,973
7,024
949

29,578
23,911
5,667

12,451
7,578
4,593
2,317
0
2,276
2,985
4,873
1,341
3,532

12,753
9,763
6,763
4,142
0
2,621
3,001
2,990
1,338
1,652

19,035
13,123
9,030
5,567
156
3,308
4,092
5,912
3,015
2,897

22,505
15,251
11,826
6,632
1,125
4,069
3,425
7,254
4,658
2,596

26,584
16,696
13,223
6,988
1,772
4,463
3,473
9,888
5,077
4,812

6,613
4,086
3,209
1,676
350
1,183
877
2,527
1,155
1,373

7,091
4,163
3,285
1,922
0
1,363
878
2,928
1,321
1,606

8,533
5,177
4,203
2,700
0
1,503
975
3,355
1,481
1,874

8,713
5,357
4,342
2,384
0
1,957
1,015
3,356
2,323
1,033

30,950
18,783
15,039
8,683
350
6,005
3,745
12,166
6,281
5,886

-513
...

-892
...

-711
...

-285
...

-326
...

-122
-195

-125
-195

-130
-195

-21
-195

-397
-780

-3,433

-3,313

-2,884

-1,253

-2,836

-594

-437

-563

-956

-2,549

868

550

-139

-322

-104

0

0

0

0

0

2,565
12
1,428
659
0
...
...
467

2,762
5
-781
1,241
197
197
...
2,100

3,023
421
398
1,805
481
481
...
-82

1,575
408
-436
2,474
230
230
...
-1,101

2,941
286
1,546
1,065
-349
301
-650
393

594
97
396
390
-169
15
-185
-119

437
97
53
390
15
15
0
-118

563
97
1,195
390
18
18
0
-1,137

956
97
73
390
18
18
0
378

2,549
388
1,716
1,559
-118
67
-185
-996

...
1,730
1,838
7,972
38,071

759
2,330
1,196
11,690
48,862

1,163
4,279
1,510
12,089
66,158

1,979
5,465
1,253
11,654
78,650

2,117
6,123
534
12,133
79,865

505
1,713
660
11,844
97,018

505
1,836
939
11,741
97,018

505
2,210
510
10,623
97,018

505
2,256
423
11,019
97,018

2,019
8,014
2,532
11,019
97,018

Total revenue and grants
Revenue 2/, 3/
Grants

25.0
18.1
6.9

21.1
18.0
3.1

25.5
20.8
4.7

27.4
23.1
4.3

30.1
23.8
6.4

6.5
5.2
1.3

7.2
5.8
1.4

8.5
6.4
2.1

8.2
7.2
1.0

30.5
24.6
5.8

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Noninterest
Wages and salaries 4/
TOR subsidy 5/
Other
Interest
Capital expenditure (total)
Capital expenditure (domestic)
Capital expenditure (foreign)

32.7
19.9
12.1
6.1
0.0
6.0
7.8
12.8
3.5
9.3

26.1
20.0
13.8
8.5
0.0
5.4
6.1
6.1
2.7
3.4

28.8
19.8
13.6
8.4
0.2
5.0
6.2
8.9
4.6
4.4

28.6
19.4
15.0
8.4
1.4
5.2
4.4
9.2
5.9
3.3

33.3
20.9
16.6
8.7
2.2
5.6
4.3
12.4
6.4
6.0

6.8
4.2
3.3
1.7
0.4
1.2
0.9
2.6
1.2
1.4

7.3
4.3
3.4
2.0
0.0
1.4
0.9
3.0
1.4
1.7

8.8
5.3
4.3
2.8
0.0
1.5
1.0
3.5
1.5
1.9

9.0
5.5
4.5
2.5
0.0
2.0
1.0
3.5
2.4
1.1

31.9
19.4
15.5
8.9
0.4
6.2
3.9
12.5
6.5
6.1

Arrears clearance and VAT refunds
Payments in 2005 due to previous years' commitments 6/

-1.3
…

-1.8
…

-1.1
…

-0.4
…

-0.4
…

-0.1
-0.2

-0.1
-0.2

-0.1
-0.2

0.0
-0.2

-0.4
-0.8

Overall balance

-2.6

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Noninterest
Wages and salaries 4/
TOR subsidy 5/
Other
Interest
Capital expenditure (total)
Capital expenditure (domestic)
Capital expenditure (foreign)
Arrears clearance and value-added tax refunds
Payments in 2005 due to previous years' commitments 6/
Overall balance
Discrepancy between above- and below-line data
Total financing
Divestiture receipts
Foreign (net)
Exceptional financing
Net savings due to inflation indexed bonds
Deferred interest payment
Redemption of deferred interest payment
Domestic (net)
Memorandum items:
Total enhanced HIPC relief
Total poverty spending (GPRS definition)
Domestic primary balance 7/
Stock of domestic debt (net) 8/
GDP at current market prices

(In percent of GDP)

-9.0

-6.8

-4.4

-1.6

-3.6

-0.6

-0.5

-0.6

-1.0

Discrepancy between above- and below-line data

2.3

1.1

-0.2

-0.4

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total financing
Divestiture receipts
Foreign (net)
Exceptional financing
Net savings due to inflation-indexed bonds
Domestic (net)

6.7
0.0
3.8
1.7
0.0
1.2

5.7
0.0
-1.6
2.5
0.4
4.3

4.6
0.6
0.6
2.7
0.7
-0.1

2.0
0.5
-0.6
3.1
0.3
-1.4

3.7
0.4
1.9
1.3
-0.4
0.5

0.6
0.1
0.4
0.4
-0.2
-0.1

0.5
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
-0.1

0.6
0.1
1.2
0.4
0.0
-1.2

1.0
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.4

2.6
0.4
1.8
1.6
-0.1
-1.0

...
4.5
4.8
20.9

1.6
4.8
2.4
23.9

1.8
6.5
2.3
18.3

2.5
6.9
1.6
14.8

2.7
7.7
0.7
15.2

0.5
1.8
0.7
12.2

0.5
1.9
1.0
12.1

0.5
2.3
0.5
10.9

0.5
2.3
0.4
11.4

2.1
8.3
2.6
11.4

Memorandum items:
Total enhanced HIPC relief
Total poverty spending (GPRS definition)
Domestic primary balance 7/
Stock of domestic debt (net) 8/
Sources: Tables 8-10.

1/ Above-the-line data for domestic recurrent and capital expenditure are presented on a cash basis (payment vouchers); arrears are not reflected in line expenditures.
Program data refer to IMF Country Report No. 04/210.
2/ For 2005, includes possible upward revision to income tax (109 billion cedis), cocoa export tax (100 billion cedis), and nontax (92 billion cedis).
3/ Prior to 2002, nontax revenue included positive balances on committed accounts outside the consolidated fund.
4/ From 2002 onward, subvented agency expenditure for wages and salaries and goods and services are subsumed under their respective line items.
5/ Assumes that required subsidies for petroleum products were eliminated in February 2005 following the adoption of an automatic pricing adjustment mechanism.
For 2005, reflects estimated recoupment of profits by TOR from petroleum price adjustment (150 billion cedis).
6/ Payments associated with wages for Ghana Universal Salary Structure, additional duty hourly allowances, and subvented agencies, pension arrears, and
outstanding TOR underrecovery.
7/ Defined as total revenue plus VAT refunds (negative) and discrepancy, less noninterest and domestic capital expenditure.
8/ Excluding non-interest-bearing perpetual BoG revaluation stocks, and bonds issued in 2004 for recapitalization of BoG and TOR, including deferred interest
payment (cumulative) on inflation-indexed bonds, and less government deposits.
9/ Unadjusted for government deposits.

- 35 -

Table 8. Ghana: Central Government Revenues, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prog. 1/

Est.

2005
Proj.

(In billions of cedis)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Company tax
Personal
Self-employed
Other direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Sales tax/value-added tax (VAT) on domestic goods
Sales tax/VAT on imports
Petroleum
Other indirect taxes
Trade taxes
Import duties
Cocoa export duty
Nontax revenue 2/
Fees, charges, and dividends
Other nontax revenue
2004 revenue measure
Health levy (2.5 percent of value-added and Social Security
and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) contributions)
Grants
Project grants
Program grants
HIPC assistance (multilateral)

9,532
6,904
6,557
2,124
967
677
114
366
2,865
509
1,455
647
254
1,568
1,269
300
348
348
0
...
...

10,333
8,800
8,542
2,790
1,162
929
173
527
3,757
729
1,598
1,080
350
1,995
1,669
326
258
258
0
...
...

16,862
13,743
13,346
4,057
1,632
1,535
234
657
6,128
1,023
2,308
2,323
474
3,160
2,391
769
397
363
34
...
...

21,537
18,187
16,761
4,918
2,048
1,801
274
796
7,938
1,277
3,006
3,031
623
3,905
2,866
1,039
1,098
608
490
328
328

24,073
18,994
17,341
5,287
2,340
1,908
286
753
8,245
1,460
3,051
3,119
615
3,809
2,878
931
1,194
795
399
459
459

29,578
23,911
20,973
5,849
2,425
2,217
372
835
10,476
1,800
3,994
3,920
762
4,648
3,768
880
1,599
1,416
183
1,339
1,339

2,627
1,566
1,061
0

1,533
467
558
508

3,119
1,037
1,267
815

3,350
1,034
1,292
1,025

5,080
2,265
1,762
1,053

5,667
2,887
1,619
1,161

30.1
23.8
21.7
6.6
2.9
2.4
0.4
0.9
10.3
1.8
3.8
3.9
0.8
4.8
3.6
1.2
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.6
6.4
2.8
2.2
1.3

30.5
24.6
21.6
6.0
2.5
2.3
0.4
0.9
10.8
1.9
4.1
4.0
0.8
4.8
3.9
0.9
1.6
1.5
0.2
1.4
1.4
5.8
3.0
1.7
1.2

…

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
25.0
21.1
25.5
Total revenue
18.1
18.0
20.8
Tax revenue
17.2
17.5
20.2
Direct taxes
5.6
5.7
6.1
Company tax
2.5
2.4
2.5
Personal
1.8
1.9
2.3
Self-employed
0.3
0.4
0.4
Other direct taxes
1.0
1.1
1.0
Indirect taxes
7.5
7.7
9.3
Sales tax/VAT on domestic goods
1.3
1.5
1.5
Sales tax/VAT on imports
3.8
3.3
3.5
Petroleum
1.7
2.2
3.5
Other indirect taxes
0.7
0.7
0.7
Trade taxes
4.1
4.1
4.8
Import duties
3.3
3.4
3.6
Cocoa export duty
0.8
0.7
1.2
Nontax revenue 2/
0.9
0.5
0.6
Fees, charges, and dividends
0.9
0.5
0.5
Other nontax revenue
0.0
0.0
0.1
2004 revenue measure
…
…
…
Health levy (2.5 percent of value-added and SSNIT contributions)
…
…
…
Grants
6.9
3.1
4.7
Project grants
4.1
1.0
1.6
Program grants
2.8
1.1
1.9
HIPC assistance (multilateral)
0.0
1.0
1.2
Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.
2/ Prior to 2002, nontax revenue included positive balances on committed accounts outside the consolidated fund.

27.4
23.1
21.3
6.3
2.6
2.3
0.3
1.0
10.1
1.6
3.8
3.9
0.8
5.0
3.6
1.3
1.4
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.4
4.3
1.3
1.6
1.3

- 36 -

Table 9. Ghana: Central Government Expenditures, 2001-05 1/
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prog. 2/

Est.

2005
Proj.

(In billions of cedis)
Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Noninterest
Wages and salaries 3/
Goods and services 3/
General goods and services
Strategic oil reserves
Subventions 3/
Transfers
Pensions
Gratuities
Social security
National Health Insurance Fund
Other transfers 4/
Utility subsidy 5/
TOR subsidy
Interest
Domestic (due)
External (due) 6/
Capital expenditure (total)
Capital expenditure (domestic)
Cash expenditure
Statutory funds
HIPC-financed expenditure
Capital expenditure (foreign)

12,451
7,578
4,593
2,317
703
703
...
788
785
227
67
234
...
0
257
0
2,985
2,310
675
4,873
1,341
417
924
...
3,532

12,753
9,763
6,763
4,142
1,452
1,452
...
0
1,168
271
114
303
...
0
480
0
3,001
2,212
789
2,990
1,338
300
863
175
1,652

19,035
13,123
9,030
5,567
2,063
2,063
...
0
1,400
359
201
412
...
0
273
156
4,092
3,268
824
5,912
3,015
422
1,871
722
2,897

22,505
15,251
11,826
6,632
2,434
2,434
...
0
2,760
509
209
485
25
0
408
1,125
3,425
2,453
972
7,254
4,658
924
2,345
1,388
2,596

26,584
16,696
13,223
6,988
2,737
2,737
...
0
3,499
515
269
495
0
12
435
1,772
3,473
2,545
927
9,888
5,077
927
2,280
1,870
4,812

30,950
18,783
15,039
8,683
2,728
2,583
145
0
3,628
614
356
619
1,339
250
100
350
3,745
2,727
1,018
12,166
6,281
1,526
3,140
1,615
5,886

Road arrears (clearance) 7/
Other domestic payment arrears (clearance)
Of which : to statutory funds
VAT refunds
Payments in 2005 due to previous years' commitments 8/

-44
-442
-235
-27
...

-208
-630
-247
-55
...

-204
-459
-97
-48
...

-30
-127
-97
-129
...

-71
-199
-97
-55
...

-100
-237
-97
-60
-780

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Noninterest
Wages and salaries 3/
Goods and services 3/
General goods and services
Strategic oil reserves
Subventions 3/
Transfers
Pensions
Gratuities
Social security
National Health Insurance Fund
Other transfers 4/
Utility subsidy 5/
TOR subsidy
Interest
Domestic (due)
External (due) 6/
Capital expenditure (total)
Capital expenditure (domestic)
Cash expenditure
Statutory funds
HIPC-financed expenditure
Capital expenditure (foreign)

32.7
19.9
12.1
6.1
1.8
1.8
...
2.1
2.1
0.6
0.2
0.6
...
0.0
0.7
0.0
7.8
6.1
1.8
12.8
3.5
1.1
2.4
…
9.3

26.1
20.0
13.8
8.5
3.0
3.0
...
0.0
2.4
0.6
0.2
0.6
...
0.0
1.0
0.0
6.1
4.5
1.6
6.1
2.7
0.6
1.8
0.4
3.4

28.8
19.8
13.6
8.4
3.1
3.1
...
0.0
2.1
0.5
0.3
0.6
...
0.0
0.4
0.2
6.2
4.9
1.2
8.9
4.6
0.6
2.8
1.1
4.4

28.6
19.4
15.0
8.4
3.1
3.1
...
0.0
3.5
0.6
0.3
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.4
4.4
3.1
1.2
9.2
5.9
1.2
3.0
1.8
3.3

33.3
20.9
16.6
8.7
3.4
3.4
...
0.0
4.4
0.6
0.3
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
2.2
4.3
3.2
1.2
12.4
6.4
1.2
2.9
2.3
6.0

31.9
19.4
15.5
8.9
2.8
2.7
0.1
0.0
3.7
0.6
0.4
0.6
1.4
0.3
0.1
0.4
3.9
2.8
1.0
12.5
6.5
1.6
3.2
1.7
6.1

-0.4
-1.3
-0.5
-0.1
...

-0.3
-0.7
-0.1
-0.1
...

0.0
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
...

-0.1
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
...

-0.1
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
-0.8

(In percent of GDP)

Road arrears (clearance) 7/
-0.1
Other domestic payment arrears (clearance)
-1.2
Of which : to statutory funds
-0.6
VAT refunds
-0.1
Payments in 2005 due to previous years' commitments 8/
...
Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1/ From 2001 onward, above-the-line data for domestic recurrent and capital expenditure are presented on a cash basis
(payment vouchers); arrears not reflected in line expenditures.
2/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.
3/ From 2002 onward, subvented agency expenditure for wages and salaries and goods and services are subsumed under
their respective line items.
4/ For 2005, this shows mitigating measures from the impact of petroleum price adjustment on vulnerable households.
5/ For 2005, includes only lifeline utility subsidies for households.
6/ The annual projections for 2004 program reflects interest and amortization due before traditional rescheduling,
because of uncertainty over the split between the former and the latter.
7/ For 2004, includes payments on diputed claims; for 2005, includes payment on float from the previous year only.
8/ Payments associated with wages for Ghana Universal Salary Structure, additional duty hourly allowances, and
subvented agencies, pension arrears,and outstanding TOR under-recovery.

- 37 -

Table 10. Ghana: Central Government Financing, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003

2004
Prog. 1/

Est.

2005
Proj.

(In billions of cedis)
Overall balance
Discrepancy between above- and below-line data
Total financing
Divestiture receipts
Foreign (net)
Project loans
Program loans
Amortization due 2/
Exceptional financing
External payment arrears
Additional donor financing
Traditional rescheduling
HIPC assistance (nonmultilateral)
Net savings due to inflation-indexed bonds
Deferred interest payment
Redemption of deferred interest payment
Domestic (net)
Banking system
Nonbanks

-3,433

-3,313

-2,884

-1,253

-2,836

-2,549

868

550

-139

-322

-104

0

2,565
12
1,428
1,966
1,056
-1,593
659
-467
0
1,126
0
0
...
...
467
-999
1,465

2,762
5
-781
1,185
160
-2,125
1,241
-461
0
1,450
252
197
197
...
2,100
1,161
939

3,023
421
398
1,860
1,097
-2,559
1,805
0
0
1,458
347
481
481
...
-82
-960
878

1,575
408
-436
1,562
946
-2,945
2,474
0
36
1,483
954
230
230
...
-1,101
-620
-481

2,941
286
1,546
2,547
920
-1,920
1,065
0
0
0
1,065
-349
301
-650
393
1,640
-1,247

2,549
388
1,716
2,999
1,368
-2,651
1,559
0
0
701
858
-118
67
-185
-996
-499
-498

(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance
Discrepancy between above- and below-line data

-9.0

-6.8

-4.4

-1.6

-3.6

-2.6

2.3

1.1

-0.2

-0.4

-0.1

0.0

5.7
0.0
-1.6
2.4
0.3
-4.3
2.5
-0.9
0.0
3.0
0.5
0.4
0.4
...
4.3
2.4
1.9

-4.2
0.6
0.6
2.8
1.7
-3.9
2.7
0.0
0.0
2.2
0.5
0.7
0.7
...
-0.1
-1.5
1.3

2.0
0.5
-0.6
2.0
1.2
-3.7
3.1
0.0
0.0
1.9
1.2
0.3
0.3
...
-1.4
-0.8
-0.6

3.7
0.4
1.9
3.2
1.2
-2.4
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
-0.4
0.4
-0.8
0.5
2.1
-1.6

2.6
0.4
1.8
3.1
1.4
-2.7
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.9
-0.1
0.1
-0.2
-1.0
-0.5
-0.5

Total financing
6.7
Divestiture receipts
0.0
Foreign (net)
3.8
Project loans
5.2
Program loans
2.8
Amortization due 2/
-4.2
Exceptional financing
1.7
External payment arrears
-1.2
Additional donor financing
0.0
Traditional rescheduling
3.0
HIPC assistance (nonmultilateral)
0.0
Net savings due to inflation-indexed bonds
0.0
Deferred interest payment
...
Redemption of deferred interest payment
...
Domestic (net)
1.2
Banking system
-2.6
Nonbanks
3.8
Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.
2/ The annual projections for 2004 program reflect interest and amortization due before traditional rescheduling,
because of uncertainty over the split between the former and the latter.

- 38 -

Table 11. Ghana: Status of Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for the
Third Review of the PRGF Arrangement
Performance Criteria/Benchmarks
Performance criteria
February 15, 2005. Implement new petroleum pricing regime
with features described in paragraph 21 of the memorandum of
economic and financial policies. In particular, oil marketing
companies will be given the right to set retail prices for
petroleum products according to a prescribed formula; an
independent oversight body will monitor application of the
formula; the pricing formula calculations will be published on
a regular basis; and the formula will be specified so as to
ensure full cost recovery.
Continuous. Ensure that electricity and water tariffs are in line
with their respective formulas for automatic quarterly
adjustments as specified in the technical memorandum of
understanding.
Benchmarks
September 30, 2004. Introduce Bank of Ghana bills.

Status

Partially done. A new pricing mechanism was adopted and
became effective on February 23, 2005, resulting in an average
increase in the price of petroleum products of about 50 percent.
The legislation necessary to establish an independent oversight
body to monitor the application of the mechanism was
presented to parliament in May 2005 and is expected to be
passed in June 2005.

Being met. The Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
indicated that no tariff adjustments were required during the
February 1, 2005–April 30, 2005 quarter.

Met. In mid-September 2004, Bank of Ghana bills were
introduced. These bills will gradually replace 91-day treasury
notes for open market operations.

March 31, 2005. Complete the share flotation for Ghana
Commercial Bank (GCB).

In progress. Financial advisors are now working on a due
diligence. Valuation of fixed assets completed. The prospectus
for floatation is expected to be completed by end-June 2005
with floatation in the third quarter of 2005. In the meantime, the
government’s position in GCB has declined to 34 percent
through the sale of shares on the local stock market.

September 30, 2004. Hire a transactions advisor for a
management contract with GCB.

Met. A World Bank-funded consultant has reported (with some
delay) to the GCB Board on various options for the
management contract. The Board has placed the current chief
executive and deputies on management contracts. Also, after
floatation of shares, a new management contract arrangement
will be presented for shareholders’ consideration.

Continuous. As required under the Financial Administration
Act (2003), all ministries, departments, and agencies will
submit to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning a
quarterly financial report detailing receipts of internally
generated funds, grants, and loans with a maximum lag of
eight weeks.

Met. All ministries, departments, and agencies are reporting
internally generated funds, grants, and loans to the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning as required by the Financial
Administration Act.

June 30, 2004. Settle all cross-debts as of December 31, 2003,
of the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG), Ghana Water
Company Limited (GWCL), Tema Oil Refinery (TOR), Volta
River Authority (VRA), and the government, together with
liabilities associated with on-lending from the government,
establish and submit to the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning monitorable financial plans to improve the
performance of these companies.

Met. The authorities have reported settlement of all cross-debts
and a write-down of remaining debts owed to government.
ECG, GWCL, TOR, and VRA have submitted their financial
plans to the Ministry of Energy.

- 39 -

Table 12. Ghana: Progress in Implementing Key FSAP Recommendations
Principal Recommendations

Progress Achieved

Banking supervision
• Reduce exposure of the two banks that still had claims on
Tema Oil Refinery (TOR) to within prudential limits.

•

In progress. Most TOR exposures converted into government
securities in 2001 and 2002. However, at end-March 2005, the
exposure of one bank to TOR amounted to nearly US$110
million, and there continue to be off-balance-sheet exposures
amounting to US$189 million. This bank’s exposure to TOR
exceeds its net worth.

•

•

In progress. Risk management approaches reviewed, and three
banks closed in 2000. With the implementation of the Banking
Act in 2004, Bank of Ghana’s enforcement powers for
prudential regulations have been strengthened.

•

In progress. The Insurance Law is being reviewed by the
Attorney General before submission to the cabinet for
approval.

•

Done. Five insolvent companies have been closed. A task
force was established in 2003 to improve prudential reporting
and conduct regular on-site inspection. As a result, a program
for on-site inspection has been adopted and a new inspection
manual established.

•

In progress. Appointment of a new board and a new director
has helped to bolster SSNIT’s independence. A new SSNIT
Law has been drafted and submitted to the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning for review. The law is
awaiting input from the Presidential Commission on Pensions.

•

In progress. Investment policies and auditing procedures still
need improvement.

•

Done.

Concentrate oversight of all securities activities, including
treasury bills, in the Security Exchange Commission (SEC).

•

Introduce higher capital requirements, as well as position
and foreign exchange exposure limits for securities
companies.

Done. The Central Securities Depository System was
established in December 2004. It will maintain records of
individual ownership of government and corporate securities,
and those listed on the stock exchange.

•

Done.

•

In progress. The Bank of Ghana is finalizing a draft law.

Review banks’ risk-management approaches and take
remedial actions as needed.

Insurance supervision
• Introduce updated insurance legislation, addressing the
need to reinforce the powers of the National Insurance
Commission.
•

Strengthen supervisory practices, including inspection
powers, prudential reporting, and mechanisms to liquidate
weak insurance companies.

Pension system
• Continue efforts to reform Social Security and National
Insurance Trust (SSNIT), including develop clear written
investment policies for SSNIT; improve its governance
structures; and improve its procedures for the preparation of
audited financial statements using transparent standards for
valuation of investments, provision, and income
recognition.
Securities regulation
• Fully implement recently adopted securities legislation.
•

•

Legal and judicial system
• Introduce a strong legislative framework against money
laundering.

- 40 -

Table 12. Ghana: Progress in Implementing Key FSAP Recommendations
Principal Recommendations

Progress Achieved

•

•

In progress. In March 2005, a commercial court began
operations to fast-track commercial claims, which had
previously been adjudicated by the high court.

•

Done.

•

Done.

Improve the effectiveness of the rules on contract
enforcement, security, and collateral foreclosure, and the
effectiveness of court procedures.

Bank of Ghana
• Reinforce the independence of the Bank of Ghana in a new
central bank law.
•

Reinforce the focus on key central bank responsibilities.

•

Set a schedule for withdrawing from development policy
and commercial financial activities.

•

Done.

•

Reinforce the transparency of financial reporting and the
independence and quality of its audit.

•

Done. The Bank of Ghana’s financial statement is verified by
an external auditor.

•

Separate debt management from liquidity management and
develop a debt-management strategy.

•

Done. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning now
uses debt sustainability analysis to support its debt
management strategy.

•

Strengthen the Bank of Ghana’s capital by replacing
government receivables with treasury bills and longer-term
government securities.

•

Done. Central Bank bills (28- and 56-day) and longer-term
government bonds (2- and 3-year) were introduced in the
fourth quarter of 2004.

•

Liquidate Bank of Ghana’s ownership in banks.

•

Done, except for shares in Ghana International Bank
(London).

- 41 -

Table 13: Ghana: Financial Soundness Indicators for the Banking Sector, 2000–04
(In percent at year’s end, unless otherwise indicated)
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Capital adequacy ratios
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets 1/
Percentage of banks greater than or equal to 10 percent
Percentage of banks below 10 and above 6 percent minimum
Percentage of banks below 6 percent minimum
Capital (net worth) to assets

11.6
62.5
37.5
0.0
11.9

14.7
64.7
35.3
0.0
13.1

13.4
52.9
35.3
11.8
12.6

9.3
66.7
27.8
5.6
12.5

13.7
61.0
39.0
0.0
12.6

Asset quality
Foreign exchange loans to total loans 2/
Past-due loans to gross loans
Nonperforming loans
Watch-listed loans
Provision as percent of past-due loans

35.3
16.2
11.9
4.4
58.6

34.1
28.0
19.6
8.5
46.4

33.8
28.6
22.7
5.8
63.6

...
24.4
18.3
6.0
64.6

...
19.1
16.1
2.9
68.6

52.4
9.7
65.7
32.0

45.9
8.7
49.7
35.9

43.4
6.8
36.9
40.9

39.1
6.4
42.8
46.3

40.2
6.2
40.8
47.1

30.5
29.3

30.5
29.5

30.5
25.5

23.3
23.0

21.3
19.3

Liquidity
Actual reserve ratio (as percent of total deposits)
Excess reserve ratio 5/
Loan/deposit
Foreign exchange liabilities/total liabilities 2/

49.5
6.5
64.0
36.2

59.8
15.8
63.9
27.0

55.2
11.2
50.1
27.4

68.8
24.8
57.4
...

56.7
12.7
55.4
...

Sensitivity to market risk
Net foreign exchange assets (liabilities) to shareholders' funds 2/

-9.4

22.9

24.3

...

...

Earnings and profitability
Net profit (before tax)/net income
Return on assets 3/
Return on equity 4/
Expense/income
Interest rate spread (deposit money banks)
Lending rates minus demand deposit rates
Lending rates minus saving deposit rates

Sources: IMF, Staff Country Report No. 396/03; and Bank of Ghana.
1/ The method for calculating capital adequacy ratio (CAR) is different from that of Basel CAR and
is likely to be more conservative than the Basel method.
2/ No comparable estimate available for 2003 as commercial banks’ foreign assets
and liabilities were reclassified.
3/ The ratio of net profit before tax to two-year annual average assets.
4/ The ratio of net profit after tax to two-year annual average shareholders' funds.
5/ The actual reserve ratio in excess of the minimum requirement ratio.

- 42 -

Table 14. Ghana: Progress in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals 1/
Goal

Status

1.

Eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger.

The proportion of the population below the extreme poverty line declined
from 52 percent in 1992 to about 35 percent in 2003. At the current pace
of growth, the goal of halving income poverty could be reached before
2015. However, progress in reducing the prevalence of child malnutrition
(currently about 23 percent) has been slow, and on current projections,
the goal is unlikely to be achieved.

2.

Achieve universal primary
education.

The gross primary enrollment rate has reached 86 percent, and is on track
for 100 percent.

3.

Promote gender equality.

The proportion of female to male enrollment in primary schools has
increased to 0.93.

4.

Reduce child mortality.

Although under-5 mortality rates have declined, it appears unlikely that
the goal of 78 per 1,000 live births will be reached from the current rate
of 111.

5.

Improve maternal health.

Maternal mortality rates have declined, but the goal of a three-fourths
reduction by 2015 (i.e., to 54 per 100,000 live births) is unlikely to be
achieved.

6.

Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria
and other diseases.

The incidence of malaria has declined. However, the incidence of
HIV/AIDS continues to rise, and the goal is unlikely to be met.

7.

Ensure environmental
sustainability.

Access to safe water has increased substantially, and this goal can be met.

8.

Develop a Global Partnership
for Development.

The debt service ratio has declined and will remain at a sustainable level
with prudent and effective debt management.

Source: Ghanaian authorities.
1/ Statistics are provided in Table 15.

- 43 -

Table 15. Ghana: Country Profile, Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2003
1990

1995

2001

2002

2003 1/

1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 2/
Population below US$1 a day (percent)
Poverty gap at US$1 a day (percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent)

...
...
...
30.3
35.0

...
...
...
27.3
17.0

44.8
17.3
5.6
24.9
12.0

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
23.3
...

2. Achieve universal primary education 3/
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (percent)
Youth literacy rate (percent of ages 15-24)

...
80.5
81.8

...
...
87.1

60.2
66.3
91.6

...
...
92.2

69.9
...
...

3. Promote gender equality 4/
Ratio of girls to boys in primary education (percent)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (percent of ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (percent)

82.0
76.7
85.5
56.6
...

87.0
..
90.9
...
8.0

90.0
88.6
95.2
...
...

...
...
95.7
...
...

93.0
...
...
...
...

125.0
78.0
61.0

110.0
69.0
70.0

100.0
62.0
81.0

97.0
60.0
81.0

111.0
64.0
83.2

5. Improve maternal health 6/
Maternal mortality rate (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)

...
40.2

280.0
43.8

...
...

...
...

250.0
...

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 7/
Prevalence of HIV, female (percent ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of malaria (percent)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under directly observed therapy (DOTS) (percent)

...
12.9
...
44.0
...
...

...
20.3
...
...
...
14.0

3.0
...
200,000.0
41.0
201.0
44.0

3.0
...
...
...
210.6
40.8

3.6
...
...
...
...
...

7. Ensure environmental sustainability 8/
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (percent of population)

33.1
...
3.8
0.2
49.0
61.0
...

...
4.8
4.3
0.3
...
...
...

27.8
4.9
5.0
0.3
73.0
72.0
...

...
5.6
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
74.1
...
...

6.2
...
2.9
0.0

...
...
4.1
1.2

...
...
20.8
3.3

2.4
...
33.4
3.8

...
...
...
...

4. Reduce child mortality 5/
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)

8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development 9/
Debt-service-to-GDP ratio (percent)
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed lines and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

Status 1/
On track
On track
On track
Off track
On track
On track

On track
On track
On track

Off track
Off track
Off track
Off track
Off track
Off track
Off track

Off track

On track

On track

Sources: World Development Indicators database, April 2004; and Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy 2003 Annual Progress Report (March 2004).
Note: In some cases the data are for years earlier or later than those stated.
1/ As reported in the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy 2003 Annual Progress Report (March 2004).
2/ Goal: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day. Halve, between 1990 and 2015,
the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
3/ Goal: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
4/ Goal: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
5/ Goal: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate.
6/ Goal: Reduce by three-fourths, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
7/ Goal: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS. Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the
incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
8/ Goal: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement
in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.
9/ Goal: Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the special
needs of the least developed dountries. Address the special needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states. Deal
comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and international measures in order to make
debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent and
productive work for youth. In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs in
developing countries. In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information
and communications.

- 44 -

Table 16. Ghana: Illustrative Projections of Central Government Budgetary Operations and Financing, 2005-08
2005

2006
Staff

Auth.

2007
Staff

Auth.

2008
Staff

Auth.

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Grants

30.5
24.6
5.8

29.4
23.9
5.5

30.3
24.8
5.5

29.2
23.6
5.5

30.3
24.8
5.5

28.6
23.1
5.5

30.3
24.8
5.5

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Domestic interest
Other recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Additional productive expenditure

31.9
19.4
8.9
2.8
7.7
12.5
...

30.8
17.8
8.7
1.9
7.2
13.0
...

33.6
18.7
9.0
2.7
7.0
12.8
2.1

30.4
16.9
8.5
1.3
7.1
13.5
...

33.2
18.5
9.0
2.7
6.8
12.8
1.9

30.3
16.2
8.4
0.8
7.0
14.0
...

32.9
18.3
9.0
2.7
6.6
12.8
1.8

Other payments 1/

-1.2

-0.1

-1.3

-0.1

-1.3

-0.2

-1.3

Overall balance

-2.6

-1.6

-4.6

-1.3

-4.2

-1.9

-3.9

Financing
Net domestic financing
Other financing 2/

2.6
-1.0
3.7

1.6
-2.1
3.7

4.6
0.9
3.7

1.3
-2.2
3.5

4.2
0.7
3.5

1.9
-1.6
3.5

3.9
0.4
3.5

Stock of domestic debt (net) 3/

11.4

7.5

10.6

4.4

10.0

2.3

9.1

Memorandum items:
Real GDP (annual percentage change)
GDP deflator (annual percentage change)

5.8
14.8

5.8
10.1

6.0
12.7

5.9
8.1

6.0
9.7

5.8
7.7

6.0
7.7

Sources: IMF staff and Ghana officials' preliminary projections and simulations.
1/ Includes arrears clearance and VAT refunds. For 2005, includes payments due to previous years' commitments.
2/ Includes divestiture receipts, foreign (net), exceptional financing, and net savings due to inflation indexed bonds.
3/ Excluding non-interest bearing perpetual BoG revaluation stocks, and bonds issued in 2004 for recapitalization of BoG and TOR,
including deferred interest payment (cumulative) on inflation indexed bonds, and less government deposits.

- 45 -

Table 17. Ghana: IMF, World Bank, and Donor Structural Conditionality
Conditionality

Status

IMF: Under the PRGF arrangement, structural conditionality will continue
to reflect areas of macro relevance:
•
Supporting fiscal consolidation through effective central government
payroll management and civil service reform;
•
Addressing quasi-fiscal activities of state-owned enterprises by
(i) monitoring the government’s involvement in these enterprises;
(ii) ensuring full cost-recovery pricing for those that have commercial
orientation, and (iii) requiring them to produce and submit annual
financial plans to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning; and
•
Strengthening the financial sector through regulatory and legislative
changes, and reducing the cost of capital through competition and other
measures.

Structural performance criteria and
benchmarks established for 2005,
with test dates at end-June and endDecember.

World Bank: Structural conditionality is reflected in a series of annual
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (each about US$125 million), and relate
mainly to
•
infrastructure, including roads,
•
community water and sanitation,
•
urban and local government development,
•
agriculture and rural development, and
•
human and private sector development.

A number of triggers were set for
2004-05, with a program review in
March/April 2005.

Multi-Donor Budget Support (MDBS): A group consisting of eleven
donors plus the World Bank make disbursements under a base payment (in
the first quarter) tied to macroeconomic performance as supported under the
program, and a performance payment based on a number of triggers. The
MDBS has structural conditionality in
•
governance and public sector financial and expenditure management,
and
•
social sectors.

A number of triggers were set for
2004-05, with a program review in
March/April 2005.

Sources: IMF; World Bank; and Ghana’s development partner countries.

- 46 -

Table 18. Ghana: Medium- and Long-Term Projections and Assumptions
A. Medium-term baseline scenario─key indicators
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

Real GDP growth
Inflation (period average)
Broad money growth
Private sector credit
Revenue/GDP
Expenditure/GDP
Overall deficit (including grants/GDP)
Net domestic borrowing/GDP
External current account/GDP (before grants)
External current account/GDP (after grants)
Gross reserves/imports (months)

2004
Prel.

2005

Projections
2006
2007

2008

5.8
12.6
26.0
10.1
23.8
33.3
3.6
0.1
-8.8
-2.7
3.7

5.8
14.3
23.5
22.1
24.6
31.7
2.6
-1.1
-9.8
-4.0
3.9

5.8
8.7
16.4
16.5
23.9
30.8
1.6
-2.2
-10.0
-4.5
4.1

5.8
5.7
13.9
15.6
23.1
30.3
1.9
-1.6
-10.4
-4.8
4.0

5.9
6.6
14.4
17.0
23.6
30.4
1.3
-2.2
-10.5
-5.0
4.0

B. Macroeconomic assumptions underlying the debt-sustainability analysis, 2009-23
Real GDP growth of 5.5 percent a year.
Inflation (GDP deflator) averaging 4.4 percent a year.
Export and import growth of 7.6 and 5.5 percent, respectively, a year.
Central government revenue of 23 percent of GDP a year.
Noninterest current expenditure of 14.5 percent of GDP a year.
Primary balance, including grants, over the projection period 2009-23.
Current fiscal account balance, including grants, of 12 percent of GDP a year.
Official grants of 4 percent of GDP a year.
Source: Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 47 -

Table 19. Ghana: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 2005-09
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)
2005
Exports f.o.b.
Cocoa beans and cocoa products
Gold
Timber and timber products
Others
Imports, f.o.b.
Non-oil
Oil
Trade balance
Services (net)
Of which : interest payments
Private transfers (net)
Current account balance,
excluding official transfers
Official transfers (net)

2006

2007

2008

2009

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2,929
995
925
224
785
-4,696
-3,701
-995
-1,767
-557

3,067
1,058
1,000
242
767
-4,968
-4,006
-963
-1,902
-579

3,295
1,057
1,200
257
781
-5,379
-4,455
-923
-2,084
-589

3,523
1,056
1,350
274
842
-5,718
-4,770
-947
-2,195
-604

3,669
1,055
1,418
291
905
-6,012
-5,032
-980
-2,342
-619

-150
1,291

-111
1,305

-107
1,319

-104
1,332

-108
1,347

-1,033
616

-1,176
650

-1,353
713

-1,467
782

-1,614
807

126

113

122

115

91

Of which: HIPC grants
Current account balance,
including official transfers
Capital account
Official capital (net)
Medium- and long-term loans
Inflows
Amortization
Private capital
Other capital and errors and omissions

-417
506
151

-526
586
206

-640
679
272

-684
761
326

-807
857
391

474
-323
355
-93

510
-304
380
-44

550
-277
407
-35

592
-267
435
-37

636
-245
466
0

Of which : change in net foreign assets of money deposit banks
Overall balance
Financing
Debt deferral
Net international reserves (negative is increase)

-22
-4
4
-35
-130

-34
16
-16
-35
-220

-25
4
-4
0
-174

-27
39
-39
0
-186

0
50
-50
0
-181

25
80
-55
169

38
80
-43
238

-63
0
-63
170

-68
0
-68
146

-58
0
-58
132

-9.8
-4.0

-10.0
-4.5

-10.5
-5.0

-10.4
-4.8

-10.5
-5.2

1,971
3.9

2,229
4.1

2,341
4.0

2,458
4.0

2,581
4.1

645
1,518

645
1,620

645
1,616

645
1,612

645
1,608

5.6
8.0

2.8
3.8

3.8
5.1

4.2
5.5

4.3
5.4

10,531

11,746

12,858

14,127

15,409

Of which: use of Fund credit
disbursements (PRGF)
repayments (PRGF)
Exceptional financing
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross international reserves
End of period (US$ millions)
In months of imports of goods and services
Cocoa exports
Volume (in thousands of tons)
Price (in U.S. dollars per ton)
External debt service paid
In percent of exports of GNFS
In percent of government revenue
GDP (in U.S. dollars)
Sources: Bank of Ghana; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

184,500,000

Total

50

7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1

In percent
of quota

1/ Ghana's quota is SDR 369 million.
2/ IMF Country Report No. 04/210.

26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,400,000

May 2003
November 2003
May 2004
November 2004
May 2005
November 2005
April 2006

Date

Original Schedule 2/
Amount
in SDRs
May 2003
December 2003
June 2004
June 2005
October 2005
March 2006
October 2006

Date

184,500,000

26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,350,000
26,400,000

Revised Schedule
Amount
in SDRs

50

7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1
7.1

In percent
of quota
Board approval of the arrangement
Completion of first review
Completion of second review
Completion of third review (end-December 2004 test date)
Completion of fourth review (end-June 2005 test date)
Completion of fifth review (end-December 2005 test date)
Completion of sixth (final) review (end-June 2006 test date)

Conditions

Table 20. Ghana: Revised Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement, 2003-06 1/

- 48 -

- 49 -

APPENDIX I

Ghana: Relations with the Fund
(As of April 30, 2005)
I. Membership Status: Joined: September 20, 1957; Article VIII.
II. General Resources Account
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency

SDR Million
369.00
369.00

%Quota
100.0
100.0

III. SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
62.98
10.66

%Allocation
100.0
16.92

IV. Outstanding Purchases and
Loans
PRGF arrangements

SDR Million
294.807

%Quota
79.89

V. Latest Financial Arrangements
Approval
Expiration
Type
Date
Date
5/9/2003
PRGF
5/8/2006
11/30/2002
PRGF
05/03/1999
05/02/1999
ESAF
06/30/1995

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
184.50
228.80
164.40

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
79.05
176.22
137.00

VI. Projected Obligations to Fund (before HIPC Assistance):
illion; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/interest
Total

2005
29.41
2.38
31.79

Forthcoming
2006
2007
41.07
28.04
2.58
2.40
43.47
30.62

2008
44.86

2009
38.22

2.18
47.04

1.97
40.18

- 50 -

APPENDIX I

Projected Payments to Fund (with Board-approved HIPC Assistance)
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming_____

Principal
Charges/interest
Total

2005
17.32
2.38
19.71

2006
20.73
2.58
23.31

______

2007
24.38

2008
31.92

2008
31.53

2.40
26.78

2.18
34.10

1.97
33.49

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed by all creditors
(US$ Million) 1/
Of which: IMF Assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date
Disbursements of IMF assistance (SDR million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point
Additional disbursement of interest income 2/
Total disbursements

Enhanced
Framework
Feb. 2002
2,186.00
112.10
90.05
Jul 2004
90.05
25.06
64.99
4.25
94.30

1/ Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at
the decision point.
2/ Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point
corresponding to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed
during the interim period.

Safeguard Assessment:
Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of Ghana was subject to a
safeguards assessment with respect to the PRGF arrangement approved on May 9, 2003.
The assessment was completed on October 15, 2003, and proposed specific
recommendations to address remaining vulnerabilities in the external audit, financial
reporting, internal audit, and internal controls areas. The authorities have implemented all
of the measures proposed by staff, except that concerning the quality of the external
audit.

- 51 -

APPENDIX I

Exchange Rate Arrangement
Ghana accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4, of the Fund’s
Articles of Agreement on February 2, 1994. Accordingly, Ghana maintains a flexible
exchange rate (defacto classified as a managed float), using the U.S. dollar as the
intervention currency, that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions. At end-April 2005, the average exchange rate for transactions
in the interbank market was ¢9065 per U.S. dollar.
Article IV Consultation and Current Fund Arrangement
On May 9, 2003, the Executive Board concluded the 2003 Article IV Consultation with
Ghana (IMF Country Report No. 03/133), endorsed the Ghana Poverty Reduction
Strategy as a sound basis for promoting growth and reducing poverty, and approved a
three-year arrangement under the PRGF amounting to SDR 184.5 million (50
percent of quota). An earlier PRGF arrangement expired on November 30, 2002, without
disbursement of the final tranche.
FSAP Participation
Ghana participated in the FSAP during 2000-01, and a Financial System Stability
Assessment (FSSA) was issued to the Executive Board in 2001 (www.imf.org). An FSAP
update was presented to the Board in December 2003.
Technical Assistance, 2001–May 2005
Fiscal Affairs Department: Ministry of Finance: fiscal data quality assessment,
February and May 2001; external debt including for HIPC, June and August, 2001;
public expenditure management, budget and debt advisor, August 2001-present; tax
and customs administration, September 2001; peripatetic advisor on the
establishment of a large taxpayers’ unit, February 2002–January 2003; review of
public expenditure management reforms and assessment of long-term advisor,
August 2002 and March 2003; tax peripatetic, May 2003; fiscal ROSC, February
2004, regional advisor on public expenditure management, August 2004–August
2005; evaluate the impact of new pricing mechanism for petroleum products on poor
and vulnerable households, January 2005.
International Capital Markets: Bank of Ghana: pilot study of access to private
capital, May 2003. Bank of Ghana and Ministry of Finance: access to international
capital markets, November 2004.
Legal Department: All Ministry of Finance: drafting of internal revenue
regulations, January 2001; advice/draft of new income tax laws, February-March
2001.
Monetary and Financial Systems Department: All Bank of Ghana (with Ministry
of Finance): recording and reporting external debt flows, February 2001 (with

- 52 -

APPENDIX I

FAD); foreign exchange/monetary operations, August 2001 (with Ministry of
Finance) monetary and fiscal data reporting, November and December 2001;
accounting and internal audit reform, July 2002, November 2002, and March 2003;
foreign exchange market, government securities market, and banking system issues,
April 2003; joint FSAP follow-up with World Bank, June 2003; multitopic technical
assistance initiation, November 2004; improving monetary operations, banking
supervision, and payment systems, May 2005.
Statistics Department: Bank of Ghana: money and banking statistics, December
2001 and July 2002. Ghana Statistical Service: national accounts statistics,
September and October 2001, August, November, and December 2002, and May
and September 2003; national accounts and prices, March and October 2004;
government finance statistics, March 2005; national accounts and prices, April-May
2005.
Resident Representative
A Fund Resident Representative has been stationed in Accra since June 1985.
Mrs. Muttardy is the current Resident Representative, having assumed the post in April
2004.

- 53 -

APPENDIX II

Ghana: IMF-World Bank Relations
(As of April 29, 2005)
I. PARTNERSHIP IN GHANA’S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
1.
Ghana’s development objectives are stated in the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy
(GPRS) approved by the government in February 2003. The broad objectives of the GPRS
are to create an environment favorable to private sector-led growth and sustainable poverty
reduction, and to create room within the government’s budget for increased expenditures on
education, health, and other priority services. The GPRS outlines five pillars focused on (i)
achieving macroeconomic stability, (ii) stimulating employment and production,
(iii) improving access to basic social services, (iv) strengthening the protection of the
vulnerable and excluded, and (v) improving public sector performance and governance. The
2004 Annual Progress Report of the GPRS is currently being finalized and the government is
working to update the strategy during 2005.
2.
The Bank and Fund teams are closely coordinating their policy advice to the
Ghanaian authorities. They are collaborating in terms of common objectives and joint
support for the implementation of Ghana’s GPRS, including through joint assessments such
as the “2004 Joint Staff Advisory Note on the GPRS Annual Progress Report”, the “2004
HIPC Expenditure Tracking Assessment and Action Plan (AAP)”, the mid-2004 assessment
of progress toward the completion point under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative, and the update
of the findings of the 2000-01 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).
3.
The completion of the GPRS created the momentum for a significant group of donors
to align their assistance under a common Multi-Donor Budget Support (MDBS) framework
agreed with the government of Ghana in June 2003. The government and development
partners consider the MDBS as the basis for supporting the implementation of the GPRS
through the budget. Building on the gains made over the past two years, representatives of
the government of Ghana and its development partners (nine bilaterals and four multilaterals,
including the World Bank) agreed on February 25, 2005 to work together according to the
principles established in the paper “Harmonization and Alignment in Ghana for Aid
Effectiveness: a Common Approach for Ghana and its Development Partners”.
II. THE WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY AND PORTFOLIO
4.
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Ghana (FY 04-07), prepared jointly with
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), was discussed by the Bank’s Board on
March 16, 2004. The CAS was designed to support the GPRS in a manner that could
effectively help the country achieve its development objectives. It complements the
interventions of other donors and focuses on three main pillars: (i) sustainable growth and
job creation, (ii) service provision for human development, and (iii) governance for
empowerment. The Bank Group strategy, described in the CAS, aims at helping the
government to (a) maintain progress made in achieving macroeconomic stability in recent
years, while pursuing accelerated growth policies by improving the investment climate and

- 54 -

APPENDIX II

harnessing sources of growth, (b) develop further the level of human capital through
improved delivery of human development services, and (c) promote good governance and
public sector reforms. The CAS for Ghana was prepared after broad consultations with
government and key stakeholders, including through regional meetings with civil society, the
private sector and others. A midterm CAS review is expected to be completed later in 2005.
The review will be prepared jointly with other development partners and aimed at further
progress in harmonizing responses to the GPRS.
5.
The CAS defines the Bank’s contribution to the achievement of the government’s
desired results, in particular achieving an annual average rate of economic growth of at least
5 percent during the CAS period, and reducing poverty levels from 40 percent in 1999 to
about 32 percent by 2007. Public expenditure management, including at the district level, is
to be strengthened to help increase the share of poverty-related spending to about one third of
domestically financed expenditures by 2007 and bring the ratio of domestic debt to GDP
down from 26 percent in 2002 to the GPRS target of 14.8 percent by end-2005, allowing the
share of private sector borrowing to further increase. Moreover, from 2002 to 2007, the
following results are also expected to be achieved: removing constraints to private sector
development by reducing the time required for land registration from an average of four
years to four months and for business registration from 120 days to 30 days and by providing
more reliable and cost-effective road, energy and financial services; maintaining the HIV
prevalence rate among pregnant women below 5 percent; increasing Gross Primary
Enrollment Rates (GER) in the 40 most deprived districts from about 71 to 89 percent, and
the rate for girls from almost 66 to 89 percent; and increasing immunization coverage from
80 to 90 percent, and the proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel from 45 to
55 percent.
6.
Overall development partner coordination in Ghana is strong. The Bank Group’s
strategy in Ghana emphasizes deepening its collaboration with other development partners
through the MDBS framework, partnership programs such as the Health SWAp and other
sector programmatic support, and further deepening harmonized approaches in areas such as
analytical work, fiduciary underpinnings and meeting and mission management. The MDBS
provides a framework for policy dialogue and decisions linked to progress in the
implementation of the GPRS.
7.
The Bank’s cumulative commitments to Ghana as of March 31, 2005, amount to
US$5.13 billion and total 151 operations. As of March 31, 2005, the portfolio contained 20
active projects totaling US$1.19 billion, of which US$641.2 million remains undisbursed.
The portfolio is diverse in terms of sectoral priorities and lending instruments. It consists of
one single-tranche Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) to provide continued support to
policies and reforms aimed at achieving the objectives of the government’s poverty reduction
strategy, complemented by major programs in health and education, agriculture, energy,
roads, community water and other infrastructure in both rural and urban areas. Annex 1
summarizes the World Bank operations in Ghana. The overall performance of the portfolio is
satisfactory, though implementation in several projects is lagging.

- 55 -

APPENDIX II

8.
The FY04-07 lending program covers programmatic lending in the form of PRSCs,
sectorwide operations to support human development, investment in infrastructure and other
support to private sector development, and several projects to support community and local
government-based programs in water, sanitation, infrastructure, and services provision.
Projects approved in FY05 include the PRSC 2 (US$125 m, July 2004), Community-Based
Rural Development (US$60 m, July 2004), Urban Water (US$103 m, July 2004) and Small
Towns Water Supply and Sanitation (US$25 m, July 2004). In November 2004, support to
the West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP) was also approved.12 Two additional credits are
planned for Board consideration later in FY05, the proposed Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise Development Project (US$43.5 m) and another regional project, the first tranche
of the West Africa Power Pool (US$25 m). Projects for FY06 will include the proposed
PRSC 3, an Economic Management Capacity Building Operation, a SWAp for HIV/AIDS,
and the energy sector investment operation.
9.
Nonlending services include updates on the core diagnostics, as well as targeted
analyses to strengthen the analytical base for the assistance program supported by the FY0407 CAS. During FY04, this work included a CFAA update, a Country Economic
Memorandum on public policy, growth, and poverty; a Financial Sector Assessment Update;
an accounting and audit assessment, a report on policy options facing the newly established
National Health Insurance Scheme, a Public Expenditure Review (PER) carried out in the
context of the MDBS; and the first Poverty and Social Impact Analysis focusing on
electricity tariffs. For FY05, non-lending services include Policy Papers on Electricity and
Petroleum Sectors, the joint WB-DFID-AFD13 study on Natural Resource Management and
Economic Growth, the external review of public financial management (ERPFM) prepared
jointly with other MDBS donors, and analytical work on policy options for the GPRS update,
decentralization and monitoring, and evaluation.
III. IMF-WORLD BANK COLLABORATION IN SPECIFIC AREAS
10.
Areas in which the Fund leads. The IMF leads the policy dialogue on
macroeconomic policies, including overall fiscal and monetary policies. The IMF has
supported Ghana’s poverty reduction efforts through several arrangements under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). The government had requested a new three-year
arrangement for 2003-05, under the PRGF, and this was put in place in May 2003, following
discussions by the Fund’s Board of Executive Directors. Reforms under the PRGF center on
measures to substantially raise revenue to make room for increased poverty-related spending
and development needs, strengthen public expenditure management, further reform energy

12

WAGP is a regional project that includes an IDA Partial Risk Guarantee for Ghana in the amount
of up to US$50.0 million. This guarantee protects commercial parties that are participating in the
pipeline project against sovereign risk. It requires a commitment equal to 25 percent of the total risk
amount to be set aside from the Ghana IDA allocation (that is, US$12.5 million).
13
Agence Française de Développement.

- 56 -

APPENDIX II

and utility pricing, and use appropriate monetary policy to achieve single-digit inflation. The
second review under the three-year PRGF arrangement was completed in July 2004.
11.
Areas in which the Bank leads. The World Bank leads the policy dialogue on
economic reforms in a number of sectors. These are infrastructure, including roads,
community water and sanitation, and urban and local government development; agriculture
and rural development; human development; private sector development and public sector
reform.
•

Infrastructure accounts for about 51 percent of commitments, and comprises several
operations. The ongoing Road Sector Development SIL has the objective of
achieving sustainable improvements in the supply and performance of road transport
services in a regionally equitable manner. The Bank Group’s engagement in energy
has grown to include ESW and PSIA; investment lending to support operational
efficiency, including a new operation planned for FY06; IFC investment in
generation and support to the West African Gas Pipeline and Power Pool. Dialogue
on water and sanitation policy has been pivotal to underpin the major new
investments in urban, small town, and community water. In view of their importance
for the delivery of reliable and cost-effective services, key policy issues in the power
and water sectors are also part of the PRSC-supported policy agenda. Based on new
developments in the government’s approach to telecommunication, the Bank Group
has reengaged in dialogue on sector strategy, policy and regulation.

•

The Agriculture and Rural Development portfolio accounts for about 13 percent of
commitments and emphasizes increasing agricultural productivity and diversification,
deepening financial intermediation in rural areas, and rehabilitating land, forest and
wildlife resources in a sustainable manner. In addition to cross-cutting issues tackled
in the context of the PRSCs, three ongoing IDA operations are supporting this
agenda, the restructured Agriculture Services Sub-Sector Investment (AgSSIP)
Project, the Rural Financial Services SIL and the Community-Based Rural
Development Project, which supports a comprehensive approach to rural-based
economic growth and poverty reduction. There are also two GEF projects in support
of the natural resource management agenda and preservation of biodiversity.

•

In Human Development, there are five projects that account for 19 percent of total
lending. The Board approved the financing for the Education Sector Project in
February 2004. Twelve months earlier, it approved the Second Health Sector Support
Program prepared using a sector-wide approach. In addition, Bank support addresses
issues in adult literacy, the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS, and service
provision for poor and marginalized groups. PRSCs complement existing sector
focused operations, leveraging their poverty focus by ensuring improved expenditure
allocation (level and structure) and by addressing some of their financing
implications for the poor (for example, removal of school fees for girls in under-

- 57 -

APPENDIX II

served areas and for disabled pupils across the country, and implementation of fee
exemption policy for maternal deliveries).
•

IDA’s assistance in Private Sector Development represents about 6 percent of
commitments. The Trade and Investment Gateway SIL responds to new policy
approaches by government, and seeks to attract a critical mass of export-oriented
investors to Ghana to accelerate export-led growth and facilitate trade. The Land
Administration project will help develop sustainable, fair, efficient and decentralized
land administration system to increase land tenure security. In addition, the PRSCs
support reforms aimed at tackling the high-cost business environment, promoting
trade facilitation and encouraging financial intermediation. Further Bank Group
support to private sector development is under active dialogue with government. The
planned Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Project will aim at
promoting a conducive business environment and improving the enterprises’
competitiveness, while the planned joint donor Economic Management Capacity
Building Project will focus on strengthening specific aspects of financial and public
sector management.

12.
Areas of Shared Responsibility. The IMF and World Bank staffs collaborate closely
in supporting the government’s structural reforms in the areas of budgeting, expenditure and
financial management, public sector reform and privatization, and the financial sector, as
outlined below. Bank support for Governance and Public Sector Management is provided
mainly in the context of the PRSC, as well as through the programs supporting public sector
capacity building and decentralization.
13.
Budgeting, public expenditure management (PEM), and control. A February
2004 joint Bank-Fund assessment of the government’s PEM capacity confirmed encouraging
progress since the 2001 evaluation, while still highlighting the need for continued
improvement in budgetary management. That assessment, the FY04 PER, and the FY05
External Review of Public Financial Management informed the identification of priority
PEM actions being supported by the PRSC/MDBS. IMF technical assistance missions and a
resident advisor provide technical advice to government on budget formulation, monitoring
of budget execution, and expenditure control.
14.
Public sector reform. The Fund closely follows public service reforms through their
impact on macroeconomic aggregates (wage bill, overall government expenditure) and
discusses the macroeconomic trade-offs the government faces in supporting a large public
sector. Building on lessons learned and the guidelines identified in its document “Towards a
New Public Service for Ghana” published in June 2004, the government is defining its public
sector reform strategy focusing on the basic needs of running government and is shifting
away from the technology-driven, all-encompassing reform programs of the past. The Bank’s
support for implementing the government strategy takes place in the context of PRSC and
through investment projects at the sector level, including those aimed at supporting the
government’s public sector capacity building efforts and the decentralization agenda.

- 58 -

APPENDIX II

15.
Public enterprise reform and divestiture. The Fund closely monitors the financial
position of large public enterprises, namely in the energy and financial sectors, because of
their importance for public finances and macroeconomic stability. Bank assistance is
provided through sectoral projects. Bank dialogue in the energy sector, pursued through the
Energy ESW and the PRSC, emphasizes the unbundling of VRA and public-private
partnership options for ECG.
16.
Financial Sector. In July 2003 a joint IMF-Bank mission carried out a mission to
update the 2000-01 FSAP. The FSAP update confirmed some progress in the financial sector
associated with improved macro-economic stability, emphasized the diversity of financial
institutions compared to the overall small size of Ghana’s financial sector, and acknowledged
the existence of strong international connections and local skills able to compete on equal
terms with international institutions. Despite this potential, the update concluded that the
financial sector is held back by overall weak financial intermediation compared with that in
other sub-Saharan African countries because of various key problems such as inefficiencies
of the dominant Ghana Commercial Bank (GCB), the crowding out of the private sector, lack
of long-term capital available as a result of poor allocation of pension resources, the still
uneven playing field for providers of financial services, and the need of further
implementation of the legislative agenda. Several of the FSAP update recommendations will
be dealt with by the government’s comprehensive Financial Sector Strategic Plan (FINSSP),
approved in 2003. The PRSC supports implementation of key actions envisaged by the
FINSSP, which will also be supported by an FY06 investment credit aimed at economic
management capacity building. In December 2003, the IMF published the Financial System
and Stability Assessment.

- 59 -

APPENDIX II

ANNEX 1
Financial Relations with the World Bank Group
Active Portfolio, as of 31 March 2005 (in millions of US dollars)

Credit/Grant Fiscal Project Name
Year
Number
26820-GH
20412-GH
31140-GH

1995
1998
1999

Ghana Thermal Power 5
GEF Forest Biodiversity
Trade Gateway and
Investment
32370-GH
1999 Community-Based
Poverty Reduction
32460-GH
1999 National Functional
Literacy
32820-GH
2000 Community Water II
33740-GH
2000 Rural Financial Services
34050-GH
2001 Agricultural Services
34580-GH
2001 AIDS Response
35540-GH
2002 Road Sector
Development
50723-GH
2002 GEF Northern Savanna
35540-GH
2003 Health Sector Program II
37430-GH
2003 Promoting Partnerships
w/Traditional Authorities
38170-GH
2004 Land Administration
38650-GH
2004 Education Sector
38890-GH
2004 Urban Environment and
Sanitation
39570-GH
2005 PRSC 2
39620-GH
2005 Urban Water
39710-GH
2005 Small Towns Water
Supply
39640-GH
2005 Community-Based Rural
Development
Total (number of credits/grants: 20)
N.A.
2005 West Africa Gas Pipeline
Total (number of partial risk guarantees: 1)

IDA
IDA GEF IDA
Credit Grant Grant Guar.
b/
175.6
8.7
50.5

Undisbursed
15.1
4.9
23.3

5.0

0.5

32.0

12.9

25.0
5.1
67.0
25.0
220.0

1.2
3.0
38.7
5.3
153.0
7.6

57.6

5.2
29.5
2.0

32.4
5.0

20.5
78.0
62.0

20.7
74.2
60.6

a/

a/

26.0

0.0
106.7
24.3

60.0

60.1

a/

85.0

994.3

40.0
103.0

180.4

16.3

641.2
50.0
50.0

Source: World Bank.
a/ Undisbursed amounts are greater than IDA amounts due to exchange rate fluctuations.
b/ IDA partial Risk Guarantee up to US$50.0 million (of which 25 percent IDA commitment) to protect
commercial parties against sovereign risk.
For additional information, please contact Michael Diliberti, Senior Country Officer, (x38766) or Marcelo
Andrade, Senior Country Economist, (x38378).

b/

- 60 -

APPENDIX III

Ghana: Statistical Issues
1.
Ghana’s provision of data to the Fund is adequate for program monitoring and
surveillance purposes, but the quality and timeliness of the data need to be improved.
There are also notable deficiencies in the dissemination of statistical information to the
public, as well as in the reporting for the various Fund publications, although the situation
has improved recently with the publication on the Bank of Ghana’s website of the Monetary
Policy Committee Statement and Statistical Releases. Data for publication in the
International Financial Statistics (IFS) on international transactions were last reported for
2000 on government finances for 1998, and on national accounts for 1997. No monthly or
quarterly fiscal or BOP data are reported for publication in the IFS. Furthermore, the latest
available data reported for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook
(GFSY) relate to 1993. The authorities reported fiscal data for the 1996 GFSY, but the data
could not be published because they were not sufficiently detailed to allow conversion to the
government finance statistics format. Ghana Statistical Service, moreover, has experienced
long delays in the release of census and survey results, irregularity of the quarterly statistical
digest, and long lags in the dissemination of data. The authorities are working toward
participation in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and, following a May 2004
STA mission, have started providing GDDS metadata to the IMF. Areas where
improvements need to be made are identified below.
National accounts and prices
2.
As a result of a methodological change in the compilation of consumer prices in
1999, both the level of the consumer price index and the rate of inflation for the 19992001 period may be underestimated. As a consequence, the level of key components of
nominal GDP is probably understated as well. The impact on overall GDP is less clear,
however, because agriculture production may have been overstated since 1990. To address
problems in the compilation of price statistics and national accounts, a peripatetic advisor
was assigned to Ghana for the period 2001-04. A follow up is being undertaken as part of the
GDDS project for Anglophone Africa. The work on revising the CPI and updating the
weights using the fourth Ghana Living Standard Survey (1998/1999), is soon to be
completed.
3.
The overhaul of the annual GDP estimates is aimed for completion in 2005. The
peripatetic STA advisor is assisting GSS in updating the base year for the national accounts
to 2002, expanding the official compilations to include the expenditure side, and improving
the sources and methods used. The ambition is to subsequently start developing a series of
quarterly GDP estimates. A comprehensive overhaul of the basic sources of national
accounts data is also needed, because existing surveys are outdated.

- 61 -

APPENDIX III

Labor statistics
4.
The paucity of labor statistics is a cause for concern. Labor statistics are almost
nonexistent, although some wage indicators are available from the Social Security National
Insurance Trust (SSNIT). The Ministry of Employment has been receiving technical
assistance from the United Nations Development Program and the International Labor
Organization in the design and compilation of labor statistics.
Public finance
5.
Steps have been taken to improve Ghana’s fiscal data. The Controller Accountant
General’s Department (CAGD) currently compiles monthly budget implementation reports,
and the data are available within six weeks, although some factors undermine their
reliability. There are, for example, discrepancies in the data reported by the CAGD and the
BOG, although these have narrowed in recent months. Above-the-line data from the CAGD
are narrower in coverage than below-the-line BOG data. The lack of comprehensive and
timely reconciliation of monthly treasury data with bank accounts undermines the reliability
of the data. To address these shortcomings, the government has formed a committee to define
the nature of “broad” and “narrow” government; moved to a system of immediate booking
for so-called direct debits and more frequent reporting of government account balances; and
is implementing a new automated Budget and Public Expenditure Management System
(BPEMS). The BPEMS covers ministries, departments and agencies. However, the economic
classification is not in sufficient detail to compile data in accordance with the requirements
of GFSM 2001─ a recent mission of STA proposed the introduction of a budget
classification in line with international guidelines.
6.
There are also problems of data comprehensiveness. The CAGD and the BOG
have been missing a substantial part of central government spending, like donor flows
disbursed directly to ministries, and those arising from internally generated funds. They have
also had difficulties in accounting for expenses undertaken by extrabudgetary funds. The
operations of special funds such as the Social Security and National Insurance Trust
(SSNIT), the Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETF) and the District Assemblies Common
Fund (DACF) are not yet covered by the fiscal accounts. Although the majority of local
government expenses are directly met from budgetary accounts, the own revenue of local
governments, all spending incurred from these revenues, and transactions financed from the
DACF are not yet covered. The extension of coverage of fiscal accounts to general
government is encouraged. A new system for compiling more comprehensive data by the
CAGD is now being introduced. In addition, the Commitment Control System has been
operating for a full year, and a report for fiscal year 2004 was generated in January 2005.
The GDDS project for Anglophone Africa has assigned a peripatetic short-term consultant to
advise on coverage and other issues related to the implementation of the new Government
Finance Statistics Manual.
7.
Central government fiscal developments are primarily monitored from belowthe-line BOG data. As no comprehensive audited accounts have been published during the

- 62 -

APPENDIX III

last few years, above-the-line fiscal aggregates are monitored by a combination of cash-flow
data from the BOG and various identifiable components of revenue and expenditure provided
by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the CAGD. The BOG produces revenue, debt service,
and domestic financing data. The Aid and Debt Management Unit (in the MOF) provides
external debt data and information on foreign project loan and grant disbursements. The
CAGD provides the data on noninterest recurrent expenditure and domestically financed
capital expenditures. The compilation of a full set of integrated accounts that record stocks
and flows, for all the sub-sectors of the general government sector, in accordance with GFSM
2001 guidelines, could largely improve and harmonize the fiscal accounts in Ghana.
8.
Comprehensive solutions to some of the data problems may have to await the
full implementation of the new BPEMS system and the incorporation of Fund technical
advice. Various missions from FAD have suggested a number of short-term, temporary
solutions aimed at alleviating current data quality problems. A long-term advisor from FAD
has been working on public expenditure and debt management issues in the Ministry of
Finance since August 2001. A joint Bank-Fund mission in 2004 assessed progress on
monitoring poverty-related spending through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
Assessments and Actions Plans, and a Fiscal Transparency Report on Observance of
Standards and Codes (ROSC) was undertaken in July 2004, and further technical assistance
was provided by STA in March 2005.
Monetary statistics and international reserves
9.
A STA monetary and financial statistics mission in 2000 proposed a plan of
action to address the classification by residency of foreign-currency-denominated
deposits in commercial banks and the proper treatment of repurchase agreements
between the BOG and the commercial banks. As a result, gross foreign reserves, net
international reserves, and net foreign assets were redefined. Reporting according to the new
definitions started in 2001.
10.
Ghana’s monetary and international reserve data were significantly revised in
early 2002, and are now based on a detailed mapping and automated software system
that extracts the data directly from the BOG’s underlying financial accounts. Fund staff
was informed in October 2001 that the BOG had revised upward the reported series on
reserve money, beginning in November 1999. The previous underrecording reflected
adjustments to data on currency in circulation. Two TA missions in November and
December 2001 examined and recompiled the reserve money data and encountered
considerable difficulty in reconciling previously reported data on BOG net credit to
government and net foreign assets with the underlying financial accounts; these difficulties
were traced to accrual and other adjustments made. The missions concluded that most
adjustments were not well founded, and together the BOG and the Fund staff agreed that the
most reliable source for monetary data and international reserve data would be the BOG’s
unadjusted financial accounts.
11.

A July 2002 STA mission confirmed that the bridge table used to automatically

- 63 -

APPENDIX III

generate data on central bank monetary variables and international reserves from
BOG’s underlying financial accounts was complete and reliable. The BOG currently
reports the data monthly with a lag of four to six weeks. In light of changes in the structure of
government accounts at the BOG associated with the introduction of BPEMS, BOG staff in
mid-2003 began constructing and testing a more detailed automated bridge table for
government accounts to facilitate reconciliation and tracking of the budget. Subsequent STA
missions detected shortcomings in the quality of data submitted by commercial banks,
especially in the treatment of foreign-currency-denominated assets and liabilities, and in the
reporting of government securities. The mission drafted a new report form for commercial
banks, which was adopted beginning with data published for July 2003. BOG reports data
from the commercial banks with a lag of 8 to 10 weeks.
Debt statistics
12.
The responsibility for external debt recording and payment is divided among
three independent agencies. The MOF, through its Aid and Debt Management Unit
(ADMU), maintains the external debt database and it is responsible for recording debtpayment obligations, issuing payment requests, and tracking HIPC debt relief. The CAGD
confirms the legality of the payment and authorizes the release of public funds and is
responsible for accounting of debt payments and rendering reports to parliament. The BOG is
the payment agent for the government and verifies payments made to ADMU and CAGD.
13.
A FAD technical assistance mission in 2001 concluded that the three institutions
involved needed to improve the transparency and accountability of external debt
management. The authorities should (i) develop a single computerized database that is
available to all the relevant institutions; (ii) formalize procedures used for settlement of debt
payments (including obtaining debt notification by donors, delegating signing authorities by
officials within the relevant organizations, and creating registers tracing the movement of
documents required to effect external debt-payment transactions); and (iii) improve the
analytical content and timeliness of data, which are not reported on a periodic basis at
present.
14.
To enable systematic comparison of the budget, the balance of payments, and the
BOG cash-flow data, the authorities should clearly identify the various government
subsectors for which data are reported and prepare a clear classification of financing, as well
as outstanding debt data and guarantees issued.
Trade and balance of payments statistics
15.
Since 1982, the BOG’s Research Department has had primary responsibility for the
compilation and presentation of the annual and quarterly balance of payments statistics. The
main data sources are the Customs Excise and Preventive Service (CEPS), administrative
data (government ministries and departments within BOG), commercial banks, and the
Ghana Statistical Service (GSS). In addition, the BOG carriers out simple financial surveys
on other corporate entities that are involved in transactions with nonresidents. Data are

- 64 -

APPENDIX III

compiled using the framework of the Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition (BPM5).
16.
Currently, the GSS is not publishing timely monthly trade statistics, although
the data are available from the CEPS. The staff has recommended that the GSS
collaborate with the CEPS to process customs data within six weeks and collaborate with the
Ministry of Trade and Industry (MOT) and the BOG to identify and reduce the discrepancies
in trade statistics and to ensure that imports into bonded warehouses are not double counted.
Data collection procedures of the CEPS need to be improved, and there is also room for
improving trade volume data collected by the CEPS through customs invoices, which would
help the GSS to develop meaningful import and export unit values.
17.
The staff has recommended that the GSS develop export unit values for major
export commodities, such as gold and cocoa. A high coverage of the country’s export
bundle can be obtained by including just three major exports—cocoa, gold, and unwrought
aluminum. In contrast, the deflation of imports is likely to involve an iterative procedure in
order to strike a balance between coverage of the index and its stability, owing to the
heterogeneity of the basket.
18.
The BOG has initiated work on implementing the recommendations of a TA
mission on balance of payments statistics in 2000, including on the introduction of surveys
of key establishments. A survey of shipping companies was introduced in 2004, but the
companies at that time proved unable to submit the required data. The collaboration among
the various government agencies responsible for data collection, moreover, has improved. A
new immigration form to capture data on travel statistics, in line with the Tourism Satellite
Account developed by an interinstitutional committee, was introduced in March 2005. The
survey on private capital flows carried out in 2000 has just been published, and the BOG
intends to implement the second phase of the capital flow project in September 2005.

- 65 -

APPENDIX III

GHANA: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF MAY 2, 2005
Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency of
6
publication

Date of latest
observation

Date
received

April 25,
2005

April 28,
2005

D

W

D

International reserve assets and reserve liabilities of
1
the monetary authorities

March 2005

April 2005

M

M

Q

Reserve/base money

March 2005

April 2005

W

M

Q

Broad money

March 2005

April 2005

M

M

Q

Central bank balance sheet

March 2005

April 2005

M

M

Q

Consolidated balance sheet of the banking system

March 2005

April 2005

M

M

Q

April 25,
2005

April 28,
2005

W

W

W

March 2005

April 2005

M

M

M

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of
3
4
financing – general government

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of
3
financing – central government

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

M

M

I

Stocks of central government and central government5
guaranteed debt

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

M

M

I

External current account balance

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

A

A

A

Exports and imports of goods and services

1997

3/2003

A

A

I

GDP/GNP

2004

Feb. 2005

A

A

I

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

M

I

A

Exchange rates

Interest rates

2

Consumer price index

Gross external debt
1

Frequency
of
6
Data

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extrabudgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

- 66 -

APPENDIX IV

Ghana—Work Program for 2005-06

June 2005

Executive Board meeting for Article IV
consultation and third PRGF review.

June 2005

Staff visit to assess recent developments in
preparation for the fourth PRGF review.

October 2005

Mission to conduct the fourth program review
and discuss the budget for 2006 (end-June
2005 test date).

December 2005

Executive Board meeting for fourth PRGF
review.

March 2006

Mission to conduct the fifth program review
(end-December 2005 test date).

April 2006

Executive Board meeting for fifth PRGF
review.

September 2006

Mission to conduct the sixth (and final)
review (end-June 2006 test date); discussion
of ex post assessment of prolonged use of
Fund resources.

October 2006

Executive Board meeting for sixth and final
PRGF review.

- 67 -

May 20, 2005

Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20431

Dear Mr. de Rato:
Since May 2003, the government of Ghana has been implementing a financial and economic
program with support from the Fund’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). We
are pleased to inform you that on February 23, 2005, petroleum prices were adjusted upward
as part of the commitment on petroleum sector deregulation made by the President of Ghana
during the discussions for the second review. The Petroleum Deregulation Bill has been
submitted to Parliament, and is expected to be passed by end-May 2005. The government of
Ghana has worked diligently to implement policy commitments under the existing
arrangement, particularly with respect to achieving our macroeconomic objectives.
Moreover, for the first time in recent history, macroeconomic discipline was maintained
during the recent presidential and parliamentary elections. However, there were some
inadvertent slippages in policy implementation in 2004 for which explanation is provided
below. Accordingly, we are requesting waivers for nonobservance of three quantitative and
one structural performance criteria.
Below is the listing of the performance criteria that were not observed, the contributing
factors for their nonobservance, and the remedial measures designed to ensure achievement
of the original program objectives.
•

The ceiling on net domestic financing of government operations was exceeded at endDecember 2004 on account of (i) higher poverty-related and infrastructure
expenditures linked to higher-than-expected foreign financing (including from recent
debt relief); (ii) higher petroleum-related subsidies as a result of higher world oil
prices; and (iii) a wage overrun for subvented agencies because their base wage
payments was inadvertently not provided for in the program, and the monitoring of
these payments was not as comprehensive as it should have been. To prevent
overruns in future, the government will strengthen payroll management, including
through computerization to cover all subvented agencies as well as central
government employees. In any event, the program for 2005 includes a quantitative
performance criterion on the absolute wage bill for the year (including all
allowances).

- 68 -

•

The ceiling on the stock of net domestic bank credit to the Tema Oil Refinery (TOR)
was exceeded at end-December 2004 because of a lag in verifying and transferring
the required (petroleum-related) subsidy for the last quarter of 2004. The transfer to
the TOR was made in early 2005 and the related bank credit repaid. Also, as subsides
to the TOR have ceased with the establishment of a new pricing mechanism for
petroleum products, this issue will not arise in future. Nonetheless, we will continue
to monitor TOR’s financial performance, and, for this reason, the 2005 program
includes a ceiling on its outstanding bank credit.

•

The (zero) ceiling on the contracting or guaranteeing of medium- to long-term
nonconcessional debt was breached in August 2004 with a US$40 million loan from
Nigeria to finance Ghana’s participation in the World Bank-supported West African
Gas pipeline─a project of significant economic benefit to Ghana and the region.
Expected financing for this project did not materialize, and the government could not
make alternative arrangements in time to avoid a US$25 million penalty (0.3 percent
of GDP). However, timely prior consultation with the Fund would have prevented the
misunderstanding regarding Ghana’s commitment to not undertake any commercial
borrowing. We have instituted mechanisms to ensure early consultation on all matters
related to the program monitoring, including—but not limited to—regular meetings
between officials and the IMF Resident Representative.

•

The implementation of a new automatic adjustment mechanism to price petroleum
products (a structural performance criterion) was met with a week’s delay
(February 23, 2005, against February 15, 2005), and the establishment of an
independent oversight board (the National Petroleum Authority) to monitor the
pricing mechanism for petroleum products is now expected by end-May 2005
(against February 15, 2005), since it is part of a whole framework of petroleum sector
deregulation. These delays were necessary to allow for adequate consultation within
the country, and to ensure the durability of this important, highly political and radical
reform. The reform measures were taken in a difficult socio-political environment
and in the context of rising world oil prices. Nevertheless, the government is
committed to fully implementing this pricing mechanism as well the provisions of the
legislation on the deregulation of the petroleum sector when the Bill is passed by
Parliament.

The attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) sets out the
objectives for 2005. The strategy is to build on the significant improvements in
macroeconomic performance during 2004, and we believe that the policies specified in the
attached MEFP provide a basis for sustaining growth, lowering inflation, and alleviating
poverty. Furthermore, we believe that the policies and measures described therein are
adequate to achieve these objectives, but we stand ready to take additional actions if
required. The government will provide the Fund with the information needed to assess our
progress in implementing the program and will consult with the Fund on the adoption of any

- 69 -

measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Fund
staff requests such a consultation.
The government intends to make the contents of this letter and those of the attached MEFP,
the technical memorandum of understanding (TMU), and the staff report for this review, as
well as the 2005 Article IV consultation available to the public. In this regard, it authorizes
the IMF to arrange for them to be posted on the Fund’s website, subsequent to Board
completion of the review and conclusion of the 2005 Article IV consultation.
Accordingly, we are requesting completion of the third program review and disbursement of
the fourth loan installment in an amount equivalent to SDR 26.35 million. Also, we are
requesting an extension of the current PRGF arrangement to October 31, 2006, so that the
final and sixth review (based on June 2006 test date) and disbursement could be completed.
Yours sincerely,

/s/
Hon. Kwadwo Baah-Wiredu, MP
Minister of Finance and Economic Planning

Attachments (2)
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies for 2005
Technical Memorandum of Understanding

/s/
Hon. Paul A. Acquah
Governor, Bank of Ghana

- 70 -

Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
of the Government of Ghana for 2005
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
In May 2003, the IMF confirmed its support for Ghana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy
(GPRS) and approved an arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF). At that time, the GPRS targeted a decline in poverty over the long term and
improvements in social indicators in line with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Accordingly, government policies aimed to raise real GDP growth during 2003-05 to an
average of 5 percent a year, reduce inflation to the single-digit range, and rebuild gross
international reserves to three months of imports of goods and services by end-2005.
2.
Since that time, Ghana has made significant progress in implementing the program.
Indeed, 2004 saw significant advances in economic reform: the fiscal position was held
broadly in check and the recent gains from macroeconomic stabilization were preserved,
unlike in previous election years; the completion point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative was reached, thereby ensuring long-term external debt
sustainability; and the politically and socially unpopular liberalization of the petroleum
sector was started, removing government involvement from the pricing of petroleum
products and opening the sector to private sector participation.
3.
For the second consecutive year, macroeconomic performance surpassed program
projections for 2004. Real GDP growth rose to 5.8 percent on the strength of a record cocoa
harvest and a broadening of economic activity. Credit growth to the private sector reached its
highest level of the past five years. Twelve-month inflation was halved to 11.8 percent by
end-year. Even though domestic supply shortages and inclement weather prevented further
disinflation, nonfood inflation stayed within the single-digit range for most of the year.
Underpinned by growing confidence in macroeconomic policies, market-determined interest
rates and the nominal exchange rate for the cedi remained relatively stable through this
period. Strong foreign exchange inflows from buoyant cocoa and gold exports and personal
remittances, together with donor support that exceeded projections, made possible a further
buildup of gross international reserves to US$1,816 million (equivalent to 3.7 months of
imports of goods and services) by the end of the 2004.
4.
The credibility of macroeconomic policies was further buttressed in 2004, even
though some of the program targets were missed. Faster GDP growth supported efforts to
achieve the programmed reduction in domestic debt that anchors fiscal policy, but some
fiscal slippages occurred relative to the projections. The slippages were largely due to higher
petroleum-related subsidies necessitated by high world oil prices, increased domestic capital
spending as a counterpart to higher donor-related (including HIPC) inflows, and higher-thanprojected wage payments to subvented agencies caused by weak payroll management.

- 71 -

ATTACHMENT

Nevertheless, the stance of monetary policy continued to be firm, and the monetary
aggregates were broadly in line with program goals at end-2004.
5.
Ghana also made progress in implementing structural reforms. Public expenditure
management was further improved through the enforcement of reporting and profit transfer
requirements (for state-owned enterprises) under the recently enacted Financial
Administration Act (FAA). The restructuring of Ghana Commercial Bank proceeded as
planned, and central bank bills were introduced to enhance the efficacy of monetary policy.
Public utility prices were kept in line with cost recovery.
6.
So far in 2005, the government has followed through on its long-standing
commitment to withdraw from administering petroleum product prices. On February 23,
2005, a mechanism for petroleum product pricing was adopted—ensuring full recovery of all
costs and taxes and ending the need for budget subsidies. The mechanism is specified along
similar lines as that employed earlier, through the use of import-parity ex-refinery prices,
based on competitive tenders from private-sector participants for both refined products and
crude imports. Distribution margins and all other taxes and levies are added to this exrefinery price to determine retail prices. Parliament is expected to pass (as a prior action)
legislation to establish the National Petroleum Authority, an independent oversight body that
is charged with monitoring the implementation of the new pricing mechanism. The
composition of the authority includes representatives from government, oil-marketing
companies, trade unions, and nongovernmental organizations such as the Association of
Ghana Industries, and persons with knowledge, expertise, and experience in matters related
to the functioning of such an entity. In addition, parliament is also expected to pass
legislation to deregulate the petroleum sector, including measures to ensure a competitive
market for fair prices and an adequate and continuous supply of environmentally clean and
high-quality petroleum products. The legislation also includes measures to promote and
encourage the entry of new participants in the downstream oil industry.
II. ECONOMIC POLICIES IN THE PERIOD AHEAD
7.
Economic policies in the period ahead are being guided by the GPRS, which
encompasses the government’s overarching strategy. The GPRS is to be updated by end-June
2005 to cover 2006-09; recent experience—including through the participatory process—has
sharpened the government’s policy focus. Achieving the MDGs will require scaling up
investment, sustaining economic growth, lowering inflation to single digits, and undertaking
structural reform to enhance the capacity of the economy to withstand shocks. In this regard,
the macroeconomic objectives for 2005 are to maintain real GDP growth of 5.8 percent;
contain inflation at an average of 14½ percent even though inflation accelerated to
16.7 percent in March 2005, in response to the deregulation of petroleum product prices
which were increased by 50 percent in February; and accumulate US$130 million in net
international reserves to provide a larger cushion against shocks. Accordingly, in the 2005
economic and financial program,

- 72 -

ATTACHMENT

•

fiscal policy will ensure that the ratio of net domestic debt to GDP declines to half the
level at end-2002;

•

monetary policy will aim at achieving the inflation and international reserves targets;

•

structural measures will be taken to enhance the conditions for private sector
development, including through investment in human and physical capital and a
deepening of financial intermediation; and

•

economic governance will be strengthened, in particular through reform of the civil
service and state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
A. Fiscal Policy

8.
The 2005 budget targets a domestic primary surplus of about 2½ percent of GDP,
consistent with a net repayment that will achieve the targeted reduction in the ratio of net
domestic debt to GDP. The achievement of the domestic debt objective is expected to result
in a further durable decline in interest rates, and the reduced domestic debt service will
provide much-needed room in the budget for growth-enhancing and poverty-alleviating
spending. However, while the ratio of domestic debt to GDP remains appropriate as the fiscal
anchor, Ghana may be reaching a point where the net marginal benefits from further
reduction in domestic debt are minimal.
9.
In the budget that was passed by parliament in March 2005, lower domestic debt
service, together with the elimination of petroleum subsidies, provides a fiscal space of
2½ percent of GDP. This space has been used for (i) increased capital expenditures (with a
significant component devoted to infrastructure); and (ii) a slight increase in poverty
spending mainly for health and education to foster human capital development and address
the recent deterioration in some health indicators. In line with technical assistance from the
Fund, the expenditure program includes outlays to ameliorate the impact of petroleum
deregulation on vulnerable households through, among other things, increased grants for
education and health services in rural areas, expanded electrification, and the extension of
public transportation to less developed areas.
10.
The budget also calls for an increase in public sector wages, mainly to encourage
capacity building and higher productivity by attracting and retaining qualified personnel.
This increase, together with the slippage in wages last year and the need to clear arrears from
2004, will bring the wage bill to 9.1 percent of GDP, which experience suggests is high in
light of the need to provide more resources for pressing demands to fight poverty. This year,
the government will ensure tight control over wage payments by (i) establishing quarterly
ceilings (inclusive of all allowances), and (ii) integrating all government employees into
personnel and payroll data bases (with technical assistance from our development partners).
The new data bases will include all employees under the Ghana Universal Salary Structure
and subvented agencies. Over the medium term, the government will undertake a

- 73 -

ATTACHMENT

comprehensive reform of the civil service that will include addressing employment and wage
policies. The reform is expected to result in increased efficiency and productivity to support
the private sector-led strategy for growth. In addition, the civil service reform is expected to
reduce the wage bill to around 8.5 percent of GDP over the medium term, thereby creating
further fiscal space for other high-priority spending programs.
11.
On the revenue side, the budget provides for a reduction of corporate income taxes to
spur investment, and an increase in the personal income tax threshold to reduce the tax
burden facing low-income earners. The loss of revenue from these two measures, however,
will be more than offset by the yield from petroleum taxes consequent upon the high oil
prices and the full-year impact of the national health insurance levy introduced in August
2004. Following improvements in administration and with the strict enforcement of the FAA,
nontax revenue will rise further this year. Thus, total tax revenue is set to increase to
24½ percent of GDP. At the same time, foreign financing is expected to be about the same as
last year.
12.
The government continues to improve public expenditure management in a way that
will enhance transparency and accountability. Fiscal reporting in the budget has recently
been expanded to include the internally generated funds of ministries, departments, and
agencies (MDAs), as well as the financial statements of statutory funds and the Social
Security and National Insurance Trust; the legislative framework has been strengthened; and
the budget and public expenditure management system (BPEMS)—which will become the
key instrument for the full implementation of the legal framework—has been deployed in a
significant number of MDAs. In the period ahead, the goal will be to follow through with the
proper enforcement and implementation of several key pieces of legislation, in particular, the
FAA, the Financial Administration Regulations, the Procurement Act, and the Internal Audit
Agency Act.
B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
13.
The goal of monetary policy will continue to be to reduce inflation. To achieve this
goal, the central bank (the Bank of Ghana (BOG)) will keep the pace of monetary expansion
broadly in line with the projected growth of nominal income, implying annual growth of
reserve and broad money (excluding foreign-currency deposits) of 18 and 23 percent,
respectively, during 2005. By maintaining a firm stance, the BOG will be able to contain the
indirect effects of petroleum price deregulation and thereby prevent an upward spiral of
inflation. The BOG has been developing its set of policy instruments, recently adding bank
bills to complement treasury securities for conducting open market operations. Also, the
BOG has promoted transparency by regularly and candidly assessing and reporting economic
conditions and its policy stance through reports from the Monetary Policy Committee. The
Monetary Policy Committee determined in March 2005 that the policy stance was
appropriate to contain the indirect effects of the petroleum-related spike in inflation, and left
the BOG’s prime rate unchanged at 18.5 percent.

- 74 -

ATTACHMENT

14.
Ghana remains committed to a managed floating exchange rate regime for the cedi
with no preannounced path for the exchange rate. Under this regime, interventions in the
foreign exchange market are limited to short-term smoothing, liquidity management, and
achievement of the international reserves objectives. The transmission of exchange rate
effects through prices is rather strong in Ghana, so the BOG remains concerned about the
potential for sharp fluctuations in the cedi’s external value. While international reserves are
at a record-high level, a further buildup may provide an added cushion against shocks, such
as the recent surge in world oil prices.
15.
As part of the ongoing reforms, the BOG intended to introduce a computerized
interbank foreign exchange market, as a means of creating an active interbank market.
However, it delayed this initiative out of concern over both its own capacity and that of
market participants to operate the system effectively and without undue risk to exchange rate
stability. Once the requisite institutional capacity exists (mainly through training), the
computerized interbank market will be launched. At this time, the BOG does not consider it
prudent to eliminate the surrender requirement for foreign exchange, as this would shift to
one or two enterprises the responsibility for properly managing annual foreign exchange
receipts that have reached US$1 billion (about 10 percent of GDP).
III. STRUCTURAL POLICIES
16.
With the benefit of recent experience and an assessment of preliminary outcomes,
Ghana has reshaped the focus of the GPRS to increase the effectiveness of policies aimed at
promoting private sector led growth and alleviating poverty. The main thrust of the structural
policies for 2005 outlined below are consistent with this focus.
A. Financial Sector
17.
The BOG will help strengthen the financial sector in order to expand private sector
credit by using the Bank of Ghana Act to enforce compliance with the increased capital and
capital adequacy requirements (10 percent of risk-weight assets as of April 2005, up from 6
percent earlier) or revoke their licenses; adopt the international norm of classifying nonperforming loans; and facilitate access to credit and reduce lending risks, including by
passing a law to establish a credit bureau. In addition, the government will step up efforts to
enhance private sector credit expansion by implementingvarious other supporting legislation
which have been enacted—such as the Long-Term Saving Bill and the Venture Capital Fund
Bill, which are intended to mobilize domestic savings; and by passing the Insolvency Bill
and the Companies Code to clarify creditor and borrower rights—and by accelerating the
judicial and legal processes to secure land tenure, which is the only form of collateral for
small- and medium-size enterprises and entrepreneurs.
18.
A key element of the development strategy is to increase financial intermediation,
which remains at a relatively low level. In recent years, prudential and legislative reform,
better governance, and macroeconomic stability have strengthened the banking system. Also,
the consolidation of the fiscal position has provided increased scope to expand credit to the

- 75 -

ATTACHMENT

private sector at lower cost. The Financial Sector Strategic Plan continues to provide the
medium-term direction of financial sector reform, with emphasis on regulatory and judicial
reform, institutional capacity building, protection of private property rights, and competition.
19.
In the period ahead, however, measures will be taken to address structural rigidities
that impinge on the availability and cost of credit while ensuring ongoing financial stability.
The secondary reserve requirement (35 percent of deposits) has served as an effective
macroprudential tool, but prevents some banks from allocating their assets optimally because
they have to meet the requirement by holding government or central bank securities. For the
system as a whole, this requirement is not binding, as indicated by the existence of free
reserves. While the BOG is moving to reduce barriers that hamper the private sector’s ability
to obtain credit, it remains concerned about balancing macroeconomic stability and the
soundness of the financial sector, on the one hand, and efficiency and growth of the
portfolios of banks, on the other hand. The BOG will move to reduce, and eventually
eliminate, the secondary reserve requirement when there is firmer control over liquidity
through more robust policy instruments.
B. External Policies and Debt Management
20.
In December 2004, the government finalized its National Trade Policy, which fosters
foreign direct investment, so as to further open the domestic market to competition, and the
transfer of technology. While a further opening to the world and, equally important, regional
markets will take time, the government will focus on several priority issues: harmonizing
external tariffs with the members of the Economic Community of West African States;
establishing a trade sector support program to make the National Trade Policy operational;
and stepping up efforts to implement the President’s Special Initiatives, which seek to
broaden the export base (for manufactured products, such as garments and textiles, salt,
industrial starch, and oil palm), create employment opportunities, and promote economic
development in rural areas.
21.
Reaching the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative made Ghana’s
external debt sustainable. In line with the initiative, Ghana has completed nearly all of the
bilateral negotiations with Paris Club creditors on the precise terms of the debt stock relief.
Nearly all creditors committed themselves to granting additional relief beyond the HIPC
Initiative. In addition, Ghana has been actively seeking to restructure the terms of some
external liabilities on more favorable terms. It has recently adopted several measures to
improve debt management, such as monthly reconciliation of external debt data among
relevant government agencies, shifting the focus of debt management from data collection to
analyzing debt sustainability, and integrating such analyses into the decision-making process
of external borrowing consistent with the government’s objective of debt sustainability.
22.
Ghana has a great need of further funds to undertake crucial development projects. In
view of the improved debt outlook, some international investment banks have signaled their
desire to assist Ghana in tapping resources from international capital markets. However,
Ghana’s decision to access such funds will be based on (i) assurance that such borrowing

- 76 -

ATTACHMENT

would not worsen its debt-service profile over the medium term; (ii) a strengthening of its
debt management capacity to both assess and design loan proposals: and (iii) maintenance of
its good track record of macroeconomic performance that will result in better financing
terms. Furthermore, Ghana will seek to exhaust all available concessional assistance to meet
the resource needs. On this basis, the government will avoid contracting or guaranteeing
nonconcessional debt, as defined in the technical memorandum of understanding (TMU)
attached to this MEFP.
C. Public Enterprise and Civil Service Reform
23.
Fiscal consolidation has reduced the government’s involvement in economic activity,
which has been complemented over time by the divestiture of a significant number of SOEs.
However, its involvement remains substantial and has a direct impact on Ghana’s overall
economic performance. In this regard, the 2005 program aims at improving the quality and
efficiency of the civil service, enhancing the financial performance and monitoring of the
largest SOEs, and reducing SOE’s current and contingent liabilities to the government.
Public Enterprise Reform
24.
Public enterprises account for a sizable part of Ghana’s economy, with 35 SOEs and
about 200 other entities that are partially owned by the government. These include some of
the largest enterprises, concentrated in the service, energy, and financial sectors. While a few
of the SOEs are profitable and have recently begun to remit profits to the budget, the
majority operate at a loss because of technical and operational inefficiencies.
25.
The private sector should lead economic development, and the government will thus
move out of those activities that private agents can undertake more efficiently. In activities in
which the government remains, it will ensure that public enterprises contribute positively to
the budget and the wider objectives of economic policies. The primary goal of reform in this
area, therefore, will focus on improving the performance of all SOEs over time, with
immediate attention placed on the largest entities (such as the public utilities, Tema Oil
Refinery, and Ghana Railways Corporation). The government envisages three elements to
this strategy. First, it plans to expand the mandate of the Nontax Revenue Unit in the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning by end-2005 to monitor, on a quarterly basis,
the financial and operating performance of the 35 SOEs now reporting to the State Enterprise
Commission, while the latter is being restructured. Second, it will continue to require each
entity to produce and submit annual financial plans to the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning—including its investment program, borrowing requirements, and projected
performance (with prospective dividend payments to the budget). These financial plans will
be submitted in time for the preparation of the national budget. Finally, the government will
ensure that commercial entities maintain or adopt pricing policies that reflect full cost
recovery.
26.
By the end of this year, the Divestiture Implementation Committee is projecting
revenue from the sale of shares in 12 joint-venture companies of about 0.6 percent of GDP.

- 77 -

ATTACHMENT

However, these proceeds have not been included in the 2005 budget because of the
associated uncertainty regarding time and the eventual amounts. In the event, the proceeds
will be used to increase poverty-related spending and finance the civil service reform in a
manner that would not give rise to future recurrent obligations or such that the additional
recurrent obligations could be absorbed without compromising the overall budget objectives.
27.
After Ghana Airways ceased operations in July 2004, a debt-restructuring committee
was established to engage creditors and audit its liabilities. Once the committee’s work is
completed in September 2005, the government will devise a strategy to address this debt,
which is currently estimated at US$172 million. A task force has also been created to resolve
issues associated with severance payments, and an allocation has been made in the budget to
accommodate this eventuality. A new airline, Ghana International Airlines (GIA), has been
established through a joint venture between the government (70 percent stake) and a U.S.based investor. The 2005 budget makes provision for the government’s equity contribution
amounting to US$4.9 million.
Civil Service Reform
28.
The government has developed a policy document─Towards a New Public Service
for Ghana—that will form the starting point for reforming the civil service. This document is
to inform the policy debate by drawing important lessons about past attempts to restructure
government operations. A number of shortcomings in past attempts at civil service reform
include (i) the inability to tackle system wide issues, such as public sector pay, rightsizing of
public-sector agencies, and human resource development; (ii) capacity constraints at
managerial and professional levels; (iii) fragmented, technology-driven, and uncoordinated
public sector modernization programs; and (vi) a lack of synergy of reforms between
different levels of government. In looking ahead, the government has identified a number of
key issues to deal with: (i) establishing a human resource policy that recognizes the need for
a civil service that emphasizes professional and career development; (ii) reviewing the
organization and structure of the civil service; (iii) addressing wage policy and payroll
management (including pensions); and (iv) bolstering service delivery to ensure value for
money.
29.
Reflecting the importance of civil service reform, a Minister of State has been
appointed to help accelerate it. With help from development partners, the Minister of State
will present a draft action plan based on the policy document for cabinet consideration by
end-June 2005. After approval by the cabinet, the implementation of the plan will begin no
later than January 2006.
IV. STATISTICS
30.
Progress has been made in improving the quality, timeliness, and availability of
economic data. Ghana is working towards participation in the IMF’s General Data
Dissemination System and has started providing metadata to the IMF. The authorities intend
to make Ghana’s economic and financial data available on the internet. In December 2005,

- 78 -

ATTACHMENT

GSS will publish revised national accounts (from 1990 onward), including by expenditurebased categories. A revised consumer price index reflecting current consumption patterns
will also be published at that time.
V. PROGRAM MONITORING
31.
Quantitative and structural performance criteria and structural benchmarks for 2005
are set out in Tables I.1 and I.2. The fourth review of the program is expected to take place
by November 2005, with end-June 2005 as the test date for the quantitative performance
criteria. The review will focus on, among other issues, prospects in strengthening payroll
management, progress in civil service and financial sector reform, establishment of a basis
for monitoring the performance of state-owned enterprises, and how the pricing mechanisms
for utilities and petroleum products are working (including the oversight activities of the
Public Utility Regulation Commission and the proposed National Petroleum Authority). The
fifth review is expected in March 2006, with December 2005 as the test date for the
quantitative performance criteria.
32.
Detailed definitions and reporting requirements for all performance criteria and
structural conditions are contained in the TMU attached to this memorandum. The
government will make available to Fund staff all core data, appropriately reconciled and on a
timely basis, as specified in the TMU.
.

0

Stock of external payment arrears (ceiling) 5/

660
8,087
5,061
1,713

1,598
8,313
10,646
3,549

3,747

(In billions of cedis)

0

218

2,109 2,109
8,633 8,633
16,886 #####
5,758

6,447

0

100

0

-283

-1,374 -1,374
2,095 -1,287
600

2,532
10,777
23,911
8,014

8,832

0

100

0

130

-996
444
600

End-December
Perf. criterion

1/ Definitions of line items and terminology are elaborated in the technical memorandum of understanding. Variables are measured at end of month values, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Based on a fixed exchange rate of 9,177 cedis/U.S. dollar, the rate prevailing at end-March 2005.
3/ This is a continuous performance criterion. It applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted by
Decision 12274-(00/123) of August 24, 2000 but also to commitments or contracted for which value has not been received, as specified in paragraph 18 of the TMU.
4/ The term "debt" has the meaning set forth in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted by Decision 12274-(00/123)
of August 24, 2000, as specified in paragraph 16 of the TMU.
5/ This is a continuous performance criterion. The TMU stipulates the precise program definition of payment arrears.
6/ Cumulative from January 2005, and Including subvented agencies, all allowances (including additional duty hour allowance), and clearance of all wage arrears from
2004 amounting to 149 billion cedis.

Indicative benchmarks
Government domestic primary balance (floor)
Reserve money stock (ceiling)
Government revenue, excluding grants and divestiture proceeds (floor)
Poverty related expenditures (floor)

1,825

0

Outstanding stock of external debt with original maturity of less than one year
owed or guaranteed by the government or the Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 4/

Wage bill of the central government (ceiling) 6/

0

0

100

-217

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

-237
1,170
568

-132

-119
166
918

End-September
Indicative

(In billions of cedis)

End-June
Perf. criterion

Net international reserves of the Bank of Ghana (floor)
The contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt with
original maturity greater than or equal to 1 year by the government or the
Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 3/

Performance criteria
Net domestic financing of government (ceiling)
Net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana (ceiling) 2/
Stock of net domestic banking sector credit to TOR (ceiling)

End-March
Est.

Table I.1. Ghana: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks, PRGF Arrangement, 2005 1/
(Cumulative flows from beginning of calendar year 2005 to end of month indicated, unless otherwise indicated)

- 79 ATTACHMENT

- 80 -

ATTACHMENT

Table I.2. Ghana: Proposed Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for 2005

Conditionality
Prior action
Establish an independent oversight body to monitor application of
the petroleum product pricing mechanism adopted on
February 23, 2005.
Performance criteria
•

End-September 2005. Establish computerized integrated
personnel and payroll databases, which will include all employees
covered under the Ghana Universal Salary Structure and all
subvented agencies (such as the police, universities, and research
centers).

•

By December 31 2005. Cabinet to approve the final plan for the
civil service reform covering human resource policy, reviewing
the organization and structure of the civil service, and addressing
wage policy and payroll management (including pensions) (in line
with paragraphs 28 and 29 of the MEFP).

Benchmarks
•

Continuous. Starting January 1, 2006, Bank of Ghana will start
to enforce compliance of commercial bank with the capital
adequacy stipulated in the Bank of Ghana Law and Banking Act.
Noncomplying banks must take timely remedial actions, or their
licenses will be revoked.

• By end-December 2005. The Minister of Finance and Economic
Planning will issue an Administrative Directive to expand the
mandate of the Non-Tax Revenue Unit at the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning to monitor—on a quarterly basis—the
financial and operating performance of the 35 state-owned
enterprises that now report to the State Enterprise Commission, as
well as any other key public enterprises so determined by the
Minister of Finance and Economic Planning (in line with
paragraph 25 of the MEFP).

Status

- 81 -

ATTACHMENT

Technical Memorandum of Understanding

1.
This technical memorandum of understanding contains definitions that are intended
to clarify the measurement of items in Table I.1, Quantitative Performance Criteria and
Benchmarks, Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Arrangement, 2005, attached
to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP). Unless otherwise
specified, all quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks will be evaluated in terms of
cumulative flows from December 31, 2004.
Provision of data to the Fund
2.
Data with respect to all variables subject to performance criteria and indicative
benchmarks will be provided to Fund staff on a monthly basis with a lag of no more than
eight weeks (except for select data for which the reporting lag is explicitly specified in
Table I.3). The authorities will transmit promptly to Fund staff any data revisions. For any
information (and data) that is (are) relevant for assessing performance against program
objectives but is (are) not specifically defined in this memorandum, the authorities will
consult with Fund staff, including the Fund’s Resident Representative.
Definitions
3.
Government is defined for the purposes of this memorandum to comprise the central
government as well as all special funds (the Education Trust Fund, the Road Fund, the
District Assembly Common Fund, and the National Health Insurance Fund) and various
subvented and other government agencies that are classified as government in the Bank of
Ghana (BOG) Statement of Accounts (SOA). The Social Security and National Insurance
Trust (SSNIT) and public enterprises, including Cocobod, are excluded from the definition of
government. With regard to government deposits in commercial banks, the BOG’s definition
of government, circulated to commercial banks in May 2004, will apply for program
purposes.
4.
Government domestic revenue comprises all tax and nontax revenues of the
government (in domestic and foreign currency), excluding foreign grants and divestiture
receipts. Revenue will be measured on a cash basis as gross inflows to the government’s
uncommitted treasury collections accounts (as reported by the BOG).
5.
Government domestic expenditure comprises all spending from uncommitted
accounts for Items 1-4, as captured by the accounts of the Controller Accountant General’s
Department (CAGD). Reporting will be based on the current National Expenditure Tracking
System (NETS) accounting system and its associated 15-digit chart of accounts and will be
fully reconciled with BOG bank statements on spending (outflows) from the 42 newly
created ministries, departments, and agencies’ (MDA’s) operational accounts (plus any
residual use of existing treasury drawing/overdraft accounts). Expenditure will also be
verified by comparing it with accounts produced by the Budget and Public Expenditure

- 82 -

ATTACHMENT

Management System (BPEMS) accounting system, until such time as it becomes fully
operational.
6.
The government will continue to report poverty-related expenditures, including
the use of funds from the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
Budgeted poverty spending for these categories will be taken from each year’s final
appropriations bill and will include spending financed by the government or donors or from
internally generated funds. Actual poverty-related spending will be identified using the last 3
digits of the 15-digit chart of accounts of the CAGD’s current NETS and the subcomponent
that is financed through HIPC Initiative debt relief. These data will be supplemented with
that proportion of transfers to the District Assembly Common Fund, the Ghana Educational
Trust Fund, and the Road Fund, which are deemed by those entities to be poverty-related.
Accordingly, actual poverty spending will exclude some donor-supported expenditure not
currently captured by the CAGD (including, among others, the pooled donor health fund).
7.
Net domestic financing of government is defined as the change in net credit to
government by the banking system (i.e., the Bank of Ghana plus deposit money banks) plus
the net change in holdings of treasury bills and other government securities by the nonbank
sector, including deferred accrued-interest payments on inflation-indexed bonds but
excluding divestiture receipts. Such credit will also exclude treasury bills issued for open
market operation purposes from January 1, 2003 onward (the holdings of which are excluded
from the BOG Treasury Department’s Debt Registry of central government securities, and
the proceeds of which are sterilized in deposits held as other BOG liabilities, as defined in
the monetary template provided to the IMF on December 3, 2003).
8.
Outstanding net credit to the government by the Bank of Ghana comprises the
sum of claims on government (SOA codes 0401 and 050101-4), including overdrafts of the
government with the BOG and deferred accrued interest on BOG holdings of inflationindexed bonds, less government deposits (1101 including the main HIPC Initiative receiving
account, and 1202) as defined in the monetary template.
9.
Outstanding net credit by deposit money banks comprises deposit money Bank
(DMB) holdings of government securities at cost of purchase value, as reported by the BOG
Treasury Department’s Debt Registry, plus overdrafts less government deposits as reported
by DMBs in the revised BSD2 report forms (and defined in the Monetary Template), plus
deferred accrued interest on their holdings of inflation-indexed bonds.
10.
Nonbank financing is the difference between total net cash receipts to the treasury
main cash account (issues/redemptions account when it becomes operational) from the
sale/repurchase of government securities, less the corresponding net cash value received
from the BOG and DMBs as indicated on the Debt Registry by holder at discount value, plus
deferred accrued interest on their holdings of inflation-indexed bonds. For each test date, any
adjustment by the BOG to the data reported by individual DMBs, on account of their
misclassification of government or for other reasons, will be reported to the Fund.

- 83 -

ATTACHMENT

11.
The domestic primary balance is defined as the difference between government
domestic revenue and noninterest domestic government expenditure as reported by the
CAGD. It will exclude foreign-financed capital expenditure, for which data are reported by
the Aid and Debt Management Unit (ADMU). The measurement will be on a cash basis, with
any positive (negative) discrepancy between the above- and below-the-line measure of the
overall balance being added to (subtracted from) the measure of the domestic primary
balance (including unspent balances remaining in committed accounts).
12.
The wage bill of the government is defined as the sum of personal emoluments and
Item 1 under the contingency expenditure, both provided by the CAGD in “Report and
Financial Statements on the Public Accounts of Ghana (Consolidated Fund).” The wage bill
is to include all remunerations (plus the Additional Duty Hourly Allowance) paid to civil
servants covered under the Ghana Universal Salary Structure (GUSS) and subvented
agencies.
13.
The program exchange rate for the purposes of this memorandum will be
9,177 cedis per dollar, which was the average interbank transaction rate prevailing at endMarch 2005.
14.
Reserve money is defined as the sum of currency in circulation (BOG statement of
accounts codes 901 plus 902), plus cedi-denominated currency deposits at the BOG
(excluding accounts that are overdrawn, blocked, or owned by banks in liquidation) of the
following entities: commercial banks, other financial institutions, private sector entities,
public institutions, and public enterprises. A more detailed listing of accounts to be included
in the measure of reserve money is contained in the monetary template referred to in
paragraph 7. If aggregate reserves fall below the legal reserve requirement of 9 percent of
bank deposits (as reported in the quarterly STCRBB), then reserve money will be adjusted
upward to the extent of any shortfall in compliance with that reserve requirement.
15.
Net foreign assets are defined in the monetary survey as short- and long-term foreign
assets minus liabilities of the BOG that are contracted with nonresidents. Short-term foreign
assets include: monetary gold (valued at the spot market rate for gold, US$/fine ounce,
London), holdings of SDRs, reserve position and HIPC Initiative trust investment in the IMF,
the HIPC Initiative Umbrella SDR account (all as reported by the IMF), foreign notes and
travelers checks, foreign securities, positive balances with correspondent banks, and other
positive short-term or time deposits. Short-term foreign liabilities include foreign currency
liabilities contracted by the BOG at original maturities of one year or less (including
overdrafts), outstanding liabilities to the IMF, and deposits of international institutions at the
BOG. Long-term foreign assets and liabilities are comprised of: other foreign assets (BOG
statement of accounts code 303), investments abroad (a subset of 60201), other long-term
liabilities to nonresidents (a subset of 1103), and bilateral payment agreements (305). All
values not in U.S. dollars are to be converted to U.S. dollars at the exchange rates prevailing
at end-March 2005 and then into cedis at the program exchange rate indicated in
paragraph 13. A more detailed listing of accounts to be included in the measure of net foreign
assets is contained in the monetary template referred to in paragraph 7 above.

- 84 -

ATTACHMENT

16.
Net international reserves of the BOG are defined for program monitoring purposes
and in the balance of payments as short-term foreign assets of the BOG, minus short-term
external liabilities. To the extent that short-term foreign assets are not fully convertible
external assets readily available to and controlled by the BOG (that is, they are pledged or
otherwise encumbered external assets, including, but not limited to, the HIPC umbrella SDR
account, they will be excluded from the definition of net international reserves. Net
international reserves are also defined to include net swap transactions (receivable less
payable) and exclude all positive foreign currency deposits at the BOG held by resident
deposit money banks, public institutions, nonfinancial public enterprises, other financial
institutions, and the private sector. All values not in U.S. dollars are to be converted to U.S.
dollars at the exchange rates prevailing at end-March 2005 and then into cedis at the program
exchange rate indicated in paragraph 13. A more detailed listing of accounts to be included in
the measure of net international reserves is contained in the monetary template referred to in
paragraph above.
17.
Net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana are defined as the difference between
reserve money and net foreign assets of the BOG, excluding the HIPC Umbrella SDR
account, converted from U.S. dollars to cedis at the program exchange rate.
18.
The performance criterion on short-term external debt refers to the outstanding
stock of external debt with an original maturity of one year or less, including overdraft
positions and debt owed or guaranteed by the government or the BOG.14 Data on the BOG’s
short-term external debt are those reported from the statement of accounts template as shortterm liabilities to nonresident commercial banks (BOG statement of accounts code 1201 plus
301 overdrafts plus Crown Agent).
19.
The performance criterion on nonconcessional medium- and long-term external
debt (Table I.1) refers to the contracting or guaranteeing of external debt with an original
maturity of more than one year by the government or Bank of Ghana.15 Medium- and long14

(A) The term “debt” has the meaning set forth in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance
Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000). This includes
overdrafts on accounts with correspondent banks. (B) Excluded from this performance criterion are
normal import-related credits, pre-export financing credits of public enterprises, cocoa loans
collateralized by cocoa contracts, and individual leases with a value of less than US$100,000 and a
loan (not exceeding US$60 million) that may be contracted to securitize future reimbursements from
the United Nations in connection with Ghana’s participation in UN peacekeeping operations. This PC
does not apply to any obligations that may arise from the conclusion of negotiations with a foreign
shareholder in Ghana Telecom relating to a US$50 million payment made by the shareholder to the
government of Ghana in 2000.

15

(A) This performance criterion applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines
on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000)
but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not been received.
(B) Excluded from this performance criterion are: individual leases with a value of less than

(continued…)

- 85 -

ATTACHMENT

term debt and its concessionality will be reported by the Aid and Debt Management Unit of
the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, and will be measured in U.S. dollars at
current exchange rates.
20.
External payment arrears are deemed to accrue when undisputed interest or
amortization payments of the government are not made within the terms of the contract, or in
conformity with the terms for interim relief provided under the enhanced HIPC Initiative and
the deferral agreed with the Paris Club on December 10, 2001.
External Data, Debt and Debt Service, and HIPC Relief
21.
To improve the transparency and accountability of external debt management,
the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning has written to the Controller Accountant
General and the Governor of the BOG setting down the formal procedures for settlement of
debt and specifying the functions that the CAGD and the BOG are expected to fulfill in
carrying out those procedures. In addition, the following measures have been initiated and
will be maintained:
a) All MDAs have been informed that the ADMU in the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning is the only entity authorized to contract or guarantee external debt, and
all leases with a total value above US$100,000 should be submitted to ADMU for
authorization. The ADMU will report to the IMF with a lag of not more than one month on
the concessionality of all new loans contracted.
b) The Minister of Finance and Economic Planning has sent a circular to all donor desks
officers in the Minister of Finance requesting that arrangements be put in place to ensure that
the ADMU is informed of all correspondence with creditors, including the latest information
on disbursements and project financing developments and any notices of payment due. All
new loan documents should also state clearly that the ADMU is the main initial point of
contact for settlement of all debt obligations.

US$100,000; debts with a grant element equivalent to 35 percent or more, calculated using currencyspecific discount rates based on OECD commercial interest reference rates; a loan (not exceeding
US$60 million) that may be contracted to securitize future reimbursements from the United Nations
in connection with Ghana’s participation in UN peacekeeping operations; and loans or purchases
from the IMF. The grant element of each loan will be assessed only with regard to (i) the interest rate
and repayment schedule of the loan and (ii) any grants or other concessional loans provided by a
foreign official entity in connection with the loan in question. Loans provided by a private entity will
not be considered concessional unless accompanied by a grant or grant element provided by a foreign
official entity equal to at least 35 percent of the combined loan. This performance criterion does not
apply to any obligations that may arise from the conclusion of negotiations with a foreign shareholder
in Ghana Telecom relating to a US$50 million payment made by the shareholder to the government
of Ghana in 2000.

- 86 -

ATTACHMENT

c) Formal procedures have been established requesting donors and creditors to confirm
with the ADMU debt-payment obligations—including for government-guaranteed
obligations—in advance of payment due dates.
d) Formal delegations have been put in place in the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning and at the CAGD to ensure that an absence of signing authority does not delay
payment requests. In addition, a register will be kept of the timing of formal debt-payment
actions. This register should be signed by the various institutions involved in the payment of
external debt.
e) At the same time, procedures instituted in early 2003 relating to prior authorization and
fiscal booking of external and other payments by direct debit will be maintained.
f)
In the event that a shortage of foreign exchange results in a queuing of debt-service
obligations at the BOG, delaying payments beyond their due dates, the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning is responsible for issuing any instructions needed to revise payment
priorities and for maintaining a record of payment arrears. Formal reporting and follow-up
procedures have been established for the BOG to confirm the transactions to CAGD and the
ADMU in the MoF on a daily basis. These reports contain information on the transactions
completed as requested, transactions previously queued and paid and transactions added to
the queue. These reports are copied to both the governor of the BOG and the Minister of
Finance and Economic Planning and his senior officials and to the IMF staff on a monthly
basis.
g) The procedures for verifying BOG data to the Fund have been formalized, and a senior
officer has been formally delegated with the responsibility for the compilation and
verification of data on program conditionality to be reported. Formal reconciliation
procedures to verify both the derivation of data reported to the Fund and the BOG internal
audit procedures have been amended to include a periodic check that procedures are
followed.
h) Two accounts have been established at the BOG for the receipt and disbursement of
HIPC Initiative relief. When each debt-service payment falls due, the government of Ghana
(or the BOG for IMF repurchases) will transfer to the account that proportion of the amount
due that, under the terms of the HIPC Initiative, does not have to be paid to the creditor. For
debt owed by public enterprises under the HIPC Initiative, the Government of Ghana will
transfer to the HIPC Initiative account the debt-relieved portion of the debt service payment,
if the enterprise fails to do so on the due date. The ADMU will issue, in advance of the due
date, a request for payment to the CAGD indicating the portions due to the creditor and the
HIPC Initiative account. The ADMU will prepare a monthly report indicating for the coming
month (i) the total debt service due by creditor, (ii) the amount of HIPC Initiative relief on
each transaction, and (iii) the debt service paid and the transfers to the HIPC Initiative
account by creditor for the previous month. This report will be provided within two weeks of
the end of the month to the CAGD and the IMF.

- 87 -

ATTACHMENT

Table I.3. Ghana: Data to be Reported to the IMF
Item
Fiscal data (to be provided by the MOFEP)
Central budget operations for revenues, expenditure and financing.

Periodicity

Monthly within six weeks of
the end of each month.

Functional breakdown by Ministry, Department, and Agency of expenditure
authorizations, payment vouchers issued, payment vouchers liquidated, and arrears.
These data will also identify poverty-related and expenditures financed through the
HIPC Initiative, as well as the inflows and disbursements from the HIPC receiving and
drawing accounts at the BOG.

Monthly within six weeks of
the end of each month.

Divestiture receipts received by the budget (in cedis and foreign exchange, net of
divestiture transactions costs).

Monthly within six weeks of
the end of each month.

Monetary data (to be provided by the BOG)
Net domestic assets and net international reserves of the BOG.

Weekly within two weeks of
the end of each week.

Detailed balance sheet of the monetary authorities.

Monthly within four weeks of
the end of each month.

Monetary survey detailing the consolidated balance sheet of commercial banks using the
new BSD2 Report Form.

Monthly within six weeks of
the end of each month.

Summary position of government committed and uncommitted accounts at BOG, as well
as total financing from BOG. Accompanying table showing composition of other
receipts and other expenditure.

Monthly within four weeks of
the end of each month.

Composition of banking system and nonbanking system net claims on government.

Monthly within four weeks of
the end of each month.

Debt registry showing structure and holders of domestic government debt, at face value
and at discount. Similar table showing holders of treasury bills for open market
operations.

Monthly within four weeks of
the end of each month.

Supervisory Technical Committee Review of Banking Business quarterly report
showing aggregate reserves of the banking system.

Quarterly within eight weeks
of the end of each quarter.

Balance of Payments (to be provided by the BOG)
Export and import data on value, volume, and unit values, by major categories and other
major balance of payments variables.

Quarterly with a maximum lag
of two months.

Foreign exchange cash flow.

External debt and foreign assistance data (to be provided by MOFEP)
Information on the concessionality of all new external loans contracted by the

Monthly within four weeks of
the end of the month.

Monthly within four weeks of

- 88 -

ATTACHMENT

Table I.3. Ghana: Data to be Reported to the IMF
Item

Periodicity

government or with a government guarantee.

the end of each quarter.

For the coming quarter: (i) total debt service due by creditor, (ii) amount of HIPC
Initiative relief on each transaction, and (iii) debt service paid and the transfers to the
HIPC Initiative account by creditor for the previous month. Report should cover
government and government-guaranteed debt (as defined in this document).

Quarterly within four weeks of
the end of each quarter.

External debt and external debt service incurred by enterprises with government
ownership above 50 percent, even if loans have not been explicitly guaranteed by the
government.

Quarterly, within three weeks
of the end of each quarter.

Disbursements of grants and loans by creditor

Quarterly, within four weeks
of the end of each quarter.

Other data (to be provided by GSS)
Overall consumer price index.

Monthly within two weeks of
the end of each month.

National accounts by sector of production, in nominal and real terms.

Annual within three months of
the end of each year
(switching to quarterly when
they become available).

- 89 -

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on Ghana
June 20, 2005
This statement provides an update on economic and policy developments since the
issuance of the staff report. These developments do not change the thrust of the staff
appraisal.
1.
A prior action for Executive Board consideration of the third review under the PRGF
arrangement was the establishment of an independent oversight body to monitor application
of the petroleum product pricing mechanism adopted on February 23, 2005 (Table I.2 of the
Staff Report, 6/8/05). On June 14, 2005, the National Petroleum Authority Bill, 2005, was
passed by Parliament and the chairperson of the Board of the National Petroleum Authority
was appointed. Accordingly, the prior action has been met.
2.
The adoption of the pricing mechanism for petroleum products was an important
structural reform. The first tenders for petroleum crude and products—following the
implementation of the pricing mechanism in February 2005—were held in March 2005 and
May 2005, respectively. Given the required period for shipment, refining, and delivery, the
transmission of the tender prices to retail prices is expected in early July 2005 for petroleum
products and mid-July 2005 for petroleum crude.
3.
In order to increase the efficiency of the transmission of monetary policy, the Bank of
Ghana announced that the secondary reserve requirement for deposit money banks will be
reduced from 35 percent to 15 percent, effectively July 1, 2005. This reform was
accompanied by the removal of the requirement that banks hold 15 percent of deposits in the
form of medium-term securities (government and central bank obligations). These measures
are broadly consistent with staff advice. The assessment is that the near term effects on
lending and inflation should not be significant; currently, opportunities are limited for banks
to expand their loan portfolios. However, significant efficiency gains are expected over the
medium term.

- 90 -

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/107
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 9, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Ghana
On June 20, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Ghana.16
Background
Since 2000, economic performance in Ghana has improved, with the economy growing at its
fastest pace in more than a decade. In 2004, real GDP growth reached 5.8 percent, driven by
agriculture─in particular, record cocoa production─and a strong pickup in the services and
construction sectors─helped by increased bank credit and private inward remittances.
The strong growth has helped reduce the poverty rate, which is now estimated at about
35 percent of the population. Inflation declined by half to 11.8 percent at the end of 2004,
although it remained above the central bank’s single-digit target. Recently, prices have jumped
in response to the deregulation of petroleum product prices which were raised by an average of
50 percent in February 2005. Nonetheless, interest rates and the nominal exchange rate for the
cedi vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar have remained relatively stable, suggesting that inflation
expectations may be well contained.
The external sector experienced further improvement in 2004, with a buildup in gross
international reserves to US$1.8 billion (equivalent to 3.7 months of imports) at the end of the
16

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

- 91 year. Private remittances, expanding export receipts from cocoa and gold, and increases in
donor support helped in this regard. The external current account (including official transfers)
moved from surplus into deficit in 2004, reflecting a significant increase in capital imports tied to
donor inflows, and a larger oil import bill as a result of higher world oil prices. The reaching of
the completion point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative in
mid-2004 led to a marked improvement in Ghana’s debt service indicators, which are projected
to remain at manageable levels over the medium term.
The overall budget deficit narrowed to 3.6 percent of GDP in 2004, but was still 2 percentage
points of GDP larger than expected. Total revenue and grants were higher than projected on
account of a significant rise in grants, strong economic growth, new tax measures, and more
efficient revenue administration. However, the additional resources were more than offset by
unanticipated capital outlays, increased subsidy for petroleum products as world oil prices rose,
and an overrun in wages. Partly as a consequence of these developments, the envisaged
repayment of domestic debt did not transpire; instead there was domestic borrowing and only
the faster GDP growth generated the authorities’ targeted reduction in the domestic debt-to-GDP
ratio, which is the anchor of fiscal policy. Monetary policy remained firm during 2004, and the
monetary aggregates were in line with the authorities’ targets.
Progress was made with structural reforms. Regulatory and legislative reforms—and the
incipient macroeconomic stability—helped strengthen the financial sector, as reflected in the fact
that commercial banks are now generally more liquid and profitable. Public expenditure and
financial management have been enhanced, and the reform of public enterprises is ongoing with
full cost recovery pricing for public utilities and the settlement of all cross-debts between the
major state-owned enterprises. The adoption of a new pricing mechanism for petroleum
products in February 2005 should help reduce the budget’s exposure to world oil prices in the
period ahead and the involvement of the government in such pricing.
Ghana’s medium-term prospects appear promising, with growth projected to continue at the
current relatively high rate, provided that macroeconomic stability becomes further entrenched
with fiscal sustainability, inflation declines further, and the government perseveres with structural
reform. Continued strong private-sector investment and the concentration of public investment
on vital infrastructure should provide a solid basis for growth. After an initial rise in 2005 because
of the deregulation of the prices of petroleum products, headline inflation is projected to decline
significantly in the medium term (to about 6 percent)—in line with the central bank’s inflation
target. The main risk to this positive outlook concerns a further increase in world oil prices, which
may slow growth, lead to a larger external current account deficit, and delay the achievement of
single digit inflation.
Executive Board Assessment
They commended the authorities on the robust economic performance during 2004, which was
supported by a further strengthening of macroeconomic policy implementation and favorable
external factors. Real GDP growth outpaced earlier projections, and the buildup in international
reserves provides a larger cushion against shocks. Inflation declined significantly through 2004,

- 92 although the recent deregulation of petroleum product prices has led to a jump in consumer
prices. Looking ahead, adherence to prudent fiscal and debt management policies, coupled with
intensified structural reforms, will be key to promoting private sector-driven growth and
diversification of the production base, and to further reduce poverty.
Directors observed that faster GDP growth resulted in a reduction of the ratio of domestic debt to
GDP, which is the anchor of the authorities’ fiscal policy. The overall fiscal deficit narrowed
during 2004, but the outturn was higher than originally envisaged. An increase in total revenue
(relative to GDP) to its highest level yet was not sufficient to offset unanticipated capital outlays,
increased subsidy for petroleum products as world oil prices rose, and an overrun of government
wages. Directors urged the authorities to avoid further fiscal slippages that could slow the
realization of the “fiscal dividend” in terms of further declines in short-term interest rates.
Directors emphasized, in particular, the importance of establishing the institutional capacity to
control wages and salaries. They encouraged the authorities to further improve prioritization of
expenditures and to sharpen the links of the budget to the medium-term expenditure framework
and the poverty reduction strategy. On the revenue side, Directors saw limited room for further
increases in view of the already relatively high tax burden, but stressed that tax administration
should continue to be strengthened.
Directors underscored the need to increase the fiscal space to allow room for growth-enhancing
and poverty-reducing expenditures aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In
this context, they saw the need to further reduce the ratio of domestic debt to GDP, primarily
through cuts in low-priority expenditures and reduction in the government wage bill relative to
GDP. With respect to the latter, the proposed civil service reform should prove helpful, even
though Directors recognized that the primary objective of this reform is to enhance the delivery
of public services.
Directors called for continuing concessional assistance from development partners to Ghana to
increase spending on growth- and poverty-related activities. Directors noted that Ghana’s debt
sustainability remains vulnerable to external shocks and emphasized the importance of relying
on financing provided on concessional terms. They also called for strengthening debt
management capacity to design and assess loan proposals, and to establish a longer track
record of good macroeconomic performance that would result in better financing terms and not
jeopardize debt sustainability.
Directors welcomed the adoption of a new pricing mechanism for petroleum products as an
important reform that will reduce the vulnerability of the budget to world oil prices, and free up
resources for growth-enhancing and poverty-reducing expenditures. They also welcomed the
establishment of the National Petroleum Authority to monitor the implementation of the pricing
mechanism and thereby safeguard the public’s interest against unfair and anti-competitive
behavior. Directors stressed the importance of allowing the automatic adjustment of petroleum
product prices and avoiding government involvement.
Directors welcomed the decline in inflation during 2004, and encouraged the central bank to
maintain a firm stance to avoid an upward shift of inflation in light of high world oil prices and

- 93 high foreign exchange inflows. They supported the authorities’ recent move to reduce banks’
secondary reserve requirements as a way of strengthening the efficiency in the transmission of
monetary policy. A firmer control over liquidity and low inflation would provide the framework to
continue this reform in order to further enhance economic efficiency and allow all banks to take
full advantage of market opportunities.
Directors agreed that the managed floating exchange rate has served Ghana well as a buffer
against external shocks. They considered the level of the exchange rate as broadly appropriate,
but recognized the tension in the inflation and exchange rate policy objectives. Directors also
indicated that the functioning of the interbank foreign and exchange market could be enhanced
by the introduction of a computerized real-time foreign exchange trading system, which should
be implemented as soon as participants have the required capacity.
Directors stressed that further structural reforms would support economic growth. In particular,
enhancing financial intermediation will foster private sector activity, while reform of the public
enterprises should improve overall economic performance. In this regard, Directors encouraged
the authorities to move quickly to develop the necessary capacity to monitor the financial and
operating performance of all public enterprises, and ensure that commercially oriented entities
maintain or adopt pricing policies that reflect full cost recovery. Directors noted that the Financial
Sector Strategic Plan continues to provide the direction for reform, with emphasis on regulatory
and judicial reform, institutional capacity building, protection of private property rights, and
competition. Several Directors encouraged the authorities to continue efforts to enhance
financial intermediation, and to improve access to credit for small- and medium-sized
enterprises. They welcomed the implementation of the recommendations of the Financial Sector
Assessment Program.
Directors encouraged the authorities to improve the quality and timeliness of economic data by
strengthening the operations of the Ghana Statistical Service and participating in the General
Data Dissemination System.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

- 94 -

Ghana: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise
specified)
National accounts and prices
Real GDP

4.2

4.5

5.2

5.8

5.8

Real GDP per capita

1.6

1.9

2.6

3.2

3.2

40.2

28.3

35.4

20.7

21.5

38.071
5,303
32.9

48,862
6,151
14.8

66,158
7,621
26.7

79.865
8,854
12.6

97,018
10,531
14.3

Exports, f.o.b.

-3.6

10.2

20.1

12.7

5.2

Imports, f.o.b.

2.6

-4.1

20.1

31.9

9.3

Export volume

-1.3

-2.1

-6.8

14.5

3.1

Import volume

10.0

-6.8

6.9

13.9

0.6

Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 1/

-5.3

0.5

1.7

-2.7

-4.0

161.4

157.4

175.7

89.6

92.3

452.4

363.6

351.0

148.9

132.5

External debt service due (in percent of GDP)

8.5

7.8

5.9

6.4

4.7

Gross international reserves (in millions of U.S.
dollars, end of period)

340

632

1,427

1,816

1,971

(In months of imports of goods and services)
Terms of trade

1.2
4.8

1.9
9.4

3.2
14.8

3.7
-15.0

3.9
-6.1

-24.0

-11.7

-17.7

-10.1

...

0.6

-0.6

1.4

-1.0

...

7,179

7,944

8,681

9,021

...

18.1
8.9
32.7

18.0
3.1
26.1

20.8
4.7
28.8

23.8
6.4
33.3

24.6
5.8
31.9

Overall balance (excluding grants) 3/

-14.6

-8.1

-8.0

-9.5

-7.3

Overall balance (including grants) 4/

-9.0

-6.8

-4.4

-3.6

-2.6

4.8

2.4

2.3

0.7

2.6

95.4

88.0

89.8

50.5

43.5

Nominal GDP
Nominal GDP (in billions of cedis)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Consumer price index (annual percentage)
External sector

NPV of external debt outstanding
(in percent of exports of goods and services) 2/
(in percent of government revenue) 2/

Nominal effective exchange rate
(annual average)
Real effective exchange rate (annual average)
Cedis per U.S. dollar (annual average)
Central government budget
Total revenue
Grants
Total expenditure

Domestic primary balance
NPV of total government debt 2/

- 95 -

Ghana: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Domestic debt (net) 5/

20.9

23.9

18.3

15.2

11.4

NPV of external debt outstanding 2/

74.5

64.1

71.5

35.3

32.1

13.5

-15.6

7.2

1.1

15.9

Credit to central government 6/

0.0

30.7

-8.2

29.9

-0.1

Credit to public enterprises 6/ 7/

11.0

-9.5

11.2

6.6

1.9

Credit to the private sector 6/ 7/

14.2

18.2

16.4

10.1

22.1

Broad money (excluding foreign currency
deposits)

48.4

49.6

40.9

26.6

23.1

Reserve money

31.3

42.6

33.4

18.8

18.0

4.8

4.1

4.0

3.8

3.8

28.9

28.1

18.1

16.4

...

Money and credit
Net domestic assets 6/

Velocity (GDP/end-of-period broad money)
Treasury bill yield (in percent; end of period)

Sources: Ghanaian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections
1/ Including official grants.
2/ Figures for 2003 and onwards are based on an updated debt sustainability analysis, with additional information
received from creditors and a reconciliation of external debt to end-2003.
3/ Before domestic arrears clearance.
4/ After domestic arrears clearance.
5/ Excluding non-interest-bearing perpetual BoG revaluation stocks and bonds issued in 2004 for recapitalization
of BoG and TOR, and including deferred interest payment (cumulative) on inflation-indexed bonds.
6/ In percent of broad money at the beginning of the period.
7/ Credit from deposit money banks to public enterprises and the private sector, respectively. The historical series
have been revised to ensure consistency with the new banking supervision reporting form introduced in July 2003,
which uses a residency rather than currency definition of foreign assets and liabilities.

- 96 -

Press Release No. 05/145
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 21, 2005

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes Third Review Under Ghana's PRGF Arrangement
and Approves US$38.7 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has completed the third
review of Ghana's economic performance under a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. The completion of the review makes immediately available to Ghana
an amount equivalent to SDR 26.4 million (about US$38.7 million) under the arrangement.
Ghana's three-year PRGF arrangement was approved on May 9, 2003 (See Press Release No.
03/66) for SDR 184.5 million (about US$271.3 million). So far, Ghana has drawn SDR 79.1
million (about US$116.2 million) under the arrangement.
In completing the review, the Executive Board also decided to extend the current PRGF
arrangement to October 31, 2006 so that the sixth and final review and all disbursements
under the arrangement could be completed. It also decided to waive the nonobservance of
three quantitative and one structural performance criteria, as the authorities have since
reviewed the factors that contributed to their nonobservance, and have put measures in place
to ensure that they achieve the original program objectives.
Following the Executive Board's discussion on Ghana's request, on June 20, 2005, Mr.
Takatoshi Kato, Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Economic performance continued to strengthen in Ghana during 2004, with growth
exceeding earlier projections and a further buildup in gross international reserves.
Strengthened policy implementation helped consolidate macroeconomic stability, supported
by favorable external factors including higher-than-expected inflows from donors. Inflation
declined by half at the end of 2004, but the recent deregulation of petroleum product prices
has led to a jump during the first quarter of this year.
“The execution of fiscal policy improved in 2004, although there were some slippages. Total
revenue relative to GDP reached its highest level yet, although this was not enough to offset
unanticipated capital outlays, the increased subsidy for petroleum products as world oil

- 97 -

prices rose, and an overrun in government wages. Consequently, the overall budget deficit
narrowed but was still above the target for the year. Faster GDP growth helped reduce the
ratio of domestic debt to GDP, which is the anchor of the fiscal strategy.
“Monetary policy has remained firm, contributing to the decline of inflation during 2004.
The central bank is to be commended for managing significant inflows in a manner that
balances monetary expansion and competitiveness. Also, the recent rapid buildup of gross
international reserves provides an important cushion against shocks.
“Structural reform has progressed, thereby enhancing the environment for private sector-led
growth. Efforts to strengthen public expenditure and financial management are helping to
improve the transparency, accountability, and efficiency of the use of public resources.
Regulatory and legislative changes and macroeconomic stability have helped strengthen the
financial sector. The reform of public enterprises is ongoing, with full cost recovery for
public utilities.
“The government’s decision to deregulate the petroleum sector and the adoption of a new
petroleum product pricing mechanism earlier this year were important achievements. The
establishment of an oversight body to monitor the application of the mechanism is also
welcome, as this will ensure fair pricing and provide safeguards against anti-competitive
behavior. These measures will remove government involvement in product pricing, reduce
the vulnerability of the budget to world oil prices, and free up resources for growth
enhancing and poverty reducing expenditures. It will be important to ensure the automatic
adjustment of petroleum prices under the new mechanism.
“The reform of the civil service is also welcome. While this initiative is primarily aimed at
improving the delivery of public services, it should also lead to prospective fiscal savings, in
particular, through a reduction of civil service wages relative to GDP. The demand for these
savings to fund priority expenditures is very high.
“Debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative has led to
a substantial improvement in Ghana’s debt-service indicators. Ghana’s long-term debt
sustainability is vulnerable, however, to a sustained deterioration in key economic variables,
and most importantly, to a significant reduction in grants as a source of financing. Until
conditions are more favorable and a longer track record of good macroeconomic
performance is established, Ghana should continue to rely on concessional borrowing to
finance development,” Mr. Kato said.
The PRGF is the IMF's concessional facility for low-income countries. PRGF-supported
programs are based on country-owned poverty reduction strategies adopted in a participatory
process involving civil society and development partners, and articulated in a Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). This is intended to ensure that each PRGF-supported
program is consistent with a comprehensive framework for macroeconomic, structural, and
social policies to foster growth and reduce poverty. PRGF loans carry an annual interest rate

- 98 -

of 0.5 percent, and are repayable over 10 years with a 5 ½-year grace period on principal
payments.

- 99 -

Statement by Abass Mirakhor, Executive Director for Ghana
June 20, 2005

The authorities thank staff for the constructive policy dialogue, and management and the
Board for their continued support to Ghana. They are also grateful for the assistance Ghana
continues to receive from its development partners. Significant progress has been made under
the PRGF-supported program in preserving macroeconomic stability, strengthening growth
performance, reducing poverty, and bringing Ghana to the completion point under the
enhanced HIPC Initiative. This commendable performance owes much to prudent policies
and steadfast implementation of structural reforms. The authorities’ commitment to
financial discipline was particularly manifested during the last presidential and
parliamentary elections held in December 2004, which, for the first time since 1992,
broke the pattern of election-related fiscal slippages that had plagued Ghana and had
interrupted the country’s economic and social progress on similar previous occasions.
Also, the authorities’ decision to deregulate the petroleum sector, despite strong public
opposition, represents one of the boldest and most important reforms undertaken in the
country with far-reaching, beneficial macroeconomic consequences.
Performance under the PRGF arrangement continues to be satisfactory, as most of the
performance criteria and benchmarks for this review were observed. Some slippages,
however, occurred, which, as the authorities detail in the LOI, were due either to factors
beyond their control or to weak systems that are being strengthened to avert reoccurrence of
these breaches. For these reasons, they request their waiver and completion of the third
review, as well as extension of the PRGF arrangement from May 8, 2006 to October 31,
2006, to allow for completion of the sixth and final review.
Macroeconomic performance exceeded program targets in 2004. Real GDP growth was
robust at 5.8 percent, driven by a record cocoa crop and complemented by a strong
performance in other sectors as well. Headline inflation was halved to 11.8 percent and,
although it accelerated to around 16.7 percent in March following the increase in petroleum
prices by about 50 percent in February, underlying inflation remained broadly stable, which,
together with stable interest and exchange rates, suggests that expectations are being
contained. The external current account position moved from a surplus to a deficit, as
increased export receipts from cocoa, timber, and gold, and higher private remittances—
reflecting growing confidence in the economy—were more than offset by higher imports,
driven by donor-financed capital goods and a larger oil bill. Reserves were higher than
programmed in absolute terms, and the import cover increased to 3.7 percent, slightly short
of the target of 3.9 months. The strengthened reserve position, together with firm
macroeconomic policies, contributed to stability of the nominal exchange rate, while the real
exchange rate depreciated, thereby reversing the slight appreciation in 2003 and preserving
competitiveness.

- 100 -

Fiscal policy was implemented broadly in line with the program. The overall deficit was
higher than programmed as a result of larger petroleum-related subsidies (due to high world
oil prices), increased capital spending as a counterpart to higher donor-related—including
HIPC—inflows, and larger wage payments to subvented agencies due to weak payroll
management. Nevertheless, the deficit declined by 0.8 percent of GDP, compared to 2003,
bringing the cumulative fiscal adjustment during 2001–04 to 5.4 percentage points of GDP.
Monetary policy provided a firm anchor for price stability by keeping monetary
aggregates within the program targets through reinforced open market operations
buttressed by an active interest rate policy. In March, immediately following the
petroleum price increase, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) determined the prevailing
policy stance to be appropriate to contain the indirect effects and, therefore, kept the prime
rate unchanged at 18.5 percent. In May, assessing the balance of risks to favor continued
progress toward low and stable inflation and relative exchange rate stability, the MPC
reduced the prime rate to 16.5 percent.
Ghana has moved its structural reform agenda forward. Public expenditure management
was further reinforced through strengthened reporting and profit transfer requirements for
state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The restructuring of Ghana Commercial Bank was kept on
schedule, and the central bank added its bills to the management of liquidity. The automatic
pricing mechanism for utilities has been implemented in line with full cost recovery and
avoidance of budgetary subsidies. More significantly, as elaborated in paragraph 6 of the
MEFP, the authorities honored their long-standing commitment to deregulate the
petroleum sector by adopting a pricing mechanism in February that essentially ensures full
recovery of all costs and taxes and ends petroleum subsidies. It is noteworthy that the highly
politicized deregulation is being carried out at a rather difficult time, with unusually high
world oil prices and strong domestic opposition.
Looking ahead, the authorities’ strategy is to consolidate the gains in macroeconomic
stabilization and to reinforce reforms to sustain a high growth trajectory to achieve a
faster pace of poverty reduction and the other MDGs. In 2005, real GDP growth is
expected to be maintained at 5.8 percent, while inflation will be contained at an average of
14.5 percent. Further accumulation of gross reserves would bring the import cover to
3.9 months.
The authorities agree with staff on the need to create fiscal space for priority spending, with
the domestic debt-to-GDP ratio remaining as the anchor. In this context, the domestic
primary surplus will be increased to allow a reduction in the net domestic debt ratio to less
than half its level at end-2002. This will bring about lower interest rates and will create room
for strengthened support for private sector activities as well as for growth-enhancing and
poverty-related spending. Public expenditure management will be reinforced by
tightening controls and increasing transparency and accountability. The wage bill, on an
accrual basis, will be maintained at 8.9 percent despite the wage award to foster capacity
building and productivity, and the 2004 arrears will be eliminated. On the revenue side,
reduction of corporate tax to spur investment and an increase in the personal income

- 101 -

threshold to reduce the burden on low-income earners, would be offset by improved tax
administration, larger yield of petroleum taxes from high oil prices, and the full-year impact
of the national health insurance levy. Accordingly, the revenue-to-GDP ratio is projected to
rise to 24.5 percent.
Monetary policy will be tailored to achieve the inflation and reserve targets. To this end,
monetary growth will be kept in line with nominal income growth. As staff advise, the Bank
of Ghana (BOG) will remain vigilant and will maintain a firm monetary stance so as to
prevent secondary effects of the hike in inflation resulting from the deregulation of the
petroleum sector. BOG will continue to develop and gear its policy instruments to reinforce
open market operations and will maintain its open policy by regularly communicating its
assessment of economic conditions and the decisions of the MPC to the public. Ghana will
continue to maintain a managed floating exchange rate regime, which has been appropriate
for absorbing shocks, safeguarding competitiveness, and building needed reserves. The BOG
is proceeding in its efforts to build institutional capacity for an effective interbank foreign
exchange market. The current system of foreign exchange surrender requirement has ensured
orderly management of foreign exchange flows that have increased substantially. The BOG
would keep the system under review, cognizant of the need to balance the objectives of
stability and efficiency.
The authorities recognize the importance of intensifying structural reforms in order to
sustain the robust growth. Particular attention will be given to strengthening public
resource management, improving the environment for private sector activity, including
through investment in human and physical capital and the deepening of financial
intermediation, and reinforcing economic governance, in particular through public sector
reform. Efficiency, transparency, and accountability in public expenditure management will
be further reinforced by following through with the relevant pieces of legislation, including
in the areas of fiscal reporting, public procurement, and audit. The financial sector will be
strengthened through stricter enforcement of prudential regulations, institutional capacity
building, and reinforced competition and corporate governance. Financial intermediation will
also be enhanced by implementing legislation toward promoting long-term savings,
reinforcing creditor and borrower rights, and accelerating the judicial and legal process
regarding collaterized lending. The authorities see a need for increased availability of credit
to the private sector at competitive cost. In this regard, access to credit will be facilitated and
lending risks reduced, while consideration would be given to a phased reduction of the
secondary reserve requirement as liquidity control takes hold.
The authorities attach great importance to public sector reform as a vehicle for
enhancing economic efficiency and as a complement to their private sector-led growth
strategy. A Minister of State has been appointed to accelerate the process. For the civil
service, a comprehensive reform is contemplated that will address employment and wage
policies based on an action plan to be derived from the policy document, Towards a New
Public Service, whose implementation is to begin by January 2006. While fiscal
consolidation and divestiture of several SOEs have reduced government’s involvement in

- 102 -

economic activities, further reduction is envisaged to enhance efficiency. In this regard, the
privatization efforts will be intensified. Furthermore, the financial performance and
monitoring of the largest SOEs will be enhanced, and their current and contingent liabilities
to government reduced. While the ultimate goal is to improve performance of all SOEs over
time, immediate attention will focus on the largest ones, particularly the public utilities, the
oil refinery, and the railway corporation. The government will also ensure that commercial
entities adopt cost-recovery pricing policies to avoid dependence on budget subsidies.
The authorities are determined to complete the deregulation of the petroleum sector by
ensuring that the automatic pricing formula is implemented without government
involvement. In this regard, the establishment of the independent National Petroleum
Authority, a prior action for this review, is a further evidence of the authorities’ seriousness
of intent.
The authorities firmly believe in the benefits of and remain committed to an open trade
policy, which will be used as a vehicle to foster FDI and technology transfer. In this
regard, initiatives will be taken towards enhancing regional trade integration, including by
adopting the common external tariff system of the Economic Community of West African
States. The export base will also be broadened in the context of the Presidential Special
Initiatives to reduce the economy’s vulnerabilities.
Reaching the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative has improved
Ghana’s external debt profile significantly. Agreement has been reached with Paris Club
creditors on the required debt stock relief, with almost all pledging additional relief. Ghana
has also been seeking to restructure the terms of some external liabilities on more favorable
terms, while reinforcing its debt management capability. In order to sustain high growth,
necessary to achieve the MDGs in accordance with the GPRS, Ghana needs additional
resources to increase investment, particularly in infrastructure.
Progress has been made in improving the quality, timeliness, and availability of
statistics, and greater effort will be devoted to further improvements. Ghana is working
towards participation in the GDDS and is already providing metadata to the Fund. It is
intended to make economic and financial data available on the internet to enhance
dissemination. In December 2005, the Ghana Statistical Service will publish revised national
accounts (from 1990 onwards), including by expenditure-based categories. A Consumer
Price Index reflecting current consumption patterns will also be published at the same time.
In conclusion, Ghana continues to make important strides in promoting macroeconomic
discipline, implementing structural reforms, improving governance, enhancing the role of the
private sector, accelerating growth, and alleviating poverty. The support of the international
community has been instrumental in Ghana’s progress and will remain crucial while the
country consolidates recent gains and moves to a higher growth path capable of delivering
durable poverty alleviation and other MDGs. Ghana appreciates Fund policy advice and
support in catalyzing assistance from the international community.

