March 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/113

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: 2005 Article IV Consultation and Sixth Review Under the
Staff Monitored Program—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members,
usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV consultation with the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the sixth review under the staff-monitored program, the following
documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation and sixth review under the staff-monitored
program, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on November 22,
2005, with the officials of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on economic developments and
policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on February 15, 2006. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of March 6, 2006 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during its March 6, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

The document(s) listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies—Update*
Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix
* May also be included in Staff Report

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be
sent by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
and Sixth Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation
with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Approved by Juan Carlos Di Tata and Matthew Fisher
February 15, 2006
•
Discussions for the 2005 Article IV consultation and the sixth review under the staff-monitored
program (SMP) were held in Kabul from November 8–22, 2005. The mission met with VicePresident Masood, Minister of Finance Ahady, Minister of Commerce Arsala, Minister of Foreign
Affairs Abdullah, Da Afghanistan Bank Acting Governor Ibrahimi, and other senior officials. The
mission also held discussions with representatives of the diplomatic community, nongovernmental
organizations, international institutions, the business and banking communities, and parliamentarians.
•
At the request of the authorities, the SMP, which initially covered the period March 2004–
March 2005, was extended through end-September 2006 at the time of the fifth review. The SMP
aims at maintaining financial stability and building institutional capacity. Progress made so far under
the SMP has paved the way for discussions on a program that could be supported by the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), which could be presented for consideration by the
Executive Board in the second quarter of 2006.
•
The mission consisted of Messrs. Symansky (head), Bessaha, Martin, Singh (all MCD), and
Thomas (FAD). It was assisted by the Fund resident representative in Kabul, Mr. Charap.
Messrs. Di Tata (MCD) and Zaidi (OED) participated in some of the policy discussions.
•
At the International Donors’ Conference held in London from January 31–February 1, 2006, the
authorities submitted their Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy (I-ANDS), which will
form the basis for the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP).
•

The last Article IV consultation was concluded on January 19, 2005.

-2-

Contents

Page

List of Acronyms .......................................................................................................................4
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................5
I.

Overview........................................................................................................................6

II.

Background and Performance Under the Staff-Monitored Program .............................6

III.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................10
A.

B.

Macroeconomic Outlook and Policy Framework for the Remainder of the
Program Period ..........................................................................................11
Fiscal Policy............................................................................................12
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies and Financial Sector Reforms...12
External Sector Policies ..........................................................................13
Structural Reforms ..................................................................................14
Poverty Reduction...................................................................................14
Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance ............................................14
Program Monitoring ...............................................................................15
Medium-Term Outlook and Reform Strategy..................................................15

IV.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................18

Box
1.

Achieving Fiscal Sustainability ...................................................................................17

Figures
1.
Price Developments, 2003–05 .....................................................................................21
2.
Monetary Developments, 2003–05..............................................................................22
3.
Foreign Exchange Reserves and Real Exchange Rate, 2003–05.................................23
Tables
1.
2.
3a.
3b.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2001/02–2006/07 .......................................................24
Savings-Investment Balances, 2002/03–2007/08 ........................................................25
Core Budget, 2003/04–2008/09 (In millions of Afghanis)..........................................26
Core Budget, 2003/04–2008/09 (In percent of GDP)..................................................27
Monetary Program (Da Afghanistan Bank), 2003/04–2006/07...................................28
Balance of Payments, 2002/03–2008/09......................................................................29
Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2003..............................................................30

-3-

Appendixes
I.
Relations with the Fund ...............................................................................................31
II.
Relations with the World Bank ...................................................................................34
III.
Statistical Issues...........................................................................................................36
IV.
Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance.............................................39
V.
Debt Sustainability Analysis........................................................................................40
Attachments
I.
Letter of Intent .............................................................................................................45
II.
Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies ..............................47

-4List of Acronyms
CPI
DAB
FDI
GDP
HIPC
I-ANDS
I-PRSP
MoF
MTFF
MYR
PRGF
PRSP
SMP
SOEs
TA
TMU
WTO

Consumer Price Index
Da Afghanistan Bank
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Ministry of Finance
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework
Midyear Budget Review
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Staff-Monitored Program
State-Owned Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Technical Memorandum of Understanding
World Trade Organization

-5EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•
Afghanistan’s performance under the SMP continues to be commendable. In a
challenging environment, the authorities have continued to pursue prudent fiscal and
monetary policies and have made further advances on the structural front. While preparing
for the September legislative elections, they observed all the end-September 2005
quantitative indicators and, albeit with some delays, all the structural benchmarks, except for
the publication of the audited 2004/05 core budget financial statements.
•
A rebound of economic activity during the last 12 months was accompanied by a
decline in inflation, and a relatively stable exchange rate. Revenue slightly exceeded the
program target, while government spending remained lower than budgeted. At the same time,
monetary growth was lower than envisaged under the program. The authorities approved a
medium-term fiscal framework that outlines a path for fiscal sustainability, made significant
progress in modernizing Da Afghanistan Bank’s (DAB) operations, and took further steps to
restructure the public sector.
•
Opium production declined by 2 percent in 2005, as a sharp drop in cultivation in
anticipation of intensified anti-narcotics efforts was largely offset by higher yields owing to
favorable weather conditions.
•
The near-term economic outlook is favorable. The real GDP growth target of
14 percent for 2005/06 is within reach as better rainfall is expected to boost agricultural
output, and the construction and service sectors remain buoyant. As price and exchange rate
developments remain broadly in line with expectations, the monetary program was kept
unchanged. The budget deficit is expected to be lower than previously envisaged in 2005/06,
which should contribute to a further build up of government deposits with DAB.
•
Sustained rapid growth and poverty alleviation require a major improvement in the
investment climate. In the context of the Interim Afghanistan National Development
Strategy (I-ANDS) presented during the International Donors’ Conference that took place in
London in late January, the authorities submitted a broad program of growth-boosting
reforms, focused on reducing the role of the government in the economy and improving the
business environment. Continued reforms of the banking system are also needed to ensure a
sustainable flow of credit to the private sector.
•
Risks to the program remain considerable. Insufficient progress in improving security
and strengthening government control over the provinces could slow down the reform
process. Political pressures could also delay the implementation of reforms and limit the
authorities’ capacity to meet the program’s objectives. Lastly, efforts to eradicate
opium-related activities could have disruptive effects on security.
•
Against this background, and on the basis of the SMP implementation to date, the
authorities intend to request a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement
to support the implementation of their ambitious reform agenda. In this connection, the IANDS should form the basis of an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP).

-6-

I. OVERVIEW
1.
Since the inception of the staff-monitored program (SMP) in March 2004, the
Afghan authorities have pursued prudent fiscal and monetary policies and have
implemented a number of important institutional and structural reforms, which have
contributed to the stabilization of the economy and the resumption of growth.
Commendable efforts have been made to improve revenue collection, establish a transparent
expenditure system with fiduciary standards, and modernize central bank operations while
strengthening the banking sector regulatory framework. These efforts took place within a
difficult environment, dominated by continued insecurity and a heavy political agenda.
Looking ahead, the authorities face the challenges of diversifying the sources of growth;
achieving external and fiscal sustainability; enhancing the competitiveness of the economy;
removing institutional and structural obstacles to private sector development; and gradually
eliminating opium-related activities.
2.
Afghanistan’s first legislative and provincial elections took place on
September 18, 2005. About 50 percent of the 12.4 million eligible Afghans voted in
elections for the 249-seat parliament and 34 provincial councils. Although some leading
parliamentarians are not supportive of President Karzai’s government, they indicated their
intention to work in a constructive fashion with the present administration. The parliament
held its first meeting on December 19, 2005.
3.
The security situation remains volatile. The number of incidents increased in the
period leading to, and in the aftermath of the legislative elections, likely due to a resurgence
of Taliban activity and the government’s counternarcotics efforts.
4.
Performance under the SMP during the second quarter of 2005/06 (the period
covered by the sixth review) continued to be favorable, notwithstanding minor
slippages in the implementation of structural reforms. While these slippages do not
reflect a change in policy priorities, they illustrate the need for the authorities to remain
focused on the reform program and strengthen ownership.
II. BACKGROUND AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE STAFF-MONITORED PROGRAM
5.
The government met all the end-September 2005 quantitative indicators and
observed, albeit with some delays, all structural benchmarks, except for the publication
of the audited 2004/05 core budget financial statements.1 This performance was achieved
in the context of the preparations for the elections.
6.
After slowing down sharply in early 2004/05, economic activity has rebounded
over the last 12 months, in line with program projections (Tables 1 and 2). These swings
in economic activity reflected primarily the impact of weather conditions on agricultural
1

The fiscal year 2005/06 runs from March 21, 2005 to March 20, 2006.

-7-

output: cereal production fell by 17 percent in 2004/05, before recovering in 2005/06. At the
same time, the reconstruction effort continued to drive growth in construction, trade,
transportation, and telecommunications. Although it is slowing, real growth remained strong
at 30 percent in the industrial sector and 31 percent in services.2
7.
The drug economy remains a major challenge for the government. Opium
production declined by 2 percent in 2005, as a 21 percent reduction in cultivated areas was
offset by an increase in yields due to favorable weather conditions. The sharp decline in
cultivated areas was due primarily to many farmers not planting in anticipation of intensified
government-led anti-narcotics activities. Increased drug seizures and eradication efforts
continued to have a modest direct impact relative to the size of the problem. Opium prices
fell slightly, which contributed to declines in export and farm gate values of 4 percent and
7 percent, respectively, to $2.7 billion and $560 million.
8.
After rising sharply in 2004/05 on account of an acceleration of rents and
petroleum product prices, inflation subsided over the first half of 2005/06, reflecting
primarily a slowdown in rents (Figure 1). Year-on-year inflation declined to 12.9 percent
in September 2005, from 16.3 percent in March, as envisaged in the program.3 However,
excluding rents and petroleum product prices, inflation rose slightly to 12.7 percent in
September, from 11.1 percent in March, owing mainly to sharp increases in bread and cereal
prices. After appreciating during the first half of 2004/05, the Afghani was broadly stable in
real effective terms during the 12 months ending in September 2005, the nominal
depreciation of the currency being offset by a positive inflation differential.
9.
The fiscal program is on track as the authorities remain committed to fiscal
discipline and continue to improve fiscal management. The operating budget deficit,
excluding grants, reached 4.9 percent of GDP in 2004/05 and 1.7 percent of annual GDP
during the first half of 2005/06 (Tables 3a and 3b). This deficit was slightly lower than
envisaged; combined with higher-than-expected grants, it contributed to a further build up of
government deposits with Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB).
10.
During 2004/05 and the first half of 2005/06, revenue was broadly in line with
program projections. Although customs reforms and larger transfers from the provinces led
to a higher-than-expected increase in customs revenue, tax administration and tax policy
reforms have yet to translate into higher domestic revenues. Domestic tax revenue declined
by 9 percent in the first half of 2005/06 owing to reduced compliance stemming from
uncertainty over the delay in passing the amended income tax laws, which were finally
approved and published in the Official Gazette in November 2005. A number of recently
2

Although it is improving, the quality of the statistical data, particularly for the national accounts and the
balance of payments, remains poor as the compilation process is hampered by the general lack of reporting from
primary sources (see appendix on statistical issues).

3

The “national” CPI, which covers five major cities in addition to Kabul, increased by 10.8 percent during the
12 months ended in September 2005.

-8-

adopted tax measures, including a higher turnover tax rate for specific services, a wage
withholding tax, and an airport departure fee, took effect in October 2005. Lastly, in response
to pressure from the private sector, the government recently: (a) eliminated the withholding
tax on exports, which had been implemented in July 2005; (b) removed import duties on dye
and yarn to assist domestic carpet makers, while raising the import tariff on finished carpets;
and (c) exempted some basic commodities and livestock from customs duty and withholding
tax, with a view to encouraging imports and reducing domestic prices.
11.
Government spending, especially for development purposes, remained lower
than budgeted because of capacity constraints. Core development expenditure reached
2.5 percent of annual GDP during the first half of 2005/06, compared with a revised budget
target of 14.1 percent of GDP for the fiscal year as a whole. Despite well structured
coordination mechanisms that seek to align donor activities with the government’s priority
programs, limited information is available on external budget spending (projected at
29 percent of GDP in 2005/06), which is directly implemented by donors.4
12.
The midyear budget review (MYR) was concluded in October 2005. The
authorities capped the increase in operating expenditure to 2.1 percent over the budget, as a
3 percent increase in compensation for civil servants—agreed under the program—and
unanticipated spending for parliamentarians and pensions were partially offset by savings in
other expenditures. A medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) was approved by Cabinet at
the time of the MYR, including a set of integrated macroeconomic projections and fiscal
targets that outline a path towards fiscal sustainability.
13.
The authorities have continued to focus on improving fiscal management and
transparency. The budgetary process and transparency have been strengthened through the
adoption of a new public finance and expenditure management law, the routine reconciliation
of the government’s fiscal and banking records, and the publication of monthly core budget
reports. A World Bank study is helping to design the computerized financial management
system that will eventually be rolled out to line ministries and provinces. However, the
reconciliation of fiscal and banking data remains largely manual and constrained by existing
procedures and information systems, and weak capacity. The external audit of the 2004/05
core budget financial statements was delayed by uncertainty over the appropriate procedures
following the introduction of the new budget law.5 To avoid a repetition of these delays, the
Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the Control and Audit Office will agree on an audit plan for
2005/06 before the end of the current fiscal year. A multi-year public administration reform
program is expected to be adopted during the remainder of 2005/06.
14.

Monetary developments during 2004/05 and through September 2005 remained

4

Security spending continues to dominate the budget. It is projected at 26 percent of total core and external
development spending in 2005/06 (implementation rates in this sector tend to be highest).
5

Audits of the main multi-donor trust fund (Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund) and World Bank funds,
which cover a large part of the budget, were finalized by end-December.

-9-

broadly in line with SMP projections (Table 4). Monetary policy continued to be guided
primarily by indicative targets for currency in circulation, and implemented almost entirely
through foreign currency auctions.6 As expected, there was a marked slowdown in currency
growth, due in part to the development of the banking sector. Currency in circulation rose by
11 percent during the first half of 2005/06, below the SMP indicative ceiling (13 percent). As
the seasonal increase in money demand during the second quarter was less marked than last
year, DAB was able to contain money growth within program limits without triggering an
appreciation of the Afghani, such as the one observed in August 2004. International reserves
reached $1.5 billion at end-September 2005 (equivalent to 4.1 months of 2006/07 imports of
goods and nonfactor services), owing partly to the accumulation of deposits by the
government. Interest rates on overnight and 30-day capital notes continued to move in the
1–2 percent and 4–6 percent ranges, respectively. Commercial bank lending operations
increased at a brisk pace, albeit from a low base, with the banks’ deposit base rising by
9 percent during the first half of 2005/06.
15.
The authorities made significant progress in modernizing DAB’s operations and
strengthening the banking sector regulatory framework. In line with Fund
recommendations, DAB modernized its foreign exchange and capital note auctions, made
progress toward introducing new instruments and increasing transparency, restructured its
balance sheet, and improved monetary statistics. The authorities also adopted a set of
regulations and administrative measures to strengthen DAB’s supervision of the banking
sector and improve the environment for lending operations, including by reducing the
registration fee for deeds from 6 percent to 0.5 percent.
16.
The external current account deficit, excluding grants, narrowed to 45 percent
of GDP in 2004/05, from 51 percent in 2003/04 (Table 5).7 This improvement essentially
reflected a slowdown in imports attributable to a stabilization of foreign aid and one-off
factors (i.e. purchase of airplane parts by Ariana Airlines in 2003/04). Including grants, the
current account recorded a surplus close to 2 percent of GDP in 2004/05, compared with
3 percent in 2003/04.
17.
Further progress was made in reconciling the external debt (an end-September
2005 structural benchmark). The reconciliation process has been completed with many of
Afghanistan’s creditors. However, debt reconciliation with the former Czechoslovakia and
Yugoslavia is hampered by uncertainty over the claimant, while two other small creditors
have yet to provide adequate documentation to validate their claims. Also, a few outstanding
issues still need to be resolved to reconcile Russian claims. The Cabinet has adopted a
comprehensive debt management strategy—a structural benchmark—which defines the

6

Afghanistan’s exchange rate system consists of a managed float with no predetermined path for the exchange
rate. Foreign exchange auctions are conducted on a weekly basis.

7

Current account figures exclude drug exports but include rough estimates of re-exports and unrecorded imports.

- 10 -

institutional and operational guidelines for public borrowing, consistent with both fiscal and
external debt sustainability.
18.
Further steps have been taken to restructure public financial institutions. The
authorities have made public their intention to liquidate three former state-owned banks that
had not been relicensed, of which only one, the Agricultural Development Bank, keeps a
deposit base. As a first step toward the transfer/reimbursement of the remaining deposits of
this bank, initially expected to be completed by end-September 2005, DAB froze its
correspondent accounts in November. In addition, the MoF (the main shareholder) will
restructure two of the relicensed state-owned banks, Bank Millie and Bank Pashtany, and is
considering the transfer of the assets of the Export Promotion Bank to one of these two
institutions. Other positive developments in the banking sector included the divestiture of
DAB’s commercial activities in those provinces where at least one commercial bank is
active.
19.
In the public enterprise area, the government adopted, with donor assistance, a
classification of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) by the envisaged restructuring
method.8 Out of 66 enterprises directly owned by the government, 8 are expected to remain
state-owned, while 58 will be liquidated or privatized. In addition, the government amended
the SOEs law to provide the MoF full authority and responsibility to privatize these
enterprises. However, the detailed modalities of the privatization have yet to be developed.
20.
Statistical deficiencies are being addressed. To improve balance of payments data,
the authorities are putting in place a new reporting system covering trade flows, private
grants, interest receipts and payments, and the international investment position. Also, a new
statistical law has been adopted which provides for an independent statistical agency and
defines the legal framework for collecting, processing, and disseminating economic data.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
21.
Afghanistan continues to establish a solid track record of macroeconomic policy
and structural reforms. As noted above, despite concerns that low capacity would hinder
the delivery of the program’s commitments, the authorities have been able to meet all the
quantitative indicators and almost all the structural benchmarks set under the SMP.
22.
Notwithstanding this commendable performance, Afghanistan’s outlook
remains clouded by lingering insecurity, drug industry activities, weak institutions, and
serious capacity constraints. Furthermore, the government remains under pressure to
quickly improve public services, increase wages, and borrow at lower concessional terms to
fund major infrastructure projects. Some constituencies, frustrated by the slow rise in the
standards of living, dispute the government’s policies and advocate lowering or temporarily
eliminating taxes to encourage investment; raising import tariffs to protect domestic
8

A number of public entities and government agencies engaged in commercial activities are not covered by the
SOEs law and were, therefore, excluded from this classification.

- 11 -

industries; and increasing government interference in the economy, including through
government ownership and price controls, notably in the agricultural sector. Staff advised the
authorities to keep the focus on the long-term benefits of market-oriented policies, and to
press ahead with medium-term policies and a reform agenda that is financially sustainable
and in line with their development objectives.
23.
While the SMP has served the country well, the authorities are ready to move to
a more ambitious reform program. At their request, the mission initiated discussions on a
successor program that could be supported by a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. The authorities view such a program as an appropriate vehicle for
implementing their structural reform agenda, which is described in detail in the Interim
Afghanistan National Development Strategy (I-ANDS) and has been prepared in consultation
with the civil society and the donor community. Specifically, the authorities are of the view
that a PRGF-supported program would help them consolidate macroeconomic stability,
develop the institutions and conditions necessary for private sector development, and
significantly improve social conditions. In addition, a PRGF arrangement would contribute
to the resolution of outstanding debt issues with Paris Club creditors (possibly in the context
of the heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) Initiative). Further discussions on a successor
program are expected to take place in early March 2006, with the view of submitting to the
Executive Board a request for a PRGF arrangement in the second quarter of 2006.
24.
Against this background, the discussions with the authorities focused on: (a) the
policy framework for the remainder of the period covered by the SMP; and (b) the
medium-term economic outlook and the reform strategy. The authorities were in broad
agreement with the staff on most of the issues that were discussed, except on tariff policy, as
they raised the possibility of an increase in import tariffs with a view to increasing revenue
and protecting the domestic industries.

A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Policy Framework for the Remainder
of the Program Period
25.
The macroeconomic outlook for 2005/06 remains favorable. Real GDP growth is
still projected at 14 percent, as originally envisaged, on account of a continued recovery of
the agriculture sector—due to better rainfall—and sustained activity in construction and
services. While there are some upside risks from second round effects of the increase in oil
prices, year-on-year inflation is targeted to decline to about 10 percent by end-2005/06. The
current account deficit, excluding grants, is projected to narrow further in 2005/06, while
international reserves would continue to rise.

- 12 -

Fiscal Policy
26.
In the context of the MYR, the government reaffirmed its commitment to fiscal
sustainability. The operating budget deficit, excluding grants, is now projected to narrow to
4.2 percent of GDP in 2005/06, from 4.9 percent in 2004/05, owing essentially to rising
revenues, while the overall deficit would be significantly lower than expected because of
continued capacity constraints in executing development spending. Overall, including
anticipated grants and loans, the government is expected to build up further cash reserves in
2005/06. Revenues are projected to increase to 5.3 percent of GDP in 2005/06, from
4.5 percent in 2004/05, reflecting the better-than-expected performance of customs revenue,
but also the implementation of the recently adopted tax measures.9 The ratio of operating
expenditures to GDP is expected to remain unchanged at its 2004/05 level of 9.4 percent.
27.
For 2006/07, under the MTFF, the operating budget deficit, excluding grants, is
projected to decline further to 2.8 percent of GDP. Revenues are projected to reach
6 percent of GDP (a 38 percent rise over 2005/2006), largely owing to the full impact of the
recent measures and structural reforms. The authorities are committed to limiting the nominal
increase in operating expenditures to 13 percent in 2006/07, thus reducing their ratio to GDP
to 8.9 percent.
28.
Possible budgetary pressures arising from the pension system are of a growing
concern. In the MYR, the authorities increased the allocation for pensions to about 5 percent
of total operating expenditures. However, a recent Supreme Court decision links military
pensions directly to sizeable salary increases granted to the Afghan National Army. This
decision, if implemented, would add a further 7 percent to the budget (0.6 percent of GDP)
for past payments, and about half that amount annually to future budgets. The authorities
have indicated that they are not in a position to fund this unexpected increase in expenditure
and have appealed the Supreme Court’s decision on the grounds that (a) it would set a costly
precedent given the imminent retirement of a large number of civil servants and proposed
pay reforms; and (b) any payment would be outside the recently adopted budget law. The
authorities and staff concurred on the need to address pension issues in a comprehensive
manner in the context of their ongoing public administration reform program.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies and Financial Sector Reforms
29.
In view of the decline in inflation, the monetary program, which caps the
increase in currency in circulation to 28 percent in 2005/06, was kept unchanged. In
2006/07, pending a deepening of the financial markets (interbank market, capital notes), the
authorities will continue to target currency in circulation within the context of a
market-determined exchange rate. However, with upward risks to inflation from second-

9

These projections exclude $80 million (equivalent to 21 percent of total revenue) stemming from the sale of the
telecoms spectrum band width (transfer of nonfinancial assets).

- 13 -

round effects of the increase in oil prices, DAB will stand ready to tighten the monetary
stance as needed to achieve the program’s inflation target.
30.
DAB is committed to pursuing the modernization of its operations and
strengthening its monetary policy framework. In line with Fund recommendations, DAB
will amend regulations to remunerate reserve requirements, while excluding capital notes
from eligible assets. These new regulations, as well as those related to open foreign currency
positions, will be enforced by end-March 2006. In addition, the authorities committed to
allowing participants in the foreign exchange auctions to sell, as well as buy foreign
exchange, and to establishing an overnight collaterized credit facility with capital notes
eligible as collateral. DAB also intends to introduce capital notes of longer maturities. Lastly,
DAB will strengthen monetary management through more reliable liquidity forecasts,
publication of the capital note interest rates, and stronger oversight.
31.
The authorities are committed to accelerating the restructuring of the public
banking sector. They will appoint officials to oversee the liquidation of the former
state-owned banks, and, by end-March 2006, they will complete the transfer/reimbursement
of Agricultural Development Bank deposits. In addition, the management boards of Bank
Millie and Bank Pashtany will be replaced and experts will be appointed to help restructure
these banks’ operations. By end-June 2006, the new managements of both banks, in
coordination with the MoF, will adopt long-term restructuring plans. In its capacity as
banking supervisory authority, DAB will monitor these developments closely.
32.
The authorities agreed to address several administrative and legal impediments
facing the banking sector. While factors such as poor judicial enforcement hinder the
expansion of bank lending operations, there appears to be a consensus between the
government and the business and donor communities on the need to give priority to the
enactment of a core group of enabling laws, including on secure transactions, business
organization, and negotiable instruments, as well as to clarify land ownership rights.
Together with several donors, the authorities are working toward the adoption of this
legislation.
External Sector Policies
33.
The current account deficit, excluding grants, would decline to 42 percent of
GDP in 2005/06. Although foreign direct investment (FDI) is expected to increase, this
deficit will continue to be primarily covered by grant financing, which is projected at
$3.1 billion. Including grants, the current account is projected to record a surplus of 2 percent
of GDP in 2005/06.
34.
An open and transparent trade regime will help improve Afghanistan’s growth
prospects. The authorities intend to pursue technical work in support of discussions on
Afghanistan’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO), with the longer-term aim
of reaping the benefits of a liberal trade regime as well as of the WTO’s dispute settlement
mechanisms and technical assistance. As part of its trade strategy, Afghanistan recently

- 14 -

joined several regional organizations, including the Central Asian Regional Economic
Council and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
35.
The authorities also recognized the need to establish an adequate legal
framework for the exchange system, in order to pave the way for accepting the obligations
under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. They requested Fund assistance in
this area.
Structural Reforms
36.
In addition to the fiscal and financial structural reforms described above, the
authorities intend to make further progress in restructuring the public sector and
creating an enabling environment for private investment. In particular, they committed
to: (a) publish in the Official Gazette, by end-December 2005, the amendments to the SOEs
law; (b) initiate an open and transparent divestiture process for the SOEs slated for
liquidation or privatization; and (c) complete by end-December 2005, an inventory of the
various public entities and government agencies engaged in commercial activities but not
covered by the SOEs law, with a view to preparing an appropriate divestment strategy.
Poverty Reduction
37.
The I-ANDS prepared in consultation with donors and the civil society places
priority on: (a) security; (b) governance, rule of law, and human rights; and
(c) economic and social development. It also identifies the elimination of the narcotics
industry as a vital and cross-cutting priority, includes sectoral strategies that outline
objectives and constraints, and provides rough estimates of resource needs. The government
and the donor community have developed a “Compact” that establishes commitments,
benchmarks, and a monitoring mechanism to support the delivery of the development
strategy.
Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance
38.
Notwithstanding recent progress, a number of statistical weaknesses remain. The
authorities are seeking assistance to improve the quality and coverage of the national
accounts and CPI estimates, as well as the reliability of monetary and balance of payments
data. An ongoing survey on recorded trade, which should be completed by March 2006, will
improve the estimates of overall trade flows. Efforts are also being made to develop social
statistics and conduct a population census in support of work on the PRSP. Lastly, DAB will
coordinate closely with the MoF to improve the quality of external debt data.
39.
The authorities decided to delay the completion of their assessment of technical
assistance (TA) until after the International Donors’ Conference. This assessment will
help identify the country’s main human capacity constraints and TA needs. It should also
contribute to improving disbursement rates and the cost-efficiency of available resources, in
line with the priorities set in the I-ANDS. Key areas of possible future Fund TA include tax
and customs administration and policy, public expenditure management, legal assistance in

- 15 -

the fiscal area (including provisions for extractive industries), banking supervision and
liquidity management, financial markets legislation, and statistics.
Program Monitoring
40.
Program implementation will continue to be guided by the definitions, data
sources, and frequency set out in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding
(TMU). The tables attached to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
establish quantitative indicators (Table 1) and structural benchmarks (Table 2) through
end-September 2006. Fund staff will be notified prior to the introduction of any policy
actions and developments that might affect the program. The SMP will continue to be in
effect unless a successor program is approved by the Executive Board before
end-September 2006.
B. Medium-Term Outlook and Reform Strategy
41.
Afghanistan’s medium-term prospects are broadly favorable. Based on
preliminary projections, growth is expected to be around 10 percent a year over the
medium-term. Agricultural growth is expected to return to its historical trend, while
telecommunications, transport, and trade would continue to expand at a strong pace.
Construction activity would increase steadily, albeit more slowly than in recent years.
Further growth prospects are predicated on the emergence of new economic activities,
assuming increased efficiency in the public sector, the design of an appropriate regulatory
framework for private sector activity, and improvements in human capital and infrastructure.
In the context of the I-ANDS, the authorities have identified four sectors that could enhance
the country’s growth and exports prospects: (a) agriculture and rural industry; (b) leasing of
state assets (land and buildings); (c) mining and extractive industries; and (d) regional trade
and transit. Assuming continued sound monetary and fiscal polices, inflation is expected to
decline further, to about 8 percent by end-2006/07, and to 5 percent a year thereafter.
42.
These projections are based on the assumption of a gradual fall in opium
production. A sharper decline in opium production could, at least temporarily, affect
adversely the real sector (GDP growth would fall due to an income-induced decline in the
demand for licit goods), and the balance of payments. However, the impact on the real sector
might not be pronounced because the larger decline in income would fall on traffickers, who
have a lower propensity to consume. Similarly, both the high level of drug-related capital
outflows and the large import content associated with drug-related consumption could
moderate the effect on the balance of payments.
43.
Fiscal consolidation and continued substantial donor support are required over
the medium term. The MTFF provides a good basis for medium-term fiscal consolidation
and sustainability. However, it needs to be strengthened in order to ensure (a) a significant
increase in revenue from its low level; (b) the implementation of a civil service reform
program to contain the wage bill and pensions to affordable levels; and (c) a gradual
consolidation of fiscal operations within the core budget. Based on the current reform
programs, it should be possible for revenues (excluding grants) to cover the rising nominal

- 16 -

wage bill by 2006/07, and the entire operating budget, as currently defined, within four years.
Nonetheless, reliance on external funding will remain significant, even for basic activities
such as the Afghan National Army and health expenditures (see Box 1).
44.
The MTFF includes an ambitious program to increase tax revenue.10 Revenue is
projected to rise from 4.5 percent of GDP in 2004/05 to 8.6 percent by 2009/10, through:
(a) rationalization of the current tariff structure and introduction of road tolls and excises in
2006/2007; (b) implementation of the taxes introduced in 2005/06; and (c) strengthened
compliance facilitated by administrative reforms, including through the operations of the
large taxpayer unit. Tax simplification to remove the plethora of small nuisance taxes and
procedures will continue over the medium-term, and the authorities intend to gradually
transform the turnover tax into a more efficient consumption-based tax. As noted earlier,
during the discussions, the authorities also raised the possibility of an increase in import
tariffs, with a view to increasing revenue while protecting the domestic industries. Staff
cautioned strongly against such an approach, emphasizing that protectionist measures would
send a wrong signal to potential investors while raising the prices of domestic goods often
needed by the poor. Instead, staff recommended giving consideration to introducing excise
taxes on a group of items.
45.
The primary medium-term objective of monetary policy will continue to be the
reduction of inflation to single-digit levels. Accordingly, with Fund assistance, the
authorities intend to: (a) strengthen DAB’s implementation capacity through new monetary
instruments and the deepening of financial markets; (b) increase DAB’s policy formulation
capacity by developing its analytical tools and improving monetary statistics; and (c) better
manage public expectations through greater transparency. Once these building blocks are in
place, the authorities intend to begin targeting a broader monetary aggregate. The authorities
will also proceed with the planned restructuring of the public banks to improve their
operational efficiency and maximize shareholder value. More generally, they will aim at
creating an enabling environment for bank lending.
46.
The pace of reconstruction and structural changes will continue to influence the
balance of payments. A decline in imports relative to GDP, stemming from a progressive
reduction in aid and gradual import substitution, would contribute to a steady decline in the
current account deficit, excluding grants, to around 29 percent of GDP by 2008/09. While
largely offset by a reduction in grant financing, this improvement in the current account,
together with an increase in FDI, would contribute to maintaining a strong reserve position.

10

In late October 2005, the MoF organized a revenue conference with the private sector and the international
community to discuss both policy and administrative issues. Several working groups were established to address
the issues raised during the conference.

- 17 -

Box 1. Achieving Fiscal Sustainability 1/
Substantial external assistance will
be required to fund Afghanistan’s
Government operating expenditure and
operating expenditures for many
revenue projections to 2011/12
years. The overall fiscal deficit
(in percent of GDP)
% GDP
(excluding grants) is large and
18.0
Domestic revenue
predominantly funded by external
16.0
grants (Tables 3a and 3b). A large
14.0
part of spending, including recurrent
Estimated recurrent spending in development budgets
12.0
spending, in key areas such as
10.0
security, counternarcotics, elections,
8.0
and infrastructure, is undertaken
Other expenditures (operating budget)
directly by donors through the
6.0
external budget. Eventually, the
4.0
Compensation to employees (operating budget)
recurrent costs of these activities,
2.0
including military salaries and
0.0
2003/04
2004/05
2005/06
2006/07
2007/08
2008/09
2009/10
2010/11
2011/12
infrastructure maintenance, will have
to be included in the government’s
Sources: Government of Afghanistan;World Bank; and Fund staff projections.
core budget. The attached chart
presents a conservative projection of total recurrent expenditures in the operating and development/external
budgets and domestic revenue mobilization. 2/
A strong increase in revenue is needed to move towards fiscal sustainability. Although revenue mobilization
has increased rapidly in the last few years, meeting the government’s revenue target of 8.6 percent of GDP by
2009/10 will require a sustained effort to rebuild administrative capacity, with a focus on the new large taxpayer
unit and customs, and a gradual move toward a coherent policy framework placing lesser reliance on trade taxes.
A first step toward fiscal sustainability would be the ability to fund recurrent expenditures from tax
revenue. So far, the government has demonstrated its commitment to pursuing a prudent fiscal policy based on
the funding of operating expenditures from tax revenue and grants. Expenditure restraint will have to remain a
priority if the government is to achieve its medium-term objectives of using only revenue to fully fund the wage
bill by 2006/07 and all other expenditures currently included in the operating budget by 2010/11. This leaves
little room for a substantial pay restructuring and a significant increase in staff numbers. Also, given the
expected borrowing constraints, other recurrent expenditures currently outside the operating budget will need to
be funded by foreign grants (around $900 million per year).
Expenditure should be consolidated within a realistic MTFF. The MTFF should be used to articulate the
path towards fiscal sustainability by elaborating strategies for domestic revenue mobilization and public service
reform, and developing detailed sectoral policies consistent with the I-ANDS and future operating and
maintenance costs. To assist the planning process and improve transparency, donors are being encouraged to
channel their resources through the budget, with greater multi-year predictability.

1/ This box draws on discussions and information supplied by the authorities and World Bank staff during the
development of the I-ANDS.
2/ Significant recurrent costs are currently funded by donors in the core development and external budgets, such
as: the Afghan National Army; health costs; non-salary education costs; transfers under the National Solidarity
Program; and costs related to the elections. The projections do not include possible increases in pensions
following the recent Supreme Court ruling.

- 18 -

47.
Afghanistan’s currency appreciated by about 20 percent in real effective terms
over the 30 months ended in September 2005. To a large extent, this real appreciation
results from “Dutch disease” stemming from drug- and aid-related inflows. In addition,
relatively high production costs reflect the difficult security situation, cumbersome business
practices, and poor infrastructure. The authorities concurred with the staff that in
Afghanistan’s present context, there is little that financial policies can do to improve external
competitiveness. Rather, strengthening competitiveness will require strong efforts to increase
efficiency in utilizing external aid, as well as the determined implementation of structural
reforms to increase productivity, including by lowering the cost of doing business. Of course,
better security conditions would help improve the business climate and unlock investment
opportunities.
48.
The authorities concurred with the main findings of the debt sustainability
analysis conducted by the staff (Appendix V). While emphasizing that Afghanistan’s
medium-term program cannot be financed solely by grants, they indicated that highly
concessional borrowing was key to achieving external sustainability. In addition, the
government will continue to seek generous debt relief from official bilateral creditors and to
pursue good faith efforts to complete the debt reconciliation process with all creditors. In this
connection, the authorities have recently intensified their contacts with Russia, Afghanistan’s
largest creditor, and remain confident that substantial progress can be achieved over the
coming months toward the resolution of outstanding claims.11
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
49.
Economic developments in Afghanistan have remained generally favorable, and
the SMP has contributed to improving macroeconomic management and making
headway in the structural area. At the same time, the country has made significant strides
in its political stabilization efforts, as evidenced by the recent legislative and provincial
elections. Still, Afghanistan faces formidable challenges, and its medium-term outlook is
subject to the risks and uncertainties typical of a post-conflict environment. In particular,
there is a need to consolidate macroeconomic stability, diversify the sources of growth,
achieve fiscal and external sustainability, address institutional and structural obstacles to
private sector development, and gradually eliminate opium-related activities. Addressing
these challenges will require formidable coordinated efforts on the part of the government,
the private sector, and the donor community for several years.
50.
Fiscal policy should remain cautious over the medium term to ensure
macroeconomic stability and maintain external imbalances at sustainable levels. New
revenue measures and decisive efforts to strengthen the limited administrative capacity of the
revenue directorate, including by targeting large taxpayers, are needed to achieve the
11

The governments of Russia, Germany, and the United States have indicated their intention to cancel all of the
debt owed by Afghanistan through the Paris Club under the HIPC Initiative. Further details will be included in
the staff statement to the Executive Board.

- 19 -

objectives of the MTFF. In particular, the introduction of excises on certain consumption
items and continued implementation of the current reform plan for the customs and tax
administrations are of critical importance. The staff would caution strongly against raising
import tariffs, introducing ad-hoc duty exceptions, or reducing tax rates.
51.
Affordable public administration reform is a major challenge. Government policy
to date has been to maintain the size of the civil service, except for the recruitment of more
teachers, while enhancing its productivity through capacity building and higher salaries to
recruit and retain qualified professional staff. In the medium term, a more systematic reform
program is required to strike a better balance between the need for higher salaries and
budgetary considerations. Furthermore, linking pensions to salary increases would constitute
a costly and counterproductive policy shift that could jeopardize medium-term fiscal
sustainability.
52.
The MTFF needs to be progressively refined to closely link multi-year
projections with policies, notably those aimed at wage reform, while ensuring proper
maintenance of development budget investments. Also, critical fiscal activities presently
funded off-budget by donors, such as the military, should be progressively incorporated in
the MTFF in order to increase transparency and better estimate the government’s significant
long-term financing needs.
53.
Monetary developments should be monitored closely, and the authorities should
stand ready to tighten monetary conditions as needed to achieve the targeted reduction
in inflation. The modernization of the current monetary framework will contribute to
strengthening DAB’s control on overall liquidity in the context of a developing financial
sector. In this connection, the authorities’ intention to remunerate required reserves and
introduce a collaterized credit facility and capital notes of longer maturities are steps in the
right direction. Looking forward, further efforts are necessary to develop DAB’s analytical
capacity and enhance the transparency of monetary management.
54.
The present managed float system has been working well and should be
maintained. The real appreciation experienced by the Afghani in recent years reflects, to a
large extent, the impact of opium- and aid-related inflows. In this context, strengthening
competitiveness requires enhancing efficiency in the utilization of foreign aid as well as a
deepening of structural reforms to increase productivity, including by lowering the cost of
doing business.
55.
The authorities must persevere in their efforts to build a resilient banking
system. In this regard, it is essential to adhere strictly to the work programs for the
restructuring of state-owned banks and to speed up the adoption of an appropriate legal and
administrative framework for the development of private financial institutions.
56.
A vigorous implementation of structural reforms is critical to promote private
sector-led growth. The authorities must continue to strengthen the legal and regulatory
environment for private sector activities, focusing on financial and business regulations and
increased transparency. Also, priority should be given to further reducing government

- 20 -

involvement in the economy, including by pressing ahead decisively with the divesture of
SOEs and reducing interference by public entities and government agencies not covered by
the current SOEs law. Direct intervention in the agricultural sector through price controls
should be avoided. More generally, the business environment could be improved by
enhancing the consistency and predictability of government policies.
57.
The I-ANDS is an important step forward in defining the government’s
medium-term development strategy. The authorities are encouraged to broaden the
participatory process as they move toward a PRSP. The main challenge will be to turn the
large number of proposals in the I-ANDS into a coherent and fully sustainable set of
medium-term programs and policies.
58.
Continued efforts are needed to eliminate the opium economy. With the
cooperation of the donor community, the government should implement vigorously the
programs aimed at reducing the cultivated area and putting in place sustainable income
generation activities in support of the eradication, interdiction and prevention campaigns.
This would pave the way for a decline in drug activities and would create the conditions for
improved security and governance.
59.
Further determined efforts are required to address a number of statistical
deficiencies. Particular attention should be given to improving the quality and coverage of
the national accounts and CPI estimates, as well as the reliability of the monetary and
balance of payments data, with donor assistance. The recent approval of a new statistical law
is a welcome step that should contribute to a successful implementation of the statistical
master plan.
60.
The program is subject to a number of risks. In particular, insufficient progress in
improving security and strengthening government control over the provinces could slow
down the reform process. Political pressures could also delay the implementation of reforms,
notably in the fiscal area, and limit the authorities’ capacity to meet the program’s objectives.
Lastly, the fight against opium-related activities could have disruptive effects on the security
situation.
61.
The current SMP has been instrumental in maintaining macroeconomic stability
and building a momentum for structural reform, and the authorities have continued to
implement it satisfactorily. Accordingly, staff support the authorities’ request for
completion of the sixth review. Staff is of the view that a successor program that could be
supported by a PRGF arrangement would help the authorities consolidate the gains that have
been made under the SMP, and would provide a suitable framework for the continued
implementation of their ambitious reform agenda.
62.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Afghanistan take place on the
standard 12-month cycle.

- 21 -

Figure 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Price Developments, 2003–2005 1/
Consumer Price Index
(Year-on-year change; in percent)

90
80

Rents

70
60
50
40

Oil and Gas
30
20

Overall index

10
Other items

0
-10

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

Jun-05

Sep-05

-20

Contributions to year-on-year inflation
(In percent)

8

7

Bread and cereals
6

Rents
5

4

Other food
3

2

Other nonfood
1

Oil and gas
0

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

-1

Sources: Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Last observation: September 2005.

Jun-05

Sep-05

- 22 -

Figure 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Monetary Developments, 2003–05 1/
Currency in Circulation
(Year-to-date change; in percent)

45
40
35
30
25
20
15

2005/06 SMP indicative ceiling
2005/06 level triggering consultation

10

2005/06 actual

5

2005/06 SMP projection

0
Mar-05

Jun-05

Sep-05

Dec-05

Mar-06

-5

Capital Notes Auctions
(Interest rate; in percent)
6

5

4

3

2

1

0
Sep-04

Nov-04

Feb-05

Overnight

Apr-05

Jun-05

30-day notes

Sources: Da Afghanistan Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Last observation: September 30, 2005.

Aug-05

- 23 -

Figure 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Foreign Exchange Reserves
and Real Exchange Rate, 2003–05 1/
DAB's Foreign Exchange Reserves and Government Foreign Currency Deposits
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1,600
1,400

DAB's foreign exchange reserves
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
Government foreign currency deposits

200
0
Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

Jun-05

Sep-05

Price and Exchange Rate Indices 2/
(March 2004 = 100)

125

CPI (Kabul)
120
115

Real exchange rate
110
105

Nominal exchange rate
100
95
90
85

Dec-02

Mar-03

Jun-03

Sep-03

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Mar-05

Jun-05

Sep-05

Sources: Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan; Da Afghanistan Bank; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Last observation: September 2005.
2/ An increase in the exchange rate indices corresponds to an appreciation. The real exchange rate is estimated
using the U.S. and Afghan CPIs.

- 24 -

Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001/02–2006/07
(Quota: SDR 161.9 million)
(Population: 21.8 million; 2002/03)
(Per capita GDP: US$253; 2004/05)
(Poverty rate: n.a)
(Main export: carpets, US$156 million; 2003/04)
Est.
2001/02

Est.
2002/03

Est.
2003/04

Est.
2004/05

Proj.
2005/06

Proj.
2006/07

13.8
10.0
12.0

11.7
8.0
8.9

43.1
10.9
0.7
4.5

40.8
11.4
0.9
4.1

10.0
9.4
0.6
0.6
...

9.2
8.9
0.4
0.4
...

(Annual percentage change)
Output and prices
Real GDP (at market prices)
Consumer prices (end of period)
Consumer prices (period average)

...
-43.4
...

28.6
52.1
5.0

15.7
10.2
23.9

8.0
16.3
14.3

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and saving
Gross domestic formation
Of which: nongovernment
Gross national savings
Of which: nongovernment

...
...
...
...

34.5
7.5
1.1
5.7

42.0
8.1
-8.9
-4.4

45.2
10.3
0.3
4.9

(In percent of GDP)
Public finances 1/
Revenue (including grants)
Expenditure
Budget balance (including grants)
Primary balance (including grants)
Total government debt 2/

...
...
...
...
...

8.4
8.5
-0.1
-0.1
13.1

9.0
9.8
-0.8
-0.8
13.5

9.8
9.4
0.4
0.4
12.5

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated)
Monetary sector
Credit to the private sector
Base money
Broad money
Velocity of broad money
One-month capital note interest rate (end-period, in percent)

...
...
...
...
...

...
20.1
20.1
8.8
...

...
40.9
40.9
7.8
...

...
37.5
37.5
7.3
4.27

...
27.8
27.8
7.2
...

...
22.5
22.5
7.1
...

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change) 3/
Imports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change) 3/
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance, excluding official transfers
Current account balance, including official transfers
Foreign direct investment
Total external debt 2/
Gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of next year imports of goods and services 3/
In percent of short-term external debt (on remaining maturity basis)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (excluding opium production; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Opium production (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Net imports of petroleum products (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (period average)
Real exchange rate (annual average, percentage change) 4/
Stock market index

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
-29.8
-33.4
-3.5
1.2
13.1
426
1.8
...

36.1
51.8
-41.3
-50.9
3.1
1.3
13.5
816
3.4
...

25.0
18.2
-37.0
-44.8
1.9
3.1
12.5
1,261
4.0
...

20.1
14.9
-35.2
-42.4
1.7
3.5
...
1,730
4.8
...

20.6
15.1
-33.3
-39.9
-0.9
4.2
...
2,119
5.8
...

2,463
...
...
...
54.4
...
...

4,084
2,540
...
13
44.8
21.0
...

4,585
2,300
...
24
49.0
12.2
...

5,971
2,800
...
77
47.7
14.9
...

7,139
2,700
...
...
...
...
...

8,608
...
...
...
...
...
...

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Operating budget. Does not include externally-financed development expenditures, which amounted to 40 percent of GDP in 2004/05.
2/ Includes unreconciled debts. Excludes Russian claims.
3/ Excluding reexports.
4/ An increase in the exchange rate indices corresponds to an appreciation. The real exchange rate is estimated using the U.S.
and Afghan CPIs.

133.4
105.1
7.8
97.3

Domestic expenditures
Consumption
Public
Private

28.6
33.8
49.8
20.1
30.1
182
3.2

49.8
20.1
30.1
182
3.2

1.1
-4.6
5.7

-33.4
8.0
-41.4

34.5
27.0
7.5

133.4
98.9
7.8
91.1

4,084

45
-187
232

-1,364
328
-1,691

1,409
1,104
305

5,447
4,038
318
3,720

28.6
33.8

-5.1
-4.6
-0.6

-33.4
8.0
-41.4

48.5
21.3
30.2
199
4.5

15.7
23.1

-15.7
-4.4
-11.3

-50.9
10.5
-61.4

35.2
34.0
1.3

150.9
115.7
9.4
106.3

4,585

-720
-203
-517

-2,335
482
-2,817

1,615
1,557
58

6,919
5,305
429
4,875

2003/04

Est.

48.5
21.3
30.2
199
4.5

15.7
23.1

-8.9
-4.4
-4.4

-50.9
10.5
-61.4

42.0
34.0
8.1

150.9
108.9
9.4
99.5

4,585

-407
-203
-204

-2,335
482
-2,817

1,928
1,557
371

6,919
4,992
429
4,562

Rev.
Est.

100.0
100.0
1/ Data originating from the fiscal accounts.
2/ Determined as a residual.
3/ Equivalent to foreign direct investment reported in the balance of payments, and some new private investment.

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Memorandum items:
Real GDP growth (annual percentage change)
Nominal GDP growth (annual percentage change)
Sectoral shares of GDP (in percent)
Agriculture
Industry
Services
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Domestic government revenue (in percent of GDP)

Domestic savings
Public savings
Private savings

Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services (excluding reexports)
Imports of goods and services (excluding reexports)

28.3
27.0
1.2

4,084

GDP at market prices

Gross fixed capital formation
Public
Private

-210
-187
-23

-1,364
328
-1,691

1,154
1,104
50

5,447
4,293
318
3,975

Domestic savings
Public savings
Private savings

Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services (excluding reexports)
Imports of goods and services (excluding reexports)

Gross fixed capital formation
Public
Private 3/

Domestic expenditures
Consumption
Public 1/
Private 2/

Rev.
Est.

2002/03

Est.

37.2
24.4
38.3
253
4.5

8.0
26.4

-6.2
-4.2
-2.0

-45.0
9.4
-54.4

38.8
34.9
4.0

145.0
106.2
9.1
97.0

5,971

-369
-251
-118

-2,688
564
-3,251

2,319
2,082
237

8,658
6,339
546
5,793

2004/05

Est.
Fifth
Rev.
2005/06

Est.
Fifth
Rev.

Est.
Sixth
Rev.

7,139

7,130

100.0

37.2
24.4
38.3
253
4.5

8.0
26.4

0.3
-4.6
4.9

-44.8
9.4
-54.3

45.2
34.9
10.3

144.8
99.7
9.1
90.5

36.1
24.8
39.2
294
5.2

13.6
24.9

-4.2
-3.4
-0.8

-44.8
9.6
-54.4

40.6
32.7
7.9

144.8
104.2
9.3
95.0

100.0

36.1
24.8
39.2
294
5.3

13.8
25.1

0.7
-3.7
4.5

-42.4
9.6
-52.0

43.1
32.2
10.9

142.4
99.3
9.0
90.3

53
-266
319

-3,026
686
-3,712

3,078
2,298
780

10,165
7,087
640
6,447

-303
-246
-57

-3,196
685
-3,881

2,893
2,331
562

10,326
7,432
661
6,771

(In percent of GDP)

5,971

20
-273
293

-2,676
564
-3,239

2,696
2,082
614

8,647
5,951
546
5,405

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Est.
Sixth
Rev.

Est.
Sixth
Rev.

34.3
24.7
41.0
344
5.2

11.2
20.1

-3.5
-2.7
-0.7

-39.9
9.6
-49.5

36.4
28.4
8.0

139.9
103.5
8.5
94.9

8,562

-296
-234
-61

-3,415
825
-4,240

3,119
2,433
686

11,976
8,857
729
8,128

100.0

34.3
24.7
41.0
344
6.0

11.7
20.6

0.9
-3.2
4.1

-39.9
9.6
-49.6

40.8
29.3
11.4

139.9
99.1
9.0
90.1

8,608

74
-275
349

-3,437
829
-4,266

3,511
2,526
985

12,045
8,534
778
7,756

2006/07

Fifth
Rev.

Est.

Table 2. Islamic Republic of Aghanistan: Savings-Investment Balances, 2002/03–2007/08
Est.
Sixth
Rev.

33.5
25.1
41.4
388
5.5

10.7
16.2

100.0

33.5
25.1
41.4
388
6.4

10.6
16.2

0.5
-2.8
3.3

-33.8
9.6
-43.4

-31.0
9.6
-40.6
-3.4
-2.5
-0.9

34.3
23.1
11.2

133.8
99.5
9.0
90.5

9,999

49
-279
328

-3,381
960
-4,341

3,429
2,307
1,122

13,380
9,950
903
9,047

27.6
19.4
8.2

131.0
103.4
8.3
95.2

9,951

-343
-249
-94

-3,086
956
-4,042

2,742
1,931
811

13,036
10,294
826
9,468

2007/08

Est.
Fifth
Rev.

- 25 -

- 26 -

Table 3a. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Core Budget, 2003/04–2008/09
Est.
2003/04

H1
Est.
2004/05

Est.
2004/05

Revised
MYR 1/
2005/06

Domestic revenue
Tax revenues
Taxes on income, profits and capital gains
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Other taxes
Non tax revenues

10,168
6,262
363
5,369
531
3,906

5,947
4,488
544
3,254
691
1,458

12,800
9,546
995
7,247
1,304
3,254

18,735
13,128
3,789
8,917
422
5,607

Donor assistance grants (to operating budget)
ARTF (recurrent window)
LOTFA
Other grants

10,074
8,182
1,892

3,858
3,372
404
83
0

14,984
12,319
2,583
83

16,878
13,580
3,298
0

YTD
Prov.
2005/06

Proj. 2/
2005/06

Proj. 2/
2006/07

Proj. 2/
2007/08

Proj. 2/
2008/09

8,752
5,670
428
4,573
669
3,082

18,776
12,705
1,738
9,323
1,643
6,072

25,864
19,717
3,345
14,347
2,025
6,147

31,970
24,212
5,654
15,635
2,923
7,759

39,835
30,257
7,059
19,155
4,043
9,578

8,588
7,257
1,331
0

16,878
13,580
3,298
0

13,733
10,580
3,153
0

12,122
10,062
2,060
0

10,248
9,080
1,168
0

(In millions of Afghanis)

Donor assistance grants (core development budget)

4,569

2,831

8,250

29,013

8,008

20,019

32,506

36,044

39,145

Total core budget expenditure

31,606

15,499

39,550

83,666

23,586

55,865

70,860

81,692

95,575

Operating expenditure
Wages and salaries
Purchase of goods and services
Transfers and Subsidies
Pensions
Capital expenditure
Interest

22,151
14,660
4,653
652
177
2,009

12,019
8,245
2,064
314
469
927

26,716
18,902
4,182
764
889
1,979

33,601
20,788
6,609
2,293
1,659
1,847
404

14,680
9,347
3,233
0
782
1,222
96

33,601
20,972
6,609
2,109
1,659
1,847
404

38,043
23,918
7,357
2,478
1,742
2,132
415

44,092
28,364
8,245
2,813
1,829
2,421
420

50,643
33,117
9,244
3,186
1,920
2,750
425

Core budget development spending 3/

9,455

3,481

12,834

50,066

8,906

22,265

32,818

37,600

44,933

National programs
1.4 Livelihoods and Social Protection
1.5 Culture, Media, Sport
2.1 Transport
2.2 Energy, Mining, and Telecommunications
2.3 Natural Resources Management
2.4 Urban Management
3.1 Trade and Investment
3.2 Public Administration and Economic Management
3.3 Justice
3.4 National Police, Law Enforcement and Stabilization
3.5 Afghan National Army

3,339
159
0
75
852
449
394
95
598
0
319
399

3,225
179
0
659
258
1,987
0
0
46
80
16
0

12,070
560
0
2,173
932
4,609
0
0
61
2,581
1,153
0

44,351
13,585
284
9,893
7,992
2,775
2,253
386
4,629
41
2,512
0

8,228
3,997
3
1,982
931
21
274
3
758
2
258
0

20,571
9,992
7
4,954
2,329
53
684
7
1,896
4
644
0

29,120
16,533
106
4,508
2,113
54
1,161
12
3,490
30
1,112
0

33,488
19,013
122
5,184
2,430
62
1,336
14
4,014
34
1,279
0

40,186
22,816
147
6,221
2,916
75
1,603
17
4,817
41
1,535
0

National priority programs
Education and Vocational Training
Health and Nutrition
Other programs

6,115
289
508
5,318

256
47
209
0

765
172
579
13

5,715
3,147
1,583
985

678
243
421
14

1,694
608
1,052
34

3,697
1,003
1,747
947

4,111
1,154
2,009
949

4,746
1,385
2,411
951

Operating budget balance (excluding grants)

-11,983

-6,072

-13,916

-14,866

-5,929

Operating budget balance (including grants)

-1,910

-2,213

1,068

2,012

2,660

2,054

1,554

0

-560

Core budget balance

-6,795

-2,863

-3,516

-19,040

1,761

-192

1,242

-1,556

-6,348

1,693

921

357

0

-1,630

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3,987

0

3,987

0

0

0

5,102
4,886
217
396
-179

1,942
9,336
-7,394
-8,912
1,518

3,158
14,754
-11,596
-10,457
-1,139

15,054
23,946
-8,892
na
na

-131
2,701
-2,832
-3,313
481

-3,795
4,236
-8,031
-5,718
-2,313

-1,242
3,880
-5,122
-3,647
-1,475

1,556
7,351
-5,795
na
na

6,348
7,750
-1,402
na
na

...
74,528
225,108
15.7

...
...
...
...

...
100,225
284,504
8.0

...
105,394
...
...

...
na
...
...

18,842
102,958
355,829
13.8

28,873
104,679
429,014
11.7

34,539
87,449
498,353
10.6

43,260
83,077
574,883
9.9

Float and adjustment 4/
Sale of nonfinancial assets 5/
Financing
External loans (net)
Domestic (net), of which:
Change in foreign currency deposits 6/
Change on domestic currency deposits 6/
Memorandum item:
Domestic revenue (government medium-term targets) 7/
External budget expenditure 8/
GDP
Real GDP growth rate (in percent)

-14,824

-12,179

-12,122

-10,808

Sources: Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB); and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ November 2005 supplementary budget relased following the midyear budget review (MYR).
2/ Staff projections. Operating budget expenditure is consistent with the authorities medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) but domestic revenue, development spending
and funding/financing are lower.
3/ Government program classification.
4/ Variation between the fiscal position recorded at MoF and DAB. This discrepancy is partially due to the difference (''float") between checks issued and checks cashed.
5/ For 2005/06 this includes US$80 million in revenue from the sale of telecommunications licenses.
6/ Net transfers from government deposits with DAB. A positive sign corresponds to a decline in balances and a negative sign to an increase in balances.
7/ Government revenue projections from the MTFF, which assume considerable policy changes and new measures.
8/ For 2005/06 the budget estimate includes only the funded portion of expected expenditure.

- 27 -

Table 3b. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Core Budget, 2003/04–2008/09
Est.
2003/04

H1
Est.
2004/05

Est.
2004/05

Revised
MYR 1/
2005/06

H1
Prov.
2005/06

Proj. 2/
2005/06

Proj. 2/
2006/07

Proj. 2/
2007/08

Proj. 2/
2008/09

(In percent of GDP)
Domestic revenue
Tax revenues
Taxes on income, profits, and capital gains
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Other taxes
Non tax revenues

4.5
2.8
0.2
2.4
0.2
1.7

2.1
1.6
0.2
1.1
0.2
0.5

4.5
3.4
0.3
2.5
0.5
1.1

5.3
3.7
1.1
2.5
0.1
1.6

2.5
1.6
0.1
1.3
0.2
0.9

5.3
3.6
0.5
2.6
0.5
1.7

6.0
4.6
0.8
3.3
0.5
1.4

6.4
4.9
1.1
3.1
0.6
1.6

6.9
5.3
1.2
3.3
0.7
1.7

Donor assistance grants (to operating budget)
ARTF (recurrent window)
LOTFA
Other grants

4.5
3.6
0.8
0.0

1.4
1.2
0.1
0.0

5.3
4.3
0.9
0.0

4.7
3.8
0.9
0.0

2.4
2.0
0.4
0.0

4.7
3.8
0.9
0.0

3.2
2.5
0.7
0.0

2.4
2.0
0.4
0.0

1.8
1.6
0.2
0.0

Donor assistance grants (core development budget)

2.0

1.0

2.9

8.2

2.3

5.6

7.6

7.2

6.8

Total core budget expenditure

14.0

5.4

13.9

23.5

6.6

15.7

16.5

16.4

16.6

Operating expenditure
Wages and salaries
Purchase of goods and services
Transfers and subsidies
Pensions
Capital expenditure
Interest

9.8
6.5
2.1
0.3
0.1
0.9
0.0

4.2
2.9
0.7
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.0

9.4
6.6
1.5
0.3
0.3
0.7
0.0

9.4
5.8
1.9
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.1

4.1
2.6
0.9
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.0

9.4
5.9
1.9
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.1

8.9
5.6
1.7
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.1

8.8
5.7
1.7
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.1

8.8
5.8
1.6
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.1

Core budget development spending 3/

4.2

1.2

4.5

14.1

2.5

6.3

7.6

7.5

7.8

National programs
1.4 Livelihoods and Social Protection
1.5 Culture, Media, Sport
2.1 Transport
2.2 Energy, Mining, and Telecommunications
2.3 Natural Resources Management
2.4 Urban Management
3.1 Trade and Investment
3.2 Public Administration and Economic Management
3.3 Justice
3.4 National Police, Law Enforcement and Stabilization
3.5 Afghan National Army

1.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.2

1.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

4.2
0.2
0.0
0.8
0.3
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.4
0.0

12.5
3.8
0.1
2.8
2.2
0.8
0.6
0.1
1.3
0.0
0.7
0.0

2.3
1.1
0.0
0.6
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0

5.8
2.8
0.0
1.4
0.7
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.2
0.0

6.8
3.9
0.0
1.1
0.5
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.3
0.0

6.7
3.8
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.3
0.0

7.0
4.0
0.0
1.1
0.5
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.3
0.0

National priority programs
Education and Vocational Training
Health and Nutrition
Other programs

2.7
0.1
0.2
2.4

0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0

0.3
0.1
0.2
0.0

1.6
0.9
0.4
0.3

0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0

0.5
0.2
0.3
0.0

0.9
0.2
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.2
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.2
0.4
0.2

Operating budget balance (excluding grants)

-5.3

-2.1

-4.9

-4.2

-1.7

-4.2

-2.8

-2.4

-1.9

Operating budget balance (including grants)

-0.8

-0.8

0.4

0.6

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.0

-0.1

Core budget balance

-3.0

-1.0

-1.2

-5.4

0.5

-0.1

0.3

-0.3

-1.1

Float and adjustment 4/

0.8

0.3

0.1

0.0

-0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Sale of nonfinancial assets 5/

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.1

0.0

1.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

Financing
External loans (net)
Domestic (net), of which:
Change in foreign currency deposits 6/
Change on domestic currency deposits 6/

2.3
2.2
0.1
0.2
-0.1

0.7
3.3
-2.6
-3.1
0.5

1.1
5.2
-4.1
-3.7
-0.4

4.2
6.7
-2.5
na
na

0.0
0.8
-0.8
-0.9
0.1

-1.1
1.2
-2.3
-1.6
-0.7

-0.3
0.9
-1.2
-0.9
-0.3

0.3
1.5
-1.2
na
na

1.1
1.3
-0.2
na
na

Memorandum item:
Domestic revenue (government medium-term targets) 7/
External budget expenditure 8/

...
33.1

...
0.0

...
35.2

...
29.6

...
na

5.3
28.9

6.7
24.4

6.9
17.5

7.5
14.5

Sources: Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB); and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ November 2005 supplementary budget relased following the midyear budget review (MYR).
2/ Staff projections. Operating budget expenditure is consistent with the authorities medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) but domestic revenue, development spending
and funding/financing are lower.
3/ Government program classification.
4/ Variation between the fiscal position recorded at MoF and DAB. This discrepancy is partially due to the difference (''float") between checks issued and checks cashed.
5/ For 2005/06 this includes $80 million in revenue from the sale of telecommunications licenses.
6/ Net transfers from government deposits with DAB. A positive sign corresponds to a decline in balances and a negative sign to an increase in balances.
7/ Government revenue projections from the MTFF, which assume considerable policy changes and new measures.
8/ For 2005/06 the budget estimate includes only the funded portion of expected expenditure.

31,124
28,801
29,726
925
2,323

Reserve money
Currency in circulation 2/
Banknotes and coins issued
less cash holdings 2/
Bank deposits with DAB and capital note holdings

...
37.5
...
...
1,261.3
3.2
16.3

41,063
38,763
41,228
2,465
2,300

-20,549
-19,751
-19,751
0
-19,751
-3,123
-16,628
0
-799

61,612
63,582
62,861
14,015
48,846
721
-1,970

Est.
Mar. 20
2004/05

3.4
35.8
...
...
1,345.8
2.4
11.5

42,247
40,084
42,758
2,674
2,163

-23,477
-19,576
-19,576
0
-19,576
-2,000
-17,576
0
-3,901

65,724
67,693
67,073
14,015
53,058
621
-1,970

Est
Jun. 21

Proj.
Dec. 20
Mar. 20

44,538
42,997
45,823
2,825
1,541

-27,295
-22,627
-22,627
0
-22,627
-2,686
-19,941
0
-4,668

71,834
73,803
72,703
14,015
58,687
1,101
-1,970

48,755
46,585
49,398
2,813
2,170

-30,894
-25,836
-25,836
0
-25,836
-4,188
-21,648
0
-5,058

79,650
81,619
80,469
14,015
66,454
1,150
-1,970

52,121
49,521
52,321
2,800
2,600

-33,324
-27,782
-27,782
0
-27,782
-5,436
-22,346
0
-5,542

85,445
87,414
86,214
14,015
72,199
1,200
-1,970

(In millions of Afghanis)

Est
Sep. 22
2005/06

13.0
27.7
43,820
46,061
1,417.6
...
...

10.9
25.3
...
...
1,458.7
2.6
12.9

20.2
28.3
46,585
48,914
1,614.5
...
...

27.8
27.8
49,521
51,997
1,729.8
...
10.0

(In percent; unless otherwise indicated)

45,845
43,820
46,591
2,771
2,025

-23,796
-19,576
-19,576
0
-19,576
-2,000
-17,576
0
-4,220

69,640
71,610
70,653
14,015
56,638
957
-1,970

Proj.
Sep. 22

2.3
26.4
52,093
53,396
1,728.2
...
...

53,544
50,678
53,578
2,900
2,867

-31,894
-25,782
-25,782
0
-25,782
-4,436
-21,346
0
-6,113

85,438
87,408
86,133
14,015
72,118
1,275
-1,970

Jun. 21

10.7
25.1
54,799
57,539
1,807.0
...
...

57,933
54,799
57,799
3,000
3,133

-31,508
-24,782
-24,782
0
-24,782
-3,436
-21,346
0
-6,726

89,440
91,410
90,060
14,015
76,045
1,350
-1,970

16.3
23.7
...
...
1,940.6
...
...

61,017
57,617
60,717
3,100
3,400

-35,156
-27,782
-27,782
0
-27,782
-4,936
-22,846
0
-7,374

96,173
98,143
96,718
14,015
82,703
1,425
-1,970

Proj.
Sep. 21
Dec. 20
2006/07

1/ Foreign currency amounts converted into Afghani at the program exchange rate (49.84 per dollar in 2004/05-05/06). Gold figures do not include the gold held in the palace vaults and
is valued at US$400 per ounce in 2004/05-05/06.
2/ In 2003/04–04/05, cash holdings only include cash in DAB's Treasury vaults and in DAB's six major provincial branches. In 2005/06–2006/07, they include cash in DAB's Treasury vaults
and in all DAB's provincial branches.

Sources: Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) and Central Statistics Office; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Currency in circulation (year-to-date change)
Currency in circulation (year-on-year change)
Currency in circulation (SMP indicative ceiling; in millions of Afghanis)
Currency in circulation (level triggering discussions; in millions of Afghanis)
Gross international reserves (end-of-period level; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices in Kabul (quarterly change)
Consumer prices in Kabul (annual change)

...
40.9
...
...
815.9
-0.5
10.2

-8,075
6,795
6,795
14,951
-8,155
-1,984
-6,171
0
-14,870

Net domestic assets
Domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Net claims on government before 2002/03
Net claims on government in 2002/3–2004/05
Domestic currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Other claims
Other items net

Memorandum items:

39,199
41,169
40,665
14,015
26,650
503
-1,970

Net foreign assets 1/
Foreign assets
Foreign exchange reserves
Gold 1/
Other
Other foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

Est.
Mar. 19
2003/04

Table 4. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Monetary Program (Da Afghanistan Bank), 2003/04–2006/07

22.5
22.5
...
...
2,118.7
...
8.0

64,140
60,640
63,840
3,200
3,500

-40,985
-32,904
-32,904
0
-32,904
-6,911
-25,993
0
-8,081

105,124
107,094
105,594
14,015
91,579
1,500
-1,970

Mar. 20

- 28 -

- 29 -

Table 5. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Balance of Payments, 2002/03–2008/09
Est.
2002/03

Est.
2003/04

Est.
2004/05

Proj.
2005/06

-1,217.6
1,290.6
276.8
1,013.9

-1,892.0
1,893.9
376.8
1,517.1

-2,210.8
1,656.1
471.0
1,185.1

-2,515.1
1,893.3
565.5
1,327.8

2,508.2
1,142.3
840.8
94.0
525.1

3,785.9
1,688.5
1,001.0
40.9
1,096.4

3,866.9
1,993.1
1,203.3
107.8
670.5

-145.1
50.8
195.9

-439.3
105.5
544.8

-1.1
0.0
1.1

Proj.
2006/07

Proj.
2007/08

Proj.
2008/09

-2,863.2
1,968.6
681.8
1,286.8

-2,824.1
1,755.3
797.5
957.8

-2,904.6
1,861.4
856.6
1,004.8

4,408.5
2,328.7
1,348.0
0.0
731.8

4,831.9
2,829.7
1,323.6
0.0
678.5

4,579.4
2,900.4
1,061.7
0.0
617.2

4,766.0
3,183.5
1,088.0
0.0
494.5

-480.8
92.5
573.3

-542.3
120.5
662.8

-621.6
146.9
768.5

-613.5
162.6
776.1

-614.8
180.8
795.7

-3.4
4.9
8.3

15.7
25.4
9.7

31.6
35.1
3.5

47.7
51.6
3.9

56.8
60.8
4.0

64.8
68.8
4.0

1,221.8
1,170.2
94.0
1,076.2
51.6

2,475.9
2,420.9
40.9
2,380.0
55.0

2,787.1
2,477.0
107.8
2,369.2
310.1

3,148.5
2,806.0
0.0
2,806.0
342.5

3,361.7
3,018.0
0.0
3,018.0
343.7

3,138.4
2,708.0
0.0
2,708.0
430.4

3,057.4
2,648.0
0.0
2,648.0
409.4

-141.9
-1,363.7

141.2
-2,334.7

111.1
-2,676.0

122.7
-3,025.8

-75.5
-3,437.2

-242.4
-3,380.8

-397.2
-3,454.6

144.0

147.7

476.7

334.8

453.7

530.9

685.7

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

17.6
17.6

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Financial account
Foreign direct investment
Public loans
Disbursement
Amortization paid 2/

144.0
50.0
94.0
100.2
6.2

147.7
57.8
89.9
96.1
6.2

459.1
186.9
289.8
296.0
6.2

334.8
253.3
81.5
85.0
3.5

453.7
351.2
102.5
106.0
3.5

530.9
383.4
147.5
151.0
3.5

685.7
530.2
155.5
159.0
3.5

Net errors and omissions

153.2

90.1

-99.3

0

0

0

0

Overall balance

155.3

379.0

488.5

457.8

378.0

289.0

288.8

-155.3

-379.0

-488.5

-457.8

-378.0

-289.0

-288.8

-101.0

-389.4

-499.1

-468.5

-388.9

-300.0

-300.0

0.0
-54.3
-54.3

0.0
10.4
10.4

0.0
10.6
10.6

0.0
10.7
10.7

0.0
10.9
10.9

0.0
11.0
11.0

0.0
11.2
11.2

426
1.8
1,341
2,704
-29.8

816
3.4
1,999
4,331
-41.3

1,261
4.0
1,749
4,440
-37.0

1,730
4.8
2,014
5,071
-35.2

2,119
5.8
2,116
5,600
-33.3

2,419
6.4
1,918
5,355
-28.2

2,719
7.3
2,042
5,562
-24.5

-3.5
-33.4
4,084

3.1
-50.9
4,585

1.9
-44.8
5,971

1.7
-42.4
7,139

-0.9
-39.9
8,608

-2.4
-33.8
9,999

-3.4
-29.1
11,853

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Trade balance
Exports of goods 1/
Domestic exports
Reexports
Imports of goods
Recorded imports
Duty Free
Of which: Commodity food aid
Other
Services
Receipts
Payments
Income (net)
Interest receipts
Interest payments 2/
Current transfers
Public
Commodity food aid
Other
Private 3/
Current account (including grants)
Current account (excluding grants)
Capital and financial account
Capital account
Debt forgiveness

Financing
Changes in reserve assets
Foreign exchange of the DAB
Fund credit (net)
Exceptional financing
Arrears

Memorandum Items:
Official foreign exchange reserves
In millions of U.S. dollars
In months of imports 4/
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Imports of goods and nonfactor services
Trade balance (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Including grants
Excluding grants
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes opium exports, and because information is unavailable, flows associated with U.S. Army and most ISAF activities.
2/ Debt service projections are based on recognized obligations, reconciled with creditors. Arrears shown here represent an estimate by Fund
staff, on the basis of loans which have been verified with creditors, but are not being serviced.
3/ Includes foreign transactions recently reported by licensed money changers.
4/ In months of imports of goods and services, excluding imports for reexports.

- 30 -

Table 6. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2003
1990

1994

1997

2000

2003

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
49.3

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (in percent of relevant age group)
Primary completion rate, total (in percent of relevant age group)
Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5
Youth literacy rate (in percent ages 15–24)

26.5
...
...
...

...
23.0
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent ages 15–24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)

4.0
...
...
17.8

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (in percent of children ages 12–23 months)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

20.0
168
260

40.0
...
...

48.0
...
...

35.0
...
...

50.0
...
...

Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Births attended by skilled health staff (in percent of total)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

...
...

...
...

...
...

12.4
1,900

14.0
..

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Contraceptive prevalence rate (in percent of women ages 15–49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Prevalence of HIV, total (in percent of population aged 15–49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
2.0

...
...
...
9.0

10.0
...
...
18.2

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to an improved water source (in percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (in percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (in percent of population)
CO2 emissions (in metric tons per capita)
Forest area (in percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP, U.S. dollars per kg oil equivalent)
Nationally protected areas (in percent of total land area)

...
...
...
0.1
2.1
...
...

...
...
...
0.1
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
2.1
...
...

13.0
8.0
...
...
...
...
0.3

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Aid per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Debt service (in percent of exports)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Unemployment, youth female (in percent of female labor force ages 15–24)
Unemployment, youth male (in percent of male labor force ages 15–24)
Unemployment, youth total (in percent of total labor force ages 15–24)

7.4
...
2.2
...
...
...
...
...

11.1
...
1.6
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
1.3
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
1.3
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
11.8
1.0
...
...
...
...

6.9
...
...
...
41.5
...
17.7
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
20.7
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
197.2
4.3
...
...
...
...
145.6

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Population below US$1 a day (in percent)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)
Poverty gap ratio at US$1 a day (incidence x depth of poverty)
Poverty headcount, national (in percent of population)
Prevalence of underweight in children (under five years of age)

Other
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (in U.S. dollars)
GNI, Atlas method (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Gross capital formation (in percent of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (in percent of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (in millions)
Trade (in percent of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators database, April 2005.

- 31 -

APPENDIX I

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Relations with the Fund
(As of December 31, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 14, 1955; Article XIV.

II.

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Holdings Exchange Rate

SDR Million
161.90
161.92
0.00

% Quota
100.00
100.01
0.00

III.

SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
26.70
0.03

% Allocation
100.00
0.11

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans

None

V.

Financial Arrangements

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Principal
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Charges/Interest
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
Total
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.81

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative

Not Applicable

Nonfinancial Relations
VIII. Exchange Arrangement
Afghanistan is an Article XIV member country. The authorities are implementing a liberal
exchange system. Based on information currently available to the staff, no exchange
restrictions and multiple currency practices are currently in place. The authorities intend to
formalize the current liberal regime through the adoption of new laws and regulations, for
which they have asked for technical assistance from the Fund. A joint LEG/MFD mission is
envisaged to take place over the next few weeks. The authorities have been implementing a
managed float system with no predetermined path for the exchange rate. As of February 2,
2006, the average exchange rate on the Kabul money exchange market was Af50.36 per $1.
To conduct monetary policy, the authorities rely on foreign exchange auctions since
May 2002, and on short-term capital note auctions since September 2004. The foreign

- 32 -

APPENDIX I

exchange auctions were initially open only to licensed money changers, but since June 2005
they are also open to commercial banks. The capital note auctions are open to commercial
banks. Auctions are linked to the overall monetary program and are held on a regular basis
(weekly for foreign exchange auctions, daily for capital note auctions).
IX.

Article IV Consultation

The last Article IV consultation with Afghanistan was discussed by the Executive Board on
January 19, 2005. Consultations with Afghanistan are on the standard 12-month cycle.
X.

Technical Assistance, 2004–05

Department
FAD

MFD

Date
March 2004 (ongoing)
March 22–April 3, 2004
April 18–May 2, 2004
May 19–25, 2005
October 18–25, 2005
February 2–6, 2004
March 21–30, 2004
September 2004 (ongoing)
February 2–15, 2005

MCD

May 16–25, 2005
October 11–20, 2005
November 20–29, 2005
February 2–6, 2004
March 3–21, 2004
January 29–February 12, 2005
January 29–March 15, 2004
April 19–May 3, 2004
May 13–June 30, 2004
May 17–29, 2004
January 15–February 15, 2005
March 23–June 11, 2005
July 20–August 31, 2005
October 31, 2005–January 12, 2006
April 16–20, 2005

METAC

November 15–20, 2005

LEG

STA

Purpose
Resident Treasury Expert
Tax policy and administration
Customs administration
Seminar of reorganization of the MoF
Tax policy
Anti-money laundering legislation
DAB capital adequacy and balance sheet
structure
Training coordinator
Implementation of DAB balance sheet
reconstruction and capital adequacy
recommendations
Monetary Policy and Financial Markets
Monetary Policy
Financial Markets
Anti-money laundering legislation
Fiscal revenue legislation
Income Tax Law
Multisector statistics
Balance of Payments Statistics
Multisector statistics
Consumer Price Index
Multisector Statistics
Multisector Statistics
Multisector Statistics
Multisector Statistics
Basic Macroeconomic Accounting
Relationships and Introduction to
Financial Programming
Tax policy and administration

- 33 -

APPENDIX I

Afghanistan is a participant in the Middle East Technical Assistance Center.
A resident treasury expert for the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Platais, was appointed in
March 2004.
A resident multisector statistical advisor, Mr. Soulatha, was stationed in Kabul on
July 17, 2002. STA has also provided technical assistance through a series of peripatetic
multisector missions which began in January 2004. These missions were suspended in July
2004 due to the security situation. A new series of peripatetic missions commenced in
January/February 2005.
During 2004, with financial support from the Sweden Technical Assistance SubAccount, the
Fund sponsored a number of training activities aimed at DAB officials. A long-term training
advisor, Mr. Khan, was appointed in September 2004. He is responsible for all practical
matters related to the delivery of formal training to DAB staff in Kabul, as well as the
coordination of training for DAB staff outside Afghanistan. Finally, Sweden has financed a
monetary policy peripatetic advisor (a position currently shared by Mr. Coats and Mr. Gray)
to assist DAB in developing the strategy and instruments for improving the implementation
of monetary policy.
XI.

Resident Representatives

During the first half of 2002, the Fund’s resident representative in Pakistan, Mr. Ghesquière,
assisted in maintaining relations with the Afghan authorities. A resident representative,
Mr. de Schaetzen, took up his post in Kabul on August 24, 2002. Mr. Charap succeeded him
on June 13, 2005.

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Relations with the World Bank
(As of January 17, 2006)
1.
A second Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) was presented to the World Bank
Board of Executive Directors in March 2003. This was due to be updated by March 2005,
following the culmination of the political process outlined in Bonn. Despite a successful
Presidential election in October 2004, parliamentary elections in Afghanistan were not held
until September 2005. This delay in the political process, coupled with the government’s
preparation of a National Development Strategy, slowed down the World Bank’s efforts to
develop a new Interim Strategy Note. The World Bank continues to assist the government
under the existing TSS and is now in the process of preparing an Interim Strategy Note, in
line with the government’s plans for the National Development Strategy.
2.
In FY 2002, World Bank staff prepared and negotiated four projects to utilize IDA
grant funds for a total of $100 million. Following the clearance of Afghanistan’s arrears to
the World Bank and the Fund through donor contributions, the first IDA credit for
$108 million for an Emergency Transport Project was approved by the Board in
March 2003. By the end of FY 2003, three additional projects—Emergency Health Sector
Rehabilitation ($59.6 million), Emergency Public Administration II ($8.4 million), and
National Emergency Employment II ($39.2 million) were approved, bringing to
$215 million the total allocation for the year.
3.
Five IDA credits/grants were negotiated for FY 2004, for a total of $293 million.
These programs include the Emergency Communications Project ($22 million), the
Emergency Customs Modernization and Trade Facilitation Project ($31 million), the
National Solidarity Program II ($95 million), the Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation
Program ($40 million), and the Emergency Power Rehabilitation Program
($105 million).
4.
For FY 2005, six projects and two supplementals were approved, for a total of
$285 million: the first budget-support operation, Programmatic Support for Institution
Building ($80 million); the Kabul Urban Reconstruction Project ($25 million); the
Investment Guarantee Facility ($5 million), together with MIGA; the Education Quality
Improvement Program ($35 million); Public Administration Capacity Building
($27 million); Strengthening Higher Education ($40 million); and supplemental financing
for the Emergency Transport Project ($45 million) and the National Solidarity Program
($28 million).
5.
For FY2006, six projects are planned for a total IDA grant commitment of
$267 million. To date, one program has been approved by the Board–the second budget
support operation: Programmatic Support for Institution Building II ($80 million), which was
approved in December 2005.

- 35 -

APPENDIX II

6.
The World Bank also administers the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
(ARTF), which became effective in May 2002 and plays a critical role in funding the
recurrent costs of government. In its first year of operation (2002/03), the ARTF mobilized
$185 million and disbursed $65 million. Paid-in contributions for 2003/04 amounted to
$286 million, while disbursements reached $254 million. Paid-in contributions for 2004/05
amounted to $380 million, while disbursements reached $292 million. Pledges for 2005/06
have reached $470 million, with $288 million having been paid in (as of
December 21, 2005). ARTF is increasing its financing of investments and has the potential to
support better donor coordination, simplified processes, and fast results. Discussions are
under way with donors to the ARTF to increase the focus on policy reform.
7.
The World Bank is also actively engaged in providing advisory services to the
government and continues to respond quickly to a range of requests. Current analytical work
focuses on civil service reform, urban development and land management, education policy
reform, labor market and pensions, and oil/gas infrastructure development, as well as broader
regional trade work encompassing issues with Afghanistan’s neighbors. A Gender
Assessment is due to be released publicly in January 2006. The World Bank has just
completed a major Public Finance Management (PFM) review, which incorporates an
assessment of public expenditures and fiduciary aspects, including procurement and financial
management. Fund staff contributed to the PFM review, including by providing an analysis
of domestic revenue prospects. The World Bank has also actively utilized the Post Conflict
Fund and continues to use resources from the Japan Social Development Fund to provide
on-the-ground support to the government and communities.
8.
The World Bank’s program is growing quickly and, as of December 2005, has an
active IDA portfolio of 18 investments and two supplementals (one project has closed). Total
commitments since 2001 add up to $973 million, of which $537 million are in grants.
Disbursements amount to $636.5 million. A number of projects are under preparation for the
remainder of the fiscal year and total commitments for FY 2005 are expected to reach
$267 million, entirely in grants.

- 36 -

APPENDIX III

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Statistical Issues
General
1.
The statistical system has improved since 2002; nonetheless, organizational
weaknesses, poor staffing, and lack of equipment continue to hamper the compilation
process. Due to security reasons and limited central government influence outside Kabul,
setting up nationwide statistics has been a difficult undertaking. While the Central Statistics
Office (CSO) has regional offices, staffing and communication are poor. Staffing in most
agencies is inadequate both in number and expertise, and salaries remain low. Strengthening
the statistical capacity is an ongoing process; greater efforts and significant institutional
support will be required if further substantial improvements are to be made. STA continues
to provide technical assistance through a peripatetic multisector statistics advisor as well as
short-term topical missions.
2.
The authorities have restructured the CSO but many key donors involved in preparing
the statistical master plan (SMP) have expressed concern over the independence of the CSO,
which now reports to the Ministry of National Economy; and the integrity of the statistical
system. Progress on the implementation of the SMP has been delayed as the authorities have
been slow in undertaking the required institutional changes and strengthening the
management structure of the CSO.
3.
The authorities have expressed interest in participating in the General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS) and have appointed a national GDDS coordinator. The
statistical agencies have started drafting the GDDS metadata with the support of STA.
Real Sector
4.
The national accounts compilation process is hampered by the general lack of source
data. The Asian Development Bank is providing funding for two major surveys that could
supply critical source data for the national accounts; however, the survey fieldwork has been
delayed until 2006. Thus, the survey data may not be available before 2007.
5.
The CSO now compiles a nationwide CPI covering Kabul and the five major cities.
Nonetheless, the inexperience of the price collectors has posed some early challenges to the
compilation process. There is also the need to update the index weights. The CPI basket was
derived from a 1987 household income and expenditure survey. In 2003, the CSO conducted
a limited exercise to update the weights based on household expenditure in Kabul; however,
a comprehensive exercise to obtain representative weights is required, and is predicated on
the completion of the delayed integrated living standard survey.
6.
Customs coverage of overland foreign trade—which is most of foreign trade—is
limited at best. The CSO currently records trade at only seven of the 14 customs posts.
Monthly trade data are updated manually, thereby causing delays in dissemination.
Accordingly, there is an urgent need for improved computer hardware.

- 37 -

APPENDIX III

Government Finance Statistics
7.
An Advisor from FAD has been assisting the Ministry of Finance in compiling GFS
data; however, there is an acute shortage of staff to work on compilation. The FreeBalance
software, which is used in many countries for budget execution and tracking and could
generate some data, does not work very well in Afghanistan. The authorities have reported
data on budgetary central government for publication in the 2005 Government Finance
Statistics Yearbook.
Money and Banking Statistics
8.
The banking sector has developed steadily over the last several years. In addition to
three relicensed state-owned banks, four foreign-owned commercial banks and four foreign
banks are now in operation. While there was some improvement in the scope and quality of
data reporting by the central bank, there are still weaknesses in many areas. Da Afghanistan
Bank (DAB) is now in the process of installing new accounting software, which is expected
to be ready for use by May 2006. This new accounting software will allow DAB to produce
its balance sheet at least on a monthly basis. The very limited accounting capacity of DAB,
especially outside Kabul has hindered efforts to produce a complete and reliable balance
sheet. Regarding the commercial banks, DAB has developed new reporting formats to
provide data for bank supervision and monetary statistics, and the banks have started
reporting data to DAB regularly according to these formats. STA reviewed the new report
forms and found that they lacked sectorization and classification of financial assets by type
of financial instrument, which are basic requirements for compiling monetary statistics in
accordance with international standards. In this regard, STA provided guidance on how to
incorporate these required breakdowns into the new report forms. STA plans to send a
mission on monetary and financial statistics to Kabul during March 2006 to help develop
source data and a data reporting system, and train staff on the methodology.
Balance of Payments
9.
Like the national accounts, balance of payments compilation suffers from the paucity
of source data. There are no estimates of unrecorded border trade, which constitutes a
significant proportion of foreign trade. No reliable source data exist to estimate services,
income, transfers, and foreign direct investment. A balance of payments statistics mission
that visited Kabul during April 11–May 7, 2005 reported that while some of the
recommendations from the previous mission in April 2004 had been introduced, most of the
efforts regarding data generation had not materialized, as the response and cooperation from
respondents was poor. The 2005 mission provided the authorities with a list of important
actions that need to be implemented before a follow-up mission:

- 38 -

APPENDIX III

•

Estimate exports and imports based on CSO data with adjustment for illegal trade and
duty free imports. The CSO should start including duty free imports according to
international classifications.

•

Adjust freight and insurance at 12 and 3 percent, respectively, of c.i.f. imports from
overseas to calculate imports f.o.b.

•

Introduce questionnaire to hotels and guesthouses to collect data on expenses of
nonresidents to estimate travel receipts.

•

Conduct sample surveys of residents returning from travel abroad and use the
immigration data to estimate travel expenses.

•

Introduce the questionnaire for collecting data from foreign embassies and other
foreign organizations to estimate government receipts, compensation of employees,
etc.

•

Introduce the questionnaire on foreign direct investment (FDI) to collect data from
major FDI enterprises.

•

Introduce reporting forms to commercial banks (on foreign exchange transactions
between residents and nonresidents) following discussions with them and with the
Banking Supervision Department of the DAB.

•

Introduce questionnaire to money changers and money service providers.

•

Collect quarterly data from the Ministry of Economy on NGOs’ receipts of donations
and grants.

•

Compile preliminary balance of payments on the basis of various estimation
procedures discussed with and documented by the Balance of Payments Section.

10.

A follow-up mission is tentatively scheduled for early 2006.

External debt
11.
Many records were destroyed during the war and the authorities are slowly rebuilding
their database through a reconciliation process in cooperation with the Secretariat of the
Paris Club and all non Paris Club creditors. The same reconciliation process is taking place
regarding Russian claims.

- 39 -

APPENDIX IV

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of January 10, 2006)
Date of latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data6

Frequency
of
Reporting6

Frequency
of
Publication6

Exchange Rates

01/08/06

1/08/06

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities1

12/21/05

12/28/05

W

W

W

Reserve/Base Money

12/21/05

01/08/06

M

M

M

Broad Money

09/30/05

10/30/05

Q

Q

Q

Central Bank Balance Sheet

12/21/05

01/08/06

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

9/31/05

11/15/05

Q

Q

Q

Interest Rates2

01/08/06

01/08/06

W

W

W

12/05

12/31/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3—General
Government4

-

-

-

-

-

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3—Central
Government

11/05

12/05

M

M

M

-

-

-

-

-

External Current Account Balance

2004/05

8/15/05

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2004/05

08/15/05

A

A

A

GDP/GNP

2004/05

8/15/05

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

2004/05

8/15/05

A

A

A

Consumer Price Index

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

1/

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes
and bonds.
3/
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4/
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds)
and state and local governments.
5/
Including currency and maturity composition.
6/
Daily (D); weekly (W); monthly (M); quarterly (Q); annually (A); irregular (I); and not available (NA).
2/

- 40 -

APPENDIX V

Debt Sustainability Analysis
1.
This annex assesses Afghanistan’s external debt sustainability (DSA) using the
joint World Bank–Fund’s DSA template for Low Income Countries. Data limitations
notwithstanding, a sound debt management strategy remains central to the overall growth
dynamics of Afghanistan, which is currently heavily dependent on external financing.1
Based on the current medium-term macroeconomic framework and outstanding stock of debt,
this DSA examines Afghanistan’s annual borrowing capacity under two scenarios: one that
assumes future borrowing under highly concessional terms, and another that assumes limited
access to concessional borrowing. The analysis concludes that Afghanistan has relatively
little scope for nonconcessional borrowing. Furthermore, Afghanistan is subject to an
elevated risk of debt distress owing to the weakness of exports, the low revenue base and the
country’s large reconstruction financing requirements.2
Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: External Debt, 2004/05
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Total external debt

749

Multilateral debt
World Bank
Asian Development Bank

455
233
222

Bilateral debt 1/

294

Verified claims
United States
USAID
USDA
Former GDR
OPEC Fund
Kuwait Development Fund

137
82
57
25
40
2
13

Unverified claims
Bulgaria
Saudi Arabia
Iraq
Former Czechoslovakia

157
47
30
6
75

Memorandum item:
(In percent of GDP)
Total external debt
Total multilateral debt
Total verified bilateral debt
Total unverified bilateral debt

13
8
2
3

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes Russian claims. Staff estimate these claims to exceed $10 billion.

1

While the DSA template uses 10-year averages of key macroeconomic variables to generate alternative
scenarios for analytical purposes, this was not possible in the case of Afghanistan as reliable economic data
exist only for the last three years. As a consequence, the present DSA does not employ the full set of stress tests
typically presented in low-income country DSAs.

2

A number of caveats must be noted. The World Bank has not yet assessed Afghanistan against its Country
Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) framework, which makes it impossible to identify a policydependent sustainability threshold as identified in “Operational Framework for Debt Sustainability Assessments
in Low Income Countries—Further Considerations” (refer to www.imf.org). For the purposes of this exercise, it
is assumed that Afghanistan is evaluated as a medium performer in the CPIA. Thus, the sustainable ratio for the
NPV of debt-to-exports is assumed to be 150 percent. It is possible that the indicative sustainability thresholds
for Afghanistan may be revised following its evaluation under the CPIA. This would affect the results of the
DSA. Owing to these caveats, this exercise cannot propose a definitive rating of debt distress for Afghanistan.

- 41 -

APPENDIX V

2.
The main economic assumptions are the same in both scenarios. The scenarios
are based on an end-2004/05 external debt stock of $749 million (see Table 1), which
includes all currently acknowledged, verified or unverified debts,3 but excludes disputed
Russian claims. If included, the Russian claims—preliminarily estimated at around
$10.8 billion—would dramatically increase the NPV of debt-to-export ratio and the need for
debt relief (possibly in the context of the HIPC Initiative). Real economic activity is
projected to expand rapidly over the next 10 years, as the reconstruction effort boosts all
sectors of the economy. Real GDP growth is projected to be around 10 percent a year during
this period of accelerated growth, before moderating to approximately 6 percent thereafter.
Assuming annual export growth of about 15 percent a year in the medium term, the trade
deficit diminishes but remains significant throughout the projection period. The current
account (including grants) is nevertheless generally in surplus, as transfers are expected to
remain substantial.
3.
The first scenario assumes that all future borrowing is contracted under highly
concessional terms (i.e. with a grant element of at least 60 percent). On this basis,
Afghanistan’s gross annual borrowing could reach $380 million without breaching the
indicative NPV of debt-to-exports threshold.4 While this level of borrowing represents a
significant increase over
220
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
200
current levels, it may be
Export shock
180
useful to contrast it against
201
160
the projected gap between
140
total recurrent spending
120
requirements and revenue
excluding grants, estimated at 100
150
80
around $900 million per year
60
over the medium term.5 This
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
highlights the need for
continued grant financing for several years. Debt sustainability is maintained only in the
absence of shocks affecting the economy (e.g. lower export growth of about 9 percent would
raise the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio to well above the indicative sustainability threshold).
4.
The second scenario assumes that Afghanistan has limited access (up to
$75 million annually) to concessional borrowing and borrows all additional funds on
nonconcessional terms.6 In this case, additional nonconcessional borrowing could reach
3

Unverified claims amount to roughly $157 million, which the authorities are in the process of reconciling.

4

This implies that most new borrowings would need to come from concessional creditors, such as IDA and/or
the Asian Development Bank.
5

See Box 1 of the staff report for a full explanation. The definition of “total recurrent spending” includes a
number of items, such as recurrent military costs, currently in the external budget, which are funded directly by
donors outside of the government-controlled operating budget.

6

This scenario is presented to underscore the importance of highly concessional resources in maintaining
external sustainability. Afghanistan currently has no commercial market access, nor is it likely to have it in the

(continued…)

- 42 -

APPENDIX V

about $250 million annually, without breaching the 150 percent indicative sustainability
threshold. This scenario illustrates both the sensitivity of debt sustainability to export growth
assumptions and the importance of continued access to highly concessional resources in
meeting Afghanistan’s
development needs. Although 240
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
220
not shown in the tables and
Export shock
200
figures, the debt
227
180
service-to-revenue ratio
160
140
reaches nearly 24 percent
under this scenario (compared 120
100
150
to less than 3 percent in the
80
first scenario), which is
60
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
another indication of the
sustainability problems that
would ensue if Afghanistan were to borrow on nonconcessional terms. Also, assuming export
growth of only 9 percent a year, Afghanistan’s sustainable borrowing capacity would be
limited to about $150 million annually. Given the geopolitical risks in the region, lower
foreign direct investment could also hinder the country’s capacity to service debt and thus
would warrant a re-evaluation of the appropriate debt sustainability threshold.
Policy Implications
5.
The availability of external borrowing to fund development spending will
depend critically on the authorities meeting their fiscal targets. Although revenue
mobilization has increased rapidly in the last few years, it remains very low, amounting to
4.5 percent of GDP in 2004/05, equivalent to about 50 percent of operating expenditures and
only 28 percent of total recurrent expenditures (see Box 1 of the staff report). The
medium-term framework projects revenue to cover operating expenditures by 2010, when the
revenue to GDP ratio is expected to reach 8 percent. Meeting the proposed fiscal target will
require both a sustained increase in revenue and expenditure restraint. Any
underperformance in these two areas, or any reduction in donor grants, will require
additional borrowing to fund recurrent expenditures, thereby reducing by an equivalent
amount the financing available for development spending.
6.
In view of the uncertainty surrounding the medium-term macroeconomic
framework, the medium-term debt strategy should continue to rely primarily on grant
financing and highly concessional borrowing. The DSA indicates that, even under the
conservative debt stock assumptions, external shocks may severely limit new borrowings,

near future. Nevertheless, this scenario assumes that additional debt is contracted at terms similar to those
obtained in commercial markets (8 percent coupon, 1-year grace period and 6 years of maturity; the principal is
to be repaid in six equal installments).

- 43 -

APPENDIX V

corroborating the results of the previous DSA exercise (IMF Country Report No. 05/34).
Afghanistan’s reliance on grants and donor support may also be tested under an uncertain
and changing political landscape.
7.
Also, the resolution of the Russian claims—not currently reconciled or
acknowledged formally by Afghanistan—will have a significant impact on debt
sustainability. Preliminary calculations suggest that anything short of a full write-off of
these claims could result in explosive debt dynamics, impeding any future borrowing.
However, given the uncertainty regarding the resolution of this issue, it would be premature
to evaluate specific debt relief options.

...
...
...
...
2.6
2.6
0.1
-9.6

28.6
4.0
...
...
...

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Noninterest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms (percentage change)
Effective interest rate (in percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
15.7
6.4
1.6
36.1
50.9

...
...
...
...
3.8
3.8
-0.2
-2.4

12.3
12.3
-0.8
-6.6
-3.1
67.8
7.5
75.3
-49.3
-21.7
-1.1
-2.3
0.2
-1.7
-0.8
5.8
-0.2

2003

8.0
17.0
1.6
25.0
2.1

5.8
78.6
5.8
78.6
3.4
3.4
-0.3
-1.6

11.8
11.8
-0.5
-7.4
-2.1
53.5
7.4
60.9
-43.9
-11.6
-2.9
-2.4
0.2
-0.8
-1.8
6.9
-0.2

2004

1.2

-1.3

10.4
6.9
0.0
7.9
34.5

22.1

-30.8

17.4
9.2
1.6
30.6
26.5

2.9

Standard
Deviation 6/

-0.4

Historical
Average 6/

13.8
9.9
0.5
20.1
14.0

5.4
75.4
5.4
75.4
1.2
1.2
-0.4
-0.5

10.7
10.7
-1.1
-6.2
-1.6
48.4
7.1
55.5
-39.6
-10.4
-3.3
-1.3
0.0
-1.3
…
5.1
-0.1

2005

Estimate

11.7
8.0
0.5
20.6
9.6

5.1
71.2
5.1
71.2
1.1
1.1
-0.3
1.4

10.0
10.0
-0.7
-4.1
0.7
43.3
7.1
50.4
-35.1
-7.5
-3.8
-1.0
0.0
-1.0
…
3.4
-0.1

2006

10.6
5.0
0.4
17.0
-5.2

5.1
71.0
5.1
71.0
0.9
0.9
-0.1
2.2

9.9
9.9
-0.1
-2.1
2.1
34.0
7.2
41.1
-28.2
-3.7
-3.4
-0.9
0.0
-0.9
…
2.1
-0.1

2007

9.9
5.0
0.4
7.4
4.1

5.0
75.3
5.0
75.3
0.9
0.9
-0.1
3.1

9.8
9.8
-0.1
-1.8
3.0
30.5
6.7
37.1
-23.8
-3.6
-4.1
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
…
1.7
0.0

2008

9.6
4.6
0.5
11.3
9.6

5.0
77.1
5.0
77.1
1.0
1.0
-0.2
2.4

9.7
9.7
-0.1
-2.3
2.4
29.0
6.5
35.5
-23.8
-2.9
-3.9
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
…
2.2
0.0

2009

9.4
4.6
0.6
11.4
9.4

4.9
77.9
4.9
77.9
1.1
1.1
-0.3
1.9

9.5
9.5
-0.2
-2.7
1.7
27.6
6.3
34.0
-23.8
-2.1
-3.7
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
…
2.6
0.0

2010

Projections

10.8
6.2
0.5
14.6
6.9

-3.7

-29.1

1.4

Average
2005–10

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Source: Fund staff simulations.

13.1
13.1
13.1
...
3.4
54.6
6.8
61.4
-29.9
-21.3
-1.2
...
...
0.0
0.0
...
...

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Noninterest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual 3/
Of which: exceptional financing

2002

Actual

Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002–25 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

8.1
4.6
1.0
10.5
8.1

4.2
74.4
4.2
74.4
2.1
2.1
0.5
4.7

7.8
7.8
-0.4
0.9
4.3
21.5
5.6
27.1
-11.9
-5.3
-3.0
-0.5
0.1
-0.6
…
-1.3
0.0

2015

5.2
3.8
0.8
7.5
5.2

2.1
44.4
2.1
44.4
2.7
2.7
2.9
5.4

4.1
4.1
-0.3
2.9
5.1
13.6
4.7
18.3
-2.5
-6.0
-2.0
-0.2
0.0
-0.2
…
-3.2
0.0

2025

7.2
4.2
1.0
9.6
7.2

-2.7

-9.1

4.6

Average
2011–25

- 44 APPENDIX V

- 45 -

ATTACHMENT I

Kabul, February 11, 2006
Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. de Rato,
1.
In November 2005, we carried out with IMF staff the discussions for the
2005 Article IV consultation and the sixth review under the staff-monitored program (SMP)
agreed in March 2004.
2.
Since the completion of the fifth review under the SMP, we have continued to
maintain economic stability while holding, for the first time in recent history, legislative and
provincial elections. During the recent discussions, we reached understandings on a revised
macroeconomic framework and an updated memorandum of economic and financial policies
(MEFP) covering the period through September 2006. As detailed in the MEFP, we have
observed all the end-September 2005 quantitative indicators and, albeit with some delays
caused by technical factors, all but one of the end-September structural benchmarks under
the SMP program (Tables 1 and 2).
3.
We believe that the policies and measures set forth in the attached MEFP are
adequate to achieve the objectives of the program, but we will take any further measures that
may become appropriate for this purpose. In accordance with IMF’s policies on such
consultations, the Government of Afghanistan will consult with staff prior to adopting any
such measures or revising any of the policies contained in the MEFP. We will also provide
any information required to assess the implementation of the SMP.
4.
Looking forward, and in view of the significant challenges facing the country,
including the prevalence of drug-related activities and pervasive poverty, we intend to
intensify our adjustment and structural reform efforts. To that end, we are preparing an
interim national development strategy consistent with the Millennium Development Goals,
which will focus on creating adequate conditions for sustainable economic growth and
reducing poverty in the context of fiscal and external sustainability. In support of this
strategy, we have initiated discussions with IMF staff on a formal program that could be
supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). We expect to continue
these discussions in early March 2006, with the view of requesting a PRGF arrangement in
the second quarter of 2006.

- 46 -

ATTACHMENT I

5.
In continuing with our policy of transparency, we consent to the publication of this
letter, the attached MEFP, the technical memorandum of understanding, and the
accompanying Executive Board documents on the IMF’s website.

Sincerely yours,

/s/
Anwar Ul-Haq Ahady
Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance

Attachment:
Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies

/s/
Noorullah Delawari
Governor
Da Afghanistan Bank

- 47 -

ATTACHMENT II

Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
of the Government of Afghanistan
Sixth Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program
November 22, 2005
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The government of Afghanistan held discussions with IMF staff in the context of the
sixth quarterly review under the staff-monitored program (SMP). These discussions, which
coincided with the 2005 Article IV consultation, covered: (a) developments under the SMP
during the second quarter of 2005/06, as specified in our Memorandum of Economic and
Financial Policies (MEFP) of September 26, 2005; (b) the macroeconomic outlook for the
remainder of 2005/06 and the first half of 2006/07; (c) the structural reform agenda; and (d)
the medium-term outlook.
2.
This update to the MEFP reviews performance during July–September 2005 and
describes policies and objectives for the remainder of 2005/06 and the first half of 2006/07.
The program will continue to be guided by the macroeconomic and structural reform policies
described in the MEFP of March 2004, and in the supplements of September 6, 2004;
December 29, 2004; February 3, 2005; May 18, 2005; and September 26, 2005. The seventh
review under the SMP is scheduled for early March 2006 and will coincide with discussions
to reach understandings on a program supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF). That review, combined with the interim Afghanistan National Development
Strategy (I-ANDS), which we will present at the January 2006 Donors’ Conference in
London, will provide the basis for policy discussions related to the PRGF program.
3.
The government continues to attach paramount importance to the SMP. We
have adhered fully to the agreed macroeconomic policies, having observed all the
end-September quantitative indicators. We have also met, albeit with some delays caused by
various factors, all end-September structural benchmarks, except for the benchmark related
to the publication of the audited 2004/05 core budget financial statements, which we now
intend to meet by end-December. Lastly, as described below, we have also taken important
policy actions in the fiscal, financial, and statistical areas.
4.
While much has been achieved under the SMP in terms of macroeconomic
stabilization and structural reforms, we still face significant challenges, including the
prevalence of drug activities and pervasive poverty. To further strengthen our reform
efforts, we intend to develop a comprehensive economic program for 2006/07–2008/09
consistent with our I-ANDS and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). In support of
these policies, the government of Afghanistan has initiated discussions with IMF staff on a
three-year PRGF-supported program, with the view of requesting a PRGF arrangement in the
second quarter of 2006.

- 48 -

ATTACHMENT II

A. Developments Under the SMP
5.
Macroeconomic developments during the first half of 2005/06 were in line with
program projections. Reflecting a rebound in agriculture output—resulting from favorable
weather conditions—and sustained activity in construction, transportation, and
telecommunications, economic growth remained strong during the first half of the year.
6.
Consumer prices in Kabul have continued to increase at a moderate pace during
the second quarter of 2005/06. They increased by 2.6 percent, up from 2.4 percent in the
first quarter. Reflecting the pass-through of international prices to consumer prices,
petroleum product prices increased by 26.3 percent during the second quarter. While slowing
markedly, rents increased by 6.5 percent. Excluding these two items, prices increased by
1.6 percent during the first quarter, and by 3.3 percent during the first half of 2005/06. After
declining sharply during the first quarter, from 16.3 percent at end-March to 11.5 percent at
end-June, year-on-year inflation rebounded somewhat, to 12.9 percent at end-September.1
7.
According to preliminary estimates provided by the UN Office of Drugs and
Crime, opium production declined by 2 percent in 2005, as a sharp fall in area
cultivated was largely offset by a rebound in yields due to favorable weather conditions.
Opium cultivation declined by 21 percent, primarily due to the decision by many farmers not
to plant in anticipation of intensified government-led anti-narcotics efforts but also in
response to relatively low farm gate prices. The intensification of the government’s
interdiction efforts led to a significant increase in seizures of opium, while eradication
contributed to a reduction in the cultivation area. Due to a slight decline in prices, the
production export value and farm gate value fell by 4 percent and 7 percent, respectively, to
$2.7 billion and $560 million.
8.
The core operating budget deficit, excluding grants, was lower than expected,
reaching 1.7 percent of GDP during the first half of 2005/06. The government continued
to abide by its “no-overdraft” commitment and the core operating deficit was more than
covered by foreign grants, resulting in a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP (including grants).
Core budget operating and development spending during the first half of the year totaled
Af 14.6 billion and Af 8.9 billion, respectively, compared with revised annual budget
estimates of Af 33.6 billion and Af 50.1 billion. Compensation of employees accounted for
about 64 percent of operating expenditures, while spending on livelihoods and social
protection and on transport amounted to 67 percent of the core development budget.
9.
Revenue, excluding grants, was estimated at Af 8.8 billion in the first half of
2005/06, exceeding the SMP indicative target (Af 8.3 billion). Revenue comprised
Af 4.6 billion in customs duties, Af 1.1 billion in domestic taxes, and Af 3.1 billion in nontax
revenues. While customs performed better than anticipated, increasing by 40 percent over the
1

The national CPI, which covers five major cities in addition to Kabul, increased by 10.6 percent in the twelve
months ending in September 2005.

- 49 -

ATTACHMENT II

same period of 2004/05, tax collections declined by 9 percent. While a number of new tax
polices and administrative reforms were introduced over this period, covering: the lowering
of corporate tax rates (from 25 to 20 percent); the increase in turnover tax rates for specific
services; the introduction of a rental tax; the removal of tax holidays; and the creation of a
large taxpayer office; the expected revenue benefits from these changes, with the exception
of the rental tax, are yet to be achieved. Factors which affected the revenue collections, and
which have now been resolved, involved: delays in the approval of the new enforcement
provisions, so over the period compliance remained voluntary; and uncertainty associated
with the administration and application of the amended income tax law, as the new one was
already drafted and was being discussed.
10.
We have started to implement a range of recently-adopted tax measures. These
measures, which have been the subject of a taxpayer education program, include: (a) an
increase in turnover tax rates for specific services (hotels, restaurants, telecommunications,
and airlines); (b) a wage withholding tax; and (c) an airline departure fee. As our
administrative capabilities are still limited and several technical issues related to
implementation and coverage need to be resolved, we are initially focusing on the larger
taxpayers.
11.
The new income tax law was approved after a short delay. The new law, which
incorporates amendments to provide for administrative powers and additional corporate tax
reform measures, was approved by the Cabinet and signed into law by the President in
November 2005. The short delay was largely due to an unanticipated legal ruling that
required the re-submission of the complete law, rather than only the amendments, as was
originally intended.
12.
The midyear review (MYR), was adopted by Cabinet in October 2005. An
increase in the wages of non-uniformed public servants was required, as the last general
increase was in November 2003. Importantly, the aggregate rise in the wage bill for 2005/06
was restricted to less than 3 percent over the original budget (Af 549 million). Overall, the
increase in operating budget stemming from the MYR was limited to 2.1 percent, with
additional unanticipated spending for parliamentarians and pensions partially offset by
savings in other current and capital expenditures. This increase in operating spending should
be more than offset by additional domestic revenues, projected to increase by around
14 percent over the initial budget.2
13.
We have adjusted the core development budget to make it more realistic,
reflecting the government’s limited spending capacity. For the remainder of 2005/06, core
development spending was reduced by 14 percent to Af 50.1 billion (15 percent of GDP) as
projects unlikely to be started in the current year were carried forward to 2006/07. Over the
medium term, core development spending is expected to average around 8 percent of GDP
2

The increase in revenue excludes $80 million (equivalent to 21 percent of domestic revenue) from the sale of
telecoms spectrum band width that we expect will be received in the third quarter of the year.

- 50 -

ATTACHMENT II

and be predominantly funded by external grants. Donor-funded spending currently
implemented outside the core budget is estimated at Af 105.4 billion (31 percent of GDP) in
2005/06.3 To enhance transparency, accountability, and the role of the budget as a key policy
instrument, we continue to encourage donors to bring this expenditure on-budget.
14.
Currency in circulation increased by 12.1 percent during the first half of
2005/06, to Af 43.5 billion, slightly below the SMP second quarter indicative ceiling
(Af 43.8 billion). As expected, demand for money accelerated somewhat during the second
quarter due to seasonal factors. This acceleration was, however, less pronounced than last
year, allowing Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) to contain money growth within program limits
without triggering a sharp appreciation of the Afghani. Reflecting the central bank’s foreign
exchange activity and the accumulation of deposits by the government, international reserves
increased further, reaching $1.5 billion at end-September, equivalent to 4.1 months of
prospective imports. Interest rates on the overnight and 30-day capital notes continued to
move in the 1–2 percent and 4–6 percent ranges, respectively. After depreciating by 3
percent during the first quarter, the Afghani appreciated by 2 percent against the U.S. dollar
during the second quarter. During the 12 months leading to end-September, the Afghani has
depreciated modestly against the dollar but remained broadly stable in real terms.
15.
Progress was made in restructuring the state-owned banks. The Ministry of
Finance, formally notified by DAB, and made public our decision to restructure the licensed
banks, and to liquidate the three former state-owned banks that had not been relicensed. As a
first step toward the transfer of its remaining deposits, DAB froze the correspondent accounts
of Agricultural Development Bank, the only institution among the three former banks that
had kept a deposit base. Regarding the licensed state-owned banks, we have decided to
restructure Bank Millie and Bank Pashtany and to finalize the restructuration plan of
Export Promotion Bank. The Ministry has initiated steps to restructure the management and
operation of the Bank Mille, with recruitment of a new chief executive and a management
team, all with the appropriate skills and experience, which will be in charge of implementing
the restructuring. At the same time, DAB has conducted a review of the performance of these
banks regarding observance of the conditions attached to their licenses. Based on the findings
of this review, DAB has adopted enforcement measures to improve the operational
performance and governance of these banks, starting with the replacement of the top
management of Bank Mille. Accordingly, consultants are being recruited to advise and assist
management of the Bank. A similar approach will be taken with Bank Pashtany. Other
positive developments in the financial sector include the completion of the transfer of DAB’s
commercial activities, and the reduction of the registration fees for deeds from 6 percent to
0.5 percent.

3

This figure reflects the funded portion of the external budget, while an additional Af 77 billion is planned but
not funded in 2005/06.

- 51 -

ATTACHMENT II

16.
The current account deficit, excluding grants, reached 45 percent of GDP,
compared with 51 percent in 2003/04.4 Including grants, the current account recorded a
surplus, which narrowed to 1.9 percent of GDP in 2004/05, down from 3.1 percent of GDP in
2003/04. In addition, there was increasing foreign direct investments, concessional loans, as
well as other unrecorded flows.
17.
We stepped up our efforts to improve compilation of balance of payments
statistics. In line with the recommendations of the May 2005 IMF technical assistance
mission on balance of payments statistics, we have started implementing a reporting system
that covers trade flows, private grants, interest receipts and payments, and the international
investment position. In this context, we are working closely with the banking community,
money changers, nongovernmental organizations, and firms engaged in international trade.
18.
We have made progress in verifying external debt owed to Paris Club creditors
and to non Paris Club creditors (an end-September 2005 structural benchmark).
However, despite protracted efforts, we are still to receive from some creditors a reply to our
requests, or provision of adequate documentation to validate claims.
19.
We have adopted a classification of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) by the
envisaged restructuring method. This list comprises the 66 enterprises directly owned by
the government. Eight will remain state-owned, while 58 will be divested (liquidated or
privatized). We expect about two thirds of the latter to be privatized, including about seven
through international tenders. To facilitate the privatization of these enterprises, many of
which are no longer in operation but hold large real estate assets, we adopted amendments to
the Tassidy law giving the Ministry of Finance full authority and responsibility to privatize
these enterprises.
20.
We have adopted a statistical law, which provides for an independent statistical
agency. This law establishes the legal framework for collecting, processing, and
disseminating economic data, with the Central Statistical Office (CSO) being an independent
institution with a separate budget. In addition, we adopted a program of restructuring and
reform to ensure that the CSO has the human capital needed to implement the statistical
master plan.
II. POLICIES FOR THE REMAINDER OF 2005/06 AND 2006/07
21.
To ensure a continued strong economic performance, we intend to pursue prudent
macroeconomic policies, consistent with the SMP objectives, and create the conditions for
sustained growth and poverty alleviation.

4

As it is now currently constructed, the current account does not include drug exports.

- 52 -

ATTACHMENT II

A. Macroeconomic Objectives
22.
The macroeconomic outlook for 2005/06 remains favorable. Real GDP is
expected to grow by 14 percent in 2005/06, driven by the continued recovery of the
agriculture sector due to better rainfall during the planting season, and sustained activity in
construction and services. Year-on-year inflation is expected to decline further, to about 10
percent at end-2005/06, notwithstanding upside risks related to possible second round effects
of oil prices. The current account deficit, including grants, is projected to decline to 1.7
percent of GDP in 2005/06, while international reserves are expected to increase further.
B. Fiscal Policy
23.
In October, the Cabinet adopted a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF), that
will form the basis for the 2006/07 budget, which also contains projections of the main
fiscal aggregates over the next four years. This MTFF, the government's first, includes a
set of integrated medium-term macroeconomic and fiscal targets and projections that set out
a path towards fiscal sustainability. The MTFF will be gradually refined to strengthen the
linkages between these aggregate projections and our policy priorities. Although it will take
time to develop more detailed sector strategies, the I-ANDS process, combined with work in
a few priority sectors, should help improve the linkages between policies and operating and
development spending and contribute to a more sustainable fiscal position and improved
outcomes.
24.
The MTFF highlights the country’s main fiscal challenges. Fiscal sustainability is
predicated on: (a) rebuilding domestic tax collection from its extremely low level;
(b) implementing an civil service reform program to both contain the wage bill and pensions
to affordable levels, in the face of significant cost pressures, and improve performance; and
(c) gradually consolidating fiscal operations within the core budget, consistent with our
limited ability to sustain such activities. In particular, incorporating the ongoing costs arising
from the current reconstruction and capital investments (i.e. for maintenance) into the
budget, remains a significant challenge. Over the medium-term, we will continue to rely on
significant external funding, even for some core current spending (such as the Afghan
National Army), while planning to enhance its predictability and effectiveness by bringing
such spending into the budget, consistent with the MTFF and I-ANDS.
25.
Revenue is expected to increase significantly over the medium-term. The MTFF
includes an ambitious program to increase domestic revenue from 4.5 percent of GDP in
2004/05 to 8.6 percent by 2009/10. In order to achieve these ambitious revenue targets, we
plan to rationalize the current tariff structure for 2006/07, expand the coverage of the taxes
introduced earlier in the year, and continue to strengthen compliance through the large
taxpayer office. We will also consider introducing an excise tax. In addition, following the
October 2005 tax policy conference with the private sector, we are jointly reviewing the
priority reforms, including the turnover tax, revenue administration, and the abolition of
nuisance taxes. Before major changes are made, we will consult widely and consider the
impact on the whole economy. By maintaining our competitive income tax and customs duty
rates and improving administration by simplifying procedures, streamlining the number of

- 53 -

ATTACHMENT II

taxes, and reducing the burden of illicit taxation and corruption, we seek to increase revenue
and reinforce a positive business environment.
26.
Continuing to improve fiscal transparency, accountability and the integrity of
fiscal information is a priority. Fiscal reporting improved markedly over the last year, with
monthly core budget data now published on our website. However, the reconciliation of
fiscal and banking data (an end-September benchmark) is constrained by existing procedures,
information systems and weak capacity. The audit of the financial statements for the 2004/05
core budget (an end-September 2005 benchmark), which has been delayed by uncertainty
over the appropriate procedures, recent changes in the new budget law, and limited
administrative capacity will now be submitted to cabinet before end-December 2005. To
avoid a repeat of such delays, the Ministry of Finance and the Control and Audit Office will
agree on an audit plan for the 2005/06 core budget by end-February 2006.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies and Financial Sector Reforms
27.
As price, exchange rate and financial developments during the first half of
2005/06 were largely in line with SMP projections, monetary policy will continue to be
guided by the program agreed during the third review. In view of the upward risks on
inflation, stemming in particular from possible second-round effects of the increase in oil
prices, we will closely monitor price and exchange rate developments in the coming months
and stand ready to tighten the monetary stance, should inflationary pressures emerge.
International reserves are expected to increase further, to about $1.7 billion at end-2005/06.
In 2006/07, pending the deepening of the financial markets (interbank market, capital notes)
and the development of a monetary survey in line with international standards, monetary
policy will continue to target currency in circulation, and the exchange rate to be marketdetermined.
28.
We will continue to modernize DAB’s operations and strengthen the monetary
policy framework. We will adopt amendments to remunerate reserve requirements, while
excluding capital notes from the eligible assets. By end-March 2006, we will enforce these
new regulations, as well as those related to the foreign currency open positions, and penalize
non-compliance. By end-December 2005, we will allow participants to the DAB’s foreign
exchange auctions to sell, as well as to buy, dollars. By year end, with technical assistance
from the IMF, we will also introduce an overnight collaterized credit facility, with capital
notes eligible as collateral. We also intend to introduce capital notes of longer maturities.
Lastly, we will strengthen the monetary framework, through the development of more
reliable liquidity forecasts, publication of the capital note interest rates, and strengthened
oversight by DAB’s Supreme Council.
29.
We will pursue the restructuring of the public banking sector. By end-December
2005, we will appoint people in charge of overseeing the liquidation of the state-owned
banks, and by end-March 2006, we will start implementing this liquidation and complete the
transfer/reimbursement of the Agricultural Development Bank deposits. We will replace the
management boards of Bank Millie and Bank Pashtany by end-December 2005 and
end-March 2006, respectively. By end-June 2006, the new management teams, in

- 54 -

ATTACHMENT II

coordination with the Ministry of Finance, will adopt long-term restructuring plans for these
two banks.
30.
We intend to tackle the administrative and legal impediments to the
development of the banking sector. We will continue working with the banking and donor
communities to identify the main impediments to the development of banking operations,
prioritize a legal, administrative and legislative reform agenda to address impediments, and
ensure better coordination between donors. One of our priorities is the adoption of essential
enabling laws for lending operations, including the secure transactions law, the business
organization law, and the negotiable instrument law.
D. External Policies and Debt Management
31.
The overall external sector outlook remains favorable. The revised current
account deficit, excluding grants, is projected to reach 42 percent of GDP in 2005/06,
compared with 45 percent in 2004/05. Although foreign direct investment and concessional
loans are expected to increase in the near future, the deficit will continue to be primarily
supported by grant financing, as well as other flows. Including grants, the current account is
expected to record a surplus of 1.7 percent of GDP.
32.
We are committed to further enhance the quality and reliability of balance of
payments data. The survey of non recorded trade is expected to be completed by
end-March 2006. Its findings will help refine trade flow estimates. In addition to the various
surveys under way on other components of the balance of payments, we will hold regular
meetings with the primary providers of data on remittances, financial flows, and the
international investment position. On external debt data, DAB will coordinate closely with
the Ministry of Finance.
33.
Our external borrowing strategy will remain cautious, relying primarily on
grants and highly concessional loans to meet our financing needs. We envisage continued
lending from multilaterals such as the Asian Development Bank and additional highly
concessional lending from bilaterals, if need be, to fund specific projects that directly benefit
the population and reduce poverty. We will continue to seek generous debt relief from
existing bilateral creditors and examine the various debt-reduction options. We will pursue
good faith efforts to conclude the debt reconciliation process with all our creditors.
34.
We recognize that an open and transparent trade regime is critical to enhancing
Afghanistan’s growth prospects. We intend to consolidate the gains made thus far through
reforms of the trade regime and customs administration. We have begun discussions with the
world trade organization (WTO) as a first step toward membership. Such membership will
provide us with more predictability in our trade relations with other countries, and give us
access to the WTO dispute settlement apparatus and to technical assistance. In addition, to
enhance our role in the region, we recently became a member of the Central Asian Regional
Economic Council, and are being considered for membership in several other regional
organizations.

- 55 -

ATTACHMENT II

E. Structural Reforms
35.
In addition to reforms in the fiscal and monetary areas, we intend to focus on
further liberalizing the economy and strengthening competition. Key measures will
include: (a) the publication in the Official Gazette, by end-December 2005, of the
amendments to the Tassady Law; (b) the initiation of an open and transparent divestiture
process of the 58 SOEs slated for liquidation or privatization; and (c) the completion by
end-December 2005 of an inventory of the various public entities and government agencies
engaged in commercial activities.5 The divesture will be accompanied by an equitable and
affordable retrenchment plan. To enhance competition and ensure an adequate regulatory
environment for investment, we will also promote land ownership rights and an insurance
law.
F.

Poverty Reduction Strategy

36.
As part of the first step in formulating our development strategy, a draft
document, the I-NDS, is being developed with broad intra-government consultation and
participation of civil society and the donor community. This draft will define our strategic
vision and sectoral priorities, consistent with the Millennium Development Goals, and will
include broad estimates of our medium-term development needs. This draft will subsequently
be discussed with our development partners, and civil society to build broader ownership
before it is presented at the January 2006 International Donors’ Conference. We will
continue to work closely with World Bank and IMF staffs to ensure that the I-ANDS meets
the requirements of an interim poverty reduction strategy paper (I-PRSP) that could support
our upcoming request for a PRGF-supported program. A final version of the I-ANDS in a
format consistent with an I-PRSP, is expected to be adopted before end-March 2006.
G. Statistical Issues
37.
We are committed to building our statistical capacity with support from the
international community. We intend to complete the institutional statistical framework by
putting in place, by March 2006, the National Statistical Council provided for by the new
statistical law. At the same time, we will actively seek donor support to fully fund the action
plan for rebuilding our statistical capacities. We recently notified the IMF of our
commitment to join the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), and have appointed a
GDDS

5

This inventory will include (a) enterprises which are not fully-owned by the government (e.g. Ariana Afghan
Airlines); and (b) departments—within ministries—which are engaged in commercial activities.

- 56 -

ATTACHMENT II

coordinator and started work on the metadata. Lastly, owing to some technical difficulties,
the three surveys designed to measure development progress were delayed and are now
expected to start in March 2006.6
H. Technical Assistance
38.
An overall review of technical assistance (TA) will be completed after the
Donors’ Conference. As we intend to request a PRGF-supported program, this review will
be instrumental in helping us, as well as our partners, to enhance the quality of TA, ensure a
better distribution of TA across government agencies, and redeploy resources in line with the
priorities defined in the I-ANDS. The government of Afghanistan remains grateful for the
assistance provided so far by the IMF and looks forward for its support in the months ahead
to implement its reform program.
III. PROGRAM MONITORING
39.
We will continue to monitor, through the Technical Coordination Committee,
the implementation of the SMP. In doing so, we will refer to the definitions, data sources,
and frequency set out in the technical memorandum of understanding (TMU). Table 1
includes the quantitative indicators through end-September 2006. Table 2 sets out the
structural benchmarks. For reporting purposes, the government will continue to provide IMF
staff all core data, appropriately reconciled and on a timely basis, as specified in the TMU.
IMF staff will be notified prior to introducing any policy actions and developments that
might affect the program.
40.
Discussions on a PRGF-supported program are expected to be completed by
March 2006, and the request for a program presented for consideration by the
Executive Board in the second quarter of 2006. Performance under the seventh review will
serve as a basis for policy discussions under the PRGF.

6

These surveys are: (a) the national risk vulnerability assessment survey on rural households; (b) the integrated
business enterprise survey; and (c) the integrated living standard survey or household income expenditure
survey.

...

0

0

4,757

85

0

1,321

1/ At end-2004/05, currency in circulation amounted to Af 38.8 billion.
3/ Excluding rescheduling arrangements, but including debt with maturities of more than one year.
3/ This benchmark will be evaluated on a continuous basis.
4/ Concessional debt is defined as debt with a grant element of at least 60 percent calculated on the basis of currency-specific discount rates,
based on the OECD commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs).
5/ On a contracting or guaranteed basis. Excluding debt related to normal import transactions.

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund estimates and projections.

3,508

0

b) New nonconcessional debt with an original maturity of less than one year (ceiling) 3/ 4/ 5/

Memorandum item:
Currency in circulation (level triggering consultation)

0

4,629

-50

0

2,453

Estimate

Indicative
Target

a) New medium- and long-term nonconcessional external debt (with original
maturities of one year or more) contracted or guaranteed by the government (ceiling) 2/ 3/

External debt

Fiscal revenue of the central government (floor)

Gross international reserves of the central bank (floor) (in millions of dollars)

Claims of the banking system on the central government (ceiling)

Currency in circulation (ceiling) 1/

Jun. 21

Jun. 21

7,298

0

0

8,306

0

0

5,057

Sep. 22

...

0

0

8,752

198

0

4,693

Estimate

2005/06

Indicative
Target

Sep. 22

(In millions of Afghanis, unless otherwise indicated; cumulative changes from beginning of fiscal year)

10,151

0

0

12,676

100

0

7,822

Indicative
Target

Dec. 20

Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Quantitative Indicators, 2005/06–2006/07

13,234

0

0

18,328

158

0

10,758

Indicative
Target

Mar. 20

3,875

0

0

5,567

0

0

2,572

Sep. 20

8,018

0

0

11,371

0

0

5,278

Indicative
Target

2006/07

Indicative
Target

Jun. 20

- 57 ATTACHMENT II

- 58 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Structural Benchmarks, June 2005–September 2006
Structural Benchmarks

Target Date

Status

Adopt (by the Cabinet) and publish in the Official Gazette the financial
management law.

End-June 2005

Implemented

Publish the financial statements of the 2003/04 external audit of DAB.

End-June 2005

Implemented

Reconcile the government accounting records with the government’s
bank accounts.

End-September 2005

Implemented 1/

Publish the 2004/05 audited financial statements (core budget).

End-September 2005

Not implemented

Adopt (by Cabinet) a comprehensive external debt management
strategy.

End-September 2005

Implemented 1/

Contact the Secretariat of the Paris Club to assist with the
comprehensive review of, and reconciliation of, debt owed to
Paris Club creditors; and continue to contact the non-Paris Club
creditors for a full reconciliation of external obligations, including those
that did not respond to earlier requests for debt reconciliation.

End-September 2005

Implemented

Publish in the Official Gazette: the proposed amendments to the income
tax law to provide for administrative powers and for additional
corporate tax reform measures.

End-September 2005

Implemented 1/

Commence implementation of recently approved tax measures, notably
the business receipt tax on hotels, restaurants, telecommunications, and
airlines and the wage withholding tax, accompanied by a taxpayer
education program.

End-September 2005

Implemented 1/

Issue a statement indicating the Ministry of Finance decision, as the
main shareholder, to liquidate the three former state-owned banks.

End-September 2005

Implemented 1/

Appoint liquidators for the three former state-owned banks and start
implementing their liquidation.

End-December 2005

Replace the management board of Bank Millie.

End-December 2005

Adopt (by Cabinet) a Medium-Term Fiscal Framework that includes
(a) a fiscal table with 3-year projections of revenues, expenditures,
fiscal deficit and sources of financing, and (b) a description of the
policy actions which sustain the projections.

End-December 2005

Eliminate, or reduce substantially, registration fees for deeds.

End-December 2005

Publish the 2004/05 audited financial statements (core budget).

End-December 2005

Remunerate required reserves.

End-March 2006

Identify largest taxpayers to be administered by the Large Taxpayer
Unit according to agreed transparent criteria, and prepare detailed
compliance profile for each taxpayer.

End-March 2006

1/ This structural benchmark was inplemented with some delay.

- 59 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Structural Benchmarks, June 2005–September 2006
(concluded)
Structural Benchmarks

Target Date

Publish estimate of revenues forgone as a result of customs exemptions,
including due to international assistance, and income tax law
exemptions.

End-March 2006

Establish appeals process for customs and tax administrations.

End-June 2006

Process gold held in the palace vaults into a form that qualifies as a
reserve asset and transfer any monetary gold held in Afghanistan to an
international gold center.

End-September 2006

Submit to parliament the core budget’s audited financial statements for
2005/06.

End-September 2006

Status

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
March 6, 2006
1.
This statement contains information on recent economic developments in Afghanistan
that has become available since the staff report was circulated to Executive Directors on
February 16, 2006. This information does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
Preliminary data indicate that all end-December 2005 quantitative indicators and all
but one of the structural benchmarks under the SMP have been observed. The authorities
appear to have failed again to meet the benchmark on the publication of the 2004/05 core
budget’s audited financial statements, which had initially been set for end-September. The
statements have been submitted to the Auditor-General, who still has to certify them.
3.
Inflation (year-on-year) declined further to 12.2 percent in December, reflecting a
slower increase in food prices that was partly offset by an acceleration in rents and petroleum
product prices.
4.
The operating budget deficit, excluding grants, reached 1.9 percent of annual GDP
during the first nine months of 2005/06, a level lower than envisaged in the program, owing
to a better-than-expected performance of customs revenue. Domestic tax collection remained
somewhat below last year’s outcome, as weaker compliance appears to have offset the gains
from new tax measures. Operating budget spending was broadly in line with the program, but
core budget development spending was only 25 percent of the estimate for the whole fiscal
year, owing to weak implementation capacity and security concerns. The operating budget
surplus, including grants, was equivalent to 1.2 percent of annual GDP.
5.
The government has not yet finalized the budget for 2006/07, as the authorities are
still discussing changes in budget coverage with the staff and the donor community. Staff
expect the budget to be consistent with a reduction in the operating deficit to 3.5 percent of
GDP in 2006/07, from 4.2 percent now projected for 2005/06, owing mainly to an increase in
revenue. Operating expenditure is expected to remain broadly unchanged relative to GDP,
after the inclusion of security and other outlays previously financed outside the budget. Staff
are working closely with the authorities to ensure that the budget is consistent with
medium-term fiscal sustainability.
6.
Faced with some pressure on the exchange rate, Da Afghanistan Bank tightened its
monetary stance by keeping currency in circulation virtually unchanged during the third
quarter of 2005/06. International reserves increased further, to more than $1.5 billion at
end-December 2005 (4.2 months of prospective imports of goods and services). The Afghani
gradually rescinded the 3-percent gain against the U.S. dollar it had made during the second
quarter, before stabilizing in January. Reflecting the inflation differential with the United
States, this resulted in a real appreciation of about 2 percent against the U.S. currency during
the third quarter.

-2–
7.
At the International Donors’ Conference held in London from January 31–February 1,
2006, the authorities presented their Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy. By
mid-March 2006, they intend to send the final version of this strategy to the Fund and the
World Bank as well as their Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. The authorities and
the donor community have also agreed on a “Compact” that includes time-bound benchmarks
on security, governance, rule of law, and economic development, and encourages donors to
deliver aid more effectively by pledging multiyear support and channeling it through the
budget.
8.
At the London Conference, donors made pledges of financial assistance amounting to
about $10.5 billion over the next five years. In addition, Germany, Russia, and the United
States (Afghanistan’s three Paris Club creditors) indicated their intention to provide
100 percent debt relief.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/27
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 8, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
On March 6, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.1
Background
Since its inception in March 2004, the Staff Monitored Program (SMP) has been
instrumental in maintaining macroeconomic stability and contributing to the
implementation of the government’s reform agenda.
Over the last 12 months, the Afghan authorities have made further progress in
rebuilding institutions and stabilizing the economy. In a challenging environment,
dominated by the difficult security situation and parliamentary elections,
the authorities have continued to pursue prudent fiscal and monetary policies and
have implemented a number of important institutional and structural reforms that
have contributed to strong growth, moderate inflation, a stable exchange rate, and
fiscal consolidation. The government met all the end-September 2005 quantitative
indicators under the SMP and observed, albeit with some delays, all structural
benchmarks, except for the publication of the audited 2004/05 core budget financial
statements.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return
to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive
Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board,
summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

-2-

After slowing down to 8 percent in 2004/05, economic activity has rebounded over
the last 12 months, owing primarily to a weather-related recovery of agricultural
output. Opium production declined by 2 percent in 2005, as a sharp reduction in the
cultivated area was largely offset by an increase in yields due to good rainfalls.
After rising sharply in 2004/05 on account of an acceleration of rents and petroleum
product prices, year-on-year inflation declined to 12.9 percent in September 2005,
owing to a slowdown in rents. At the same time, the external current account deficit,
excluding grants, narrowed to 45 percent of GDP in 2004/05, from 51 percent in
2003/04.
The operating budget deficit is expected to decline significantly in 2005/06,
mainly because of an increase in revenue. During 2004/05 and the first half of
2005/06, revenue was broadly in line with program projections, as higher-thanprogrammed customs receipts offset a lower-than-envisaged domestic tax collection.
Government spending, especially for development purposes, remained lower-thanbudgeted because of capacity constraints.
Monetary developments during 2004/05 and through September 2005 remained
broadly in line with SMP projections. Monetary policy continued to be guided by
indicative targets for currency in circulation, within the context of a managed float
exchange rate system, and was implemented through mainly foreign currency
auctions. International reserves continued to increase steadily.
On the structural side, the Afghan authorities have carried out major reforms to
improve revenue collection, and have started to establish a transparent public
expenditure system with fiduciary standards. The authorities have also modernized
central bank operations and reinforced its supervision capacity, while strengthening
the banking sector regulatory framework. Moreover, the authorities have adopted a
debt management strategy and a medium-term fiscal framework consistent with their
continued commitment to fiscal and external sustainability. Further steps have also
been taken to restructure the public sector.
Building upon the progress made so far under the SMP, and with a view to
addressing vigorously the country’s important challenges, the government has
initiated discussions on a successor program that could be supported by the IMF’s
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). The Interim-Afghanistan National
Development Strategy that the authorities presented at the London International
Donors’ Conference in late January will form the basis of an interim poverty strategy
paper, in support of such a program.

-3-

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for the continued implementation of
sound macroeconomic policies, which have contributed to Afghanistan’s strong
economic performance over the last year. Directors noted Afghanistan’s record of
sustained growth and moderate inflation and viewed the short-term economic outlook as
favorable, notwithstanding some downside risks. They were also encouraged by the fact
that the recent legislative and provincial elections took place without any major
disruption.
Directors observed that Afghanistan faces formidable medium-term challenges, which
are compounded by lingering insecurity. The most pressing tasks are to consolidate
macroeconomic stability while pursuing vigorously the government’s reform agenda in
support of sustained growth and poverty alleviation. Directors were encouraged by the
authorities’ commitment to address these challenges, as articulated in the Interim
Afghanistan Development Strategy (I-ANDS). This strategy focuses on diversifying the
sources of growth, ensuring fiscal and external sustainability, addressing institutional
and structural obstacles to private sector development, and gradually eliminating opiumrelated activities.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ fiscal consolidation efforts and their adoption of a
medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF). Adherence to this framework will be critical to
achieving fiscal sustainability, especially as significant expenditure pressures for both
existing and new programs are likely to develop. Directors encouraged the authorities to
refine the MTFF over time to link closely multi-year projections with policies. Also, fiscal
activities presently funded off-budget by donors need to be progressively incorporated
into the core budget in order to increase transparency and estimate better the
government’s long-term financing needs.
Directors welcomed the continued growth in revenue, which consistently exceeded the
targets set under the Staff Monitored Program. New revenue measures and decisive
efforts to strengthen tax administration, including by targeting large taxpayers, will be
crucial to achieving the MTFF’s objectives. Directors called for the introduction of
excises on certain consumption items and the continued implementation of the reform
plans for the customs and tax administrations, in order to enhance long-term fiscal
sustainability. They cautioned against raising import tariffs for protectionist purposes,
introducing ad-hoc duty exemptions, or reducing domestic tax rates.
Directors noted that, while recurrent spending has been broadly in line with budget
estimates, development expenditures have remained significantly lower than budgeted.
They encouraged the authorities to prepare more realistic development budgets, taking
into account capacity constraints. Directors recognized, however, that this task is
complicated by the large amount of spending implemented directly by donors. In this
regard, they hoped that the Compact recently adopted by the government and the donor
community—as well as the I-ANDS—will help to improve aid delivery and the process of
economic reconstruction.

-4-

Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to enhance the productivity of the civil service
through capacity building. They emphasized the need to implement, in due course, a
reform of the public administration that will provide adequate compensation to
government employees while ensuring fiscal sustainability and broad social harmony.
Directors cautioned the authorities against linking pensions to salary increases, as this
would have serious budgetary implications.
Directors regarded the current monetary program as broadly consistent with the
program’s objectives, and welcomed the authorities’ commitment to tighten monetary
conditions further, if necessary to reduce inflation. They supported the central bank’s
efforts to strengthen the monetary policy framework, including through the introduction
of new monetary instruments, the development of its analytical capacity, and increased
transparency in monetary management.
Directors were of the view that the present managed float exchange rate system has
worked well and should be maintained. They noted that the real appreciation of the
Afghani in recent years stemmed, to a large extent, from the impact of opium- and
aid-related inflows, and that monetary policy could do little in this context to enhance
competitiveness. Directors emphasized that future efforts to strengthen competitiveness
should focus primarily on enhancing the effectiveness of foreign assistance and
deepening structural reforms in order to increase productivity.
Directors emphasized the importance of moving forward with reforms aimed at building
a resilient banking system. In particular, they stressed the need for decisive action to
address the situation of the state-owned banks, and encouraged the authorities to adopt
an appropriate legal and administrative framework for the development of the
commercial banking system.
Directors called for the establishment of an enabling environment for private sector
activities. They urged the further liberalization of the economy through a careful and
well-sequenced divestiture of the state-owned enterprises and of commercial activities
currently performed by public agencies. They emphasized that enhancing the
consistency and predictability of government policies would contribute to improving the
business climate.
Directors considered that the I-ANDS meets most of the requirements for an Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. However, much needs to be done to turn the large
number of proposals in the I-ANDS into a coherent and sustainable set of medium-term
programs and policies. Directors encouraged the authorities to strengthen the
participatory process and broaden the involvement of stakeholders as they work on their
poverty reduction strategy.
Directors called on the authorities to continue implementing vigorously, with donor
support, the programs aimed at eliminating the drug economy. In particular, they
underscored the importance of developing sustainable income generation activities in
support of the eradication, interdiction, and prevention campaigns. Success in this area
would also help improve security and governance.

-5-

Directors noted that, notwithstanding recent progress, further efforts are necessary to
address a number of statistical weaknesses. Looking ahead, they encouraged the
authorities to implement, with donor assistance, the statistical master plan, which aims
at tackling data deficiencies. Directors welcomed the recent adoption of a new statistical
law.
Taking into account Afghanistan’s solid track record of policy implementation under the
SMP, Directors supported the authorities’ intention to open discussions on a successor
program that could be supported by a three-year arrangement under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility. Such a program would help the authorities consolidate
macroeconomic stability, provide a suitable framework for the continued implementation
of their ambitious reform agenda, and contribute to resolving outstanding debt issues.
Directors were encouraged by the announcement by Paris Club creditors that they
would offer 100 percent debt relief to Afghanistan if it meets the eligibility criteria for the
enhanced HIPC Initiative.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-6-

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001/02–2006/07
Est.
Est.
Est.
Est.
2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05

Est.
Proj.
2005/06 2006/07

Output and prices
Real GDP (in percent, excluding opium)
GDP (in billions of Afghanis)
GDP(in millions of U.S. dollars, excluding opium)
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars, excluding opium)

...
134
2,463
123

28.6
183
4,084
182

15.7
225
4,585
199

8.0
285
5,971
253

13.8
356
7,139
294

11.7
429
8,608
344

Prices
CPI (Kabul, year-on-year change; in percent)
CPI (Kabul, average change; in percent)

-43.4
...

52.1
5.0

10.2
23.9

16.3
14.3

10.0
12.0

8.0
8.9

54.4
31.0

44.8
52.6

49.0
50.3

47.7
48.7

...
...

...
...

General government operating budget
Revenue (in percent of GDP)
Expenditures (in percent of GDP)
Grants (in percent of GDP)

...
...
...

3.2
8.5
5.2

4.5
9.8
4.5

4.5
9.4
5.3

5.3
9.4
4.7

6.0
8.9
3.2

Monetary indicators
Broad money (percent change)
Gross international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)

...
...

20.1
426

40.9
816

37.5
1,261

27.8
1,730

22.5
2,119

Exchange rates
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (annual average)
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (end of period)

External sector
Current account (excluding grants; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account (including grants; in percent of GDP)

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
...
...

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

-1,364
-3.5

-2,335
3.1

-2,676
1.9

-3,026
1.7

-3,437
-0.9

Statement by Abbas Mirakhor, Executive Director for Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
March 6, 2006

Key Points
•

In an exceptionally challenging environment, the Afghan authorities have persevered
with the implementation of prudent financial policies and bold structural reforms,
and have observed all of the quantitative indicators and the structural benchmarks
for end-September under the SMP, except for the publication of the audited 2004/05
core budget financial statements.

•

The budget deficit is expected to be lower than envisaged in 2005/06. Revenue
exceeded the program target during the first half of 2005/06, while spending
remained lower than budgeted because of capacity constraints.

•

Monetary policy remained focused on inflation control, and inflation subsided over
the first half of 2005/06.

•

Important regulatory and judicial reforms are underway, including preparatory work
for laws aimed at enhancing governance, property rights, and competition.

•

The authorities recognize that an open and transparent trade regime is vital for
growth prospects, and they intend to pursue discussions on Afghanistan’s accession
to the WTO.

•

The authorities have expressed strong interest in continued Fund involvement, and
the progress made so far under the SMP has paved the way for discussions on a
program that could be supported by the PRGF.

The Afghan authorities would like to thank management and staff for the constructive policy
dialogue and support, particularly over the last two years of the Staff Monitored Program
(SMP). They value highly their collaborative relationship with the Fund and recognize the
important role of this engagement in support of their efforts to stabilize and transform the
economy. The staff report reflects in a comprehensive and balanced way the progress made
under the SMP, while highlighting the remaining challenges. The topics selected for analysis
in the Selected Issues paper are relevant, and the discussion is informative, providing the
analytical underpinnings for policy formulation.
In an exceptionally challenging environment dominated by security issues and adverse
shocks—but with significant support from the international community—the authorities have
persevered with the implementation of prudent financial policies and bold structural reforms.
Although the security situation in some parts of the country remains difficult, with the
number of incidents increasing in the period surrounding the legislative elections and despite
concerns that low capacity would hinder the delivery of the program’s commitments, the

-2authorities observed all of the quantitative indicators and the structural benchmarks for
end-September in the SMP, except for the publication of the audited 2004/05 core budget
financial statements. The budget statements have been submitted to the Auditor-General, but
administrative capacity constraints have led to delays in their certification. The progress so
far achieved in the adjustment of the economy finds strong expression in the high rate of
economic growth and reduced inflation. Economic growth moderated in 2004/05, attributed
primarily to the impact of adverse weather conditions on agricultural output, but real GDP
rebounded in 2005/06, with the reconstruction effort continuing to drive growth in
construction, trade, transportation, and telecommunications. After rising sharply in 2004/05
on account of petroleum prices, inflation subsided over the first half of 2005/06: year-on-year
inflation declined to 12.9 percent in September 2005, from 16.3 percent in March, as
envisaged in the program. Opium production declined by 2 percent in 2005: the decline could
have been significantly larger, as many farmers did not plant in anticipation of intensified
government-led anti-narcotics activities, but the sharp drop in cultivation was largely offset
by higher yields owing to favorable weather conditions.
Fiscal policy
The authorities have continued to focus on improving the budgetary process and
transparency, which were strengthened through the adoption of a new public finance and
expenditure management law. The authorities recognize that fiscal policy should remain
cautious over the medium term to ensure macroeconomic stability, and have demonstrated
their commitment to fiscal discipline in the steadfast implementation of the SMP. The budget
deficit is expected to be lower than previously envisaged in 2005/06, which should contribute
to a further build-up of government deposits with Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB). The
operating budget deficit, excluding grants, was 4.9 percent of GDP in 2004/05 and
1.7 percent of annual GDP during the first half of 2005/06. Revenue has increased rapidly in
the last few years and exceeded the program target during the first half of 2005/06.
Nonetheless, the authorities plan to take new measures because they are well aware that a
broad tax base and a reduced reliance on trade taxes, as well as a strengthened administrative
capacity of the revenue directorate, are a sine qua non to achieve fiscal sustainability. They
have initiated a reform plan for the customs and tax administrations, with immediate focus on
the new large taxpayer unit for improving compliance. They are also contemplating the
introduction of excises on certain consumption items.
Current government spending remained close to budgeted but capital expenditure was lower
because of capacity constraints. Core development expenditure reached 2.5 percent of annual
GDP during the first half of 2005/06, compared to a revised budget target of 14.1 percent of
GDP for the fiscal year as a whole. In the midyear budget review (MYR) in October 2005,
the authorities capped the increase in operating expenditure to 2.1 percent over the budget, as
a 3 percent increase in compensation for civil servants—agreed under the program—and
unanticipated spending for parliamentarians and pensions were partially offset by savings in
other expenditures. As for rationalizing the civil service, given the relatively large public
employment level, the authorities believe that reform in this area should be gradual and in
line with employment developments in the private sector to avoid social disruptions. To this
end, the modest wage increase in 2005 was undertaken to reduce the large gap between

-3public and private sector wages. They have chosen to keep wage increases low so as to leave
room for a more fundamental reform. Recognizing that a systematic reform program is
required to strike a better balance between the need for higher salaries and budgetary
considerations in the medium term, a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) was approved
by Cabinet at the time of the MYR, which includes integrated macroeconomic projections
and fiscal targets.
Monetary and exchange rate policies
Monetary policy remained focused on inflation control, guided primarily by indicative targets
for currency in circulation. The growth of monetary indicators during 2004/05 and through
September 2005 was in line with, or lower than SMP projections, which included a marked
slowdown in currency growth. DAB made significant progress in modernizing its foreign
exchange and capital note auctions, as well as in strengthening the banking sector regulatory
framework. Other positive developments in the banking sector included the divestiture of
DAB's commercial activities in those provinces where at least one commercial bank is active,
and the reduction, from 6 percent to 0.5 percent, of the registration fee for deeds, whose high
level had constituted a major deterrent to lending operations. The authorities consider that the
new regulations and administrative measures to strengthen DAB’s supervision of the banking
sector will result in higher public confidence in banks, thereby encouraging depositors to
invest in longer-maturity instruments, which in turn should improve the environment for
lending operations.
The managed float system has served the country well. The real appreciation experienced by
the Afghani in recent years reflects, to a large extent, the impact of drug- and aid-related
inflows. The authorities agree with the staff that, in this context, strengthening external
competitiveness requires enhancing efficiency in the utilization of foreign aid and deepening
structural reforms to increase productivity, and they view the maintenance of competitiveness
through these measures as a constant challenge. They are anxious about the upward risks to
inflation, stemming in particular from possible second-round effects of the increase in oil
prices. They have been following closely price and exchange rate developments, with a view
to tighten the monetary stance if there were to be any intensification of inflationary pressures.
Structural reforms
In recent years, the foundation of the economy has been strengthened significantly due to the
structural reforms that have been undertaken. In addition to modernizing DAB’s monetary
operations and strengthening bank supervision, the authorities took further steps to advance
the reform agenda, including removing distortions and addressing structural weaknesses in
the economy, which should encourage private investment and diversify the growth and
export bases. Important regulatory and judicial reforms are underway, including preparatory
work for laws aimed at enhancing governance, property rights, and competition. In particular,
the authorities, with donor support, are working toward the adoption of a core group of
enabling laws—including on secured transactions, business organization, and negotiable
instruments—that would strengthen judicial enforcement. Regarding state-owned enterprises
(SOE), the government adopted a classification for the envisaged restructuring in which only

-4a few will remain in the public sector: out of 66 SOEs, eight are expected to remain stateowned, while 58 will be liquidated or privatized. In the restructuring of public financial
institutions, the authorities have made public their intention to liquidate three former stateowned banks that had not been relicensed. The authorities recognize that an open and
transparent trade regime is vital for growth prospects, and they intend to pursue technical
work in support of Afghanistan’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Poverty reduction
In the Interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy (I-ANDS), which was presented
during the international donors’ conference in London in January, the authorities have
articulated a medium-term development strategy, which will be underpinned by growthboosting reforms, focused on reducing the role of the government in the economy and
improving the investment climate. The I-ANDS process has been conducted through broadbased consultations with key stakeholders and civil society, which has enabled the authorities
to develop a broad and credible agenda of reforms and establish their priorities, taking into
account the competing demands on the limited resources. The I-ANDS places priority on: (a)
security; (b) governance, rule of law, and human rights; and (c) economic and social
development. The elimination of the narcotics industry is identified as a top priority in the
quest for sustained rapid growth and poverty alleviation. They will exercise expenditure
restraints as dictated by the MTFF, especially in nonpriority areas that have been identified.
The government and the donor community have developed a “Compact” that establishes
commitments, benchmarks, and a monitoring mechanism. There will be improvement in
monitoring and evaluation, which will help to identify capacity constraints in the public
sector. While moving toward a full ANDS, the authorities will broaden the already extensive
participatory process of the I-ANDS, and will clearly define the goals and link them to
specific policy actions.
Medium-term outlook
The authorities recognize that the medium-term outlook is subject to various risks, but with
the support of the population in the new environment shaped by the first legislative and
provincial elections in 35 years, they stand ready to face the formidable challenges and make
further progress in reducing poverty. Under the assumptions of continued reform, donor
support, and the gradual improvement of infrastructure, the medium-term framework
envisages growth of about 10 percent on average for the next three years. This scenario is
consistent with a return to trend of agricultural growth, and sustained, albeit decelerating,
activity in construction and services. The MTFF will serve as a key anchor for sound
macroeconomic policies; it outlines a clear path toward fiscal and external sustainability,
including an ambitious program to increase domestic revenue from 4.5 percent of GDP
in 2004/05 to 8.6 percent of GDP by 2009/10, through, inter alia, the rationalization of the
current tariff structure and the introduction of road tolls and excise taxes in 2006/07.
Considerable progress has been made in reconciling the external debt, which was an endSeptember 2005 structural benchmark, including the completion of the reconciliation process
with many of the creditors. A major milestone was reached in the aftermath of the recent
donor’s conference when the governments of Russia, Germany, and the United States

-5indicated their intention to cancel the entire debt owed by Afghanistan through the Paris Club
under the HIPC Initiative. It was heartening to read in the public statements of the donors on
100% debt cancellation that this achievement reflected the hard work of the government and
the people of Afghanistan to build a stable economy, despite many challenges, and that the
solution of the debt problem will strongly contribute to the further development of
Afghanistan's trade, investment and other economic ties with its major creditors and with the
rest of the world.
Poverty reduction and growth facility
The authorities have taken appropriate measures to ensure achievement of macroeconomic
objectives under the SMP. These successes can hardly be overestimated in light of the
difficult and severely constrained circumstances under which they were achieved and the
variety of adverse shocks that have complicated program implementation. At the same time,
the authorities are very much aware that there is a long way to go towards self-sustained
growth and completing the ambitious program of reforms required to finish the tasks of
economic reconstruction, eliminating opium production and providing alternative income
opportunities, strengthening productive efficiency, and reducing poverty. As indicated in the
staff report, the authorities have expressed strong interest in continued Fund involvement,
and the progress made so far under the SMP has paved the way for discussions on a program
that could be supported by the PRGF. The current SMP has been instrumental in maintaining
macroeconomic stability and building a momentum for structural reform, and a successor
program would help the authorities to consolidate these gains, reinforce the implementation
of the ambitious policy agenda, including the critical task of developing the institutions and
conditions necessary for private sector development, and significantly improving social
conditions. In addition, a PRGF arrangement would contribute to the resolution of
outstanding debt issues with Paris Club creditors in the context of the HIPC Initiative.
The authorities plan to continue the laborious process of restructuring the economy,
improving governance and transparency, and enhancing efficiency through greater reliance
on market forces with reduced government intervention in the economy. Their adjustment
record since the inception of the SMP in March 2004 should give confidence in their ability
to pursue such a strategy in a pragmatic way within the existing economic and political
constraints. The record is all the more commendable because of a difficult environment,
which has been dominated by lingering insecurity, poor state of infrastructure, weak
institutions, and other myriad uncertainties typical of a post-conflict environment.

