June 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/186

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Kuwait: 2003 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Kuwait
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with Kuwait, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on October 30, 2003, with the officials of Kuwait on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on January 16, 2004. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its February 9, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Kuwait.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
KUWAIT
Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Kuwait
Approved by Mohammad Shadman-Valavi and Juha Kähkönen
January 16, 2004

•
•

•

•

•

•

•

The discussions for the 2003 Article IV consultation were held in Kuwait from
October 15-30, 2003.
The team comprised Messrs. Iqbal (Head), Elhage, Thai, Okogu, and Takizawa (all of MCD).
Mr. Habermeier (MFD), head of the Joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) team, and Mr. Shaalan, Executive Director for Kuwait also participated in
the policy discussions, which included the recommendations of the FSAP exercise.
The mission met with Mr. Mahmoud Al-Nouri, Minister of Finance; Sheikh Salem Abdulaziz
Al-Sabah, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK); Undersecretaries in the Ministries of
Finance, Commerce, Energy, and Planning; Deputy Governor of CBK; Secretary General,
Higher Committee for Economic Development and Reform; and other senior government
officials. It also met with representatives of commercial banks, the Chamber of Commerce,
the Kuwait Stock Exchange, and the Kuwait Petrochemical Company (Equate).
In concluding the 2002 Article IV consultation on December 13, 2002, Executive Directors
commended the Kuwaiti authorities for their continued pursuit of prudent fiscal and monetary
policies under an open and free exchange and trade system, which have resulted in a strong
macroeconomic position despite wide fluctuations in oil prices. While the medium-term
outlook remains favorable, Directors noted that Kuwait would face unemployment pressures
and sustaining intergenerational equity may become more difficult.
Directors commended the authorities for addressing these emerging challenges by promoting
non-oil growth through structural reforms, improving labor market performance, and
strengthening the budget structure. They encouraged the authorities to continue with their
efforts to broaden support for sustained implementation of reforms, based on expenditure
restraint and structural reform, to accelerate growth of the private non-oil sector. They
endorsed a cautious monetary policy to sustain exchange rate stability. Directors commended
the authorities for their effective supervision of the financial sector and looked forward to the
early enactment of the Privatization Law and implementation of the Foreign Investment Law
and of the amended Banking Law. Directors also encouraged further efforts to continue
improving the quality, currentness, and dissemination of economic data.
Kuwait accepted the obligations of Article VIII on April 5 1963. It also accepted the Fourth
Amendment of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. The authorities have agreed to issue a
Public Information Notice (PIN) following the conclusion of the consultation process, and to
publish the staff report.
The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Zubair Iqbal and Hajime Takizawa.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Background and Recent Developments ..................................................................................5
A. Introduction ...........................................................................................................................5
B. Recent Economic Developments ..........................................................................................6
II. Report on Discussions .........................................................................................................12
A. Structural Policies ...............................................................................................................14
B. Macroeconomic Policies .....................................................................................................18
III. Monetary Policy and the Exchange System .......................................................................20
IV. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance .......................................................................22
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................22
Text Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Developments Relating to the Oil Market in 2002 and 2003 .............................................7
Structural Reforms .............................................................................................................10
Labor Market Reforms.......................................................................................................11
Priority Recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)............16

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997–2003......................................................................26
Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1997–2003 ...........................................................27
External Sector Developments, 1997–2003.......................................................................28
Monetary and Financial Developments, 1997–2003 .........................................................29
Exchange Rate Movements, January 1995–September 2003 ............................................30
Stock Market Indicators, 1997–2003 .................................................................................31
Oil Prices, Fiscal Expenditure, and Non-oil Balance, 1983...............................................32
Projected Fiscal Developments and Real Per Capita Wealth, 2004–33 ............................33

-3-

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic Indicators, 1998–2003........................................................................34
Summary of Government Finance, 2000/01–2008/09 .......................................................36
Summary Balance of Payments, 2000–08..........................................................................38
Monetary Survey, 1998–2004............................................................................................40
Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 1998–2008 .................41
Vulnerability Indicators, 1998–2003 .................................................................................42

Appendices
I. Fund Relations ...................................................................................................................44
II. Relations with the World Bank Group...............................................................................46
III. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................50

-4-

Executive Summary
Present Setting
•

Kuwait has been gradually pursuing a strategy of structural reforms supported by fiscal
strengthening in order to address the dual objectives of accelerating non-oil growth with
financial and monetary stability and maintaining intergenerational equity. Core elements
of the strategy include a reduction in the role of the public sector, promotion of private
investment, deepening and widening of the financial sector, reform of the labor market,
and expenditure restraint.

•

In 2002–03, the macroeconomic position was favorably affected by firmer oil prices and
developments in Iraq. Real non-oil GDP growth rose sharply, in part, on account of the
reconstruction activity in Iraq. The overall fiscal surplus rose in 2002/03 to 25 percent of
GDP mainly because of higher oil revenues and restraint on expenditure. Though
projected to fall, the overall surplus is expected to remain at a comfortable 19 percent of
GDP in 2003/04. The underlying fiscal stance will be expansionary. The external current
account surplus fell in 2002 before rising to about 19 percent of GDP in 2003. The net
foreign assets of the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) fell to the equivalent of about eight
months of imports in 2002 and are expected to fall further in 2003 on account of larger
portfolio investments abroad.

•

The macroeconomic position over the medium term under current oil price expectations
and the maintenance of a cautious policy stance is projected to weaken, but is not
expected to pose sustainability issues. Under this scenario, growth is expected to
decelerate and be insufficient to address employment needs. Moreover, a steady increase
in wealth per capita over the longer term will necessitate stronger fiscal effort.

Staff Appraisal
•

The implementation of the official reform program should be accelerated to further
strengthen the fiscal position and create the institutional and legal environment needed for
promoting private investment, under an appropriately sequenced timetable. The staff
welcomes the authorities’ intention to accelerate privatization. It would benefit from
market pricing of publicly supplied goods and services, reduction in and targeting of
subsidies, and flexible wages with a cautious Kuwaitization policy. Steps to increase
financial efficiency and strengthened regulation of the securities market would reinforce a
sound financial system.

•

Fiscal tightening should be aimed at a significant improvement in the non-oil deficits
through current expenditure restraint and buildup of non-oil revenues. The countercyclicality of fiscal policy should be strengthened by casting the budget in a medium-term
macroeconomic framework with a well-defined fiscal rule.

-5-

•

More progress is needed in the collection and dissemination of economic data. Areas
needing further improvement include aggregate expenditure, nonfinancial private capital
flows, and labor and employment.

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
A. Introduction
1.
Over the past few years, Kuwait has endeavored to: (a) accelerate non-oil growth and
address the emerging unemployment pressures through structural reforms in a stable
monetary and financial environment, and (b) strengthen further its fiscal position to maintain
intergenerational equity. The authorities’ strategy to achieve these objectives aims at reducing
the role of the public sector through restructuring and privatization, promoting private
investment (including FDI) and reforming the labor market, while further strengthening the
fiscal position.
2.
The staff and the authorities agree on the nature of the challenges facing the Kuwaiti
economy, but there are differences in the pace of needed adjustment. In previous Article IV
consultations, the staff has encouraged speeding up structural reforms to facilitate private
sector investment to spur growth and generate employment opportunities, and to structurally
strengthen the budget. The authorities have shared this view and have taken some steps
toward addressing these issues. However, progress on the implementation of the official
strategy has been hampered, in part, by difficulties in reaching political consensus especially
between the government and the parliament on important policy initiatives, administrative
constraints, and regional uncertainties. Moreover, the implementation of Fund technical
assistance for strengthening public expenditure management and medium-term fiscal
planning has lagged, in part, because of regional security concerns. The FSAP exercise has
been completed.
3.
The 2003 consultation discussions were held at a time of accelerating non-oil
growth with resurgence in private activity because of Iraqi developments. Reflecting
higher oil prices, internal and external surpluses have remained large. Following the July
parliamentary elections, a new Cabinet was installed in August 2003. With security concerns
becoming more manageable and oil prices remaining firm, the authorities currently see better
prospects for an acceleration of their reform agenda in the near term. However, the timeconsuming process of political consensus building is likely to constrain any expeditious
action toward implementing these reforms. Kuwait has committed to providing $500 million
to Iraq in 2004, in addition to about $1 billion, which has already been disbursed in 2003.
Kuwait’s economic assistance to developing countries has amounted to about 2 percent of
GDP per year.

-6-

B. Recent Economic Developments 1
4.
In 2002, the macroeconomic position was favorably affected by developments in
the oil market and the run-up to the Iraq conflict (Box 1). Real non-oil GDP growth rose
to 5 percent from 3.4 percent in 2001, in part, on account of the increased demand for goods
and services associated with Iraqi developments (Table 1 and Figure 1).2 However, real oil
GDP fell sharply by 8 percent on account of a 10 percent decline in oil production in line
with OPEC-mandated cuts. Overall, real GDP declined slightly. Inflation and unemployment
remained low. Reflecting the buoyant non-oil activities, and ample private sector liquidity
associated, in part, with the UN compensation payments, the stock market index rose further
by 39 percent in 2002 after a 27 percent increase in 2001.
5.
Fiscal performance strengthened in 2002/03.3 The overall surplus rose to about
25 percent of GDP, reflecting favorable oil market developments in the last quarter of the
fiscal year (first quarter of 2003) and a decline in current expenditures equivalent to
2.5 percent of GDP (Table 2 and Figure 2). The wage bill declined slightly as a percent of
GDP. Expenditure on subsidies fell by 1.6 percent of GDP, returning to the trend levels after
a one-time increase in allocation to the housing agency in 2001/02. However, the underlying
fiscal position weakened slightly as the non-oil deficit rose to 44 percent of non-oil GDP
because of lower non-oil revenues.
6.
The external current account surplus fell to about 12 percent of GDP from
24 percent in 2001 (Table 3 and Figure 3). Reflecting the weaker performance in the
international financial markets and the decline in global interest rates, net investment income
declined by 31 percent, while imports rose by about 15 percent, partly, for inventory build up
in anticipation of the Iraq conflict. With an increase in capital outflows, the overall balance of
payments registered a small deficit resulting in a 7 percent decline in net foreign assets of the
Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK), which remained comfortable at the equivalent of over
eight months of imports.4

1

The Kuwaiti economy continues to be heavily oil-dependent. While the oil GDP is about 45 percent
of real total GDP, oil constitutes about 90 percent of total exports. About 70 percent of total revenue is
derived from the oil sector, while 23 percent of total revenue represents investment income.
2

National account data since 1995 have been revised. For details, see Appendix III on Statistical
Issues.
3

The fiscal year corresponds to April 2002–March 2003. However, the calendar year is used to
estimate the external current account.
4

In addition to assets held by the CBK, substantial official foreign assets are managed by the Reserve
Fund for Future Generations (RFFG).

-7-

Box 1. Developments Relating to the Oil Market in 2002 and 2003
Oil Market Developments in 2002
•

Developments in the world oil market in 2002 were driven largely by security concerns in the Middle East,
the strike in Venezuela, the after-effects of the September 2001 events, and weak global economic recovery.
World oil demand grew by 0.3 percent—about the same level as in 2001—compared to the historical
average growth of about 1.2–1.5 percent. This slow growth was due to the slowdown in global economic
activity, as well as the effect of the sharp price increases since 2000. The average price of the WEO basket
rose by 2.8 percent for the year, as non-fundamental factors drove the price upward from the low levels
attained in 1Q2002. OPEC quota discipline was mostly lax in 2002, but this had limited impact on the price
as uncertainty factors dominated market sentiments.

Developments in 2003 and the medium term
•

The factors that kept the oil price high in 2002 continued into 2003, culminating in the Iraq war, with the
WEO oil price reaching a peak of US$34.24 on March 7. In response to the rising prices, OPEC increased
the quotas of its members from 21.5Mb/d to 24.5 Mb/d on February 1, and again to 25.4 Mb/d, effective
June 1) partly to make up for the shortage from Venezuela and Iraq (as well as to validate the over-quota
production of its members that had gone on since 3Q 2002). However, this increase was reversed, effective
November 1 (quota ceiling now stands at 24.5 Mb/d), in a preemptive move to protect the oil price against
the effect of rising Iraqi output and growing non-OPEC production. Kuwait’s current quota is 1.966 Mb/d.
Oil price levels have continued to be firm because of a variety of non-fundamental factors, with the average
price in 2003 being much higher than the 2002 level. Going forward, the oil price is expected to fall from the
projected US$28 per barrel in 2004 to US$21.50 per barrel in 2008—as Iraq returns fully to the market and
uncertainty recedes.

Domestic oil sector developments
•

The authorities are pressing ahead with plans to develop the North fields, with the involvement of
international oil companies (IOCs) on a service contract basis. The timing of the project is uncertain, as
approval by the National Assembly is required. The Assembly is presently considering the matter. Kuwait
Petroleum Company (KPC) has received expressions of interest from three consortiums. It is expected that
the field would add some 0.25 Mb/d to Kuwait’s production capacity, although it may not result in output
expansion immediately because of the requirements of OPEC quota obligations. The involvement of the
IOCs would be at the technical and management level, and will not result in equity ownership by them. They
will bring in technology, finance the projects, manage the wells, and be paid for their services based on costreduction and savings achieved by their involvement.

•

The private sector is being given greater opportunity for participation in the oil sector: KPC has recently
transferred 40 gas stations (out of a total of 100) to private sector operators on a trial basis. The rest of the
stations would be transferred to them after the pilot phase has been successfully completed.

•

The prices of domestic petroleum products in Kuwait were last increased in 1999, and no further increases
are planned for now. There are no subsidies on petroleum products.

-8-

7.
Growth of broad money decelerated to about 5 percent in 2002 (Table 4 and
Figure 4). While net foreign assets declined, credit growth to the private sector remained
robust at 11 percent of the beginning stock of broad money in response to the low interest
rates and rising domestic economic activity. Much of the credit expansion, however, was to
finance personal consumer loans, real estate, and securities trading. Monetary policy
continued to be aimed primarily at exchange rate stability under an open exchange and trade
system. Following trends in the global financial markets, the CBK reduced its discount rate
twice in 2002. The differential of the Kuwaiti dinar deposit rate over the U.S. dollar deposit
rate was allowed to rise slightly to 63 basis points compared with the historical 50 basis
points. In addition, the deposit facilities at the CBK and liquidity ratios were used to stabilize
liquidity in the banking system, while ceilings on lending rates remained in effect.5
8.
The financial sector continued to perform well. The recent FSAP exercise has
confirmed that the banking sector is sound and remains well regulated and supervised.
Capitalization, asset quality, earnings, and liquidity are all strong; and the major Kuwaiti
banks offer a wide variety of up-to-date banking products and services. The risk-adjusted
capital/assets ratio remained high (20 percent) at more than two times the Basel Committee
recommended rate. Total nonperforming loans declined by June 2003 to 7 percent from
10.3 percent in 2001; only about 3 percent of loans extended since the invasion in 1991 were
nonperforming and were fully provisioned. The comprehensive system for bank regulation
and supervision broadly conforms to the Basel Core Principles (BCP), and the anti-money
laundering law (AML) is now in effect. A risk-management framework has been
implemented to improve monitoring the quality of bank loans while a credit bureau is now in
place to help lenders assess the loan risk of borrowers. Stress tests conducted by the FSAP
exercise indicate that the banking system could stand significant shocks.
9.
The Kuwaiti dinar depreciated in real effective terms during 2002 and the first
10 months of 2003 in line with the depreciating U.S. dollar (Figure 5). Effective
January 2003, Kuwait shifted its exchange regime from pegging to a basket of currencies
(with a large weight of the U.S. dollar) to a peg with the U.S. dollar with margins of
plus/minus 3.5 percent as a step toward the planned monetary union among member
countries of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). External
vulnerability indicators remained strong (Table 6).

5

The CBK relies on both indirect and direct instruments for monetary policy. The most frequently used
instrument has been deposits of banks with the CBK. They are based on the daily determination of
liquidity needs of the banking system. In addition, liquidity is regulated through the use of liquid asset
requirements with banks required to hold government securities at least equal to 20 percent of the
private Kuwaiti dinar deposits, primarily for prudential purposes. The CBK also uses its unsecured
overnight lending facility at a penalty rate (10 percent presently) as a monetary policy instrument.

-9-

10.
Progress remained limited on structural reforms (Box 2). Steps toward the
establishment of the legal and institutional framework for structural reforms have been
constrained by difficulties in reaching political consensus. The Privatization Law, which
would allow divestment of major public sector utilities and clarify the domain for the private
sector remains to be approved by the National Assembly. However, the private sector has
been encouraged to invest in areas where explicit approval by the National Assembly is not
required, including in telecommunications, health, and education services. While the Foreign
Direct Investment law has been approved allowing for full foreign ownership of companies,
bylaws are required for its implementation including clarification of areas open to foreign
investment including for 100 percent foreign ownership. The planned revised corporate
income tax law, lowering the tax from 55 percent to 25 percent, remains under consideration.
Moreover, administered prices of publicly supplied goods and services have remained
unchanged. However, effective October 2003, the authorities formally implemented
Kuwaitization policy to generate employment opportunities for Kuwaiti workers in the
private sector (Box 3).
11.
Transparency, quality, currentness, and availability of economic data have
continued to improve. National accounts data have been revised for 1995 and beyond. A
new consumer price index based on the Household Expenditure Survey for 2000 has been put
in place. The authorities also expect to develop a data warehouse in 2004 as an extension of
the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) so as to allow easy access for users.
Similarly, more detailed data are now available on nonfinancial private capital flows.

- 10 -

Box 2. Structural Reforms
Kuwait initiated structural reform efforts in 2000 aimed at reducing the role of the government in the economy,
encouraging private sector activities, and providing employment opportunities for the growing labor force. Key
areas of the reform consist of privatization, promotion of foreign direct investment, labor market reform, and the
financial sector deepening.
Measures already implemented
•

The National Assembly approved the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Law (April 2001), which
would allow foreigners to own up to 100 percent of Kuwaiti companies subject to certain conditions as
compared with the current maximum of 49 percent, and offer various incentives to foreign investors.
•
The National Assembly approved the Labor Market Law (May 2000), resulting in establishment of
Manpower and Government Restructuring Program which provides vocational training, job-placement
services, and job search allowances to unemployed Kuwaitis. Social allowance has been extended to
Kuwaitis employed in the private sector. Enforcement of the “Kuwaitization” went into effect in
October 2003 (Box 3).
•
The CBK issued instructions to local banks to enhance the management and monitoring of
operational risks (October 2003), requiring banks to establish a framework to manage operational
risks and to disclose the information on their operational risk management.
•
The Islamic Banking Law was approved (June 2003), whereby Islamic banking will be brought under
the CBK’s supervision effective December 2003.
•
Full functioning of a credit bureau, known as Ci-Net, took place in April 2002.
•
A regulatory and supervisory framework for anti-money laundering activities (AML) has been
developed and has recently been strengthened. Measures include enactment of a law criminalizing
money laundering activities (March 2002), issuances of AML/CFT regulations to banks and exchange
companies, and the establishment of the Kuwait Financial Intelligence Unit at the CBK (July 2003).
•
For capital markets, implemented measures include: expansion of the primary market through the
opening of a parallel stock exchange; cross-listing agreements with Bahrain, Egypt, and Lebanon; and
establishment of a guaranteed fund to cover default by brokers (June 2002).
•
An amendment to the Banking law was approved by the National Assembly in January 2004 to allow
establishment of foreign banks in Kuwait.
Measures to be implemented
•

Introduction of new products in the stock market is planned. These include bond trading and
derivatives and convertible bonds, which are expected to be introduced by end-2003.
•
Lifting of the implicit blanket guarantee on bank deposits is planned. In preparation, the liquidity
ratio has been modified into a range (25–35 percent) to be applied differentially to banks according to
their financial strength.
Measures still under consideration or pending
•
•
•
•
•
•

Bylaws for the implementation of the FDI Law are awaited.
The government has proposed to amend the Tax Law to lower corporate income tax, which applies
only to foreign companies, from the current rate of 55 percent to 25 percent.
A comprehensive Privatization Law has been approved by the Finance Committee of the National
Assembly and is awaiting approval by the latter. Privatization of state enterprises including electricity,
water, telecommunications, and port, which will require legislative approval, is under consideration.
An amended Labor Law is under consideration while the Civil Service Law is being revised to
streamline public sector employment.
For labor market, the government is considering introducing on-the-job vocational training.
For capital markets, further expansion of cross-listing agreements is planned. Also under
consideration are liberalizing rules governing nonresident participation in the capital market and
upgrading the current electronic trading system for real time transactions.

- 11 -

Box 3. Labor Market Reforms
Labor market reforms are centered on two fronts: Kuwaitization to create employment opportunities
in the private sector, and generation of skills needed by and incentives for employment in the
private sector.
I. Kuwaitization
•

In September 2002, the Council of Ministers (Council) established quotas for percentages
of Kuwaiti workers to be employed by individual non-government entities depending on
their type of economic activities. In addition, owners of projects can stipulate terms of the
contract, engagement, or bid that require a higher percentage of Kuwaiti workers than that
established by the Council.

•

The quotas range from 1 percent for agriculture and construction to 39 percent for banks.
These quotas were determined in line with the existing distribution of Kuwaiti workers
across economic activities.

•

Starting October 2003, non-government entities not complying with the quota are:

•

i.

subject to an annual fine of KD 100 for each non-Kuwaiti worker renewing the work
permit or obtaining an authorization of a residency, in excess of the permitted
maximum percentage;

ii.

not allowed to conclude contracts, do business, or negotiate directly with the
government; and

iii.

not eligible for financial or material support provided by government entities (such as
disposition, leasing, or allocation of government property).
Non-compliant entities could be exempted if despite best efforts, employers were unable to
hire the requisite Kuwaitis, or existing long-term contracts do not allow them to change
their composition of workers. Examples include education and medical services for which
supply of Kuwaiti workers with right skills is limited over the short term, and agriculture
and certain services such as cleaning for which expatriate workers is the only source of
labor. Most companies are complying with the quota requirements.

II. Other labor market reform. The following measures have been implemented to encourage
Kuwaiti workers to seek employment in the private sector:
•

providing off-the-job vocational training financed by a 2.5 percent tax on all shareholding companies operating in Kuwait;

•

providing job search allowances for a maximum period of one year to unemployed
Kuwaiti nationals who have been registered for at least six months as a job seeker for a
private sector job;

•

extending social allowances, which were provided only to Kuwaiti workers in the public
sector, to Kuwaiti workers employed in the private sector, and thus equalizing allowance
levels; and

•

enhancing job-placement services by providing matching services for job vacancies and
job seekers.

- 12 -

II. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS
12.
Macroeconomic conditions in 2003 are estimated to have remained comfortable
(Table 5). Real non-oil GDP growth is estimated to have picked up briskly to about
6.5 percent because of the spillover effects of developments in Iraq and improved domestic
confidence, resulting in sharply higher private sector investment.6 The stock market has also
continued to rise sharply, registering an increase of 80 percent in the first nine months of the
year.7 Concurrently, credit expansion has been brisk and broad money is estimated to have
risen by about 13 percent. Notwithstanding a 26 percent increase in imports partly for reexports to Iraq, the external current account surplus is estimated to remain high at close
to 20 percent of GDP as oil export receipts are estimated to have increased by 34 percent
owing to higher prices and output. With an estimated sharp increase in both portfolio and
other investments abroad, in response to a recovery in the foreign equity markets and asset
diversification, CBK’s net foreign assets are estimated to have declined to the equivalent of
less than six months of imports. However, foreign assets of the RFFG are projected to have
increased by about $8 billion. The budget surplus in 2003/04 is projected to moderate
under an expansionary fiscal stance.8 With oil prices projected to weaken in the last
quarter of the fiscal year and an 11 percent increase in expenditures, the overall surplus is
projected to decline to about 19 percent of GDP. The non-oil fiscal deficit is expected to rise
further to the equivalent of about 46 percent of non-oil GDP.
13.
The macroeconomic position is projected to remain manageable over the
medium-term (2004–08). On the basis of the current expectations for declining oil prices,
official foreign asset position, and the authorities’ intentions to follow a cautious fiscal
policy, the budget and external current account surpluses are projected to contract. The
overall fiscal surplus is expected to decline gradually to about 7 percent of GDP in 2008/09,9
6

The sectors that have shown a significant pickup in activity include construction, trade, hotels and
restaurants, transport, storage, real estate, and business services.
7

Market capitalization increased by end-September 2003 to over 250 percent of non-oil GDP. The
authorities attribute the rapid rise in the stock index to several factors including the high liquidity
levels, downward drift in the interest rates, limited opportunities for alternative investment, improved
business climate in Kuwait, and the continued corporate profitability, especially in the banking sector.
8

The budget for 2003/04, which was based on a low oil price assumption (US$15 per barrel) and
excludes investment income, projected a deficit equivalent to 18 percent of GDP (Table 2).
9

The medium-term macroeconomic forecasts remain highly sensitive to oil price developments and the
behavior of transfers under the UN Compensation Program. These forecasts are based on the WEO
prices prevailing at the time of the consultation discussions. In November 2003, such prices were
adjusted upward. Based on these WEO prices, the budget surplus could be about 10 percent of GDP
in 2008/09 on unchanged policies. The decline in external current account surplus would moderate to
about 13 percent by 2008 and CBK’s net foreign asset position would improve to the equivalent of

(continued…)

- 13 -

while non-oil fiscal balance in relation to non-oil GDP would improve somewhat. However,
the fiscal position will remain vulnerable to any sustained downside oil price shocks and may
not be sufficient to ensure intergenerational equity in the longer term. Concurrently, external
current account surpluses would decline gradually to about 9 percent of GDP in 2008 despite
rising investment income. Growth of real non-oil GDP is projected to decelerate gradually
effective 2005 to the trend levels of about 3 percent per annum, as the transitory positive
impact of Iraqi developments wears out. Such growth may not be adequate to address the
employment needs of the rapidly growing Kuwaiti labor force, which is estimated to increase
by about 6 percent per year over the medium term and is likely to accelerate in the longer
run.10
14.
The authorities agreed that the twin challenges of accelerating non-oil growth in
a sustained fashion to address unemployment pressures, and ensuring a steady increase
in wealth per capita in the longer term will call for speeding up structural reforms and
strengthened the fiscal position in a socially acceptable fashion and without
exacerbating short-term unemployment pressures. They noted that the recently announced
three-pronged, four-year Action Program for the next four years reaffirms the government’s
commitment to addressing the structural imbalances in the domestic labor market,
strengthening the fiscal position, and enhancing private sector’s role in the economy. Priority
will continue to be accorded to encouraging private investment and generation of
employment opportunities in the nongovernmental sector, which in turn would facilitate
government expenditure restraint and help improve the fiscal position. Given the timeconsuming process of political consensus building, the authorities intend to explore avenues
under the existing legal structures to speed up reforms.
15.
Policy discussions concentrated on the adequacy and implementation of the
authorities’ reform program in achieving their twin objectives. The mission also
reviewed the preliminary recommendations of the FSAP exercise. Other matters discussed
included transparency issues, technical assistance, and regional integration.

nine months of imports. The authorities have indicated that any changes in the planned inflow of the
UN compensation payments will be reflected in the accumulation of official foreign assets.
10

Data available as of end-June 2003 indicate that Kuwait’s population stood at 2.48 million including
914,000 Kuwaitis or 37 percent of total population. The labor force totaled 1.42 million including
272,000 Kuwaitis (19 percent of total). Ninety percent of Kuwaiti labor force is employed in the public
sector. Unemployment at end-June 2003 stood at 3.6 percent of total Kuwaiti labor force.

- 14 -

A. Structural Policies
Restructuring and privatization
16.
The private sector has increased opportunities for investment in public utilities
and downstream activities. The authorities intend to pursue their strategy along two parallel
tracks in order to accelerate the process.11 First, increased efforts will be made to seek an
early approval of the Privatization Law by the National Assembly. Second, the existing legal,
regulatory, and institutional foundations will be strengthened, administrative obstacles
eliminated, and government procedures simplified in order to encourage private investment,
including in joint ventures with the public sector. The authorities intend to continue
identifying public sector entities that do not require explicit legislative approval for
privatization to be sold to the private sector. In this context, the Kuwait Petroleum Company
(KPC) is expected to soon allow the private sector to participate in the downstream marketing
of petroleum products.
17.
While calling for an early enactment of the Privatization Law, the mission supported
the authorities’ initiatives to identify activities, which could be privatized under the existing
laws, and encouraged their early privatization. Such a step could signal the authorities’
serious intent to support private sector-led growth and, thus, further strengthen the
environment for private investment. The market pricing of publicly supplied goods and
services in conjunction with targeted subsidies should also facilitate a more efficient
allocation of resources and reduce the burden on the budget. Noting that the establishment of
an unambiguous legal framework is crucial for appropriate private investment decisions, the
mission called for an early clarification of rules governing FDI under the Foreign Investment
Law, particularly the identification of the “negative list”, the enactment of a nondiscriminatory corporate income tax, and steps to ensure equal access for both domestic and
foreign investors to the domestic financial markets.
Labor policies
18.
The authorities have continued to follow a two-pronged strategy to address the
emerging unemployment pressures while minimizing the burden on the budget. It
includes: (a) Kuwaitization of the labor force, and (b) gradual integration of the segmented
labor markets. Effective October 2003, the Kuwaitization policy was formally
implemented (Box 3). While the authorities intend to continue pursuing a liberal foreign
11

The privatization strategy aims, in a sequential fashion, to autonomize, commercialize, and finally
privatize state enterprises while market-based prices are introduced and regulatory authorities are
established to ensure protection against monopolies. The Privatization Law, which is presently under
review of the National Assembly, will establish a comprehensive framework for large-scale
privatization, identify areas and modes of privatization, and establish a pricing mechanism and
safeguards against job losses.

- 15 -

labor policy, the Kuwaitization policy calls for all non-governmental entities to fulfill
specified mandatory quotas for Kuwait workers, based on the type of activity.
Noncompliance will be subject to an annual fee of KD 100 per each foreign worker in excess
of the thresholds that depend on the type of economic activities.12 Penalties for
noncompliance could be waived if existing long-term contracts do not allow compliance or if
the supply of Kuwaiti workers with required skills is limited in the short run. The integration
of the labor market is being pursued through equalizing benefits for Kuwaiti workers in both
the public and the private sectors. The social allowances which were limited to Kuwaiti
workers in the public sector have, effective 2002, been extended to Kuwaiti workers in the
private sector. The policy of providing vocational training to generate skills and, thus,
employability in the private sector, under the Manpower and Government Restructuring
Program (MGRP), has remained broadly unchanged.
19.
The mission called for greater focus on the development of skills and an early
integration of the labor market with flexible wages to protect competitiveness and encourage
private investment. It called for an early assumption of allowances and benefits by the private
sector along with a gradual reduction in such benefits both in the public and the private
sectors. The mission encouraged a cautious application of Kuwaitization and more concerted
civil service reforms aimed at linking wages to productivity in the public sector.
Financial sector policies
20.
The FSAP mission has concluded that there are no immediate threats to
financial stability in Kuwait. Stress tests indicate that the banking system could withstand
significant shocks including stock market-related risks. However, the major concern in the
near and medium term is financial efficiency rather than stability. In particular, increased
financial intermediation and an efficient growth of the private sector in a globalized
environment will require continued further development of the financial infrastructure. This
will call for the modernization of legal and regulatory institutions, increased competition, and
new financial products to meet the evolving market conditions. The authorities broadly
agreed with the staff recommendations as summarized in Box 4.

12

In addition, noncomplying companies could be excluded from government contracts and other
benefits. The quotas are in line with the present broad composition of workers in the various economic
activities.

- 16 -

Box 4. Priority Recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP)
•

General. Take steps to reduce moral hazard and encourage economic agents to deal prudently
with risk, including through the elimination of the blanket deposit guarantee, bank bailouts,
and bailouts of investors in the stock and real estate markets.

•

Banking. (i) enact amendments to the CBK law that enhance the independence and powers of
the CBK in its capacity as banking regulator and supervisor, to firmly establish its ability to
conduct consolidated supervision and take remedial measures; (ii) continue to closely monitor
banks’ lending risk associated with the stock market and real estate sectors, and further
develop related stress testing procedures and capabilities within the banking supervision
department, and be prepared to take quick supervisory action if necessary; (iii) ease or remove
the ceiling on lending rates, to enable lenders to better price the risks of lending, including in
particular to SMEs; and (iv) seek authority to share confidential information for supervisory
purposes with appropriate domestic and foreign authorities.

•

Securities. (i) enact a new Capital Markets Law creating a single, independent and
accountable authority with full powers to develop and regulate the securities market and
industry; (ii) prohibit insider trading and market manipulation, and enforce by establishing
comprehensive inspection, investigation and surveillance systems; (iii) define entry standards
for all types of market intermediaries; (iv) develop unified code of prudential regulations; and
(v) allow the market to diversify product lines, and liberalize participation of foreign
intermediaries in the market.

•

Insurance. (i) enact a new insurance law that includes the elements of a modern insurance
supervision framework, including independent status for the supervisory agency;
(ii) strengthen the capacity of the insurance department of the MoCI in the near term.

•

AML/CFT. (i) formally extend Law 35/2002 to cover the broad financial sector; (ii) exercise
more control over ownership of financial institutions; (iii) strengthen procedures for
international cooperation in AML/CFT; and (iv) criminalize the financing of terrorism.

•

Monetary operations. (i) in liquidity management, reduce reliance on banks’ deposits with
CBK by using marketable instruments in monetary operations; (ii) simplify and streamline the
multiple liquid asset requirements, and in the medium term, reduce or introduce more
flexibility in the 20 percent liquid asset requirement (e.g., counting deposits with the CBK and
permitting banks to meet the requirement on average over a period of time rather than every
day); and (iii) building on the preceding steps, foster secondary market development.

•

Payment system. Continue high priority implementation of the RTGS system, ensuring that its
regulations comply with Core Principles 3 (management of credit risks and liquidity risks) and
9 (objective and publicly disclosed criteria for participation, and in general publicly disclosing
major policies).

21.
The amended Banking Law, which is expected to be implemented in 2004, will
further deepen the financial sector. While the financial market will be opened to foreign
banks to increase competition and efficiency, the authorities did not consider the

- 17 -

establishment of new financial institutions as necessary to enlarge the market.13 It is expected
that the amended law will help introduce new instruments including mortgage financing and
Shariah-compliant bonds. The introduction of new instruments will be governed by the
requirements of the economy and meet stringent regulations so as not to adversely impact
banks’ soundness. Islamic instruments will be tradable and marketable and could be used in
open market operations under new prudential regulations and supervision rules to govern
further development of Islamic banking. The mission encouraged the authorities to promote
the development of the corporate bond market, which, in conjunction with the government
bond market, could deepen the financial market and provide more flexible financing options
for the private sector.14 The authorities recognize that a faster growth of the corporate bond
market will call for accelerated privatization.
22.
The regulatory, supervisory, and licensing powers of the CBK will be
strengthened under the amended Banking Law. These powers will include: (a) extension
of the role of external auditors; (b) authorization for sharing information with other
regulatory agencies for supervisory purposes; (c) approval of the CBK for changes in bank
ownership; and (d) stiff financial penalties for noncompliance with laws and regulations.
Finally, the blanket deposit guarantee will be discontinued over the next three to four months.
Liquidity management has been strengthened effective November 2003, requiring banks to
maintain liquidity ratios (within a range of 25–35 percent) consistent with each bank’s
CAMELS rating.15 The enlarged range of liquidity ratios would, in addition to containing
credit growth, give less secure banks a larger liquidity margin to meet potential deposit
withdrawal resulting from the planned abolition of the blanket guarantee. The mission
encouraged the establishment of a limited deposit insurance scheme to reinforce liquidity
management and to protect small savers for social reasons.16
23.
The mission also called for a new Capital Markets Law to establish a single
independent and accountable authority with full powers to develop and regulate the
securities market. Such an agency would be crucial to a continued orderly market
13

In January 2004, the Parliament approved a bill allowing foreign banks to operate in Kuwait. Two
international banks have so far applied to open branches in Kuwait.
14

The corporate bond market is small at the equivalent of KD 600 million or 10 percent of non-oil
GDP at end-2002. Its relatively small size reflects the presently limited scope of the private sector,
which accounts for about 25 percent of GDP. Marketed by investment companies, such bonds, prior to
issuance, must have a rating and meet requirements of transparency and disclosure.

15

The CAMELS methodology is based on six groups of indicators of bank soundness: capital
adequacy, asset quality, management soundness, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk.
16

In the absence of such a scheme, the CBK should be prepared to act swiftly in case of bank runs
with the establishment of clear conditions to borrow from the central bank.

- 18 -

development and support for private sector-oriented growth. To reduce the impact of
potential shocks, the mission agreed with the authorities’ plans to introduce bond trading to
complement share trading; encouraging development of new products such as derivatives,
options, and convertible bonds; and liberalizing rules governing nonresident participation
under appropriate safeguards against speculative activities.17 The authorities intend to closely
monitor bank lending for securities trading to minimize potential stock market-related risks.
The mission noted that an accelerated privatization of state enterprises would generate
demand for long-term financing and thus help deepen the market.
B. Macroeconomic Policies
Fiscal policy
24.
Although the fiscal position is projected to remain manageable over the medium
term, fiscal performance will have to be strengthened further to ensure a steady
increase in wealth per capita over the longer term. A continuation of the projected
medium-term trends would imply declining wealth per capita effective 2014. Moreover,
dependence on oil revenues will need to be curtailed to reduce vulnerability to oil price
fluctuations, strengthen counter-cyclicality of expenditures, and improve non-oil growth
prospects. Therefore, there will be a need for a structural strengthening of the budget through
a reduction in expenditures and an increase in non-oil revenues.
25.
The authorities are cognizant of the need for a greater fiscal effort, mainly
through expenditure restraint. They expressed their intention to introduce new taxes, but
noted opposition to such measures. This will go hand-in-hand with the strategy to reduce the
government’s role in the economy. In 2003/04, expenditure as a percentage of GDP will be
contained at 43 percent or about the same as in 2002/03. While no policy change is planned
in 2003/04, the authorities aim to shift toward a more effective and efficient implementation
of capital projects, improved expenditure management, and stricter controls on new hiring.
While investment income and the UN compensation payments are estimated to increase,
domestic non-oil revenues will remain small at 4.5 percent of non-oil GDP. The non-oil
deficit relative to non-oil GDP is expected to rise to about 46 percent, implying an
expansionary fiscal stance.

17

The authorities are of the view that the banking system could absorb a stock market shock because
of a number of factors. First, the risks of bank exposure to equities are lower now than in the previous
correction because of a higher capital base and better risk management. Second, the CBK monitors
developments in consumer and stock trading loans more closely, with prudential limit of 10 percent on
bank lending for stock trading being strictly enforced. Third, the consumer and stock trading lending
have ample and liquid collaterals and are subject to prudential limits. Fourth, the stock market depth
has increased, providing some cushion in case of price shocks. The authorities are of the view that a
correction of up to 50 percent would not affect the stability of the financial system and the economy.

- 19 -

26.
Over the medium term, the authorities are considering taking the following
measures:
•

Reduce subsidies by increases in prices of publicly supplied water and electricity
and services, including health and education.

•

Introduce a uniform Corporate Income Tax to ensure equal treatment of Kuwait and
foreign corporation; the planned amended tax law would reduce the tax on the latter
to 25 percent from the present 55 percent.

•

Contain current expenditures by restricting the increase in government employment
in conjunction with incentives for new Kuwaiti job entrants to seek employment in
the private sector.18

•

Strengthen the efficiency and productivity of capital spending based on more
clearly defined priorities so as to contain such outlays.

The authorities generally agreed that an expedited reduction in current expenditures would
entail reduction in the public sector employment under a comprehensive civil service reform
as an integral part of the overall labor policy.
27.
The mission noted that a sustained increase in non-oil revenue would not only
strengthen the fiscal position over the long run, but also reduce vulnerability to volatile
oil prices. Consideration should, therefore, be given to an early introduction of the valueadded-tax, which would also facilitate fiscal coordination among GCC member countries
toward the establishment of the planned monetary union by 2010. The authorities, however,
felt that, given the ample financial cushion, the fiscal consolidation would be implemented
gradually in a socially acceptable fashion and consistent with the creation of employment
opportunities in the private sector.19 They noted that the public expenditure management

18

Civil service employment will be streamlined through the centralization of hiring and placement
under stricter application of existing regulations. It is also hoped that the extension of social benefits to
Kuwaiti workers in the private sector will reduce real wage differentials and encourage migration to
the private sector.
19

A number of steps that had been initiated in 2001–02 to strengthen budget management will
continue to be applied. These include the use of private companies to collect utility charges and fees
and upward adjustment in employee contributions toward services. Expenditure management has been
strengthened through improved coordination of expenditure procedures under the Ministry of Finance.

- 20 -

reform is getting under way as recommended by the Fund technical assistance, which would
underpin their fiscal consolidation strategy over the medium term.20
28.
The mission observed that the introduction of a fiscal policy framework
targeting a fiscal rule would help strengthen counter-cyclicality of fiscal policy. The
lagged positive relationship between oil price developments and the non-oil fiscal balance
over the past several years could point to the potential of weakening effectiveness of fiscal
policy in stabilizing aggregate demand, engendering bias toward declining fiscal surpluses,
and negatively impacting private sector growth (Figure 7).21 Targeting a steady decline in
non-oil deficit relative to non-oil GDP under a medium-term macroeconomic framework,
based on realistic oil prices could provide a useful anchor to minimize the effect of oil price
fluctuations. Such an approach would also improve the effectiveness of the General Reserve
Fund (GRF) as a stabilization fund. The authorities concurred with the mission and noted that
they intended, over the period ahead, to target the fiscal position net of exogenous factors,
including oil price fluctuations and returns on investments, through the implementation of a
three-year rolling budget effective 2005/06.
29.
Strengthened fiscal strategy would also reinforce the authorities’ ability to
ensure a steady increase in public wealth per capita over the longer term as an indicator
of long-term fiscal sustainability. Staff estimates indicate that under current policies,
population growth rate, and oil price expectations (the baseline scenario), wealth per capita
will start to decline from 2014 (Figure 8). Unchanged wealth per capita will require
additional fiscal effort during the medium term to shift the path of non-oil deficit/non-oil
GDP ratio to about 36 percent in 2008/09 as against 40 percent under the baseline scenario.
These results are highly sensitive to oil price developments; a faster fall in oil prices would
require a commensurately smaller non-oil deficit/non-oil GDP ratio.
III. MONETARY POLICY AND THE EXCHANGE SYSTEM
30.
The authorities intend to follow a cautious monetary policy in 2004 to maintain
stability of the exchange rate under an open and free exchange and trade system. While
20

The Fund has provided technical assistance in 2002–03 to help reform the Kuwaiti public
expenditure management system so it will better reflect the government’s key priorities and to generate
accurate information on public sector spending. The assistance involved several measures: (i)
streamlining budget preparation under a macroeconomic-fiscal framework; (ii) amending the budget
preparation process; and (iii) facilitating program budgeting under an appropriate budget classification
and accounting system. According to the authorities, implementation has remained slow due, in part, to
the uncertainties relating to the run-up to the Iraq war, together with domestic administrative
bottlenecks.
21

A procyclical fiscal policy could negatively impact private sector growth by destabilizing aggregate
demand, increasing cost of reallocating resources, and generating real exchange rate volatility.

- 21 -

no money growth rate is targeted, broad money is expected to slow down in 2004 to about
7 percent from about 13 percent in 2003. Net foreign assets are projected to increase
somewhat while growth of credit to the private sector would be limited to about 6 percent of
the beginning stock of broad money as growth of non-oil GDP starts to return to trend levels.
31.
Money supply will continue to be regulated, mainly by adjustments in domestic
interest rates in order to maintain the differential with rates prevailing in the global markets,
and the use of direct bank deposits with the CBK. The mission supported the authorities’
strategy, but felt that the reintroduction of the market oriented central bank paper for use in
the open-market operations could, in conjunction with the direct deposits facility provide
greater flexibility in managing liquidity. Similarly, a wider range of government debt
instruments for use in the open-market operations would also support the development of the
secondary market.22 The mission also recommended discontinuing lending rate ceilings or
adjusting these rates to reflect differential risks in order to ensure a better allocation of
resources.
32.
Progress continued to be made toward regional integration under the GCC.
Tariff rates have been raised slightly to 5 percent effective 2003 in line with the Common
External Tariff (CET).23 The GCC Common Market is targeted to come into effect in 2007,
while steps are being taken on the regional basis for the introduction of a monetary union
by 2010. The authorities have started considering steps for policy coordination and
convergence for an orderly transition to the planned monetary union.24 In addition to issues
relating to fiscal convergence criteria, the authorities attach high priority to the harmonization
of bank regulatory and supervisory framework among GCC countries in line with the
International Accounting Standards (IAS) and Basel Core Principles (BCP). As part of the

22

The authorities have been cautious about a larger use of government securities on the grounds that
such a practice could incorrectly imply a weakening fiscal position. The outstanding amount of
government paper, which is used primarily for monetary management purposes, stood at 22 percent of
GDP in 2002 and is declining.
23

A minimum tariff rate of 5 percent applies to non-GCC imports while no tariffs apply to imports
from other GCC countries with at least 40 percent local value added. Kuwait applies higher tariffs in
industries where domestic producers cater to at least 40 percent of the local market. If the domestically
produced goods contain at least 20 percent, 30 percent, or 40 percent domestic value added, protective
duties of 15 percent, 20 percent, and 25 percent, respectively, may be applied to competing imports.
The maximum duty imposed on products that compete with locally manufactured goods is
100 percent.
24

Currently, the experiences of other monetary unions are being considered to determine the legal and
institutional requirements that will need to be put in place for an effective GCC monetary union. The
European Central Bank is presently developing a detailed framework for such a monetary union.

- 22 -

Greater Arab Free Trade Agreement, Kuwait aims to eliminate duties on imports from other
Arab countries by 2005.25
IV. STATISTICAL ISSUES AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
33.
Kuwait continues to make progress in improving the quality, currentness, and
dissemination of economic data. Monetary, financial, and balance of payments data are
timely and adequate for surveillance purposes. Data on the international investment position
have been provided. Improvements have been made in the national accounts for 2002, with
the adoption of the System of National Accounts (SNA) 1993 data collection system and a
sampling frame based on a new establishment survey (2002), and with the expansion of the
coverage of questionnaires. The quality and coverage of the consumer price index (CPI) has
significantly improved with new weights derived from the recently completed household
expenditure survey (2000). Dissemination of the data has also improved and lags in the
release of the national accounts and the CPI data have been shortened. Notwithstanding these
improvements, there is a need for further improvements in statistics, particularly in the areas
of aggregate expenditure, nonfinancial sector private capital flows, FDI, and the national
accounts’ consistency with the balance of payments data. Furthermore, fiscal data submitted
for publication in the Fund (GFS) can be improved in its coverage and currentness,
particularly for major components of extra-budgetary revenues (including investment income
and transfers of profits of public institutions) and extra-budgetary expenditures (interest on
treasury bills and bonds). Collection and sharing of data on labor market would help improve
the formulation of policies to address unemployment pressures.
34.
The authorities indicated that the delay in implementing the recommendations of the
recent technical assistance missions in the fiscal area was due to uncertainties relating to the
war in Iraq. They stressed that appropriate preparations were under way for a speedy
implementation of the recommendations for public expenditure management reforms. The
staff emphasized that additional technical assistance would be conditional on the
implementation of the recommendations of earlier technical assistance missions.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
35.
The main challenge for the Kuwaiti economy over the medium term is to
generate a sustained increase in non-oil growth and create productive employment
opportunities for the rapidly growing indigenous labor force, while maintaining
intergenerational equity over the long run. These require key structural reforms and
prudent financial policies focusing, inter alia, on further diversifying the Kuwaiti economy,
reducing the role of the public sector, eliminating underlining rigidities (particularly in the
labor market), and promoting transparency. Over the past several years, Kuwait has
25

Kuwait is a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

- 23 -

endeavored to implement such a strategy. However, progress has been relatively slow
because of difficulties in reaching political consensus on important reform measures,
administrative limitations, and regional political uncertainties.
36.
The macroeconomic position over the medium term is projected to weaken, but
is not expected to pose sustainability issues under the current cautious policy stance.
Unless there is a significant pick up in structural reforms to improve resource allocation, the
growth rate of non-oil GDP is likely to decelerate as the transitory impact of Iraq wears off
and would be insufficient to meet the employment needs of the rapidly growing Kuwaiti
labor force. Moreover, a steady increase in public wealth per capita over the longer term will
necessitate stronger fiscal effort. Additional steps would also be needed to reduce
vulnerability to the volatile oil export receipts, thus strengthening the counter-cyclicality of
fiscal policy, minimizing the bias toward shrinking fiscal surpluses, and improving growth
prospects.
37.
The authorities should take advantage of the presently strengthened
macroeconomic position and buoyancy in the private sector to step up reforms. The
focus should be on further strengthening the fiscal position and creating the institutional and
legal environment needed for a significant increase in private investment under prudent
monetary policies with a stable exchange rate. The effectiveness of the reform program will
also require proper planning, increased coordination, and an appropriate sequencing of
policies under a well-defined timetable. Moreover, a wider dissemination of the policy
imperatives and of the likely gains of the planned reform measures for the current and future
generations, should aid the reform process.
38.
A sustained buildup in private investment will require an expeditious passage of
the Privatization Law, which would help define the domain for the private sector and
establish the needed legal and institutional framework. In the interim, the authorities
should identify activities that do not require explicit legislative approval for privatization and
take steps for their early divestiture. Moreover, rules governing FDI under the Foreign
Investment Law should be clarified quickly and steps taken to establish a level playing field
for domestic and foreign investors in terms of access to the domestic financial markets and
tax treatment. An early initiation of the North Kuwait oil field development would also
promote FDI in other related sectors. Given the limited size of the nontradable sector, focus
should be on developing opportunities in the tradable sector including upstream oil and
petrochemicals as well as the service sector. This will call for steps to ensure competitiveness
through flexible wages and the maintenance of a stable real effective exchange rate. The staff
also calls for an early transition to full market pricing of publicly supplied goods and
services, including water and electricity, in order to ensure an efficient allocation of resources
and to reduce burden on the budget. Targeted subsidies could be considered to protect
vulnerable groups from the inevitable increase in the cost of living.
39.
It is important to ensure continued effective regulation and supervision of the
financial system. The authorities have succeeded in maintaining financial system stability.

- 24 -

Sound macroeconomic policies, effective banking regulation and supervision, and ongoing
efforts to prevent a repetition of earlier bailouts of private investors, have been key to this
achievement. Moreover, the most critical elements of systemic liquidity and crisis
management policies are in place. Stress tests indicate that the banking system could
withstand significant shocks. While some institutions are sensitive to price declines in the
equity and property markets, the exposures seem to be manageable, and the authorities have
begun to take the necessary corrective steps. In other areas, early action to strengthen the
regulation and supervision of the securities markets is highly desirable to ensure the integrity
of these markets, enhance their prospects for further development, and to help mitigate the
large boom and bust cycles. An improved regulatory infrastructure would also be helpful in
the insurance sector. Kuwait’s regulatory and supervisory framework for anti-money
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) has recently been
strengthened, including through enactment of new legislation, but vulnerabilities remain that
should be addressed promptly.
40.
The staff considers the authorities’ plans to continue addressing the emerging
unemployment pressures through training, thus creating skills needed by the private
sector as appropriate. However, it is important that quotas under the Kuwaitization policy
be applied flexibly so that the competitiveness of the private sector is not adversely affected.
The staff encourages the authorities to gradually reduce benefits, both to the public sector as
well as the private sector, under a well-defined timetable to reduce burden on the budget.
Moreover, promotion of market-based flexibility in wages for the Kuwaiti workforce would
be critical in the integration of segmented labor markets. However, labor market reforms
should be closely linked with state enterprise reform and private investment so that job
creation in the private sector is in step with the potential job losses in the public sector, thus
minimizing the budgetary costs.
41.
Structural reforms should be underpinned by a tighter fiscal policy. Stemming
the projected decline in budgetary surpluses over the medium term will also be critical in
ensuring a steady increase in wealth per capita over the longer term. This will entail
strengthening the structure of the budget in order to significantly reduce the non-oil deficit.
The staff encourages the authorities to reduce outlays on wages and subsidies, which account
for about 60 percent of total expenditures. An early implementation of Fund’s technical
assistance recommendations to improve expenditure management and tighter rules governing
wage increases associated with civil service reforms would be helpful. Upward adjustment in
prices of electricity and water toward cost recovery would not only strengthen the budget, but
also improve resource allocation. The authorities should continue to press forward with
political consensus building in order to mobilize revenue through the introduction of a VAT
and a revamped corporate income tax applicable to both foreign and Kuwaiti companies.
42.
The counter-cyclicality of fiscal policy should be strengthened by casting the
budget in a medium-term macroeconomic framework with a well-defined fiscal rule.
The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to introduce a three-year rolling budget in the
period ahead. The underlying medium-term framework should be based on realistic oil price

- 25 -

assumptions and should target a declining non-oil deficit relative to non-oil GDP as a fiscal
rule so as to cushion the impact of oil revenue variability. This should help define the
magnitude of non-oil revenue effort over the chosen policy horizon. Given the oil price
uncertainties, the fiscal rule and the accompanying medium-term framework should be
reviewed periodically.
43.
The staff considers as appropriate the authorities’ policy of maintaining a
pegged exchange arrangement with the U.S. dollar under an open and liberal exchange
and trade system as a first step toward the GCC-wide monetary union. The planned
pursuit of cautious monetary policy stance in 2004 for moderating liquidity growth,
consistent with the projected growth in the non-oil sector, is appropriate. The staff agrees
with the thrust of the policy, which is aimed at keeping CBK’s discount rate in line with
those prevailing in the global market and continuing to use direct bank deposits with CBK to
regulate liquidity. However, expanding the variety of debt instruments, which could be used
for open market operations, would allow increased flexibility. Given that the ceilings on
lending rates cannot be eliminated because of the difficulties in amending the relevant law,
the staff encourages the authorities to consider adjusting these rates to reflect differential
risks. Consideration should also be given to introducing a limited deposit insurance scheme
to, at least, cover small depositors for welfare reasons.
44.
More progress is needed in the development and dissemination of economic data.
The staff welcomes improvements in the national accounts and balance of payments data and
their reporting. It is to be hoped that steps will be taken to further improve data on aggregate
expenditure, nonfinancial private capital flows, FDI, labor and employment, and on further
improving consistency between national accounts and the balance of payments. Steps will
also be needed in coordination with other GCC member countries to develop common and
transparent data series as a step toward establishing convergence criteria for the planned
monetary union. Fund technical assistance, perhaps on a GCC-wide basis, would be
particularly beneficial.
45.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 26 -

Figure 1. Kuwait: Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997–2003
(Annual percentage change)
20

20

Gross Domestic Product

15

15
Real non-oil GDP
Real oil GDP

10

10

Real GDP

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

20
15

20

Real GDP and GDI

15
Real GDI

10

10

Real GDP

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
15

15

CPI and Import Prices
10

10

5

5

Consumer Price Index

0

0

Import Prices

-5

-5

-10

-10
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

2002

2003

- 27 -

Figure 2. Kuwait Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1997/98–2003/04
(In millions of Kuwaiti Dinars, unless otherwise indicated)
10,000
Total Revenue and Expenditure
8,000
Total Revenue
Total Expenditure

6,000
4,000
2,000
0
1997/98

10,000
8,000

1998/99

1999/2000

2000/2001

7,000

Revenue

2001/2002

Interest payments
Capital expenditure
Non-interest current expenditure

5,000

6,000

2003/04

Expenditure

6,000

Non-oil revenue
Investment income
Oil revenue

2002/2003

4,000
3,000

4,000

2,000
2,000

1,000
0

0
1997/98

1999/2000

2001/2002

50

50
40

1997/98

2003/04

Fiscal Balance
(In percent of GDP)

1999/2000

2001/2002

2003/04

60

60
Gross Domestic Debt
(In percent of GDP)

40
Current Balance

30

30

20

20
Overall
Balance

10

10

40

40

20

20

0

0

-10

-10
1997/98

1999/2000

2001/2002

2003/04

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti Authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

0

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

- 28 -

Figure 3. Kuwait: External Sector Developments, 1997–2003
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
16,000

16,000

External Sector Balances
12,000

12,000

Trade Balance
Current

8,000

Account Balance

8,000

Overall Balance

4,000

4,000

0

0

-4,000

-4,000
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

25,000
20,000

25,000

Exports and Trade Balance

20,000

Exports of Goods

15,000

Oil Exports

10,000

15,000
10,000

Trade Balance

5,000

5,000

Other Exports
0

0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

10,000

10,000

Income

8,000

8,000

Investment Income
( t)

6,000
4,000

6,000
4,000

2,000

2,000

0

0

-2,000

-2,000

Services (net)

-4,000

-4,000

-6,000

-6,000
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

2002

2003

- 29 Figure 4. Monetary and Financial Developments, 1997–2003
(In millions of Kuwaiti Dinars; unless otherwise indicated)
24,000

24,000

Monetary and Liquidity Aggregates

Currency in Circulation

20,000

20,000
Demand Deposits

16,000

16,000

12,000

12,000

Quasi Money

8,000

8,000
Money and Quasi Money (M3)

4,000

4,000

0

0

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

16,000

16,000

Monetary Counterparts
Net Foreign Assets
12,000

12,000

8,000

8,000

Net Claims on Government

Claims on Nongovernment

4,000

4,000

0

0

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
10

10
9

3-Months Deposit Interest Rates on Kuwaiti Dinars and U.S. Dollars 1/

9

(In percent per anum)

8

8

7

7

Kuwaiti Dinar

6

6

5

5

4

4

3
2

3

U.S. Dollar

2

1
0

1
1997Q1

1997Q4

1998Q3

1999Q2

2000Q1

2000Q4

2001Q3

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ U.S. dollar rates available until 2003, third quarter.

2002Q2

2003Q1

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

U.S. Dollar Per Dinar

Real Effective Exchange Rate

Nominal Effective Exchange

(1990 = 100)

2002

Figure 5. Kuwait: Exchange Rate Movements, January 1995–October 2003

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System ; and Central Bank of Kuwait.

90

95

100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

g

2003

- 30 -

1997

1998

1999

1/ 2003 covers January to September.
2/ Value of shares traded divided by market capitalization.
3/ December 29, 1993 = 1000

Source: Central Bank of Kuwait.

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

2000

2001

2002

Market capitalization/GDP (left scale)
Turnover 2/ (left scale)
Market index 3/ (right scale)

(In Percent)

Figure 6. Kuwait: Stock Market Indicators, 1997–2003 1/

2003

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

4,000

4,500

5,000

- 31 -

1991/92

1990/91

1989/90

1988/89

1987/88

1986/87

1985/86

1984/85

1983/84

1982/83

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities and IMF staff estimates

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

Non-oil Balance

Total Expenditure

1994/95

200

1995/96

250

1996/97

300

Oil Export Price

1998/99

350

1999/00

400

(Percent changes)

1997/98

Figure 7. Kuwait: Oil Prices, Fiscal Expenditure, and Non-oil Balance, 1982/83–2002/03

-150

-100

-50

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

- 32 -

2002/03

2001/02

2000/01

1993/94

1992/93

- 33 -

Figure 8. Kuwait: Projected Fiscal Developments and Real Per Capita Wealth, 2004–33
14

14

Projected Fiscal Balances: Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios Required for Constant Real
Wealth Per Capita and Growing Wealth Per Capita
(In percent of GDP)

12
10

12
10

8

8

6

6

4

4
Adjustment

2

2

0

0
Baseline

-2
-4
2004

-2
-4

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

-50

-50

Non-oil fiscal deficit (In percent of GDP)
-45

-45
Baseline

-40

-40

Adjustment

-35

-35

-30

-30

-25

-25
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

6

6

Real Wealth Per Capita under Baseline and Adjustment Scenarios
(Percent Change)

5
4

5
4

3

3

2

2
Adjustment

1

1

0

0
Baseline

-1
-2
2004

-1
-2

2006

2008

2010

2012

Source: Fund staff projections.

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2032

- 34 -

Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998–2003

Nominal GDP (market prices, US$ millions)
Crude oil production (millions barrels per day)
Kuwait crude export price (US$ per barrel)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

25,945
2.05
10.3

30,077
1.87
16.1

37,017
1.98
25.0

34,236
1.95
21.2

35,333
1.75
22.9

42,372
2.03
25.6

2.3
6.6
-0.4
-8.0
5.0
1.4

18.2
7.1
9.9
15.5
6.5
2.0

(Percent changes)
Production and prices
Nominal GDP
Nominal non-oil GDP
Real GDP
Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Consumer price index

-14.1
5.9
3.6
1.8
5.2
0.1

16.0
3.9
-1.7
-6.5
2.2
3.0

23.8
3.5
1.9
2.3
1.8
1.8

-7.6
4.2
0.6
-3.2
3.4
1.7

(Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Money and credit
Foreign assets (net)
Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Broad money

-1.9
1.1
-1.4
7.3
-0.8

1.5
0.1
-2.7
3.6
1.6

11.4
-5.1
-7.3
3.9
6.3

6.5
6.3
-4.1
12.0
12.8

-4.1
8.8
0.2
10.6
4.8

-3.4
16.0
-3.5
18.5
12.5

2.2
1.3

1.5
0.7

(Percent per year)
Interest rates 1/
Kuwaiti dinar three-month deposits
U.S. dollar three-month deposits

5.9
5.1

5.3
4.9

5.4
6.0

3.7
3.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports
Of which : oil and refined products
Imports
Current account
In percent of GDP
Overall balance
In percent of GDP
International reserve assets
In months of imports of goods and services
Total external debt (incl private sector)
In percent of GDP

9,616
8,470
-7,715
2,215
8.5
288
1.1
4,034
3.7
9,938
38.3

12,225
11,027
-6,708
5,013
16.6
894
3.0
4,928
5.0
10,057
33.4

19,476
18,184
-6,451
14,672
39.6
2,241
6.1
7,170
7.4
9,955
26.9

16,246
14,976
-7,049
8,328
24.3
2,827
8.3
9,997
9.7
11,095
32.4

15,365
14,058
-8,118
4,190
11.9
-741
-2.1
9,256
8.3
12,939
36.6

20,992
18,784
-10,241
8,046
19.0
-1,907
-4.5
7,348
5.6
12,480
29.5

3.29
-0.7
-1.5

3.35
-6.4
-6.8

(Percentage change)
Exchange rates
Exchange rates (US$ per KD, period average) 2/
Nominal effective exchange rate 3/
Real effective exchange rate 3/

3.28
5.5
3.1

3.28
-0.6
0.9

3.26
4.7
4.2

3.26
5.8
5.1

- 35 -

Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998–2003 (concluded)

1998/99 1999/2000

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

Est.
2003/04

68.6
49.0
14.4
43.2
38.2
5.0
24.6
10.2

61.3
42.3
14.2
42.6
37.6
5.0
18.6
4.4

(In percent of GDP)
Public finance 4/
Total revenue, of which :
Oil and gas revenue
Investment income
Total expenditures
Current
Capital
Fiscal balance (deficit -)
Fiscal balance excluding investment income (defic

46.4
26.4
16.6
48.7
43.1
5.6
-2.3
-18.9

68.7
46.7
19.3
39.5
36.0
3.5
29.3
10.0

77.8
55.3
18.2
39.2
36.0
3.1
38.7
20.5

66.3
42.9
16.6
44.8
40.7
4.1
21.5
4.9

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ In 2003, up to September.
2/ For 2003, average for January to October.
3/ In 2003, up to October.
4/ The fiscal numbers are for fiscal year which was changed from July–June to April–March effective 2001/02.

- 36 -

Table 2. Kuwait: Summary of Government Finance, 2000/01–2008/09 1/

Budget
2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Projections
2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Total revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income and transfer

8,505
6,037

6,995
4,525

7,707
5,499

3,397
2,971

7,747
5,340

7,175
4,761

6,837
4,393

6,640
4,158

6,633
4,115

6,714
4,156

1,991

1,751

1,619

…

1,800

1,832

1,863

1,894

1,923

1,952

476
0

718
1

563
26

392
34

580
27

580
2

579
2

586
2

594
2

604
2

4,279
3,935
1,573
985

4,729
4,299
1,636
1,062

4,848
4,285
1,706
1,200

5,666
4,761
1,834
1,421

5,390
4,757
1,779
1,378

5,487
4,854
1,850
1,392

5,578
4,945
1,915
1,406

5,672
5,039
1,982
1,420

5,758
5,125
2,041
1,434

5,847
5,214
2,103
1,449

249

213

124

49

142

141

139

138

137

135

0
91
1,036
344

0
97
1,291
430

0
61
1,194
563

0
85
1,372
905

0
85
1,372
634

0
85
1,386
634

0
85
1,400
634

0
85
1,414
634

0
85
1,428
634

0
85
1,442
634

Overall balance
Overall balance exc. oil rev.

4,226
-1,811

2,266
-2,259

2,765 -2,270
-2,640 -5,240

2,357
-2,983

1,688
-3,073

1,258
-3,135

968
-3,190

875
-3,240

867
-3,289

Financing
Domestic (net)
Banks
Nonbanks
External
Reserve funds

-4,226
-303
-438
135
0
-3,923

-2,266
-135
-169
34
0
-2,131

-2,765
-162
-196
34
0
-2,603

-2,357
-248
-282
34
0
-2,109

-1,688
-168
-202
34
0
-1,520

-1,258
-117
-151
34
0
-1,142

-968
-82
-116
34
0
-886

-875
-71
-105
34
0
-804

-867
-70
-104
34
0
-797

55.0
35.4
15.0
4.7
44.9
39.8
15.4
11.3
1.1
11.3
5.1
10.1
-43.7

52.9
33.1
15.1
4.7
45.2
40.2
15.8
11.3
1.1
11.3
5.0
7.7
-42.3

51.6
32.0
15.0
4.6
44.8
39.9
15.9
11.2
1.1
11.1
4.9
6.8
-41.1

50.7
31.4
14.7
4.6
44.2
39.4
15.9
10.9
1.0
10.9
4.8
6.5
-39.8

of profits of public entities 2/
Other current revenue3/
Capital revenue
Total expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest on domestic debt 4/
Interest on foreign debt 2/
Transfers abroad
Subsidies and transfers
Capital

2,270
....
....
....
....
....

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income
Other
Expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and noninterest services
Interest on domestic and foreign deb
Subsidies and transfers
Capital
Overall balance
Non-oil deficit/Non-oil GDP

77.8
55.3
18.2
4.4
39.2
36.0
14.4
9.0
2.3
9.5
3.1
38.7
-33.8

66.3
42.9
16.6
6.8
44.8
40.7
15.5
10.1
2.0
12.2
4.1
21.5
-40.2

68.6
49.0
14.4
5.0
43.2
38.2
15.2
10.7
1.1
10.6
5.0
24.6
-44.0

26.9
23.5
....
3.1
44.8
37.7
14.5
11.2
0.0
10.9
7.2
-18.0
...

61.3
42.3
14.2
4.6
42.6
37.6
14.1
10.9
1.1
10.9
5.0
18.6
-46.4

57.6
38.2
14.7
4.7
44.1
39.0
14.9
11.2
1.1
11.1
5.1
13.6
-45.1

- 37 -

Table 2. Kuwait: Summary of Government Finance, 2000/01–2008/09 1/

Budget
2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Projections
2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

(In percent of GDP)
Memorandum items:
Overall balance (excluding investment
income and profit transfers)
2,235
(In percent of GDP)
20.5
Average Kuwait oil export price ($/b)
23.1

515
4.9
21.6

1,146 -2,270
10.2 -18.0
23.6
...

557
4.4
25.1

-144
-1.2
23.0

-604
-4.9
21.1

-926
-7.4
19.9

-1,048
-8.2
19.5

-1,086
-8.2
19.5

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year has been changed to April-March effective 2001/02. The 2000/01 data were obtained by grossing up the 2000/01
(9-month) fiscal data.
2/ Excluded from national budget presentation.
3/ Excludes revenues from utility tariffs (included in the national budget presentation), but includes UN (Iraq) compensations.
4/ Covers interest on treasury bills and bonds, and on DCP bonds. Only the latter is included in the national budget presentation.

- 38 -

Table 3. Kuwait: Summary Balance of Payments, 2000–08
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Current account
Goods (trade balance)
Exports
Oil exports
Non-oil exports including re-exports
Of which: re-exports
Imports
Services
Transportation
Travel

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

14,672

8,328

4,190

8,046

2004

Projections
2005
2006

2007

2008

6,482

5,973

4,789

3,957

5,826

13,025

9,197

7,247

10,751

8,150

7,156

5,840

5,157

4,838

19,476

16,246

15,365

20,992

19,045

17,107

16,303

16,106

16,296

18,184

14,976

14,058

18,784

16,736

15,501

14,632

14,375

14,502

1,292

1,270

1,307

2,207

2,309

1,605

1,671

1,731

1,794

209

203

216

967

1,012

432

450

466

483

-6,451

-7,049

-8,118

-10,241

-10,896

-9,950

-10,463

-10,949

-11,458

-3,096

-3,693

-4,271

-4,669

-5,049

-5,180

-5,547

-5,689

-5,970

-153

-372

-619

-772

-871

-819

-1,001

-966

-1,063

-2,396

-2,741

-2,902

-3,109

-3,308

-3,485

-3,665

-3,835

-4,014

Other services

-547

-580

-750

-788

-870

-875

-882

-888

-894

Investment income

6,699

4,903

3,359

4,414

6,109

7,013

8,852

8,956

9,055

7,315

5,428

3,724

4,786

6,496

7,462

9,323

9,448

9,571

4,704

3,673

2,796

3,416

4,472

5,199

6,546

6,710

6,870

2,611
-616

1,755
-525

928
-365

1,369
-371

2,024
-388

2,263
-449

2,777
-470

2,738
-493

2,701
-516

-16
-600
-1,956

-52
-473
-2,079

-13
-352
-2,145

-15
-356
-2,451

-24
-364
-2,728

-65
-384
-3,017

-65
-405
-3,320

-65
-427
-3,636

-65
-451
-3,966

-11,555
2,217

-3,382
2,933

-3,489
1,668

-10,425
1,650

-5,642
993

-4,969
1,000

-4,659
1,167

-3,513
1,333

-2,671
1,350

-13,772
319

-6,315
-512

-5,157
165

-12,075
-250

-6,636
-300

-5,969
-50

-5,826
-10

-4,846
40

-4,021
100

303
16
-12,667

-365
-147
-7,447

158
7
-3,265

-350
100
-8,520

-500
200
-5,372

-350
300
-4,950

-350
340
-4,828

-350
390
-3,969

-350
450
-3,280

-12,921

-7,369

-3,426

-8,739

-5,510

-5,077

-4,952

-4,070

-3,364

254
-1,424
-274

-78
1,644
470

161
-2,057
-405

218
-3,304
-394

138
-964
171

127
-969
103

124
-988
72

102
-918
21

84
-842
11

Loans
Currency and deposits
Other

-489
-1,040
378

-42
2,055
-838

-270
-1,504
122

-268
-2,688
45

-216
-959
41

-199
-923
50

-194
-913
47

-160
-839
60

-132
-780
60

Net errors and omissions 3/

-876

-2,119

-1,443

472

0

0

0

0

0

2,241

2,827

-741

-1,907

840

1,003

1,167

1,276

1,286

-2,241

-2,827

741

1,907

-840

-1,003

-1,167

-1,276

-1,286

Receipts
General government 1/
Other sectors 2/
Payments
General government
Other
Current transfers
Capital and financial account
Capital account (UN compensation)
Financial account
Direct investment
Abroad
In reporting country
Portfolio investment
Assets
Liabilities
Other investment
Trade credits

Overall balance
International reserve assets (-increase) 4/

- 39 -

Table 3. Kuwait: Summary Balance of Payments, 2000–08
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

Current account/GDP

39.6

24.3

11.9

19.0

15.6

14.4

Overall balance/GDP

6.1

8.3

-2.1

-4.5

2.0

2.4

2004

Projections
2005
2006

2007

2008

14.0

11.3

9.0

2.8

3.0

2.9

Memorandum items

International reserve assets (US$ millions) 4/

7,170

9,997

9,256

7,348

8,188

9,191

10,358

11,634

12,920

Total reserves minus gold

7,066

9,894

9,150

7,244

8,084

9,087

10,254

11,530

12,816

Gold (national valuation)

104

103

106

104.2

104.2

104.2

104.2

104.2

104.2

In months of imports of goods and services

7.4

9.7

8.3

5.6

6.0

7.1

7.7

8.4

9.0

Source: Central Bank of Kuwait, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Kuwait Investment Authority, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, Public Institute for
Social Security, Kuwait Airways Corporation, and Bank of Credit and Savings.
2/ CBK, local banks, investment, exchange, and insurance companies, and non-financial private sector.
3/ Includes other unclassified private sector flows.
4/ As reported in the international investment position table in the Statistical Appendix.

- 40 Table 4. Kuwait: Monetary Survey, 1998–2004

End of period

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

Proj.
2004

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Foreign assets (net)
Central bank
Local banks

1,784
1,080
704

1,899
1,320
579

2,778
2,005
773

3,307
2,850
457

2,930
2,521
409

2,600
1,950
650

3,001
2,202
799

Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Central bank (net)
Claims
Deposits
Local banks (net)
Claims
Government debt bonds
Public debt instruments
Other claims
Deposits

5,773
3,678
-205
0
205
3,883
4,140
2,246
1,895
0
257

5,780
3,475
-392
45
437
3,867
4,062
1,931
2,132
0
195

5,386
2,911
-532
0
532
3,443
3,628
1,491
2,137
0
185

5,902
2,573
-598
0
598
3,171
3,402
1,294
2,108
0
231

6,716
2,595
-354
0
354
2,949
3,248
1,006
2,242
0
299

8,256
2,257
-454
0
454
2,711
3,027
885
2,142
0
316

8,652
2,043
-483
0
483
2,526
2,883
624
2,259
0
357

5,303
4,802
501
-3,209

5,572
5,015
557
-3,268

5,871
5,252
619
-3,396

6,851
6,125
726
-3,522

7,824
6,954
870
-3,703

9,613
8,801
811
-3,614

10,222
9,360
863
-3,614

7,557
1,143
6,413
1,037

7,678
1,371
6,307
881

8,163
1,468
6,695
895

9,209
1,641
7,567
892

9,646
2,067
7,580
904

10,856
2,515
8,341
1,135

11,653
2,696
8,957
1,219

Claims on nongovernment sector
Credit facilities
Local investments
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

(Annual percentage change)
Foreign assets (net)
Central Bank
Local banks

-7.5
4.5
-21.4

6.4
22.2
-17.7

46.3
51.9
33.5

19.0
42.2
-40.9

-11.4
-11.6
-10.3

-11.3
-22.6
58.8

15.4
12.9
23.0

Domestic assets (net)
Claims on Government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)

1.5
-2.7
11.8
-13.0

0.1
-5.5
5.1
-1.8

-6.8
-16.2
5.4
-3.9

9.6
-11.6
16.7
-3.7

13.8
0.8
14.2
-5.1

22.9
-13.0
22.9
2.4

4.8
-9.5
6.3
0.0

Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

-0.8
-8.3
0.7
-10.1

1.6
19.9
-1.7
-15.1

6.3
7.0
6.2
1.6

12.8
11.8
13.0
-0.3

4.8
25.9
0.2
1.3

12.5
21.7
10.1
25.6

7.3
7.2
7.4
7.4

(Change in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Foreign assets (net)
Central bank
Local banks

-1.9
0.6
-2.5

1.5
3.2
-1.7

11.4
8.9
2.5

6.5
10.4
-3.9

-4.1
-3.6
-0.5

-3.4
-5.9
2.5

3.7
2.3
1.4

Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)

1.1
-1.4
7.3
-4.8

0.1
-2.7
3.6
-0.8

-5.1
-7.3
3.9
-1.7

6.3
-4.1
12.0
-1.5

8.8
0.2
10.6
-2.0

16.0
-3.5
18.5
0.9

3.7
-2.0
5.6
0.0

Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

-0.8
-1.4
0.6
-1.5

1.6
3.0
-1.4
-2.1

6.3
1.3
5.1
0.2

12.8
2.1
10.7
0.0

4.8
4.6
0.1
0.1

12.5
4.6
7.9
2.4

7.3
1.7
5.7
0.8

5.3

0.7

-2.9

7.3

10.6

13.9

3.3

Memorandum items
Net domestic credit (annual percentage change)

Sources: Central Bank of Kuwait and Fund staff estimates and projections.

46.4
26.4
16.6
48.7
43.1
5.6
-2.3
-18.9
-48.7
40.8
32.7
-48.2
22.6
8.5
88.8
30.5
58.3
18.5
6.2
12.2
27.0

Public finance 1/
Revenue, of which :
Oil and gas
Investment income 2/
Expenditure
Current
Capital
Fiscal balance (deficit -)
Fiscal balance excluding investment income (deficit -)
Non-oil fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)

Balance of payments 3/
Exports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Of which : oil and refined products
Imports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Investment income (net)
Current account

Saving-investment balance 3/
Final consumption
Government
Private
Gross domestic investment
Government
Private
Savings
78.9
26.9
52.1
14.6
4.6
10.0
31.4

43.8
36.9
-37.3
17.1
16.6

68.7
46.7
19.3
39.5
36.0
3.5
29.3
10.0
-34.3

9,170
16.0
3.9
-1.7
-6.5
2.2
16.1
1.87

1999

65.5
21.9
43.7
7.6
3.1
4.6
47.3

55.7
49.1
-28.9
18.1
39.6

77.8
55.3
18.2
39.2
36.0
3.1
38.7
20.5
-33.8

11,357
23.8
3.5
1.9
2.3
1.8
25.0
1.98

2000

75.3
24.0
51.2
8.7
3.7
5.0
32.8

49.3
42.8
-33.8
14.0
24.3

66.3
42.9
16.6
44.8
40.7
4.1
21.5
4.9
-40.2

10,496
-7.6
4.2
0.6
-3.2
3.4
21.2
1.95

2001

82.2
26.4
55.8
9.1
4.9
4.2
21.2

45.5
39.2
-37.4
9.4
11.9

68.6
49.0
14.4
43.2
38.2
5.0
24.6
10.2
-44.0

10,738
2.3
6.6
-0.4
-8.0
5.0
22.9
1.75

2002

69.7
24.4
45.3
16.0
4.9
11.1
35.0

47.6
44.3
-33.2
10.4
19.0

61.3
42.3
14.2
42.6
37.6
5.0
18.6
4.4
-46.4

12,696
18.2
7.1
9.9
15.5
6.5
25.6
2.03

Est.
2003

77.0
25.8
51.1
15.6
5.1
10.5
31.2

43.7
40.2
-36.3
14.7
15.6

57.6
38.2
14.7
44.1
39.0
5.1
13.6
-1.2
-45.1

12,471
-1.8
6.4
1.9
-2.4
4.5
23.5
1.97

2004

81.3
26.6
54.7
13.9
5.1
8.8
28.4

44.2
37.4
-39.5
16.9
14.4

55.0
35.4
15.0
44.9
39.8
5.1
10.1
-4.9
-43.7

12,410
-0.5
5.4
2.7
0.7
3.7
21.5
1.99

85.2
27.1
58.1
14.1
5.1
9.0
28.0

42.3
35.1
-41.6
21.2
14.0

52.9
33.1
15.1
45.2
40.2
5.0
7.7
-7.4
-42.3

12,482
0.6
5.2
2.7
1.0
3.5
20.0
2.01

2008

88.2
27.1
61.0
13.1
5.0
8.1
24.3

41.2
33.8
-42.4
21.1
11.3

51.6
32.0
15.0
44.8
39.9
4.9
6.8
-8.2
-41.1

89.3
26.8
62.5
13.3
4.8
8.4
22.3

40.5
33.0
-43.1
20.6
9.0

50.7
31.4
14.7
44.2
39.4
4.8
6.5
-8.2
-39.8

12,746 13,162
2.1
3.3
4.7
4.7
2.3
2.4
1.0
1.2
3.0
3.0
19.5
19.5
2.03
2.05

Baseline Scenario
2005
2006
2007

1/ On a fiscal year basis (July-June); since 2001/02, the fiscal year was changed to April-March. FY 2001/02 was obtained by grossing up the
2001/02 fiscal data.
2/ Includes profits of public enterprises.
3/ Domestic demand and net export do not add up to GDP because of the difference in available data coverage of balance of payments and national
accounts.

Sources: Kuwait authorities, IMF World Economic Outlook, and Fund staff estimates.

7,907
-14.1
5.9
3.6
1.8
5.2
10.3
2.05

Production and prices
Nominal GDP (KD millions)
Nominal GDP (percent change)
Nominal non-oil GDP (percent change)
Real GDP (percent change)
Real oil GDP (percent change)
Real non-oil GDP (percent change)
Kuwait crude export price (US$ per barrel)
Crude oil output (millions of barrels per day)

1998

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)

Table 5. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 1998–2008

- 41 -

- 42 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Vulnerability Indicators, 1998–2003
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

External solvency indicators
REER (CPI based, period average)
External debt including private sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Short-term debt (original maturity) 1/
Medium- and long-term debt 1/
External debt/GDP
External debt/total exports of goods and services
Short-term debt/total exports of goods and services
External debt service/total exports of goods and services

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

3.0
9,938
2,600
7,338
38.3
87.3
22.8
11.5

0.9
10,057
2,000
8,057
33.4
72.8
14.5
7.1

4.1
9,955
2,000
7,955
26.9
46.6
9.4
2.9

5.1
11,095
2,000
9,095
32.4
56.0
10.1
2.6

-1.0
12,939
2,000
10,939
36.6
69.6
10.8
2.0

-6.8
12,480
2,000
10,480
29.5
50.9
8.2
1.5

11/

54.0
7.0

46.5
3.1

34.9
2.9

35.8
3.0

32.3
1.6

26.4
1.8

12/

93.5
6.5
56.9

91.2
6.9
68.0

86.4
13.6
71.0

85.6
14.4
64.7

91.0
9.0
71.4

88.9
11.1
68.9

12/

3,545
3,552
3.2
136.6
238.9
93.7
14.3
2,308
5,866
3,558
88.7

4,336
4,344
4.4
217.2
226.7
96.3
17.2
1,901
5,869
3,968
90.2

6,535
6,547
6.8
327.4
373.5
136.2
24.6
2,519
6,415
3,896
93.4

9,297
9,308
9.0
465.4
549.6
174.6
30.9
1,489
6,612
5,123
92.2

8,295
8,334
7.6
416.7
423.1
120.8
26.1
1,347
8,032
6,686
91.5

6,508
6,575
5.4
328.7
443.6
78.3
18.0
2,170
7,795
5,625
89.5

-8.2
1.6
13.8
11.4
22.5

13.7
1.8
15.3
11.6
23.7

20.9
2.0
17.6
11.5
22.2

9.9
2.0
18.2
11.2
22.0

0.6
1.8
17.4
10.4
19.7

15.2
2.0
18.6
10.8
18.4

13/

8.8

8.6

8.7

9.0

9.6

9.8

13/

Public sector solvency indicators
General government domestic debt/GDP 2/
Interest payments/total revenue
Distribution of the public domestic debt by holders
Local commercial banks
Other (including nongovernment public institutions)
Oil revenue/total revenue
External liquidity indicators
CBK net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
CBK gross foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) 3/
In months of imports of goods and services
Relative to short-term external debt
Relative to M0
Relative to M1
Total official net foreign assets/M3
Local banks' net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities
Oil exports/total exports

12/

Financial sector indicators
Increase in net bank profits 4/
Ratio of net profits to total bank assets
Ratio of net profits to total shareholders' equity
Banks' capital-asset ratio
Banks risk-weighted capital-asset ratio
Banks' leverage 5/

13/
13/
13/
13/

- 43 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Vulnerability Indicators, 1998–2003
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Est.
2003

15.5
10.3
7.3
3.0
68.2

17.6
12.8
6.8
6.0
53.2

16.3
19.2
12.8
6.4
50.1

14.8
10.3
5.1
5.2
53.7

14.0
7.8
4.8
3.0
64.3

13.0
7.0
4.1
2.9
72.4

13/

6.1

4.3

4.7

6.3

5.7

5.6

13/

17.5
23.6

19.9
24.3

16.3
21.0

19.0
25.3

18.7
24.4

18.7
24.3

13/

19.9
57.3
77.2

14.4
66.5
80.9

15.7
53.9
69.6

22.9
69.3
92.2

22.5
73.3
95.8

...
...
...

0.8
38.6

0.4
39.5

-0.6
37.4

0.4
31.5

0.9
31.4

0.7
...

Financial sector indicators
Banks' liquidity ratio 6/
Ratio of banks' nonperforming loans to total loans
Nonperforming loans from before invasion
Nonperforming loans since liberation
Loan provisions as a proportion of nonperforming loans
Ratio of bank lending to total domestic credit facilities
Stock market-related
Real estate 7/
Total (stock market, real estate)
Ratio of bank lending to banks' own funds
Stock market-related
Real estate 7/
Total (stock market, real estate)
Banks' interest rate spread 8/
Investment companies' capital and reserve/total assets

13/
13/
13/
13/

13/

14/

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Net foreign assets of local banks

703.5

578.7

772.8

456.5

409.3

650.1

Net foreign assets of investment companies 9/
Open foreign exchange position of banks 10/

601.3
26.0

705.5
19.4

794.8
6.8

667.1
-13.5

709.0
-12.5

699.0
...

Source: Central Bank of Kuwait, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Estimates based on ratios computed from the joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank database.
2/ Treasury bills and bonds, and debt purchase bonds.
3/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.
4/ For net profits in 1998 and 1999, excluding two banks not listed in the Kuwait Stock Exchange.
5/ Ratio of total liabilities to banks' own funds.
6/ Ratio of liquid assets (cash, central bank current deposits, and treasury bills and bonds) to total assets.
7/ Ratios may be overestimated due to loan classification problems by the local banks.
8/ Calculated as the difference between 3- month deposits rates in KD relative to the 3-month deposit rates in US$.
9/ Equals nonresident assets minus nonresident liabilities, excluding own funds.
10/ A (-) sign indicates a short position.
11/ January-August.
12/ As of end-September 2003.
13/ As of end-June 2003.
14/ Data covers January-September 2003.

13/

- 44 -

APPENDIX I

KUWAIT
Fund Relations
(As of October 31, 2003)
I.

Membership Status: Joined September 13, 1962
Article VIII on April 5, 1963

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

SDR Million
1,381.10
855.36
525.74
SDR Million
26.74
105.33

% Quota
100.00
61.93
38.07
% Allocation
100.00
393.84

Since January 1, 2003, the Kuwaiti dinar has been pegged to the U.S. dollar. The decision to
peg the dinar to the U.S. dollar reflected plans to create a single currency for the six members
of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). Previously, the Kuwaiti
dinar was pegged to a U.S. dollar-dominated basket of currencies. The central bank normally
maintains buying/selling rates for the U.S. dollar at one-sixteenth of 1 percent on either side
of the Kuwaiti dinar exchange rate: US$1=KD 0.29387 as of end-October 2003.
VIII.

Article IV Consultations:

The latest Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on
December 13, 2002. The staff report and the associated Selected Issues and Statistical
Appendix were issued in November 2002, Country Report No. 03/13.

- 45 -

IX.

APPENDIX I

FSAP Participation

A FSAP exercise was conducted in September 2003 in order to assess three international
standards and codes (banking, securities, and AML/CFT). A FSSA report is currently under
preparation and will be discussed by the Executive Board along with the staff report for the
2003 Article IV consultation.
X.

XI.

Technical Assistance:
FAD
MAE
FAD
STA
FAD

Advisory mission
Advice on bank report forms
Advice on fiscal reform
Multi-topic statistics mission
Budget advisor

MED
MAE
STA
MAE
MAE
MAE
MAE
INS
MAE
STA
STA
FAD
FAD

Macroeconomic model
Early warning system and banks supervision
Balance of payments statistics
Monetary policy instruments
Early warning system
Monetary policy issues
Bank supervision
Financial programming
Bank deposit insurance scheme
Seminar on GDDS
National Accounts and Price Statistics
Restructuring Budget Processes
Kuwait: A Program for Tax Reform

April 1992
October 1992
February–March 1993
April–May 1994
September 1993–
October 1994
September 1996
May 1997
November 1998
November 1998
December 1998
March 1999
April 1999
April 1999
October/November 1999
February 2000
June 2001–June 2002
January/February 2002
December 2002

Resident Representative: None

XII. Kuwait has consented to the quota increase under the Eleventh General Review of
Quotas; it has accepted the Fourth Amendment of the Articles of Agreement.

- 46 -

APPENDIX II

KUWAIT
Relations with the World Bank Group
As of November 30, 2003
At the request of the Kuwait government, the World Bank has been providing Kuwait with
technical assistance in the following broad areas:
•
Post-war reconstruction: In January 1991, the Bank submitted to the government a
report, Kuwait: Emergency Relief Program that included action plans and a framework for
reconstruction following liberation.
•
Privatization: The World Bank has carried out a study of privatization strategies in
the industrial, services, health, telecommunications, power, ports, and transportation sectors,
(World Bank, Kuwait: A Privatization Strategy, Washington, 1993); assisted delegations
from the National Assembly and the KIA in studying worldwide experience in the
implementation of privatization (1994-97); and provided assistance on the draft and
privatization law. In addition, the World Bank has been advising the Kuwait Investment
Authority (KIA) on the divestiture phase of the privatization program.
•
Development strategy: The Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) prepared
in 1995 focused on several issues (i) the role of government and public sector productivity;
(ii) fiscal policies and public saving; (iii) welfare and subsidization; and (iv) the labor market
and employment policies. The World Bank also provided the National Assembly with its
views on the draft Five-Year Plan (1996), in addition to providing advice on the draft reform
plan prepared by the Higher Committee for Economic Development and Reform over the
period 1998–99. Also, the World Bank in collaboration with Kuwait’s Higher Planning
Council, and Kuwait University has in early March 2001 completed a study entitled
“Energizing the Private Sector” in Kuwait. In 2002, the World Bank is conducting various
missions in land policy, power sector reform, telecommunications, transportation, and
tourism to identify areas where technical assistance might be needed.
•
Reform implementation: Based on this recent study on “Energizing the Private
Sector,” as well as other technical assistance activities, the Government of Kuwait has
requested World Bank assistance in implementation of the various reform initiatives,
including the institutional set-up for an implementation agency. The Government of Kuwait
and the World Bank are currently exploring mechanisms for more World Bank technical
assistance involvement in this regard.
•
Investment environment: The World Bank’s recent technical assistance
relationship with the Kuwaiti authorities has concentrated on enhancing the investment
environment, with work on the FDI law, identification of policy and administrative

- 47 -

APPENDIX II

impediments to investment, and development of a competition law and policy. A presentation
was made on investment promotion, investment climate, and FDI regulations in 2002.
Further, the World Bank initiated the FDI Bylaw and provided technical assistance on the
negative restricted list.
•
Public awareness: As a first step to support the Economic Reform Program, the
Bank began managing on behalf of the government a Public Awareness Campaign for its
reform agenda in April 2001.
•
Transparency and anti-corruption: At the request of the government, a scoping
mission was conducted in September 2002. One central objective of the mission was to
develop the Terms of Reference (TORs) and identify the key institutions to be involved. The
Council of Ministers assigned the responsibility for developing the Transparency and AntiCorruption Strategy to the Citizens Services and Governmental Bodies Assessment Agency.
A working group was also formed based on Bank recommendation. Last June, a Bank
mission produced a report, “Toward a Comprehensive Transparency and Anti-Corruption
Strategy in Kuwait.” The report proposed a number of measures that could be initiated in the
short term, as well as a framework that encompassed the main elements of a long-term
strategy. Next step is to organize a high-level workshop on international experience and
strategies currently planned for early 2004.
•
Small business promotion: The World Bank has provided technical assistance,
which has led to the establishment of the Kuwait Small Projects Development Company
(KSPDC). The World Bank is currently advising KSPDC on its operations.
•
Labor market: The World Bank, in partnership with Kuwait Institute for Scientific
Research (KISR), carried out a labor market study. The study includes a household survey,
and an employee/employer survey. The study was conducted at the request of the Higher
Committee for Economic Reform and Development and was completed in January 1999. In
March 1999, a presentation of the main recommendations of the study was made to the
government. The presentation was attended by three ministers, namely Finance, Planning and
Education. Some recommendations of the study were proposed by the government for
legislative approval.
•
Employment generation: As a follow up to the Labor Market Study, the
government requested Bank support in creating private sector jobs for Kuwaitis. A Bank
mission visited Kuwait in late August 2003 to develop the Terms of Reference for this
activity.
•
Education Sector Reform: Following the successful completion of “Education
Expenditure Analysis” study, the government sought Bank assistance in implementing the
recommendations. It was agreed to focus on these issues: (i) indicators for general education
system; (ii) introducing program budgeting; and (iii) carrying out more in-depth analysis on
the financing issues and of the costs at school level. This is expected to be carried out in four

- 48 -

APPENDIX II

phases. Phase one, which includes development of indicators, has started and a mission
visited Kuwait in late last June. A larger mission visited Kuwait in September 2003 to
continue the development of indicators and begin work on program budgeting for education.
•
Kuwait health sector: The government recently requested Bank support in assessing
the general performance of the health sector and in identifying areas of potential reform, and
missions were sent in October 2002 and January 2003. The study (June 2003) provided a
general overview of the main issues facing the health sector plus special coverage of five
priority areas identified by the government: (i) developing the National Health Accounts
(NHA), and financing the expatriate health insurance system; (ii) hospital accreditation and
quality; (iii) regulation of private health insurance; (iv) assessing hospital efficiency; and
(v) program budgeting for the health sector.
•
Telecommunications: The Bank received a request from the government in 2002 to
develop a Sector Reform Strategy and an implementation action plan. Both have been
completed. Recently the government appointed KMPG as advisor on sector reform. Bank
will continue to advise government on strategic sector reform issues and help supervise their
advisors.
•
Power and water strategy: Two draft reports, one on possible LNG options and the
other on reforms in the power and waters sector, were submitted to government for
comments in early August. The next steps include several tasks: (i) developing the
government’s vision for the development of the electricity and water sectors; (ii) working out
key principles for a legal and regulatory framework and the role for an independent
regulatory agency; (iii) determining options for industry restructuring; (iv) discussing various
options with key stakeholders; and (v) working out an implementation plan.
•
Concessions/BOT: Based on the Concessions Study submitted in early 2002,
implementation steps for the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) were sent to the government. In
addition to addressing the background of the BOT issue, the note identified the required
decisions and responsibilities of the various ministries and departments, and included TORs
for a BOT Manager and a Value-for-Money Committee.
•
Public private partnerships: The project is in the early stages of being defined with
the government—(with its focus on its scope and plan of action. The government is
considering combining current Concessions/BOT activity with the planned PPP project.
•
Land Transport Reform: In July 2002, Kuwait launched an initiative to explore
options for reforming its public transport sector, and requested Bank assistance in a Land
Transport Sector Reform project consisting of two phases. Phase I (completed August 2002)
addressed sector shortcomings in policy, strategy, regulations, and service. Phase II
(completed August 2003) recommended interventions, the institution of a “Land Transport
Regulatory Authority” to focus on near term needs and private sector participation. The next
steps will be to finalize the regulatory strategy and decrees; structure future industry

- 49 -

APPENDIX II

including Public Transport Corporation (KPTC); and prepare a transition package for
privatization.
•
Bubyan Port Strategic Assessment: This pre-feasibility study was requested in July
and implemented on an accelerated basis. Consultants provided their draft final report
August 8 for Bank review. Project was completed in September 2003.
•
Land Policy: Land management in Kuwait is in transition. A review of the existing
situation in the land and real estate was prepared. The review identified barriers for more
productive and efficient use of urban land and set out an action plan for the sector. The
review and action plan were submitted in October 2002.
•
Housing Policy: As a follow up to the work done on land policy, a study on housing
subsidies was conducted by the Bank. A draft report entitled “A Study of the Housing
Benefits Program” was delivered to government for comments last May.
•
Competition Policy: Work began in July 2002 and included: (a) preliminary
assessment of laws and policies in place as they interface with or impact competition policy;
and (b) provision of a draft outline of the type of competition law/policy that Kuwait may
wish to consider. The report was finalized in October 2002, and the letter of invitation and
the TOR for law firms to engage in the drafting of the competition law/policy were sent in
January 2003.
•
General public reform: The World Bank has been advising government on various
reform initiatives, and has provided ad hoc technical assistance on various topics. In
November 2000, the Bank finalized an Evaluation of the Offset Program in Kuwait, which
assessed the current structure and presented options for reform. As for ad hoc issues, the
Bank made a presentation to high-level decision makers on WTO issues and how Kuwait can
benefit from its membership in WTO.

- 50 -

APPENDIX III

KUWAIT
Statistical Issues
National Accounts and Production
The Central Statistical Office has prepared estimates of GDP at both current and constant
prices through 2002 (the 2002 estimates are still provisional). Recent improvements of
national accounts include: change of the base year for the constant price data from 1984 to
1995; and improvements in the estimates of value-added for subsidized-goods and services of
the public utilities sector through the use of input costs (the household expenditure survey
was used previously). The estimates of GDP have been published at the Central Statistical
Office website. Starting from the final 2002 data, further improvements will be made to
national accounts reflecting the adoption of the SNA 1993 data collection system and a
sampling frame based on the establishment survey (2002), and the expansion of the coverage
of questionnaires. Continued progress, especially in the estimation of value-added data for
the oil sector, requires the dedication of adequate resources and improved coordination
between the Ministries of Planning, Oil, and Finance. STA has provided the Ministry of
Planning with technical assistance (including fielding of a resident expert) in a project to
evaluate and enhance Kuwait’s national accounts and price data. It would also be useful if the
Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) would publish oil sector information in the Quarterly
Statistical Bulletin pertaining to output, refining, domestic consumption, export price for
crude and refined products and the domestic price of petroleum products. These data are
readily available from the Ministry of Oil.
Price Statistics
The household expenditure survey (2000) has been completed, and a revised basket of goods
and services for the consumer price index (CPI) was finalized by the end of 2001. Improved
monthly CPI based on a revised basket has been published in monthly CPI bulletins with
about a two months lag. The wholesale price index (WPI) needs to be revised to a more
modern statistical measure, such as a producer price index (PPI), which is also more useful
for national accounting needs. Also, consideration should be given to compiling data on
wage rates and developments in the private sector.
Government Finance Statistics
Kuwait reports regularly annual GFS data for publication in the Government Finance
Statistics Yearbook (GFSY) and monthly GFS data for publication in IFS. However, since
1987, Kuwait has not reported major components of its extrabudgetary revenues (investment
income and transfers of profits of public institutions), extrabudgetary expenditures (interest
on foreign debt and treasury paper), and financing operations conducted by two reserve
funds. Data on investment income, and on interest on foreign debt and treasury paper,
however, are usually provided to Article IV consultation missions. The authorities have made

- 51 -

APPENDIX III

some progress in fiscal data presentation, but the lack of a suitable classification of data on
the execution of the budget remains a constraint on monitoring effectively fiscal
developments during the year. Moreover, data on the operations of the Public Institute for
Social Security are not made available. Much of the weaknesses in the fiscal accounts stem
from the limitations on the sharing of information between various government agencies.
STA has indicated to the authorities that operations of the two reserve funds should be
classified as part of government as they perform activities for public policy purposes
(management of debt and assets, and financing of the budget).1 The authorities have also
been briefed on the IMF’s ongoing work to enhance the transparency of fiscal accounts and
presentations detailed in the “Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency” and were
encouraged to adopt some of the practices recommended in the Code. According to the FAD
report entitled “Restructuring Budget Processes” which was finalized in March 2002, the
weakest part of the Kuwaiti Public Expenditure Management (PEM) system is the accounting
system.2
Money and Banking Statistics
Money and banking data are reported on a regular and timely basis. Coverage in IFS of the
data on deposit money banks and other banking institutions for January 1981 onward was
revised according to recommendations of the 1994 STA multisector mission. On an issue
noted by that mission it was clarified that the Savings and Credit Bank (SCB) does not accept
transferable deposits from the public. Nevertheless, the status of the SCB remains to be
ascertained to determine its proper sectorization.
Balance of Payments Statistics
Kuwait’s balance of payments data have undergone substantial improvement, both in
coverage and methodology. Since the beginning of 1997, the CBK has compiled and
disseminated detailed annual data in accordance with the methodology of the BPM5.
Quarterly balance of payments and a detailed annual statement of Kuwait’s international
investment position have also been compiled since 1997 by the CBK and provided to
Article IV consultation missions. Data on capital flows of the nonfinancial private sector
(including foreign direct investment abroad and portfolio investment abroad) are currently
not being compiled but measures are being taken (including collaboration between the CBK
and the Tax Department of the Ministry of Finance) to correct this omission (which has led to
a large “errors and omissions” item in the BOP statistics). Enhancements were made in the

1

During a GFS seminar in Kuwait in June 1999 and in correspondence with the Ministry of
Finance in August 1999.

2

The mission was conducted by the FAD in January/February 2002 at the request of
H. E. Dr. Yousef Al-Ebraheem.

- 52 -

APPENDIX III

estimation of travel services, but further improvements are needed in compilation practices
and in the estimation of data on several service items and private transfers.
F.

Data dissemination

Kuwait is a participant in the GDDS, and its metadata were last updated in the Fund’s DSBB
in October 2002. In preparation for the eventual move to the SDDS, the CBK has established
its own webpage, which contains the following data that are made available online to the
public: money and banking (monthly); balance of payments (annually); trade balance
(monthly); exchange rate (average, monthly); GDP by sector and expenditure at current and
constant prices (annually); public finance (selected data are available monthly); CPI and WPI
(monthly with about a three-month lag); and securities market indicators (quarterly).
Similarly, the Ministry of Planning has constructed a webpage corresponding to the CSO,
which publishes data on national accounts, prices, and other related statistics. The Ministry of
Finance’s webpage includes elaborated data for the actual and estimated budget. In addition,
the KIA’s webpage provides data on stock market indices, volume and value of securities
traded, as well as privatization schedules and other related information.

Kuwait: Core Statistical Indicators, as of December 11, 2003

International
Reserves 1/

Date of latest
observation

11/03

11/03

11/03

11/03

11/03

11/03

07/03

09/03

2002

FY2002/03

2002

...

Date
received

12/03

12/03

12/03

12/03

12/03

12/03

10/03

10/03

10/03

10/03

10/03

...

Frequency of
data

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

A

A 3/

A

...

Frequency of
reporting

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

A

A

A

...

CBK

CBK

Ministry of
Finance

CSO

...

CTA
Reports,
QSB

STA
Reports,
QSB,
on-line

STA
Reports,
QSB

STA
Reports,
QSB

...

Source of
update

Central
Bank of
Kuwait
(CBK)

Mode of
reporting

Reserve/
Base
Money

Broad
Money

Interest
Rates

Consumer
Price
Index

Central
Statistical
Office
(CSO)

Exports/
Imports

Current
Account
Balance

Overall
Government
Balance 2/

GDP/
GNP

External
Debt/
Debt
Service 7/

CBK

CBK

CBK

CBK

CBK

Fax
QSB 4/
MMS 5/

STA
Reports,
QSB, MMS,
on-line

STA
Reports,
QSB,
MMS,
on-line

STA
Reports,
QSB,
MMS,
on-line

STA
Reports,
QSB,
MMS,
on-line

STA
Reports,
QSB,
MMS,
on-line

Confidentiality 6/

U

U

U

U

U

U

U

U

U

U

U

...

Frequency of
Publication

M

Q

M, Q 5/

M, Q

M, Q

M

M

Q

A

Not pub. on
Fund
standards

A

...

APPENDIX III

1/ Central Bank of Kuwait only. Government external assets are confidential.
2/ Fiscal year data only.
3/ Higher frequency data available only in national format.
4/ Quarterly Statistical Bulletin.
5/ Monthly Monetary Statistics.
6/ U stands for Unrestricted.
7/ Except for a small volume of trade credits, Kuwait has no public external debt.

QSB,
STA
Reports

- 53 -

Exchange
Rates

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

Statement by A. Shakour Shaalan, Executive Director for Kuwait
February 9, 2004

1. The Kuwaiti economy has once again coped well with a difficult regional situation and
swings in oil prices, thanks to the authorities’ relentless pursuit of stability-oriented
policies and reforms to diversify the economy’s productive base. The implementation of
prudent fiscal policies, including restraint in public expenditures, as well as the existence
of a sound and well-supervised banking system have helped the economy withstand the
financial repercussion of fluctuating oil-related revenues and maintained confidence
during and in the period leading to the conflict in the region.
2. The significant decline in oil GDP growth in 2002 was offset to a large extent by a robust
and broad-based growth in the non-oil sector, which continued in 2003. This reflected the
environment of stable exchange rate and low interest rates, and strong consumer and
investor confidence in spite of the regional tension. Stability in the region and the
resumption of trade relations with neighboring Iraq is likely to further improve the
prospects for the non-oil sector. The boom in the real estate prices, the acceleration of the
stock market and the sharp increase in domestic credit demand also attest to the enhanced
confidence in the economy’s outlook.
3. Despite the uncertainties and security concerns associated with the Iraq war, which
fortunately was short-lived, the authorities persisted in implementing the structural
reform agenda, albeit at an understandably slower pace than they had hoped for. Notable
advances were made in labor market reform, privatization, and strengthening the
financial sector.
4. Looking forward, while the economy’s outlook remains favorable over the medium term,
the authorities are aware of the need to address the challenges of increasing employment
opportunities for the growing labor force and reducing the economy’s high dependence
on oil, while ensuring intergenerational equity. They are determined to take advantage of
the current favorable environment and vigorously continue the pursuit of economic
policies aimed at strengthening public finance, further diversifying the economy, and
promoting private sector investment, both domestic and foreign.
5. Fiscal developments in the past two years affirm the authorities’ long-standing approach
to fiscal prudence whose hallmark has been expenditure restraint. In spite of increasing
demands on the budget engendered by high oil prices, the authorities maintained a
significant degree of spending discipline, which is reflected in a broadly unchanged ratio
of current spending to GDP over the past three years. In fact, in 2002/03 when oil
revenue increased by some 6 percentage points of GDP, total current spending was
reduced by over 2 percentage points of GDP. For the current fiscal year, strict control
over wages and public sector hiring is likely to result in a decline in the wage bill relative
to GDP. The prudent policy conduct has allowed the government to accumulate further
foreign assets in the Reserve Fund for Future Generations.

-26. Despite the broadly comfortable fiscal situation, the Kuwaiti authorities are keen to push
forward an ambitious fiscal reform strategy to speed up the accumulation of financial
assets for future generations on the one hand, and to reduce vulnerability of the budget to
oil price shocks on the other. An important step in this regard is the introduction of a
three-year rolling budget effective 2005/06 that would target the fiscal position net of
exogenous factors. The authorities intend to pursue their fiscal consolidation strategy in a
pragmatic and gradual manner to ensure broad support for the planned reforms. Policies
to reduce public employment and diversify the revenue base including through the
introduction of a value added tax, are best implemented along with the envisaged reforms
to promote the role of the private sector, in order to reduce their potential adverse social
impact on the population. Priority at this time is accorded to achieving a significant
reduction in current spending and improving the efficiency of capital outlays.
Consideration is given to control the wage bill by limiting employment in the public
sector, as well as better defining capital spending priorities. The authorities have already
initiated measures to strengthen budget and expenditure management in line with the
recommendations of the Fund technical assistance and are planning on carrying out other
Fund recommendations in this regard. On the revenue side, the authorities are
considering a number of measures to secure stable sources of revenue. They are planning
on raising the tariffs of publicly supplied goods and services for expatriates and Kuwaitis,
reforming the corporate income tax to extend its coverage to domestic companies, and
eventually introducing the value added tax.
7. Monetary policy in Kuwait continued to be prudent and aimed at maintaining stability of
the exchange rate under an open exchange and trade system. Deposit auctions for banks
are being used effectively by the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) to manage domestic
liquidity. The authorities moved to a peg with the US dollar as a step towards establishing
a Gulf Cooperation Council monetary union in 2010. Consistent with this objective, the
CBK will continue to monitor domestic interest rates and adjust its discount rate in line
with developments in global markets with a view to maintaining an interest rate
differential on domestic currency-denominated assets. The CBK will also maintain a
cautious monetary stance in 2004 to ensure that money and credit growth remains in line
with the expansion of non-oil activity.
8. The banking system remains sound and provides a solid supporting environment for the
private sector. The system is highly liquid, and well capitalized, regulated, and
supervised, and therefore, can withstand significant shocks as highlighted in the FSSA
report. Banks activity increased in recent years in line with economic growth, while their
financial soundness indicators improved, notably the significant decline in nonperforming loans and increased provisioning. In an effort to maintain the soundness of
the sector, the authorities strengthened supervision further in 2003, by adopting a
comprehensive regulatory and supervisory system in accordance with international
standards and practices. Additional measures were taken in 2003 to enhance risk
management and information disclosure in the banking system and a credit bureau was
established to help banks better assess credit risks. A recent legislation has also been
enacted to bring all Islamic banks under the supervision of the CBK including their
licensing. Furthermore, the amended Banking Law, which was approved by the National

-3Assembly in January of this year, will further strengthen the licensing power of the CBK,
deepen the financial sector by introducing new financial instruments, and enhance
efficiency and competition in the banking system by allowing the establishment of
foreign banks in Kuwait. Capital markets have also been deepened through the opening
of a parallel stock market, and consideration is given to introducing options, derivatives
and convertible bonds.
9. The authorities are committed to accelerating their reform agenda within a four year
action plan to reduce the role of the state in the economy and establish a friendly business
environment to encourage private investment and attract FDI, and have already initiated
efforts to this end. A comprehensive privatization law, which awaits approval by the
National Assembly will provide the legal and institutional framework for the government
to divest from major state enterprises, including water, electricity, telecommunications,
and ports. In the meantime, the authorities are focusing on promoting the role of the
private sector in areas that do not require approval by the National Assembly. They have
encouraged private sector participation in activities in the oil sector, health,
communications, and education services. The approval of the foreign direct investment
law by the National Assembly, which allows a 100 percent foreign ownership in Kuwaiti
companies and provides incentives for foreign investors, is an important step to attracting
foreign direct investment. In addition, the government is proposing a tax law to reduce
corporate income tax from 55 to 25 percent on foreign businesses and apply it uniformly
on Kuwaiti and foreign companies.
10. Labor reform is another important pillar in the authorities’ economic strategy. Intensive
efforts are underway to encourage private employment as a vehicle to reduce the size of
the state in the economy and to help absorb the rapidly growing labor force in the
country. The recent decision to extend social allowances to the private sector was taken
with a view to integrating the labor market and to render private jobs more attractive. The
authorities have also provided incentives for Kuwaitis to join the private sector including
through putting in place a program to provide vocational training, providing job search
allowances for the unemployed, and enhancing job placement services.
11. Finally, progress has been made in improving the quality and dissemination of data. The
national accounts have been improved by the adoption of the System of National
Accounts and the consumer price index has been revised to reflect new weights based on
a recent household expenditure survey. The lag for releasing the national accounts and
the CPI data has also been shortened, and the ministry of finance, the ministry of
planning, and the central bank are now publishing economic data on their web sites. The
authorities are committed to continue to develop economic data in line with the
recommendations of Fund technical assistance missions.

EXTERNAL
RELATIONS
DEPARTMENT

International Monetary Fund
700 lgth Street, N W
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/12
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 25,2004

IMF Concludes

2003 Article IV Consultation

with Kuwait

On February 9, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the 2003 Article IV consultation with Kuwait.’
Background
In 2002, overall real GDP declined slightly as oil output fell sharply in line with OPECmandated cuts. However, real non-oil GDP growth rose to 5 percent from 3.4 percent in 2001,
in part, on account of the increased demand for goods and services associated with Iraqi
development. Inflation remained low at about 1.5 percent.
The fiscal position improved, with the overall fiscal surplus rising to 25 percent of GDP in
2002/03. The rise in the surplus reflected, mainly, favorable oil market developments in the last
quarter of the fiscal year (first quarter of 2003) and restraint on current expenditures.
The external position remained comfortable despite a drop in the external current account
surplus to about 12 percent of GDP as imports rose, partly, for inventory build up in
anticipation of the Iraq conflict. Net investment income declined reflecting the weaker
performance in the international financial markets and the decline in global interest rates.
W ith an increase in capital outflows, net foreign assets of the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK)
declined slightly to the equivalent of about eight months of imports of goods and services.
Growth of broad money decelerated to about 5 percent in 2002 from 13 percent in 2001.
While net foreign assets declined, credit growth to the private sector remained robust in
’Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country’s authorities.

Washington, D.C. 20431

l

Telephone 202-623-7100

l

Fax 202-623-6772

l

www.imf.org

-2response to the low interest rates and rising domestic economic activity. The financial sector
continued to perform well. Reflecting the buoyant non-oil activities and ample private sector
liquidity associated, in part, with the United Nations compensation payments, the stock market
index rose further by 39 percent in 2002 after a 27 percent increase in 2001. Following trends
in the global financial markets, the CBK reduced its discount rate twice in 2002, down to the
present 3.25 percent. The Kuwaiti dinar-U.S. dollar deposit rate differential was allowed to rise
slightly to 63 basis points compared with the historical 50 basis points. The Kuwaiti dinar
depreciated in real effective terms by about 1.5 percent.
The macroeconomic position is estimated to have remained comfortable in 2003. Real non-oil
GDP growth picked up briskly to about 6.5 percent because of the spillover effects of
developments in Iraq and improved domestic confidence. The stock market-has also continued
to rise sharply. Concurrently, credit expansion has been brisk and broad money is estimated to
have risen by about 13 percent. The external current account surplus is estimated to have
improved further to 19 percent of GDP due, in part, to an increase in oil export receipts.
With an estimated sharp increase in portfolio and other investments abroad, CBK’s net foreign
assets are estimated to have declined to the equivalent of about six months of prospective
imports. The overall fiscal surplus for 2003104 is projected to decline to about 19 percent of
GDP. The macroeconomic position is projected to remain manageable over the medium term
(2004-2008). The fiscal and external current account surpluses are projected to contract on
the basis of the expectation for declining oil prices, official foreign asset position, and the
authorities’ intention to follow a cautious fiscal policy.
Progress remained limited on structural reforms. The privatization law, which would allow
divestment of major public sector utilities and clarify the domain for the private sector, remains
to be approved by the National Assembly. However, the private sector has been encouraged
to invest in areas where explicit approval by the National Assembly is not required.
Implementation of the Foreign Investment law requires clarification of areas open to foreign
investment including 100 percent foreign ownership. The planned revised corporate income
tax law, lowering the tax rate from 55 percent to 25 percent, remains under consideration.
Moreover, administered prices of publicly supplied goods and services have remained
unchanged. Effective October 2003, the authorities formally implemented the Kuwaitization
policy to generate employment opportunities for Kuwaiti workers in the private sector.
The policy imposed quotas for percentages of Kuwaiti workers to be employed by individual
non-government entities. Regarding the financial sector, the Banking law was amended in
January 2004, which approves the establishment of foreign banks in Kuwait. The Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) exercise has been completed.
Executive

Board Assessment

Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the Kuwaiti
authorities for pursuing cautious macroeconomic policies over the past several years, which
have resulted in sizeable fiscal and external current account surpluses, a comfortable level of
net foreign reserves, and low inflation. They agreed that the macroeconomic outlook over the
medium term is likely to remain favorable. Directors considered that the main challenges

-3ahead are to accelerate non-oil economic growth in order to absorb the rapidly growing Kuwaiti
labor force and maintain intergenerational equity over the long run, and to reduce the
budgetary dependence on oil revenue. They endorsed the official strategy of pursuing
structural reforms and fiscal strengthening to achieve these objectives. While noting the likely
positive effects of Iraq reconstruction in the period ahead. Directors encouraged the authorities
to take advantage of the current favorable macroeconomic conditions and buoyant private
sector, and step up the pace of implementation of their strategy. In particular, they encouraged
accelerating reforms to reduce state involvement in the economy, promote private investment,
and improve the functioning of the labor market.
Directors looked forward to the early passage of the Privatization Law to establish the legal
and institutional framework for promoting private investment. In the meanwhile, they
encouraged the authorities to move forward with early divesture of public sector activities that
do not require explicit legislative action for privatization. They considered that such a step
would signal the authorities’ commitment to private sector-led growth and further strengthen
the environment for private investment. Directors also called for an early clarification of rules
governing foreign direct investment, including the “negative list” under the Foreign Investment
Law, and the establishment of a level playing field for domestic and foreign investors in terms
of access to the domestic financial markets and tax treatment. In this context, they
recommended early enactment of a non-discriminatory corporate income tax.
Directors supported the authorities’ strategy of addressing unemployment pressures through
the development of skills needed by the private sector. However, they urged authorities to
apply the Kuwaitization policy flexibly in order to avoid adverse effects on the competitiveness
of the private sector. They stressed the importance of promoting market-based wage flexibility
for the Kuwaiti workforce. In this context, they supported civil service reforms aimed at linking
wages to productivity in the public sector. Moreover, in order to minimize the burden on the
budget, Directors encouraged the authorities to adopt a plan for rationalizing benefits to
workers in both the public and private sectors. There was broad support for linking labor
market reforms to state enterprise restructuring and private sector development, to facilitate
redeployment of jobs from the public to the private sector.
Directors commended the authorities for maintaining financial system stability through sound
macroeconomic policies and effective banking regulation and supervision. They welcomed the
FSAP findings that the most critical elements of the systemic liquidity and crisis management
policies are in place. They noted that, while some banks are sensitive to fluctuations in equity
and property prices, their exposure appears to be manageable. Directors also noted that the
newly implemented Islamic Banking Law and the recently amended Banking Law would further
strengthen the effectiveness of banking regulation and supervision, and called for determined
enforcement of these laws.
Noting the large swings in stock prices, Directors called for steps to strengthen the regulation
and supervision of the capital market-including
the creation of a single, independent, and
accountable regulatory agency to oversee the securities market. There was broad support for
the authorities’ plan to encourage development of new financial products and to liberalize rules

-4governing nonresident participation. Directors commended the authorities for the recent
strengthening of regulatory and supervisory framework for combating money laundering and
terrorism financing.
Directors commended the maintenance of a strong overall fiscal balance in 2002103 and
2003104. However, they noted that the non-oil fiscal deficit remains high. They therefore
welcomed the authorities’ plans to tighten fiscal policy in the period ahead, notwithstanding the
recent rise in oil prices. Directors encouraged the authorities to improve the budget structure
by reducing current expenditure, particularly on wages and subsidies, in conjunction with civil
service reform and adjustment of prices of goods and services provided by the public sector
toward cost recovery. On the revenue side, they stressed the need to boost non-oil revenue,
and encouraged the authorities to work with regional partners toward the introduction of the
value added tax. Directors supported the authorities’ intention to implement fiscal policy in the
context of a medium-term macroeconomic framework by adopting a three-year rolling budget.
In this context, they advised the authorities to target a declining non-oil deficit relative to nonoil GDP, based on realistic oil price assumption, in order to cushion the impact of oil revenue
volatility and strengthen the counter-cyclicality of fiscal policy.
Directors endorsed the authorities’ policy of maintaining a pegged exchange rate arrangement
with the US. dollar under the prevailing free exchange and trade system as a first step toward
the GCC-wide monetary union. They supported a continued prudent monetary policy, backed
by a sound financial system and a tight fiscal policy, to help ensure the stability of the peg.
They considered that further strengthening the independence of the central bank will be
important to boost the credibility of monetary policy and investor confidence. Directors
encouraged the authorities to adjust the ceilings on lending rates to reflect differential risks and
improve resource allocation, and to introduce a limited deposit insurance scheme for social
welfare reasons. Directors welcomed the progress in trade liberalization and regional
integration in the GCC states, observing that it will contribute to the diversification and
efficiency of Kuwait’s economy.
Directors commended the progress made in improving the quality and dissemination of
economic data, particularly in the areas of public finances, national accounts, and the balance
of payments. They encouraged continued progress in improving the quality, timeliness, and
transparency of the economic data.
Directors commended Kuwait for its generous financial assistance to developing countries.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Kuwait will take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

Public information
Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board.

-5-

Kuwait:

Selected

Economic
1998

Indicators
1999

2000

2001

2002

(Percent Change)
Production

and prices

Real GDP
Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Consumer

price index

3.6

-1.7

1.9

0.6

-0.4

1.8

-6.5

2.3

-3.2

-8.0

5.2

2.2

1.8

3.4

5.0

0.1

3.0

1.8

1.7

1.4

(In percent of GDP: unless otherwise
Financial

variables

indicated)

I/

Total revenue, of which:

46.4

68.7

77.8

66.3

68.6

Oil and gas 2/
Investment income 21

26.4

46.7

55.3

42.9

49.0

16.6

19.3

18.2

16.6

14.4

39.5

39.2

44.8

43.2

Current

48.7
43.1

36.0

36.0

40.7

38.2

Capital

5.6

3.5

3.1

4.1

5.0

Overall fiscal balance

-2.3

29.3

38.7

21.5

24.6

Change in broad money supply (in percent)

-0.8

1.6

6.3

12.8

4.8

5.9

5.3

5.4

3.7

2.2

Total expenditure

Interest rate (in percent) 31

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise
External

sector

Exports, f.o.b. of which:
Crude oil and refined products
Imports, c.i.f.
Current account balance (deficit = -)
In percent of GDP
Central Bank of Kuwait’s

international

reserves

In months of imports of goods and services
Real effective exchange
Sources:

indicated)

rate (percent change)

Data provided by the authorities;

I/ The fiscal year was changed

3/ Three-month

Kuwaiti dinar deposits.

12,225

19,476

16,246

15,365

8,470

11,027

18,184

14,976

14,058

-7,715

-6,708

-6,451

-7,049

-8,118

2,215

5,013

14,672

8,328

4,190

8.5

16.6

39.6

24.3

11.9

4,034

4,928

7,170

9,997

9,256

3.7

5.0

7.4

9.7

8.3

3.1

0.9

4.2

5.1

-1.5

and IMF staff estimates.

from July-June

2/ Includes profits of public enterprises.

9,616

to April-March

effective 2001/02.

