August 2007
IMF Country Report No. 07/293

© 2007 International Monetary Fund

Haiti: 2007 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement
Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Requests for Waiver of
Nonobservance and Modification of Performance Criteria—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Executive Director for Haiti
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2007 Article IV
consultation with Haiti, the first review under the three-year arrangement under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility and requests for a waiver of nonobservance and modification of
performance criteria, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2007 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Requests for
Waiver of Nonobservance and Modification of Performance Criteria, prepared by a staff team
of the IMF, following discussions that ended on May 16, 2007, with the officials of Haiti on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 6, 2007. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its July 23, 2007, discussion of the staff report on issues
related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Haiti.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Haiti*
Supplemental Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the
authorities of Haiti*
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
HAITI
Staff Report for the 2007 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under
the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility and Requests for Waiver of Nonobservance and
Modification of Performance Criteria
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2007 Consultation with Haiti
Approved by Caroline Atkinson and Mark Plant
July 6, 2007

•

Developments. At the time of the last Article IV consultation in May 2005, Executive Directors
welcomed progress toward restoring macroeconomic stability and implementing structural
reforms, but underscored the need to tighten monetary policy and absorb excess liquidity. They
also looked forward to measures to improve budget management and expenditure control. Many
of these and other key recommendations were subsequently implemented. Moreover, the political
and economic situation stabilized further, and the economy returned to positive—albeit still
modest—growth. In November 2006, a new PRGF arrangement was approved, along with Haiti’s
decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

•

Discussions. A team, comprising Messrs. Bauer (Head), El-Masry, Hartelius, and Ms. Redifer
(all WHD), Mr. Sacasa (MCM), Ms. Funke (FAD), and Ms. Goretti (PDR), visited Haiti during
May 2–16, 2007. Ms. Florestal (OED) participated in the policy discussions. The mission, which
was supported by Mr. Fasano (Resident Representative), held discussions with Prime Minister
Alexis, Minister of the Economy and Finance Dorsainvil, Minister of Planning Bellerive,
Governor of the Bank of the Republic of Haiti (BRH) Magloire, and other members of the
economic team. As part of its outreach activities, the mission also met with donor representatives,
civil society, and the banking and business communities.

•

Exchange rate regime and Article VIII status. Haiti has a managed float with no
predetermined path for the exchange rate. Haiti has accepted the obligations of Art. VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4, and its exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments
and transfers for current transactions.

•

Statistics. Haiti’s economic statistics are broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, but further
improvements in coverage, periodicity, quality and timeliness are desirable (Annex I).

•

Article IV cycle and publication. The authorities have consented to the publication of the staff
report and related documents. It is proposed that Haiti remain on the 24-month Article IV
consultation cycle.

2

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Background: A Stabilizing Economy and Society...................................................................5
II. Policy Discussions: Creating Conditions for Durable Growth ............................................8
A. Medium-Term Outlook and Challenges ...................................................................8
B. Domestic Revenue Mobilization.............................................................................11
C. Monetary Policy Framework...................................................................................14
D. Competitiveness ......................................................................................................16
E. PRSP and HIPC.......................................................................................................17
III. PRGF-Supported Program: First Review...........................................................................18
A. Macroeconomic Framework for Remainder of FY 2007........................................19
B. Macroeconomic Framework for FY 2008...............................................................22
C. Capacity to Repay, Program Risks, and DSA.........................................................23
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................24
Figure
1. Economic Situation at a Glance........................................................................................7
Tables
1.
Indicative Targets and Quantitative Performance Criteria, FY 2007 .............................27
2.
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators ..................................................................28
3a. Central Government Operations .....................................................................................29
3b. Central Government Operations .....................................................................................30
4.
Summary Accounts of the Banking System ...................................................................31
5.
Balance of Payments.......................................................................................................32
6.
Medium-Term Scenario ..................................................................................................33
7.
Indicators of Fund Credit ................................................................................................34
8.
Budgetary Financing, by Donor and Type......................................................................35
9.
Millennium Development Goals.....................................................................................36
10. Proposed Schedule of Disbursement under the PRGF Arrangement, 2006–2009 .........37
11. Indicators of External Vulnerability ...............................................................................38
12. Aggregate Financial Soundness Indicators of the Banking System, 2001–07 ...............39
Boxes
1.
Growth Outlook in Haiti .................................................................................................10
2.
Banking Sector Developments........................................................................................21
Annexes
Summary of Annexes...............................................................................................................40
I.
Fund Relations ................................................................................................................41
II. Relations with The World Bank Group ..........................................................................44

3
III. Relations with The Inter-American Development Bank ................................................46
IV. Statistical Issues ..............................................................................................................48
Attachments
I. Letter of Intent ..................................................................................................................51
II. Supplemental Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies..................................53
III. Technical Memorandum of Understanding .....................................................................61

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
• Haiti has made remarkable progress in stabilizing the economy and restoring political institutions.
Inflation has declined, the currency has stabilized, and growth has resumed, albeit at a modest pace,
thanks to the pursuit of prudent macroeconomic policies by the authorities.
• The PRGF-supported program is broadly on track. Quantitative PCs for the first review (test date
end-March) were met with large margins, and most structural PCs and benchmarks were fulfilled on
time. The authorities are requesting a waiver for nonobservance of one structural PC.
Focus of discussions
• Policy discussions centered around Haiti’s challenge to consolidate stabilization gains and achieve
higher growth, to underpin external stability and bring about significant improvement in social
outcomes. Discussions focused on three policy issues relating to this challenge: (i) the mobilization of
domestic revenues to scale up the provision of essential public goods and services, and reduce
reliance on donor support; (ii) the transition toward a more coherent monetary policy framework to
help entrench macroeconomic stability; and (iii) external competitiveness.
Main policy recommendations
• In the short term, the key priority is to step up the slow pace of budget execution, particularly in
domestically financed investment, without compromising expenditure quality. In addition, the central
bank should fully use the available room for base money growth under the indicative program targets,
to avoid an overly tight monetary stance.
• In the medium term, strengthened domestic revenue efforts will be essential to provide stable
funding for priority expenditures. This could be achieved through a carefully sequenced combination
of improving revenue administration, broadening the tax base, and adjusting, in due course, tax rates
and fees.
• To clarify the monetary policy framework, the authorities’ near term focus should be on
controlling inflation via the supply of base money. This would require modification of BRH bond
auctions to set volumes in line with base money supply targets, while leaving interest rates to be
market-determined through a competitive bidding process. The proposed focus on money supply
would be an interim step, while conditions evolve in the longer term to allow for a transition to formal
inflation targeting.
• Staff analysis does not suggest, on balance, that the Haitian gourde is misaligned. However, the
economy experiences equilibrium real exchange rate appreciation from rising private remittances and
other transfers. Resulting competitiveness pressures should be mainly countered through
microeconomic interventions to address widespread non-price competitiveness problems. Attempts to
resist the observed equilibrium appreciation would likely be costly and ineffective over time. The
authorities should therefore maintain a floating exchange rate regime, limiting interventions to
rebuilding reserves in line with PRGF program objectives, and smoothing out seasonal fluctuations.

5
I. BACKGROUND: A STABILIZING ECONOMY AND SOCIETY
1.
Haiti has suffered from a long period of economic decline. Over the past 40 years,
real per capita GDP contracted on average by 0.7 percent per year. The country experienced
considerable macroeconomic volatility, notably sharp growth swings, periodic episodes of
balance of payments difficulties, disruptive exchange rate movements, and accelerating
inflation, which resulted from a combination of extreme political strife (15 governments in
the last 20 years), external shocks (including commodity price declines, aid volatility, and
natural disasters), and unsound macroeconomic policies. Against this background, it is not
surprising that Haiti remains the poorest country in the hemisphere, with 54 percent of the
population living on less than one U.S. dollar a day.
2.
Encouragingly, there has been considerable progress in recent years in
stabilizing the economy. The transitional
1
Real GDP growth and inflation
government that took over following
5
(y/y percent change)
4
President Aristide’s departure in February
Real GDP
3
2004 and the government of President Préval
2
that took office in early 2006, have
1
0
implemented prudent fiscal and monetary
-1
policies. As a result, inflation has declined,
-2
the currency stabilized, and gross reserves
-3
CPI, end-of-period
increased. Most notably, real per capita GDP -4 (right scale)
-5
has begun to recover, although its growth
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
rate still remains modest (¾ of a percentage
1/ Fiscal years.
Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance and Fund staff estimates
point in fiscal year (FY) 2006).1
3.
Similarly, there have been positive steps toward restoring political institutions
and improving governance and transparency in public sector operations. President
Préval has espoused good governance and the fight against corruption as central tenets of his
administration. So far during his tenure, Haiti has witnessed the democratic election of a new
parliament and municipal and local authorities, and experienced increased reliance on
political compromise and coalition building. Stepped up operations to combat criminal gangs
have also restored a sense of relative security in recent months, even though still occasionally
interrupted by episodes of heightened crime.

1

Haiti’s fiscal year runs from October to September.

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

6
4.
On the basis of its performance, Haiti has received additional support from the
international community. After the early mobilization of donor support under an interim
cooperation framework in 2004 and the clearance of arrears with multilateral lenders, Haiti
reached its HIPC decision point in late 2006, and the Paris Club agreed to grant debt relief on
its most generous terms. In addition, the United States extended preferential tariffs for Haiti’s
largest export sector, through the approval of the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity
Partnership Encouragement (HOPE) Act.
5.
The IMF supported Haiti’s stabilization process through the sequenced use of
different instruments and facilities. After a 6-month staff monitored program, the IMF
approved support under Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) for two successive
programs, from September 2004 to September 2006. These programs provided a framework
for economic stabilization and a track record leading to the new three-year PRGF
arrangement and HIPC decision point, approved in November 2006.

Authorities’ Response to Key Policy Recommendations of
Previous Article IV Consultations
Key IMF Recommendations

Authorities’ Policy Response

•

Prepare annual budget in close consultation with political
parties and align donor support with budget priorities.

•

The FY 2007 budget was approved within the
constitutionally specified time frame by the newly elected
Parliament. Donor financing was sought and obtained at
an international conference held in Madrid in July 2006, in
line with priorities set out in the draft budget.

•

Improve budget management and expenditure control
mechanisms.

•

The authorities have kept spending from current accounts
below 10 percent of nonwage current expenditure
appropriations through March 2007.

•

Avoid accumulation of nonconcessional debt and move
toward grant- or highly concessional financing.

•

New financing has been obtained as grants or on
concessional terms, including from non-Paris Club donors.

•

Tighten monetary policy with a view to absorbing excess
liquidity in the banking system and avoiding central bank
financing.

•

The central bank has discontinued providing credit to
government since the first EPCA program in September
2004. This and a concerted sterilization policy have helped
reduce excess reserves from over 30 percent in
September 2004 to about 1 percent currently.

•

Rapid implementation of auctioning mechanism for the
placement of central bank bonds.

•

The authorities have indicated their interest in introducing
and expanding the auction but taken no action so far.

•

Improve fiscal transparency by completing the survey of
domestic arrears and the census of government
employees, and publishing data on budget execution.

•

A census of government employees has been performed
in FY 2005. A survey of wage arrears has been completed
and plan for their clearance is being implemented.
Inventory of nonwage arrears and a plan for their
clearance is underway.

•

Improve the quality and timeliness of economic statistics,
including through the use of Fund technical assistance.

•

The authorities have taken advantage of extensive
technical assistance from the Fund’s Statistics Department
to improve their economic data, particularly in monetary
and fiscal statistics. However, further improvements in
data coverage, quality and timeliness are needed.

7
Figure 1. Haiti - Economic Situation at a Glance
Growth has picked up since 2005 after a period of
economic decline.
10

Contributions to real GDP growth
8 (In percent)
Net exports
Investment

10

14

8

12

Increased revenues and higher external budget
support have improved the fiscal cash balance...
(In percent of GDP)

14
12

Net budget support
Total revenue

6

10

4

8

8

2

2

6

6

0

0

4

4

-2

-2

2

2

-4

-4

0

0

-6

-6

-2

-8

-4

6

10

Consumption
4

Real GDP growth

-8
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

30

10

25

0

20

-10

15

-20

10

-30

(In percent of GDP)

Index
(1988=100)

50
Stock of central bank financing
(right scale)

45

2007

The current account has been kept in balance
despite a marked real exchange rate appreciation...

(Billions of gourdes)

(In percent)

-2
-4

2007

...which has facilitated a reduction of central bank
financing and inflation.
55

Cash balance1

40
35

75
70
65
60

30
25

55

20

50

15
Current account

10

5

-40

Annual inflation

5

Current account exc.
grants and remittances

0

0

Oct-00

Oct-01

Oct-02

Oct-03

Oct-04

Oct-05

(In millions of U.S.dollars)

1,400
Net private transfers

1,200

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

…which has enabled the central bank to start
rebuilding its international reserves.
1,600

140

1,400

120

1,200

External grants

1,000

45
40

-50

Oct-06

...mainly through strong inflows of remittances...
1,600

Real effective exchange rate,
increase = depreciation
(right scale)

(In millions of U.S.dollars)

Gross international reserves
(right scale)

600

600

400

400

200

200

2.0

Net international
reserves

80
800

2.5

100

1,000

800

(In month of imports)

1.5

60

1.0

40
0.5

0

0
2001
1

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

20
0

0.0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Cash balance equals revenues, budget support grants, budget loans, and change in arrears less current expenditure,
domestically financed investment expenditure, and amortization of external loans.
Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.

2006

8
II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS: CREATING CONDITIONS FOR DURABLE GROWTH
6.
With significant stabilization progress already achieved, the challenge for Haiti
is to convert its incipient recovery into a sustainable economic expansion. Economic
growth is needed to underpin external stability and bring about significant improvement in
social outcomes. Without tangible social progress, there is a risk that civil conflict will
resurface and hard-won progress will be lost.
A. Medium-Term Outlook and Challenges
7.
The authorities and staff agreed that the current path could lead to an
overall favorable outlook for growth. There was a sense that the medium- and long-term
growth projections determined in PRGF negotiations last year remained broadly appropriate.
This framework envisaged an acceleration of real GDP growth to a rate of about 4 percent in
the medium and longer term, similar to growth rates achieved during past periods of
domestic and external stability (Box 1).
8.
However, there was also agreement that meeting the growth objectives would
require overcoming significant and widespread obstacles. Alleviating these constraints
would create conditions for a crowding-in of private sector investment and support higher
levels of productivity to underpin growth:
•

In the short term, the still fragile security situation has to be improved further, so that
recent successes in the combat of criminal gangs can take root across the country and
help boost confidence.

•

Further consolidating economic stability will be important to create a more predictable
business environment and ensure continued donor and IFI support. However, by itself
this will not yet be a sufficient condition for raising growth.

•

In addition, medium-term growth is constrained by a number of structural and
institutional bottlenecks, including supply shortages, notably in the construction sector;
dilapidated infrastructure; inadequate and costly basic utility services, particularly
electricity; poor coverage and quality of education and health services; low financial
intermediation; and difficult enforcement of property rights. Moreover, spending and
implementation capacity of the government remains limited, as evidenced by a significant
underexecution of budgeted expenditures in the first half of FY 2007.

9
9.
The authorities were cognizant of these obstacles and noted that they are
taking important steps to remove them. To alleviate supply side bottlenecks, the
authorities are seeking to broaden participation of domestic firms in public tenders, and
facilitate entry of foreign suppliers, particularly in the area of public infrastructure projects.
In addition, they are building up financial administration and project management capacity at
line ministries to raise expenditure execution. The mission welcomed these steps, but noted it
would likely take some time until their effects could play out in full. In terms of addressing
microeconomic impediments to growth, the authorities pointed to the creation of the center
for investment facilitation, a one-stop window for investors. They also intend to improve
competitiveness of remaining state-owned enterprises through outright privatization or other
modalities of private sector participation. Staff agreed these were steps in the right direction.
10.
There was agreement about the importance of donor assistance to overcome
critical bottlenecks, including through technical assistance. Coordination was deemed
particularly important in this context, so that foreign aid and domestically financed
government expenditures could be mutually reinforcing and have a stronger impact on
economic and social outcomes. The authorities noted that they had recently taken steps to
lead more effectively the coordination effort, including through more frequent and regular
meetings of local donor representatives with the Prime Minister.
11.
Against this general backdrop, the Article IV discussions focused selectively on
three policy issues that are important to support growth and stability over the medium
term:
•

First, in the fiscal area, generating additional revenue to support higher spending on
critical social and infrastructure needs and prepare the country for a transition to less
dependence on volatile foreign assistance;

•

Second, strengthening Haiti’s monetary policy framework to provide for a stable lowinflation environment; and

•

Third, assessing the evolution of external competitiveness, particularly in light of the
real appreciation of the Haitian gourde in recent years and over the longer term.

10

Box 1. Growth Outlook in Haiti
Haiti’s real GDP growth could increase to 4 percent in the medium to long term, similar to growth rates
achieved during past periods of domestic and external stability. This forecast assumes continued
improvements in security conditions, sustained political and macroeconomic stability, and improvements in
social and economic infrastructure. As infrastructure constraints are gradually removed, agricultural production
and exports could pick up. The textile assembly industry is likely to benefit from the Haitian Hemispheric
Opportunity Partnership Encouragement (HOPE) Act, which will extend preferential access to the U.S. market
over the next three to five years. Over time, improvements in security and the rehabilitation of transport
infrastructure would create favorable conditions for the tourism industry, which could initially cater to the
Haitian Diaspora and cruise tourism, and later to broader international markets. Nevertheless, owing to the
significant structural obstacles that need to be overcome, Haiti’s growth performance is likely to remain for
some time below the rates recorded by other low-income countries.
Average real GDP growth (in percent)
1995-2000 2001-04

2005-06

2007-11

Haiti

3.8

-1.1

2.1

4.0

Low income countries/1
PRGF countries/2
Post-conflict countries/3

3.5
5.1
3.8

4.9
7.8
5.2

5.8
7.7
6.1

5.9
6.9
5.7

1/ PRGF eligible with 2005 GNI lower than US$1000
2/ PRGF countries as of April 2007.
3/ Country with EPCA between 1988 and 2007
Source: Staff estimates and WEO

Available indicators do not point to a significant acceleration of growth so far in FY 2007. Staff has
developed a monthly expenditure approach GDP estimator, as well as activity indicators based on real credit,
real money growth, construction activity, and total imports. These indicators suggest a continued expansion of
the economy, but at rates only marginally higher than in 2006. As a consequence, staff has lowered its growth
forecast for FY 2007 to 3.5 percent from 4 percent, with the balance of risks to this forecast still remaining tilted
toward the downside.
Real GDP Growth
Expenditure Approach Estimator and National Accounts

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

-1.0

-2.0

-3.0

Estimated, Expenditure Approach
HP filtered trend of estimated growth
National Accounts

-4.0
Sep-01

Mar-02

Sep-02

Mar-03

Sep-03

Mar-04

Sep-04

Mar-05

Sep-05

Mar-06

Sep-06

Mar-07

Source: Staff estimates

For FY 2008, on the other hand, staff anticipates the economy will benefit from an extra push from the
HOPE Act. The HOPE Act is likely enter into force in July 2007, allowing Haiti to export garments made from
third-country textiles free of duty to the United States. Orders from U.S. customers have begun to accumulate in
anticipation of HOPE, and staff estimates that exports could increase by as much as US$150 million next year
owing to the Act. Given a value added in the textile assembly industry of about 20 percent, growth could rise to
4.5 percent in FY2008, before returning to the projected long-term trend of about 4 percent in subsequent years.

11
B. Domestic Revenue Mobilization

Bolivia 2/

Honduras

Paraguay 2/

Nicaragua

Dominican
Republic

Ecuador 2/

El Salvador

Guatemala

Haiti

12.
Increasing domestic revenue to fund higher levels of essential government
expenditure is a key challenge for Haiti, particularly over the medium term. The
mission noted that at about
Revenue Collections in Middle-Income Western Hemisphere Countries
(In percent of GDP, 2005-06) 1/
10 percent of GDP, Haiti’s
30
revenue effort is relatively
Nontax revenue
low, possibly reflecting a large 25
Indirect taxes
informal sector and weak
20
administrative capacity. It
15
underscored that more
10
domestic revenues would
Direct
taxes
provide fiscal space for higher
5
levels of public spending on
0
essential goods and services,
while reducing dependence on
volatile aid flows.2
1/ Haiti data for FY2005/06.
2/ Include substantial revenue from energy production (hydroelectric, oil, or gas).

13.
The authorities agreed with this assessment and stated their intention to raise
domestic revenues to at least 15 percent of GDP. They pointed to initial steps that had
been taken, mainly on reforming the income tax system and improving revenue
administration. These measures had helped boost revenues by 30 percent in the first half of
the current fiscal year (y/y), and are on course to raise domestic revenues by more than
1 percent of GDP in FY 2007 as a whole.
14.
The mission welcomed the strong revenue performance so far and proposed
actions to raise revenue in coming years to help attain the authorities’ targeted level.
Staff noted that this could be achieved through a carefully sequenced combination of
improvements in revenue administration, broadening of the tax base, and selective
adjustments to tax rates:3

2

Because of the small size of the government, the scope to create fiscal space through expenditure re-allocation
appears fairly limited at present. For example, security and defense outlays are very low in Haiti. Similarly, the
wage bill—at about 3½ percent of GDP—is very low by international standards.

3

A more detailed discussion of the challenges and opportunities in mobilizing domestic revenues in Haiti’s
post-conflict environment is presented in the companion Selected Issues Paper.

12
•

Strengthening revenue administration should be the first step in this three-pronged
strategy. Efforts should initially focus on strengthening basic functions and tax
procedures, followed by more far-reaching modernization, such as, for the inland revenue
authority (DGI), moving to a functional model of tax administration. For the customs
authority (AGD), establishing effective controls in the provinces should be the first step,
followed by the strengthening of procedures at all locations, including through
introducing more risk management, shifting to post-release controls, and applying the
WTO valuation system. Along these lines, the authorities have already prepared plans to
strengthen customs and to modernize the DGI, which should be diligently implemented.

•

Broadening the tax base will be important to distribute the tax burden more evenly. This
requires, among other things, combating evasion through stronger controls at the border,
bringing potentially large taxpayers currently operating informally into the tax net, and
eliminating the turnover tax (i.e., VAT) exemption of export sector inputs, while
introducing a tax refund system for excess credits.4 In addition, investment incentives
could be streamlined. Also, the potential of nontax revenues could be used more fully by
adjusting fees and charges for past inflation and improving the profitability of stateowned enterprises. Finally, there is significant scope to rationalize the tax system and
release tax administration resources for better uses, through a front-loaded elimination of
“nuisance” taxes that deliver insignificant revenue.

•

Adjusting some of the tax rates that are low by international standards should also
be considered in due course. The taxation of diesel could be raised to narrow the gap and
reduce the distortions vis-à-vis other petroleum products. Once revenue administration
and customs controls have been sufficiently strengthened, the VAT rate—currently at
10 percent—and excise tax rates could be raised closer to average levels of the region.

15.
Staff estimates that the above-mentioned measures could raise revenues by at
least 3 percent of GDP, phased in over a number of years. Actions to strengthen the DGI
and AGD could yield about 1 percentage point of GDP, and the proposed increases in
selective tax rates could generate about 1½ percentage points of GDP in revenue, if the VAT
rate were raised to the regional average of 14 percent. While the immediate impact of
measures to broaden the tax base would be limited, these measures would likely increase tax
buoyancy over time, and their progressive nature could help make the reforms more
politically palatable.

4

The turnover tax, officially known as “taxe sur le chiffre d’affaires” (TCA), is akin to a value-added tax
(VAT).

13
Summary of revenue impact of tax administration and tax policy measures
Expected additional
revenue yield
(percent of GDP)

Time frame of
implementation
(years)

1.00

1-3

Direct taxes
Broaden tax base
Indirect taxes
VAT: raise tax rate to 14%
Introducing VAT refund mechanism
Petroleum: simplify taxation, increase government
take on diesel to 25%
Adjust other excises (alcohol, etc.)
Eliminate nuisance taxes
Strengthen tax and customs administration

1.00

2-3

Not determined

2-3

0.40

0.5-1

0.60

1-2

Neutral

1-3

1.00

1-3

Non-tax revenue
Improve management of SOE

Not determined

3-4

Adjust fees and charges to inflation

Not determined

1-2

Source: IMF Staff estimates

16.
The authorities broadly agreed with the proposed approach, placing most
emphasis on strengthening tax administration and broadening the tax base. In this
context they thought that the modernization experience of the large taxpayer unit could be
usefully applied to other units. The authorities also expressed their intention to increase the
use of income tax withholding, as a means of reducing evasion. The authorities cautioned
that decisions to increase selected tax rates should be taken in the context of a comprehensive
review of the tax system, among other things, to ensure that social implications of the
envisaged changes are duly considered, a point that was well taken by staff. Another revenue
source, not yet included in estimates, could be an increase in tariff revenue if Haiti adopts
CARICOM’s common external tariff.5
17.
There was agreement that together with measures to enhance revenue, public
financial management and budget execution capacity would also need to be
strengthened. Otherwise, there could be a contractionary impulse on the economy. In
addition, a higher revenue effort was likely to face less taxpayer resistance, and would thus
be more sustainable over time, if accompanied by a visible increase in the provision and
quality of public goods and services. Continuing the authorities’ ongoing efforts to improve
public financial management systems, which have been supported by IMF technical
assistance, would therefore be important.6

5
6

Haiti rejoined CARICOM in June 2006.

A joint IDB-World Bank Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR)
is currently underway, which is set to provide additional recommendations for longer-term public expenditure
reform and institutional development.

14
C. Monetary Policy Framework
18.
The Bank of the Republic of Haiti (BRH) conducts monetary policy in a
challenging environment with limited policy tools. The money supply is regulated by
issuing BRH bonds, but with both volumes and prices for bond auctions fixed, the policy
interest rate (91-day BRH bonds) has little impact on market interest rates, creating an
ineffective transmission mechanism. Furthermore, dollarization is high and financial markets
are shallow, with no interbank money market, secondary market for BRH bonds, nor
standing facilities.
19.
Despite this environment, the BRH has made significant progress over the past
three years in reducing inflation. In 2003, inflation rose sharply to 38 percent at year-end,
mainly as a consequence of increasing central bank borrowing by the government. Monetary
control was later restored, primarily as a result of discontinuing central bank financing to the
government and sterilizing excess liquidity, and inflation declined gradually to 8.3 percent in
May 2007.
20.
The authorities and the mission agreed that the central bank’s current
approach to monetary management can result in inconsistent policy signals. Under the
current framework—which mixes
Policy conflict: policy interest rate reduced while
elements of monetary and inflation
base money tightened
20
26
targeting, and exchange rate
(In percent)
(In billions of gourdes)
19
management—monetary policy
25
BRH 90-day interest rate (right scale)
18
instruments are used sometimes in
17
24
conflicting ways, making it difficult for
16
market participants to infer the central
23
15
Base money
bank’s monetary stance. For example, in
14
22
recent months, the BRH has lowered its 13
key policy interest rate on several
12
21
occasions, while at the same time
Jan-06
Apr-06
Jul-06
Oct-06
Jan-07
Apr-07
allowing a slower pace of base money
Money multipliers (over base money)
growth.
2.5
2.5
21.
To clarify the monetary
policy framework, the mission
proposed a stronger near-term focus
on controlling inflation via the supply
of base money. Empirical analysis
points to a strong historical relationship
between monetary aggregates and

2.0

2.0

M2 multiplier

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0
M1 multiplier

0.5
0.0
2000

2001

2002

2003

0.5

2004

2005

2006

0.0
2007

15
inflation.7 There is also evidence of a significant exchange rate pass-through to inflation, but
little indication of an impact from interest rates. While broad money is most strongly related
to inflation, the relationship between inflation and gourde money (M2) is also very
significant, with the latter having the advantage of being under more direct control of the
BRH. Given stable base money multipliers, these findings as a whole support the conclusion
that monetary control can be an effective way of containing inflation in Haiti in the period
immediately ahead.
22.
The mission advised the authorities to steer the money supply principally
through the BRH bond auctions. Under this approach, BRH bond auctions would be
modified to set volumes in line with the central bank’s base money supply targets, while
interest rates would be market determined through a competitive bidding process, thereby
ceasing to be an instrument of central bank policy.
23.
The mission stressed that the focus on money supply should be seen as an
interim step toward a more advanced monetary policy regime in the future. However,
the proposed simple framework appears suitable for the current stage of development of
Haiti’s financial system. In the meantime, the BRH should take steps to encourage financial
market deepening and strengthen the interest rate channel as a means of transitioning, over
the longer term, to an inflation targeting regime.
24.
The authorities generally supported the proposed framework, but pointed out
implementation issues that would need to be addressed first. They emphasized that
widening participation in bond auctions would be essential to ensure competitive pricebidding, given that BRH bond holdings are concentrated in a few large banks. They also
argued for a gradual introduction of competitive pricing, given that the market-clearing
interest rate could be quite low, and banks holding large quantities of bonds would need to
adjust to the resulting drop in earnings. Furthermore, the central bank would need to
strengthen its liquidity forecasting, and the authorities requested technical assistance for this
from the IMF. Staff acknowledged the importance of addressing these issues, but encouraged
the authorities to move forward as quickly as possible.
25.
There was agreement that strengthening central bank autonomy would also be
important. Rehabilitating the balance sheet of the BRH should help make monetary policy
more independent of financial considerations, while establishing effective limits on central
bank financing to the government should help preclude future fiscal dominance. In this
context, development of a treasury securities market to enable the government to borrow
directly from the private sector would serve the dual purposes of strengthening central bank
independence and deepening financial markets.
7

A more detailed analysis and discussion of inflation and the monetary transmission mechanism in Haiti is
provided in the companion Selected Issues Paper.

16
D. Competitiveness
26.
Haiti’s real exchange rate has appreciated substantially both recently and over
the long term. Despite this appreciation, the current account has remained relatively
balanced, due to a strong inflow of private and public transfers financing an increasing trade
deficit. The existing export sector, which is small and has become very concentrated, was
able to recover partly from the collapse induced by the imposition of economic sanctions in
the early 1990s, and competitor-based real effective exchange rates (REERs) for textiles and
agricultural exports indicate that Haiti has lost less ground to competitors in these sectors
than the overall REER would suggest. 8 Moreover, analysis of tradables vs. nontradables
inflation does not provide clear evidence that the relative price of nontraded goods has been
increasing over the past decade. However, this evidence by itself does not rule out the
existence of a competitiveness problem, because high distribution costs render the distinction
between tradables and nontradables difficult when using CPI data. In any case, there was
agreement between the authorities and staff that the observed real appreciation exerts
considerable competitive pressure on both the export and the import-substitution sectors.
Haiti's share of U.S. apparel imports

REER and Current Account
40

REER, increase=depreciation
(right scale)
Index (1988=100)

30

140 1.0
120 0.8

20
100

10

80

0

0.4

-10
-20

0.6

60

-30

Current account
balance (% GDP)

-40
1971

1976

1981

with transfers
without transfers
1986

1991

1996

40

2001

20
2006

(In percent of total U.S. apparel
Index (1988=100)
imports)
Real effective exchange rate,
increase=depreciation
(right scale)
Haiti's market
share

0.2

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

0.0

0
1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005

27.
While equilibrium real exchange rate analysis suggests that the appreciation of
the last few years has been somewhat stronger than implied by fundamentals, this
evidence is not sufficient to conclude that the currency is misaligned. First, binding
limitations in data availability and quality call for a cautious interpretation of the results.
Moreover, the utilized econometric model cannot adequately capture the impact on the
equilibrium real exchange rate of recent structural changes, such as the macroeconomic
stabilization and the arrival of a large UN support mission. Finally, a number of other
indicators, including the evolution of export shares and the current account, do not provide
clear evidence of a currency misalignment.

8

A more detailed assessment of Haiti external competitiveness is provided in the companion Selected Issues
Paper.

17
28.
Overall, both the authorities and the mission viewed the observed appreciation
largely as an equilibrium phenomenon, with little scope for a macroeconomic policy
response. The staff’s analysis suggests that Haiti’s equilibrium REER exhibits a trend
appreciation due to strongly increasing current transfers, mostly private remittances from
Haiti’s large and still growing diaspora. Seeking to offset this appreciation trend through
market intervention would be costly and in all likelihood ineffective over time. The mission
therefore advised the authorities to maintain a floating exchange rate regime, noting that it
had supported disinflation. Intervention should continue to be limited to replenishing reserves
in line with PRGF program objectives, and smoothing out seasonal fluctuations.
29.
There was agreement that competitiveness should be bolstered by addressing
widespread non-price competitiveness problems. While the level of the real exchange rate
does not imply a problem for external sustainability, as long as transfers remain stable, the
dependence of the economy on transfer flows and their impact on the exchange rate may hold
back the development of more robust export and import-substitution sectors. To ease the
burden on these sectors, the mission encouraged the authorities to improve Haiti’s business
environment, which imposes very high costs on firms, including as a result of unreliable and
expensive utilities, insecurity, poor infrastructure, and legal uncertainties. Steps should also
be taken to identify and address structural rigidities that contribute to the large intermediation
margins of banks and to reduce borrowing costs in the economy. The authorities and the
mission agreed that the ongoing FSAP exercise should study these issues in greater detail and
advise on how to increase competition in the banking system and reduce intermediation
spreads.
E. PRSP and HIPC
30.
A full PRSP is being developed under an ambitious timetable. The authorities aim
to complete the PRSP by end-September 2007. They have established a coordinating
committee headed by the Prime Minister, involving representatives of civil society, the
business community, and local governments. The committee has laid out a timetable for the
consultation process, which has commenced with outreach workshops across the country.
Staff welcomed the intention to advance quickly with the formulation of the PRSP, but
encouraged the authorities to ensure that this would not come at the expense of the
document’s quality and a broad participatory process.
31.
First steps have been taken in implementing HIPC completion point triggers.
The authorities have completed the adoption of a mechanism to track poverty-reducing
public expenditures on the basis of existing expenditure classifications, and are implementing
a plan to extend customs control to the provinces.

18
III. PRGF-SUPPORTED PROGRAM: FIRST REVIEW
32.
Performance under the PRGF-supported program has been strong, although
growth has fallen somewhat short of expectations. In the attached letter and
supplementary Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), the authorities
outline the progress under the program and request completion of the first review. All
quantitative performance criteria (PCs) for the end-March test date were met with significant
margins, and most structural conditionality was implemented on time:
•

Budget execution was significantly lower than anticipated, while domestic
revenues exceeded expectations. This led to a stock of central bank financing to the
central government G1.8 billion lower than foreseen in the program.

•

The central bank used the opportunity of strong transfer inflows to step up their
foreign exchange purchases, resulting in an accumulation of net international
reserves (NIR) far higher than programmed (US$218 million compared to an endMarch PC of US$129 million). The large liquidity injection from the reserves
purchases was more than compensated for by the contractionary impact of the fiscal
overperformance, thus allowing the authorities to keep base money growth slightly
below its indicative program target, without further issuing sterilization bonds.

•

Seven out of eight structural PCs and three out of six structural benchmarks
were met for end-March. Missed end-March benchmarks were subsequently
implemented. The authorities are requesting a waiver of nonobservance of the PC on
submission of a new banking law to Parliament by end-March, which was delayed to
enable the draft law to benefit from IMF technical assistance and an internal
consultation process. The draft law was submitted to Parliament in late June as a prior
action for completing the first review. The authorities also met two structural PCs for
end-June, which are conditions for the second program review.

•

While inflation has declined at a faster than anticipated pace, growth is below
projections. Available indicators suggest that economic activity continues to expand,
but its pace is picking up less than expected. In the absence of significant stimulus
from government spending, growth appears to have been mostly sustained by exports
and private investment.

19
A. Macroeconomic Framework for Remainder of FY 2007
33.
Staff and the authorities agreed on some revisions to the macroeconomic
framework for the current fiscal year. In light of the weaker than expected performance so
far, the growth estimate for FY 2007 was reduced from 4.0 percent to 3.5 percent. While
there remains considerable downside risk to this forecast, the authorities are hopeful that
accelerated government spending in the second half of the fiscal year will inject new stimulus
for economic activity. Similarly, the inflation target for end-September 2007 was reduced
from 9 percent to 8 percent, a level that was already achieved in March and April. Recent oil
price increases are creating some inflation pressures, but this is likely to be offset by the
impact of exchange rate appreciation on prices of imported goods.
34.
Program targets for the second review were modified to reflect better outcomes.
In light of the still low reserves coverage and the prospects for continued strength of
remittances and scheduled budget support, the annual floor for NIR accumulation was raised
from US$30 million to US$135 million.9 With unchanged money growth targets, this NIR
increase dictates a one-for-one decrease in the ceiling for net domestic assets, which would
require the issuance of up to G2.5 billion (about US$65 million) in BRH bonds if the
government budget is fully executed (i.e. government deposits accumulated so far are fully
drawn down). Staff believes that the risk of private sector crowding out from this sterilization
would be limited, because credit demand still remains significantly constrained by structural
impediments. Also, reducing the potential volume of sterilization through an ex-ante limit on
budget execution would not be desirable, given the country’s substantial government
spending needs.
35.
Accelerating budget execution will be the key challenge for the authorities in the
remaining months of the fiscal year. The supplementary budget provides for significantly
higher expenditures, particularly public investment, which are mainly funded from higherthan-anticipated domestic revenue and debt relief. If the authorities can overcome spending
constraints, total expenditure could increase by up to 3 percent of GDP for the fiscal year,
leaving a deficit (excluding grants and externally financed projects) of 1.4 percent of GDP.
This deficit is fully financed by identified external budget support, with no recourse to
central bank financing on a year-over-year basis.
36.
Staff expressed concern about the unprogrammed tightening of the monetary
stance and encouraged the authorities to fully use the available room under the
program to expand base money. While base money growth through end-March was
broadly in line with expectations, it subsequently fell well below program targets, in
anticipation of the pick up in government spending in the second half of the year. Under the
9

At the same time, the ceiling on the program adjustor for budget support shortfalls was increased from
US$20 million to US$50 million.

20
circumstances, staff urged the authorities to improve the flow of information between the
BRH and the ministry of finance for purposes of liquidity planning, in order to avoid
episodes of excessively restrictive monetary policy. In light of contained inflation risk, weak
credit, and the general intention to shift the monetary policy focus on managing money
supply, staff supported the authorities’ policy of gradual reductions in administered BRH
bond rates. Current interest rates remain high in real terms by historical standards, and still
appear to be well above market equilibrium levels. However, for the rest of the fiscal year,
the possible need for large-scale sterilization with BRH bonds justifies a cautious approach to
further interest rate reduction.
37.
A number of adjustments to the program’s structural conditionality were
agreed. In order to benefit from IMF technical assistance planned for the fall, the authorities
requested to move the PC on developing a central bank recapitalization plan to March 2008.
They also requested to align the timing of a plan to divest the BRH’s ownership in Teleco,
originally required by end-June 2007, with the development of a recapitalization strategy.
These changes were approved by the Executive Board on a lapse-of-time basis in late June.
Two PCs will be added for end-September to further advance in the areas of revenue
administration reform and safeguards implementation. The authorities will adopt a detailed
implementation plan for modernizing the DGI, and complete a technical report on obstacles
to implementing International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) at the central bank. In
addition, they agreed on a structural benchmark to ensure stronger quality control of monthly
monetary data.
Summary of Proposed Changes to Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
Measures
1.

Proposal

Structural performance criteria
1

Prepare a plan to recapitalize the central bank.

Reset test date from September 2007 to March 2008

Adopt a strategy for discontinuing BRH involvement with TÉLÉCO.

Reset test date from June 2007 to March 2008

Commence an independent assessment of possible recapitalization
needs and required financial and operational restructuring of BNC.

Modify the PC to commence rather than complete the
assessment by end-September 2007

Adopt detailed implementation plan for modernization of the DGI.

Introduce as a new PC for the third disbursement
(second review), with end-September 2007 test date

Review of the feasibility of IFRS implementation in line with the
BRH action plan.

Introduce as a new PC for the third disbursement
(second review), with end-September 2007 test date.

2.

1

Structural benchmarks

Monthly monetary program data to be signed off by the Central
Bank’s interdepartmental and steering committee.
1/ These PCs were approved by the Executive Board on a lapse-of-time basis.

Introduce as new monthly structural benchmark from
August 2007.

21

38.
The plan to resolve weaknesses in the banking system is advancing, and the
banking sector shows improved performance and solvency after its orderly
consolidation in 2006 (Box 2). In early 2007, state-owned Banque Nationale de Crédit
(BNC) absorbed all assets and liabilities of Socabank, which was under financial distress. As
part of the authorities’ plan to address financial sector weaknesses, a thorough assessment of
the merged bank is to be undertaken to determine any needs for recapitalization, and
financial and operational restructuring. Because the identification of a qualified international
assessor has proven time consuming, the authorities are requesting that this assessment is
being allowed to commence by end-September rather than being completed by that date, as
required under the program. The authorities intend for this assessment to be completed no
later than end-March 2008.

Box 2. Banking Sector Developments
Haiti’s banking sector underwent further consolidation in 2006 and 2007. In this process, the
number of banks declined from 13 to 9 and concentration increased, with the three largest banks now
holding almost 80 percent of total assets.
In March 2007, BNC, a large state-owned bank, acquired the assets and liabilities of Socabank,
previously Haiti’s fourth-largest bank. This halted a prolonged period of distress for Socabank,
which had significant negative capital, a nonperforming loan (NPL) ratio of close to 50 percent, and
deposit outflows. The capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of BNC after the merger was reported to be
26 percent at end-March, while its liquid balances to deposits substantially exceeded the system’s
average.
Most banks report high solvency, strong liquidity, and good earnings, but NPLs are high. All
but one bank reported CARs well above the 12 percent regulatory minimum as of March 2007. The
aggregate ratio of liquid assets to deposits has been around 54 percent over the past few years.
Aggregate annualized return on assets more than doubled during FY 2006, and rose to 2.0 percent in
the first half of FY 2007. However, NPLs were also fairly high, representing on average 12 percent of
total assets.
The systemic importance of the largest banks underscores the need for careful supervision. A
joint Bank-Fund FSAP is currently ongoing, with a dual focus on the soundness of the financial
sector and its developmental needs. The FSAP conclusions and recommendations will be presented to
the IMF Executive Board at the time of the second program review.

22
B. Macroeconomic Framework for FY 2008
39.
The authorities and the mission discussed the broad outlines for the FY 2008
budget and macroeconomic framework. The authorities’ draft budget envisages an
increase in domestic revenues by 0.9 percent of GDP from strengthened tax administration
efforts, partly offset by somewhat lower budgetary grants. Expenditures (excluding foreignfinanced projects) would rise by 0.6 percent of GDP, focused on education, health, justice,
public security, agriculture, infrastructure and tourism development. As in the current fiscal
year, the budget does not foresee any recourse to central bank financing. Firmly committed
budget support already amounts to 1.2 percent of GDP, and, based on historical patterns, the
authorities feel reasonably assured that additional donor commitments for a small remainder
of 0.3 percent of GDP will be forthcoming (see further in the paragraph below). Other key
assumptions of the preliminary macroeconomic framework are a real GDP growth rate of
4.5 percent; a further decline in inflation to 7.5 percent; NIR accumulation of US$70 million;
and base money growth that is slightly lower that expected nominal GDP growth.
40.
Firm quantitative targets for FY 2008 will be finalized at the time of the second
program review, since the outlined indicative framework is still subject to change. For
instance, the authorities intend to convene a donors meeting after the completion of the
PRSP, presumably in early 2008, to realign spending priorities and discuss new pledges.
Second, Haiti has ratified the Petrocaribe agreement with Venezuela and recently signed an
agreement for benefits under ALBA terms, and could thus potentially receive substantial
concessional financing for oil purchases under these initiatives.10 These developments would
have to be incorporated in due course into the framework, along with other relevant
information that might become available. The authorities indicated their intention to invest
the Petrocaribe funds and spend only the investment proceeds transparently through the
budget. Staff welcomed the intention to channel the resulting investment spending through
the budget, and noted that the authorities’ approach would require strong safeguards.

10

Under the Petrocaribe agreement, Haiti could import up to 14,000 barrels of crude oil and refined products
from Venezuela per day. At current oil prices, up to 40 percent of each shipment could be financed by a
bilateral 25-year loan at a 1 percent interest rate (the grant element of these loans amounts to about 50 percent).
For Haiti, this would imply a loan volume of up to US$140 million per year (2.5 percent of FY 2007 GDP)

23
C. Capacity to Repay, Program Risks, and DSA
41.
Haiti’s capacity to repay the Fund and the risks to the program are broadly
unchanged from the time of the approval of the arrangement last November. Credit
outstanding to the Fund at end-May 2007 was SDR 28.1 million or 34.3 percent of quota.
Outstanding obligations to the Fund will peak at SDR 74 million in 2010, or about 9 percent
of exports of goods and services. The authorities have continued their good track record of
timely debt service payment, and external indebtedness should continue to improve with
time. The key risks to the program, which remain substantial, are the absence of a meaningful
growth acceleration and improvements in social conditions, which could lead to domestic
instability and put external support into question.
42.
A joint Bank-Fund low-income country debt sustainability analysis (LIC DSA)
was conducted in November 2006, and will be updated for the second program review.11
It indicated that Haiti’s risk of debt distress is high, even after full delivery of HIPC and
bilateral debt relief, but would be significantly reduced by MDRI relief from IDA.12 The
forthcoming LIC DSA will reflect a number of developments that have taken place since last
November:
•

In early 2007, the IDB committed MDRI-type post-completion point debt relief and
announced the move to grant-only financing for the next two years. Using unchanged
assumptions from the November 2006 LIC DSA exercise, the relief provided by the IDB
alone would reduce the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio by over 30 percentage points.

•

As a consequence of the HOPE Act, exports of goods and non-factor services are
projected to rise faster in coming years than assumed last November. This would reduce
the NPV of debt-to-export ratio approximately by another 10 percentage points.

•

Finally, the volume of the Petrocaribe agreement with Venezuela, which Haiti ratified in
May 2007, was increased from 7,000 to 14,000 barrels of oil products per day. Thus, the
agreement could provide concessional lending of up to 2.5 percent of GDP per year,
putting upward pressure on the NPV of debt-to-export ratio.

The combined impact of these developments will likely result in a significant decline of
Haiti’s NPV of debt-to-exports ratio in the short and medium term in the updated LIC DSA.
The longer-term impact is less certain, as it will depend on the intensity of use of the
Petrocaribe facility.

11

Applicable guidance indicates that a full LIC DSA should be produced once per year.

12

See Country Report No. 06/440.

24
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
43.
Haiti has achieved substantial economic and political stabilization over the
past three years. The authorities are to be commended for the implementation of sound
monetary and fiscal policies, which have led to a sharp reduction in inflation, stabilization of
the exchange rate, and resumption of growth. The restoration of political and constitutional
order, exemplified by peaceful and transparent elections, the recent improvements in the
security situation, and the government’s drive to promote good governance are all welcome
and encouraging.
44.
The PRGF-supported program is broadly on track, although growth is
somewhat below projected levels. Quantitative targets for the first review were met by large
margins, partly because of slower-than-expected government spending. While inflation has
declined more rapidly than expected, the absence of meaningful fiscal stimulus in the early
part of the fiscal year has held back growth.
45.
Progress is also being made in the implementation of structural reforms.
Structural conditionality under the program in the areas of revenue administration, public
financial management, and central bank reform has been implemented, mostly on time. The
mission also welcomes steps that have been taken to address weaknesses in the banking
system.
46.
Conditions are in place for continued strong implementation of the PRGFsupported program. The program for the remainder of the current fiscal year is fully
financed, including after the recently approved supplementary budget. In addition, two PCs
for the second review have already been met. An indicative macroeconomic framework for
the coming fiscal year has also been drawn up, consistent with program objectives.
47.
The key issue for economic management in the short term is to step up budget
execution. Staff supports the steps that are being taken by the authorities to overcome
administrative capacity constraints and supply bottlenecks, although realistically their impact
will take some time to fully materialize. The authorities have to be vigilant that efforts to
accelerate spending do not affect either its quality or its allocation, which should remain in
line with the priorities identified in the interim PRSP.
48.
The authorities also have to monitor liquidity conditions closely, to avoid an
overly tight monetary policy stance. Staff cautions about the recent deceleration in base
money growth, and suggests that the BRH fully use the space provided for under the program
to expand money supply. In light of the uncertainties about the timing of budget execution
during the remainder of the fiscal year, close coordination between the monetary and fiscal
authorities is advisable to avoid episodes of liquidity squeeze, which can also exacerbate
exchange rate appreciation pressures.

25
49.
Looking toward the medium term, and beyond the consolidation of recent
stabilization gains, Haiti’s main challenge remains the achievement of higher, sustained
growth. Modest growth has resumed, but a more robust pick up in economic activity has yet
to set in. A weak growth response caused by factors such as supply and government capacity
bottlenecks, continued security problems, or exchange rate appreciation beginning to affect
export and import-competing sectors, represents one of the main downside risks to the
program, and to domestic and external stability more broadly.
50.
Avoiding a low-growth outcome will require overcoming many deep-seated
structural bottlenecks. Among them are the dilapidated infrastructure, inadequate supply of
basic utility services, and poor quality and coverage of education and health services. It will
be important for the authorities—with support from the international community—to focus
on ways to address these issues, including through the ongoing PRSP process.
51.
Against this backdrop, the task of generating funding for priority expenditures
through a strengthened domestic revenue effort becomes central. Staff applauds the
strong revenue performance so far this year and supports the authorities’ intention to raise
revenue over the medium term to at least 15 percent of GDP. Progress toward this goal could
be achieved through a carefully sequenced combination of improving revenue administration,
broadening the tax base and burden, and adjusting in due course tax rates and fees. Staff
agrees with the authorities that decisions on adjusting tax rates could best be made in the
context of a comprehensive tax policy review, and should take into account their social
ramifications.
52.
The authorities should also strive to clarify their monetary policy framework,
to help consolidate a stable low-inflation environment conducive to economic activity.
The current, somewhat eclectic, approach to monetary policy has successfully supported
disinflation in recent years, but may not be most adequate to sustain further progress and
enable needed deepening of financial markets.
53.
In light of Haiti’s weak interest rate channel, staff encourages the authorities
to focus on the control of base money supply for the time being. This would require
modifying central bank bond auctions to set volumes and allow interest rates to be
competitively determined. Central bank independence should also be strengthened in due
course through recapitalization and more effective limits on government borrowing. The
authorities’ view that some interim steps will be needed is well taken, but staff believes that
these should not overly delay implementation of the proposed framework.

26
54.
The staff’s analysis does not suggest, on balance, that the Haitian gourde is
misaligned. However, Haiti is facing an appreciating equilibrium real exchange rate, which
is a reflection of its strong dependence on remittances and other external transfers to support
consumption. While Haiti’s small and concentrated export sector has so far held up, its
further expansion and much needed diversification could be hampered by these real
appreciation pressures.
55.
External competitiveness should mainly be fostered through microeconomic
interventions, which offer significant scope for improvement. Attempts to resist the
observed equilibrium appreciation would likely be costly and ineffective over time. The
authorities should therefore maintain a floating exchange rate regime, limiting intervention to
replenishing reserves in line with PRGF program objectives and smoothing out seasonal
fluctuations. They should also focus on addressing widespread non-price competitiveness
problems, including the remaining insecurity, a generally difficult business environment,
legal uncertainties, and the structural bottlenecks described above.
56.
In sum, while significant challenges and risks remain, staff is hopeful that the
authorities can build on their accomplishments to bring about domestic and external
stability, sustained growth, and improved standards of living. This will require both
continued strong policy implementation and well-coordinated support from the international
community. Based on the authorities’ solid track record and the prospects for continued
implementation of the program, staff supports the requests for completion of the first review
under the PRGF arrangement, waiver for non-observance, and modification of a structural
PC.
57.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be conducted on the 24-month
cycle, subject to the provisions of the decision on consultation cycles in program countries.

130

Net international reserves of central bank (in millions of U.S. dollars) - floor

…

Government total expenditure, excl. ext-fin investment (in millions of gourdes) 9/

6,534

5,945

1,451

1,609

0

10

0
0

0

1,027

0

4

0
0

0

1,288

-50

211
0

211

Dec 06

Prog. with
adjustor 2/

5,812

5,847

1,213

1,502

0

50

0
0

0

-891

-747

-327
-254

-581

-722.6

-97.9

-238.4

-107.0

0

46

0
0

0

-2,179

-697

-538
-254

-792

12,245

11,364

693

1,164

0

15

0
0

0

59

-349

-349
0

-349

0

-1

0
0

0

740

333

333
0

333

10,600

11,745

-242

922

0

88

0
0

0

-3,919

-1,998

-1,457
-398

-1,855

Prel.

Mar 07

Test date Prog. with
1/
adjustor 2/

Cumulative Flows since September 2006
Deviation
Actual from prog
w/adjustor

-1,644.8

381.8

-935.1

-242.2

0

89

0
0

0

-4,659

-2,331

-1,790
-397

-2,188

Deviation
from prog
w/adjustor

1/ From EBS/06/141.
2/ Dec adjusted by US$6.2 million and March by US$16.2 due to less-than-programmed external financing.
3/ For program monitoring purposes, NDA is defined as currency in circulation minus NIR in gourde terms. Program exchange rate of G42/$ through end-March and G40/$ through end-Sept.
4/ On a continuous basis.
5/ Excludes guarantees granted to the electricity sector in the form of credit/guarantee letters.
6/ Includes foreign currency denominated debt.
7/ An amount of US$30,000 due on a small investment loan from the IDB, originally granted to a state-owned millm was repaid with a delay in February 2007.
Since the central government's responsibility for the loan could not be identified, the late payment does not cause a nonobservance of the PC. Nevertheless, staff will confirm with the MEF
whether, following the arrears payment in February, the loan will now be considered government's obligation for the purpose of the second program review.
8/ Includes recapitalization operation of a commercial bank.
9/ Accumulated flows over the program period.

Sources: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank of Haiti, and Fund staff estimates.

…

11,159

23,172

Government total revenue, excl. grants (in millions of gourdes) 9/

Change in currency in circulation

Memorandum items:

Change in base money 8/ 9/

Indicative target:

0

0
0

New contracting or guaranteeing by the central government or the BRH of
nonconcessional external debt 4/ 5/ 6/
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Up to and including one year
Over one-year maturity

External arrears accumulation (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4/ 7/

0

5,685

-50

-50
0

21,176
-174
20,118

-50

Prog. 1/

21,002

Domestic arrears accumulation of the central government 4/

Net domestic assets of the central bank (in millions of gourdes) - ceiling 3/

Net domestic banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector
(in millions of gourdes)

Net central bank credit to the NFPS (in millions of gourdes)
Of which:
Central Government
Rest of NFPS

Performance criteria

end-September 2006

Actual stock at

Table 1. Haiti: Indicative Targets and Quantitative Performance Criteria, FY 2007

18,988

18,318

261

1,239

0

103

0
0

0

-3,587

-1,559

-876
-398

-1,274

Jun 07

Ind. target

28,078

25,000

859

2,294

0

135

0
0

0

-4,279

0

0
0

0

Sept. 07

Test date

27

28
Table 2. Haiti: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
Fiscal year ending September 30
Nominal GDP (2006): US$ 4.8 billion
Population (2006): 9.1 million
Share of pop. living with less than $1 a day (2003): 54 percent

GDP per capita (2006): US$ 527
Adult literacy (2005): 53 percent
Unemployment rate (2003): 27 percent

2005

Prel.
2006

2007

Proj.
2008

2009

(change over previous year unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end-of-period)

1.8
17.6
16.8
14.8

2.3
16.6
14.2
12.4

3.5
9.0
9.0
8.0

4.5
7.8
7.8
7.5

4.0
7.3
7.3
7.0

External sector
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Real effective exchange rate (+ appreciation)

21.3
8.0
-5.8

7.7
18.3
13.4

11.9
5.9
...

26.1
17.6
...

12.7
13.0
...

Central government
Total revenue and grants 1/
Total revenue excl. grants
Current expenditure
Total expenditure

54.2
30.5
46.4
30.4

23.1
23.7
12.3
24.8

39.0
24.3
23.2
33.4

16.7
22.1
16.4
19.7

3.1
11.8
15.7
17.3

Money and credit
Credit to public sector (net)
Credit to private sector
Base money
Broad money (including foreign currency deposits)

0.3
21.1
0.6
20.3

-4.9
5.5
5.5
10.0

0.0
5.1
9.9
9.7

0.0
10.0
8.1
10.0

0.0
13.7
10.0
11.1

Central government
Overall balance (including grants) 1/
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance (excluding grants and externally-financed projects)
Central bank net credit to the central government
Savings and investment
Gross investment
Gross national savings
Of which: Central government savings
External current account balance (incl. official grants)
External current account balance (excl. official grants)
External public debt (end-of-period)
Total public debt (end-of-period) 2/
External public debt service (in percent of
exports of goods and nonfactor services)

(percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
-0.6
-4.1
-1.2
0.0

-0.8
-4.4
0.0
-0.2

-0.3
-6.0
-1.4
0.0

-0.8
-6.1
-1.1
0.0

-3.0
-7.0
-1.6
0.0

27.4
30.1
1.5
2.6
-5.0
30.9
34.0
17.5

28.9
28.9
1.6
0.0
-7.9
29.3
33.1
8.5

30.9
32.1
2.7
1.2
-6.4
26.0
30.3
5.1

32.2
32.0
3.0
-0.2
-7.2
23.9
28.1
6.0

33.5
31.3
1.4
-2.2
-8.8
23.1
27.0
6.4

(millions of US$, unless otherwise indicated)
Overall balance of payments
Net international reserves (program) 3/
Liquid gross reserves 4/
In months of imports of the following year
Exchange rate (gourdes per dollar, end-of-period)
Nominal GDP (millions of gourdes)
Nominal GDP (millions of dollars)

56.2
70.4
228.5
1.3
43.0
168,034
4,310

87.7
130.3
335.5
1.8
39.1
200,456
4,836

156.8
265.3
534.7
2.4
...
226,195
5,655

76.5
335.3
652.3
2.6
...
254,845
6,371

-59.8
410.3
776.7
2.9
...
284,283
6,933

Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ From 2009 onward, budget grants are assumed zero until firm donor commitments are forthcoming.
2/ Includes external public sector debt, outstanding Central Bank bonds, and credit from commercial banks to the NFPS.
3/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
4/ Gross reserves excluding capital contributions to international organizations.

29
Table 3a: Central Government Operations
Fiscal year ending September 30, in millions of gourdes
Prel.
2006

EBS/06/141

2005

2007

2007

Proj.
2008

2009

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Other current revenue
Grants
Budget support 1/
Project grants

22,056
16,255
10,653
4,275
1,328
5,800
2,361
3,440

27,160
20,110
12,878
6,099
1,133
7,051
1,253
5,797

34,178
21,944
15,095
6,464
386
12,234
3,030
9,203

37,748
25,000
17,161
7,427
412
12,748
3,457
9,291

44,035
30,516
21,663
8,385
468
13,519
3,274
10,244

45,386
34,126
24,226
9,377
523
11,260
...
11,260

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Net Operations 2/
Operations
Interest payments
Transfers and subsidies
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Foreign-financed

23,111
16,161
5,700
4,306
3,388
1,132
5,023
6,949
2,144
4,805

28,845
18,156
6,470
4,505
4,505
1,627
5,553
10,689
1,940
8,749

38,470
21,349
8,495
5,962
5,962
1,799
4,462
17,122
3,500
13,622

38,470
22,369
9,509
7,356
7,356
739
4,764
16,101
5,709
10,392

46,059
26,045
11,866
7,461
7,461
1,717
5,001
20,014
7,200
12,814

54,044
30,123
13,646
9,041
9,041
1,751
5,686
23,921
8,600
15,321

Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants
Excluding grants and externally financed projects

-1,055
-6,856
-2,050

-1,685
-8,735
13

-4,292
-16,526
-2,904

-722
-13,470
-3,078

-2,024
-15,543
-2,729

-8,658
-19,918
-4,597

Financing
External net financing
Loans (net)
Disbursements
Budget support
Project loans
Amortization
Arrears (net) 3/

1,055
1,064
2,737
4,010
2,645
1,365
-1,274
-1,673

1,685
2,509
2,123
3,729
778
2,951
-1,606
386

4,292
2,049
3,908
5,673
1,255
4,418
-1,765
-1,859

722
-1,528
210
1,701
600
1,101
-1,491
-1,737

2,024
1,311
1,311
3,170
600
2,570
-1,858
0

2,053
2,053
2,053
4,061
...
4,061
-2,008
0

-9
-50
-21
-29
0
41

-824
-752
-462
-290
-120
48

-294
0
0
0
-294
0

-446
-446
0
-446
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0
0

1,978
559

1,879
817

313
400

323
0

0
0.0

0
0.0

0
0.0

0
0.0

0
0.0

6,282
153.2

Internal net financing
Banking system
BRH
Commercial banks
Other nonbank financing
Arrears (net)
Prospective rescheduling 4/
HIPC 5/
Unidentified financing
Unidentified financing (in U.S. dollars)

Sources: Ministry of Finance and Economy; and Fund staff estimates
1/ Budget support 2006 and 2007 includes grants from Canada to cover debt service to the IDB.
2/ Includes statistical discrepancy.
3/ Arrears accumulation in 2005-06 reflects an informal deferral of debt service to France, Italy and Spain granted
until the IMF arrangement was in place.
4/ Including clearance of arrears accumulated in agreement with Italy, France, and Spain.
5/ HIPC debt relief.

30

Table 3b: Central Government Operations
Fiscal year ending September 30, in percent of GDP
Proj.

Prel.

EBS/06/141

2005

2006

2007

2007

2008

2009

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Other current revenue
Grants
Budget support 1/
Project grants

13.1
9.7
6.3
2.5
0.8
3.5
1.4
2.0

13.5
10.0
6.4
3.0
0.6
3.5
0.6
2.9

15.1
9.7
6.7
2.9
0.2
5.4
1.3
4.1

16.7
11.1
7.6
3.3
0.2
5.6
1.5
4.1

17.3
12.0
8.5
3.3
0.2
5.3
1.3
4.0

16.0
12.0
8.5
3.3
0.2
4.0
...
4.0

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Net Operations 2/
Operations
Interest payments
Transfers and subsidies
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Foreign-financed

13.8
9.6
3.4
2.6
2.0
0.7
3.0
4.1
1.3
2.9

14.4
9.1
3.2
2.2
2.2
0.8
2.8
5.3
1.0
4.4

17.0
9.4
3.8
2.6
2.6
0.8
2.0
7.6
1.5
6.0

17.0
9.9
4.2
3.3
3.3
0.3
2.1
7.1
2.5
4.6

18.1
10.2
4.7
2.9
2.9
0.7
2.0
7.9
2.8
5.0

19.0
10.6
4.8
3.2
3.2
0.6
2.0
8.4
3.0
5.4

Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants
Excluding grants and externally financed projects

-0.6
-4.1
-1.2

-0.8
-4.4
0.0

-1.9
-7.3
-1.3

-0.3
-6.0
-1.4

-0.8
-6.1
-1.1

-3.0
-7.0
-1.6

Financing
External net financing
Loans (net)
Disbursements
Budget support
Project loans
Amortization
Arrears (net) 3/

0.6
0.6
1.6
2.4
1.6
0.8
-0.8
-1.0

0.8
1.3
1.1
1.9
0.4
1.5
-0.8
0.2

1.9
0.9
1.7
2.5
0.6
2.0
-0.8
-0.8

0.3
-0.7
0.1
0.8
0.3
0.5
-0.7
-0.8

0.8
0.5
0.5
1.2
0.2
1.0
-0.7
0.0

0.8
0.7
0.7
1.4
...
1.4
-0.7
0.0

Internal net financing
Banking system
BRH
Commercial banks
Other nonbank financing
Arrears (net)

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
-0.4
-0.2
-0.1
-0.1
0.0

-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0

-0.2
-0.2
0.0
-0.2
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Prospective rescheduling 4/
HIPC 5/

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.9
0.2

0.8
0.4

0.1
0.2

0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

2.2
153.2

Unidentified financing
Unidentified financing (in U.S. dollars)

Sources: Ministry of Finance and Economy; and Fund staff estimates
1/ Budget support 2006 and 2007 includes grant from Canada to cover debt service to the IDB.
2/ Includes statistical discrepancy.
3/ Arrears accumulation in 2005-06 reflects an informal deferral of debt service to France, Italy and Spain granted
until the IMF arrangement was in place.
4/ Including clearance of arrears accumulated in agreement with Italy, France, and Spain.
5/ HIPC debt relief.

31
Table 4. Haiti: Summary Accounts of the Banking System
Fiscal year ending September 30, in millions of gourdes

2005

Prel. EBS/06/141
2006
2007

2007

Proj.
2008

2009

I. Central Bank
Net foreign assets
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Net international reserves (program)
Commercial bank forex deposits
Net domestic assets 1/
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector
of which: Credit to the central government
Liabilities to commercial banks (excl gourde deposits)
BRH bonds
Counterpart of commercial bank forex deposits
Other
Base Money
Currency in circulation
Commercial bank gourde deposits

8,226
191
70
121

11,276
288
130
158

14,001
333
160
178

17,680
467
265
201

21,462
561
335
226

25,717
663
410
252

13,740
21,602
21,638
-10,695
-5,501
-5,194
2,833

11,896
21,002
21,176
-13,986
-7,809
-6,177
4,880

11,462
21,153
21,325
-13,788
-6,327
-7,461
4,098

7,786
21,002
21,176
-17,322
-9,692
-7,630
4,106

6,066
21,002
21,176
-19,042
-10,429
-8,612
4,106

4,555
21,002
21,176
-20,553
-10,836
-9,716
4,106

21,966
10,547
11,419

23,172
11,159
12,013

25,463
12,151
13,312

25,466
12,018
13,448

27,528
12,982
14,547

30,272
14,285
15,987

II. Consolidated Banking System
Net foreign assets
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Of which: Commercial banks NFA

18,630
433
242

24,000
613
325

26,884
681
348

30,493
805
339

35,866
934
373

41,660
1,072
409

Net domestic assets
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector
Credit to the private sector
In gourdes
In foreign currency
Other

49,660
21,159
25,609
13,000
12,609
2,892

51,091
20,118
27,019
12,920
14,099
3,955

55,359
20,616
31,660
15,654
16,007
3,083

51,895
20,118
28,399
13,104
15,295
3,378

54,737
20,118
31,241
13,682
17,559
3,378

59,016
20,118
35,520
15,418
20,102
3,378

Broad money
Currency in circulation
Gourde deposits
Foreign currency deposits
In millions of U.S. dollars

68,290
10,547
28,292
29,451
684

75,091
11,159
31,533
32,399
828

82,243
12,151
33,584
36,508
926

82,388
12,018
33,962
36,408
928

90,602
12,982
36,685
40,936
1,041

100,677
14,285
40,369
46,022
1,163

(12-month percentage change)
Currency in circulation
Base money
Gourde money (M2)
Broad money (M3)

21.4
0.6
12.5
20.3

5.8
5.5
9.9
10.0

8.9
9.9
7.1
9.5

7.7
9.9
10.4
9.7

8.0
8.1
8.0
10.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
11.1

Gourde deposits
Foreign currency deposits (US dollars)

9.6
32.4

11.5
21.0

6.5
11.8

7.7
12.1

8.0
12.2

10.0
11.6

Credit to the nonfinancial public sector
Credit to the private sector
Credit in gourdes
Credit in foreign currency (US dollars)

0.3
21.1
19.3
23.0

-4.9
5.5
-0.6
23.0

2.5
17.2
21.2
-2.7

0.0
5.1
1.4
13.9

0.0
10.0
4.4
13.8

0.0
13.7
12.7
13.0

Memorandum items:
Foreign currency bank deposits (percent of total)
Foreign curr. credit to priv. sector (percent of total)

51.0
49.2

50.7
52.2

52.1
50.6

51.7
53.9

52.7
56.2

53.3
56.6

Sources: Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For program monitoring purposes, NDA is defined differently: as currency in circulation minus NIR at the program exchange rate.

32
Table 5. Haiti: Balance of Payments
Fiscal year ending September 30, in millions of US$
Prel.
2005
Current account
Current account (excluding grants)

114.0

Proj.

2006

2007

-0.7

66.9

2008
-12.0

2009
-153.2

-214.0

-380.7

-361.0

-460.2

-611.2

-849.6
458.9
396.8
-1308.5
-313.5

-1053.8
494.4
435.0
-1548.3
-397.1

-1086.4
553.5
491.1
-1639.8
-399.6

-1230.6
698.0
631.0
-1928.5
-450.3

-1392.0
786.3
713.1
-2178.3
-466.6

-313.2
138.3
-451.5

-335.7
197.2
-532.8

-357.0
230.0
-587.0

-400.2
290.1
-690.3

-452.9
326.8
-779.7

-36.5
-33.4

6.6
-19.4

1.3
-19.3

-4.4
-22.4

2.2
-22.7

1313.3
328.0
985.3

1382.2
380.0
1002.2

1508.9
427.9
1081.0

1623.2
448.2
1175.0

1689.6
458.0
1231.6

Capital and financial accounts

-57.8

88.4

89.9

88.5

93.4

Public sector capital flows (net)
Loan disbursements
Amortization
Banks (net) 2/
Foreign direct investment
Errors and omissions 3/

31.3
102.1
-70.8
-75.5
26.0
-39.6

50.9
90.2
-39.2
-83.5
160.0
-39.1

23.2
43.7
-20.4
-13.3
80.0
0.0

42.8
79.2
-36.4
-34.3
80.0
0.0

50.1
99.0
-49.0
-36.7
80.0
0.0

56.2

87.7

156.8

76.5

-59.8

-56.2
-12.9
-22.1
9.2
11.1
15.6
-4.5
-1.9
-43.3
0.0
0.0

-87.7
-97.0
-106.9
9.9
10.3
14.8
-4.5
-0.5
9.3
0.0
0.0

-156.8
-178.5
-199.2
20.7
20.7
53.9
-33.2
0.0
-44.7
49.7
16.7

-76.5
-94.6
-117.6
23.1
23.1
23.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.8
10.2

-93.4
-101.3
-124.4
23.1
23.1
23.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.9
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

153.2

2.6
-5.0
21.3
8.0
222.7
17.5
228.5

0.0
-7.9
7.7
18.3
205.1
8.5
335.5

1.2
-6.4
11.9
5.9
187.4
5.1
534.7

-0.2
-7.2
26.1
17.6
154.4
6.0
652.3

-2.2
-8.8
12.7
13.0
144.1
6.4
776.7

1.3

1.8

2.4

2.6

2.9

Trade balance
Exports of goods
of which: Assembly industry
Imports of goods
of which: Petroleum products
Services (net)
Receipts
Payments
Income (net)
of which: Interest payments
Current transfers (net)
Official transfers (net)
Private transfers (net) 1/

Overall balance
Financing
Change in net foreign assets 4/
Change in gross reserves
Liabilities
Utilization of Fund credits, existing and prospective (net)
Purchases and loans 5/
Repayments
Other liabilities
Change in arrears
Debt rescheduling 6/
HIPC interim assistance from multilateral creditors
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance, excluding grants (in percent of GDP)
Goods exports (f.o.b) growth
Goods import (f.o.b) growth
External debt as percent of exports
Debt service as percent of exports
Gross liquid international reserves (in millions of USD) 4/
Gross liquid international reserves (in months
of following year's imports of goods and services) 4/
Sources: Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Based on remittances transferred through authorized "transfer houses" and BRH estimates.
2/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
3/ Includes short-term capital and errors and omissions.
4/ Includes NIR and commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
5/ Includes current PRGF arrangement, with an upfront disbursement equivalent to 25 percent of quota used to repay EPCA purchases.
6/ In line with the Dec. 2006 Paris Club agreement, rescheduling of arrears and debt service to bilateral creditors during the PRGF
arrangement.

33
Table 6. Haiti: Medium-Term Scenario
Fiscal year ending September 30

2005

Prel.
2006

2007

2008

Proj.
2009

2010

2011

Real sector (annual percentage rate)
Real GDP growth
Inflation (CPI end-of-period)

1.8
14.8

2.3
12.4

3.5
8.0

4.5
7.5

4.0
7.0

4.0
6.0

4.0
5.0

Fiscal sector (in percent of GDP)
Central government overall balance (incl. grants)
Total revenue and grants
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Domestic financing
External financing 1/

-0.6
13.1
9.7
13.8
0.0
0.6

-0.8
13.5
10.0
14.4
-0.4
1.3

-0.3
16.7
11.1
17.0
-0.2
0.5

-0.8
17.3
12.0
18.1
0.0
0.8

-3.0
16.0
12.0
19.0
0.0
3.0

-3.5
16.6
12.6
20.1
0.0
3.5

-3.3
17.2
13.3
20.5
0.0
3.3

Monetary sector
Growth in broad money

20.3

10.0

9.7

10.0

11.1

10.5

9.6

-19.7
-7.3
-0.8
22.9
7.6
2.6
-5.0
0.0
0.0
228.5
1.3

-21.8
-6.9
0.1
20.7
7.9
0.0
-7.9
0.0
0.0
335.5
1.8

-19.2
-6.3
0.0
19.1
7.6
1.2
-6.4
0.0
0.0
534.7
2.4

-19.3
-6.3
-0.1
18.4
7.0
-0.2
-7.2
0.0
0.0
652.3
2.6

-20.1
-6.5
0.0
17.8
6.6
-2.2
-8.8
2.2
2.2
776.7
2.9

-20.6
-6.7
0.2
17.8
6.6
-2.7
-9.3
2.2
2.4
890.4
3.1

-20.5
-6.6
0.3
17.8
6.6
-2.5
-9.1
1.9
2.1
993.2
3.2

External sector (in percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Services (net)
Income (net)
Private transfers (net)
External grants
Current account (incl. official transfers)
Current account (excl. official transfers)
External financing gap
Of which : Central government
Liquid gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of imports of the following year
Sources: Haitian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Including prospective rescheduling, HIPC relief, and unidentified financing.

34
Table 7. Haiti: Indicators of Fund Credit
Fiscal year ending September 30
Prel.

Proj.

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Outstanding Fund credit, existing and prospective
In millions of SDRs
In millions of gourdes
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services

14.8
852
18.0
0.5
3.7

22.0
1,359
26.9
0.7
4.7

35.7
2,264
43.6
1.0
6.9

50.9
3,243
62.1
1.3
7.8

66.1
4,226
80.7
1.5
9.0

Debt service to the Fund 1/ 2/ 3/
In millions of SDRs
In millions of gourdes
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service due
In percent of net international reserves

3.3
188.1
4.0
0.1
0.8
4.6
2.1

3.9
237.1
4.7
0.1
0.8
9.8
1.7

22.6
1,367.5
27.6
0.6
4.4
86.0
6.4

0.5
30.7
0.6
0.0
0.1
1.3
0.1

0.5
31
0.6
0.0
0.1
1.1
0.1

(In millions of SDRs)
Net use of Fund credit
Disbursements
Repayments

7.2
10.2
3.0

7.2
10.2
3.0

13.7
35.7
22.0

Sources: IMF Finance Department and staff projections.
1/ Debt service to the Fund in 2007 includes the repurchase of outstanding EPCA obligations
using the upfront 25% of quota PRGF disbursement.
2/ Including SDR charges.
3/ After subsidization of GRA charges.

15.2
15.2
0.0

15.2
15.2
0.0

68.7

34.2

0.0
17.8
2.7

45.4
24.9
0.0
17.8

10.9
0.2
4.1
1.3
2.7
2.5

56.3

2007
Proj.

40.1

0.0
35.1
5.3

92.2
51.9
0.0
35.1

21.5
0.2
8.8
2.3
5.4
4.8

113.7

2005-07
Total

0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.6
0.0
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.3

3.6

2007
Proj.

(C)

Paris Club

0.1

0.0
6.7
0.0

16.7
10.0
0.0
6.7

5.0
0.1
0.4
1.6
0.0
2.9

21.7

2006/07
Proj.

(D)

HIPC

19.8

0.0
-1.1
-2.7

41.9
12.6
33.1
-1.1

30.0
6.8
3.5
10.2
-2.7
12.2

71.9

2007
Proj.

( A+C+D-B )

28.7

0.0
-3.6
-5.3

19.9
-4.4
33.1
-3.6

52.2
22.1
4.6
16.3
-5.4
14.6

72.1

2005-07
Total

Net Transfers Cash Basis

1/ Excludes humanitarian assistance.
2/ Includes funds for clearance of arrears to the World Bank.
3/ Disbursements consist of 60 percent concessional loans and 40 percent grants in 2005 and 2006, and 100 percent grants in 2007 and 2008.

Sources: Haitian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

53.9

0.0
24.8
0.0

0.0
10.0
0.0

Memorandum item:
IMF

95.4
37.5
33.1
24.8

70.6
27.5
33.1
10.0

Multilateral creditors
IDB
EU
World Bank 3/
of which
Arrears clearance
Other
Other

65.1
22.1
9.7
17.0
0.0
16.3

160.6

32.3
6.8
3.9
10.0
0.0
11.6

102.9

Bilateral creditors
Canada 2/
France
United States
Taiwan
Others

Bilateral and multilateral

2005-07
Total

(B)

(A)
2007
Proj.

Debt Service Payments

Cash Budget Support

Fiscal year ending September 30, in millions of US dollars

Table 8: Haiti: Budgetary Financing, by Donor and Type 1/

0.0

9.9

99.2
53.8
17.7
17.8

165.4
51.6
19.9
53.7
12.1
28.1

264.6

2007
Proj.

(E)

0.0

0.0
0.0
13.0

174.7
116.5
17.7
27.4

302.7
131.7
28.3
76.6
25.6
40.4

477.4

2005-07
Total

Project Loans and Grants

19.8

7.1

141.1
66.4
50.8
16.7

195.4
58.4
23.4
63.9
9.4
40.3

336.5

2007
Proj.

28.7

0.0
0.0
7.8

194.6
112.2
50.8
23.8

354.9
153.8
32.9
92.9
20.3
55.0

549.5

2005-07
Total

( A+C+D+E-B )

Net Overall Transfers

35

36
Table 9. Haiti: Millennium Development Goals
With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015 estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years
1990

1995

2000

2004

2005

2006

Goal 1: Halve share of people on less than $1 a day (PP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)

…

…

53.9

…

…

…

Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)

…

…

…

78.0

…

…

Share of income or consumption to the poorest quintile (%)

…

…

2.4

…

…

…

Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

27

28

17

…

…

…

Primary school enrollment (net, %)

22

…

…

…

…

…

Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)

28

…

…

…

…

…

Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)

21

…

…

…

…

…

Youth literacy rate (% of population ages 15-24)

55

…

…

…

…

…

Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)

95

…

…

…

…

…

Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment

40

…

…

…

…

…

Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

…

4.0

4.0

4.0

3.6

2.4

Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000)

150

137

125

117

120

…

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

102

91

81

74

84

…

31

49

54

54

54

…

Goal 2: Ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling

Goal 3: Eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women

Goal 4: Reduce under-five mortality by two-thirds

Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: Reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

…

…

680

…

…

…

Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

23

20

24

…

…

…

Goal 6: Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)

…

…

…

3.8

3.8

…

Contraceptive prevalence (% of women, ages 15-49)

11

18

27

…

…

…

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

484

…

…

306

305

…

Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

…

2

22

49

57

…

47

…

…

54

…

…

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

24

…

…

30

…

…

Forest area (% of total land area)

4.2

…

4.0

3.8

3.8

…

…

…

…

0.4

…

…

Protected areas (% of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capital)

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

…

…

10.4

7.3

7.0

6.3

…

…

Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)

7.0

8.0

16

64

…

…

Internet users (per 1,000 people)

…

GDP per unit energy use (constant 2,000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development

0.0

0.0

3.0

59

70

Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

…

…

…

…

…

…

Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

24

…

17

…

…

…

Source: World Bank

37
Table 10. Haiti: Proposed Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF arrangement, 2006-2009

Amount

Date

Conditions for Disbursement 1/

SDR 28,100,000

November 20, 2006

Executive Board approval of the three-year arrangement
under the PRGF. Includes 25% of quota in access
for repayment of EPCA purchases

SDR 7,600,000

July 23, 2007

Observance of performance criteria for March 2007 and
completion of the first review under the PRGF arrangement.

SDR 7,600,000

December 15, 2007

Observance of performance criteria for September 2007 and
completion of the second review under the PRGF arrangement.

SDR 7,600,000

July 23, 2008

Observance of performance criteria for March 2008 and
completion of the third review under the PRGF arrangement.

SDR 7,600,000

December 15, 2008

Observance of performance criteria for September 2008 and
completion of the fourth review under the PRGF arrangement.

SDR 7,600,000

July 23, 2009

Observance of performance criteria for March 2009 and
completion of the fifth review under the PRGF arrangement.

SDR 7,610,000

December 15, 2009

Observance of performance criteria for September 2009 and
completion of the sixth review under the PRGF arrangement.

Source: IMF
1/ Other than the generally applicable conditions for the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)

38
Table 11. Haiti: Indicators of External Vulnerability
Fiscal year ending September 30, units as indicated

2005

Prel.
2006

2007

Proj.
2008

2009

30.9
222.7
2.4
1.6
0.8
17.5
11.9
5.6

29.3
205.1
1.2
0.8
0.4
8.5
5.7
2.8

26.0
187.4
0.7
0.4
0.3
5.1
2.6
2.5

23.9
154.4
0.9
0.6
0.4
6.0
3.7
2.3

23.1
144.1
1.0
0.7
0.3
6.4
4.4
2.0

27.6
18.7
8.9

11.4
7.6
3.8

6.4
3.3
3.1

7.7
4.8
2.9

8.8
6.0
2.8

21.3
8.0
25.0
-5.8
39.0
114.0
-57.8
31.3
-89.1
228.5
1.3
390
44.8

7.7
18.3
23.6
13.4
41.4
-0.7
88.4
50.9
37.4
335.5
1.8
844
56.6

11.9
5.9
22.4
...
...
66.9
89.9
23.2
66.7
534.7
2.4
909
84.0

26.1
17.6
21.5
...
...
-12.0
88.5
42.8
45.7
652.3
2.6
910
94.8

12.7
13.0
20.7
...
...
-153.2
93.4
50.1
43.3
776.7
2.9
1056
107.8

Debt indicators
Total external public debt (in percent of GDP)
Total external public debt (in percent of exports 1/)
External debt service (in percent of GDP)
Amortization
Interest
External debt service (in percent of exports 1/)
Amortization
Interest
External debt service (in percent of current central gov. revenues)
Amortization
Interest
Other indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Remittances and grants (in percent of gross disposable income)
Real effective exchange rate appreciation (+) (end of period)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
Current account balance (US$ million) 2/
Capital and financial account balance (US$ million)
Public sector
Private sector 3/
Liquid gross reserves (US$ million)
In months of imports of the following year 1/
In percent of debt service due in the following year
In percent of base money

Sources: Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Goods and services.
2/ Includes grants.
3/ Includes short-term capital, errors and omissions.

44.8
53.0
...
...

...

...
...
...
...

31.9
5.5
5.4
97.2
1.0

...
5.4

1,354.5
13.6
35.9
33.7

47.4
55.3
...

...
...
...
...

34.5
6.5
5.5
84.4
6.4

...
5.8

936.6
12.9
32.1
15.1

43.6
50.5
59.3
52.9

0.7
12.8
71.8
5.9

31.5
12.4
6.1
49.1
42.2

16.5
5.0

1,605.1
10.7
31.1
5.6

45.2
54.5
66.0
53.7

1.8
34.2
72.2
5.7

29.9
10.5
9.4
88.8
6.6

14.3
5.3

1,929.1
10.2
30.6
13.7

2006

44.4
53.0
69.2
52.4

2.0
32.7
70.1
5.6

29.8
11.7
7.5
64.6
19.2

18.1
7.0

1,977.7
11.1
31.1
6.6

Oct 2006Mar 2007

1/ The figures for all years were converted from gourdes at the same 12/31/06 exchange rate of 37.5914 G/US dollar.
2/ Liquid assets comprise cash and central bank bonds.

...

46.5
54.1
...

0.8
15.1
55.1
...

30.5
7.4
6.2
82.9
7.8

...
5.3

1,487.9
12.2
34.2
5.1

Year Ending September 30
2003
2004
2005

Source: Based on statistics published by the Banque de la Republique d'Haiti.

Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets 2/
Liquid assets to deposits 2/
Foreign currency loans to total loans (net)
Foreign currency deposits to total deposits

Earnings and profitability (annualized)
ROA
ROE
Net interest income to gross interest income
Administrative expenses to average assets

Asset quality and composition
Loans (net) to assets
NPLs to gross loans
Provisions to gross loans
Provisions to gross NPLs
NPL less provisions to net worth

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Capital (net worth) to assets

Credit/GDP (percent)
Deposits/GDP (percent)
Credit growth (net) from year before (percent)

Size and growth
Asset volume (in US$ millions, end of period) 1/

2002

Table 12. Haiti: Aggregate Financial Soundness Indicators of the Banking System, 2001-2007

39

40

SUMMARY OF ANNEXES
Fund relations
Haiti’s current outstanding obligations to the Fund are SDR 28.1 million, which originate
from drawings under PRGF arrangements. Haiti’s exchange rate regime is a managed float
with no predetermined path for the exchange rate. The central bank has implemented priority
recommendations of the update Safeguards assessment that was completed in March 2007,
and is currently in the process of implementing other remaining recommendations. The last
article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on May 16, 2005 (Country
Report No. 05/206).
Relations with the World Bank Group1
The World Bank Group’s strategy and program in Haiti for FY 2007 and FY 2008 are set out
in the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) reviewed by the Bank’s Board on January 30, 2007. A full
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) will be prepared during FY 2008. Since January 2005,
IDA has approved 11 projects for Haiti, for a total value of $199 million. This is in addition
to $12 million of trust fund resources since 2004. All assistance has been provided entirely in
grant form since July 2005. The IDA grants program for FY 2007 totals US$68 million. The
Bank is involved mainly in such areas as institutional capacity strengthening, governance
reforms, community driven development, education, or water and sanitation.
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank2
Since 2003, the Bank has operationalized its presence in Haiti through two successive
transition strategies. At the present time, the IDB has 20 loans under execution, totaling
US$624.9 million. The balance available for disbursements is US$458 million, which
represents 73 percent of the approved amount. The IDB is involved mainly in public finance
reform, road rehabilitation, agriculture, education, or local development projects.
Statistical Issues
Haiti is currently working toward participation in the General Data Dissemination System.
While data provision is broadly adequate for program purpose, there is a need to improve the
coverage, periodicity, quality and timeliness of statistics. Further work is required to extend the
coverage of government finance statistics, and improve the quality of real sector and balance
of payments statistics, including external debt. Also, the production of quarterly GDP data
would be highly desirable for program monitoring purposes.

1

Adapted from text prepared by the staff of the World Bank in May 2007.

2

Adapted from text prepared by the staff of the IDB in May 2007

41

ANNEX I. FUND RELATIONS
(As of May 31, 2007)
I. Membership status: Joined September 8, 1953; Article VIII.
II.

General resources account

SDR Million

Percent of Quota

81.90
81.83
0.07

100.00
99.92
0.08

SDR Million

Percent of Allocation

13.70
5.01

100.00
36.54

SDR Million

Percent of Quota

28.10

34.31

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

SDR department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding purchases and loans:
PRGF Arrangements

V.

Financial arrangements:
Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDRmillion)

Type of
Arrangement

Approval Expiration
Date
Date

PRGF

11/20/06

11/19/09

73.71

28.10

PRGF

10/18/96

10/17/99

91.05

15.18

Stand-by

03/08/95

03/07/96

20.00

16.40

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund (without HIPC Assistance)1/
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2007

2008

Forthcoming
2009

2010

2011

0.33
0.33

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

1/When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the
amount of such arrears will be shown in this section.

VII. Projected Payments to Fund: (with Board-approved HIPC Assistance)
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2007

2008

Forthcoming
2009

2010

2011

0.29
0.29

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

0.51
0.51

42
VIII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative
I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed by all creditors (US$ million) 1/
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date

Enhanced framework
November, 2006
140.30
3.12
2.10
Floating

II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR Million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income 2/
Total disbursements

0.04
0.04
----0.04

1/

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at
the completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV
terms at the decision point. Hence these two amounts can not be added.
2/

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point
corresponding to interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not
disbursed during the interim period.

IX.

Exchange arrangements:

Managed floating with no predetermined path for the exchange rate. The change from
a fixed to managed floating regime took place in January 1990. Haiti's exchange system is
free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions. Since September 1991 all transactions have taken place at the free (interbank)
market rate.
X.

Safeguards assessment

The update safeguards assessment of the Banque de la République d’Haiti (BRH),
completed on March 5, 2007, found slow progress in strengthening the BRH’s safeguards
framework since the 2005 assessment and made recommendations to address remaining
vulnerabilities. Implementation of priority recommendations, comprising a special audit of
the monetary data, the formalization of an action plan to fully implement IFRS, and the
establishment of an audit committee were part of the conditionality for the first review of the
PRGF arrangement. The proposed audit committee will inter alia monitor the implementation
of remaining safeguards recommendations.

43
XI.

Article IV Consultation

The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on
May16, 2005. Haiti is on a 24-month cycle.
XII.

Technical assistance

Technical assistance missions since 2005:
Department

Dates

Purpose

FAD

April 2005
May 2005

Public expenditure management
Tax policy and revenue administration

MFD

March 2005
November 2005
May 2006
March 2007

Monetary operations
Implementation of a bond auction mechanism
Accounting of the central bank
Banking law (jointly with LEG)

STA

November 2005 and
May 2006
May, October and
December 2006,
April-May 2007

Multisector statistics
Monetary and financial statistics

March 2007

Banking law

LEG

XI.

Resident representative
Mr. Ugo Fasano has been the Fund’s Resident Representative since October 2005.

44
ANNEX II. RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of May 31, 2007)
The World Bank stepped up its engagement in Haiti in March 2004, as part of a broader
partnership between the Transitional Government and donors to address Haiti’s social,
economic and institutional needs. The government and donors conducted a needs assessment
in May 2004 which provided the basis for the Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF). This
established a two-year program for reform and recovery and the structures through which it
would be pursued. The ICF was presented at an international donor conference in July 2004
at the World Bank headquarters, at which donor countries and international organizations
pledged US$1.1 billion for Haiti. At a subsequent conference in July 2006 in Port-au-Prince,
Haiti’s new elected Government extended the ICF until September 2007 and revised it to
reflect Government priorities. Donors pledged US$751 million for the period 2006–07.
The World Bank Group’s strategy and program in Haiti for FY 2007 and FY 2008 are set out
in the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) reviewed by the Bank’s Board on January 30, 2007. A full
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) will be prepared during FY2008 on the basis of the full
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) that the Government plans to complete during
2007. The most recent full CAS was discussed by the Board in 1996.
Since January 2005, when Haiti cleared its arrears to the International Development
Association (IDA), IDA has approved 11 projects for Haiti, for a total value of $199 million.
This is in addition to $12 million of trust fund resources since 2004, primarily from the PostConflict Fund and the Low Income Countries Under Stress Trust Fund (LICUS). All
assistance has been provided entirely in grant form since July 2005.
The IDA grants program for FY 2007 totals US$68 million. Of this, the first project
(approved in July) was a US$6 million Electricity Loss Reduction Project, which aims to
strengthen operational, financial, and customer management performance in key areas of the
state electrical utility. A US$5 million Rural Water and Sanitation Project, to increase access
to safe water and sanitation, and a US$23 million development policy grant linked to the
government’s economic governance reform program (Economic Governance Reform
Operation II) were approved in January 2007. In addition, a US$9 million Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Project, approved in March, will finance Haiti’s entrance fee and participation for
three years in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, which will provide rapid
payouts in the event of a major hurricane or earthquake. A US$25 million Education for All
(EFA) Project, which aims to expand primary enrollment, was approved in April 26, 2007.
The three investment projects approved in FY 2005 and FY 2006 all remain active: (1) a
US$12 million Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Project (January 2005),
which aims to support the rehabilitation of areas affected by recent disasters and strengthen
capacity to manage disaster risks and respond to emergencies at both the national and
community levels; (2) a US$38 million Community Driven Development (CDD) project
(July 2005), which aims to improve access to basic social services and provide incomegenerating opportunities to poor people in rural and peri-urban areas; and (3) a
US$16 million Transport and Territorial Development Project (April 2006), which pilots a
territorial development approach in two micro-regions, through financing improvement of
key roads and other infrastructure to promote rural development.

45
The Bank is also funding technical assistance, primarily through two US$2 million Economic
Governance Technical Assistance Grants (ECTAG I and II, approved in June 2005 and
June 2006). It is also providing support to the preparation of the PRSP. An earlier
US$61 million development policy operation in support of economic governance reform
(Economic Governance Reform Operation I) is now fully disbursed. Since July 2004, the
World Bank’s total disbursements to Haiti have amounted to roughly US$80 million (endMarch 2007).
In addition, the Bank has completed six major analytical works, including a Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM), a Country Social Analysis, and a Social Protection
Strategy. A joint World Bank-IADB Public Expenditure Management and Financial
Accountability Review (PEMFAR), in progress, will provide the Government with
recommendations for longer-term public expenditure reform and institutional development.
The Bank will also undertake a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) jointly with
the IMF in FY 2008.
A Preliminary HIPC Document, prepared jointly by the Bank and IMF staff in collaboration
with the Government, was discussed by the Boards of the IMF and the Bank in September
2006. The final HIPC Decision Point document was discussed by both boards in November
2006. An Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper was prepared by the Government and
presented to the IMF and World Bank Boards, together with the Joint Staff Advisory Note
(JSAN), in November 2006 at the time of discussion of the HIPC Decision Point Document.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is working to identify specific actions to
promote a sound business enabling environment, while investing in projects that support the
development of a sustainable private sector and income-generating activities. Recent
investments have been in cellular telecommunications (Digicel—US$15 million in each of
FY 2006 and FY 2007), textiles (Grupo M—US$20 million in FY 2004), and microfinance
(MicroCredit National—US$0.4 million in FY 2004). In May, the IFC approved a
US$2.0 million trade finance line for Capital Bank. In addition, IFC is discussing with the
Government the provision of advisory support in the design and implementation of private
sector participation transactions for the airport of Port-au-Prince and for state-owned telecom
TELECO. Additional support is envisaged through the IFC LAC Facility and the Foreign
Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), possibly in the following areas: (1) business
simplification; (2) improving access to finance; (3) investment facilitation (notably textiles);
and (4) training, through the SME Toolkit and Business Edge.

46

ANNEX III. RELATIONS WITH THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of May 31, 2007)
Since 2003, the Bank has operationalized its presence in Haiti through two successive
transition strategies. At the present time, the IDB has 20 loans under execution, totaling
US$624.9 million. The balance available for disbursements is US$458 million, which
represents 73 percent of the approved amount. Hence, the main challenge for the country and
the Bank is the implementation of the portfolio.
The IDB finances projects in three of the ICF’s key pillars: US$65 million for economic
governance and institutional development, US$312 million for economic recovery, and
US$247.9 million for access to basic services.
During the period 2004–2006 the Bank disbursed about US$163.7 million for ICF-related
programs. During the period January 1st to May 31st, 2007, the Bank disbursed
US$27.4 million exceeding, one month in advance, the January to June target (105 percent).
Revised targets for 2007 and 2008 are respectively US$ 105.2 million and
US$ 160.5 million. From these amounts, US$27.4 and US$27.5 million respectively will be
for budgetary support.
Out of the total approved portfolio of US$ 624.9 million, US$ 100.5 million representing
four new operations and one increase are pending legal effect (legislative ratification or
official publication). The following table shows the programs that were approved during the
current government:
Table. IDB Programs Approved During the Preval’s Government (2006–2011)
Number
HA-L1007
HA-L1003
HA-L1008
HA-L1014
HA-L1018
HA-L1010

Name
Rural Water and Sanitation Program
Rural Supply Chain Development Program
Financial Sector Reform Support Program
Rehabilitation of Electricity Distribution
System in Port au Prince
Support Human Resource Management in
Public Sector *
Transport Infrastructure Rehabilitation
Program (increase)

US$ Million
15.0
17.8
25.0

Date of approval
20/09/2006
24/10/2006
06/12/2006

Ratification / expected date
Ratified
21/05/2007
Ratified

18.1

06/12/2006

21/05/2007

10.0

13/12/2006

21/05/2007

14.6

08/03/2007

21/05/2007

Total
100.5
Note: * The Parliament did not ratify this program last month. The Government has been working on this issue with the presidents of both
chambers of Parliament. The program will be submitted again for ratification on May 21, 2007.

The main challenges in order to accelerate the implementation of the programs are the weak
institutional capacity; the small local private market and the saturation of the national firms;
and the low level of participation of foreign private firms. To improve the delivery of its aid,
the Bank has taken specific measures, as special procurement measures and the delegation of
authority to the Representative. To go further, the Bank is currently working on the
implementation of additional measures such as the establishment of performance contracts
between the MEF and the executing units in order to promote a culture of results-based

47

management. However, to succeed, the Bank needs strong support of the Government. With
the support of the Bank, the Government should: organize presentations of business
opportunities in Haiti in order to attract foreign firms to the country; expand agreements with
foreign universities and technical institutions in order to improve the human capital, etc.
Ongoing Bank interventions, combining investment and policy-based loans, are
complemented with a sustained program of non-reimbursable technical assistance and non
financial products to underpin program and policy preparation and implementation and
increase country knowledge.
The IDB is working with the government of President Préval in carrying out his vision for
Haiti, which looks beyond electoral terms and calls for national unity on a development
agenda based on sustainable and inclusive economic growth. For example, in collaboration with
the OAS the IDB will sponsor the Foreign Trade and Investment Conference in Port Au Prince
(September 2007). Also, the IDB has offered to support the development of a single three-year

matrix of economic governance reforms, on the basis of which future budget support could
be extended.
The Bank has elaborated a New Debt Sustainability Framework (NDS) and Performance
Based Allocation System (PBA) that considers that Haiti will receive yearly grants up to
US$50 million from 2007 to 2009, inclusive. After 2009, Haiti would be eligible to receive a
mix of grants and loans from the Fund of Special Operations (FSO). In terms of the
allocation for Policy Based operations, rules similar to those of the International
Development Association (IDA) shall be applied. Additionally, in 2006 the Bank approved a
debt relief to Haiti under the HIPC initiative of US$60.4 million. The interim debt relief will
be US$20 million for 2007–2008. The complete relief will be effective when Haiti reaches
the Completion Point.
The Bank and the Government (GOH) met on April 17, 2007 to formalize the 2007–2008
work program and strategic priorities for the new Country Strategy, currently under
preparation. The new operations for the period 2007 will continue supporting the key pillars
of the extended ICF as well as the priorities of the Haitian government. The agreed 2007–
2008 lending program is as follows:
(US
Million)

2007
HA-L1017

Strengthening
Management I

HA-L1019
HA-L10221

TOTAL

Public

Resource

2008

12.5

HA-L1023

Rehabilitation of Road Infrastructure
for Productive Sector I

25.0

HA-L1024

Supplementary
Financing
Agriculture HA0016

12.5

HA-0033

50.0

TOTAL

for

Strengthening Public Resource
Management II
Rehabilitation
of
Road
Infrastructure for Productive
Sector II
National Watershed Management
Program

(US
Million)

12.5
25.0
12.5
50.0

48

ANNEX IV. STATISTICAL ISSUES
Economic statistics are broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, but further
improvements in coverage, periodicity, and timeliness are desirable. Haiti is taking
steps to begin participation in the General Data Dissemination System.
Real sector: A March 2000 STA technical assistance (TA) mission recommended that the
Haitian Institute of Statistics (IHSI) establish a new base year for national accounts and a
revised CPI. In 2004, the IHSI began publishing a new CPI rebased to August 2004 and
using expenditure weights derived from a 2000 household survey. Also, the IHSI has made
progress in implementing recommendations of several Fund TA missions to improve the
quality of real sector statistics, and it has published annual national accounts for the period
1986/1987 to 2005/2006 based on the interim base year 1986/1987. The IHSI publishes
limited quarterly data on economic activity, including indices of industrial production,
energy, construction, and domestic and external trade. Preparations are underway for a
survey of the informal sector, as well as a limited household survey. Further TA may be
needed to address the deficiencies that continue to affect the quality of the real sector
statistics. Also, the production of quarterly GDP data would be highly desirable for program
monitoring purposes.
Government finance: In the course of three STA missions since November 2005 that
included government finance statistics (GFS) issues, a two-tiered action plan was developed.
One set of short-term measures to improve the consistency of monetary and fiscal data, and
another intended to develop more fundamental, longer-term improvements to extend the
coverage and breakdowns of central and general government operations and to develop
functional and economic classifications of expenditure. While the longer-term improvements
require additional human and financial resources, many of the shorter-term measures have
been advanced or completed by the Interministerial Committee established following the
November 2005 multisector statistics mission. Haiti reports monthly and annual GFS on a
regular basis for publication in IFS. However, no data have been provided for publication in
the GFS Yearbook for the past 15 years due to the lack of human and financial resources.
Data provided in 2001 to STA were not published in the 2001 GFSY owing to insufficient
detail and consistency problems. There is a need to improve the timeliness of dissemination
of government finance statistics and to encourage the broader dissemination of balance sheets
and income statements of units in the nonfinancial public sector.
Monetary accounts: Following the November 2005 multisector statistics mission, the
authorities fully implemented STA recommendations to improve the sectorization and
classification of accounts of the BRH and the commercial banks. This includes a move to
greater automation of inputs, and a change in reporting formats consistent with the standards
established under the Manual of Monetary and Financial Statistics. The BRH reports its
integrated monetary database monthly to STA which communicates the data to WHD. Until
recently, WHD has sometimes required supplemental data, together with clarifications and
further information from the BRH. Reporting via standardized reporting forms was recently
initiated, and monetary data will disseminated electronically starting with the July 2007
edition of the Supplement to the International Financial Statistics on Monetary and

49

Financial Statistics. The BRH has also created two interdepartmental committees to provide
better oversight on the quality of data for program monitoring, and a special external audit of
program monitoring data was undertaken on data as of September 30, 2006.
Balance of payments: Although progress has been made towards increasing the reliability of
balance of payments data, further improvements, notably in the area of external debt data, are
needed. In particular, further efforts need to be undertaken in order to centralize all
information on external debt in foreign currency in a single database, by reconciling MEF
and BRH debt data. Furthermore, notwithstanding the improvement in the quality and
coverage of trade statistics, there is still scope for improvements in the compiling
methodology and collection of trade data, notably by making a more systematic use of
existing sources such as customs, port and airport authorities, airlines, and oil companies.

50

Haiti: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of June 26, 2007)
Date of
latest
observation

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
6
Publication

Exchange Rates

April 07

May 07

D

D

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

April 07

May 07

D

D

M

Reserve/Base Money

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

Broad Money

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

April 07

May 07

W

W

M

Consumer Price Index

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

April 07

May 07

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Dec 06

May 07

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

Sept 06

May 07

A

V

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Sept 06

May 07

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

Sept 06

May 07

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

Sept 04

Nov 04

M

M

M

Interest Rates

1

Date
received

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and
local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA).
2

51

ATTACHMENT I. LETTER OF INTENT
Port-au-Prince
July 4, 2007
Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. de Rato:
1.
The IMF’s Executive Board approved a three-year arrangement under the Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) for Haiti in November 2006. The purpose of this
letter is to inform you on the progress under the PRGF arrangement and to request that the
second disbursement under the arrangement, in the amount of SDR 7.6 million, be made
available to Haiti, following the completion of the first review.
2.
The attached Supplementary Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
(MEFP) reviews the progress under the PRGF, and updates the Government’s polices and
objectives for the period through September 2007. The MEFP also outlines the
Government’s preliminary macroeconomic framework for FY 2008 (October 2007–
September 2008). Over the past years, Haiti has implemented macroeconomic policies that
have contributed to stabilizing the economy. We have also made significant strides in
strengthening security and reducing crime. Going forward, the key challenge will be to build
on these gains and bring about strong and sustained economic growth that can substantially
improve the living conditions of our population and reduce poverty in our country. We will
continue to work together with the IMF and the international community to reach these goals.
3.
All quantitative performance criteria and all but one structural performance criteria
for the first review under the PRGF were observed with comfortable margins. The
Government requests a waiver for the nonobservance of the performance criterion on
submission to Parliament of a draft banking law by end-March 2007, because the delivery of
technical assistance and the consultative process with stakeholders, including the banking
community and the legislative branch, proved more time-consuming than originally
anticipated. The Government submitted the draft banking law to Parliament on June 29, 2007
as a prior action ahead of the Executive Board’s consideration of the first review.
4.
The absorption of Socabank by BNC is well under way, and under our banking sector
action plan an independent assessment of possible needs for recapitalization and financial
and operational restructuring of BNC was to be conducted by end-September. However,

52

identifying and retaining international experts for this assessment has proven time
consuming, and we therefore request a modification of the PC to allow for the
commencement of the assessment by end-September 2007. We intend to complete this
assessment no later than end-March 2008.
5.
The Government is currently developing a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) in consultation with its development partners and civil society. We intend to finalize
the PRSP in the coming months so it can be considered by the Executive Boards of the IMF
and the World Bank during the last quarter of this year. We would like to underscore that a
number of the priorities set forth in the interim PRSP will be integrated into the 2007/08
budget, and are already being implemented.
6.
The Government believes that the policies set forth in the attached Memorandum of
Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) are adequate to achieve the objectives of its
program, but it will take any further measures that may become appropriate for this purpose.
Haiti will consult with the Fund on the adoption of these measures, and in advance of any
revision to the policies contained in the MEFP, in accordance with the Fund’s policies on
such consultation.
7.
In line with our demonstrated commitment to transparency, we agree to the
publication of the PIN, selected issues papers, and combined staff report for the 2007
Article IV consultation and first review under the PRGF.

Sincerely yours,

/s/
Daniel Dorsainvil

/s/
Raymond Magloire

Minister of Economy and Finance

Governor

Haiti

Bank of the Republic of Haiti

Attachments

53

HAITI: SUPPLEMENTAL MEMORANDUM ON ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
1.
During the first half of FY 2007 (October 2006–September 2007), Haiti has made
further progress on its path of institutional reconstruction and economic recovery. On the
political front, the successful communal elections in late 2006 have further consolidated the
return to constitutional order, while recent successes in the combat of gang-related violence
have led to a tangible improvement in the security situation in Port-au-Prince, boosting
confidence. Economic and financial stabilization has also been encouraging, as evidenced by
our strong performance on several fronts in the first six months of the PRGF-supported
program. Thus, while substantial challenges still lie ahead, we are confident that Haiti is
slowly rising to the challenge of generating sustainable growth and development that will
lead to poverty reduction and lasting improvements in the living conditions of our
population.
2.
This Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) supplements that of
November 3, 2006. It describes additional policy commitments and changes to the
macroeconomic framework for the second half of FY 2007, and outlines the Government’s
preliminary macroeconomic framework for FY 2008. Unless explicitly noted, our policy
commitments from the November 2006 MEFP remain valid.
A. Performance to Date Under the Program
3.
Performance under the PRGF-supported program has been strong. Quantitative
performance criteria (PCs) and indicative targets for end-December and end-March were met
with significant margins (Table 1). Inflation declined from 12.4 percent in September 2006 to
8.3 percent in May 2007, a level that we now expect to be broadly maintained through the
end of the current fiscal year. In addition, we have been able to accumulate substantially
higher net international reserves (NIR) than originally programmed (US$218 million
compared to an end-March PC of US$128 million, adjusted for shortfalls in budget support),
as a result of significantly higher foreign exchange purchases made possible by the continued
strength of remittances inflows, large foreign direct investments in the telecommunications
sector, and lower imports during the first semester of FY 2007.
4.
We have also made good progress on our ambitious structural reform agenda. All
but one structural performance criteria (PC) for end-March were met on time (Table 2). The
only missed structural PC—submission of a new banking law to Parliament—was
implemented on June 29, 2007, as a prior action for this review. The submission of the law
was delayed to benefit from additional technical assistance, and ensure a more inclusive and
comprehensive review of the draft law within the Government and with relevant financial
sector participants. A program waiver for nonobservance of this PC is being requested.

54

B. Objectives for the Remainder of FY 2007
5.
Available indicators point to a continued expansion of the economy. However, it
is not clear that the acceleration of growth expected for this year has already fully set in, in
part because of supply-side bottlenecks in the private sector, and delays in central
government budget execution and disbursements of external support (see ¶7). As a
consequence, growth in FY 2007 could turn out at 3.5 percent, rather than the originally
expected 4 percent.
Fiscal
6.
We remain strongly committed to further strengthening our capacity to mobilize
domestic revenue. Customs and tax revenue rose by more than 30 percent in the first half of
FY06/07, partly due to stepped up efforts to combat evasion and smuggling. Our mediumterm strategy to increase revenue focuses, as a first step, on further strengthening tax and
customs administration. In this context, we have prepared and begun to implement a plan to
extend customs control to the provinces (PCs for end-December 2006 and end-March 2007
respectively) and approved a strategic plan for the modernization of the DGI (benchmark for
end-March 2007). We have also expanded the use of the central taxpayers file to include the
tax centers of Delmas and Croix-des-Bouquets (PC for end-March 2007), and will extend its
use further in the course of this year (floating HIPC completion point trigger). To further
advance the modernization process of the DGI, we will prepare a detailed implementation
plan (new PC for end-September 2007).
7.
We intend to take actions to raise the central government’s expenditure execution,
which fell short of program expectations in the first half of the fiscal year. The slower
expenditure execution was the consequence of both bottlenecks in the public administration
and supply constraints of the private sector, most notably in construction and public works.
To overcome these problems, we are deploying accountants to line ministries to strengthen
financial management and support them in their compliance with procurement rules and
documentation. We are also strengthening project formulation and implementation capacity
through the strengthening of programming units in line ministries. To overcome private
sector supply constraints, we are actively strengthening Haitian private firms and
encouraging foreign participation in government tenders, which has already resulted in the
entry of some new actors. Overall, we are confident that these constraints can be
progressively overcome, and we are encouraged that expenditure execution has experienced a
marked pick-up in March and April.
8.
We have submitted to Parliament a supplementary budget to account for higher
than expected revenues and to reallocate expenditures to sectors that reflect more closely the
priorities of the Government, as established in the I-PRSP, including security, revenue
generation and investment in infrastructure. The supplementary budget is consistent with the
goals established under the program for FY 2007, notably the absence of central bank

55

financing to the central government. To further strengthen budget management and ensure a
high quality of public expenditures, we have expanded the coverage of the TOFE to include
the own resources and related expenditures of ministries and deconcentrated agencies and
information about checks in circulation (benchmark for end-March 2007). We will continue
to improve the quality of this information in forthcoming months. We have also adopted a
mechanism for tracking expenditure allocated for poverty reduction (benchmark for endMarch 2007 and HIPC completion point trigger) and begun to produce quarterly reports on
the evolution of these expenditures. Finally, we have devised plans for the settlement of
domestic wage and non-wage arrears (benchmark for end-March 2007), which are to be
cleared by end-September 2007 (benchmark).
9.
We intend to submit our FY 2008 budget shortly to Parliament, in line with
Constitutional requirements. The budget foresees domestic revenues of 12 percent of GDP,
current expenditures of 10.2 percent of GDP, and domestically financed investment of
2.8 percent of GDP. This budget is already fully financed, except for a small share
(0.3 percent of GDP) for which we feel reasonably assured, based on historical patterns, that
firm donor commitments will be forthcoming. The draft budget remains within the indicative
framework set forth in the PRGF program document, both in terms of the overall deficit
target (excluding grants and foreign financed projects) and the absence of recourse to central
bank financing.
10.
The recently ratified PetroCaribe agreement and its extension, the recently signed
ALBA agreement with Venezuela promise to provide Haiti with significant amounts of
concessional trade financing. The Government intends to create an investment fund for the
financing components of these agreements, transferring only the income proceeds of the fund
to the budget. The Government will put in place arrangements to ensure that the investment
fund is run in a transparent manner, and to report regularly to Parliament on the flows,
earnings, and uses of the investment fund.
Monetary and Financial Sector
11.
Prudent fiscal and monetary policies during the first half of FY 2007 have helped
reduce inflation to 8.3 percent by end-May. Since December 2006, the Bank of the Republic
of Haiti (BRH) has reduced its main (90-day) interest rate on BRH bonds on four occasions.
We expect these reductions to induce lower market interest rates on loans once lags are
allowed to work out. The BRH remains committed to keep base money growth below
nominal GDP growth, and will use the available space under the program’s indicative target
for a somewhat faster expansion of base money through the end of the fiscal year. The BRH
remains committed to keeping interest rates positive in real terms and to maintaining a
flexible exchange rate regime.
12.
The BRH has made good progress in implementing its plan to relinquish
involvement in non-essential activities. Draft laws to eliminate BRH participation in the

56

management of APN and SONAPI have been prepared (PC for end-March 2007) and were
submitted to Parliament (PC for end-June 2007). The BRH has also adopted a strategy to
discontinue its involvement in the management of BPH (PC for end-March 2007), and
submitted a law to this effect to Parliament (PC for end-June 2007). We will adopt a strategy
for discontinuing BRH involvement in TELECO together with a plan for central bank
recapitalization by end-March 2008 (PCs).
13.
We remain committed to fully implement the recommendations of the safeguards
assessment. Key recommendations have already been implemented (PC for March 2007),
including establishment of an external audit committee, formalization of an IFRS action plan,
and a special external audit of monetary data submitted for program monitoring purposes.
The BRH’s audited financial statements for FY2006 (October 2005–September 2006) are
being finalized, and we intend to post them on the BRH website before the Board meeting for
the first review. As part of our action plan toward the implementation of IFRS, we will
produce a review of implementation issues for the adoption of IFRS by the BRH (new PC for
end-September 2007). We will also establish a monthly benchmark that will further improve
quality control of monetary data that is submitted to the IMF for program monitoring
purposes.
14.
The banking sector shows improved performance and solvency after its orderly
consolidation in 2006, and we remain committed to ensure the continued compliance of all
banks with the requirements established by our prudential regulations. The absorption of
Socabank by BNC is well underway. As part of our plan to carry out on-site inspections with
the support of international experts for key banks, an independent assessment of possible
recapitalization needs and required restructuring of BNC will be commenced by endSeptember, once the bank is fully integrated and an appropriate international assessor can be
identified (modified PC). We intend to complete this assessment no later than end-March
2008. We look forward to the results of an in-depth assessment of financial sector soundness
to be conducted by an upcoming joint Bank/Fund FSAP. The FSAP will also focus on how
the domestic financial sector can be broadened and intermediation costs reduced, in order to
support private sector activity and investment.
Macroeconomic framework
15.
For the remainder of this fiscal year, we have agreed to revise the program’s
quantitative framework to reflect the better-than-expected performance so far in the fiscal
year. In light of the strong NIR accumulation to date, we have agreed to increase the floor on
NIR accumulation up to US$135 million from US$30 million. With unchanged indicative
base money growth targets, this implies a reduction in the ceiling on NDA accumulation to—
G4,279 million from—G273 million. Due to slower-than-expected expenditure execution,
central bank financing has been strongly negative in the first half of the fiscal year. However,
we are confident that spending can be accelerated in the second half of the program year,

57

without compromising on the quality of expenditures, and the target for zero central bank
financing has therefore been left unchanged.
16.
For FY 2008, we have agreed on an indicative macroeconomic framework, which
builds on the forthcoming budget (¶9). This indicative framework foresees an annual NIR
accumulation of at least US$70 million, and base money growth somewhat below nominal
GDP growth. Quarterly quantitative PCs for FY 2008 will be agreed with the IMF at the time
of the second program review later this year.
PRSP, HIPC completion point triggers
17.
Progress is being made in the process of developing a full PRSP. The institutional
framework for the process, which includes a preparatory commission and a technical
secretariat, has been put in place and a broad participatory process is currently underway. We
intend to move diligently forward in the process, and aim to complete the PRSP by endSeptember 2007. However, we will ensure that this ambitious timetable will not compromise
the participatory process and the quality of the document. We are working toward the
implementation of the HIPC completion point triggers, and have so far completed and put in
place a mechanism to track poverty-related expenditures (¶8).

130

Net international reserves of central bank (in millions of U.S. dollars) - floor

…

Government total expenditure, excl. ext-fin investment (in millions of gourdes) 9/

6,534

5,945

1,451

1,609

0

10

0
0

0

1,027

0

4

0
0

0

1,288

-50

211
0

211

Dec 06

Prog. with
adjustor 2/

5,812

5,847

1,213

1,502

0

50

0
0

0

-891

-747

-327
-254

-581

-722.6

-97.9

-238.4

-107.0

0

46

0
0

0

-2,179

-697

-538
-254

-792

12,245

11,364

693

1,164

0

15

0
0

0

59

-349

-349
0

-349

0

-1

0
0

0

740

333

333
0

333

10,600

11,745

-242

922

0

88

0
0

0

-3,919

-1,998

-1,457
-398

-1,855

Prel.

Mar 07

Test date Prog. with
1/
adjustor 2/

Cumulative Flows since September 2006
Deviation
Actual from prog
w/adjustor

-1,644.8

381.8

-935.1

-242.2

0

89

0
0

0

-4,659

-2,331

-1,790
-397

-2,188

Deviation
from prog
w/adjustor

1/ From EBS/06/141.
2/ Dec adjusted by US$6.2 million and March by US$16.2 due to less-than-programmed external financing.
3/ For program monitoring purposes, NDA is defined as currency in circulation minus NIR in gourde terms. Program exchange rate of G42/$ through end-March and G40/$ through end-Sept.
4/ On a continuous basis.
5/ Excludes guarantees granted to the electricity sector in the form of credit/guarantee letters.
6/ Includes foreign currency denominated debt.
7/ An amount of US$30,000 due on a small investment loan from the IDB, originally granted to a state-owned millm was repaid with a delay in February 2007.
Since the central government's responsibility for the loan could not be identified, the late payment does not cause a nonobservance of the PC. Nevertheless, staff will confirm with the MEF
whether, following the arrears payment in February, the loan will now be considered government's obligation for the purpose of the second program review.
8/ Includes recapitalization operation of a commercial bank.
9/ Accumulated flows over the program period.

Sources: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank of Haiti, and Fund staff estimates.

…

11,159

23,172

Government total revenue, excl. grants (in millions of gourdes) 9/

Change in currency in circulation

Memorandum items:

Change in base money 8/ 9/

Indicative target:

0

0
0

New contracting or guaranteeing by the central government or the BRH of
nonconcessional external debt 4/ 5/ 6/
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Up to and including one year
Over one-year maturity

External arrears accumulation (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4/ 7/

0

5,685

-50

-50
0

21,176
-174
20,118

-50

Prog. 1/

21,002

Domestic arrears accumulation of the central government 4/

Net domestic assets of the central bank (in millions of gourdes) - ceiling 3/

Net domestic banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector
(in millions of gourdes)

Net central bank credit to the NFPS (in millions of gourdes)
Of which:
Central Government
Rest of NFPS

Performance criteria

end-September 2006

Actual stock at

Table 1. Haiti: Indicative Targets and Quantitative Performance Criteria, FY 2007

18,988

18,318

261

1,239

0

103

0
0

0

-3,587

-1,559

-876
-398

-1,274

Jun 07

Ind. target

28,078

25,000

859

2,294

0

135

0
0

0

-4,279

0

0
0

0

Sept. 07

Test date

58

59
Table 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks
Measures

1.

Date
(Month-end)

Status

December 2006

Met

Structural performance criteria

•

Approve a comprehensive plan to establish customs control in the provinces.

•

Start implementing the plan based on an agreed timetable.

March 2007

Met

•

Expand use of the central taxpayer file to include all taxpayers identified in
the Delmas and Croix-des-Bouquets tax centers.

March 2007

Met

•

Implementation on schedule of approved plan, referred to in prior actions, to
deal with banking system weaknesses.

March 2007

Met

•

Implement the key recommendations on safeguards in accordance with the
action plan.

March 2007

Met

•

Continue to limit spending executed through current accounts to below
10 percent of budget appropriations for nonwage current expenditures as
defined in paragraph 18 of the TMU.

Quarterly

Met

•

Submit to parliament a draft banking law consistent with international
standards, as described in the TMU.

March 2007

Prior action

•

The BRH will cease certain nonessential activities related, in particular, to its
participation in the management of and/or shareholding in the BPH,
TÉLÉCO, and SONAPI, in the following phases:
March 2007

Met

March 2007

Met

June 2007

Met

March 2008
June 2007

Met

•
•
•
•
•

Adopt a strategy for discontinuing BRH involvement in BPH
management;
Formulate draft laws amending the APN and SONAPI organic laws to,
inter alia, change the composition of the Boards of both institutions;
Submit to parliament for approval the draft law on the option adopted
with respect to discontinuing involvement with the BPH;
Adopt a strategy for discontinuing BRH involvement with TÉLÉCO;
Submit to parliament for approval amendments to the laws on the APN
and SONAPI changing the composition of the boards of both
institutions.

•

Begin independent assessment of possible recapitalization needs and
required financial and operational restructuring of BNC.

September 2007

•

Complete a review of implementation issues for the adoption of IFRS by the
BRH

September 2007

•

Adopt detailed implementation plan for modernization of the DGI.

September 2007

•

Prepare a plan to recapitalize the central bank.

1/ Completed on June 29, 2007.

March 2008

1

60

Measures
2.

Date
(Month-end)

Status

Structural benchmarks

•

Submit the new draft customs code to parliament.

March 2007

Met with delay

•

The Minister of the Economy and Finance will approve a medium-term
strategic plan for the DGI, setting out the corporate vision, mission, values,
goals, and objectives.

March 2007

Met

•

Based on the existing expenditure classification, adopt a mechanism for
tracking expenditure allocated to poverty reduction and produce quarterly
reports on these expenditures.

March 2007

Met

•

Formulate a plan for the settlement of domestic arrears.

March 2007

Met with delay

•

Expand the TOFE coverage by including in it the ministries’ and
deconcentrated agencies’ own resources and related expenditure.

March 2007

Met

•

Every three months, conduct an independent confirmation audit of the
mechanism for monitoring the subsidy to the Ed’H.

March 2007

Met with delay

•

Complete the payment of wage and nonwage arrears.

September 2007

•

Monthly monetary program data to be signed off by the Central Bank’s
interdepartmental and steering committee.

Monthly, starting
August 2007

•

Set quarterly limits on the expenditure of each ministry and ensure, within
the ministries, that all recruitment and promotion proposals are within budget
appropriations.

September 2007

61
ATTACHMENT III. HAITI—TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
Haiti’s performance under the program (April 2007–September 2007) supported by
the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) will be assessed on the basis of the
observance of quantitative performance criteria as well as compliance with structural
performance criteria and benchmarks. This Technical Memorandum of Understanding
(TMU) defines the quantitative and structural performance criteria and indicative targets,
specified in Tables 1 and 2 of the Memorandum of Financial and Economic Policies (MEFP).
It also lays down the monitoring and reporting requirements. The quantitative performance
criteria under the program are set for end-September 2007, and the quarterly targets for endJune 2007 are indicative.
I. DEFINITIONS
A. Net BRH Credit to the Central Government15
2.
The change in net BRH credit to the central government is defined as, and will be
measured using:
a.

Change in net domestic credit to the central government from the BRH
according to Table 10R of the BRH;

b.

Change in the stock of special accounts (“Comptes Spéciaux”) and seized
values (Valeurs saisies UCREF) included in Table 10R of the BRH will be
excluded from change in net domestic credit to the central government as
defined above.16

3.
Changes in any other special account (as defined in footnote 2) maintained or
established at the BRH will be treated as in 2.b above.
4.
The changes will be measured on a cumulative basis from the stock at
end-September 2006.

15

The central government comprises the presidency, prime minister’s office, parliament, national
courts, treasury, line ministries and “organismes déconcentrés”. It includes expenditures financed
directly by foreign donors through ministerial accounts (comptes-courants).
16

Special accounts are accounts of the government at the BRH which can only be used with the
authorization of donors. If included, movements in these accounts would appear as BRH credit to the
government.

62
B. Net Domestic Banking Sector Credit to the Nonfinancial Public Sector17
5.
The change in net domestic banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector is
defined as, and will be measured using:
a.

Change in the stock of net domestic credit of the public sector from the BRH
according to Table 10R of the BRH;

b.

Change in the stock of net domestic credit of the public sector from the
Banque Nationale de Crédit (BNC) and other domestic banks;

c.

Change in the stock of special accounts according to Table “Comptes
Spéciaux” of the BRH will be excluded from the definition of net domestic
banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector.

6.
Changes in any other special account (as defined in footnote 2) maintained or
established in the BRH, BNC, or BPH will be excluded.
7.
The changes will be measured on a cumulative basis from the stock at endSeptember 2006.
C. Net International Reserves
8.

The change in net international reserves will be measured using:
a.

Change in net foreign assets (“Réserves de change nettes” of the BRH
Table 10R);

b.

Minus the change in foreign currency deposits of commercial banks at the
BRH (“Dépôts à vue en US$ et en EURO des bcm à la BRH” of the BRH
Table 10R).

9.
Data will be expressed in U.S. dollar terms and valued at the corresponding endperiod market exchange rate.
10.
For definition purposes, net international reserves are the difference between the
BRH’s gross foreign assets (comprising gold, special drawing rights, all claims on
nonresidents, and BRH claims in foreign currency on domestic financial institutions) and
reserve liabilities (including liabilities to nonresidents of one-year maturity or less, use of
17

The NFPS includes the central government, the key public enterprises (Teleco, EDH, APN, AAN,
and CAMEP), and foreign-financed projects.

63
Fund credit, and excluding trust funds). Swaps in foreign currency with domestic financial
institutions and pledged or otherwise encumbered reserve assets are excluded from net
international reserves; however, foreign exchange deposits held at the BRH for externally
funded projects are included.
11.
The changes will be measured on a cumulative basis from the stock at endSeptember 2006.
D. Net Domestic Assets of the BRH
12.
The change in net domestic assets of the BRH is defined as, and will be measured
using:
a.

Change in currency in circulation (“Monnaie en circulation” of the BRH
Table 10R);

b.
Minus the change in the U.S. dollar amount of net international reserves
(program definition according to section C above), converted into gourdes at
the program exchange rate.
13.
The program definition of net domestic assets of the BRH will use a program
exchange rate of G40 per U.S. dollar for the period April 2007–September 2007. For the
purposes of the June indicative target and the end-September test date only, the endSeptember 2006 stock of NIR will also be valued at the exchange rate of G40 per U.S. dollar.
14.
The changes will be measured on a cumulative basis from the stock at endSeptember 2006.
E. Nonconcessional External and Foreign-Currency Denominated Debt
15.
The definition of debt comprises all instruments, including new financial instruments
that share the characteristics of debt, as set forth in paragraph No. 9 of the Guidelines on
Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision No.12274-(00/85),
August 24, 2000).
16.
The concessional nature of debt will be determined on the basis of the commercial
interest reference rates (CIRRs), as laid out by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD). A debt is defined as concessional if, on the date of signature, the
ratio between the present value of the debt computed on the basis of reference interest rates
and the face value of the debt is less than 65 percent (equivalent to a grant element of at least
35 percent).

64
17.
Excluded from the ceiling are short-term import-related credits, rescheduling
arrangements, borrowing from the Fund, and guarantees for the electricity sector in the form
of letters of credit.
18.
The ceilings for contracting and guaranteeing nonconcessional debt by the central
government and the BRH will be set at zero continuously throughout the program period.
F. Government Current Accounts
19.
Ministerial discretionary accounts are mechanisms for channeling expenditures. In
principle, the use of these accounts should be limited to unforeseen emergency outlays. The
BRH will provide monthly information on the stock of these current accounts for the central
government (as defined in footnote 1).
G. Arrears
20.
External payment arrears are defined as overdue payments (principal and interest) to
non-residents on debt contracted and guaranteed by the central government, and will be
defined according to the terms of indebtedness of each creditor. The criterion of zero
accumulation of external arrears will be monitored on a continuous basis.
21.
Domestic arrears are defined to include: (i) any bill that has been received by a
spending ministry from a supplier for goods and services delivered (and verified) and for
which payment has not been made within 45 days after the due date of payment; (ii) wage,
salary, and other payment to government employees, including direct and indirect
allowances, that were due to be paid in a given month but remained unpaid on the 30th of the
following month; and (iii) interest or principal obligations which remain unpaid 30 days after
the due date of payment. This definition excludes changes in the stock of arrears on account
of interest, penalties and valuation changes.
H. Base money
22.

The change in base money is defined as, and will be measured using:
a. Change in the stock of currency in circulation from Table 10R of the
BRH
b. Change in the stock of reserve deposits of commercial banks at the BRH, from
Table 10R, using gourde sight deposits of commercial banks (depots a vue gourdes
des BCM a la BRH) and cash-in-vault of commercial banks (Encaisses des BCM).

23.
The changes will be measured on a cumulative basis from the stock at end-September
2006.

65
II. QUARTERLY ADJUSTMENTS
24.
The quarterly performance criteria and indicative targets will be adjusted for the
following amounts:
A. Adjustment for Domestic Arrears Accumulation
25.
The ceilings for net BRH credit to the central government and the net domestic
banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector will be adjusted downward for the
amount of outstanding domestic arrears accumulation.
B. Adjustment for External Financing
26.
The program ceilings on BRH credit to the government and the nonfinancial public
sector, and on BRH net domestic assets and the floor on NIR reflect an assumed flow of
external financing, defined as disbursements of cash budgetary assistance, exceptional
financing (including rescheduled principal and interest) and debt relief. The adjuster will be
calculated on a cumulative basis from October 1, 2006.
27.
If actual external financing is lower than programmed external financing, the ceilings
on BRH credit to the government and of the public sector and on BRH net domestic assets
will be adjusted upward, and the floor on NIR will be adjusted downward, by the amount of
the difference between actual and programmed external financing, converted into gourdes at
the program exchange rate. The amount of this adjustment will be limited to US$50 million.
Future disbursements under PetroCaribe to finance projects included in the domestic public
investment program are not subject to this adjuster.
Program External Financing18
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
December
2006

Program net disbursements

18

9.9

March
2007

20.7

June
2007

September
2007

23.4

63.5

Actual program net disbursements for end-December and end-March were US$3.6 and US$4.5 million,
respectively, causing program adjustments of US$6.2 million and $16.2 million, respectively.

66
III. CLARIFICATION OF STRUCTURAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
A. Implementation plan for the modernization of the DGI
28.
Adoption of a detailed implementation plan for the modernization of the DGI, as
agreed under the program, would comprise approval by the Minister of Economy and
Finance of a document containing at least the following elements:
a. Main strategic objectives and their order of priority;
b. Actions planned to reach each of the strategic objectives, in accordance with the
outlined prioritization;
c. Expected results, both at the broad strategic level and detailed results from each
planned action;
d. Implementation schedule, including milestones and checkpoints;
e. Technical assistance needs in specific areas (e.g., for organizational restructuring,
auditing, and training);
f. Budget plan, presenting the required resources for the implementation plan,
resources that have already been identified (e.g., budget allocations and available
donor funding), and possible sources to cover remaining resource needs.
29.
The document should also identify a project leader who will oversee and coordinate
the implementation process, as well as a project team whose members will be responsible for
actions in critical areas.
B. Implementation issues for IFRS
30.
The review of implementation issues for the adoption of IFRS by the BRH involves
the completion of a report (i) outlining current differences between BRH accounting
practices and IFRS requirements; (ii) identifying any constraints to IFRS migration, legal or
structural; (iii) establishing the legal feasibility of any technical solutions compatible with the
legal obligations under the central bank charter and IFRS, and (iv) in the event that the
technical solutions in (iii) are not feasible, outline for all other areas the specific changes to
accounting policies and disclosures that will be required and can be pursued, irrespective of
the result of the legal review. The report should be shared with Fund staff by end-September
2007.

67
C. Assessment of BNC
31.
The independent assessment of BNC after absorbing Socabank shall be conducted by
international experts, independent from local interests, though they could enlist local experts
to assist. The procedures for the selection of the assessor(s) and the terms of reference for the
assessment shall be agreed on with Fund staff. At the minimum, the assessment shall cover
the following aspects:
a. the bank’s current financial condition and sustainability, and potential needs of
recapitalization and financial restructuring;
b. the adequacy and effectiveness of the bank’s main organizational-operational
structures and processes, including governance, with special emphasis on the
management of credit risk and other relevant risks;
c. the formulation of a short-term action plan to address any identified capital
shortfalls and urgent financial and operational restructuring needs; and
d. identification of any issues requiring further analysis and/or action over a longerterm horizon.
32.
“Commencement” of the assessment will entail signing of a contract with the
international assessor.
D. Monthly Benchmark for Program Monitoring Data
33.
The interdepartmental and steering committees will review the monthly data reported
to the IMF (NIR, NDA and net credit to government in the 10R report), including
compliance with the TMU, and sign off on the data prior to its submission to the IMF.
IV. PROVISION OF INFORMATION TO IMF STAFF
34.
To ensure adequate monitoring of the program, the authorities will provide daily,
weekly and monthly monetary and fiscal indicators to IMF staff, as well as other data upon
request.
A. Daily
35.
Monetary Indicators: (a) Exchange rate; (b) Volume of foreign exchange
transactions, of which BRH sales and purchases; (c) Gross international reserves; and (d) Net
international reserves.
36.

These data will be reported with maximum two-day lag (14-day final).

68
B. Weekly
37.
Monetary Indicators: (a) Stock of BRH bonds; (b) Deposits at commercial banks (in
gourdes and U.S. dollars); (c) Credit to private sector (in gourdes and U.S. dollars);
(d) Credit to central government and public sector (net); and (e) Currency in circulation.
38.
Fiscal Indicators: (a) Revenues (internal, external, other) and (b) Expenditures on
cash basis (wages and salaries, goods and services, external debt, current accounts).
39.
These data will be reported with maximum five-day lag preliminary data (four weeks
for final data).
C. Monthly
40.

Table 10 R and Table 20 R.

41.

Tableau on the comptes courants

42.

Tableau de trésorerie de devises.

43.

Tableau des Operations Financiere d’Etat (within 14 days).

44.

Checks in cirulation.

45.

Analysis of internal revenue collection (DGI).

46.

Analysis of external revenue collection (AGD).
D. Quarterly

47.

Table tracking poverty-reducing expenditures.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No.07/86
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 25, 2007

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2007 Article IV Consultation with Haiti
On July 23, 2007, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Haiti.1
Background
The transitional government that took over following President Aristide’s departure in February
2004 implemented prudent fiscal and monetary policies, and significantly improved governance
and transparency in public sector operations. These efforts were supported by a staff-monitored
program and two successive arrangements under the Emergency Post Conflict Assistance
(EPCA) facility between mid-2004 and late 2006. As a result, inflation was reduced to single
digits, from almost 40 percent in 2003, the currency stabilized, and gross reserves more than
doubled from US$157 million (1.2 months of imports) at end-FY 2003 to US$335 million
(1.8 months of imports) at end-FY 2006. Most notably, real per capita GDP has begun to
recover, albeit at a modest rate (¾ of a percentage point in FY 2005/06). Based on its strong
macroeconomic track record, a new arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) and the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) decision point were approved
for Haiti in November 2006.
There have also been significant efforts to restore political stability and improve governance and
transparency in public sector operations. President Préval, who took office in May 2006, has
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
espoused good governance and the fight against corruption as central tenets of his
administration. The security situation in Port-au-Prince has improved markedly in the last few
months, following joint operations by the United National Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the National Police that succeeded in arresting numerous suspected
criminals and gang leaders. Notwithstanding these successes, the security situation remains
fragile and continues to be a binding constraint to sustained political and social stability, holding
back private sector investment and a pick-up in economic growth.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the Haitian
authorities for their determined efforts and significant achievements in stabilizing the economy
under the PRGF-supported program approved last November, which have resulted in a sharp
reduction in inflation, a recovering of international reserves, and the return to positive—albeit
still modest—growth. Directors were also encouraged by improvements in security conditions,
progress in restoring political stability, and ongoing efforts to strengthening governance and
combating corruption.
Directors viewed that the key challenge going forward will be to consolidate stabilization gains
while establishing higher, sustained growth. Prospects for an acceleration of growth over the
medium-term are positive, but this will depend on the promotion of private sector investment
and increased productivity. Directors observed that an improved security situation, infrastructure
enhancements, a more reliable energy supply, better education and health services,
strengthened financial intermediation and legal institutions would contribute to achieving this
objective. They were encouraged by the authorities’ initial steps to address these problems and
improve the business climate, including through the creation of a one-stop window for investors
and by their plans to improve the efficiency of remaining state-owned enterprises. Continued
international support, including Fund and donor technical assistance, will be critical to building
the capacity needed to achieve these objectives.
Directors observed that further revenue mobilization will create the space needed to finance
higher levels of priority expenditures. In this light, they commended the authorities for recent
increases in tax collection and welcomed ongoing efforts to strengthen and modernize tax and
customs administration. These steps, together with measures to broaden tax bases and adjust
some rates and fees, could help raise domestic revenue significantly. Directors observed that
decisions to raise taxes should be taken in the context of a comprehensive review of the tax
system and with due consideration to social implications. They also noted the importance of
strengthening public financial management and budget execution capacity. In light of the current
limited capacity for budget implementation, they urged the authorities to exercise caution in
approaching new loan financing.

3
Directors welcomed the somewhat faster-than-anticipated reduction in inflation in recent
months, and encouraged the authorities to use the available space for base money growth in
the period ahead. As the underexecution of government expenditure has posed challenges for
short-term liquidity management, they encouraged close coordination between monetary and
fiscal authorities to avoid unwanted tightening of the monetary stance. Directors observed that,
while the current approach to monetary policy has successfully supported disinflation in recent
years, the further development of the monetary policy framework would contribute to
consolidating a stable low-inflation environment and enabling needed financial deepening.
Directors viewed that, on balance, the real exchange rate does not appear to be misaligned.
They noted that Haiti faces an appreciating equilibrium real exchange rate, reflecting strong
dependence on remittances and other external transfers. Directors agreed that the authorities
should maintain a floating exchange rate regime, with interventions limited to the accumulation
of reserves in line with program targets and smoothing out seasonal fluctuations. While
acknowledging the resulting pressure on the country’s export and import-substitution sectors,
they encouraged the authorities to boost competitiveness by addressing widespread structural
constraints.
Directors agreed that conditions are in place for the continued strong implementation of the
PRGF-supported program. In this regard, they noted that two performance criteria for the next
review have already been met and that an indicative macroeconomic framework for the coming
fiscal year, consistent with program objectives, had already been drawn up.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation will be held on the 24-month cycle, subject to
the provisions of the decision on consultation cycles in program countries.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Haiti: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
Fiscal Year Ending September 30
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Prel.

Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
GDP at constant prices

0.4

-3.5

1.8

2.3

3.5

Consumer prices (end-of-period)

37.8

21.7

14.8

12.4

8.0

Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP)

30.7

27.3

27.4

28.9

30.9

Gross national savings (in percent of GDP)

29.1

25.7

30.1

28.9

32.1

Central government overall balance (including grants)

-3.5

-2.4

-0.6

-0.8

-0.3

Central government overall balance (excluding grants)

-3.6

-3.8

-4.1

-4.4

-6.0

Public sector savings

-0.2

1.3

1.5

1.6

2.7

Credit to the public sector (net)

22.8

12.8

0.3

-4.9

0.0

Credit to the private sector

33.4

9.2

21.1

5.5

5.1

Base money

36.2

21.6

0.6

5.5

9.9

Broad money (including foreign currency deposits)

39.8

9.1

20.3

10.0

9.7

13.5

21.3

7.7

11.9

(In percent of GDP)
Public finances

(Annual percentage change)
Money and credit

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports (f.o.b.)

21.4

Imports (f.o.b.)

13.6

8.6

8.0

18.3

5.9

Current account balance (including official grants, in percent of GDP)

-1.6

-1.6

2.6

0.0

1.2

Current account balance (excluding official grants, in percent of GDP)

-6.2

-4.4

-5.0

-7.9

-6.4

External public debt (end-of-period, in percent of GDP)

44.4

36.2

30.9

29.3

26.0

8.5

9.5

17.5

8.5

5.1

External public debt service (in percent of exports of goods
and services)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/

38.8

54.5

70.4

130.3

265.3

157.1

207.4

228.5

335.5

534.7

In months of imports of the following year

1.2

1.4

1.3

1.8

2.4

Real effective exchange rate (appreciation +)

-5.9

32.5

-5.8

13.4

...

Liquid gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.

Press Release No. 07/168
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 24, 2007

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board approves First Review Under Haiti’s PRGF agreement and
approves US$ 11.7 million disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund completed on July 23rd the first
review of Haiti’s economic program under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. Completion of the review makes SDR7.6 million (US$ 11.7 million)
immediately available for disbursement. The PRGF arrangement was approved on November
20, 2006 (see Press Release No. 06/258) in the amount equivalent to SDR73.7 million (about
US$ 113 million).
The Executive Board also approved Haiti’s request for a program waiver for delayed
observance of a performance criterion requiring submission of a new banking law to
parliament, as well as a number of modifications and additions to the quantitative and
structural performance criteria associated with the forthcoming second review of the
program.
Following the Executive Board discussion, Mr. Murilo Portugal, Deputy Managing Director
and Acting Chair, said:
“Haiti has made commendable progress on its path of economic and social stabilization.
Significant economic reforms have been implemented, and the security situation has
improved markedly. The government is also building on earlier efforts to improve
governance, including through transparency in public sector operations and improved public
financial management. A full poverty reduction strategy is being developed, based on a broad
participatory process.
“Haiti’s performance under the PRGF-supported program has been strong and the authorities
deserve credit on achieved positive results. All performance criteria associated with the first
review were met, but growth has lagged slightly behind expectations. For the remainder of
the program year, a significant pick-up in the rate of budget execution will be important. For
this, the authorities are putting in place measures to strengthen administrative capacity and

2

overcome supply-side constraints. The government is finalizing a draft budget that is
consistent with the indicative macroeconomic framework for the second year of the PRGF
arrangement.
“Over the medium term, Haiti’s main challenge will be to secure a sustained increase in
growth, while consolidating low inflation, in order to reduce poverty, and promote social
stability. Higher growth can be achieved provided that the conditions to overcome existing
structural and institutional bottlenecks continue to improve. To address these issues, the
authorities are taking steps to invigorate private sector investment, including the recent
creation of a one-stop window for investors, and plans to improve the efficiency of remaining
state-owned enterprises through various modalities of private participation.
“Domestic revenues will be raised from the current relatively low level to allow for a
sustainable increase in priority expenditures. Enhancing and modernizing the tax and
customs administrations, which the authorities are already undertaking, will contribute to this
effort, as will the broadening of the tax base. Improved public financial management capacity
will help ensure that additional resources are well spent, in support of poverty reduction.
“The further development of Haiti’s monetary policy regime will help to consolidate a stable
low-inflation environment. This will entail focusing monetary policy in the short term on
money supply management, with a view of developing a more effective interest rate channel.
“To strengthen competitiveness, against the background of an appreciating real exchange rate
caused by growing international transfers, the existing structural and institutional bottlenecks
will need to be addressed. This will lower the high costs of doing business in Haiti and, in
general, help to promote private sector activity.
“Overall, prospects are positive for an acceleration of growth over the medium term, and for
continued strong implementation of the PRGF program,” Mr. Portugal said.

Statement by Paulo Nogueira Batista, Jr., Executive Director for Haiti and
Ketleen Florestal, Advisor to Executive Director
July 13, 2007

1.
Fund Management and staff need to be commended for all the support provided to
Haiti. Our authorities are appreciative of the balanced report, which reflects well the thrust of
the discussions held in Port-au-Prince last May and the authorities’ own appraisal of key
issues and challenges going forward. The selected issues paper provides useful inputs to
ongoing domestic discussions regarding the appropriateness of the current exchange rate and
monetary policies, and the authorities’ deliberations on how to further improve the tax
system. The technical support provided by the Fund whether it is through TAs proper (e.g.
STATS, LEG/MFD, public officials’ training through the Institute) or through constructive
dialogues with the team working on Haiti is invaluable. The Safeguard Assessment for which
there was a follow up mission last March has been helpful in supporting the Central Bank’s
efforts to strengthen its capacity to carry out effectively its mission and mandate. The FSAP,
which was launched last month, will be instrumental in shaping the reform agenda for the
strengthening of the financial sector.
2.
At this juncture, it is important to take stock of Haiti’s accomplishments and of the
transformation of the macroeconomic framework. Growth has resumed, inflation has been
reduced to a single digit level despite petroleum price increases, and the external position has
become stronger. The banking sector has been strengthened. Salutary outcomes have been
found for all the three banks, which had been in difficulty during the past year. Good public
financial management practices have been adopted and are becoming the norm. The
restricted use of discretionary current accounts, the avoidance of central bank financing, the
annuity of the budget, the observance of transparent and harmonized national procurement
rules, and the regular publication of data on budget implementation are noteworthy examples.
More importantly, Haiti is being effectively governed. Problems are raised, discussed and
addressed not just within the public sector but regularly in partnership with the private sector
and other stakeholders.
3.
The PRSP drafting process launched earlier this year has been an opportunity for the
Government to perform an in-depth assessment of what needs to be done to reach the MDGs
and to pull a significant portion of the population out of poverty with inputs from different
segments of the population. The final document, which will be submitted to the Boards of the
World Bank and of the IMF in the upcoming months, will embody Haiti’s development
agenda as it will be the outcome of a wide participatory process and should become donors’
reference in designing future assistance strategies.

2
4.
Haiti’s performance has been solid under successive programs supported by the Fund
including the PRGF for which the authorities are requesting to conclude the first review
today. Considerable progress has been achieved in consolidating macro stability and
improving governance. Despite important capacity constraints, the comprehensive homegrown structural reform agenda is moving forward in a timely fashion. With the help of the
international community, mostly through the UN forces, considerable improvements in
restoring order and security have been achieved. The medium-term outlook is promising,
however, several challenges lie ahead. The authorities are convinced of the need to push
forward with the reform agenda, but they consider the acceleration of economic recovery
critical to ensure the permanence of the reforms.
5.
Economic expansion has been slower than envisaged during the first half of the fiscal
year mostly because of delays in implementing the public investment program and a longer
period of a “wait and see” stance from private investors. A noticeable increase in the speed of
disbursements of the investment budget is observed during the second half of the fiscal year
as several bottlenecks, which were identified earlier, have been addressed. Line ministries
have acquired a certain degree of expertise in following budget procedures and the capacity
to comply with new stringent procurement rules. New suppliers (foreign and domestic) have
been actively sought to alleviate supply bottlenecks and facilitate the execution of public
infrastructure projects. The authorities’ efforts have been supplemented by valuable TAs
from several donors, some of which (USAID, Canada, the EU) have consented to help
finance the return of qualified expatriates to alleviate the human resource constraint.
6.
The high cost of doing business in Haiti constitutes a serious constraint to growth.
With the assistance of donors, efforts are being made to address the inefficiencies in the
energy, communication, and transportation sectors. The work of the CEMEP, the institution
that had been responsible for the modernization/privatization of public enterprises in the
recent past, has been relaunched. The CEMEP is entrusted with the immediate task of
designing the means for the decreased involvement of the state in the public enterprises. The
Telecom company (Téléco) and the electricity company (EDH) are at the top of the list.
Administrative and legal bottlenecks are among the other factors constraining private
initiative. The Center for Investment Facilitation (CFI), which has been inaugurated recently,
will be instrumental in improving the business environment. Chief priorities in the CFI’s
work program are the reduction of steps for company registration and the review of the legal
framework for investment and trade. These are important steps for Haiti to take full
advantage of the HOPE Act.
7.
The limited access to credit and other financial services are also important factors
constraining growth. The recent easing of monetary policy (through the gradual decrease of
interest rates on the Central Bank Paper and, more recently, through a reduction of its total
stock of bonds) should help stimulate private investment. Several other impediments to
private credit growth are being addressed such as the absence of a credit registry, the

3
difficulties to realize collateral, and the poor registry of property. Accordingly, pertinent
legislations have been drafted and/or submitted to Parliament. These include a draft law on
chattel mortgage. Concurrently, the Central Bank wants to ensure that credit growth is not
accompanied by a deterioration in the quality of the portfolios of the banking system and a
weakening of the financial system. Accordingly, the Central Bank is upgrading its
monitoring and regulatory capacity and releasing itself from non-essential activities. Draft
laws have been submitted to Parliament to eliminate BRH participation in the Port Authority
(APN), the Industrial Park (SONAPI), and the state-owned bank BPH.
8.
The laws governing banking activity today were enacted in the nineteen eighties.
They have become inadequate in view of the changes that have occurred in the banking
system and insufficient to cover innovations introduced in the financial market during the
past decades. A new draft Banking Law was submitted to Parliament this past month. The
changes that were introduced herein seek to give the Central Bank strengthened authority to
regulate the banking system and extend its power over a wider portion of the non-bank
financial institutions. The draft legislation accommodates the financial innovations fashioned
by the technological changes that have taken place during the past two decades. The banking
system’s obligation to have the appropriate infrastructures to combat money laundering is
also reinforced in the draft law.
9.
The authorities are advancing well in achieving HIPC completion point triggers.
Poverty-reducing expenditures are being tracked through a new mechanism adopted during
the first half of the fiscal year. Draft legislation on asset declaration of public officials has
been submitted to Parliament. The plan to extend customs control to the provinces adopted
during the first half of the fiscal year is moving forward in its implementation. The PRSP
drafting process is approaching its final phase of intense consultations with stakeholders
throughout the country. While efforts to boost fiscal revenues will continue to be
strengthened, donors’ assistance will inevitably be needed to carry forward identified
programs and projects. It is the Government’s hope that a donor conference will be held early
in FY08 to address additional financing needs for the first year of implementation of the
PRSP.
10.
Enhanced donor coordination will be crucial to the successful implementation of the
PRSP. We encourage the Fund to play an amplified role in supporting the Government’s
efforts to ensure greater efficiency in the supply of external assistance. More predictable and
reliable disbursements will enhance the effectiveness of the Government’s fiscal, monetary,
and exchange rate policies.
11.
Before concluding, we would like to briefly touch on the three policy issues raised
during the Article IV discussions and covered in detail in the selected issues paper. As noted
in the staff report, the authorities concur with the need to raise domestic revenues to fund
higher levels of expenditures in the medium term. They have already launched an aggressive

4
plan to strengthen fiscal agencies and have taken measures to broaden the tax base. These
actions have yielded commendable results during the first half of the fiscal year (30 percent
increase in revenues). During the second half of this fiscal year, they will pursue efforts to
boost revenues through additional improvements in tax administration with an emphasis on
combating tax evasion and fighting contraband. In time, due consideration will be given to
selected increases in tax rates, but only within the context of a comprehensive review of the
tax system and after having taken full account of undesirable social impacts and considered
the necessary changes to adhere to CARICOM policies. At the present time, the authorities
are studying the possibility of modifying the present system of cross-subsidies in petroleum
product taxation with a view to increasing efficiency and equity.
12.
The Central Bank is cognizant of the limitations of the policy tools presently at its
disposal and is grateful for the technical assistance the Fund is providing to support its efforts
to improve the monetary policy framework. It concurs with staff that the slow pace of base
money growth has offset to a certain extent the easing of monetary policy through the
decreased interest rates on Central Bank paper and that, in theory, this could have led market
participants to have difficulties inferring the bank’s monetary stance. However, in practice,
the Central Bank is in continuous dialogue with the banking system and financial market
operators explaining its policy stance and objectives, and formal meetings are always held to
discuss changes in policy. Market participants are very aware of the Central Bank’s
constraints and often provide valuable inputs in final decisions.
13.
The recent accelerated appreciation of the exchange rate, even if it is considered an
equilibrium phenomenon, provides cause for some concerns. Indeed, in the short term, it is
associated with a decrease in the purchasing power of recipients of remittances, and may
adversely affect the export sector. However, the authorities will not seek to offset the
appreciation trend through market interventions, but are looking instead into ways to bolster
competitiveness via the implementation of appropriate energy policies and increased planned
public investment expenditures, for example.
14.
Finally, we would like to seize this opportunity to thank our colleagues for their
support in approving last month the rephasing of the performance criteria relating to the
Central-Bank’s relinquishing of its involvement in Teleco and adopting a strategy for its
recapitalization.

