July 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/283

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

June 29, 2006
May 9, 2006

July 26, 2006
2006
July 26, 2006

Kingdom of the Netherlands—Netherlands: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report; Staff Statement; and Public Information Notice on the Executive Board
Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with the Kingdom of
the Netherlands—Netherlands, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 9, 2006, with the officials of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands—Netherlands on economic developments and policies. Based on information
available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on June 29, 2006.
The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of July 26, 2006 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 26, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS—NETHERLANDS
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives
for the 2006 Consultation with the Netherlands
Approved by Juha Kähkönen and Michael T. Hadjimichael
June 29, 2006

The 2006 Article IV discussions were held in Amsterdam and The Hague during
April 27-May 9, 2006. The staff team comprised Messrs. Feldman (head), Daal, and
Nadal De Simone, and Ms. Yelten (all EUR). It met with the minister of finance, the
governor and other representatives of the central bank (DNB) and financial
supervision, senior staff of several government ministries and agencies, including the
Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB), the Competition Authority (NMa), and
the Social and Economic Council (SER), representatives of labor unions and employer
organizations, the financial sector, including banks and pension funds, and academics.
Parliamentary elections are due in May 2007.
The Netherlands has accepted the obligations of Article VIII (Appendix I). It
subscribes to the SDDS, and economic data are adequate to conduct effective
surveillance (Appendix II).
The authorities released the mission’s concluding statement, organized a press
conference at the end of the mission, and agreed to the publication of the staff report.

2

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Background.............................................................................................................................5
II. Report on Policy Discussions................................................................................................8
A. Near-Term Outlook...................................................................................................9
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................10
C. The Financial Sector................................................................................................13
D. Structural Reforms and Other Policies....................................................................18
III. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................19
Tables
1. Basic Data, 2001–08 ............................................................................................................23
2. General Government Accounts, 2001–07............................................................................24
3. Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability, 2005–05..............................................25
4. The Core Set of Financial Sound Indicators, 1998–2005 ....................................................26
5. Encouraged Financial Soundness Indicators, 1998–2005 ...................................................27
6. Financial Systems Structure, 1998–2005.............................................................................28
7. Performance of Dutch Pension Funds, 1990–2005..............................................................28
Figures
1. 2001–03––A Period of Weak Economic Performance........................................................29
2. Competitiveness Indicators..................................................................................................32
3. Cyclical Comparisons ..........................................................................................................33
4. The Beginning of an Upturn ................................................................................................34
5. Monetary Conditions ...........................................................................................................36
6. Selected Labor Market Indicators........................................................................................37
Boxes
1. Past Fund Policy Recommendations and Implementation.....................................................8
2. ROSC Recommendations to Strengthen the Fiscal Framework ..........................................13
Appendices
1. Fund Relations .....................................................................................................................39
2. Statistical Data Issues andTable of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance ...........41
3. Staff Analytical Work on the Kingdom of the Netherlands, 2000–05 ................................43
4. A Summary of the CPB Study on Aging and the Sustainability
of Dutch Public Finances ...................................................................................................44

3

Main Websites for Dutch Data
Statistics Netherlands (CBS)..................................................................... http://www.cbs.nl
De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB)................................................................ http://www.dnb.nl
Ministry of Finance............................................................................... http://www.minfin.nl
Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB)........................................... http://www.cpb.nl
Additional information on Dutch economic statistics can be found at the Fund’s SDDS
website http://dsbb.imf.org/Applications/web/sddscountrycategorylist/?strcode=NLD
and at the Statistics Netherlands Data Portal:
http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb/Start.asp?lp=Search/Search&LA=EN&DM=SLEN.

4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background: After a period of slow or negative growth, a recovery is taking hold, with
growth this year and next likely to be well above potential of about 2 percent.
Notwithstanding the lackluster economic activity of the recent past, the general government
accounts were still brought close to balance in 2005—the result of significant underlying
structural fiscal adjustment of over 2 percentage points of GDP—after breaching the
Maastricht deficit ceiling just two years earlier. While much has been accomplished on the
structural front—such as reform of health care, disability, and financial supervision, and by
strengthening the administration of social benefits by local authorities—the merits of doing
more to buttress labor participation and raise productivity were recognized. Meanwhile, the
financial sector has been performing well overall—though issues have arisen with regard to
rapid mortgage credit growth and deteriorating credit quality and pension supervision.
Policy discussions focused on the following areas:
●
Fiscal policy. In light of fiscal requirements in the medium term and with the upturn
in train, staff urged the authorities to safeguard the structural fiscal adjustment of the past two
years by pursuing at least a neutral fiscal stance in 2006 and 2007. While preliminary plans
suggested that fiscal policy would turn somewhat expansionary in 2007, the authorities also
recognized the benefits of directing any budgetary overperformance to deficit reduction.
Looking further ahead, population aging requires a combination of further fiscal adjustment
during the next government’s term (2008–11) and other sustainability-enhancing measures.
The authorities are well aware of the policy requirements for dealing with aging, based on the
CPB’s study on the topic; difficult political and economic decisions nevertheless lie ahead.
●
Financial sector. Staff supported efforts to strengthen the code of conduct for
mortgage lending. There is, however, a need to ensure that compliance is monitored and that
appropriate action is taken if violations were to occur. A new Financial Supervision Act is
expected to come into force at the start of 2007. It clarifies and strengthens the supervisory
framework and therefore contributes to generally strong supervision continuing to get better.
One important issue is the appropriate length of the recovery period if a pension fund falls
below the minimum coverage ratio. Staff supported the supervisors in arguing for an ex ante
period of one year but also emphasized that escape clauses are indispensable to ensure
needed flexibility. Though the authorities are not necessarily committed to a policy move, all
agreed on the importance of ongoing research on phasing out the tax deduction for mortgage
interest payments while minimizing disruptive effects.
●
Structural reforms. While recognizing that several, not always easy, measures have
been taken to raise labor participation, additional measures were discussed related, for
example, to inactivity traps, the minimum wage, and unemployment benefits. Several
avenues were also identified to boost productivity growth.

5

I. BACKGROUND
1.
The Netherlands is coming out of a period of slow or negative economic growth
(Figure 1). Average annual growth in 2001–03 was ½ percent. This was well below the euro
area average and the slowest rate in the Netherlands in any three-year period since the
beginning of the 1980s. Deteriorating external competitiveness, combined with weak foreign
demand, restrained exports and growth overall (Figure 2 and Text Table).
The Netherlands: Exports and Overall Growth, 2000–05
(In percent change in real terms)

Export market 1/
Export of goods and
nonfactor services
GDP
Memorandum item:
Euro area GDP

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

10.9
11.3

2.2
1.6

1.3
0.9

3.8
2.0

7.5
8.5

5.5
5.9

3.5

1.4

0.1

-0.1

1.7

1.1

3.8

1.9

0.9

0.7

2.1

1.3

Sources: Dutch official publications; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ WEO data on the real imports of goods and services by trading partners.

2.
A hesitant recovery started to take hold during 2005. Employment and
consumption through end-2005 were weak compared with previous expansions (Figure 3),
with a recovery at the start of 2004 failing to gather steam and growth below the euro area.
But with foreign demand more robust, exports, though tempered by the lagged effects of real
exchange rate appreciation, drove a mild recovery. Perhaps most important, the growth of
private consumption, investment, and GDP gained traction in the second half of 2005
(Figure 4). Business and consumer confidence also strengthened. Employment in 2005
recorded a more sustained rise than at any time since 2001.
3.
Inflation remained in check, with little pressure from wages as the social
partners sought to boost external competitiveness (Table 1). Year-on-year CPI inflation
averaged 1.6 percent in January–February 2006 (1.7 percent in January–May, using data
available after the mission). Wage growth has been subdued: the economy-wide wage
moderation agreement for 2004–05 explicitly targeted low wage growth with
competitiveness in mind. Recent economic performance, including relatively rapid export
growth in relation to the export market, suggests that competitiveness is not a particular
threat to sustaining economic recovery, a point reinforced by the current account surplus.
4.
After breaching the Maastricht deficit ceiling in 2003, the authorities achieved
considerable fiscal consolidation (Table 2). The general government deficit narrowed to
0.3 percent of GDP in 2005 from 3.2 percent in 2003, reflecting underlying structural
adjustment of 2½ percentage points of GDP. Contributing expenditure measures included

6

a virtual freeze on public wages, reduced coverage of public health insurance, changes in
disability and other social benefits, adjustments by local governments, and other smaller
measures. In addition, revenue measures were implemented, including an increase in excise
duties and contribution rates for health care and disability insurance, and natural gas revenues
increased (together contributing ½ percentage point of GDP to structural adjustment).
5.
Monetary conditions started tightening in late 2001, before easing last year
(Figure 5). With the ECB having lowered interest rates through virtually the entire period
since late 2000, the tightening was essentially due to the real effective exchange rate effect,
with higher real interest rates also contributing as inflation fell in the Netherlands. Most
recently, a moderate depreciation of the real effective exchange rate has reversed about half
of the monetary tightening.
6.
The financial sector is generally sound but
colored by developments largely related to real estate
(Tables 3–7).

Coverage Ratio Pension Funds
(Percentage)

marked-to-market rate
(to be used from 2007)
4 % accounting rate
(used through 2006)

200

180

160

140

120

100
05
20

04
20

03
20

02
20

01
20

00
20

99
19

98
19

•
Banks’ capital adequacy remains strong. Other
indicators, such as return on equity, noninterest expenses to
gross income, and nonperforming loans for large banks,
have been improving. Pension funds are, on average, close
to their required coverage ratios that come into effect in
January 2007, with only one fund reportedly below the
minimum ratio of 105 percent (Text Figure).1 In the
insurance sector, earlier stress tests performed for the
FSSA2 indicated that shocks, except the most extreme ones,
could be absorbed. If anything, the situation has recently

220

Source: DNB.

1

Under the new requirements, pension funds will be required to achieve a coverage ratio (i.e., the ratio of the
present value of assets over liabilities, based on marked-to-market calculations) implied by a 97½ percent
probability of meeting their obligations. In cases where the indexation of benefits to inflation/wages is not
guaranteed, this implies a coverage ratio, on average, of 130 percent, to be met within a period agreed on with
the supervisor not exceeding 15 years (the required coverage ratio would be higher if funds provided
guarantees). However, if the ratio falls below 105 percent, it has to be restored within a given time period
(likely between one and three years, but this is being discussed in parliament), except at times of severe
macroeconomic downturns or systemic risk.
2

The Kingdom of the Netherlands—Netherlands: Financial System Stability Assessment, IMF Country Report
No. 04/312, September 2004.

7

improved, partly reflecting higher equity prices than when the
stress tests were performed. Moreover, while life insurance
profitability has been adversely affected by the low long-term
interest rate environment, prospects are improving with
expectations of rising interest rates.3
●
Despite tight interest rate margins on mortgages,
reflecting heavy competition between banks for borrowers,
continued demand has held up profits. However, credit quality
has reportedly deteriorated with the continued expansion of
mortgages. Households have also become more sensitive to
interest rate changes: the ratio of mortgage debt-to-GDP is high
at more than 100 percent and increasing (Text Figures); reports
by the DNB indicate that the proportion of mortgages subject
to an interest rate adjustment within two years increased from
21 percent in 2003 to 31 percent in 2005, and the percentage of
newly provided loans with loan-to-value ratios (LTVs)
exceeding 100 percent has also been increasing significantly
(Text Figure). In addition, a small bank failed in
December 2005, without systemic repercussions.

1.5

Household Debt to GDP

1.0

0.5

0.0
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Source: DNB.
1.5

Mortgage Debt-to-GDP Ratio, 2004

1.0

0.5
70

60

Percentage of Newly Provided
Loans with LTVs > 100 Percent
0.0

iu
m

Fr
an
ce
Sw
U
ed
ni
en
te
d
K
in
gd
om
D
en
m
ar
N
k
et
he
rl
an
ds

40

Be
lg

EU
15

50

30

Source: European Mortgage Federation.
20

10

0
01

96

91

86

81

76

71

5
-0

0
-0

5
-9

0
-9

5
-8

0
-8

5
-7

Source: DNB.

3

While too early to judge the financial effects, the introduction of a new health care system at the start of 2006
is prompting significant changes in the health insurance sector and careful monitoring by the authorities.
Basically, in the new system, insurance is provided by private health funds—though the funds are obliged to
accept all customers and offer a standard insurance package at a standard premium applicable to all
policyholders, defined by law. The change in the health insurance system will lead to a shift in financing run
through the fiscal accounts and, relatedly, a shift from private to public consumption. A system of risk
equalization makes the acceptance obligation possible. The funds can provide themselves or negotiate the
purchase of medical services, offer additional packages, and adjust premiums, introducing competition into the
system.

8

II. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS
7.
In addition to the near-term outlook, the discussions focused on key measures to
ensure fiscal sustainability with population aging, while building a solid foundation for
sustaining growth and safeguarding financial stability. The discussions benefited from
CPB studies on related issues. The discussions also drew on staff’s Selected Issues papers
(on potential growth and productivity, housing, and high volatility in fiscal revenues), and
past analytical work.4 Box 1 summarizes the implementation of previous IMF
recommendations.
Box 1. The Netherlands: Past Fund Policy Recommendations and Implementation
Fiscal Policy: Past recommendations included structural fiscal adjustment of at least
½ percentage point of GDP per year during the government’s term, taken upfront in
view of the election cycle, closer coordination between the central government and the
local governments, and refinements to enhance the transparency of the fiscal
framework. Fiscal consolidation of over 2 percentage points of GDP, in structural
terms, was already achieved in 2004–05. The authorities have improved coordination
between various levels of government. Any decisions on the fiscal framework would
not be taken before a new coalition agreement, although preparatory analysis is being
done.
Labor Market Reform: Broadly in line with Fund advice, but sometimes to a lesser
extent than recommended, unemployment benefits were tightened; fiscal incentives for
early retirement abolished; inactivity traps gradually reduced; disability revamped; and
reform of employment protection legislation (EPL) is being discussed.
Recommendations not yet taken on board include adjusting the minimum wage and
taking into account life expectancy in determining the retirement age. Calls for greater
wage differentiation have not resulted in notable changes.
Product Market Reform: The Fund has generally supported the authorities’
liberalization program, including the unbundling of the energy market, the reduction in
required licenses and permits, and, more generally, the efforts to increase competition.
The powers of the competition authority have been gradually and continually
increased. The government is well set to achieve its goal of a 25 percent reduction in
the administrative burden by 2007.
Financial Sector: The authorities have made significant progress in implementing the
recommendations from the 2004 Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA).

4

Summarized in Appendix III.

9

A. Near-Term Outlook
8.
There was consensus on projecting
a pickup in growth to well above potential
rates in 2006 and 2007. Growing employment
bodes well for private consumption. Further
improvements in competitiveness supported by
wage moderation are also expected to help exports
in circumstances in which foreign demand is
expected to be strong. Meanwhile, stronger
corporate balance sheets (Text Figures) alongside
export growth support higher investment. In all,
the official growth forecast is 2¾ percent in 2006
and 3 percent in 2007. With higher projected oil
prices (in line with WEO assumptions), staff
projected lower growth: 2.6 percent in 2006 and
2.8 percent in 2007 (higher than euro area
growth). While not an immediate issue, staff
stressed, and the authorities concurred, that
continued wage moderation to support external
competitiveness would allow the Netherlands to
take full advantage of the global upturn—an issue
that could take on increasing importance as the
recovery gathers force.

0.75
0.73

Debt-to-Asset-Ratio

0.71
0.69
0.67
0.65
0.63
0.61
0.59
0.57
0.55
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Source: DNB.
4.5

Gross Profit Margin
(In percent of firms' revenues)

4.3
4.1
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.1
2.9
2.7
2.5

1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Source: DNB.
Household Savings, 1971-2005
9.
Both upside and downside risks were
(As percent of disposable income)
25
apparent. Further oil price hikes, a significant
Total savings
appreciation of the euro, and slower-than20
Total less mandatory pension
savings
expected growth of trading partners could dampen
15
the upswing (including in the euro area, a major
destination for Dutch exports, where the projected 10
strength of the recovery is not yet assured).
5
Drawing on its empirical work, staff also pointed
to downside risks from a possible interest rate-led
0
house price decline.5 However, most officials,
-5
appealing to supply constraints, felt there was
1971 1974 1977 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998
little risk of house prices falling significantly.
Source: CPB.
There was also some concern that a bounce-back
in household saving might hold back consumption (Text Figure). All agreed, in any event,
5

The accompanying Selected Issues paper on housing, among other things, updates previous work on the
determinants of house prices and continues to find a high sensitivity to interest rate changes.

2001 2004

10

that private consumption was also subject to considerable upside potential in the face of a
strengthening economy. Indeed, officials pointed to above-budgeted revenues in the first
quarter as an early indication of the upside materializing.6
B. Fiscal Policy
10.
The recent fiscal consolidation is in accord with economic requirements. With an
eye to contributing to fiscal sustainability and resilience to population aging, staff had
recommended cumulative structural fiscal adjustment of at least 2 percentage points of GDP
during the government’s term (2004–07)—an amount already achieved in 2004–05 (¶4).
While such a tightening may not have been ideal in the face of some weakness in economic
activity, the risks were judged acceptable. The marked deterioration in the public finances
during 2000–03 contributed to declining confidence. Though difficult to quantify, subsequent
fiscal consolidation likely helped reverse this, especially when consolidation was needed to
prepare for aging. Moreover, with the impact on activity probably moderate in a small open
economy, and benefits because of aging, the authorities and staff concurred that the policy
was sensible. Staff also emphasized the merits of upfront adjustment in light of the election
cycle.
11.
The fiscal stance for the remainder of the government’s term may turn
somewhat expansionary. The budget implies about a neutral fiscal stance in 2006. But
preliminary plans suggested that fiscal policy—reflecting business-related tax cuts and
various expenditures on economic structure and security, and to raise the purchasing power
of lower income groups—would turn somewhat expansionary in 2007 (deteriorating
structurally by 0.3 percentage point of GDP according to staff estimates). In light of longerterm fiscal requirements (¶13) and with the upturn in train, staff urged the authorities to
pursue at least a neutral stance. At a minimum, staff urged that any revenue overperformance
or below-budget expenditures outturns for cyclical reasons go to deficit reduction—an
approach the authorities already had in mind.
12.
The authorities are well aware of the policy requirements for dealing with
population aging. In the CPB’s benchmark analysis, achieving fiscal sustainability requires
either a structural general government surplus of 3 percent of GDP by 2011 or other
sustainability-enhancing measures to compensate in present value terms for any shortfalls
from this. Appendix IV summarizes the CPB’s work, which staff commended, and illustrates
debt dynamics under different scenarios.

6

Quarter-on-quarter GDP growth, released after the mission, was weaker-than-expected in the first quarter
of 2006 (0.2 percent). However, this reflected a drop in investment (which tends to be volatile on a quarterly
basis) and inventories. Meanwhile, exports were robust and private consumption above expectations. Thus, on
balance, these data are seen as broadly in line with staff’s full-year GDP projections.

11

●
The discussions revealed a sense that any new government, because of political
economy considerations, could encounter difficulties in achieving a fiscal surplus of more
than 1 percent of GDP by the normal end of its four-year term (2011). Staff estimated that
achieving a surplus of this size in 2011 would represent structural adjustment of about
1¼ percentage point of GDP (assuming a closed output gap by then). Other sustainabilityenhancing measures, equivalent in present value terms to about 2 percentage points of GDP,
would still be needed to close the remaining sustainability gap. One of various options
included in the CPB study is to increase the retirement age by two years, which would reduce
the sustainability gap by ½ percentage point of GDP. Staff supported this measure, arguing
that changes in life expectancy should be taken into account in determining the official
retirement age.
●
While difficult decisions lie ahead, staff suggested some guiding principles for the
period through the next government. First, in view of the size of remaining measures even
when achieving a fiscal surplus of 1 percent of GDP by 2011, the next government should
continue fiscal adjustment. Aiming for a 1 percent surplus or more makes sense: this would
represent a significant fiscal adjustment in structural terms and take advantage of the
favorable environment provided by the economic upturn. In addition, as noted by some
officials and staff, this seems feasible in light of the Scandinavian experience. Second, to the
extent possible, it is better to identify and implement upfront the other measures needed to
close the sustainability gap. This reduces the risk of the size of the problem growing and the
risk of reducing intergenerational equity,7 while also adding to confidence that aging is being
dealt with. Third, risks are asymmetrical in the sense that the sensitivity analysis in the CPB
study ascribes a greater weight to needing a larger structural surplus than 3 percent of GDP
by 2011 than to a smaller one. This only accentuates the importance of upfront action.
Finally, any budgetary overperformance in 2007 should be saved and used by the next
government as an opportunity to pursue more ambitious fiscal targets, thus applying the
targeted adjustment it intends to pursue to a better-than-budgeted base.
13.

An official working group is contemplating a fiscal strategy.

●
This group prepares recommendations for the next government on the fiscal
framework and fiscal policy generally.8 It is too early to tell what its recommendations will
be, as it started its deliberations only a few months before the Fund mission and the sense
was conveyed to the mission that views on various issues were not uniform. In any event,

7

8

See Appendix IV, paragraph 3.

This group (called the Study Group on the Budget Margin) comprises representatives from various
government ministries and the central bank, is formed and starts its work well before a new government comes
into power, and has become a regular feature of Dutch fiscal policy.

12

officials, both in the working group and outside, were broadly supportive of the guiding
principles mentioned above.
●
The working group, and the finance ministry generally, welcomed the findings of a
recent fiscal ROSC.9 It found that the Netherlands meets or exceeds the good-practice
standards against each of the four general principles of the fiscal transparency code. The
roles and responsibilities of and within government are clearly defined; the system of fiscal
management is open and well understood, with a fiscal framework based on a stable and
well-defined set of expenditure rules; the budget and accounts documents are of a high
standard and provide comprehensive and timely information on government activity; and the
CPB’s independent and central role provides a best-practice example of separating the
political and technical elements of macroeconomic policy. Nevertheless, with the volatility of
tax revenues having increased in recent years, forecasting tax revenues has become more
difficult, adding a degree of uncertainty to budgetary policy and the operation of the fiscal
framework (Text Figure).10
Coefficient of Variation of Tax Revenues
(As share of GDP) 1/
25

25

The Netherlands

Average of EU countries

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
Corporate income tax

Personal income tax 2/

1975-84

1985-94

Indirect taxes

Corporate income tax

1995-04

Personal income tax 2/

1975-84

1985-94

Indirect taxes

1995-04

Source: IMF staff calculations using OECD Economic Outlook 78.
1/ Coefficient of variation is defined as the standard deviation relative to the mean.
2/ Including social contributions.

9

Kingdom of the Netherlands—Netherlands: Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes—Fiscal
Transparency Module, and the Aide-Mémoire Regarding the Fiscal Framework, IMF Country Report
No. 06/124, March 2006.
10

See details in an accompanying Selected Issues paper. Business cycle fluctuations, corporate location
decisions, and the tax deductibility of changing pension contributions appear to have been contributing factors.

13

●
The ROSC made suggestions for refinements to the fiscal framework. These are
summarized in Box 2 and are under consideration by the working group. There were
indications that recommendation (1) would be supported, that the role of the FES in
(3) would be reexamined, that ambitious fiscal targets would render (6) less important, and
that (7) made sense. There was less of a tendency to support (2), to avoid making too many
changes, and to incur the resource costs that (5) could entail when the framework was already
working well. Tax expenditures in (4) could also be given a more prominent role, but the
authorities stressed that these were documented in the material prepared for the budget.
Box 2. The Netherlands: ROSC Recommendations to Strengthen the Fiscal Framework
Key recommendations include:
(1) reporting, with respect to the expenditure ceilings, gross expenditures and nontax revenues
separately, in contrast to the current practice of reporting just net expenditure;
(2) including only that part of nontax revenues in the net expenditure ceilings whose inclusion
provides incentives for line ministries to collect resources to fund part of their spending that is
not funded by budgetary resources;
(3) reexamining the budgetary fund based on gas revenues (FES): while maintaining a separate
fund, integrate its operations better into the expenditure ceilings and overall fiscal framework;
(4) formally connecting tax expenditures to the fiscal framework, possibly by setting explicit
ceilings for tax expenditures;
(5) more clearly reconciling the reporting on the budget and performance relative to the
expenditure ceilings with national accounts standards, with a view to improving monitoring;
(6) to help provide greater room for maneuver for the automatic stabilizers to play and help
reduce the likelihood of procyclical policies to remain within the Maastricht deficit ceiling,
incorporating somewhat larger buffers in the fiscal framework (through lowering what the
authorities call the “signal value,” which triggers corrective measures, and erring on the side of
a more ambitious target for the structural balance at the end of a new government’s term); and
(7) enhancing flexibility by allowing tax changes to be phased in differently than planned or
permitting offsetting measures, to avoid procyclicality if cyclical conditions turn out differently
than initially anticipated.

C. The Financial Sector
14.
The authorities continue to strive to make strong financial supervision even
better. A new Financial Supervision Act, which clarifies and strengthens the framework for
financial sector supervision and sets out the requirements that financial services providers
must meet, is scheduled to come into force at the start of 2007. While this was a year later
than initially planned, the authorities explained that the delay was because it took more time

14

than expected to prepare the necessary legislation and all the details associated with it.
Within the DNB, the Financial Stability Division has started coordinating a new round of
stress tests, involving the private sector, and officials felt the Division was contributing to a
better overarching view of financial stability issues (including through The Overview of
Financial Stability, published since December 2004). More broadly, continued efforts were
being made to strengthen the risk orientation of supervision, in which greater supervisory
resources would be devoted to those institutions having higher risk profiles. With the creation
of integrated financial supervision, which has led to an improvement in the overall quality of
supervision, this applies to all supervised sectors, comprising the different-sized banks,
pension and health funds, and insurance. All this progress has occurred against the
conclusion of the 2004 FSSA that the financial sector was already well supervised.
15.
Continual progress is being made on virtually all of the key FSSA
recommendations (Text Table). Of note, the tax deductibility of mortgage interest
payments, almost a tabooed subject politically in the past, is now being discussed actively.
The authorities do not see strong advantages in prefunding deposit insurance, given the
dominance and deposit size of large banks. They explained that they are doubling coverage
to €40,000, retroactively after the small bank failure and to move more in line with other
European countries. They would like to introduce self coverage for some proportion of
deposits over €20,000 to limit moral hazard.
16.
The financial vulnerabilities that have arisen could adversely affect the economy
although there is no particular threat to overall financial stability. The tax deductibility
of mortgage interest payments and innovations in mortgage financing have strongly
encouraged a rapid run-up of debt. This is particularly evident in an international context (¶6)
and has occurred while other indicators, such as high LTVs and increasing household
sensitivity to interest rate changes, also raise concerns. An oft-made counter-argument was
that these indicators ignore the corresponding assets of households. Staff stressed, however,
that house prices seem sensitive to interest rates and that borrowers could therefore be hurt
significantly should interest rates rise substantially, both through a fall in asset values and
higher interest payments on their mortgages. Indeed, the authorities, like staff, were well
aware that newcomers to the market without financial buffers were particularly susceptible.

15

Netherlands: Status of Implementation of Key FSSA Recommendations
Key FSSA Recommendations

Actions Taken

Spell out clearly the role of the minister of
finance, as applicable in those few areas
where autonomy is not fully delegated to
the supervisor.

Starting in 2004, the approval of the minister of finance
(MoF) is only needed if one of the five largest banks or
insurers takes a participation in another. The new Financial
Supervision Act (FSA), to be enacted on January 1, 2007,
defines the role of the MoF in those areas where autonomy is
not fully delegated to the supervisor. The minister can revoke
autonomy of the supervisor in special situations; for non-EU
countries, the minister has to determine that their supervisory
policies and practices sufficiently promote the objectives of
the FSA, otherwise the supervisor cannot give a financial
institution from those countries a permit to open a branch; and
the minister has the exclusive power to grant persons and
legal bodies the necessary permits, licenses, and exemptions
to establish a financial market.

Ensure that the Authority for Financial
Markets has the power to cooperate with
securities supervisors internationally even
when there is no “domestic interest.”

In the FSA, to be enacted on January 1, 2007.

Continue to work with cross-border
counterparts to further improve securities
settlement arrangements.

Improvements being made through promoting the use of
delivery of securities against payment and supporting
Euroclear's single settlement platform. The market
infrastructure part of the FSA is expected to come into effect
on January 1, 2008.

Ensure that the new pension supervisory
arrangements allow sufficient flexibility
in the specified time frame for making up
shortfalls in the coverage ratio to prevent
procyclical effects, but without allowing
unduly prolonged adjustment.

Forthcoming (see paragraph 20).

Continue the development of the
framework for dealing with crisis
situations both through (i) further work
with other supervisors internationally; and
(ii) completion of the review of the
domestic deposit guarantee scheme.

(i) Bilateral discussions and coordination at the EU level. In
addition, after continued discussions, the DNB, the Belgian
central bank, and the Belgian banking, finance, and insurance
supervisor signed in May 2006 a memorandum of
understanding on crisis management in order to further
enhance cooperation. This pertains especially to those
financial institutions that have substantial interests in both
countries.
(ii) Completed, though the authorities opted for keeping their
ex-post scheme rather than implementing a prefunding
scheme (see paragraph 15).

Continue the development of
macroprudential surveillance to help
strengthen the early identification of risks

The DNB established a new financial stability division (see
paragraph 14) and improved its models and indicators,
including by coordinating a new round of stress testing,
developing an analytical framework for financial stability, and

16

and vulnerabilities.

producing financial stability reports bi-annually since
December 2004.

Over the medium term, phase out tax
deductibility of mortgage interest,
avoiding disruptive effects.

Ways to phase out tax deductibility while avoiding disruptive
effects are being discussed actively in policy circles (see
paragraph 18). The measures taken so far, listed below, are
seen as having only a small impact. Since 2001, the interest
payments on mortgage loans used for consumption and
second homes have been excluded from tax deductibility.
Starting in 2004, with a view to preventing the use of “surplus
value” on a first house for consumption, the authorities
tightened eligibility requirements for the mortgage interest tax
deduction. As of January 1, 2005, fiscal incentives for paying
off mortgages were strengthened.

In addition, there were a number of
secondary FSSA recommendation aimed
at strengthening supervision and in the
context of AML/CFT

Examples of some additional actions taken follow. The FSA
makes a clear distinction between prudential supervision,
exercised by the DNB, and conduct of business supervision,
exercised by AFM (Authority for Financial Markets, in the
finance ministry). In the European context of supervisory
disclosure, the Recast Directive (2000/12/EC) includes a
section that covers the FSSA recommendation on publishing
more information about policies and procedures. In addition,
another directive, on reinsurance (2005/68/EC), to be
implemented by December 10, 2007, serves to meet another
FSSA recommendation, namely that the DNB will supervise
reinsurers that are not supervised elsewhere in the EU/EEA.
With respect to AML/CFT, customer identification has been
strengthened through the regulation on customer due
diligence at credit institutions and insurance companies,
which came into force on January 1, 2004. The amended
Disclosure of Unusual Transaction (Services) Act, which
entered into force in May 2006, puts additional obligations on
the disclosure of information.

But the authorities, noting supply constraints, were, by and large, less concerned than staff
about the risks from a drop in house prices at the current conjuncture.11
17.
Worries voiced by the financial supervisors (including in DNB publications)
about a deterioration in credit quality in the face of rapid growth of mortgage lending
prompted a review of the code of conduct for mortgage lending. As a result of this
review, the code has been strengthened, notably by tightening lending guidelines with respect
to judging affordability and informing consumers about risks. Some felt it could also be
useful to add an explicit LTV test to the guidelines, because households would carry a large
risk of residual debt if house prices fell. But others felt that affordability tests sufficiently

11

Empirical work at the CPB also suggested that house price adjustments were more sluggish on the downside
than upside.

17

covered the risks to consumers and banks and that an LTV test would provide no value added
as macroeconomic risks were not part of the prudential supervision framework.12 In any
event, at this stage, it is not yet clear how the code will be monitored and enforced, though
the subject is under active discussion.
18.
With the subject now on the policy radar screen, public debate about policy
options for phasing out the tax deduction for mortgage interest payments is
intensifying. A key question—under early discussion by the authorities so they did not have
a uniform view—was whether house prices would drop quickly, even if tax deductibility
were phased out over a long period of time. The authorities were quite interested in the
Selected Issues paper on house prices and policy options for phasing out tax deductibility,
which staff hoped could usefully contribute to the debate. The paper suggests that a quick
drop in house prices need not necessarily occur if the phase-out takes place over a long
period of time. During the discussions, the advantages for the budget of eliminating
deductibility were noted, including by providing room for tax cuts, which could also lessen
the downward impact on demand and stimulate labor participation. More generally, while not
a focus of the mission, severe distortions in the housing market were apparent. This prompted
staff to encourage the authorities to study whether other possible improvements could be
made to the functioning of the housing market, including by examining whether rent controls
and administrative allocation mechanisms appropriately serve their intended social and
economic purpose.
19.
Although a bank failed, there was general satisfaction that it had no
macroeconomic implications. While clearly unwelcome, the event was also seen as an
opportunity to learn from a real world experience—for example, from the tensions that arose
between the requirement to disclose price-sensitive information (under the Market Abuse
Act) and the aim to guard over the solvency and liquidity of the institution using emergency
regulations (under the Banking Act). These tensions reflect the fact that the release of
information pertaining to the implementation of emergency regulations can have
counterproductive effects on a bank’s viability. The authorities explained that they await the
report from “the trustees of the bankruptcy,” with a view to seeing if lessons on other issues
can be drawn.
20.
Within the framework for pension supervision in the new Financial Supervision
Act, one key aspect—the appropriate recovery period when a pension fund’s coverage
ratio falls below the minimum requirement of 105 percent—is still under discussion.
One consideration is to avoid unduly punishing pension holders, for example because of
having to take actions in the face of temporarily unfavorable market conditions. This has to
be balanced against the need of ensuring discipline. It was agreed that the time period
12

Imposing direct restrictions on LTVs is not common in industrial countries. In addition, the excess of a loan
over 75 percent of the liquidation value of the property has a 100 percent risk weighting in calculating required
capital.

18

specified should ensure that corrective actions by a pension fund are not unduly postponed.
Intervention would also have to be sufficiently stringent that the threat of it would itself
provide a strong incentive to avoid it. In addition, it was noted that pension funds are not
subject to the same market discipline as banks in the sense that individuals have no choice on
the pension fund to which they contribute. In all, these considerations were generally taken to
support the ex ante specification of a one-year recovery period. But the need for flexibility
was also recognized. Indeed, it was emphasized that the DNB has already demonstrated
flexibility with longer recovery periods and thus supported, along with the ministries
involved in financial supervision, appropriate escape clauses.
21.
The authorities recognize that continuity planning is essential to minimizing
financial system disruptions if an avian flu pandemic were to occur. The appropriate
issues have been well publicized by the authorities, including by having supervisors ask
financial institutions how they are preparing.
D. Structural Reforms and Other Policies
22.
Several, not always easy, measures have been taken to raise labor participation,
which is comparatively low (Figure 6). Earlier reforms of the disability scheme had already
reduced inflows significantly, and reassessments of the existing stock have already resulted
in reclassifications. The more recent reform distinguishes between partly and fully disabled,
enhancing the incentives to participate in the labor market for those who can. Early
retirement is now actuarially fair. Still, the operations of the “life-course (tax-free saving)
scheme” are not yet fully clear. It would be unfortunate if it effectively became a vehicle
solely for subsidizing early retirement. The reduction in the duration of unemployment
benefits to three years and reduction in inactivity and poverty traps (following the abolition
of the real estate tax and smoothing of the income dependency of the child credit) should
further induce higher participation.
23.
Partly drawing on the CPB’s study of welfare state reform, there are further
measures to consider. Smoothing the income dependency of the rent subsidy would reduce
other spikes in marginal tax rates (and could be designed to lessen costs). Further measures to
lower childcare expenses and individualize the tax credit for nonparticipating partners would
also be promising avenues to increase participation. A reduction in the minimum wage could
be effective in increasing low-skilled employment and would be more acceptable in the
context of equity considerations if the negative effects on equity were mitigated through an
earned tax credit. On unemployment benefits, staff felt room existed to further reduce
duration, still generous by international standards, and taper off replacement rates more
rapidly. While the discussions revealed a clear understanding of the potential benefits of
these reforms, there was also a sense of reform fatigue setting in and that further reforms
needed to await the next government.

19

24.
Several avenues were identified to boost productivity growth. Against the
background of slowing potential and overall productivity growth—evidenced, for example,
in staff’s Selected Issues paper—this was seen as an important topic. Thus, the authorities
underscored efforts to increase competition, for example by unbundling the energy market
and through the NMa’s work, including in areas such as construction where earlier staff work
on sectoral productivity showed weak growth. The authorities also explained that the goal of
reducing red tape by one quarter would be achieved by the end of the government’s terms,
including by reducing the number of permits and license systems that can adversely affect
innovation and experimentation. Staff noted that product market reforms can also facilitate
labor market reforms, notably by dampening the impact of the latter on real wages. Like
before, staff also encouraged greater wage differentiation (to attract labor to higher
productivity companies and sectors, while strengthening the incentives for human capital
investment), and less strict EPL (which basically acts as a tax on new hiring and labor
reallocation and can therefore also hamper innovation). The latter was under active
discussion at the SER. Though the different parties could recognize benefits from less strict
EPL, there was no consensus on reforms because of different vested interests; continued
discussions were postponed. There was general agreement on the importance of ensuring
sufficient space within the budgetary envelope for education, infrastructure, and marketoriented incentives for R&D.
25.
The authorities enthusiastically support overseas development assistance (ODA),
continuing to exceed the United Nations’ target of 0.7 percent of GNI.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
26.
There is reason for optimism. After a period of slow or negative growth, the
economic recovery is gathering steam, broadening to the domestic components of economic
activity. While challenges lie ahead, the capability to deal with them has clearly been in
evidence in the achievements over the past few years. Among them are reform of health care,
disability, and financial supervision, strengthened administration of social benefits by local
authorities because of improved incentives, and a turnaround in the public finances.
27.
To ensure a solid foundation for sustaining economic growth over the medium
and longer terms, there is a need to deal with a number of key challenges. These include
making sure that the public finances are sustainable in the face of population aging. While
competitiveness is not problematic, continued wage moderation to support it would allow the
Netherlands to take full advantage of the global upturn, an issue that could take on increasing
importance as the recovery gathers force. Furthermore, in addition to safeguarding financial
stability, the challenges also include undertaking deeper structural reforms to raise labor
participation, hours worked, and overall productivity, without which potential growth could
get stuck at a low rate as the population ages.

20

28.
The impressive fiscal adjustment of the past two years should be safeguarded. At
over 2 percentage points of GDP in structural terms during 2004–05, the adjustment achieved
so far during the current government’s term has reflected a determined policy effort. In
addition, though difficult to measure, this adjustment likely helped reverse the decline in
confidence from breaching the Maastricht deficit ceiling. While fiscal policy may turn
somewhat expansionary in 2007, it would be preferable to pursue at least a neutral stance in
view of fiscal requirements in the medium term and with the upturn well in train. Further
rationalizing and restraining unemployment benefits and rent subsidies would be among the
measures that could be taken to exploit synergies between fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms aimed at raising employment rates and potential growth. At a minimum, any revenue
overperformance or below-budget expenditure outturns in 2006 and 2007 should go to deficit
reduction.
29.
Looking further ahead, continued fiscal consolidation and other sustainabilityenhancing reforms will be essential for securing longer-term fiscal sustainability. This is
well recognized by the authorities and well analyzed in their comprehensive study on aging.
Moreover, official efforts to enhance public awareness of aging issues are to be commended.
For the next government, aiming for a general government surplus of at least 1 percent of
GDP by the end of its term (2011) would be well-placed. This would represent significant
structural fiscal adjustment and take advantage of the favorable environment provided by the
economic upturn. Even so, a significant sustainability gap would remain. Thus, to reduce the
risk that the size of the aging problem will grow and that intergenerational equity will be
reduced, it is important to identify and implement upfront other measures to close the
sustainability gap. Asymmetrical risks tilted toward needing more adjustment accentuate the
case for upfront action and for using any fiscal overperformance in 2006–07 to pursue more
ambitious fiscal targets in later years.
30.
The sound fiscal practices in the Netherlands provide a strong framework to
help the country achieve its goals, though refinements would help strengthen it further.
It is commendable that Dutch fiscal practices meet or exceed the good-practice standards,
a key conclusion of the recent ROSC. Moreover, the CPB’s independent and central role
provides a best-practice example of separating the political and technical elements of
macroeconomic policy. Refinements could still be made in some areas, including by making
the reporting and monitoring of the expenditure ceilings more transparent, incorporating in
the calculation of the net expenditure ceiling only those nontax items for which there are
appropriate incentives to collect resources, and reassessing the role of the budgetary fund
based on gas revenues with a view to better assessing the trade-offs faced in allocating
spending as part of the general budgetary process.
31.
The financial sector remains sound, and improvements continue to be made to
already strong supervision. The new Financial Supervision Act, the strengthening of the
risk orientation of supervision, and the analytical work on financial stability, including a new
round of stress tests, are welcome. Financial vulnerabilities have nevertheless arisen,

21

prompting a review of the code of conduct on mortgage lending. The strengthening of the
code, with a view to minimizing these vulnerabilities, is a step in the right direction. But to
be effective, monitoring compliance is essential, as is taking appropriate actions if violations
occur. While a small bank failed, the event, in broad outline, exemplified the system
working: the emerging problems came as no surprise to supervisors and they closed the bank.
The event should also add a degree of market discipline by demonstrating to creditors that a
bank can fail.
32.
The authorities’ responsiveness to the FSSA recommendations is welcome.
Phasing out the tax deductibility of mortgage interest payments is now on the policy radar
screen, and it is encouraging that the authorities are trying to find a way to do this that
minimizes disruptive effects. There are advantages for the budget from a phase-out, including
by providing room for tax cuts, which can lessen the downward impact on demand and
stimulate labor participation. In a broader sense, the authorities are also encouraged to study
whether rent controls and administrative allocation mechanisms appropriately serve their
intended social and economic purposes. On pension funds, when the minimum coverage ratio
is not met, the presumption of a one-year recovery period would help ensure discipline,
including through the ex ante threat of stringent intervention. At the same time, flexibility is
indispensable—for example if macroeconomic distress or systemic pension problems were to
occur—so escape clauses allowing for a longer, ex post, recovery period are necessary, too.
33.
Continuity planning is essential to minimizing financial system disruptions if an
avian flu pandemic were to occur. It is therefore commendable that the Dutch authorities
are at the forefront of dealing with financial issues related to a possible pandemic.
34.
While there is room for further reforms to raise the economy’s growth potential,
the authorities have already made considerable efforts to raise labor participation and
overall productivity. Efforts to better align work effort and the return from work, and
minimize the negative effects on labor participation of satisfying society’s preferences for
equity, are well-placed and have been exemplified with disability reform, making early
retirement actuarially fair, and lowering unemployment benefits. But the duration of
unemployment benefits is still generous by international standards, and a more rapid
tapering-off in replacement rates could be introduced. New ways of lessening inactivity traps
and stimulating demand for low-skilled labor should also be examined, including through
changes in the minimum wage and its links to several social benefits. With respect to
enhancing productivity, including by boosting innovation, efforts to increase competition and
reduce red tape are among the steps in the right direction, and should be continued. Greater
wage differentiation would be helpful in encouraging human capital investment and
attracting labor to higher productivity companies and sectors. EPL, which acts as a tax on
new hiring and labor reallocation and can hamper innovation, could be made less stringent.
All these reforms would be mutually reinforcing in creating employment, enhancing
economic growth, boosting competitiveness, imparting flexibility for dealing with

22

asymmetric shocks in a monetary union, and achieving fiscal savings to ensure adequate
resources for an aging population.
35.
The commitment to ODA, even in the face of budgetary pressures, is
commendable. The Netherlands continues to exceed the United Nations’ ODA target.
36.
It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with the Netherlands remain
on the 12-month cycle.

23

Table 1. The Netherlands: Basic Data, 2001-08
Land area (2005)
Population (2005)
Population characteristics and health:
Life expectancy at birth (2005)
Fertility rate (2005)
Infant mortality rate (2005)
Population per sq. km. of land area (2005)

41.5 thousand sq. km.
16.4 million
76.3 (male), 81.5 (female)
1.7 children/woman
5.04 per 1,000 live births
483 persons

National accounts 2005

(In billions of euros)

Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Stockbuilding
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Imports of goods and nonfactor services
GDP

(In percent of GDP)

244.0
120.5
97.6
-1.4
357.5
316.3
501.9

2001

2002

48.6
24.0
19.5
-0.3
71.2
63.0
100.0

2003

2004

Est.
2005

Proj. 1/
2006

Proj.
2007

Proj.
2008

1.6
0.8
4.4
2.2
6.5
6.2
0.7
2.8

2.0
1.2
3.4
2.1
6.0
5.6
0.8
2.7

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts (constant prices)
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Total domestic demand
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Imports of goods and nonfactor services
Net foreign balance 2/
Gross domestic product

1.4
4.8
0.2
1.8
1.6
2.2
-0.3
1.4

0.9
3.3
-4.5
-0.4
0.9
0.3
0.5
0.1

-0.7
2.4
-3.5
-0.3
2.0
2.0
0.1
-0.1

--2.9
0.8
8.5
7.8
0.9
1.7

0.3
0.5
2.2
0.2
5.9
5.1
0.9
1.1

Output gap (in percent of potential output)

2.7

0.6

-1.6

-1.9

-2.7

-2.1

-1.3

-0.6

Prices, wages, and employment
Consumer price index (HICP)
GDP deflator

5.1
9.7

3.9
3.8

2.2
2.5

1.4
0.9

1.5
1.6

1.5
1.7

1.8
1.6

1.8
1.8

3.9
5.0

3.7
2.8

2.7
2.3

1.6
-1.6

0.8
-0.3

0.8
-0.4

2.0
0.8

2.6
0.8

2.1
2.5

0.4
2.9

-0.4
4.0

-0.7
4.9

-0.3
5.2

1.1
4.8

1.4
4.3

0.7
4.4

6.2
6.8

-0.3
6.5

-0.3
6.9

40.7
9.0

-0.1
8.5

2.4
8.4

1.9
8.3

External trade
Exports of goods, volume
Imports of goods, volume
Terms of trade
Merchandise balance (percent of GDP)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)

-2.0
0.4
3.3
4.8
2.4

1.0
3.2
1.5
4.2
2.5

6.6
2.3
1.4
6.6
5.5

9.0
8.5
-0.4
7.1
8.9

6.1
7.4
0.3
7.0
6.4

5.8
5.6
1.1
8.9
7.8

5.9
5.5
0.1
9.3
8.1

Public sector accounts (in percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
General government balance
Structural balance 4/
Primary balance
Structural primary balance 4/
General government gross debt

44.9
45.2
-0.3
-1.2
2.1
1.2
50.7

44.0
45.9
-2.0
-2.3
0.2
-0.1
50.5

43.6
46.8
-3.2
-2.4
-1.1
-0.4
51.9

44.4
46.3
-2.1
-1.2
-0.1
0.8
52.6

45.6
45.8
-0.3
0.1
2.0
2.3
52.9

45.5
46.4
-0.9
-0.3
1.2
1.8
52.0

45.5
45.8
-0.3
-1.9
2.2
51.6

Hourly compensation (manufacturing)
Unit labor costs (manufacturing)
Employment
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Personal sector
Real disposable income
Household savings ratio 3/

-1.0 1/
7.7 1/
4.8
2.6
6.0
6.2
0.3
2.6

-2.0 1/
7.5
6.3
6.1
1.2
8.0
6.9
45.8 1/
46.7 1/
-0.9
-1.3
2.1
52.6

Sources: Dutch official publications; IMF, IFS; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ The introduction of the new health insurance scheme in 2006 will cause a significant shift in health care expenditure from private to public
consumption, thereby lowering private and raising public consumption growth without changing overall GDP. In a related vein, government revenues
will rise and private disposable income fall, without affecting the financial position of the public sector or households' net terms. This is because public
expenditure for health care also rises, while the fall in private disposable income is offset by a similar fall in private health consumption, which is now
financed through the fiscal accounts.
2/ Contribution to GDP growth.
3/ In percent of disposable income.
4/ See Table 2.

24

Table 2. The Netherlands: General Government Accounts, 2001-07
(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005 1/

2006 2/

2007 2/

Revenues
Tax revenues and social security contributions
Tax revenues
Social security contributions
Nontax revenues

44.9
38.4
24.7
13.7
6.5

44.0
37.8
24.5
13.3
6.2

43.6
37.5
23.7
13.8
6.1

44.3
37.8
23.8
14.0
6.6

45.6
39.7
26.2
13.5
5.9

45.8
39.3
24.6
14.7
6.5

45.5
39.3
24.9
14.4
6.2

Expenditure
Direct expenditure
Compensation of employees
Goods and services (excluding capital formation)
Fixed capital formation
Social benefits in kind
Transfers
Subsidies (including EU)
Other transfers
Households
Corporations
Rest of the world
Interest

45.2
26.9
9.6
6.9
3.3
7.1
15.1
1.7
13.4
10.6
0.7
2.1
3.2

45.9
28.1
9.8
7.0
3.5
7.8
15.0
1.8
13.2
10.7
0.5
2.0
2.8

46.8
28.9
10.1
7.2
3.4
8.2
15.2
1.7
13.5
11.1
0.5
1.9
2.7

46.4
28.4
10.1
7.0
3.1
8.2
15.3
1.7
13.6
11.1
0.5
2.0
2.6

45.8
28.1
9.9
6.9
3.0
8.3
15.3
1.6
13.7
11.0
0.4
2.3
2.5

46.7
29.5
9.7
6.9
3.0
9.9
15.0
1.5
13.5
11.0
0.4
2.1
2.4

46.4
29.0
9.4
6.8
3.0
10.0
14.8
1.5
13.3
10.7
0.5
2.1
2.3

Fiscal balance 3/

-0.3

-2.0

-3.2

-2.1

-0.3

-0.9

-0.9

Memorandum items:
Primary balance
Structural balance (in percent of GDP) 4/ 5/
Nominal expenditure growth (in percent) 6/
Real expenditure growth (in percent) 6/

2.1
-1.2
6.5
-3.0

0.2
-2.3
6.2
2.3

-1.1
-2.4
4.4
1.8

-0.1
-1.2
1.3
0.4

2.0
0.1
1.8
0.3

1.3
0.0
6.6
4.7

1.2
-0.3
3.4
1.2

Sources: National accounts; ministry of finance; CPB; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Estimates.
2/ Projections. The introduction of the new health care system in 2006 will have an upward effect on both expenditures and revenues,
with no effect on the overall balance.
3/ For 2000, includes UMTS receipts (0.7 percent of GDP); and for 2001, includes purchase of gas rights from DSM (0.3 percent of GDP).
4/ The calculation of the structural balance is based on the standard methodology, which uses fixed elasticities with respect to GDP. Biases
can occur, in particular in the context of asset price boom and busts (as discussed for the Netherlands in IMF Country Report 04/301),
but also when the components of GDP move differently than the overall aggregate.
5/ For 2000, excludes UMTS receipts (0.7 percent of GDP); for 2001, excludes the purchase of gas rights from DSM (0.3 percent
of GDP); for 2005, reflecting the purchase of the gas network, includes a one-off increase of equal size in revenue and expenditure
(¾ percent of GDP), which does not affect the structural balance; and for 2005-06, adjusted for corporate tax receipts,
which were exceptionally large in the earlier year because of a temporarily high interest rate received on overpayments.
6/ The increase in expenditure growth in 2006 largely reflects the introduction of the new health care system, as in footnote 2.

25

Table 3. The Netherlands: Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability, 2000-05
(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)

External indicators
Exports goods and services
(annual percent change, in U.S. dollars)
Imports goods and services
(annual percent change, in U.S. dollars)
Terms of trade goods (annual percent change)
Current account balance
Inward portfolio investment
Inward foreign direct investment
Official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets of the banking sector
(in billions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign liabilities of the banking sector
(in billions of U.S. dollars)
Official reserves in months of imports
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
Financial market indicators
Public sector debt (Maastricht definition)
Government bond yield
Government bond yield (real)
Stock market index
Spread of government bond yield with Germany
Financial sector risk indicators
Residential mortgage loans to total loans (in percent)
Nonperforming loans net of provisions in percent of capital 1/
Classified loan to total loans (in percent) 1/
Foreign credit exposure (in percent of own funds)
Central and Eastern Europe
Latin America
Asia
Contingent and off-balance-sheet accounts
to total assets (in percent)
Risk-based capital-asset ratio
Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF, IFS.
1/ Average of the three largest banks.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

4.4

-0.7

4.4

16.9

17.7

13.6

2.9
-0.3
2.0
2.4
17.2
17.6

-0.3
3.3
2.4
-3.4
13.0
16.9

4.4
1.5
2.5
3.4
5.7
19.0

22.7
1.4
5.5
-4.3
4.0
21.6

19.3
-0.4
8.9
5.2
0.1
21.2

12.6
1.1
6.4
-12.0
6.5
20.5

163.9

211.4

256.2

308.2

376.9

408.8

206.1
0.9
1.08

250.1
0.8
1.12

305.8
1.0
1.06

328.2
1.0
0.88

392.5
0.9
0.80

416.4
0.7
0.80

55.9
5.5
3.2
100.0
0.27

50.7
5.2
0.1
81.9
0.47

50.5
5.0
1.1
63.1
0.39

51.9
4.2
1.9
45.7
0.37

52.6
4.1
2.7
51.0
0.34

52.9
3.4
1.9
57.9
0.19

0.79
31.34
2.22

0.79
31.13
2.28

0.79
31.22
2.38

0.78
24.32
1.99

0.78
19.19
1.54

0.80
15.66
1.22

16.7
20.6
28.2

16.6
19.0
25.6

17.1
14.8
23.5

17.3
11.9
26.1

16.2
9.3
27.6

18.4
11.6
25.2

21.9
11.3

20.3
11.4

19.5
11.9

16.7
12.1

15.3
12.1

14.6
12.3

26

Table 4. The Netherlands: The Core Set of Financial Soundness Indicators, 1998-2005
(In percent; unless otherwise indicated)
Indicator

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Regulatory capital-to-risk-weighted assets
Regulatory Tier I capital-to-risk-weighted assets
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital 1/
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans 1/

11.41
8.53
30.05
2.72

11.18
8.43
32.32
2.48

11.25
8.62
31.34
2.22

11.44
8.51
31.13
2.28

11.86
8.98
31.22
2.38

12.05
9.39
24.32
1.99

12.07
9.76
19.19
1.54

12.35
10.05
15.66
1.22

Sectoral distribution of loans to total loans
Households
Nonfinancial companies
Insurance companies and pension funds
Other financial institutions

49.85
37.79
1.33
11.03

50.85
35.96
1.10
12.10

50.20
35.94
1.08
12.78

50.92
34.48
1.63
12.97

50.80
32.60
1.43
15.17

50.26
31.51
0.99
17.24

49.94
29.62
1.67
18.77

49.39
28.56
1.95
20.10

Return on assets
Return on equity
Interest margin to gross income (ratio)
Noninterest expenses to gross income (ratio)

0.44
10.89
0.60
0.79

0.57
14.21
0.57
0.74

0.60
14.79
0.52
0.73

0.43
10.86
0.56
0.79

0.35
9.05
0.61
0.82

0.45
11.68
0.61
0.75

0.54
13.81
0.58
0.71

0.54
14.55
0.54
0.69

8.41

9.04

6.15

4.76

4.25

6.11

4.07

0.77

Deposit-taking institutions

Net open position in foreign exchange to capital
Source: Data provided by the authorities.
1/ Three largest credit institutions.

27

Table 5. The Netherlands: Encouraged Financial Soundness Indicators, 1998-2005
Indicator

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Corporate sector
Total debt to equity
Return on equity
Earnings to interest and principal expenses

0.69
0.18
2.37

0.69
0.18
2.40

0.70
0.16
1.84

0.69
0.14
1.46

0.66
0.12
1.56

0.65
0.12
1.92

0.65
0.14
3.47

...
...
...

Deposit-taking institutions
Capital to assets

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

0.04

20.67
4.54
2.76
0.32
28.29

21.53
4.66
2.01
0.39
28.60

21.05
4.33
1.19
0.37
26.95

23.29
5.52
2.54
0.38
31.73

25.39
4.99
1.79
0.27
32.45

26.56
4.36
1.64
0.37
32.93

27.62
4.24
1.61
0.31
33.78

28.17
4.43
1.51
0.39
34.51

71
0.82
0.07
0.50
3.40
0.81
0.17

87
1.17
0.08
0.52
0.72
0.76
0.16

84
1.15
0.09
0.53
1.90
0.76
0.17

94
1.24
0.08
0.52
1.90
0.79
0.20

99
0.77
0.06
0.50
1.19
0.78
0.17

99
0.78
0.07
0.51
0.51
0.82
0.15

108
0.84
0.08
0.54
0.44
0.83
0.15

94
0.66
0.10
0.49
0.43
0.82
0.20

0.23
0.01

0.23
0.02

0.23
0.02

0.28
0.02

0.24
0.01

0.21
0.02

0.20
0.02

0.25
0.00

0.31
2,290

0.09
2,876

0.12
4,559

0.09
4,131

0.06
1,885

0.04
1,585

0.04
1,695

...
2,069

0.35
1.81

0.36
2.03

0.34
1.96

0.31
1.79

0.33
1.84

0.30
1.72

0.31
1.95

0.28
2.17

0.76
0.096

0.83
0.108

0.87
0.122

0.90
0.113

0.95
0.109

1.03
0.116

1.10
0.123

1.17
...

Geographical distribution of loans to total loans (in percent)
Europe (excluding Netherlands)
America
Asia
Other (Africa, Middle East, and Oceania)
Total
Financial derivatives to capital
Large exposures to capital
Trading income to total income
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Spread between reference lending and deposit rates
Customer deposits to total (noninterbank) loans
Foreign currency-denominated loans to total loans
Foreign currency-denominated liabilities to
total liabilities (deposits)
Net open position in equities to capital
Market liquidity
Average bid-ask spread in the securities market
Average daily turnover ratio in the securities market
Other financial corporations
Assets to total financial system assets
Assets to GDP
Households
Household debt to GDP
Household debt service and principal payments to income
Real estate markets
Real estate prices (in euros)
Residential real estate loans to total loans
Source: Data provided by the authorities.

123,358 142,450 171,058 187,625 199,333 204,417 212,500 222,167
0.79
0.80
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.78
0.80

28

Table 6. The Netherlands: Financial System Structure, 1998-2005

Number
Banks
Private commercial
State-owned
Foreign-owned subsidiaries
Branches of foreign banks
Life insurance companies
General insurance companies
Pension funds

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

99
68
2

100
73
1

104
75
1

101
69
1

93
61
1

93
63
1

94
64
1
29
32
77
275
800
3
...
...
...

29

26

28

31

31

29

...
108
318
1,040

31
109
337
1,016

35
101
313
988

33
98
308
963

32
92
297
926

31
87
292
875

94
64
1
29
33
85
278
839

3
12
40
23

3
12
40
22

3
11
32
24

3
11
33
25

3
10
32
25

3
10
31
25

3
10
30
24

Concentration
Banks 1/
Life insurance companies 1/
General insurance companies 1/
Pension funds 1/
Assets (in millions of euros)
Banks
Foreign-owned subsidiaries
Branches of foreign banks
Securities companies
Life insurance companies
General insurance companies
Pension funds
Deposits (in millions of euros)
Banks
Foreign-owned subsidiaries
Branches of foreign banks

1,206,632 1,367,120 1,606,591 1,749,569 1,762,511 1,911,343 2,198,404 2,767,526
...
...
136,821
154,340
147,213
180,531
215,064
249,948
24,129
24,551
33,884
29,732
28,396
27,673
31,481
34,523
74,995
103,565
122,650
113,659
91,212
98,420
99,695
107,078
212,820
234,144
246,057
251,214
240,571
255,597
267,204
291,871
31,927
33,934
34,791
35,143
35,441
38,360
42,132
46,021
...
469,440
481,556
474,637
442,734
496,750
550,876
649,635
560,392
...
5,193

637,106
...
5,796

734,462
49,261
5,772

817,582
61,551
5,531

838,441
56,056
7,171

909,748
69,152
6,245

999,711 1,153,049
72,502
86,219
7,740
9,051

Source: National authorities.
1/ Number of institutions with 75 percent of total assets.

Table 7. The Netherlands: Performance of Dutch Pension Funds, 1990-2005
1990-94 1995-99

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Returns (annual average, in percent)

7.3

11.6

2.6

-2.5

-8.0

10.1

9.5

13.0

Contribution rate (in percent of gross wages)

8.5

9.0

9.5

10.0

12.4

15.0

16.5

17.0

Asset-liability ratio (in percent of liabilities) 1/

116

139

141

127

109

114

121

132

Asset-liability ratio
(in percent of liabilities, market rate) 2/
Equity holding (in percent of portfolio)
Sources: CPB; and DNB.
1/ Uses 15-year bond yield as nominal market rate.
2/ Uses accounting rate of 4 percent.

...

...

173

157

124

130

124

126

15.8

32.2

41.8

42.5

35.6

40.6

40.8

42.0

29

Figure 1. Netherlands: 2001–03—A Period of Weak Economic Performance
A main reason was weak private consumption,
reflecting modest growth of wages and social
security benefits.

While a posterchild in the late 1980s and 1990s,
Dutch economic growth fell sharply into the new
millennium. 1/
5

6
Real GDP (Annual percent change)

Real private consumption (Annual percent change)
Netherlands
France
Germany
Euro Area

4

3

5

Netherlands
France
Germany
Euro Area

4

3
2
2
1
1
0

0

-1

-1
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

1995

The collapse of equity prices early in the new
century contributed.
360

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

So did some slowdown in the pace of house price
increases.
270
Residential property prices
(1995=100)

330
240
300
270

210

240
180
210
180

150

150
120

Netherlands (CBS all shares)

90
1995Q1 1996Q4 1998Q3 2000Q2 2002Q1 2003Q4 2005Q3

120

90
1995Q1 1996Q4 1998Q3 2000Q2 2002Q1 2003Q4 2005Q3

Sources: WEFA; Netherlands authorities; and IMF, IFS and WEO.
1/ As discussed in the staff report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation (IMF Country Report No. 04/200), wealth and
certain policy effects have tended to amplify the cycle in the Netherlands compared with other euro area countries,
especially through their impact on private consumption (studied in L ong-Run Household Consumption Equilibrium in the
Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 05/225). In addition, while delivering wage moderation on average, the Dutch wage
bargaining system has tended to react sluggishly to changes in economic circumstances. This was analyzed in Wage
Bargaining in the Netherlands (IMF Country Report No. 03/240) and could also accentuate the cycle.

30

Figure 1. Netherlands: 2001–03—A Period of Weak Economic Performance (continued)
An additional, and partly related factor, was a sharp
erosion of consumer confidence, which was also
affected by rising unemployment and uncertainty
14
about pensions and other policies.

40

12

Consumer confidence indicator
30

Business investment deteriorated, especially up to
2003...

Real business investment (Annual percent change)

10

20

8
6

10

4
0

2

-10

0
-2

-20
Netherlands
France
Germany
Euro Area

-30

-6
-8

-40

1995

1995M1 1997M1 1999M1 2001M1 2003M1 2005M1

6

Netherlands
France
Germany
Euro Area

-4

...as earlier rapid growth was based on what now
appears to have been unrealistic expectations of future
growth...
Real GDP growth
CPB Forecast 2000
CPB Forecast 2001
CPB Forecast 2002
CPB Forecast 2003

4

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

...and as large increases in unit labor costs cut into profit
margins.
16

8
Profit margins (Percent of GDP)
Unit labor cost growth (Right scale, in
percent, total economy)

14

6

12

4

10

2

8

0

2

0

6

-2
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-2
1995

1997

Sources: WEFA; Netherlands authorities; and IMF, IFS and WEO.

1999

2001

2003

2005

31

Figure 1. Netherlands: 2001–03—A Period of Weak Economic Performance (concluded)
The fiscal deficit widened sharply
during 2001-03...

The output gap widened, contributing to low
inflation.

6

3

5

2

4
1
3
0

2
1

-1

0

-2

-1
-3
-2
Output gap in percent of potential GDP

-3

-4

General government balance (Percent of GDP)

Inflation rate (Harmonized CPI)

-4

-5
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1995

2005

...with structural effects, including the 2001 tax reform
and increases in health and education spending,
accounting for about 2 percentage points of GDP of the
deterioration.

12

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Combined with weak foreign demand during
2001-03, export growth also fell sharply.
Real exports (Annual
percent change)

0

-1
8
-2

-3

4

General government structural balance (Percent
of GDP)

-4

-5

0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

1995

1997

Sources: WEFA; Netherlands authorities; and IMF, IFS and WEO.

1999

2001

2003

2005

32

Figure 2. Netherlands: Competitiveness Indicators
... ULCs rose more rapidly than in other European
countries.

Along with recent real exchange rate appreciation...
120

125
Normalized Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
(1990=100)

Real Effective Exchange Rate (NULC-based)
120

Nominal Effective Exchange Rate

115

Real Effective Exchange Rate (CPI-based)
115
110
110
105
105
Netherlands
France
Germany
Euro Area

100
100
95

95

90

90
1990M1

8

1993M1

1996M1

1999M1

2002M1

2005M1

1990M1

While market shares in value terms have shown little
discernable trend 1/ ...
115

1993M1

1996M1

1999M1

2002M1

2005M1

falling market shares have been especially apparent in
volume terms since the mid-1990s, although even for goods,
they are still unchanged over the entire period.
(1990=100)
Export share: Goods 2/
Export share: Goods and services 2/

6

110
Nominal exports in percent of the EU market
Nominal exports in percent of the world market

4

105

100

2
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Source: CPB; IMF, INS , DOT , and WEO.
1/ This may reflect developments in oil and therefore natural gas prices.
2/ As derived from WEO volume data on the growth of exports (and exports of goods and services) and the
corresponding growth of import demand in partner countries.

33

Figure 3. Netherlands: Cyclical Comparisons (Dates indicate cyclical troughs for GDP) 1/
Exports are driving the mild recovery; employment and consumption are weak compared with
their position during previous expansions.
107

110

Real GDP (Trough=100)

106

1975Q2
1982Q4
1986Q4
1992Q2
2003Q2

108

106

Total employment (Trough=100)
1975Q2
1982Q4
1986Q4
1992Q2
2003Q2

105
104
103

104
2003Q2

102
101

102

100
100
99
98

2003Q2

98
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

10

1

2

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

8

9

10

120

114

112

3

Quarters around cyclical troughs

Quarters around cyclical troughs

Private final consumption expenditure
(Trough=100)

Exports of goods and services
(Trough=100)
115

1975Q2
1982Q4
1986Q4
1992Q2
2003Q2

110

108

1975Q2
1982Q4
1986Q4
1992Q2
2003Q2

110

106
105

104

2003Q2
102
100
100
2003Q2
98

95
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Quarters around cyclical troughs

8

9

10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Quarters around cyclical troughs

Sources: OECD, analytical database and economic outlook.
1/ Troughs were identified using the methodology of Harding and Pagan (2002), "Dissecting the Cycle: A
Methodological Investigation," Journal of Monetary Economics.

34

Figure 4. Netherlands: The Beginning of an Upturn?
After a false start in 2004, the recovery gained traction in 2005.
Largely driven by the contribution of net exports,
overall growth was robust in the second half of 2005.

2.0

GDP (Percent change from preceding period)
1.5

1.0

Q3= 0.4
Q4=-0.1

0.5

Q1= 0.1
Q2=-0.4

Q1=0.0
Q2=0.7

Q3=0.1
Q4=0.6

0.0

Q3=0.7
Q4=0.6

Q1=0.9
Q2=0.3
-0.5
2003H1

2003H2

2004H1

2004H2

2005H1

2005H2

Moreover, quarterly employment recorded a more sustained rise in 2005 than in any year since 2001,
boding well for consumption.
8.4

Employment (In millions)

8.2

8.0
2003Q1

Source: IMF, WEO.

2003Q3

2004Q1

2004Q3

2005Q1

2005Q3

35

Figure 4. Netherlands: The Beginning of an Upturn? (Concluded)
Private consumption, while volatile on a quarterly
basis, recorded positive growth in the last three
quarters of 2005, rising strongly on average in the
last half of the year.

Investment, while also volatile on a quarterly basis,
recorded a substantial rise in the second half of 2005.
4

1.8

Investment (Percent change from preceding period)

Consumption (Percent change from preceding period)

3

Q1= 2.8
Q2=-2.6

1.3
2

Q1= 1.1
Q2=-0.6

0.8

Q1=0.3
Q2=0.4
0.3

Q1=-0.2
Q2=-0.4

0
Q3=0.4
Q4=-0.1

-0.3

Q3=-0.1
Q4=-0.4

-0.8
Q3=-0.6
Q4=-0.1

Q1=-2.6
Q2= 3.8

1
Q1=-0.7
Q2= 0.2
Q3=0.2
Q4=1.9

Q3= 2.1
Q4=-1.8

Q3=-0.4
Q4= 3.2

-1

-2

-1.3

-3
2003H1

2003H2

2004H1

2004H2

2005H1

2005H2

2003H1

Consumer confidence has strengthened recently.
5

0

2003H2

2004H1

2004H2

2005H1

2005H2

Business confidence has recently strengthened as
well.

-2

0

-4

-5

-6
-10
-8
-15

-10

-20

-12

2003M1

2004M1

Source: IMF, WEO.

2005M1

2006M1

2003M1

2004M1

2005M1

2006M1

36

Figure 5. Netherlands: Monetary Conditions
The tightening of monetary conditions after 2000 initially reflected the impact of a lowering of inflation
on real interest rates and subsequently an appreciating euro. More recently, monetary conditions
have eased as the real exchange rate depreciated.

5.5
5.0

Euro Area Interest Rates
(In percent)
3-month money market rate
Main refinancing rate

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1/1/99

8/29/99 4/25/00 12/21/00 8/18/01 4/15/02 12/11/02 8/8/03

4/5/04

12/1/04 7/29/05 3/26/06

8.0

120
Real short-term interest rate
MCI (Deviation from long-term average)
Real Effective Exchange Rate (NULC based, 1995=100, right scale) 1/

6.0

115

4.0

110

2.0

105

0.0

100

-2.0

95

-4.0

90

1994M1

1996M1

1998M1

2000M1

Source: IMF, IFS .
1/ An increase implies less accommodative conditions.

2002M1

2004M1

2006M1

37

Figure 6. Netherlands: Selected Labor Market Indicators
The employment rate is at about the
European average when measured in
workers...

80

80

...but it is the lowest when measured in
hours, partly reflecting women participating
part-time.
Employment in hours worked
(Average over last cycle)

Employment in persons
(Average over last cycle)
70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30
ITA GRC ESP BEL FRA USA NLD IRL FIN DEU GBR SWE DNK

NLD ITA BEL FRA DEU ESP GRC IRL DNK USA FIN SWE GBR

Wage dispersion is compressed...

... and minimum wages are high.

5

0.8
Minimum wage to average wage (Percent)

Wage dispersion
(90th percentile over 10th)
4
0.6

3
0.4
2

0.2
1

0

0.0
DNK

SWE

ITA

Source: OECD.

NLD

DEU

FRA

GBR

USA

FRA

BEL

NLD

GBR

USA

JPN

38

Figure 6. Netherlands: Selected Labor Market Indicators (Concluded)
Unemployment benefits are fairly generous.

Women participate only part-time...
120

80
Maximum duration of unemployment benefits
(In months)

Female participation in labor force ( In percent)
100
Share of full-time

60

Share of part-time
80

60

40

40
20
20

0

0
DNK BEL NLD DEU SWE GBR FRA USA JPN ITA

DNK FRA NLD NOR SWE DEU JPN GBR ITA USA

70

...and the effective retirement age is low.

EPL on regular contracts is high.
4

Effective retirement age (Years)

Employment protection legislation

68
66
64

Men
Women

3

62
2
60
58
1

56
54
52

0
FRA ITA DEU NLD GBR DNK SWE NOR USA JPN

Source: OECD.

NLD SWE DEU FRA JPN NOR ITA BEL DNK GBR USA

39

APPENDIX I. Fund Relations
As of April 30, 2006
I.

Membership Status: Joined December 27, 1945; Article VIII.

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR Million

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

5,162.40
4,513.86
648.59

SDR Department

100.00
87.44
12.56

SDR Million

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

Percent of Quota

Percent of Allocation

530.34
508.54

100.00
95.89

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements: None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/interest
Total
VII.

2006

Forthcoming
2007
2008
2009

2010

0.53
0.53

0.79
0.79

0.79
0.79

0.80
0.80

0.79
0.79

Exchange Rate Arrangements:

The Netherlands entered the final stage of the European Economic and Monetary Union on
January 1, 1999, at a rate of 2.20371 guilders per euro.
VIII.

Article IV Consultation:

Discussions for the 2006 Article IV Consultation were held in Amsterdam and The Hague
from April 27–May 9, 2006. The staff report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation (IMF
Country Report 05/226) was considered by the Executive Board on June 29, 2005 . The
Article IV discussions with the Netherlands are on the standard 12-month consultation cycle.

40

IX.

Exchange Restrictions:

In compliance with the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions and/or EU regulations, the
Netherlands maintains exchange restrictions vis-à-vis the former government of Iraq;
Somalia; Libya; specific persons and entities of Myanmar and Zimbabwe; specific
individuals associated with the previous government of the former Republic of Yugoslavia;
and certain persons and entities with a view to combating terrorism; Osama Bin Laden, the
Al-Qaeda network, and the Taliban. These restrictions are solely for the preservation of
national or international security and have been notified to the Fund in accordance with EBD
No. 144-(52/51).

41

APPENDIX II. Statistical Data Issues
The Netherlands publishes a wide range of economic and financial statistics. Specifically,
annual and quarterly national account data are provided by the Central Bureau of Statistics;
financial and balance of payments data are provided by De Nederlandsche Bank; and fiscal
data are provided by the ministry of finance. These data are increasingly available in
electronic form. Macroeconomic data are generally of high quality.
As a one-off matter, a number of institutional reforms significantly impact national accounts
and other data in 2006. Most importantly, the envisaged reform of health care insurance will
cause a significant reclassification of private consumption into public consumption. This shift
will have a big impact on the growth rates of the components concerned, but overall GDP
will not be affected.
The frequency and timeliness of the availability of the core statistical indicators for Fund
surveillance purposes are summarized in the attached table. The authorities subscribe to the
Special Data Dissemination Standard, providing information about their data and data
dissemination practices on the IMF Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board.

APPENDIX II. Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(as of June 5, 2006)
Date of Latest
Observation

Date Received

Frequency of
Data

Frequency of
Reporting

Frequency of
Publication

Exchange Rates

05/06

06/01/06

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the
Monetary Authorities1

01/06

2/21/06

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Reserve/Base Money2

4/14/05

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Broad Money

03/05

4/27/05

Monthly

Monthly

Weekly

Central Bank Balance Sheet

04/06

5/30/06

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

04/06

5/30/06

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Interest Rates3

05/06

6/01/06

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

04/06

5/18/05

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing ––
General Government5

2003

6/24/04

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing4 ––
Central Government

03/05

4/29/05

Monthly

Monthly

Monthly

Stocks of Central Government and Central GovernmentGuaranteed Debt

Q1 2005

4/15/04

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

External Current Account Balance

Q4 2005

4/6/06

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Q4 2005

4/6/06

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

GDP/GNP

Q4 2004

2/14/05

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Gross External Debt6

Q4 2004

3/31/04

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Consumer Price Index
4

1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Pertains to contribution to EMU aggregate.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
4
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
5
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
6
Including currency and maturity composition.
2

3

42

03/05

2

43

APPENDIX III. Staff Analytical Work on the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
2000–05
Fiscal Policy
o
o
o
o

Budgetary Policymaking in the Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 05/225.
Recent Fiscal Developments in the Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 04/301.
Medium-Term Fiscal Policy, IMF Country Report No. 02/123.
Health Care Reform, IMF Country Report No. 02/123.

The Financial Sector
o The Financial Sector in the Netherlands: A Health Check and Progress Report on the
FSSA Recommendations, IMF Country Report No. 05/225.
o House Prices in the Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 05/225.
o Second Pillar Pensions, Stock Market Returns, and Labor Demand, IMF Country
Report No. 03/240.
Labor Markets
o
o
o
o

Wage Bargaining in the Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 03/240.
Inactivity and Poverty Traps, IMF Country Report No. 02/123.
Reform of the Disability Program, IMF Country Report No. 02/123.
The Labor Income Tax Credit in an International Perspective, IMF Country Report
No. 01/96.

Growth, Productivity, and Related Cyclical Issues
o The External Competitiveness of the Dutch Economy: A Short Note on Evidence from
both Aggregate and Disaggregate Data, IMF Country Report No. 05/225.
o Long-Run Household Consumption Equilibrium in the Netherlands, IMF Country
Report No. 05/225.
o Recent Productivity Trends in the Netherlands, IMF Country Report No. 04/301.
o Estimating Potential Growth and Output Gaps for the Netherlands, IMF Country
Report No. 03/240.
o Dealing with Cyclical Tensions, IMF Country Report No. 00/88.

44

APPENDIX IV. A Summary of the CPB Study on
Aging and the Sustainability of Dutch Public Finances
Budgetary measures are necessary. If measures are not taken—now or later—public debt will
eventually explode or future generations will be unduly burdened with raising taxes or
scaling back public expenditures to secure sustainability. The situation is made more difficult
by the expected decline in natural gas revenues as reserves are exhausted over time.
Methodology
To analyze the problem, the CPB uses an applied general equilibrium model with
overlapping generations. The model accounts for certain behavioral feedbacks such as the
effects of changes in taxation and interest rates on wages, labor supply, and private saving, as
well as the impact of demographic changes on private consumption and other components of
GDP.1 Broadly speaking, the model distinguishes between two types of primary government
expenditures: (i) an age-related component to expenditure, explicitly affected by
demographic shifts, and (ii) a nonage-related component to expenditure, for which the
aggregate growth rate moves with GDP and wages. Thus, for example, in the baseline
scenario, policies are such that the ratio of health care costs to GDP stays constant except
from the effect of health care costs changing with different age groups. Revenues comprise
direct taxes, social security contributions, indirect and other taxes, corporate taxes, and
revenues from government assets (including natural gas). The growth of direct taxes and
social security contributions is based on the dynamics of income and savings during the life
cycle of households and therefore endogenous to the model. Indirect and other taxes are
divided into that part levied on investments and another part affected by consumer spending.
In the CPB study, attention is paid to tax smoothing—that is, the analysis is performed
assuming constant tax rates, with a view to minimizing the distortionary impact of taxation
on economic decisions over time. In addition, the analysis ensures intergenerational equity in
the sense that the net benefit from government relative to lifetime incomes is meant to be
constant for all generations starting from the base year (2006 in the study).2 In effect, since
all generations pay the same tax rates and have the same benefits from government, the
baseline and benchmark policy option (see below) are neutral with respect to the
intergenerational distribution. If the government defers the measures required to secure

1

This contrasts with the recent work of the Aging Working Group of the EU, which does not include such
behavior relationships, and holds most components of revenues constant relative to GDP. Thus, the CPB study
is more rigorous and comprehensive in the sense that the future development of tax bases is explicitly analyzed.
Both studies use the same discount rate and productivity growth of 1.7 percent per year.
2

Referred to as the “Musgrave criterion.”

45

sustainable public finances, the net benefits from the government will be higher for people
who are born before the government takes such action.3
The size of the problem
The CPB estimates in its baseline that, absent measures to curb the future cost of aging,
a structural general government surplus of about 3 percent of GDP (corresponding to
a structural primary surplus of about 4½ percent of GDP) is needed by the end of the next
cabinet period (2011). Taking into account various risks, this translates into a band of
2-5 percent of GDP. This band is asymmetrical around the baseline, with a greater weight
attached to the upside (i.e., to needing a larger surplus) than the downside with respect to the
real interest rate, the increase in life expectancy, and the growth in health care expenditures.4
Other variables (e.g., productivity growth,5 higher labor market participation, and
demographic changes) are judged to be symmetrical.
The options
The benchmark option is to put into effect an immediate and permanent adjustment to
achieve the desired structural surplus. This is implemented technically by cutting public
consumption, and more specifically those expenditure items that have no feedback effects
(which is why this is the mechanism through which the adjustment is implemented in the
model), and thus the burden of adjustment affects all generations equally. It is against this
benchmark that other policy options are compared.
(1) One option is to delay adjustment. This benefits current cohorts but leads to increasing
debt levels, depending on how long adjustment is delayed, which eventually burden the yetunborn cohorts. If, for example, adjustment is delayed until 2040, the required surplus to
achieve sustainability would then be 4.8 percent of GDP higher than in the benchmark case,
assuming that the lost ground in terms of higher debt is fully recovered over a period equal to
the length of time over which the delay occurs (i.e., 34 years = 2040 – 2006).
3

Note, however, that, in general, generational equity cannot be determined for generations already alive at
present, as this would require specific but unavailable data for the past.
4

The baseline combines a unitary income elasticity of health care demand with an aging effect. Health care
costs could, however, be higher because of a higher income elasticity (found by many studies), technological
progress, and the so-called Baumol effect (i.e., labor productivity growth is below other sectors but its wage
growth keeps pace, resulting in a continued relative price increase in the health sector).
5

Note that while stronger productivity growth leads to greater prosperity and is therefore desirable, it raises the
sustainable surplus. This is because wages rise when productivity increases, and expenditures are tied to wages.
It also reflects higher future pension benefits and the higher (tax deductible) pension premiums that result.
Restraining expenditures to a given time path in the face of higher productivity would certainly contribute to
sustainability, but this is not considered relevant for the baseline because it would impair intergenerational
equity as future generations would suffer from lower public expenditure.

46

(2) In another option, indirect taxation is increased by 2 percent of GDP to achieve
sustainable public finances. This is lower than the cut in public expenditure that would be
required because revenues from an increase in indirect taxation grow in the future as a result
of aging, lifting the share of consumption in GDP. Real income from labor is lower than in
the benchmark option; so is labor supply, causing lower employment and output. Older
cohorts born between 1940 and 2000 are adversely affected compared with the benchmark
policy option. This is because their contribution to consumption tax revenues is higher than
their share in benefits from material public consumption.
(3) In a third option, raising taxes on labor income, taxes have to be raised by 4.1 percent of
GDP to achieve sustainability. The increase is as high as it is because the drop in disposable
income of households results in a partially offsetting decline in indirect tax revenues. Like in
the previous option, the labor supply, employment, and output are lower, but to a greater
extent—since part of the indirect taxation is paid by pensioners who cannot avoid taxation by
reducing labor supply. Older cohorts of those already born are less adversely affected than
with indirect taxation because this group’s remaining lifetime participation on the labor
market is limited.
(4) Pensioners currently enjoy a tax advantage, reflected in the exemption of pension
contributions and capital gains from taxation. The option of equalizing the taxation of
pensioners by eliminating tax subsidies reduces the needed surplus to achieve sustainability
by 0.7 percent of GDP from the benchmark scenario. The intergenerational effects are much
smaller than with the other options.
(5) A final option considered is to raise the official retirement age from 65 to 67 years. This
reduces the sustainable surplus needed to achieve sustainability by 0.6 percent of GDP from
the benchmark scenario. This option has the advantage that lifetime welfare effects are
positive for all groups (with the caveat that decreased consumption of leisure is not taken into
account), and the intergenerational effects are also much smaller than with Options 1–3.
Debt dynamics
The figures below illustrate debt dynamics under different scenarios. Scenario A, for
illustrative purposes, shows the dynamics under a passive scenario with no policy
adjustments. Clearly, this would result in unsustainable debt dynamics, with debt levels
reaching triple digits. Scenario B illustrates the dynamics under the authorities’ benchmark
option, in which a structural surplus of 3 percent of GDP is achieved by 2011. In this case,
a sustainable path would be achieved, with government debt falling from about 55 percent of
GDP to somewhat below zero. Finally, Scenario C represents a combination of upfront
adjustment (achieving a fiscal surplus of 1 percent of GDP by 2011) along with other longerterm sustainability-enhancing measures (in particular, increasing the official retirement age
by 2 years to 67 years and eliminating the implicit tax subsidy for pensioners, which taken by
themselves would reduce the sustainability gap by 1¼ percentage point of GDP). Additional

47

expenditure cuts are spread over time to close the sustainability gap. While sustainability is
still achieved, debt stabilizes at a higher level than in the previous scenario.
Netherlands: Fiscal Scenarios, 2006-60
(In percent of GDP)
7

Scenario A

140.0

Primary balance

120.0

Interest payments

5

Fiscal balance
3

100.0

Debt (right scale)

80.0

1

60.0
-1

40.0

-3

20.0

-5

0.0

-7

-20.0
2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021 2024 2027 2030 2033 2036 2039 2042 2045 2048 2051 2054 2057 2060

7

Scenario B

Primary balance
Interest payments

5

Fiscal balance
3

Debt (right scale)

140
120
100
80

1

60
-1

40

-3

20

-5

0

-7

-20
2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021 2024 2027 2030 2033 2036 2039 2042 2045 2048 2051 2054 2057 2060

7

140

Scenario C
Primary balance

5

Interest payments
Fiscal balance

3

Debt (right scale)
1

120
100
80
60

-1

40

-3

20

-5

0

-7

-20
2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 2021 2024 2027 2030 2033 2036 2039 2042 2045 2048 2051 2054 2057 2060

Source: IMF staff calculations, based on the authorities' aging study.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
July 26, 2006

1.
This staff statement provides information on economic and political developments
that has become available since the preparation of the staff report for the 2006 Article IV
Consultation. The new information does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
Historical data on real GDP growth have been revised: up on an annual basis
for 2003–05, but down slightly for Q1 2006 (Text Table). The main factor for 2003–05
was higher private consumption. There were also upward revisions to both investment
growth (2003) and the contribution of net exports (2004). Although quarter-on-quarter
growth in Q1 2006 was revised down, the revision was small (just 0.1 percentage point of
GDP) and first quarter developments continue to be seen as broadly in line with staff’s
full-year GDP projections (as indicated in footnote 6 of the staff report). The new first
quarter data show lower government consumption growth than before, while investment
growth is now positive instead of slightly negative. Meanwhile, as indicated in the staff
report, exports remained robust and private consumption above expectations.
Revised GDP Growth
(In percent)
2003 2004 2005
Previous data
Revised data

-0.1
0.3

1.7
2.0

1.1
1.5

Q1 2006 1/
0.2
0.1

1/ Quarter-on-quarter growth based on seasonally adjusted data.

3.
Other economic developments are generally in line with a projected
recovery. Employment continues to grow, with 35,000 new jobs created in the first
quarter of 2006. Consumer confidence strengthened further in June, while business
confidence remained at its higher level.
4.
Year-on-year inflation has remained moderate. In June, it stayed at 1.8 percent
(CPI-HICP), the same rate as in May and April. For January-June, it averaged
1.7 percent.
5.
The CPB in June 2006 revised its growth projection—to 3 percent in 2006
(from 2.7 percent) and 2.8 percent in 2007 (from 3 percent). This revision mainly
reflects stronger consumer spending in 2006 followed by a somewhat slower pace of
consumption growth in 2007. Meanwhile, the DNB’s forecast, released in June 2006,
shows growth of 2.5 percent in 2006 and 2.7 percent in 2007.

2
6.
The Dutch government resigned after losing the support of the smallest
coalition partner (D66). New elections are scheduled for November 22, 2006. In the
meantime, the remaining coalition parties—the Christian Democratic Party (CDA) and
the Liberal Party (VVD)—have formed a minority coalition government, which will
finalize the 2007 budget preparations. These preparations were already well advanced,
supported by D66, and appear to have broader support in parliament.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/83
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 31, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with the
Kingdom of the Netherlands — Netherlands
On July 26, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with the Kingdom of the Netherlands — Netherlands.1
Background
The Netherlands is coming out of a period of slow or negative economic growth. Average
annual growth in 2001–03 was 0.5 percent, the slowest rate in any three-year period since the
beginning of the 1980s. Deteriorating external competitiveness, combined with weak foreign
demand, restrained exports and growth overall.
A hesitant recovery started to take hold during 2005. Employment and consumption through
end-2005 were weak compared with previous expansions, with a recovery at the start of 2004
failing to gather steam. But with foreign demand more robust, exports, though tempered by the
lagged effects of real exchange rate appreciation, drove a mild recovery. Perhaps most
important, the growth of private consumption, investment, and GDP gained traction in the
second half of 2005. Business and consumer confidence also strengthened. Employment
in 2005 recorded a more sustained rise than at any time since 2001.
Inflation remained in check, with little pressure from wages as the social partners sought to
boost external competitiveness. Year-on-year CPI inflation averaged 1.7 percent in January–
May 2006. Wage growth was subdued: the economy-wide wage moderation agreement
for 2004–05 explicitly targeted low wage growth with competitiveness in mind. Recent economic
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
performance suggests that competitiveness is not a particular threat to sustaining economic
recovery, a point reinforced by the current account surplus.
After breaching the Maastricht deficit ceiling in 2003, the authorities achieved considerable
fiscal consolidation. The general government deficit narrowed to 0.3 percent of GDP in 2005
from 3.2 percent in 2003. This reflected underlying structural adjustment of some
2.5 percentage points of GDP, largely the result of expenditure restraint.
The financial sector is generally sound but somewhat colored by developments largely related
to real estate. Banks’ capital adequacy remains strong, and other indicators have been
improving. Pension funds are, on average, close to their required coverage ratios that come into
effect in January 2007. In the insurance sector, earlier stress tests performed for the IMF’s
Financial System Stability Assessment (see Country Report No. 04/312) indicated that shocks,
except the most extreme ones, could be absorbed. However, credit quality has reportedly
deteriorated with the continued expansion of mortgages. In addition, households have also
become more sensitive to interest rate changes: the ratio of mortgage debt-to-GDP is high, the
proportion of mortgages subject to an interest rate adjustment within two years has increased,
and the percentage of newly provided loans with loan-to-value ratios exceeding 100 percent has
also been increasing significantly. A small bank failed in December 2005, without systemic
repercussions.
In addition to the near-term outlook, the discussions focused on key measures to ensure fiscal
sustainability with population aging, while building a solid foundation for sustaining growth and
safeguarding financial stability. In this context, the discussions benefited from official studies on
related issues. Work on the financial sector included a continued follow-up on the
recommendations made in the FSSA.
Executive Board Assessment
Directors were encouraged that the economic recovery is gathering steam, supported by the
strong polices of recent years, including a turnaround in public finances and structural reforms
in a number of key areas—among them health care, disability, and financial supervision.
Looking ahead, Directors agreed that ensuring a solid foundation for sustained economic
growth would require in particular ensuring the sustainability of public finances in the face of an
aging population, safeguarding financial stability, and undertaking further structural reforms to
raise labor participation, hours worked, and overall productivity. Directors also noted that
continued wage moderation would help to take full advantage of the global upturn.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ comprehensive study on population aging and
recommended early action to contain the medium-term risks and to take advantage of the
current favorable economic environment. They therefore recommended achieving a general
government surplus of at least 1 percent of GDP by 2011. However, to achieve fiscal
sustainability in the face of an aging population will also require sustainability-enhancing
structural reforms—including, for example, a rise in the retirement age and linking it to changes
in life expectancy, and Directors encouraged the authorities to put these reforms in place on a
timely basis.

3
In view of medium-term fiscal requirements and with the upturn well in train, Directors noted that
the 2007 budget could turn somewhat expansionary. They encouraged the authorities to pursue
at least a neutral fiscal stance this year and next and to use any revenue overperformance or
below-budget expenditure outturns for deficit reduction.
Directors commended the strong fiscal framework, noting that it meets or exceeds the goodpractice standards according to the recent ROSC. They also welcomed the independent and
central role of the Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) as a best-practice example of
separating the political and technical elements of macroeconomic policy. They nevertheless
encouraged the authorities to consider the refinements to the framework recommended by the
ROSC related to the operations of the expenditure ceilings and the budgetary fund based on
gas revenues.
Directors noted that the financial sector remains sound and welcomed the new Financial
Supervision Act, the strengthening of the risk orientation of supervision, and the ongoing
analytical work on financial stability, including a new round of stress testing. They noted with
concern the emerging vulnerabilities in the mortgage sector, but were encouraged by the
authorities’ efforts to strengthen the code on mortgage lending and monitoring and enforcing
compliance.
Directors appreciated the authorities’ responsiveness to the recommendations of the Financial
System Stability Assessment. More broadly, they encouraged the authorities to assess whether
rent controls and administrative allocation mechanisms for housing appropriately served their
intended purposes. On pension supervision, Directors agreed on the merits of specifying a oneyear recovery period should shortfalls from the minimum coverage ratio occur, but recognized
that escape clauses allowing for a longer period are necessary too.
Directors welcomed the considerable efforts already made by the authorities to raise labor
participation and overall productivity, but felt that there is still room for further reforms—
regarding, for instance, still generous unemployment benefits. They also encouraged the
authorities to find new ways of lessening inactivity traps and stimulating demand for low-skilled
labor, including through changes in the minimum wage and its links to several social benefits.
Directors also urged the authorities to make employment protection legislation less stringent,
noting that it acts as a tax on new hiring and labor reallocation and can hamper innovation.
They encouraged the authorities to continue with their efforts to increase competition and
reduce red tape as important steps to enhance productivity and boost innovation.
Directors commended the authorities for their strong commitment to Overseas Development
Assistance.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV
Consultation with the Netherlands is also available.

Netherlands: Selected Economic Indicators
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006 1/

2007 1/

Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP
Domestic demand
CPI (harmonized) 2/
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Gross national saving (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP)

1.4
1.8
5.1
2.5
25.5
21.5

0.1
-0.4
3.9
2.9
24.7
19.7

-0.1
-0.3
2.2
4.0
24.5
19.0

1.7
0.8
1.4
4.9
28.5
19.5

1.1
0.2
1.5
5.2
25.6
19.2

2.6
2.6
1.5
4.8
26.5
19.6

2.8
2.2
1.6
4.3
27.8
20.1

Public finance (percent of GDP)
General government balance
Structural balance
General government debt

-0.3
-1.2
50.7

-2.0
-2.3
50.5

-3.2
-2.4
51.9

-2.1
-1.2
52.6

-0.3
0.1
52.9

-0.9
--52.6

-0.9
-0.3
52.0

Interest rates (percent)
Money market rate 3/
Government bond yield 4/

4.3
5.2

3.3
5.0

2.3
4.2

2.1
4.1

2.2
3.4

2.7
3.7

...
...

Balance of payments
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 5/
Trade balance
Current account balance
Official reserves, excl. gold (in US$ billion) 3/
Reserve cover (in months of imports of GNFS)

4.8
2.4
9.0
0.4

4.2
2.5
9.6
0.5

6.6
5.5
11.0
0.4

7.1
8.9
10.1
0.3

7.0
6.4
9.1
0.3

8.0
6.9
9.3
...

8.9
7.8
...
...

102.4
108.2

1.28
101.8
107.95

...
...

Exchange rate
Exchange rate regime
U.S. dollar per euro (May 2006)
Nominal effective rate (1990=100) 3/
Real effective rate (1990=100) 3/, 6/

Member of EMU
94.0
99.4

95.6
102.3

100.9
107.4

102.5
109.5

Sources: International Financial Statistics; information provided by the Dutch authorities; and IMF staff
estimates.
1/ Staff projections, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ In 2001, an indirect tax increase is estimated to have boosted inflation by 1.2 percentage points.
3/ As of April for 2006.
4/ As of May for 2006.
5/ Transactions basis.
6/ Based on relative normalized unit labor costs.

