© 2009 International Monetary Fund

June 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/179

United Republic of Tanzania: 2009 Article IV Consultation, Fifth Review Under the
Policy Support Instrument, Request for a Twelve-Month Arrangement Under the
Exogenous Shocks Facility, and Request for an Extension of the Policy Support
Instrument—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; Public Information Notice and Press
Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director
for United Republic of Tanzania
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2009 Article IV
consultation with the United Republic of Tanzania, the fifth review under the Policy Support
Instrument, a request for a twelve-month arrangement under the Exogenous Shocks Facility, and a
request for an extension of the Policy Support Instrument, the following documents have been
released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2009 Article IV Consultation, Fifth Review Under the
Policy Support Instrument, Request for a Twelve-Month Arrangement Under the Exogenous
Shocks Facility and Request for an Extension of the Policy Support Instrument prepared by a
staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on March 31, 2009, with the officials
of the United Republic of Tanzania on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
May 15, 2009. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A staff supplement on the joint IMF/World Bank debt sustainability analysis.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its May 29, 2009, discussion of the staff report on issues
related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangements, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for the United Republic of Tanzania.

The documents listed below will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the United Republic of Tanzanai*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of the
United Republic of Tanzanai *
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation,
Fifth Review Under the Policy Support Instrument,
Request for a Twelve-Month Arrangement Under the Exogenous Shocks Facility,
and Request for an Extension of the Policy Support Instrument
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Saul Lizondo and Dominique Desruelle
May 15, 2009

Discussions on the 2009 Article IV consultation, the fifth review under the Policy
Support Instrument, and the request for an arrangement under the ESF were held in
Dar es Salaam during March 17–31, 2009 and concluded in Washington during
April 22–24, 2009. The staff team consisted of Roger Nord (head), David Dunn,
Stéphane Roudet (all AFR), Daehaeng Kim (FAD), Bozena Radzewizc-Bak (MCM),
and Mika Saito (SPR). The team met with the Minister for Finance and Economic
Affairs (MOFEA), Mr. Mkulo, the Governor of the Bank of Tanzania, Prof. Ndulu,
the Permanent Secretary of MOFEA, Mr. Khijjah, other senior officials, members of
Parliament, and representatives of the private sector, civil society, and development
partners. Mr. Robinson, the Fund’s senior resident representative in Dar es Salaam,
and Mr. Ndyeshobola, senior advisor to the Executive Director, participated in the
discussions. The staff in the resident representative’s office provided valuable
support to the mission.
Tanzania joined the Fund on June 10, 1962, and accepted the obligations of
Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4 on July 15, 1996. Tanzania maintains an exchange
system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions. Tanzania maintains a floating exchange rate regime.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Background—A Decade of Robust Economic Growth ..........................................................5
II. Performance under the PSI Program .....................................................................................6
III. The Current Context—The Impact of the Global Economic and Financial Crisis ..............8
IV. Policy Framework—Near-Term Stimulus and Medium-Term Support for
Economic Growth ..........................................................................................................11
A. Counter-Cyclical Fiscal and Monetary Policy ........................................................11
B. Effective Use of Fiscal Space to Raise Growth and Reduce Poverty .....................12
C. Structural Reforms to Enhance Growth and Poverty Reduction,
and External Sustainability ..................................................................................14
V. Request for ESF Arrangement ............................................................................................19
VI. Program Monitoring ..........................................................................................................20
VII. Staff Appraisal and Risks .................................................................................................21
Boxes
1. Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on the Financial Sector ...........................................10
2. A Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Framework for Tanzania...................................................13
3. Implementation of Recommendations of the 2008 Voluntary Safeguards Assessment .....18
Figures
1. Growth and Inflation...........................................................................................................24
2. Fiscal Developments, 2001/01-2008/09 .............................................................................25
3. Monetary and Financial Developments ..............................................................................26
4. External Sector Developments............................................................................................27
5. Exchange Rate Developments ............................................................................................28
6. Tanzania’s Performance in Perspective ..............................................................................29
Tables
1. MDG Indicators ..................................................................................................................31
2. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006/7–2011/12 ..........................................32
3. National Accounts, 2006–2014...........................................................................................33
4. Central Government Operations, 2005/06–2011/12 ...........................................................34
5. Summary Accounts of the Bank of Tanzania, 2008/09–2009/10 .......................................36
6. Monetary Survey, 2008/09–2009/10...................................................................................37
7. Balance of Payments, 2007/08–2013/14.............................................................................38
8. Balance of Payments, 2008–10 ...........................................................................................39
9. Financial Soundess Indicators, 2003–08.............................................................................40
10. Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund .........................................................................41

3
Appendix
I. Letter of Intent .....................................................................................................................42
Attachment I. Memorandum of Economic Planning and Financial Policies ......................44
Table 1. Quantitative Assessment Criteria, Performance Criteria, and Indicative
Targets under the PSI and the ESF, 2008/09–2009/10 ..................................................51
Table 2. PSI/ESF Structural Benchmarks for 2009/10 .....................................................52
Attachment II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding on Selected Concepts and
Definitions Used in the Monitoring of the PSI-Supported Program and
Twelve-Month Arrangement under the ESF....................................................53
Table 1. Summary of Reporting Requirements..................................................................57

4
Executive Summary
•

The global economic and financial crisis is having a significant impact on the
Tanzanian economy. Falling traditional crop exports and tourist arrivals and a
contraction of foreign direct investment are projected to lead to a slowdown in real
GDP growth to 4–5 percent in 2009, from 7½ percent in 2008. A gradual recovery is
expected over the medium term, but there are downside risks. Inflation, which has
risen over the past year in the wake of the food and fuel price shock, is expected to
recede in the coming months.

•

Staff recommends completion of the fifth review of the PSI. All but one quantitative
assessment criteria were observed and there was good progress on the structural
agenda. Staff recommends a waiver for the nonobservance of the December 2008
ceiling on government’s net domestic financing, which was narrowly missed.
In the short term, Tanzania’s low level of public debt provides valuable fiscal space to
allow some widening of the budget deficit to counter the impact of the global crisis on
the Tanzanian economy. Falling inflationary expectations also provide some room for
monetary easing.

•

•

Over the medium term, it will be important that the available fiscal space is used
judiciously, notably to improve much-needed public infrastructure. A sound debt
management strategy and strong expenditure management are essential to ensure
value for money. Staff proposed developing a medium-term fiscal policy framework
that allows greater flexibility while ensuring macroeconomic stability.

•

The banking system remains sound but is vulnerable to credit risk resulting from the
economic slowdown. The authorities have taken steps to maintain financial sector
stability, including comprehensive and regular analysis of risks to the sector.
However, the absence of firm supervision over pension fund activities remains a
serious shortcoming, and the rapid establishment of the new regulator is a top priority.

•

Tanzania’s balance of payments is under pressure and reserves are declining.
Nevertheless, the risk of external debt distress remains low and the exchange rate is
broadly in line with economic fundamentals. Improved infrastructure and further
progress with the structural agenda, together with its flexible exchange rate policy,
will help maintain international competitiveness.

•

Staff endorses the request by the Tanzanian authorities for support under the
Exogenous Shock Facility with access up to 110 percent of quota (218 million SDR).
Tanzania’s strong performance over the past several years, including under the current
three-year PSI (approved in February 2007), has positioned the country to meet the
challenges posed by the global crisis.

5
I. BACKGROUND—A DECADE OF ROBUST ECONOMIC GROWTH1
1.
Tanzania sustained high rates of broad-based economic growth with generally
low inflation over the past decade. Real GDP growth averaged about 7 percent a year
during 2000–08, with substantial contributions from the mining, manufacturing, construction,
and services sectors (Figures 1–6). However, growth in agriculture—which still accounts for
the largest share of GDP and provides a livelihood for the majority of the population,
including the country’s poorest households—has lagged (at about 4 percent a year). Inflation
was kept solidly in check for much of this period, but accelerated in 2008 (13.5 percent at end
year), driven mainly by lagged effects of the spike in international food and fuel prices,2 and
more recently, by adverse regional food supply shocks. In contrast, nonfood inflation
remained modest (5.8 percent).
2.
Sound macroeconomic policies and far-reaching structural reforms, together
with a favorable global environment and debt relief, provided the foundation for this
successful outcome. A major expansion in government spending in line with poverty
reducing priorities was financed in equal parts by rising government revenues and substantial
donor assistance. By limiting government’s domestic borrowing requirement, fiscal policy
helped to contain inflationary pressures over the years and avoided crowding out credit to the
private sector by the financial sector, which in turn expanded strongly. Monetary policy
accommodated the significant deepening of financial intermediation during this period. In
addition, extensive debt relief under the HIPC Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative, coupled with falling domestic debt, greatly reduced Tanzania’s public debt burden.
Critical areas of structural reforms included privatization—which was instrumental in
reducing financial imbalances of the broader public sector—and liberalization of trade and
the financial and foreign exchange markets. Noteworthy improvements in public financial
management were also achieved, including Tanzania’s becoming the first country in the
region to employ a computer-based integrated financial management system (IFMS), but
progress on the comprehensive public financial management reform program (PFMRP) has
since slowed.
3.
External vulnerabilities were greatly reduced. Official international reserves
increased to well over US$2½ billion in recent years (about 4 months of imported goods and
services), but are projected to decline moderately in 2009 and 2010. Merchandise exports
grew at a rapid pace, including in new industries such as gold mining and manufacturing,
while tourism and freight services (for the transshipment of goods to and from the port in Dar
es Salaam to Tanzania’s land-locked neighbors) also became important foreign exchange
1

2

See Tanzania: The Story of an African Transition (IMF, 2009).

See “Impact of Rising International Food and Fuel Prices on Inflation in EAC Countries”, in Rwanda and
Uganda—Selected Issues (Country Report No. 09/36).

6
earners. Import growth was also high, leading to a widening of the current account deficit,
which was financed not only by large amounts of donor assistance, but increasingly from
foreign direct investment (FDI) and, most recently, large syndicated foreign loans to major
Tanzanian corporations put together by local branches of international banks.3
4.
Despite the strong macroeconomic performance, progress on poverty reduction
has been mixed. Preliminary data from the 2007 Household Budget Survey (HBS) show
substantial improvements in education and health outcomes, a significant increase in
household assets, and improved residences.4 Nonetheless, they also indicate that the
incidence of poverty has declined only modestly since 2000-01 (from 35.6 percent of the
population to 33.4 percent), implying an increase in the absolute number of Tanzanians living
in poverty (Table 1).
II. PERFORMANCE UNDER THE PSI PROGRAM
5.
Performance under the PSI has been broadly satisfactory. Four reviews have been
completed since the PSI was approved in February 2007. The program remains on track. All
but one of the quantitative assessment criteria were met for end-December 2008 (test date for
the fifth review). In particular, the floor for net international reserves was met by a wide
margin and the reserve money program was brought back on track. The ceiling on
government’s net domestic financing (NDF) was missed by a small margin, mainly reflecting
the revenue shortfall arising from the slowing economy (see Table 1 of the authorities’
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) Appendix I, Attachment I). Good
progress was also achieved on the structural agenda (Text Table 1).

3

The pipeline of these syndications exceeded US$500 million as of mid-2008.

4

The HBS report can be found at http://www.nbs.go.tz/.

7
Text Table 1. Tanzania: Status of PSI Structural Agenda for 2008/09
Measure

Target Date of
Implementation

Status

Adopt a strategy for refocusing the Bank of
1
Tanzania on its core activities.

End-May 2009

Strategy is part of the new
BoT corporate plan. To be
discussed by BoT Board
shortly.

Issue investment guidelines for pension funds
prepared by the Bank of Tanzania.

End-March 2009

Recruitment of Director of
the new regulator is
underway. Guidelines to be
issued shortly afterwards.

Prepare an action plan for the liberalization and
improved monitoring of capital account
transactions.

End-March 2009

Met.

Prepare quarterly financial stability reports for the
BOT Board, including assessments of risk-based
prudential supervision.

End-December 2008

Met.

Establish an operational credit reference
databank.

End-June 2009

Delayed. Recruitment of
long-term advisor underway.

Cash Management Unit (CMU) in the Accountant
General’s Department to produce Government’s
three month rolling cash-flow forecast.

Continuous

Met.

Introduce a functional classification of
expenditures consistent with the IMF’s
Government Financial Statistics Manual 2001 in
the budget for 2009/10.

End-June 2009

Delayed to next budget
cycle.

Complete the integration of the Customs and
Excise Department and TISCAN’s import
clearance processes.

End-December 2008

Implemented in March 2009.

Financial Sector

Fiscal

_________________________________
1

Assessment criterion. Request pending for
conversion to a benchmark.

8
III. THE CURRENT CONTEXT—THE IMPACT OF THE
GLOBAL ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL CRISIS
6.
The global financial crisis (GFC) and recession have begun to have a significant
impact on Tanzania. Weakened demand for exports of goods and services—notably
traditional cash crops, tourism, and transportation—and a contraction of foreign investment
and syndicated loans are hitting key sectors of the economy (see charts below). Real GDP
growth in 2009 is projected to drop sharply to 4–5 percent, and downside risks remain
(Tables 2–8). Moreover, Tanzania’s recovery from this economic slowdown is likely to be
gradual, as demand for its exports and foreign investment are expected to lag behind a global
recovery. The sharp drop in international commodity prices is expected to contribute to lower
inflation in the near future, particularly as food shortages in the region are resolved. Indeed,
headline inflation has begun to subside (13.0 percent in March 2009), while nonfood inflation
continues on a downward path (4.3 percent in March).
As for other countries in the region, Tanzania's
growth is expected to fall in 2009...
12
GDP Growth (percent)

10

…driven by a drop in export growth...
50
Exports Growth (percent)
40

Uganda

Uganda

Mozambique

Ghana

30
8
20
6

10

Ghana

Senegal
0

4

Tanzania

-10
Tanzania

2

Mozambique

-20

Senegal
0

-30
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

As other sub-Saharan currencies, the Tanzanian
Shilling has weakened against the U.S. dollar.

…and lower FDI...
700

90

FDI
(USD; 2002 = 100)

Currency units per US$1, Sep 1, 2008-April 28, 2009 (Sep 1=100)

600
100
500
Senegal
110

400
Uganda
300

120
Tanzania

200

Tanzania

130

Uganda

100

Ghana

Mozambique

Mozambique
0

140
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sep-08

Oct-08

Nov-08

Dec-08

Feb-09

Mar-09

Apr-09

9
7.
The economic slowdown has led to slippages in government revenues. After five
years of robust growth, revenues have stagnated (relative to GDP) and are falling well short
of the budget target. For 2008/09 (July–June), the shortfall is expected to reach
TSh 480 billion (nearly 2 percent of GDP). Program assistance from development partners in
2008/09 is now expected to exceed budget projections (by 0.4 percent of GDP), which would
partially offset the revenue shortfall. For 2009/10, revenue growth is projected to remain soft.
8.
The Tanzanian financial system was not directly affected by the GFC, but
second round effects are likely to increase pressures on banks and other financial
institutions. Currently, banks are well-capitalized and are not exposed to toxic assets in the
global financial centers (Table 9). Non-performing loans have remained at a low level.
However, as the economy slows down and international commodity prices and demand for
traditional exports fall, non-performing loans are likely to increase (Box 1). Banks are
particularly exposed to
Tanzania. Selected Financial Sector Indicators
personal loans and crop
2006
2007
2008
financing, both of which are
Capital adequacy
Capital / risk-weighted assets
16.3
16.2
14.9
likely to suffer during a
Asset quality
Non-performing loans (net of provisions) to gross loans
6.8
6.3
6.2
downturn. Credit risk is
Sectoral distribution of loans
compounded by a large credit
Agriculture
…
11.9
10.4
…
Mining and manufacturing
20.3
14.7
concentration. Other financial
Trade
…
17.0
18.5
…
Tourism, Hotels, and Restaurants
4.3
4.9
institutions, such as the
16.2
19.9
Personal
…
rapidly-growing and
Earnings and profitability
Return on assets
3.9
4.7
3.8
inadequately supervised
Return on equity
26.7
29.0
23.1
pension funds, could also be
Liquidity
Liquid assets / total assets
48.6
48.0
37.6
affected by a deterioration in
Liquid assets to short term liabilities
54.2
53.0
41.7
the quality of their assets. In
Source: Bank of Tanzania
End-September for 2008.
addition, as large foreign
banks experience financial difficulties, there is a risk that they try to repatriate funds from
their Tanzanian subsidiaries or curtail their local operations by selling their assets.
1

1

9.
The balance of payments is under pressure and international reserves have
declined. The positive effects from the collapse in international oil prices and strong gold
prices have been more than offset by lower receipts from falling exports of other goods and
services and reduced capital inflows. There was some depreciation pressure on the exchange
rate against the U.S. dollar in late 2008 and early 2009, but in nominal effective terms, the
shilling remained fairly stable, partly reflecting actions by the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) to
smooth adjustments in the foreign exchange market with stepped up volumes of its regular
sales of foreign exchange for sterilization purposes. Compared with other currencies in the
region, the Tanzanian shilling remained relatively strong, and has appreciated in real effective
terms during this period.

10

Box 1. Tanzania: Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on the Financial Sector
As the crisis persists there are clear risks of enhanced pressures on the financial system. These
include:
•
The likely increase of credit risk for banks. As Tanzania is hit by the global recession, the
economy slows down, and commodity prices and demand for traditional and mining exports collapse,
NPLs are likely to increase. Some cotton, coffee, and gem stones exporters are already experiencing debt
servicing difficulties. Banks also appear to be exposed to personal loans, which have grown at a fast pace
in recent years and now account for about one fifth of total credit allocation. Stress tests conducted by
staff show that, in spite of being well capitalized, banks would be affected by a rapid deterioration in
their loan portfolios. In addition, credit risk is compounded by a large credit concentration.
•
Difficulties experienced by foreign parent banks. As foreign banks—which account for about
51 percent of the banking system’s assets—experience financial difficulties, there is a risk that they will
repatriate funds from their Tanzanian subsidiaries or curtail local operations by selling their assets. Local
depositors could also lose confidence in a foreign bank creating a potentially rapid withdrawal of
deposits.
•
Exacerbation of financial weaknesses of nonbank institutions. The pension sector accounts
for over one fifth of financial sector assets, but is not effectively supervised. Available actuarial studies
point to financial weaknesses in some funds. A number of insurance companies are also experiencing
difficulties and require rapid recapitalization. Although these structural underlying weaknesses were not
caused by the financial crisis, the latter could exacerbate them.
The authorities are well aware of these risks and have already taken steps to mitigate them, but
staff stressed a number of areas where further progress could be made. The BoT has strengthened
its monitoring of the financial sector. It now holds daily meetings to discuss developments in the banking
system and has launched a survey to capture banks’ potential exposure to vulnerable sectors. Staff
proposed the following additional measures to help limit the impact of the crisis:
•
Pursuing efforts to strengthen monitoring of banks’ soundness. Data collection on NPLs
could be more frequent and data quality enhanced. Commercial banks could be encouraged to improve
their oversight of credit risk and to adopt a more conservative approach for collateral valuations.
•
Enhancing contingency plans. The bank resolution framework could to be reviewed to ensure
it is fully operational in times of stress. Arrangements to provide emergency liquidity could also be made
more efficient, potentially by broadening the scope of paper accepted as collateral and reducing costs
related to it.
•
Improving financial sector supervision. Take a comprehensive approach to financial sector
stability assessment to include all types of institutions.
•
Enhancing supervision of pension funds. Put in place the regulator, issue investment
guidelines and undertake comprehensive audits as required under the legal framework that became
effective in November.
•
Intensifying cross-border coordination between host country and home country
supervisors to avoid transmitting stress from one institution to another.

11

IV. POLICY FRAMEWORK—NEAR-TERM STIMULUS AND
MEDIUM-TERM SUPPORT FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH
10.
The near- and medium-term macroeconomic policy stance aims to minimize the
immediate downside risks to the Tanzanian economy, while enabling a gradual noninflationary recovery to strong economic growth. Policies aim at returning real GDP
growth to 7½ percent a year in 2012 and beyond, while reducing inflation to the authorities’
medium-term objective of 5 percent by the end of 2010. A scaling up of infrastructure
investment over the medium term and structural reforms to improve the business
environment are critical elements of the policy framework. With a view toward achieving a
greater reduction in poverty, government programs will particularly target raising agricultural
productivity. After narrowing in 2008/09, the external current account deficit (excluding
grants) is projected to widen temporarily in 2009/10 (to about 13 percent of GDP), before
returning to a gradual downward path over the medium term. With the aid of resources from
the Fund, gross international reserves are expected to withstand the current external shock
and maintain a comfortable level of import coverage (nearly 4 months of imported good and
services).
A. Counter-Cyclical Fiscal and Monetary Policy
11.
The Tanzanian authorities have taken immediate actions to minimize the
adverse effects of the current economic slowdown, beginning with a moderate fiscal
stimulus. For 2008/09, the government will aim to execute spending largely as budgeted,
despite the projected revenue shortfall. As a result, government’s NDF is expected to reach
1.2 percent of GDP in the current year, compared with the original budget target of zero
NDF. A further fiscal easing is anticipated in the budget for 2009/10, scheduled to be
submitted to parliament in mid-June. The government is expected to initiate in the coming
year a medium-term plan for scaling up infrastructure investment. Given the present difficulty
of accessing external financing, however, the government will once again need to resort to
NDF (1.6 percent of GDP). Over the two fiscal years, the total fiscal stimulus is projected to
reach about 4 percent of GDP—about 2 percentage points of GDP more than was previously
planned.5 Staff agreed with this fiscal stance, noting that the magnitude of the stimulus struck
an appropriate balance between elevating public sector demand without creating excessive
crowding out effects.
12.
In parallel, monetary policy will be eased modestly. Relief from regional food
supply shocks—notably improved local rains—and subdued global price pressures point to a
benign outlook for near-term inflation. In this context, the BoT sees scope for increasing the
5

Measured by the increase in the overall fiscal deficit before grants between 2007/08 and 2009/10.

12
growth target for broad money by a couple of percentage points (to 22 percent in 2008/09 and
20 percent in 2009/10). Although higher levels of NDF are anticipated, credit to the private
sector is still projected to expand by at a rapid pace in 2008/09 and 2009/10. To achieve these
objectives, the BoT will continue to rely on regular sales of foreign exchange, rather than net
increases in liquidity paper, to sterilize domestic liquidity.6 The mission agreed with the
authorities that the benign outlook for inflation provided room for easing, but urged vigilance
since inflationary expectations could quickly return. The BoT assured staff that they stand
ready to assume a tighter monetary stance to extinguish inflationary pressures, if necessary.
B. Effective Use of Fiscal Space to Raise Growth and Reduce Poverty
13.
Tanzania’s track record of sound macroeconomic policies has created the fiscal
space to allow not only a more expansionary near-term response to the economic
slowdown, but also a greater role for government spending in raising productivity over
the medium and longer term.7 The authorities expressed the need for a significant boost in
infrastructure spending—such as, to build up the transportation network and expand the
power grid—as well as programs focused on directly raising the incomes of the poor—such
as, fertilizer subsidies for small farmers. In this context, discussions focused on three main
elements of fiscal policy: (i) developing a rules-based medium-term fiscal policy framework
(MTFPF) that provides greater flexibility, while ensuring macroeconomic stability;
(ii) strengthening public financial management; and (iii) managing risks and financing
options.
14.
Tanzania’s low level of public debt suggests that the government could embark a
major expansion of infrastructure investment without jeopardizing sustainability. It was
agreed that although the yearly zero-NDF ceiling of the past served Tanzania well in
maintaining macroeconomic stability and fostering private sector financial intermediation, it
constrained countercyclical policies and limited the financing of investment. Staff discussed
options for a rules-based MTFPF, which could: (i) extend the commitment to stability over a
longer time horizon; (ii) help define the fiscal space available for more infrastructure
spending consistent with fiscal sustainability; (iii) provide more flexibility for countercyclical
policy; and (iv) facilitate regional convergence and economic integration (Box 2). The
authorities agreed that going forward, such a framework would be appropriate for Tanzania
and could be further developed in the context of the ongoing preparations of the update of
Tanzania’s poverty reduction strategy (MKUKUTA) scheduled to be finalized by
February 2010.

6

7

Government securities for liquidity management purposes.

See Teresa Ter-Minassian, Richard Hughes, and Alejandro Hajdenberg, Creating Sustainable Fiscal Space for
Infrastructure: The Case of Tanzania, IMF Working Paper (WP/08/256), November 2008.

13
Box 2: A Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Framework for Tanzania
A fiscal policy rule is generally defined as a mechanism placing durable constraints on fiscal discretion
through numerical limits on budgetary aggregates. In practice, fiscal policy is typically anchored around
(i) budget balances or their cyclical variants; (ii) total or specific categories of spending; (iii) revenue or
tax rate; and (iv) and public debt. A monitoring and enforcement procedure, including an explicit cost of
deviation from the targets, is also an essential part of a fiscal rule.
The design of a policy rule faces important trade-offs between targets, and it varies widely across
countries, reflecting country-specific circumstances and the priority of policy objectives. For instance,
while a public debt ceiling can help fend off a debt sustainability problem with more flexibility, shortterm policy credibility and discipline may not be ensured since adjustments can always be postponed
until the ceiling becomes binding. To relax this credibility-flexibility trade-off, combinations of targets
are often used in practice, but this should not cost the operational simplicity and transparency of a rule.
Having previously endured the consequences of excessive borrowing and the resulting high interest
payments that constrain other essential spending, the importance of avoiding the reaccumulation of
unsustainable public debt is well understood in Tanzania. This suggests that medium-term fiscal policy
could be guided by a “Diamond Rule”, which consists of a fiscal anchor and three complementary
benchmarks.

Anchor

The primary medium-term anchor would
be the present value (PV) of gross public
PV of Gross
Public Debt
debt. Although it is very difficult to pin
down a desirable debt-to-GDP ratio, it is
reasonable to maintain the PV of the
Net Domestic
Nonconcessional
Financing
Borrowing
public debt below 40 percent of GDP,
which was roughly the average debt-toGDP ratio in emerging market
Expenditure to
economies at end-2008. Three additional
GDP Ratio
benchmarks would serve to prevent a
rapid buildup of fiscal vulnerabilities within the debt ceiling: (i) a limit on net domestic financing in a
single year (say, 2½ percent of GDP), (ii) a limit on nonconcessional borrowing (also 2½ percent of
GDP), and (iii) a limit on the change in the ratio of spending to GDP (say, 3 percent of GDP).
Benchm akrs

Simulations show that an increase of infrastructure spending by 1½ percentage points of GDP from the
current level over 10 years could be consistent with the Diamond Rule under a reasonable set of
assumptions on growth, inflation, financing costs and the growth-enhancing effect of infrastructure
investment.* However, the simulation also confirms that the growth-enhancing effect of public
investment and access to low-cost financing are critical for debt sustainability. This highlights that
Tanzania should also: (i) explore low-cost financing for infrastructure investment; and (ii) further
improve expenditure policy to maximize the growth impact of the investment, particularly on investment
project selection, execution, and monitoring.
* See A Rule-Based Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Framework for Tanzania, by Daehaeng Kim and Mika
Saito, IMF Working Paper (forthcoming).

14
15.
To ensure high returns and value for money, the authorities are taking steps to
reinvigorate implementation of the comprehensive public financial management reform
program (PFMRP). An extensive training program for line ministry and spending agency
staff, including local governments, is underway to improve cash-flow projections and
compliance with IFMS controls. This is expected to significantly improve budget execution.
In addition, the mapping of accounts for the GFS economic classification, and later the
functional classification, on the IFMS is planned during 2009/10. Enforcement of
procurement laws continues to improve and, to address under execution of development
spending, steps are being taken to shorten the processing time of government contracts. With
good results, parliamentary oversight has been strengthened by the review of the audit reports
prepared by the Controller and Auditor General. The mission welcomed these steps, but also
urged the authorities to better integrate the medium-term expenditure framework with annual
budget preparations, particularly in the context of moving toward a MTFPF.
16.
The authorities are looking to employ a variety of methods to finance scaled-up
investment, including public-private partnerships (PPPs) and non-concessional
domestic and sovereign borrowing. Although the external environment is currently
constraining investment and financing opportunities, the authorities agreed that efforts would
be well placed by preparing the institutional and regulatory framework and capacity to ensure
fiscal sustainability and the quality of spending. In particular, they intend to strengthen debt
management.8 To harness the private sector as a partner for infrastructure development, the
authorities are also taking steps to create a PPP control unit. Assessment of fiscal risks will
become increasingly important as alternative methods are used to undertake infrastructure
investment. The mission recommended, as a first step toward building capacity for assessing
fiscal risks, that government develop a comprehensive and transparent list of contingent
liabilities, such as implicit and explicit government debt guarantees. The authorities agreed
that this would be useful and intends to have such a list completed early in 2009/10.
C. Structural Reforms to Enhance Growth and Poverty Reduction,
and External Sustainability
Financial sector reform and strengthened supervision
17.
The Second Generation Financial Sector Reform Program aims to broaden
access to financial services, while ensuring the soundness of the financial system.
Progress has been achieved with the legal framework needed for establishing an effective
system for mortgage financing by the set of laws approved by parliament in late 2008, and

8

At the time of the 2008 Annual Meetings, the authorities requested technical assistance under the joint IMFWorld Bank program for offering assistance in developing medium-term debt management strategies.

A mission is expected to take place by end-2009.

15
corresponding regulations are under preparation. The authorities’ other priorities include
developing a credit reference system and the recapitalization of the Tanzania Investment
Bank, including a window for agricultural lending that would complement the already active
role the private sector financial system plays (MEFP ¶27). In consultation with stakeholders,
the authorities have also developed a plan for easing capital and financial account
restrictions, which aims at preparing the ground for steps toward liberalizing such flows in
line with the harmonization of these policies among the members of the East African
Community (MEFP ¶28).
18.
Further steps to strengthen and enhance financial sector supervision are being
taken. The Bank of Tanzania produced an initial financial stability report for internal
discussion and have initiated risk-based assessments of financial institutions and an earlywarning system to spot signs of weakness. In addition, the authorities recognize the critical
importance of having an effective system in place for financial supervision of the rapidly
growing pension funds. The new Social Security Act was passed by Parliament in April 2008,
providing the legal basis for the creation of a single regulator and giving the BoT the
authority to establish investment guidelines. It is anticipated that investment guidelines will
be issued by mid-2009, once the new regulator has been set up, and a complete actuarial
assessment of the funds will begin shortly (MEFP ¶29). The mission welcomed this progress
and urged the authorities to expedite the finalization of regulations and recruitment of the
necessary officials for the new regulator.
Private Sector Development
19.
Tanzania’s ranking in the Word Bank’s Doing Business Indicators points at
continued weaknesses in the business environment. Key areas of concern include
construction permits and hiring constraints. Recently steps have been taken to shorten the
waiting time for imports at the main port in Dar es Salaam, but still the capacity and
efficiency of the port are constraining. In addition, the electricity supply is limited and, at
times, unreliable. The authorities’ focus on building up infrastructure would help to address
several impediments to private sector development.
External Sustainability
Medium-term outlook for the balance of payments
20.
Despite the stress of the current global crisis, the medium-term outlook for
Tanzania’s balance of payments is favorable. Tanzania’s exports of goods and services are
expected to have a healthy, though gradual, recovery to the pre-crisis growth of recent years.
Moreover, the government’s programs to increase agricultural productivity and build up
infrastructure—particularly on the seaport and transportation networks—bode well not only
for traditional export crops, but also for resuming strong growth of earnings from regional
freight services. A rebound in tourism will likely lag behind the global recovery. While

16
import growth is also projected to pick up, the external current account deficit is expected to
narrow moderately after the effects of the crisis have passed. On the financing side, FDI is
also expected to lag behind the global economic recovery, but is expected to resume strongly,
together with the large syndicated loans to Tanzanian corporations. As a result, official
international reserves are projected to eventually rebuild over the medium term.
Exchange rate in line with economic fundamentals
21.
The Tanzanian shilling is assessed to be broadly in line with economic
fundamentals. Using three CGER methodologies, the shilling was found to be about in
equilibrium or slightly overvalued. The equilibrium real exchange rate approach suggests a
larger overvaluation, however, applying this methodology to Tanzania has limitations as
discussed in WP/08/138.

Current account norm
Current account projection
CA gap
Elasticity 3/
Real exchange rate gap 4/

Macroeconomic
Balance 1/
-10.1
-10.4
0.4
0.5
0.7

Equilibrium Real
Exchange Rate
...
...
...
...
11.5

External
Sustainability 2/
-8.5
-8.8
0.3
0.5
0.6

1/

The current account projection is for 20013/14.
The current account reported are non-interest portions only. The projection is for 2008/09.
3/
Elasticity is the upper bound used in WP/08/138.
4/
Movement in real exchange rate needed to close the gap between norm and projection.
2/

22.
These assessments are sensitive to the projections of capital and financial inflows
such as FDI, external borrowing, and donor assistance. If the current global economic and
financial crisis is prolonged, these flows could diminish significantly, suggesting a
depreciation of the real equilibrium, and vice versa. A sensitivity exercise indicates that the
real exchange rate could appreciate or depreciate approximately 8½ percent over the next five
years, as a result of additional financing inflows or outflows.9

9

Based on additional capital inflows (or outflows) of 1 percentage point of GDP a year.

17
Tanzania: Estimated REER Under Baseline and Alternative Scenarios
110.0

110

Projected REER

100

100.0

Actual REER
90

90.0
Additional
Inflows

80

70

80.0

70.0

60

60.0
Additional
Outflows

Baseline
50.0

50
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Low risk of debt distress
23.
Tanzania’s risk of debt distress is low.10 At present, the government continues to
limit its external borrowing to resources that are available on concessional terms. Looking
ahead, however, significant financing will be required to address Tanzania’s development
needs. In addition to donor assistance and concessional loans, the government will also
consider borrowing from both domestic and external sources on non-concessional terms in
the future. Reflecting such a development, the outlook for Tanzania’s debt sustainability
would still be benign. Non-concessional borrowing would cause debt indicators to rise
modestly over the medium-term, but they would remain well below the thresholds and
resume a downward path over the long term. Although only partial information is presently
available on contingent liabilities, it does not appear that they would significantly alter these
results.11 Standard sensitivity analysis also suggest that there is little risk of debt distress.
Alternative downside scenarios (less donor assistance and low-growth/low-return on
investment) result in some deterioration in debt indicators, but generally reinforce the
positive assessment of Tanzania’s debt sustainability. In discussions with the authorities, staff
agreed that the debt sustainability analysis supports the view that there is indeed fiscal space
for additional borrowing to finance investment, but cautioned that a sound debt management
strategy and quality analysis of projects are necessary for successfully stepping up investment
spending.

10

See Joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis for Tanzania (See Supplement). The DSA results are
inclusive of the proposed ESF disbursements.
11

The authorities intend to compile a complete list of government guarantees and contingent liabilities by
September 2009.

18
Safeguards Assessment
24.
Further progress has been achieved toward implementing the recommendations
of the voluntary safeguards assessment update completed in 2008, although there have
been delays (Box 3). The external audit of the Bank of Tanzania for 2007/08 yielded an
unqualified opinion, however, the financial statements have not yet been published. The
BoT’s Board will shortly discuss its 2009/10 corporate plan that, among other objectives,
would set an agenda for greater focus on core activities, as recommended (MEFP ¶30). In
conjunction with the proposed ESF arrangement below, a further update will be conducted
before the time of the first review.
Box 3. Tanzania. Implementation of Recommendations of the
2008 Voluntary Safeguards Assessment
The Bank of Tanzania continued to implement the recommendations of the IMF Safeguards Assessment
Mission issued in June 2008. Among those implemented include:
•

Audit quality review by a concurring partner.

•

Formal agreement on the modalities for the selection of audit firm subcontracted to
conduct audits.

•

Majority composition of non-executive directors in the audit committee.

•

Draft year end procedures prepared awaiting review by Internal Audit Directorate (IAD)
and external auditors.

•

MOU agreed between the MOFEA and the BoT. (The MOU clarifying government
obligations to the BoT was signed on December 4, 2008 and agreed upon outstanding
obligations were settled on December 10, 2008.)

•

The 2007/08 external audit of the BoT has been completed and submitted to the MOFEA.
It is expected to be submitted to Parliament shortly by the MOFEA.

•

Capacity building in IAD has commenced by hiring 10 new staff as well as phasing in risk
based internal auditing on pilot basis in FY 2008/09.

•

The process of hiring a consulting firm to conduct a comprehensive risk assessment is
advancing (World Bank granted “no objection” on the TORs).

•

A draft policy on whistle-blowing has been prepared awaiting Board approval.

Statistics
25.
Economic policy making during the current economic crisis is complicated by
weak economic data. With the help of Fund/AFRITAC technical assistance, the authorities
have stepped up efforts to develop quarterly national accounts and more timely higher
frequency economic indicators (MEFP ¶31). And the recently revised monetary and financial
statistics (MFS) framework has become fully operational. Serious weaknesses in the
collection of balance of payments data, however, still need to be addressed, particularly in the
areas of income flows, both official and private transfers, and investment flows (MEFP ¶32).

19
V. REQUEST FOR ESF ARRANGEMENT
26.
The global economic and financial crisis constitutes a sudden shock that is
seriously affecting Tanzania’s balance of payments. Beginning in early 2009 traditional
exports and tourism have turned sharply downward. Cotton prices have declined by
26 percent over the past year and tourist arrivals are estimated to have fallen by about onethird in the first quarter of 2009. Foreign direct investment, which reached US$700 million in
2007/08 (3.7 percent of GDP), and was expected to increase this year, is now projected to fall
below US$600 million as international investors, notably in the mining and energy sectors,
scale back their plans. In calendar years, the larger part of the direct balance of payments
effect of the shock is expected to be felt in 2009, followed by a still significant deterioration
in 2010 (Text Table). The negative impact of the shock is mitigated by lower international oil
prices. Beyond the direct effects of the external shock, the fiscal stimulus in 2009 and 2010 is
expected to increase import demand (by about US$100 million), but this would largely be
offset by other items, most notably additional donor assistance (about US$220 million)—
mainly from a front-loading
1
Impact of External Shocks on the BOP
of the World Bank’s 3-year
(Millions of U.S. dollars)
2009
2010 2009-10
schedule of disbursements
Aggregate direct impact of external shocks
-254
-78
-332
Traditional exports
-32
-12
-44
under IDA 15. Taking into
Gold exports, net of income outflow
-83
59
-24
account these various
Oil imports
139
-54
84
Travel receipts
-181
-51
-232
factors, the net impact is a
FDI
-97
-19
-116
Fiscal stimulus
-86
-13
-99
significant deterioration of
Other, residual
-103
78
-25
the balance of payments.
Change in overall balance, excluding donor assistance
-443
-13
-456
39
180
219
Gross international reserves Donor assistance, including projects
Change in overall balance, including donor assistance2
-404
167
-237
are projected to fall by
Memorandum
US$256 million in 2009 and
Change in stock of gross reserves before ESF
-256
-89
-345
1
a further US$89 million in
Change from the previous year. Column for 2009-10 is sum of annual changes.
2
Reflects a narrowing of the overall deficit in 2010.
2010 (Table 8).
27.
A substantial loss of international reserves would curtail the authorities ability
to implement supportive fiscal and monetary policies to cushion the impact of the global
crisis on Tanzania. Moreover, risks remain tilted to the downside. Bolstering reserves will
provide the necessary room for maneuver in the face of uncertainty.12
28.
In the staff’s judgment, Tanzania is eligible for a one-year arrangement under
the ESF, with access of 110 percent of quota (SDR 218.79 million or about
US$325 million) to be made available in three drawings (80 percent of quota,
20 percent, and 10 percent of quota). Tanzania’s economic program under the PSI remains
12

In the absence of support under the ESF, the coverage of gross international reserves is projected to slip to
about 3½ months of imported goods and services.

20
fully on track and the policies envisaged for 2009/10 are adequate to address the economic
downturn that Tanzania is facing. Falling reserves in 2009 and 2010 are indicative of a
sizeable external shock and a balance of payments need that the support under the ESF would
help to address. In view of the nature of the shock, which is concentrated in 2009, front
loading the disbursements is consistent with the need. Tanzania’s track record of solid
performance under the PSI and sound policy framework looking forward ensures that Fund
resources would be used effectively. In addition, Tanzania has ample capacity to repay the
Fund and the risk of debt distress would remain low (Table 10 and Section IV.C above).
Proposed Disbursements Under the ESF
Expected
Timing

Upon Board approval of ESF
Upon completion of the first review
Upon completion of the second review

May-09
Oct-09
Apr-10

Amount of Disbursement
(In percent
(In millions
of quota)
of SDR)
80
20
10

159.12
39.78
19.89

VI. PROGRAM MONITORING
29.
Program implementation under the PSI and ESF arrangement in 2009–10 will be
monitored by the quantitative assessment criteria and performance criteria for end-June 2009
and end-December 2009 and quantitative indicative targets for end-September 2009 and endMarch 2010, as presented in Table 1 of the authorities’ Memorandum of Economic and
Financial Policies (MEFP) (Appendix I, Attachment I). Table 2 of the MEFP presents
structural benchmarks that will be monitored under the PSI. These benchmarks focus sound
fiscal and debt management, financial stability, and the institutional framework for monetary
and exchange rate policies, which are critical for the success of the program (Text Table 2).
The first and second reviews under the ESF will take place at the same time as the sixth and
seventh PSI reviews (by end-October 2009 and end-April 2010), respectively, and will be
based on performance as of the end-June and end-December 2009 test dates, respectively.
30.
In agreement with the authorities, staff requests that the assessment criterion for endMay 2009 regarding the adoption of a strategy for refocusing the BoT on its core activities,
be converted into a structural benchmark under the PSI.

21
Text Table 2. Tanzania: Macroeconomic Rationale for Structural Benchmarks in 2009/10
Measure

Target Date of
Implementation

Macroeconomic Rationale

Financial Sector
Adopt a strategy for refocusing the Bank of Tanzania
1
(BoT) on its core activities.

End-May 2009

To strengthen confidence in the
BoT and focus BoT on monetary
and exchange rate policies and
financial supervision.

Issue investment guidelines for pension funds prepared
by the BoT.

End-June 2009

To broaden the scope of financial
sector regulation and strengthen
the ability of the BoT and the future
pension fund regulator to promote
financial stability.

Prepare an updated financial stability report for the BOT
Board, including assessments of risk-based prudential
supervision.

End-December 2009

To strengthen the ability of the BoT
to promote financial stability in an
environment of rapid financial
sector development.

Cash Management Unit (CMU) in the Accountant
General’s Department to produce Government’s three
month rolling cash-flow forecast.

Continuous

To facilitate efficient budget
execution by line ministries and
liquidity management by the BoT.

Prepare a list of outstanding government guarantees and
contingent liabilities, including debts held by parastatals.

End-September 2009

To ensure debt and fiscal
sustainability and enhance
transparency and monitoring of
government liabilities.

Prepare a functional classification of expenditures
consistent with the IMF’s Government Financial Statistics
Manual 2001 for the budget for 2010/11.

End-April 2010

To enhance budget planning,
execution, and management, as
part of the broader PFM reform
program to increase the efficiency
and effectiveness of government
spending.

Fiscal

_____________________________
1

PSI assessment criterion. Request pending for conversion to a benchmark.

VII. STAFF APPRAISAL AND RISKS
31.
The global financial crisis will have a significant impact on Tanzania. Growth is
expected to fall to 4–5 percent in 2009, compared with 7–7½ percent in recent years, and key
sectors of the economy, including cash crops and tourism, face a severe downturn. Both the
fiscal and the external positions are expected to weaken in 2009–10.

22
32.
Strong fundamentals provide Tanzania with some room for maneuver. The
broadening of the domestic revenue base, a decline in public debt levels, and an effective
monetary policy in recent years, now provide scope for fiscal and monetary easing in the
short term. The planned scaling up of infrastructure spending in 2009–10 should be
maintained.
33.
But short-term policies must not jeopardize Tanzania’s hard-won economic
stability. This means that fiscal stimulus should remain consistent with long-term fiscal
sustainability, monetary easing should not put at risk medium-term price stability, and
international reserve losses should be moderate, consistent with external stability.
34.
The banking sector is sound, but is vulnerable in some areas. Banks are wellcapitalized and there is no indication that they are directly exposed to the toxic debt that has
caused havoc in global financial centers. But the economic slow-down will raise banks’
credit risk, notably through their exposure to export crop financing and personal loans, which
have been growing rapidly in recent years. Welcome steps have already been taken to raise
supervisory standards, but more can be done to broadening monitoring to all financial
institutions, and reinforce cross-border coordination between host country and home country
supervisors.
35.
The absence of firm supervision over pension fund activities remains a serious
shortcoming. Pension funds continue to grow rapidly, with total assets approaching onequarter of those held by banks. It is imperative to accelerate progress in this area to avoid a
serious risk of asset impairment and an inability of pension funds to meet their obligations
once pensions become due.
36.
Preserving and indeed raising Tanzania’s medium-term growth potential must
remain paramount. Key priorities to that end must be to raise agricultural productivity and
improve Tanzania’s ailing infrastructure. This will require significant financing, including
from the public sector. Non-concessional sources of financing are not a first resort, but are
likely needed to address the infrastructure gap.
37.
Scaling up public spending is not an end in itself: there is need to raise the
return on public spending. Strong public financial management is critical to ensuring that
public spending is as effective as possible to avoid the re-accumulation of unsustainable
public debt. Important steps have already been taken, for example to strengthen budgeting
and public procurement practices. But more can and should be done to raise value for money.
In particular, responding decisively to the recommendations of the public audits by the
National Audit Office will help raise both accountability and the quality of public spending.
38.
Tanzania’s outlook is good, but not without risks. A deeper, and more prolonged
global downturn will exacerbate the problems faced by the export and tourism sectors.
Foreign direct investment, especially in the mining sector, is also likely to suffer more if the
global financial crisis is long-drawn. And the fiscal sustainability of a sustained scaling up of
public spending requires continued robust economic growth. The importance of ensuring that

23
public spending is effective in generating a high social and economic return cannot be
overstated.
39.
Staff recommends the completion of the fifth review under the PSI and approval
of Tanzania’s request for access under the ESF. Staff also recommends a waiver for the
nonobservance of the assessment criterion on the ceiling on net domestic financing for endDecember 2008, which was missed by a small margin.
40.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Tanzania will place within
24 months, in line with the Board decision on consultation cycles in program countries.

24

Figure 1. Tanzania: Growth and Inflation
Tanzania has achieved robust growth.

Growth has also been broad based.

10

600

20
2004-08 Real GDP Growth by Sector

GDP per Capita, USD, RHS
Real GDP Growth, LHS
SSA Growth, LHS

9

500

16 Real GDP
growth
(7.2%)

8
400

12

7
300
8

6
200
5

4
100

4

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Services, contruction, and mining have been the main
drivers of growth...

…resulting in a smaller weight of agriculture in total
GDP .
Sectors, % of total real GDP 2008

Sectors, % of total real GDP 2000
Other, including
services and net
taxes

Services

2003

Construction

2002

Electricity and
water

2001

Manufacturing

Agriculture

2000

Mining

0
0

3

Other, including
services and net
taxes

Agriculture

Agriculture

Mining

Mining

Manufacturing

Manufacturing

Trade and transport

Trade and transport

Electricity and water

Electricity and water
Construction

Construction

…reflecting mainly rising food price inflation.

Inflation has accelerated...
20

12 month inflation

12 month average

12

16
Food

Foo

12
8

Tot
al

5

4

Total

0

Non-food
Non-food

-4

Dec-08

Jun-08

Dec-07

Jun-07

Dec-06

Jun-06

Dec-05

Jun-05

Dec-04

Jun-04

Dec-03

Jan-09

Jul-08

Jul-07

Sources: Tanzanian authorities; IMF staff estimates;

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jul-06

Jan-06

Jul-05

Jan-05

Jul-04

Jan-04

Jul-03

Jan-03

-2

25
Figure 2. Tanzania: Fiscal Developments, 2000/01–2008/09 *
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated)
… together with substantial donor assistance...

Steady growth of government revenues...
12

20
18

Tax Revenue

16

Nontax Revenue

10

14

50

Aid, % of budget resources
(right scale)

Aid
(left scale)

45
40
35

8

12

30

10

25

6

8

20
4

6
4

15
10

2

2

5

0
2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

0

0
2000/01

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

…with generally low net domestic financing.

...has allowed for a strong increase in spending...
3

30
25

2002/03

Capital Expenditure

2

Current Expenditure

1

Net Domestic Financing

0

20

-1
15

-2
-3

10

-4

5

-5

Overall Fiscal
Balance,
including grants

-6

0
2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

Debt relief has greatly eased the debt burden...
90

2000/01

2008/09

2002/03

Interest Payments

1.2

Domestic

2008/09

Domestic

External

70
Externa

2006/07

…but the increase in interest payments on domestic debt has
largely offset the reduction in the interest bill on external debt.
1.4

Public Sector Debt

80

2004/05

1.0

60
50

0.8

40

0.6

30
0.4
20
0.2

10
0

0.0
2003/04

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

Source: Tanzanian authorities; Fund staff estimates/projections.
* Figures for 2008/09 are projections.

2003/04

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

26
Figure 3. Tanzania: Monetary and Financial Developments
Monetary aggregates have grown at a rapid
pace...

50

... reflecting strong financial deepening.
35

Monetary Aggregates (12-month growth rate)

M3/GDP

40

Kenya
30

30
M3

20

Tanzania

25

10
20
0
Reserve
money

-10

15

Uganda

10

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

-20
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

Lending is also expanding rapidly...
80

…both to productive sectors and households.

Private Sector Credit (12-month growth rate) and
Loans/Deposits Ratio

70

Share of Total
Loans, Feb. 2009

Manufacturing

60

Agriculture

50

Transport and
Communication
Utilities

40

Mining

30

Real Estate
Private
sector
credit

20
10

Loan to
deposit ratio

Trade
Personal Loans
Other

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

0

T-bill yields have begun to increase, but
have turned negative in real terms.
20

Commercial bank deposit rates have recently fallen,
leading to a wider spread with lending rates.
25

Monthly Weighted Average T-Bill Yield
(monthly average)

15

Commercial Deposits and Lending

20

Nominal

10

Lending Rate

15

5

10
Deposit Rate

Real

0

5

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

Source: Bank of Tanzania

Jan-00

0

-5

27

Figure 4. Tanzania: External Sector Developments
Exports have risen sharply in recent years...
40
7000

Gold

Export growth (RHS)

35

6000

Traditional

5000

Nontraditional
(excl. gold)

30
25

4000

20

3000
2000

Exports (in US $
millions, LHS)

1000
0
2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

5

1000

0

0

Assistance

12

30
25
20

Import growth
(RHS)

15
10
5
0
-5

2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

…allowing reserves to remain ample.
8

3000
2500
2000

10

35

Other

4000

2000

Current
account deficit

40

Imports (in US $
millions, LHS)

5000

10

(Percent of GDP)

14

6000

3000

2008/09

Capital
Goods
Fuel

7000

15

Large current account deficits have been largely
financed by donor assistance...
16

...but imports have risen even faster, driven by higher
fuel costs and investment.

Import
Coverage
(months
RHS)

Net International Reserves
(millions of US$, LHS)

7
6
5
4

1500

8
6

3

1000

2

4
500

1

2
0

0
2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

Source: Tanzania authorities; Fund staff estimates.

0
2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

28
Figure 5. Tanzania: Exchange Rate Developments
Deteriorating terms of trade contributed to
depreciation in 2001–07...
25
20

…but the real effective exchange rate has appreciated
in the past two years.
115

(Percent

Effective Exchange Rates, (Index:
2000=100, monthly)

15

100
Terms of
Trade

10
5

85
Real effective
exchange rate

0
-5

70

-10
55
REER

Source: Tanzania authorities; Fund staff estimates.

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

40
2002

2008/09

2007/08

2006/07

2005/06

2004/05

2003/04

2002/03

2001/02

2000/01

-25

Nominal effective
exchange rate

2001

-20

2000

-15

29
Figure 6. Tanzania's Performance in Perspective
Tanzania's growth has been higher and
steadier than most of its peers ...
12

...while, until recently, inflation has been lower.
30

GDP Growth

10

Uganda

Mozambique

Annual Inflation

25
Ghana
20

8

Mozambique

15
6

Ghana

Tanzania

10

4

5
Tanzania

2

Senegal

0

Senegal

0

Uganda

-5
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Tanzania's revenues have increased
but are still below comparator countries...

25

2002

2009

2001

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2001

16

2008

2008
15

12

10

8

5

4

0

0
Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

Ghana

Mozambique

Tanzania's strong money growth has led to
increased financial deepening...

40

2008

Tanzania

Uganda

Private Sector Credit, % of GDP

Broad Money, % of GDP
2001

Senegal

...and rapidly growing private sector
credit.
30

50

2009

...while donor assistance has risen
substantially.
Foreign Aid, % of GDP

20

Revenue, % of GDP

20

2003

25

2001
2008

20

30
15
20

10

10

5

0

0
Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

30
Figure 6. Tanzania's Performance in Perspective (cont.)
But the external current account has widened due to
the growing aid-financed imports.

Tanzania's export performance has
improved.
35

50

Exports, % of GDP
2001

40

2008
30

Current Account Deficit, % of GDP

30

2001

25

2008

20
15

20

10
10

5
0

0
Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Ghana

Uganda

Mozambique

30

Uganda

Domestic Debt, % of GDP

External Debt, % of GDP

150

Tanzania

…but domestic debt has increased.

External debt has fallen...
175

Senegal

2001
2008

125
100

25

2001
2008

20
15

75
10

50

5

25

0

0
Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

Ghana

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

The business environment has improved, but
still compares poorly worldwide.

Tanzania's reserve position is relatively
comfortable.
8

Mozambique

180

Net International Reserves, months of imports

6

Doing Business
Ranking

160

2001

140

2008

120

2005
2009

100
4

80
60

2

40
20
0

0
Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

Ghana

Mozambique

Senegal

Tanzania

Uganda

31
Table 1. Tanzania. MDG Indicators
1990

1995

2000

2007

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)
Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)
Income share held by lowest 20%
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population)
Vulnerable employment, total (% of total employment)

87
77
7.4
25.1
38.6
37
..

86
77
..
26.9
..
50
..

85
74
7.3
25.3
35.6
..
11

84
72
..
16.7
33.4
..
..

78
86
..
46
..

..
..
..
57
..

76
81
74
55
53

..
..
83
85
98

..
19
98
77
90
..

18
..
..
..
..
..

16
15
99
82
94
45.4

30
48
98
..
..
..

80
102
161

78
100
159

78
88
141

93
74
118

..
53
10
..
62
28

131
47
18
..
50
24

132
44
25
..
49
22

123
43
26
950
78
..

..
..
..
178
..
..
..

..
6
22
271
..
..
57

53
10
26
339
..
7.0
49

58
..
..
312
0.9
6.2
46

..
0.1
0.1
47
35
49
..
..

..
0.2
0.1
..
35
50
..
..

6.2
0.1
0.1
42
34
53
..
..

..
..
..
40
33
55
..
..

46
31.3
0.0
0.0
0.3

29
17.2
0.0
0.0
0.3

30
11.8
0.1
0.3
0.5

46
2.0
1.0
20.4
0.6

6.1
190
4.8
26.1
51
59
25.5
50.1

5.8
160
4.9
19.8
49
..
29.9
65.6

5.7
260
8.9
17.6
49
69
33.8
41.0

5.3
400
16.3
16.7
52
..
40.4
49.7

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Literacy rate, youth female (% of females ages 15-24)
Literacy rate, youth male (% of males ages 15-24)
Persistence to last grade of primary, total (% of cohort)
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)
Total enrollment, primary (% net)
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Ratio of female to male enrollments in tertiary education
Ratio of female to male primary enrollment
Ratio of female to male secondary enrollment
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of total nonagricultural employment)
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)
Unmet need for contraception (% of married women ages 15-49)
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under age 5 with fever)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, female (% of females ages 15-24)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, male (% of males ages 15-24)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Annual freshwater withdrawals, total (% of internal resources)
CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (% of land area)
Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)
Improved water source (% of population with access)
Marine protected areas, (% of surface area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports of G&S, excl. workers' remittances)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Other
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)
Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)
Trade (% of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators database
Figures in italics refer to periods other than those specified.

32
Table 2. Tanzania: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006/07–2011/12
2006/07 2007/08
Prel.

2008/09
2009/10 2010/11 2011/12
Prog
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
1
Real GDP growth (calendar year, at market prices)
Real GDP growth (fiscal year, at market prices)
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
External sector
Export, f.o.b (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Imports, f.o.b. (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Nominal effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -)

2

2

6.7
6.9
6.3
5.8

7.1
7.3
8.4
9.3

7.5
7.7
8.3
6.8

7.5
6.2
12.0
11.0

5.0
5.3
7.7
6.0

5.7
6.4
5.2
5.0

7.2
7.3
5.0
5.0

2,060
-4,336
-6.6
19.2
1.7

2,609
-5,667
6.2
13.3
-7.4

2,887
-6,068
9.3
12.9
8.9

2,891
-5,955
7.3
1.8
14.1

2,860
-5,841
-1.2
7.4
9.7

2,961
-6,001
2.1
-2.5
-3.8

3,187
-6,276
9.3
1.7
-4.2

-4.9

3.9

...

7.3

...

...

...

-3.2

5.7

...

16.0

...

...

...

20.1
12.2
36.3
36.2
4.1

18.1
4.6
41.0
34.7
3.9

18.0
6.0
31.1
21.7
3.7

22.0
2.7
46.4
39.8
3.7

20.0
1.2
36.6
28.7
3.5

…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…

16.0

8.2

…

13.3

…

…

…

3

Money and credit
Broad money (M3)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to nongovernment sector
Velocity of money (GDP/M3; average)
4

Treasury bill interest rate (in percent; end of period)

(Percent of GDP)
Public Finance
Revenue (excluding grants)
Total grants
Expenditure (including adjustment to cash)
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Domestic financing
Stock of domestic debt (end of period)

14.1
4.9
23.9
-8.9
1.2
12.8

15.9
6.9
24.4
-6.9
-1.5
13.4

18.0
5.5
27.2
-9.4
0.0
11.7

15.8
5.5
26.3
-10.5
1.2
12.5

16.3
5.7
27.2
-10.9
1.6
12.6

16.8
5.5
27.7
-10.9
1.0
12.2

17.1
5.1
26.8
-9.7
1.0
11.9

Savings and investment
Resource gap
Investment
Government
5
Nongovernment
Gross domestic savings

-13.1
27.6
8.4
19.3
14.5

-16.9
29.6
10.0
19.7
12.8

-12.8
32.6
9.5
23.1
19.8

-16.9
31.8
10.7
21.1
14.9

-15.9
30.8
11.6
19.2
14.9

-15.6
31.9
12.2
19.7
16.3

-14.7
32.9
12.0
20.9
18.3

External sector
Current account balance (excluding current transfers)
Current account balance (including current transfers)

-13.2
-9.9

-14.0
-10.6

-13.0
-10.1

-12.0
-8.9

-12.6
-9.3

-12.3
-8.8

-11.2
-8.0

1

(Millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
Current account balance (excluding current transfers; deficit -)
Overall balance of payments (deficit -)
Gross official reserves
In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
External debt (percent of GDP)

-2,005
286
2,157
3.6
20.5

-2,675
501
2,660
4.2
24.8

-2,871
144
2,793
3.7
29.3

-2,580
-132
2,766
4.4
25.1

-2,844
-108
2,748
4.2
25.3

-2,996
-84
2,663
3.9
26.7

-2,968
168
2,829
3.9
26.8

Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Data are on calendar year basis. For example, 2005/06 data are for calendar year 2005.
Figures for 2008/09 reflect change up to February 2009.
3
Figures for 2008/09 reflect new series based on the Fund's 2000 Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual .
4
End-year (June) monthly weighted-average yield of 35-, 91-, 182-, and 364-day treasury bills. For 2008/09, figure is for March 2009.
5
Including change in stocks.
2

Table 3. Tanzania: National Accounts, 2006–2014

2006

2007

2008
Prel.

2009
Prog.

Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

(Annual percentage change in real terms)
GDP at market prices
Nominal (billions of T Sh, calendar-year basis)
Real (percentage change)
Deflator (percentage change)

Sectoral components of GDP
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Memorandum items:

20,948
7.1
9.0

24,817
7.5
10.2

28,100
8.0
7.2

28,941
5.0
11.1

32,343
5.7
5.8

36,389
7.2
5.0

41,069
7.5
5.0

46,348
7.5
5.0

52,323
7.5
5.0

3.9
8.5
7.7

4.0
9.5
8.0

3.7
9.4
8.8

4.1
10.9
8.9

3.2
4.5
6.0

5.0
4.7
6.3

5.0
7.1
8.2

5.0
7.8
8.5

4.5
7.9
8.6

4.5
8.0
8.6

2005/06

2006/07

Proj.

2009/10
Proj.

2010/11
Proj.

2011/12
Proj.

2012/13
Proj.

2013/14
Proj.

26,879
17.5
6.2
12.0
11.0

30,642
14.0
5.3
7.7
6.0

34,366
12.2
6.4
5.2
5.0

38,729
12.7
7.3
5.2
5.0

43,709
12.9
7.5
5.0
5.0

49,336
12.9
7.5
5.0
5.0

16,953
13.3
7.0
5.6
6.8

Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

19,445
14.7
6.9
6.3
5.8

2007/08
Prel.
22,883
17.7
7.3
8.4
9.3

2008/09
Prog.
26,244
15.8
7.7
8.3
6.8

33

Nominal GDP (billions of T sh, fiscal-year basis)
Nominal GDP growth
Real GDP growth
CPI inflation (average)
CPI inflation (end period)

17,941
6.7
5.3

34
Table 4. Tanzania: Central Government Operations, 2005/06–2011/12
(Billions of Tanzania Shilling)

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

Actual

Actual

Prel.

1

2008/09
Prog.

Proj.

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Total revenue

2,125

2,739

3,635

4,729

4,249

4,997

5,776

6,625

Tax revenue

1,946

2,529

3,359

4,485

4,053

4,644

5,329

6,074

Import duties

191

246

289

421

372

426

492

561

Value-added tax

803

832

1,042

1,256

1,231

1,411

1,630

1,858

Excises2

262

520

661

932

749

858

992

1,131

Income taxes

554

714

984

1,393

1,229

1,408

1,627

1,855

Other taxes

137

219

383

483

473

542

626

714

Nontax revenue

178

210

275

243

196

352

447

551

Total expenditure

3,873

4,475

5,217

7,192

7,058

8,343

9,509

10,371

Recurrent expenditure

2,920

3,296

3,398

4,701

4,701

5,389

5,755

6,234

Wages and salaries

657

976

1,135

1,570

1,596

1,775

1,991

2,244

Interest payments

219

216

265

282

301

437

441

438

164

185

237

248

263

389

386

378

Domestic
Foreign 2

55

31

27

35

39

47

55

60

2,044

2,105

1,998

2,848

2,803

3,177

3,323

3,552

0

18

7

0

0

0

0

0

Development expenditure

953

1,179

1,819

2,491

2,357

2,955

3,754

4,137

Domestically financed

296

504

974

1,359

1,260

1,742

2,470

2,783

0

105

114

66

66

114

0

0

657

675

845

1,132

1,098

1,212

1,284

1,354

-1,748

-1,736

-1,583

-2,464

-2,809

-3,347

-3,733

-3,745

Goods and services and transfers
of which: MDRI (IMF) related

of which: MDRI (IMF) related
Foreign financed
Overall balance before grants
Grants

911

953

1,581

1,441

1,487

1,760

1,898

1,973

Program (including basket grants) 3

507

591

832

750

830

994

1,207

1,245

Project

328

242

636

625

590

652

691

728

76

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

123

114

66

66

114

0

0

-837

-783

-1

-1,022

-1,322

-1,587

-1,836

-1,772

-87

-171

-365

0

0

0

0

0

-924

-954

-366

-1,022

-1,322

-1,587

-1,836

-1,772

HIPC grant relief
MDRI (IMF) grant relief
Overall balance after grants
Adjustment to cash 4
Overall balance (cash basis)
Financing
Foreign (net)
Foreign loans

924

954

366

1,022

1,322

1,587

1,836

1,772

561

717

730

946

976

1,124

1,539

1,438

669

746

775

988

1,053

1,202

1,628

1,544

Program (including basket loans) 3

340

313

566

481

546

642

691

531

Project

329

433

209

507

507

560

594

626

0

0

0

344

387

Sovereign borrowing
Amortization

-108

-30

-45

-42

-77

-79

-89

-106

Domestic (net)

349

237

-346

53

323

505

344

387

Bank financing

127

25

…

...

...

...

...

...

Nonbank financing

222

212

…

...

...

...

...

...

-19

0

-15

-37

-37

-42

-47

-53

33

0

0

60

60

0

0

0

Public domestic debt (in percent of GDP)

14.8

16.1

13.3

11.7

12.5

12.6

12.2

11.9

Ratio of recurrent expenditures to total revenue

137

120

93

98

111

108

100

94

16,953

19,445

22,883

26,244

26,879

30,642

34,366

38,729

Amortization of parastatal debt
Privatization proceeds

Memorandum items:

Nominal GDP 5

35
Table 4. Tanzania: Central Government Operations, 2005/06–2011/12 (continued)1
(Percent of GDP)

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

Actual

Actual

Prel.

2008/09
Prog.

Proj.

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Total revenue
Tax revenue
Import duties
Value-added tax
Excises
Income taxes
Other taxes
Nontax revenue

12.5
11.5
1.1
4.7
1.5
3.3
0.8
1.1

14.1
13.0
1.3
4.3
2.7
3.7
1.1
1.1

15.9
14.7
1.3
4.6
2.9
4.3
1.7
1.2

18.0
17.1
1.6
4.8
3.6
5.3
1.8
0.9

15.8
15.1
1.4
4.6
2.8
4.6
1.8
0.7

16.3
15.2
1.4
4.6
2.8
4.6
1.8
1.2

16.8
15.5
1.4
4.7
2.9
4.7
1.8
1.3

17.1
15.7
1.4
4.8
2.9
4.8
1.8
1.4

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Interest payments
Domestic
Foreign 2

22.8
17.2
3.9
1.3
1.0
0.3
12.1
0.0

23.0
17.0
5.0
1.1
1.0
0.2
10.8
0.1

22.8
14.8
5.0
1.2
1.0
0.1
8.7
0.0

27.4
17.9
6.0
1.1
0.9
0.1
10.9
0.0

26.3
17.5
5.9
1.1
1.0
0.1
10.4
0.0

27.2
17.6
5.8
1.4
1.3
0.2
10.4
0.0

27.7
16.7
5.8
1.3
1.1
0.2
9.7
0.0

26.8
16.1
5.8
1.1
1.0
0.2
9.2
0.0

Development expenditure
Domestically financed
o/w MDRI (IMF) related
Foreign financed

5.6
1.7
0.0
3.9

6.1
2.6
0.5
3.5

7.9
4.3
0.5
3.7

9.5
5.2
0.3
4.3

8.8
4.7
0.2
4.1

9.6
5.7
0.4
4.0

10.9
7.2
0.0
3.7

10.7
7.2
0.0
3.5

Overall balance before grants

-10.3

-8.9

-6.9

-9.4

-10.5

-10.9

-10.9

-9.7

Project
HIPC grant relief
MDRI (IMF) grant relief

5.4
3.0
1.9
0.5
0.0

4.9
3.0
1.2
0.0
0.6

6.9
3.6
2.8
0.0
0.5

5.5
2.9
2.4
0.0
0.3

5.5
3.1
2.2
0.0
0.2

5.7
3.2
2.1
0.0
0.4

5.5
3.5
2.0
0.0
0.0

5.1
3.2
1.9
0.0
0.0

Overall balance after grants

-4.9

-4.0

0.0

-3.9

-4.9

-5.2

-5.3

-4.6

Adjustment to cash 4

-0.5

-0.9

-1.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance (cash basis)

-5.5

-4.9

-1.6

-3.9

-4.9

-5.2

-5.3

-4.6

5.5
3.3
3.9
2.0
1.9

4.9
3.7
3.8
1.6
2.2

1.6
3.2
3.4
2.5
0.9

-0.6
2.1
0.8
1.3
-0.1
0.2

-0.2
1.2
0.1
1.1
0.0
0.0

-0.2
-1.5
...
...
-0.1
0.0

3.9
3.6
3.8
1.8
1.9
0.0
-0.2
0.2
...
...
-0.1
0.2

4.9
3.6
3.9
2.0
1.9
0.0
-0.3
1.2
...
...
-0.1
0.2

5.2
3.7
3.9
2.1
1.8
0.0
-0.3
1.6
...
...
-0.1
0.0

5.3
4.5
4.7
2.0
1.7
1.0
-0.3
1.0
...
...
-0.1
0.0

4.6
3.7
4.0
1.4
1.6
1.0
-0.3
1.0
...
...
-0.1
0.0

Goods and services and transfers
o/w MDRI (IMF) related

Grants
Program (including basket grants) 3

Financing
Foreign (net)
Foreign loans
Program (including basket loans) 2
Project
Nonconcessional borrowing
Amortization
Domestic (net)
Bank financing
Nonbank financing
Amortization of parastatal debt
Privatization proceeds

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Bank of Tanzania; and Fund staff projections.
Fiscal year: July-June.
2
Some projected external debt obligations are under negotiation for relief with a number of creditors.
3
Basket funds are sector-specific accounts established by the government to channel donor support to fund-specific activities.
4
Unidentified financing (+)/expenditure (-). Includes expenditure carryover from the previous year.
5
The nominal GDP series was revised upwards by about 10% in 2007. All ratios to GDP have been revised accordingly.
1

Table 5. Tanzania: Summary Accounts of the Bank of Tanzania, 2008/09–2009/10
(Billions of Tanzania Shillings, unless otherwise indicated; end of period)
2008
Sept.

Jun
Act.1

Net foreign assets
Net international reserves
(Millions of U.S. dollars)
Net non-reserve foreign assets

Prel.1

Revised
Data

Prog.

2009
Jun

Mar
Act.

Prog.

Prel.

Prog.

Proj.

Dec

Mar

Jun

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2,966

3,120

2,928

3,127

3,268

3,655

3,326

3,523

3,385

3,338

3,273

3,532

3,678

3,334

3,001
2,541

3,120
2,642

2,963
2,535

3,127
2,675

3,268
2,758

3,655
2,855

3,326
2,772

3,523
2,710

3,385
2,786

3,338
2,510

3,273
2,434

3,532
2,599

3,678
2,677

3,334
2,402

0

-35

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-1,040

-564

-764

-968

-1,379

-996

-1,073

-967

-664

-434

-552

-652

-125

-1,163
4
…

-1,407
-240
-162

-958
139
…

-1,287
-191
-149

-1,502
-414
-130

-1,480
-253
-137

-1,501
-364
-98

-1,448
-347
-131

-1,428
-240
-99

-1,085
-60
-114

-670
330
-85

-813
162
-57

-747
253
-28

-308
592
0

277
-106
-162

367
-105
…

394
-123
-149

524
-123
…

533
-50
…

101
-120
…

505
-113
…

375
-90
…

461
-25
…

421
-28
…

236
-79
…

261
-13
…

95
-137
…

182
-8
…

2,080

2,080

2,364

2,364

2,300

2,276

2,330

2,450

2,418

2,674

2,839

2,980

3,026

3,209

1,272
807
179
628
420
208

1,269
810
182
628
504
124

1,453
911
222
689
426
263

1,450
914
224
689
511
179

1,397
903
203
700
492
208

1,439
838
272
566
532
35

1,372
958
215
743
517
226

1,396
1,054
237
817
683
134

1,511
907
203
703
537
167

1,541
1,133
262
871
714
157

1,649
1,190
280
910
758
152

1,734
1,246
295
952
793
159

1,750
1,276
298
978
815
163

1,849
1,360
314
1,045
841
126

1,168
2,049

1,168
2,054

1,097
2,350

1,097
2,350

1,088
2,320

1,227
2,318

1,138
2,350

1,101
2,500

1,188
2,438

1,025
2,648

1,000
2,833

975
2,979

1,000
3,058

900
3,178

Reserve money2
Currency outside banks
Bank reserves
Currency in banks
Deposits
Required reserves (calculated)2
Excess reserves (calculated)
Memorandum items:
Stock of liquidity paper
Average reserve money

Sources: Bank of Tanzania; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
Figures reflect monetary surevy data covering the banking system, which was previously used for program monitoring. Beginning in December 2008, program monitoring will be based on data that
covers a broader set of deposit taking institutions consistent with the Fund's 2000 Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual.
2
In January 2009 the reserve requirement on government deposits was increased to 20 percent (from 10 percent) and cash in banks was no longer counted towards required reserves.
Previously, 50 percent of cash in banks was counted toward required reserves.

36

-35

Other items (net)
of which: REPOs
of which: MDRI (IMF)

1

2010
Sept

-886

Net domestic assets
Credit to government
of which: Excluding counterpart of liquidity paper
of which: MDRI (IMF)

Revised
Data

Dec

Table 6. Tanzania: Monetary Survey, 2008/09–2009/10
(Billions of Tanzania Shillings, unless otherwise indicated; end of period)
2008
Sept

June
Revised
1

Net foreign assets
Bank of Tanzania
Commercial banks

3,553
2,966
587

Net domestic assets

Other items (net)

2009
June

Mar

2010
Sept

Dec

Mar

June

Revised

Data

Prel.

1

Data

Prog.

Act.

Prog.

Prel.

Prog.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

3,689
3,120
569

3,445
2,928
517

3,617
3,127
490

3,932
3,268
663

4,150
3,655
495

3,938
3,326
612

3,998
3,523
475

3,995
3,385
610

3,788
3,338
450

3,736
3,273
463

4,007
3,532
475

4,165
3,678
488

3,834
3,334
500

2,813

2,923

3,376

3,476

3,386

3,309

3,667

3,695

3,885

4,279

4,896

5,068

5,152

5,846

3,247
-22
3,269

3,114
-151
3,265

3,695
-119
3,815

3,526
-26
3,552

3,457
-355
3,812

3,907
-335
4,242

3,703
-315
4,018

4,082
-231
4,313

4,054
-201
4,255

4,686
121
4,564

5,349
390
4,959

5,567
194
5,373

5,699
256
5,443

6,439
567
5,872

Act.

Domestic credit
Credit to government (net)
Credit to nongovernment sector

Dec

-191

-319

-51

-71

-598

-36

-387

-169

-407

-453

-499

-546

-593

6,612

6,821

7,093

7,318

7,459

7,605

7,693

7,881

8,067

8,632

9,075

9,317

9,680

Foreign currency deposits

1,737

1,785

1,770

1,832

2,127

1,997

2,212

2,059

2,076

2,159

2,311

2,429

2,494

2,591

M2
Currency in circulation
Deposits (Tanzania Sh)

4,629
1,272
3,357

4,827
1,269
3,557

5,051
1,453
3,599

5,261
1,450
3,811

5,190
1,397
3,793

5,462
1,439
4,024

5,393
1,372
4,021

5,634
1,396
4,238

5,805
1,511
4,293

5,908
1,541
4,367

6,321
1,649
4,672

6,646
1,734
4,912

6,823
1,750
5,073

7,089
1,849
5,240

22.7
5.1
30.8
44.6
30.1
21.6
20.0
3.1
3.9
-30
-317
-346

18.1
-0.1
26.6
34.7
25.1
21.9
22.0
3.2
…
48
-395
-346

24.2
7.4
31.5
48.0
40.3
28.0
21.3
2.9
…
202
-97
105

21.2
2.8
29.3
28.9
42.4
28.0
23.6
3.0
…
-109
125
16

17.7
16.3
18.2
26.4
22.4
23.3
19.1
3.2
…
30
-204
-174

19.8
9.0
24.4
40.7
21.1
23.2
22.9
3.2
…
17
-184
-167

14.6
12.3
15.6
23.1
19.9
22.3
18.0
3.2
…
40
-164
-124

15.3
2.5
20.7
32.2
26.0
30.5
18.1
3.1
…
30
-80
-50

19.3
16.6
20.3
30.3
16.3
19.0
19.2
3.2
3.6
50
-50
0

22.0
20.9
22.4
39.8
28.6
28.9
22.4
3.0
3.6
50
273
323

21.7
26.1
20.1
39.6
20.1
20.6
22.4
3.0
…
10
269
279

21.7
21.7
21.7
26.7
30.9
28.5
22.4
3.0
…
20
72
92

21.1
21.1
21.1
26.2
23.5
22.3
22.0
3.0
…
30
135
165

20.0
20.0
20.0
28.7
20.0
20.0
22.4
3.0
3.5
60
445
505

Memorandum items:
M3 growth (12-month percent change)
Foreign currency deposits (12-month percent change)
M2 growth (12-month percent change)
Credit to nongovernment sector (12-month percent change)
Reserve money (12-month percent change)1
Average reserve money (12-month percent change)1
Currency/M3 (in percent)
Reserve money multiplier (M3/average reserve money)1
Velocity of money (M3; average)
Nonbank financing of the government (net) 2
Bank financing of the government (net) 2
Bank and nonbank financing of the government (net) 2
Sources: Bank of Tanzania; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Figures reflect monetary survey data covering the banking system, which was previously used for program monitoring. Beginning in December 2008, program monitoring will be based on data that
covers a broader set of deposit taking institutions consistent with the Fund's 2000 Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual.
2
Cumulative from the beginning of the fiscal year (July 1).

37

-434
6,366

M3

38
Table 7. Tanzania: Balance of Payments, 2007/08–2013/14
(Millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2007/08
Act.
Current account

2008/09
Prog.
Proj.

2009/10
Proj.

2010/11
Proj.

2011/12
Proj.

2012/13
Proj.

2013/14
Proj.

-2,012

-2,240

-1,906

-2,108

-2,142

-2,114

-2,331

-2,420

-3,070
2,609
337
921
-5,667
-1,683

-3,403
3,187
432
...
-6,590
-1,833

-3,064
2,891
460
805
-5,955
-1,408

-2,982
2,860
369
963
-5,841
-1,406

-3,040
2,961
379
993
-6,001
-1,517

-3,089
3,187
422
1,031
-6,276
-1,740

-3,419
3,284
471
1,073
-6,702
-1,951

-3,705
3,548
529
1,114
-7,253
-2,175

401
1,186

608
...

563
1,239

252
1,053

185
1,001

258
1,101

326
1,211

512
1,453

-28
-30
-20

-100
-51
-28

-108
-54
-31

-141
-55
-35

-166
-60
-39

-159
-59
-41

-133
-56
-42

-140
-54
-42

-20

-28

-31

-35

-39

-41

-42

-42

686
663
663
0

655
631
631
0

703
675
675
0

762
735
735
0

880
855
855
0

876
854
854
0

895
871
871
0

913
888
888
0

627
570
0
0

588
526
0
0

532
470
0
0

578
512
0
0

593
524
0
0

608
534
0
0

624
545
0
0

641
556
0
0

1,491
0
0
696
795
3
…
792
458
419
-38

1,796
0
0
802
994
3
…
991
405
427
-33

1,382
0
0
591
791
3
…
788
434
404
-61

1,423
0
0
502
920
3
…
917
473
440
-58

1,465
0
0
553
912
247
243
666
489
450
-63

1,674
0
0
663
1,011
269
266
743
364
459
-73

1,964
0
0
829
1,135
245
242
891
371
469
-68

2,244
0
0
1,036
1,208
215
212
993
379
478
-79

Errors and omissions

395

0

-141

0

0

0

0

0

Overall balance

501

144

-132

-108

-84

168

258

465

-501
-501
0

-144
-144
0

132
-106
238

108
18
89

84
85
-1

-168
-167
-2

-258
-256
-2

-465
-463
-3

2,660
4.2

2,793
3.7

2,766
4.4

2,748
4.2

2,663
3.9

2,829
3.9

3,085
4.0

3,548
4.3

-14.2
-10.7
11.2
3.7
18,877

-13.0
-10.1
9.0
3.6
22,091

-12.4
-9.1
9.5
2.8
20,836

-13.0
-9.7
9.9
2.3
21,820

-12.8
-9.1
9.9
2.4
23,500

-11.6
-8.2
8.6
2.6
25,640

-11.4
-8.3
8.0
3.0
28,068

-10.8
-7.9
7.5
3.4
30,754

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
of which: Traditional
of which: Gold
Imports, f.o.b
Of which: Oil
Services (net)
Of which: Travel receipts

Income (net)
Of which : interest payments due
Of which : interest on public debt
Of which : interest on central government debt

1

Current transfers (net)
Of which : official transfers
Of which : program grants
HIPC relief
Capital account
Of which : project grants
Debt stock reduction under MDRI (including HIPC)
Of which: HIPC
Financial account
MDRI (including HIPC)
Of which: HIPC
Direct investment
Other investment (including Portfolio investment)
Portfolio investment
Of which: government securities
Other investment
Program loans
Project loans
Government-scheduled amortization

1

Financing
Change in BoT reserve assets (increase, -)
Use of Fund credit
Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (BoT)
Months of imports of goods and services (next year)
Current account deficit (percent of GDP)
Excluding official current transfers
Including official current transfers
Foreign program and project assistance (percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment (percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP

Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Relief on some projected external debt obligations is being negotiated with a number of creditors.

Table 8. Tanzania: Balance of Payments, 2008–2010

1

(Millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Change Relative to the Previous Year
2009
2008

2009

2010

Act.

Proj.

Proj.

Δ in
value

Δ in
price

2010
Δ in
volume

Δ in
value

Δ in
price

Δ in
volume

Cumulative

Current account

-1911

-2041

-2125

-130

-84

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.

-3061
2750

-3023
2875

-3011
2910

38
125

12
35

418

386

374

-32

-42

10

-12

8

-20

-44

67

-94

88
-23
31

8

80

61

297

-159

-54

85

-139

84

Of which:

Traditional

2

2

890
-5898
-4491

978
-5921
-4460

-1546

-1407

-1462

139

524
1259

374
1078

219
1027

-150
-181

-155
-51

-232

Income (net)

-68

-124

-153

-56

-29

-85

Current transfers (net)
Of which: Program grants

694
669

733
719

821
821

38

88

126

580

555

585

-25

30

6

1436
643
446

1230
547
453

1451
528
481

-206
-97
7

220
-19
28

14
-116
35

43

0

0

148

-256

-89

2,873

2,616

2,527

-256
-254

-89
-78

-345
-332

Of which: Oil

4

Services (net)
Of which: Travel receipts

Capital account
Financial account
Of which: Direct investment
Of which: Program loans
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (end-December)
Aggregate impact of external shocks 3

Calendar figures computed by averaging two relevant fiscal year figures unless otherwise specified.
Monthly export data already available were used to calculate the 2008 figures.
3
The sum of the items in bold.
4
Lag effects in the downward price movements are assumed.
2

39

917
-5811
-4265

-27
-87
-226

Of which: Gold
Imports, f.o.b
Of which: Nonoil

1

-214

40
Table 9: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2003–08
(Percent, end of calendar year)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

5.4

8.8

9.0

11.3

13.9

17.0

Capital adequacy
Capital to risk-weighted assets
Capital to assets

21.0
9.9

15.4
10.2

15.1
10.0

16.3
7.6

16.2
8.1

14.9
9.1

Asset composition and quality
Total loans and advances to total assets

30.2

33.7

33.7

37.3

41.2

50.7

Sectoral distribution of loans
Trade
Mining and manufacturing
Agricultural production
Building and construction
Transport

23.8
27.3
14.1
5.5
10.3

22.4
22.2
12.8
3.8
8.3

23.5
22.0
12.7
5.7
7.4

15.2
18.3
9.0
5.0
7.9

17.0
20.3
11.9
5.1
6.9

18.5
14.7
10.4
4.9
7.2

Foreign exchange loans to total loans
Gross nonperforming loans (NPLs) to gross loans
2
NPLs net of provisions to gross loans
NPLs net of provisions to capital
Large exposures to total capital

27.2
4.5
3.0
…
59.3

28.6
3.5
2.5
…
64.1

32.4
4.9
4.3
…
53.3

32.0
7.3
6.8
21.1
282.8

31.4
6.3
6.3
22.0
183.5

31.8
6.3
6.2
25.2
227.3

Earnings and profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Interest margin to gross income
Noninterest expenses to gross income
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Trading and fee income to total income

2.1
20.7
51.5
67.1
39.9
42.3

3.1
22.3
60.7
53.3
39.0
39.1

3.9
26.3
65.6
48.4
39.6
33.6

3.9
26.7
70.6
43.5
39.5
28.9

4.7
29.0
72.5
42.5
40.5
24.2

3.8
23.1
71.3
48.8
41.9
…

Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to total short term liabilities
Total loans to customer deposits
Foreign exchange liabilities to total liabilities

56.3
62.8
41.2
36.5

50.7
58.4
46.3
34.7

52.5
60.1
43.7
34.9

48.6
54.2
50.1
38.6

48.0
53.0
57.6
33.8

37.6
41.7
68.4
32.6

Access to bank lending
1
Claims on the non-government sector to GDP

Sources: Bank of Tanzania; and Fund staff estimates.
1
2

Calendar year; end of period claims relative to annual GDP. For 2008, based on projected GDP.
The increase in nonperforming loans to gross loans between 2005 and 2006 was due largely to
a change in reporting standards.

41
Table 10. Tanzania: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund1
Projection
2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20

2020/21

Total

Fund obligations based on existing credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

0.0
0.2

0.3
0.2

1.4
0.2

2.0
0.2

2.2
0.2

2.2
0.2

2.0
0.1

0.8
0.1

0.3
0.1

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

11.2
1.7

credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

0.0
0.6

0.3
1.1

1.4
1.3

2.0
1.3

2.2
1.3

18.2
1.2

35.8
1.1

44.6
0.9

44.0
0.7

43.8
0.5

27.9
0.3

10.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

230.0
10.2

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service2
In percent of GDP
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of quota

0.6
1.0
0.0
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.3

1.3
2.0
0.0
3.3
0.0
0.1
0.7

2.7
4.1
0.1
5.2
0.0
0.2
1.3

3.2
4.9
0.1
4.4
0.0
0.2
1.6

3.5
5.4
0.1
3.2
0.0
0.2
1.8

19.4
29.8
0.5
12.3
0.1
0.9
9.7

36.9
57.0
0.8
16.0
0.2
1.7
18.5

45.5
70.6
1.0
15.3
0.2
1.9
22.9

44.7
69.6
0.9
12.9
0.2
1.7
22.5

44.2
69.1
0.8
12.1
0.2
1.6
22.2

28.1
44.1
0.5
7.2
0.1
0.9
14.1

10.0
15.7
0.1
2.5
0.0
0.3
5.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Outstanding Fund credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service2
In percent of GDP
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of quota

170.3
257.6
5.1
476.9
1.2
10.2
85.6

229.7
348.5
7.2
578.7
1.5
14.4
115.5

228.3
347.8
7.1
445.6
1.4
14.9
114.8

226.4
346.4
6.5
309.9
1.3
13.8
113.8

224.1
344.4
6.2
203.8
1.2
12.5
112.7

206.0
317.7
5.2
131.4
1.0
9.9
103.5

170.2
263.5
3.9
74.1
0.8
7.8
85.6

125.6
195.2
2.6
42.2
0.5
5.3
63.1

81.6
127.2
1.6
23.6
0.3
3.2
41.0

37.8
59.2
0.7
10.3
0.1
1.4
19.0

10.0
15.6
0.2
2.6
0.0
0.3
5.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Net use of Fund credit (in millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments

159.1
159.1
0.0

59.4
59.7
0.3

-1.4
0.0
1.4

-2.0
0.0
2.0

-2.2
0.0
2.2

-18.2
0.0
18.2

-35.8
0.0
35.8

-44.6
0.0
44.6

-44.0
0.0
44.0

-43.8
0.0
43.8

-27.9
0.0
27.9

-10.0
0.0
10.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

5,290 5,532 6,075
112
169
242
26,551 29,032 31,775
2,501 2,757 3,220
198.9 198.9 198.9

6,739
355
34,260
3,394
198.9

7,390
463
37,511
3,690
198.9

8,103
8,885
9,742
538
573
613
41,071 44,746 48,557
4,012
4,363
4,744
198.9
198.9
198.9

10,682
635
52,431
5,158
198.9

11,713
683
56,614
5,608
198.9

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and services (in millions of US$)
Debt service (in millions of US$)2
Nominal GDP (in millions of US$)
Gross International Reserves (in millions of US$)
Quota (millions of SDRs)

5,055 4,849
4,930
54
60
78
21,411 22,547 24,343
2,528 2,420
2,335
198.9 198.9
198.9

Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1

ESF disbursements of SDR 159.12 million (80 percent of quota) upon approval, June 2009; SDR 39.78 million (20 percent of quota) upon completion of the first review, October
2009; and SDR 19.89 million (10 percent of quota) upon completion of the second review, April 2010; in total SDR 218.79 million (110 percent of quota) during 2009-10.
2

Total debt service includes IMF repayments.

-11.2
218.8
230.0

42
APPENDIX I. LETTER OF INTENT
May 11, 2009
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
1.
Tanzania has continued to benefit from support by the Fund under the Policy Support
Instrument (PSI). The implementation of programme under the PSI has progressed well with
sound macroeconomic policies that have contributed to a sustainable high economic growth.
The government seeks to consolidate these achievements and explore more initiatives to
further promote growth and reduce poverty.
2.
During the first half of the fiscal year (July–December 2008), performance under the
programme has been good. All but one of the quantitative assessment criteria for endDecember 2008 were met and good progress was achieved on the structural benchmarks. The
floor on net international reserves was met by a wide margin, while reserve money was held
in check. However, net domestic financing of the Government slightly exceeded its ceiling
(by less than 0.1 percent of GDP).
3.
The economic performance during 2008 was good despite the continued pressures
from energy and food prices, as well as the global financial and economic crisis. Some
challenges were encountered in the implementation of monetary policy, primarily on account
of high inflation and rapid expansion of credit to private sector. Nominal exchange rate
remained fairly stable, while interest rates on Treasury securities began to edge upwards in
recent months, partly reflecting a tighter stance of monetary policy and the thinness of the
financial market.
4.
However, the Tanzanian economy is now slowing down, driven by the worsening
external environment. To mitigate the adverse impact of the global financial crisis, the
Government has taken initiatives, in consultation with Fund staff, that will provide a
countercyclical stimulus to the economy, including an easing of the fiscal and monetary
stance over the second half of the current fiscal year; but the scope for supportive policies is
curtailed by a projected fall in reserves resulting from the sudden deterioration of Tanzania’s
external environment. Indeed, beginning in early 2009, receipts from traditional exports,
tourism, and gem stones exports have started to decline. Foreign direct investment and other
foreign inflows are now projected to decline in 2009, leading to a projected deterioration in
the balance of payments.

43
5.
Against this background, the government of Tanzania requests access to the
Exogenous Shock Facility (ESF) under the High Access Component. This request is for a
12-month ESF arrangement in an amount of 110 percent of quota, the equivalent of
SDR 218.79 million (about USD 328 million), to be disbursed in three tranches. In order to
ensure full consistency between the PSI and the ESF-supported programme, the government
also requests an extension of the PSI until May 29, 2010. We would request that the seventh
review of the PSI take place by April 30, 2010.
6.
Following discussions and consultations with the Fund staff, I hereby transmit the
letter of intent and memorandum of economic and financial policies which reviews the
implementation of the programme during the first half of 2008/09 and describes the
objectives and policies that the government intends to pursue during the remainder of the
fiscal year and 2009/10 and over the medium term, including to respond, in a sustainable
manner, to the exogenous shock that has affected Tanzania.
7.
The Government of Tanzania is confident that the policies set forth in the attached
MEFP are adequate to achieve the objectives of its programme but it will, in further
consultation with the Fund, take any appropriate measures for this purpose. We will regularly
update the Fund on developments in our economic and financial policies, and provide the
data needed for the monitoring of the programme. In addition, the Government will consult
regularly with the Fund on any relevant developments at the initiative of the Government or
the Fund.
8.
The Government of Tanzania intends to disseminate this letter and the attached
MEFP as well as related Fund staff reports, and hereby authorizes the IMF to publish the
same on its website after consideration by the Executive Board.
Yours Sincerely,
/s/
Mustafa H. Mkulo (MP)
MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

Attachments:
I. Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding on Selected Concepts and Definitions Used in
the Monitoring of the PSI-Supported Programme and Twelve-Month Arrangement under
the ESF

44
Attachment I. Tanzania: Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
May 11, 2009
I. RECENT MACROECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROGRESS UNDER THE PROGRAMME
Recent economic developments
1.
Tanzania continued to record impressive economic performance in 2008, with an estimated
real GDP growth of 7.5 percent, up from 7.1 percent in 2007. Good performance was recorded in
industry and construction (9.6 percent) and services (8.9 percent) particularly in real estate and
business services sub-activities. As Tanzania cannot be insulated from the impact of the current
global financial and economic crisis, the government has formed a Task Force to monitor and
advise on effects of the crisis and measures to mitigate them.
2.
The economy continued to experience inflationary pressures that had arisen from the
lagged effects of soaring world commodity prices earlier in the year, compounded by severe food
supply shocks in the region, and poor short rains in some areas of Tanzania in the last quarter of
2008. As a result, annual inflation rose to 13.5 percent in December 2008, driven by food inflation
of 18.6 percent. Non-food inflation, however, was held to just 6.0 percent. The recent easing of
global fuel prices, as well as sustained prudent fiscal and monetary policies, are expected to lead to
a downward trajectory in inflation in the coming months.
Performance under the programme
3.
Performance was good under the PSI programme during this period. All but one of the
quantitative assessment criteria for the fifth review of the PSI were met (end-December 2008 test
date). Despite larger than programmed sales of foreign exchange, the target for net international
reserves was met, and the reserve money programme was brought back on track, after several
months of excess liquidity. Shortfalls in government revenues, however, resulted in net domestic
financing slightly missing its target. Government registered a net build up of deposits by TZS 167
billion compared to TZS 174 billion that was envisaged in the programme (see Appendix Table 1).
Good progress was also achieved under the programme’s structural agenda.
Near-Term Fiscal Policies
4.
During the first half of 2008/09, the fiscal outturn was characterized by lower performance
against targets, although overall foreign inflows were in line with budget estimates. Total revenue
collection was 93 percent of budget projections during the period. While shortfalls were mainly in
PAYE; excise duties; and import duty, good performance was recorded in the Value Added Tax.
Despite the shortfall, revenue collection in the first half of 2008/09 was 23 percent higher than in
the corresponding period of the preceding fiscal year.
5.
Total expenditure during July–December 2008 was also below budget estimates, in line
with the resource envelope. Disbursement of budget support over the period was slightly higher
than projected, but incurred some delays and was mainly received during the second quarter of the

45
year. Total expenditure end June 2009 is projected to be inline with available resources and
incorporates TZS. 53 billion from supplementary budget of February 2009, which allocated TZS.
40 billion for fertilizer subsidies; TZS. 10 billion for livestock development and TZS. 3 billion for
TIB recapitalization.
6.
Budget support for the whole fiscal year is projected to be higher than the amount
budgeted due to new disbursements that were not anticipated in the budget. Project and basket
funds are expected to remain within estimates. The additional disbursements of donor grants will
offset part of the domestic revenue shortfall, but the government still expects recourse to domestic
borrowing of about 1.2 percent of GDP. The higher than programmed deficit spending is expected
to have some stimulus effects on the economy.
Public Financial Management

7.
Progress has been made in strengthening public financial management systems in order to
improve management of public resources and enhance accountability at all levels. This involved
establishment of oversight units for procurement and audit in all MDAs; strengthening of the three
Parliamentary public accounts committees; creating a Public Procurement Policy Unit at the
MoFEA and introducing audit committees in MDAs and LGAs. A separate independent internal
audit department—which will report directly to the Paymaster General—is in the process of being
established in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, with the objective of enhancing its
independence and accountability.
8.
In ensuring efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability in the use of public
financial resources the Government is implementing the Public Financial Management Reform
Programme III (PFMRP III) after the completion of the review of PFMRP II strategic plan. The
objective of PFMRP III is to improve planning and budgeting tools, including integrating the
MTEF and IFMS.
9.
As for cash flow management, the Cash Management Unit continues to prepare the three
month rolling cash flow forecasts. Efforts have been made to enhance the capacity of the Cash
Management Unit, line Ministries and other spending agencies to improve the forecasts,
expenditure planning, and implementation. This will also facilitate liquidity forecasting for
monetary and fiscal policies. Moreover, MoFEA and the BoT have agreed that, the monthly
meetings which are held by the Ministry to determine the resource envelope and expenditure
ceilings shall be conducted after the MPC meetings, so as to incorporate the net fiscal flows
projected under the monetary plan. Particularly during periods of large fiscal liquidity injections,
such as the run-up to the end of the fiscal year, the MoFEA and BoT staff will coordinate closely
to ensure that shocks to liquidity can be anticipated and contained.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
10.
Monetary developments in the first quarter of 2008/09 were characterized by acceleration
in the expansion of credit to the private sector and mounting inflationary pressures. In response to
these developments, the Bank of Tanzania increased reserve requirements on central government
deposits from 10 percent to 20 percent and abolished acceptance of 50 percent of vault cash as an

46
eligible component of the minimum reserves effective January 2009. These changes were also
aimed at limiting the liquidity impact of the idle central government balances in commercial
banks. Consequently, the level of commercial banks’ minimum reserve balances at the Bank of
Tanzania increased by about TShs 140 billion, while expansion of credit and money supply
slowed down.
11.
In line with the tightening of monetary policy, interest rates on government securities
increased gradually in 2008/09, while the shilling began to weaken against the US dollar in
October 2008, after having gained value for about a year. The weakening of the shilling reflected
the initial market reaction to global financial crisis which was compounded by activities of
speculators who purchased dollars on anticipation of further depreciation.
12.
The BoT continued to maintain a flexible exchange rate, while engaging in foreign
exchange sales for sterilization purposes. During the first half of 2008/09, the BoT enhanced its
foreign exchange sales in a bid to calm the market against speculations of negative impact of the
global financial and economic crisis. Throughout the period under review, gross international
reserves were maintained above USD 2.7 billion. Going forward, foreign exchange transactions by
the Bank will be limited to IFEM counterparties with Reuter’s electronic dealing system to
enhance transparency and competitive trading. Following the inception of online monitoring of all
banks’ foreign exchange transactions, the BoT will closely monitor, among others, the activities of
hedge funds.
II

PROGRAMME FOR 2009/10 AND IN THE MEDIUM TERM

13.
The economic recession in the developed world is likely to feed into the Tanzanian
economy in a number of ways. Based on the macroeconomic projections and policy targets for the
period 2009/10–20011/12, real GDP growth is expected to slip to 5.0 percent in 2009 from
7.5 percent in 2008; and begin to recover in 2010. However, the sharp decline in oil import prices
provides some relief to these adverse economic effects, while minimal exposure to the toxic assets
that have plagued global financial markets has insulated the financial sector from the acute shocks
seen in more advanced economies. Although inflation has remained high (13.3 percent in
February) because of elevated food prices, non-food inflation declined to just under 5 percent. It is
expected that headline inflation will come down later in 2009, as food supplies improve.
14.
In spite of the lower oil import bill, the worsening external environment will lead to a
deterioration of the balance of payments. Receipts from traditional exports, tourism, and gem
stones exports have already begun to slow down, while sources of foreign financing for private
investment—FDI and syndicated loans—have begun to dry up.
15.
Efforts are being made to ensure that the negative impacts of the global financial and
economic crisis are not spread much in the real sector. Among measures that the Government
intends to undertake include: ensure food sufficiency, financial stability through daily monitoring
of the banking system, strengthening Infrastructural development, promoting domestic tourism
and increasing productivity in economic sectors.

47
Fiscal and monetary policies
16.
The 2009/10 budget will aim to continue to provide some stimulus to the economy. The
government will also continue to strengthen domestic resource mobilization in the medium term.
Areas under consideration include changes to the fiscal regime of the mining sector; non tax
revenue; and tax exemptions. Revenue to GDP ratio is projected to rise to 16.3 percent in 2009/10
and further to 17.1 percent by 2011/12. Meanwhile, total expenditure is projected to increase to
27.5 percent of GDP in 2009/10 and maintained broadly at that level through 2011/12. The need to
meet infrastructural challenges will imply net domestic financing of 1.6 percent of GDP in
2009/10 and non-concessional financing, from both domestic and foreign sources, of up to
2 percent of GDP over the medium term.
17.
The government will continue to implement the Medium Term Pay Policy (MTPP) with a
focus on, among others, enhancing salary levels so as to retain the staff while continuing to attract
highly qualified ones. Incentives will also be made to attract staffing in the most under served
areas especially under education and health sectors. The medium term projection indicates that
wages will be around 5.6 percent of GDP in 2009/10, and gradually edge upwards to 6.0 percent
for the remaining period.
18.
The Government is in the process of approving the Medium Term Public Investment Plan
(MPIP), which is expected to be operational in 2009/10. The plan seeks to consolidate the
achievements so far attained in growth and economic management by scaling up public
investments, particularly in strategic areas. More specifically, the focus of the Plan over the next
five years will be in the following investment priority areas: rehabilitation and construction of new
transport and communication infrastructure (railways, road, ports) to make Tanzania a
transportation hub and international trade gateway; generation, transmission and distribution of
low cost energy to attract efficiency seeking industrial and commercial investment capital;
rehabilitation and development of new irrigation infrastructure to attain food self sufficiency and
make Tanzania a grain reserve and source of industrial feedstock in the region; effective
utilization of the country’s mineral wealth and leverage its gain for the development of
infrastructure; and improvement of the current labour force to acquire the necessary skills for
technological and industrial revolution. The Government’s medium-term fiscal framework is
consistent with the MPIP and the Government expects to contribute 40 percent of overall finance
of the Plan.
19.
In order to accelerate infrastructural development, the Government in collaboration with
other stakeholders, plans to organize an infrastructure round-table to take stock of transport, water,
and energy infrastructure; lay out strategies for reducing port congestion in Dar es Salaam port;
and assess financing gap and propose alternative financing options.
20.
The government seeks to promote Public Private Partnership (PPP) as a way of raising the
efficiency of financing the compelling demand for infrastructure development. This will increase
participation of the private sector in the implementation of infrastructure projects, while ensuring
fair sharing of risks associated with such projects. Following agreement on a broad policy

48
framework for PPPs in early 2008, we expect a detailed PPP policy, including the establishment of
a dedicated PPP unit, to be approved by the Government by end-June 2009.
21.
With regard to MKUKUTA implementation, the first phase of MKUKUTA is coming to
an end in June 2010. Currently the Government is in the process of reviewing MKUKUTA and
results from the review will form the basis for designing and implementing the second phase.
22.
The Government continues to monitor closely public debt developments. In October 2008
debt sustainability analysis was conducted, and the results from the exercise reveal that the
external debt is sustainable. The Government will continue to finance development projects
mainly through concessional borrowing. The Government is undertaking a detailed analysis of
contingent liabilities, including those arising from government guarantees. A detailed list is
expected to be ready by end-September 2009.
23.
With the objective of further improving cash management, effective 1st July 2009, all
government payments in excess of TSh 10 million will be made through TISS (Tanzanian
Interbank Settlement System), which will reduce the expenditure float and improve the
predictability of the liquidity impact of government transactions.
24.
Efforts are underway to implement the IMF’s Government Finance Statistics Manual
(GFSM) 2001. As a first step, we plan to introduce an economic classification of expenditure. A
migration path has been prepared for incorporating GFSM 2001 in the Integrated Financial
Management System (IFMS) and a bridge table will map the budgets submitted by MDAs,
Regions and LGAs that are still in GFSM 1986 format. Therefore budget books for 2009/10 will
include an economic classification consistent with GFSM 2001. As a second step, we plan to
introduce a functional classification of expenditure, which should be ready for the 2010/11 budget.
25.
The weak aggregate demand, resulting from the global financial crisis and the prospects for
continued low inflation provides a scope for easing monetary policy in the second half 2008/09
and 2009/10. Accordingly, the Bank of Tanzania will reduce the volume of liquidity papers and
continue to complement sale of government securities with foreign exchange sales. Consistent
with the BoT’s primary objective of maintaining price stability, this will also help to reduce
pressure on interest rates and provide the market with foreign exchange at the time of scarcity.
The Bank will also explore the option of using discount and Lombard rates more actively by
altering their respective penal margins—which have so far been fixed—to reflect the monetary
policy stance. The Bank of Tanzania will, however, monitor inflation closely and make
appropriate adjustments to monetary targets, should inflationary pressures re-emerge.
Financial Sector Stability
26.
The impact of the current financial crisis on the capital and financial markets has so far
been subdued, mainly on account of the low level of intergration with international markets. All
indicators of financial sector stability have remained strong. The Government is aware of the
downside risks of the crisis on the economy and is closely monitoring developments in the
financial sector with a view to taking timely measures. The BoT has stepped up its regular

49
supervision of the banking system. An early warning system has been set up, using selected
indicators of financial sector performance on daily basis to spot signs of weakness.
27.
The BOT continues to coordinate the implementation of the Second Generation Financial
Sector Reform programme. With regard to the credit reference system, the Terms of Reference
have been developed for procurement of a consultant who will assist in the establishment of the
credit reference databank. Credit reference bureau regulations and licensing guidelines are in the
approval process. Meanwhile, the Government is reviewing the recommendation of the consultant
on how best to transform Tanzania Investment Bank into a Development Finance Institution with
a window for lending to agricultural and industrial sectors. On credit guarantee schemes, work is
in progress by a consultant to determine the future structure and modus operandi of the schemes
outside the Bank of Tanzania.
28.
A review of the legal and regulatory framework of capital and financial account
transactions was completed and shared with stakeholders. Their comments and suggestions
contributed to the development of a tentative plan for timing and sequencing of capital account
liberalization, which was completed in February 2009. The focus now will be laying the
foundation for implementing the plan. In addition,, the review of the Bank of Tanzania’s functions
with the objective of refocusing its mission to its core activities has been completed and a strategy
has been prepared to be incorparated into the Bank’s Corporate Plan by the end of May 2009.
29.
With regard to financial supervision of pension funds, the new Social Security (Regulatory
Authority) Act became effective on 1st November 2008. The Ministry of Labor, Employment, and
Youth Development is presently finalizing the regulations and in the process of recruiting a CEO
of the Regulatory Authority, with the expectation of completing both steps by end-June 2009.
Immediately thereafter, the BoT, in consultation with the regulator, will issue investment
guidelines for the pension funds.
30.
The Bank continued to implement the recommendations of the IMF Safeguards
Assessment Mission issued in June 2008. Among those implemented include: audit quality review
by a concurrent partner, formal agreement on the modalities for the selection of audit firm
subcontracted to conduct audits, majority composition of non-executive directors in the audit
committee, draft year end procedures prepared awaiting review by Internal Audit Directorate
(IAD) and external auditors, MOU agreed between the MOFEA and the Bank. The MOU was
signed on December 4th, 2008 and outstanding obligations settled on 10th December, 2008. The
2007/08 external audit of the BoT has been completed and submitted to the MOFEA. It is
expected to be submitted to Parliament by the MOFEA by end-June 2009. Also, capacity building
in IAD has commenced by hiring 10 new staff as well as phasing in risk based internal auditing on
pilot basis in FY 2008/09. On engaging a consulting firm to conduct a comprehensive risk
assessment, following the submission of the TORs “no objection” has been granted by the World
Bank to initiate a process to hire a consultant. Finally, a draft policy on whistle-blowing has been
prepared awaiting Board approval.

50
Statistical issues
31.
The National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) has produced Tanzania Statistical Master Plan for
2008/09–2012/13 with the aim of strengthening production of core statistics. The recent HBS
results will be used to revise and rebase the national accounts, and this will improve GDP and CPI
data. The NBS has produced quarterly GDP series from 2001 to 2007. The dissemination of 2001
to 2008 series is expected in July 2009. On BOP statistics, the BoT in collaboration with other
participating institutions will continue to conduct annual surveys on departing international
visitors in order to improve tourism statistics. Meanwhile, the Government is looking into ways to
improve the collection of statistics on foreign remittances to complement the current sources of
such information.
32.
The Bank of Tanzania, in collaboration with the Tanzanian Investment Center (TIC) and
the NBS, continues with surveys that began in 1999 to monitor private capital flows, including
foreign direct investment. The 2007 report which covers 2006/07 information is now ready for
presentation to chief executive officers of the participating institutions, before being published by
June 2009. The survey for 2009, which will cover information through 2007/08, is expected to
begin in May 2009 and published by June 2010.
III

PROGRAMME MONITORING

33.
Quantitative assessment criteria and performance criteria for end-June 2009 and endDecember 2009 and quantitative indicative targets for end-September 2009 and end-March 2010
will monitor programme implementation under the PSI and ESF arrangement in 2009–10 (see
Table 1). The government and IMF staff also agreed on the structural benchmarks listed in
Table 2. The first and second reviews under the ESF will take place at the same time as the sixth
and seventh PSI reviews respectively.

Table 1. Tanzania: Quantitative Assessment Criteria, Performance Criteria, and Indicative Targets Under the PSI and the ESF, 2008/09–2009/10

June
Actual

Revised
Data 1/

-346

-346

2008
September
Actual
Revised
Data 1/

December
Program
Prel.
Assessment
Criteria

March
Program
Proj.
Indicative
Targets

2009
June
Program
Proposed
Assessment Assessment/Performance
Criteria
Criteria

September
Proposed
Indicative
Targets

December
Proposed
Assessment/Performance
Criteria

2010
March
Proposed
Indicative
Targets

279

95

168

(Billions of Tanzania shillings; end of period, unless otherwise indicated)
Net domestic financing of the government of Tanzania
(cumulative, ceiling) 2/ 3/
Accumulation of budgetary arrears (ceiling; indicative target only)

105

16

-174

-167

-124

-50

0

323

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Average reserve money (upper bound) 4/
Average reserve money target 4/
Average reserve money (lower bound) 4/

2,054
-----

2,054
-----

2,350
-----

2,350
-----

2,343
2,320
2,297

2,318
-----

2,374
2,350
2,327

2,500
-----

2,463
2,438
2,414

2,674
2,648
2,622

2,862
2,833
2,805

3,009
2,979
2,949

3,089
3,058
3,028

Net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania (floor) 5/

2,541

2,642

2,535

2,675

2,559

2,855

2,573

2,710

2,587

2,310

2,234

2,399

2,478

Accumulation of external payments arrears (ceiling) 6/

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on
nonconcessional terms (ceiling) 6/

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1,122

1,122

264

289

550

751

777

1,045

1,036

1,109

315

818

1,139

(Millions of U.S. dollars; end of period)

Memorandum item:
Foreign program assistance (cumulative grants and loans) 2/

Revised data are based on the Standard Reporting Forms covering a broader set of deposit taking institutions, in line with the Fund's 2000 Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual .
Cumulative from the beginning of the fiscal year (July 1).
To be adjusted upward by up to T Sh 250 billion for the U.S. dollar equivalent of a shortfall in foreign program assistance from the amounts shown in the memorandum item.
Assessment criteria (performance criteria) and indicative targets apply to upper bound only.
Floors are set US$200 million below projected levels. Floor will be adjusted downward for any shortfall in foreign program assistance from the amounts shown in the
memorandum item up to the equivalent of T Sh 250 billion.
6/ Continuous assessment criterion under the PSI and continuous performance criterion under the ESF; excludes arrears on debt-service payments pending the conclusion of debt-rescheduling agreements.

1/
2/
3/
4/
5/

51

Note: For precise definitions of the aggregates shown and details of the adjustment clauses, see the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) attached to the
Government's letter of May 11, 2009.

52
Table 2. Tanzania: PSI/ESF Structural Benchmarks for 2009/10
Measure

Target Date of
Implementation

Financial Sector
Adopt a strategy for refocusing the Bank of Tanzania on its core
activities.

End-May 2009

Issue investment guidelines for pension funds prepared by the Bank
of Tanzania.

End-June 2009

Prepare an updated financial stability report for the BOT Board,
including assessments of risk-based prudential supervision.

End-December 2009

Fiscal
Cash Management Unit (CMU) in the Accountant General’s
Department to produce Government’s three month rolling cash-flow
forecast.

Continuous

Prepare a list of outstanding government guarantees and contingent
liabilities, including debts held by parastatals.

End-September 2009

Prepare a functional classification of expenditures consistent with the
IMF’s Government Financial Statistics Manual 2001 for the budget for
2010/11.

End-April 2010

53
Attachment II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding on Selected Concepts and
Definitions Used in the Monitoring of the PSI-Supported Programme and
Twelve-Month Arrangement under the ESF
May 11, 2009
I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The purpose of this Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) is to describe
concepts and definitions that are being used in the monitoring of the quantitative assessment
criteria, performance criteria, and indicative targets under Tanzania’s programme supported
by the PSI and ESF arrangement. The principal data source is the standardized reporting
forms, 1SR and 2SR, as provided by the Bank of Tanzania to the IMF, and the government
debt tables provided by the Accountant General’s office.
II.

DEFINITIONS

Net international reserves
2.
Net international reserves (NIR) of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) are defined as reserve
assets minus reserve liabilities. The BoT’s reserve assets, as defined in the IMF BOP manual
(5th edition) and elaborated in the reserve template of the IMF’s special data dissemination
standards (SDDS), include (i) monetary gold; (ii) holdings of SDRs; (iii) the reserve position
at the IMF; (iv) all holdings of foreign exchange; and (v) other liquid and marketable assets
readily available to the monetary authorities. Reserve assets exclude assets pledged or
otherwise encumbered, including but not limited to assets used as collateral or guaranteed for
a third party external liability (assets not readily available). The BoT’s reserve liabilities
include (i) all short-term foreign exchange liabilities to nonresidents, and (ii) all liabilities to
the IMF. Reserve liabilities exclude medium- and long-term foreign liabilities.
Reserve money and reserve money band
3.
Reserve money is defined as the sum of currency issued by the BoT, including the
vault cash of commercial banks, and the deposits of the commercial banks with the BoT. The
reserve money targets are the projected daily averages of March, June, September, and
December within a symmetrical one percent band. The upper bound of the band serves as the
assessment/performance criterion or indicative target

54
Net domestic financing of the Government of Tanzania
4.
Net domestic financing of the Government of Tanzania (NDF) includes financing of
the budget of the central (union) government of Tanzania (“government”) by the banking
system (BoT and other depository corporations) and the nonbank public. NDF is calculated as
the cumulative change since the beginning of the fiscal year in the sum of (i) loans and
advances to the government by the BoT and holdings of government securities and
promissory notes (including liquidity paper issued by the BoT for monetary policy purposes),
minus all government deposits with the BoT; (ii) all BoT accounts receivable on the
Government of Tanzania that are not included under (i) above; (iii) loans and advances to the
government by other depository corporations and holdings of government securities and
promissory notes, minus all government deposits held with other depository corporations;
(iv) all ODC accounts receivable on the Government of Tanzania that are not included under
(iii) above; and (v) the outstanding stock of domestic debt held outside depository
corporations excluding: government debt issued for the recapitalization of the NMB and TIB;
debt swaps with COMELCO (Russia) and the government of Bulgaria; mortgage on acquired
sisal estates; compensation claims; and debt of parastatal companies assumed by the
government.
Government deposits at the BoT
5.
Government deposits at the BoT include government deposits as reported in the BoT
balance sheet (1SR), which includes counterpart deposits in the BoT of liquidity paper issued
for monetary policy purposes, and foreign currency-denominated government deposits at the
BoT, including the PRBS accounts and the foreign currency deposit account.
External payments arrears
6.
External payments arrears consist of the total amount of external debt service
obligations (interest and principal) of the government and the BoT that have not been paid at
the time they are due, excluding arrears on external debt service obligations pending the
conclusion of debt-rescheduling arrangements.
Contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on nonconcessional terms
7.
The term “debt” will have the meaning set forth in Point 9 of the Guidelines on
Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted on August 24, 2000 (Decision
No. 12274-(00/85)). Government debt is outstanding debt owed or guaranteed by the
Government of Tanzania or the Bank of Tanzania.
8.
Government debt is considered nonconcessional if the grant element is lower than
35 percent, calculated using discount rates based on Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) commercial interest reference rates (CIRR), adjusted as

55
appropriate for different maturities. For maturities of less than 15 years, the grant element
will be calculated based on 6-month averages of commercial interest rates. For maturities
longer than 15 years, the grant element will be calculated based on 10-year averages. This
assessment/performance criterion applies not only to debt as defined in Point 9 of the
Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted on August 24,
2000 (Decision No. 12274-(00/85)), but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for
which value has not been received.
Budgetary arrears
9.
Budgetary arrears are defined as the sum of all verified bills that have been received
by a central government spending unit or line ministry, and for which payment has not been
made within 30 days during the fiscal year on wages, domestic interest, and goods and
services (excluding court awards).
Foreign programme assistance
10.
Foreign programme assistance is defined as budget support and basket grants and
loans received by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs (MoFEA) through BoT
accounts and accounts at other depository corporations and is calculated as the cumulative
sum, since the beginning of the fiscal year, of the receipts from (i) programme loans and (ii)
programme grants.
Programme exchange rate
11.
For 2008/09, the end-of-period programme exchange rate is set at T Sh 1330 per
U.S. dollar for quarter IV. For 2009/10, the end-of-period programme exchange rates are set
at T Sh 1345 per U.S. dollar, T Sh 1359 per U.S. dollar, and T Sh 1374 per U.S. dollar for
quarters I–III, respectively. For 2008/09, the period average programme exchange rate is set
at T Sh 1315 per U.S. dollar for quarter IV. For 2009/10, the period average programme
exchange rates are T Sh 1337 per U.S. dollar, T Sh 1352 per U.S. dollar, and T Sh 1366 per
U.S. dollar for quarters I–III, respectively. For 2008/09 and 2009/10 as a whole, the
programme average exchange rates are set at T Sh 1255 per U.S. dollar and T Sh 1359 per
U.S. dollar, respectively.
III.
ADJUSTERS
Net international reserves
12.
The end-June, end-September, and end-December 2009 and end-March and end-June
2010 quantitative targets for the BoT’s net international reserves will be adjusted downward
by the amount in U.S. dollars of any shortfall in foreign programme assistance in U.S.
dollars, up to a limit of T Sh 250 billion, converted into U.S. dollars at the programme
average exchange rate, for the end-quarter test dates in 2008/09 and 2009/10, relative to

56
projections shown in the Quantitative Assessment Criteria, Performance Criteria, and
Indicative Targets Table attached to the applicable Letter of Intent and Memorandum of
Economic and Financial Polices of the Government of Tanzania.
Net domestic financing
13.
The end-June, end-September and end-December 2009 and end-March and end-June
2010 quantitative limits on the net domestic financing of the Government of Tanzania will be
adjusted upward for any shortfall in foreign programme assistance in U.S. dollars, up to a
limit of T Sh 250 billion, evaluated using the corresponding programme annual average
exchange rates, relative to projections shown in the Quantitative Assessment Criteria,
Performance Criteria, and Indicative Targets Table attached to the applicable Letter of Intent
and Memorandum of Economic and Financial Polices of the Government of Tanzania.
IV.

DATA REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

14.
For purposes of monitoring the programme, the Government of Tanzania will provide
the data listed in Table 1 below.

57

Table 1 Summary of Reporting Requirements
Information

Reporting
Institution

Frequency

Submission
Lag

Issuance of government securities.

BoT

Bi-weekly

1 week

Yields on government securities.

BoT

Bi-weekly

1 week

Consumer price index.
The annual national account statistics in
current and constant prices

NBS
NBS

Monthly
Annually

2 weeks
6 months

Balance sheet of the BoT (1SR)

BoT

Monthly

1 week

Consolidated accounts of other depository
corporations and the depository
corporations survey (2SR and the DCS).

BoT

Monthly

4 weeks

Summary of stock of external debt,
external arrears, and committed
undisbursed loan balances by creditor.

BoT

Monthly

2 weeks

External trade developments

BoT

Monthly

4 weeks

Balance of payments

BoT

Quarterly

4 weeks

Standard off-site bank supervision
indicators for deposit money banks and for
other depository corporations.

BoT

Quarterly

6 weeks

Financial Soundness Indicators for deposit
money banks and for other depository
corporations
Other depository corporation lending by
activity.

BoT

Quarterly

6 weeks

BoT

Monthly

4 weeks

Interest rate structure of other deposit
institutions.

BoT

Monthly

4 weeks

Quarterly

4 weeks

Summary table of: (i) average reserve
money; (ii) net domestic financing of the
government; (iii) accumulation of budgetary
arrears; (iv) stock of external arrears; (v)
new contracting or guaranteeing of external
debt on nonconcessional terms; and (vi)
net international reserves. The MoFEA and
BoT will reconcile data on BoT claims on
the government, to ensure that such claims
recorded in the BoT balance sheet are the
same as those reported by the Accountant

BoT and MoFEA

58
Information

Reporting
Institution

Frequency

Submission
Lag

MoFEA

Monthly

4 weeks

TRA

Monthly

4 weeks

The monthly domestic debt report. As
discussed above, the MoFEA and BoT will
reconcile data on BoT claims on the
government, to ensure that such claims
recorded in the BoT balance sheet are the
same as those reported by the Accountant
General of the MoFEA.

MoFEA

Monthly

4 weeks

Monthly report on central government
operations.

MoFEA

Monthly

4 weeks

Detailed central government account of
disbursed budget support grants and
loans, and external debt service due and
paid.

MoFEA

Monthly

4 weeks

Detailed central government account of
disbursed donor project support grants and
loans.

MoFEA

Monthly

4 weeks

Statement on new loans contracted during
the period including terms and conditions
according to loan agreements.

MoFEA

Quarterly

4 weeks

General of the MoFEA.
The flash report on revenues and
expenditures.
The TRA revenue report

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION AND
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
Joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the staffs of the International Development Association and
International Monetary Fund
Approved by Carlos Braga and Sudhir Shetty (World Bank) and
Saul Lizondo and Dominique Desruelle (IMF)
May 15, 2009
Tanzania’s risk of debt distress is low. Extensive debt relief in recent years greatly reduced
the external debt burden and the long-term outlook under the baseline scenario is benign,
even taking into account some non concessional borrowing to help finance a stepping up of
government investment spending on infrastructure over the medium term. Sensitivity analysis
based on standardized shocks support the conclusion that the risk of debt distress is low
going forward. Alternative downside scenarios illustrate, however, that debt indicators
would be sensitive to significantly less donor assistance or lower long-term growth. This
highlights the importance of a sound debt management strategy and quality evaluation of
infrastructure projects to ensure healthy rates of return on investment.
Background
1.
Tanzania has sustained high rates of broad-based economic growth with
generally low inflation over the past decade. Real GDP growth averaged about 7 percent a
year during 2000–08. Inflation was kept solidly in check for much of this period, but
accelerated in 2008 (13.5 percent at end year), driven mainly by lagged effects of the spike in
international food and fuel prices,1 and more recently, by adverse regional food supply
shocks. In contrast, nonfood inflation remained modest (5.8 percent). Strong growth in tax
revenues over the past 5 years, together with substantial donor support has enabled
government spending to expand at a rapid pace with only limited recourse to domestic
financing. Tanzania also achieved a large buildup in official international reserves, partly

1

See “Impact of Rising International Food and Fuel Prices on Inflation in EAC Countries”, in Rwanda and
Uganda—Selected Issues (Country Report No. 09/36).

2
reflecting solid export growth over the years. As of end-2008, gross international reserves
stood at about US$2.8 billion (more than 4 months of imports of goods and services).
2.
Tanzania has benefited from extensive debt relief under the HIPC Initiative and,
more recently, the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). As of end-June 2008,
Tanzania’s public external debt stood at US$3.7 billion (20.9 percent of GDP), compared
with US$7.2 billion (53.4 percent of GDP) at end-June 2006, before MDRI went into effect
(Table 1).2 Multilateral debt accounts for about one-half of the total external debt. Tanzania’s
public domestic debt increased from TSh 2.5 trillion (14.5 percent of GDP) at end-June 2006
to TSh 3.3 trillion (14.3 percent of GDP) at end-June 2008, about half of which was shortterm Treasury bills (Table 2). Tanzania is classified as a strong performer according to the
three-year moving average index of the World Bank’s Country Performance and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA).
Medium- to Long-Term Macroeconomic and Financing Assumptions
3.
The baseline scenario assumes that the Tanzanian economy gradually recovers
from the current slowdown caused by the global economic and financial crisis (Table 3).
After falling to 4-5 percent in 2009 (or 5.3 percent in 2009/10), real GDP growth is projected
to increase gradually to 7.5 percent in 2012/13,3 driven partly by a stepping up of government
spending on infrastructure investment (by 2 percentage points of GDP) sustained over the
medium term. Growth is assumed to remain at 7.5 percent for 5 years, before gradually
declining to a long-run growth rate of 6 percent by 2019/20 and beyond, as the positive
growth impact of the stepped-up infrastructure investment diminishes. Inflation (GDP
deflator) is also projected to decelerate to the Bank of Tanzania’s (BoT) medium-term
objective of 5 percent by 2011/12—as the impact of high food and fuel prices subsides4—and
then remain unchanged through 2028/29. Reflecting the projected path of CPI inflation, the
annual average real exchange rate is projected to appreciate modestly in 2009/10 and 2010/11
and is then assumed to be constant throughout the remainder of the projection period. Both
the export and import price index deflators are assumed to grow at 2 percent a year. In
addition, the income elasticity used for export and import projections are 1.25 and 1.1,
2

The debt stock excludes the estimated amount of interest arrears of about US$560 million, which are expected
to be canceled upon conclusion of formal agreements on HIPC debt relief. Most of these arrears are associated
with bilateral debt. It also excludes the undisbursed committed debt of US$2.3 billion.

3

4

Tables and Figures are in fiscal years (July-June). For example, 2009 refers to fiscal year 2009/10.

Inflation accelerated over the past year (13.0 percent in March 2009), driven mainly by lagged effects of the
spike in international food and fuel prices, and more recently by adverse regional food supply shocks. Nonfood
inflation has however declined over the past year (4.3 percent in March 2009).

3
respectively, which contributes to a gradual narrowing of the external current account deficit
over the long term, and a gradual increase in national saving (both private and public).
4.
To finance the additional infrastructure spending, the baseline incorporates
additional domestic and external borrowing on non concessional terms. Given the
difficulty of accessing foreign credit markets during the current crisis, initially the additional
borrowing is obtained from domestic sources (total projected net domestic finance (NDF) is
1.2 percent of GDP in 2008/09 and 1.6 percent of GDP in 2009/10). Thereafter, the
additional borrowing needs (2 percent of GDP in 2010/11–2014/15) are assumed to be evenly
split between domestic and foreign financing. The terms of domestic and foreign financing
are assumed as follows: interest on new domestic borrowing is 12 percent (with automatic
rollover of debt) and interest on foreign borrowing is 9 percent (with 1 year grace period and
10 year maturity).5 The elevated infrastructure investment is reflected in an initial increase in
development spending from 8.8 percent of GDP in 2008/09 to 10.9 percent of GDP in
2010/11. After that, development spending falls to about 10.5 percent of GDP on average
during 2011/12-2014/15.6 Following the period of stepped-up spending, public investment
returns to about 9 percent of GDP for the rest of projection period. The baseline also accounts
for annual maintenance cost of 5 percent of the total value of the accumulated additional
infrastructure spending, which reaches about 0.2 percent of GDP in 2014/15, before gradually
declining relative to GDP over the remainder of the projection period. These maintenance
costs are added to recurrent costs.
5.
Government revenues are assumed to increase—albeit more gradually than in
recent years—while external grants decline. Roughly in line with the Tanzania Revenue
Authority’s objective, government revenues are assumed to rise from 16 percent of GDP in
2009/10 to about 20 percent of GDP by 2017/18 and remain at this level. External grants are
assumed to decline from 6 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to 4.5 percent of GDP by 2014/15 and
remain at that level. Foreign concessional loans (in U.S. dollar terms) are assumed to grow at
4 percent a year. As a result, concessional loans fall from 4 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to
1.5 percent of GDP by 2028/29, representing a gradual reduction in Tanzania’s aid
dependency. Any residual financing need is assumed to be met initially from domestic
borrowing up to a ceiling of 2.5 percent of GDP for NDF as a whole, with the remaining
residual being met by foreign non concessional borrowing.

5

An interest parity between domestic and foreign borrowing is assumed only for new borrowing. Debt service
figures on existing public sector debt (both domestic and foreign) are provided by the authorities.

6

After 2010/11, it is expected that resources from MDRI that were available for pro-poor development spending
will be exhausted, which explains the drop in development spending in the subsequent period.

4
External Debt Sustainability
6.
Tanzania’s external debt level is low. Tanzania’s total external debt declined from
US$7.7 billion, or 57.3 percent of GDP at end-June 2006, to US$4.5 billion, or 24.8 percent
of GDP at end-June 2008 (Table 4). In PV terms, the public sector component of this debt
stood at about 10½ percent of GDP at end-June 2008, or 45 percent of exports.7 Public
external debt service is around 1.7 percent of exports of goods and services. All these
indicators are significantly below the indicative debt-burden thresholds that apply to
Tanzania.
7.
Looking ahead, Tanzania’s risk of external debt distress continues to be low.8
Even with substantial non concessional borrowing over the medium term in the baseline
scenario, debt follows a benign path—rising gently over the medium term and then declining
over the long term (Figure 1). An increase in non concessional external borrowing of about
1 percent of GDP a year for 5 years would lead to an accumulated total of about US$1.5
billion of outstanding non concessional debt by end-2014/15.9 Total external debt would
increase from 25 percent of GDP in 2007/08 to 27 percent in the medium-term, but would
then fall to about 20 percent of GDP by the end of projection period. The PV of public
external debt would increase from about 10½ percent of GDP to 15½ percent of GDP in the
medium-term, but would then decline to about 7 percent of GDP. The standard alternative
scenarios and bound tests indicate that Tanzania’s external debt will remain sustainable under
the individual defined shocks and their combination (Table 5 and Figure 1).10 For all these
cases, debt and debt-service indicators remain below thresholds for a low-income country
DSA. As such, Tanzania is classified as “low risk” of debt distress.
7

The PV of debt is calculated after factoring in all the debt relief, including HIPC debt relief for which the final
agreements on delivery have yet to be signed.

8

Based on the 3-year average of the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment Index, Tanzania
is classified as a “strong performer”. Its thresholds therefore are: 50 percent of NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio,
200 percent of NPV of debt-to-exports ratio, 300 percent of debt-to-revenue ratio, 25 percent of debt service-toexports ratio, and 35 percent of debt service-to-revenue ratio.

9

An increase in non concessional external borrowing also reduces the grant element schedule during the
medium-term (Figure 1).

10

Scenario A1 (key variables at historical averages) yields debt and debt-service indicators that are generally
below those of the baseline scenario, suggesting that the baseline’s economic assumptions (notably for real GDP
growth, external current account deficit, and foreign direct investment) are conservative relative to past
performance. Scenario A2 assumes a 2 percentage point increase in the interest rate on new borrowing, but does
not lead to a substantial deterioration of the indicators. Bound tests are based on 7-year averages and standard
deviations. Because of some discontinuities in the data the staffs did not use the standard 10-year historical
period.

5
8.
An alternative Tanzania-specific downside scenario (A3 in Table 5), indicates
that Tanzania’s future external debt sustainability is sensitive to the assumptions on
real GDP growth and donor support. Assuming annual real GDP growth of 6.0 percent
over the projection period (i.e., the stepping up of investment over the next several years has
no positive impact on real GDP growth above the assumed long-term growth rate), while
leaving the baseline path of non-interest government spending unchanged in nominal terms,
would imply a significant increase in debt indicators over time. If this lower growth scenario
were to be coupled with grants falling as a share of GDP (more detail described below), the
PV of external public debt-to-GDP ratio increases to 42 percent over the projection period.
Indeed, the debt service indicators would generally approach the indicative thresholds
towards the end of projection period. This highlights the importance of a sound debt
management strategy—and possible fiscal adjustment—and quality evaluation of
infrastructure projects to ensure healthy rates of return on investment.
Fiscal Sustainability
9.
Including domestic debt in the analysis, indicators continue to suggest a benign
outlook for public debt and fiscal sustainability. In the baseline scenario, the PV of public
debt rises from 25½ percent to 30 percent of GDP over the medium-term, before falling to
about 14 percent of GDP by the end of projection period (Table 6). The bound tests and
alternative scenarios generally support the assessment that Tanzania’s debt outlook is benign
(Table 7 and Figure 2). For example, alternative scenario A3 (permanently lower GDP
growth) suggests that the PV of public debt would reach about the same level in the mediumterm before falling to about 18 percent of GDP by the end of projection period. While debt
indicators are indeed sensitive to real GDP growth, all indicators suggest that debt remains
sustainable.
10.
Taking into account contingent liabilities does not cause a significant
deterioration to the debt indicators, although information is lacking on the full extent of
such liabilities. Based on partial information, current contingent liabilities are estimated to
be about TSh 365 billion, or 1.2 percent of GDP, mainly reflecting the guaranteed debt of the
government-owned electricity company (TANESCO). The bound test B5 shows only a
modest increase in the debt indicators in 2009/10, at which the recognition of these
contingent liabilities are assumed. As full information on the size of contingent liabilities
become available, however, the sensitivity analysis may become less benign.
11.
The public sector debt sustainability is also dependent on donor support. In the
baseline, grants were assumed to remain at 4.5 percent of GDP during the medium- and longterm. If grants were to grow at the same rate as foreign loans (i.e., 4 percent a year in U.S.
dollar terms), the grants would fall from 4.5 percent to 2.4 percent of GDP by 2028/29. This
would turn the primary surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP under the baseline into primary deficit
of 1.4 percent by 2028/29. Replacing concessional loans and grants with non concessional

6
borrowing (evenly split between domestic and foreign financing) increases the PV of public
debt-to-GDP ratio over time. The alternative Tanzania-specific downside scenario (A4 in
Table 7) presents a case where the falling grants are combined with low growth (i.e., no
return on investment). Under this scenario, the PV of public debt would reach 86 percent of
GDP in 2028/29, of which the external debt portion would be 42 percent of GDP, below the
relevant threshold. The debt service-to-revenue ratio would reach 71 percent, if no fiscal
adjustments were to take place for the entire projection period.
Concluding remarks
12.
Tanzania’s risk of debt distress is low. Based on the debt sustainability analysis,
there appears to be room for an increase in debt, even on non concessional terms, to finance a
stepping up of infrastructure investment over the medium term. Tanzania’s debt indicators
are sensitive to a number of parameters, but in general the downside scenarios and standard
sensitivity analysis support the assessment of a low risk of debt distress. Nevertheless, a
sound debt management strategy and quality evaluation of investment projects are essential
conditions for maintaining debt and fiscal sustainability. For example, should key variables
such as donor support or real GDP growth deteriorate excessively, government spending
would have to adjust to maintain sustainability.

7
Table 1. TANZANIA: External Debt Developments
(Millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2004
2004/2005

2005
2005/2006

2006
2006/2007

2007
2007/2008

Overall Total Debt Committed
Disbursed Outstanding Debt (DOD)
Undisbursed Debt

8345.1
6799.5
1545.6

8638.8
6971.1
1667.7

5212.4
3442.3
1770.1

6776.3
4483.1
2293.2

Disbursed Debt by Creditor Category
Multilateral Debt
Bilateral Debt
Commercial Debt
Export credits

6799.5
4626.3
1502.3
416.4
254.5

7733.9
5459.6
1506.2
462.2
305.9

3442.3
1772.6
910.5
437.3
321.9

4483
2620.2
934.1
617.9
310.8

Disbursed Debt by Debtor Category
Central Government
Parastatal Companies
Private Sector

6799.5
5830.5
477.5
491.5

6724.5
450
559.5

2692
167.8
582.5

3582.5
156.3
744.4

Total Debt (incl. Interest Arrears) by Creditor Category
Multilateral Debt
Bilateral Debt
Commercial Debt
Export credits

8134.8
4649.7
2321.1
750.1
413.9

8994.0
5481.6
2190.2
835.1
487.1

4660.9
1800.3
1446.6
877.3
536.7

5846.5
2620.3
1545.4
1135.6
545.1

Total Debt (excl. Interest Arrears) by Debtor Category
Public Sector
Private Sector
Sources: Tanzanian authorities

6308.0
491.5

7174.5
559.5

2859.8
582.5

3738.8
744.4

Table 2. TANZANIA: Public Domestic Debt Developments
(Billions of Tanzania Shilling)
2004
2005
2004/05
2005/06

2006
2006/07

2007
2007/08

3228
1769
1459

3265
1606
1659

Total Domestic Debt Stock
Short term (T-bills) 1/
Medium term (Bonds)
Sources: Tanzanian authorities
1/ Includes BOT Liquidity Papers.

1701
919
781

2456
1351
1105

8
Table 3. TANZANIA: Key Assumptions in the Baseline and Country-Specific Downside Scenarios
Baseline
Real GDP growth rate 1/

At 5.3 percent (2009/10); increases to 7.5 percent
(2012/13); remains at 7.5 percent (2013/142016/17); falls to 6 percent (2019/20); remains at 6
percent (2020/21-2028/29).

Inflation (GDP deflator)
Infrastructure investment

5 percent (2011/12-28/29).
1 percent (NDF only) (2009/10); 2 percent (NDF
and external borrowing) (2010/11-2014/15).

Development spending

At 8.8 percent (2008/09); increases to 10.9 percent
(2010/11); after MDRI, it falls to (on average) 10.5
percent (2011/12-2014/15); falls to 9 percent
(2015/16) after the elevated investment period;
remains at 9 percent (2017/18-2028/29).

Maintenance costs

5 percent of total borrowing, or about additional 0.2
percent of GDP to noninterest recurrent costs.

Low growth and grants falling
At 5.3 percent (2009/10); increases to 6.0 percent
(2010/11); remains at 6.0 percent (2011/122028/29).

Interest rates 2/

12 percent (new domestic borrowing); 9 percent
(new external borrowing).
Domestic revenue (as a percent At 16 percent (2009/10); increases to 20 percent
of GDP)
(2017/18); remains at 20 percent (2018/19-2028/29).

Grants (as a percent of GDP)

At 6 percent (2009/10); falls to 4.5 percent
(2014/15); remains at 4.5 percent (2015/162028/29).
4 percent (2009/10); falls to 1.5 percent (2028/29).

Foreign (concessional) loans
(as a percent of GDP)
1/ Includes the effect of infrastructure investment.
2/ A real interest parity is assumed.

At 6 percent (2009/10); falls to 4.5 percent
(2014/15); continues to fall to 2.4 percent (2028/29).

Table 4.Tanzania: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2005-2028 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

Source: Staff simulations.

0

Average

2014-2028

2018

2028

2018/19

2028/29

57.3

20.5

24.8

25.1

25.3

26.7

26.8

26.9

26.9

23.2

20.1

53.4

16.6

20.9

21.6

21.9

23.0

23.3

23.5

23.5

18.7

11.7

4.6

-36.8

4.3

0.3

0.2

1.4

0.0

0.1

0.0

-0.8

-0.1

1.7
7.4
10.9
21.8
32.7
-3.7
-3.0
0.2
-3.8
-1.9
0.4
-3.6
1.3
2.9
0.0

2.3
9.7
13.0
24.5
37.4
-3.5
-3.3
0.2
-4.3
-3.0
0.2
-3.8
0.5
-39.1
0.0

2.7
10.3
14.0
23.6
37.6
-3.6
-3.5
-0.1
-3.7
-4.0
0.2
-1.2
-3.0
1.7
0.0

3.4
8.8
11.7
23.6
35.3
-3.3
-3.2
0.4
-2.8
-2.7
0.1
-1.4
-1.4
-4.5
0.0

5.8
9.2
12.1
21.5
33.6
-3.4
-3.3
0.5
-2.2
-1.2
0.1
-1.3
0.0
-5.6
0.0

3.6
8.6
11.7
20.3
32.0
-3.6
-3.5
0.6
-3.3
-1.7
0.2
-1.5
-0.4
-2.6
0.0

2.2
7.8
10.6
20.0
30.6
-3.3
-3.2
0.4
-3.5
-2.0
0.2
-1.8
-0.4
-2.6
0.0

2.1
7.7
10.6
19.1
29.7
-3.1
-3.0
0.2
-3.7
-2.0
0.3
-1.8
-0.5
-2.4
0.0

1.4
7.3
10.0
19.2
29.2
-2.9
-2.8
0.1
-3.9
-1.9
0.4
-1.8
-0.5
-1.8
0.0

1.1
7.0
9.1
20.2
29.3
-2.3
-2.2
0.1
-4.4
-1.4
0.4
-1.4
-0.4
-2.3
0.0

-0.6
6.5
8.0
23.4
31.4
-1.6
-1.5
0.1
-6.0
-1.1
0.4
-1.1
-0.4
0.1
0.0

...
...
...
...
...
4.4
4.3
7.6
0.7
2.8

...
...
...
...
...
2.0
1.1
1.9
0.9
46.5

14.5
61.5
10.6
44.9
66.8
4.2
1.7
2.6
1.4
6.0

14.5
61.5
11.0
46.6
69.6
4.5
1.1
1.6
1.5
8.5

15.2
70.8
11.7
54.6
72.0
3.6
1.2
1.6
1.7
9.0

16.9
83.1
13.1
64.7
78.1
3.8
1.6
1.9
1.5
7.3

17.5
87.8
14.1
70.5
82.2
3.5
2.1
2.5
1.3
7.7

18.3
95.6
14.8
77.7
85.2
4.1
3.0
3.3
1.4
7.6

18.9
98.5
15.4
80.6
87.2
4.9
4.0
4.3
1.4
7.3

17.1
84.7
12.6
62.3
62.2
7.4
6.3
6.2
2.0
7.8

15.5
66.4
7.1
30.2
35.0
6.6
4.8
5.5
2.2
6.6

0.6

0.5

2.8

0.1

0.3

0.1

7.0
-2.4
0.8
11.7
22.2
...
12.5
0.8
0.8
0.0
...
...

6.9
-0.9
0.3
19.1
21.5
...
14.1
0.7
0.7
0.0
...
...

7.3
16.9
1.1
21.0
25.8
...
15.9
1.3
1.3
0.0
...
...

6.2
5.9
0.4
12.4
5.6
51.4
15.8
1.2
1.2
0.0
7.0
83.8

5.3
0.0
0.5
-4.1
0.3
56.2
16.3
1.8
1.3
0.5
7.1
87.2

6.4
1.4
0.7
1.9
2.7
32.5
16.8
1.8
1.3
0.5
6.5
76.2

7.3
1.6
0.9
7.3
4.3
24.7
17.1
1.7
1.4
0.4
5.7
75.5

7.5
1.7
1.3
4.6
6.2
21.9
17.4
1.8
1.4
0.4
5.3
73.5

7.5
1.8
1.5
9.8
7.5
19.1
17.7
1.8
1.4
0.4
4.9
71.3

6.5
1.9
2.0
9.2
8.7
35.2
20.2
2.6
2.2
0.5
5.0
84.8

6.0
1.9
2.1
9.7
8.7
26.6
20.2
5.4
4.7
0.7
4.8
85.3

14.3
4.4

15.2
6.0

19.0
25.4
2.0

21.4
12.4
2.4
1.8

22.5
5.3
2.6
1.4

24.3
8.0
3.2
2.4

26.6
9.1
3.7
2.2

29.0
9.3
4.3
2.2

31.8
9.4
4.9
2.1

48.6
8.5
6.1
0.3

104.6
8.0
7.4
0.1

5.7

5.5

5.1

4.8

4.5

4.5

6.4

2.8

-3.4

0.6

-3.8

0.3

5.7

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)

2008-2013

2005

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/

Projections

7.1
2.0
0.8
18.1
19.2
...

0.3
7.3
0.3
9.4
9.1
...

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

4.4 #

6.7
2.1
0.9
5.3
4.4
34.3

8.9
2.0

Average

6.9

-2.1

-4.9

9

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Historical 0 Standard
Average 0 Deviation

6.4
1.8
2.0
9.7
8.8
31.1
19.9

4.9
83.9

8.3
0.4

10
Table 5.Tanzania: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028
(In percent)
Projections
2008
2008/09

2009
2009/10

2010
2010/11

2011
2011/12

2012
2012/13

2013
2013/14

2018
2018/19

2028
2028/29

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline

11

12

13

14

15

15

13

7

11
11
11

8
12
12

7
14
13

6
16
14

6
17
16

7
19
17

5
18
21

11
16
42

11
11
11
11
11
11

12
9
12
11
7
17

13
7
15
13
4
19

14
8
16
14
5
20

15
9
17
15
7
21

15
10
17
15
8
22

12
9
14
12
7
18

7
5
8
7
5
10

47

55

65

70

78

81

62

30

47
47
47

35
58
55

33
69
65

32
78
72

33
90
81

34
97
87

23
90
103

47
67
181

47
47
47
47
47
47

55
38
55
52
29
55

65
29
65
64
14
65

70
35
70
70
20
70

78
41
78
77
25
78

80
44
80
80
29
80

62
36
62
62
25
62

30
19
30
30
15
30

70

72

78

82

85

87

62

35

70
70
70

47
76
72

40
83
78

38
91
84

36
98
89

37
105
94

23
90
103

55
77
209

70
70
70
70
70
70

71
57
76
68
46
103

77
43
88
78
23
112

81
49
93
82
31
117

84
54
96
85
37
122

86
58
98
87
43
124

61
43
70
62
34
88

34
27
39
35
23
50

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
A3. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 7/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
A3. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 7/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
A3. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 7/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

11
Table 5.Tanzania: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028 (continued)
(In percent)
Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline

1

1

2

2

3

4

6

5

1
1
1

1
1
1

1
2
2

1
2
2

2
3
3

2
3
4

3
6
10

4
7
27

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

2
1
2
1
1
2

2
1
2
2
0
2

3
2
3
3
1
3

4
2
4
4
2
4

6
4
6
6
3
6

5
3
5
5
3
5

2

2

2

2

3

4

6

5

2
2
2

2
2
2

1
2
2

1
2
2

2
3
3

2
4
5

3
6
10

4
8
32

2
2
2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2
2
2

2
1
2
2
1
3

2
1
3
2
0
4

3
2
4
3
1
5

4
3
5
4
3
6

6
5
7
6
4
9

5
5
6
5
4
8

16

16

16

16

16

16

16

16

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
A3. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 7/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
A3. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 7/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.
7/ Assumes that real GDP growth remains at 6 percent during the medium- and long-term. It also assumes that grants (in US dollars) grow at 4 percent during 2015-29.

Table 6.Tanzania: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2005-2028
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

Estimate
Average

2005

2006

2007

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

Standard
Deviation

Projections
2008-13
Average

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

2011/12

2012/13

2013/14

2014-28
Average

2018

2028

2018/19

2028/29

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

71.6
53.4

38.7
16.6

35.2
20.9

35.4
21.6

35.7
21.9

36.5
23.0

36.5
23.3

36.9
23.5

37.5
23.5

30.3
18.7

18.6
11.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

7.1
0.8
3.6
17.9
5.4
21.5
-2.6
-5.1
-0.9
-4.2
2.5
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.3

-33.0
-9.9
2.7
19.0
4.9
21.7
-12.7
-5.8
-1.2
-4.7
-6.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-23.0

-3.5
-3.9
-1.2
22.8
6.9
21.6
-2.8
-3.6
-1.0
-2.6
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

0.2
1.0
3.8
21.3
5.5
25.1
-2.6
-2.1
0.0
-2.0
-0.5
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.8

0.3
1.7
3.8
22.0
5.7
25.8
-2.1
-1.6
0.2
-1.8
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.3

0.7
2.2
4.1
22.3
5.5
26.4
-1.8
-1.8
0.4
-2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.5

0.1
1.4
3.4
22.2
5.1
25.6
-2.0
-2.1
0.4
-2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.3

0.4
1.5
3.4
22.2
4.8
25.6
-1.9
-1.9
0.6
-2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.1

0.6
1.5
3.3
22.1
4.4
25.4
-1.7
-1.7
0.8
-2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0

-2.1
-1.4
-0.6
24.7
4.5
24.2
-0.8
-0.9
1.1
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

-0.6
-0.2
-0.7
24.7
4.5
24.1
0.5
0.5
1.6
-1.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

37.7
19.5
19.5
...
14.6
210.7
301.1
155.5
10.9
15.6
-3.5

37.8
15.8
15.8
...
14.4
198.9
268.2
111.9
7.6
10.2
35.7

25.6
11.3
11.3
...
12.6
112.2
161.0
71.1
6.2
8.9
2.3

25.7
11.9
11.9
...
11.6
120.5
162.6
75.4
8.6
11.7
3.6

26.1
12.2
12.2
...
12.2
118.1
159.7
74.8
8.1
11.0
3.4

27.0
13.6
13.6
...
12.5
121.1
160.9
80.7
7.5
9.9
3.3

27.8
14.5
14.5
...
11.7
125.0
162.2
84.9
7.6
9.8
3.4

28.7
15.3
15.3
...
11.8
129.6
165.0
87.9
8.7
11.0
3.1

29.9
15.9
15.9
...
12.1
135.0
168.8
89.9
10.3
12.8
2.7

24.3
12.8
12.8
...
8.5
98.3
120.1
63.1
11.7
14.3
1.5

14.1
7.2
7.2
...
5.7
57.2
69.9
35.5
11.8
14.4
0.0

1.3

1.5

3.6

-0.2

PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio
Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP
g growth (in percent) p
(

p
)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

12

Other Sustainability Indicators

7.0

6.9

7.3

6.5

1.3

6.2

5.3

6.4

7.3

7.5

7.5

6.7

6.5

6.0

6.4

0.8
1.5
5.6
5.8
0.1
...

0.3
0.1
-14.1
7.2
0.1
...

1.0
-3.9
5.4
9.7
0.1
...

0.8
-0.6
1.4
6.5
0.1
...

0.3
2.4
8.4
2.8
0.1
...

-0.2
2.2
...
10.6
0.2
51.4

0.1
4.0
...
8.2
0.1
56.2

0.3
5.2
...
5.4
0.1
32.5

0.7
5.3
...
5.0
0.0
24.7

1.2
6.1
...
5.0
0.1
21.9

1.6
7.3
...
5.0
0.1
19.1

0.6
5.0
...
6.5
0.1
34.3

2.2
9.1

2.7
22.5

2.2
13.3
...
5.0
0.1
31.1

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

...

...

5.0
0.1
35.2

5.0
0.1
26.6

13
Table 7.Tanzania: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2008-2028

2008
2008/09

2009
2009/10

2010
2010/11

Projections
2011
2012
2011/12 2012/13

2013
2013/14

2018
2018/19

2028
2028/29

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
26

26

27

28

29

30

24

14

26
26
26
26

23
23
26
26

21
21
27
27

20
20
28
29

18
18
29
31

18
17
30
34

16
14
25
43

26
24
18
86

26
26
26
26
26

25
25
24
31
27

26
25
23
31
28

26
26
23
32
29

27
27
24
32
30

28
28
24
34
31

20
22
16
29
26

5
11
0
24
16

120

118

121

125

130

135

98

57

120
120
120
120

105
106
118
118

95
95
121
122

89
88
126
129

84
82
130
139

80
77
136
152

63
57
102
180

107
99
73
378

120
120
120
120
120

116
115
109
139
124

117
112
103
139
127

119
116
105
142
131

122
121
108
146
136

126
126
111
152
141

82
89
66
117
104

19
45
0
98
66

9

8

7

8

9

10

12

12

9
9
9
9

8
8
8
8

6
6
7
7

4
4
8
8

3
3
9
9

3
2
10
12

1
0
12
22

19
17
15
71

B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009

9
9
9
9

8
8
8
8

7
7
7
8

7
6
5
9

8
7
5
10

9
9
6
12

9
10
6
17

4
9
0
23

B5. 1.2 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

9

8

8

9

10

11

13

14

Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from average of 2008 and 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 3/
A4. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 4/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
B5. 1.2 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from average of 2008 and 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 3/
A4. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 4/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
B5. 1.2 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from average of 2008 and 2009
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 3/
A4. Tanzania-Specific Downside Scenario : Low growth and grants falling 4/
B. Bound tests

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth remains at 5.3 percent during the medium- and long-term (no boost in growth from the infrastructure investment).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.
3/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
4/ Assumes that real GDP growth remains at 6 percent during the medium- and long-term. It also assumes that grants (in US dollars) grow at 4 percent during 2015-29.

14
Figure 1. Tanzania: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt under
Alternatives Scenarios, 2008-2028 1/
a. Debt Accumulation

8
7

60

60

50

50

40

40

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

6
5
4

30

3

20

2

30
20

10

1

10
0

0
2008

2013

2018

Rate of Debt Accumulation

2023

2028

0
2008

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

2013

2018

2023

2028

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

250

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

350
300

200
250
150

200
150

100

100
50
50
0

0
2008

2013

2018

2023

2028

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

30

2008

2013

2018

2023

2028

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

40
35

25

30
20

25
20

15

15

10

10
5

5
0

0
2008

2013
Baseline

2018

2023

2028

Most extreme shock 1/

2008

2013
Threshold

2018

2023

2028

Historical scenario

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018. In figure b. it corresponds to a Terms shock; in c. to a
Terms shock; in d. to a Terms shock; in e. to a Growth shock and in picture f. to a One-time depreciation shock
2/ Assumes that real GDP growth remains at 6 percent during the medium- and long-term. It also assumes that grants (in US dollars)
grow at 4 percent during 2015-29.

15

Figure 2.Tanzania: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008-2028 1/
Baseline

Historical scenario

Most extreme shock

40
35

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
180
160

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
25

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

20

15

10

5

0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation,
Fifth Review Under the Policy Support Instrument,
Request for a Twelve-Month Arrangement under the Exogenous Shocks Facility,
and Request for an Extension of the Policy Support Instrument
Informational Annex
Prepared by the African Department
May 15, 2009

Contents

Page

I.

Relations with the Fund ............................................................................................... 2

II.

Joint Bank-Fund Work Program, May 2009–May 2010............................................ 10

III.

Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... 12

2
APPENDIX I: RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of March 31, 2009)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 06/10/62; Accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3 and 4: 07/15/96.

II.

General Resources Account:

III.

SDR million

Percent Quota

Quota

198.90

100.00

Fund holdings of currency

188.90

94.97

Reserve position in Fund

10.00

5.03

SDR million

Percent Allocation

31.37

100.00

0.04

0.13

SDR million

Percent Quota

11.20

5.63

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Arrangements

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:

Approval
date

Expiration date

Amount
approved
(SDR million)

PRGF

08/16/2003

2/26/2007

19.60

19.60

PRGF

04/04/2000

08/15/2003

135.00

135.00

PRGF

11/08/1996

02/07/2000

181.59

181.59

Type

VI.

Amount
drawn
(SDR
million)

Projected Payments to Fund
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

--

0.28

1.40

1.96

2.24

Charges/interest

0.16

0.19

0.18

0.18

0.17

Total

0.16

0.47

1.58

2.14

2.41

Principal

3

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
Enhanced
framework
Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Total assistance (US$ million)
Of which: Fund assistance (US$ million)
Completion point date
Delivery of Fund assistance (SDR million)
Amount disbursed
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income1
Total disbursements

Apr 2000
2,026.00
119.80
11/21/01
88.95
26.68
62.27
7.51
96.46

VIII. Implementation of MDRI Assistance:
1.

Total debt relief (SDR million)2
Of which: MDRI
HIPC

2.

Debt relief by facility (SDR million)

234.03
207.00
27.03

Eligible Debt
Delivery date
January 2006

GRA
N/A

PRGF
234.03

Total
234.03

1

Under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, an additional disbursement
is made at the completion point that corresponds to interest income earned on amounts committed but
not disbursed during the interim, calculated using the average return (during the interim period) on the
investment of resources held by or for the benefit of the PRGF-HIPC Trust.

2

The Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member
countries that are qualified for the assistance. The debt relief covers the full stock of debt owed to the
Fund as of end-2004 which remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief.
The MDRI is financed by bilateral contributions and the Fund’s own resources, as well as the
resources already disbursed to the member under the HIPC Initiative (see Section VII above).

4
IX.

Safeguards Assessments:

A safeguards assessment of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) was completed on December 05,
2003 and a voluntary update assessment was finalized on August 22, 2008. The update
assessment was conducted at the request of the authorities and found that the BoT’s 2006/07
financial statements comply with International Financial Reporting Standards and have been
audited in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. Recent steps have been taken
to strengthen the BoT’s oversight framework, the internal audit function, and the control
system, but risks remain. The assessment recommends further strengthening of the mandate
and independence of the Audit Committee, revamping the internal audit function,
implementation of an internationally recognized control framework, and measures to improve
transparency on accounting, audit and control matters. An update assessment will be
conducted in conjunction with the proposed ESF.
X.

Exchange Arrangements:

The currency of Tanzania is the Tanzania shilling. Under the revised classification
methodology, Tanzania has a floating exchange rate arrangement. The official exchange rate
is determined in relation to the rate established in the interbank market for foreign exchange.
The middle rate in terms of the U.S. dollar, the intervention currency, was T Sh 1,314 per
U.S. dollar as of end-March, 2009. The exchange system is free of restrictions on the making
of payments and transfers for current international transactions.
XI.

Article IV Consultation:

The most recent Article IV consultation was concluded on June 27, 2007 (Country Report
No. 07/246).

5
XII.

Technical Assistance

A.

AFRITAC East1
Area

2003/04

2004/05

Focus

Public financial management

Intergovernmental financial relations; program
budgeting

Revenue administration

Work plan for the Tanzania Revenue Authority
(TRA); Stamp Duty Act

Financial sector regulation and
supervision
Monetary operations

Prudential supervision; AML/CFT legislation

Economic statistics

PPI; IIP; quarterly national accounts;
agricultural census; industrial census; CPI;
GFS
Intergovernmental financial relations;
program budgeting; Medium-term
expenditure framework (MTEF); cash flow
planning; IFMIS
Zanzibar—design reform program;
commitment control
Modernization of TRA; customs
administration; tax policy
Financial sector legal framework

Public financial management

Revenue administration
Financial sector regulation and
supervision

Liquidity forecasting; monetary policy
instruments; operational guidelines and
procedures

Monetary operations

NPS legal and regulatory framework;
liquidity management and seasonality;
domestic debt market

Economic statistics

Regional GDP; CPI; extending GDP series
backwards
Zanzibar—CPI

2005/06

1

Public financial management

Financial accountability; support to
comprehensive PFM reform program; cash
flow planning and management

Unless otherwise indicate, refers to technical assistance provided to the mainland of Tanzania.

6
Area

Focus
Zanzibar—commitment control

Revenue administration
Financial sector regulation and
supervision
Monetary operations

Economic statistics

2006/07

Public financial management

Tax administration; risk assessment and
audit; IT support
Risk-based supervision; bank resolution;
prudential regulations
NPS legal and regulatory framework;
liquidity management and seasonality;
domestic debt market; reserve management
Diagnostic analysis and strengthening of data
weaknesses; industrial indicators; quarterly
national accounts; GFS; CPI;BOP manual
Cash-flow planning
Zanzibar—cash management

Revenue administration

Tax modernization program; customs reform
and modernization; rationalization and
integration of Customs and Tiscan
Zanzibar—Modernization plan for Zanzibar
Revenue Board (ZRB); large taxpayer office;
tourism taxation

2007/08

Financial sector regulation and
supervision

Risk-based supervision and on-site
inspection; prudential regulations for new
Bank and Financial Institutions Act

Economic statistics

BOP and International Investment
Position (IIP); revised CPI; PPI

Public financial management

Capacity building for cash management

Bank supervision

BoT – develop framework for consolidated
supervision; improve off-site surveillance
reports and to conduct financial analysis
training; prepare Problem Bank Manual and
to conduct training on its use
BoT – comprehensive review of the Bank of
Tanzania’s implementation of risk-based
supervision.

Revenue administration

Multi-donor review of the Tax
Modernization Project (TMP)

7
Area

2008/09

Focus

Revenue administration

Support to the East African Community
(EAC)

Statistics

Price statistics - Zanzibar

Macro-Fiscal Analysis

Assist the Policy Analysis Department of the
MoF

Statistics

CPI (Mainland and Zanzibar)
Quarterly National Accounts

B.

Headquarters

Department
Fiscal Affairs

Date

Form

Purpose

2002–03
Mar.–May 2003
April 2003
June–Sep. 2003
Sep.–Oct. 2003
Oct 2003
November 2003
April 2004
July 2004
July 2004

Long-term consultant
Peripatetic advisor
Mission
Long-term consultant
Peripatetic advisor
Mission
Multicountry mission
Mission
Peripatetic advisor
Mission

September 2004
September 2004
April 2005
July 2005

Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission

Aug.- Sep. 2005
Oct.–Nov. 2005

Mission
Mission

December 2005
April 2006

Mission
Peripatetic advisor

April - May 2006
October 2006
April 2007
May 2007

Expert
Mission
Mission
Mission

August 2007
August 2007

Mission
Mission

Public expenditure management
Tax administration
Inspection and tripartite review
Public expenditure management
Tax administration
Tax administration
EAC tax harmonization
Customs administration
Tax administration
Public Expenditure Management
Assessment and Action Plan
Review of mining taxation
Tax administration (Zanzibar)
Customs administration
Improve the effectiveness of the
Ministry of Finance
Tax administration
Strengthen macro fiscal analysis at
the Ministry of Finance
Tax policy
Strengthen macro fiscal analysis in
Ministry of Finance
Customs Administration
Customs Administration
Customs Administration
Multi donor revenue
administration review (TMP)
Tax Administration
Strengthening tax administration

8
Department

Legal

Date

Form

October 2007
Oct-Nov 2007

Mission
Mission

March – April, 2003
Sept. 2003
June 2004
July 2004

Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission with MFD

July–November 2004 Desk review

Monetary and
Capital Markets

Feb. 2003

Mission

May 2003
November 2003
March 2004

Mission
Mission
Mission

June 2004
July 2004

Mission
Mission

August 2004

Mission

November 2004
December 2004
May 2005

Mission
Mission
Mission

September 2005

Mission

January 2006

Mission

January 2006
February 2006
December 2006

Mission
Mission
Mission

August 2007

Mission

Oct-Nov 2007

Mission

December 2007

Mission

April 2008

Mission

Purpose
for ZRB
PFMRP strategies and activities
PFM: Review of classification
Income tax law
Income tax law
Income tax law
Central and commercial bank
legislative reform
Foreign Exchange Act, Evidence
Act, Bills of Exchange Ordnance,
National Payment System bill,
Electronic Transactions bill
Pre-FSAP mission
FSAP
FSAP follow-up workshop
Accounting and banking
supervision
BoT accounting
Central and commercial banking
legislation reform with LEG
Financial sector reform/FSAP
follow-up
BoT accounting
Second FSAP follow-up workshop
Financial sector reform/FSAP
follow-up
Credit reference database and
IFRS-generated reports
Monetary and foreign exchange
operations
Problem bank resolution
Prudential regulations
Monetary and foreign exchange
operations
Assessment of MCM TA
implementation
Financial supervision and
regulations
Monetary and foreign exchange
operations
Financial stability analysis and
reporting

9
Department

Statistics

Date

Form

August 2008
January 2009

Mission
Mission

2002–03
August 2003
Jan.-Feb. 2005
October 2005
December 2005
February 2006
November 2006
Oct-Nov 2007
November 2007
November 2007
January 2008
September 2008

Long-term consultant
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission
Mission

Purpose
Foreign Exchange Operations
Financial stability analysis and
reporting
Multisector statistics
Government finance statistics
Monetary statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Technical assistance evaluation
CPI software application
Monetary and financial statistics
Price statistics
BoP and external debt statistics
National accounts statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
Monetary and financial statistics

XIII.
Resident Representative: Mr. David O. Robinson has been the Senior Resident
Representative since March 2007.

10
APPENDIX II: TANZANIA— JOINT BANK-FUND WORK PROGRAM
MAY 2009–MAY 2010
Title

Products

Provisional
timing of
missions
(if relevant)

Expected
delivery date

A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
Key elements of
World Bank
work program in
next 12 months

In conjunction with the multi-donor
Joint Assistance Strategy for Tanzania
(JAST), Poverty Reduction Support
Credits to enhance productivity and
competitiveness, effective delivery of
social services, public sector
management, and human development
issues.

June 2009

The work program will continue to
concentrate on areas within the
existing portfolio: primary, secondary,
and higher education; health sector
development; water and sanitation;
social action fund; agriculture;
forestry; environment; road and
railway infrastructure; power sector
restructuring; fiscal decentralization;
private sector competitiveness; and
public sector reform.

Continuous

Analysis of the micro-impediments to
shared-growth, with a focus on rural
areas.

August 2009

November 2009

Public Expenditure Review with the
focus on rapid budget analysis.
IMF work
program in next
12 months

Article IV and Fifth PSI Review

March 2009

May 2009

Sixth PSI Review

September 2009

November 2009

Seventh PSI Review

March 2010

May 2010

11

B. Requests for work program inputs
Fund request to 1. Assessment of key infrastructure
Bank
projects and sectoral programs.

Continuous

Bank requests
to Fund

1. Monitoring of government
contracting of non-concessional
borrowing.

Continuous

2. Monitoring of steps to strengthen
corporate governance of the BoT.

Continuous

3. Sharing macro-framework updates

Continuous

4. Statement of fiscal risk and
contingent liabilities

October 2009

C. Agreement on joint products and missions
Joint products
in next 12
months

1. Collaborate on the Joint DSA.

March 2009

2. Collaborate on financial sector reform
program (FSAP).

September 2009 November 2009

3. Collaborate together with other
development partners on the annual
review of general budget support.

November 2009

4. Collaborate on PFM reform program
in the context of multi-donor support of
the Public Financial Management
Reform Program.

May 2009

November 2009

Continuous

12
APPENDIX III—TANZANIA—STATISTICAL ISSUES APPENDIX
As of May 7, 2009
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision is adequate for surveillance and program monitoring purposes. Progress was made
toward the adoption of the broader reporting forms for monetary/financial sector data and toward the
subscription to SDDS. However, weaknesses remain in some areas. There are few statistical publications and no
fully articulated publication policy. Only limited data are reported for Zanzibar. E.AFRITAC and other donors
provides extensive assistance in strengthening statistics; the Tanzanian Statistical Master Plan provides a
comprehensive basis for enhancing quality and timeliness of data; and a national panel survey has been initiated
which will provide more regular information on living standards.
National Accounts: National accounts statistics for mainland Tanzania are prepared by the National Bureau of
Statistics (NBS). Separate accounts are compiled for Zanzibar by the Office of the Chief Government
Statistician for Zanzibar. The data sources for estimating national accounts by expenditure category and the
indicators used to extrapolate benchmark production levels suffer from deficiencies that complicate estimation
of saving-investment. The accounts are based on the 1993 System of National Accounts (1993 SNA) and are
published at current and constant (2001) prices. To improve the quality of the national accounts changed the
base year of the national accounts from 1992 to 2001. The revised series were published in September 2007.
They are based on the Household Budget Survey (HBS) 2000/01, the Integrated Labor Force Survey 2000/01,
and the Annual Survey of Industrial Production 1999/2000. The results of a new HBS, which were released in
2008 (http://www.nbs.go.tz/HBS/Main_Report2007.htm). The authorities intend to use them as a base to revise
the national account weights.
East AFRITAC has been providing training and assistance in the compilation of quarterly national accounts
(QNA), a key element for subscribing to SDDS. QNA at current prices since 2001 have been compiled, but not
yet released. As per the annual national accounts, the series suffer from weaknesses regarding source data.
Prices: The NBS compiles a monthly consumer price index (CPI) for mainland Tanzania based on consumer
expenditure in 20 urban centers. A separate price index is compiled for Zanzibar. The mainland CPI has, since
September 2004, been compiled (retroactively to January 2003) using weights based on the 2000/01 HBS data.
The methodology was revised in September 2006, but the CPI series have not been backdated.
The price index calculated by the latest HBS points to significantly higher inflation than recorded in CPI.
However, the HBS index is a very narrow basket of food items with a couple of nonfood items and excludes for
example consumer durables where prices have fallen. The discrepancies do though point to key weaknesses in
the statistical database—CPI is calculated fairly narrowly on the basis of urban centers whereas bulk of
population live in rural areas. The NBS intends to rebase the CPI in light of the HBS results.
Government finance statistics: The authorities provide Fund missions with monthly data on central
government revenue, expenditure, and financing on a timely basis. Although the underlying concepts broadly
follow the Government Finance Statistics Manual 1986, the reporting differs from international standards in
coverage and the treatment of lending minus repayments, and transfer payments. Coverage of data on the
operations of the central government refers to Tanzania mainland only – recently the Ministry of Finance of
Zanzibar established a unit tasked with developing a fiscal reporting framework for Zanzibar. The data also
exclude the operations of extra-budgetary units and funds. Data for general government are not available as no
information is yet provided on the financial position of local governments, although the authorities have stated
their intention to produce such reports.
Despite improvements in the recording of government transactions, discrepancies remain between revenue and
expenditure data, on the one hand, and financing data. The discrepancies are related to the lack of a fully
integrated set of accounts and the delineation of the public sector and its sub-sectors, differing source data, and

13
timing differences.
The Ministry of Finance created a database of donor-funded projects in 2001/02 (July-June), with donor
assistance. Since then, the number of foreign-financed projects reported by and channeled through the budget
has increased significantly.
The government has completed the computerization of its accounting system for budgetary units. Although the
authorities indicated that it would allow resumption of reporting in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook
(GFSY), no data were reported for the 2007 GFSY. The computerized accounting system does not yet provide
details about donor funded development expenditure and has not yet been extended to cover the extra-budgetary
units. The authorities regularly report fiscal data for inclusion in the IFS.
Monetary statistics: The monetary statistics are broadly adequate for policy and analytical purposes.
Nevertheless, the December 2006 and January 2008 missions confirmed earlier findings of methodological
problems, such as (a) exclusion of some deposit-taking financial institutions from the institutional coverage of
depository corporations survey, (b) arbitrary application of the residency criterion by the other depository
corporations (ODCs), (c) inadequate subdivision of the resident sector data, (d) misclassification of certain
accounting data among statistical aggregates, (e) discrepancies between reported interbank positions,
(f) nontransparent treatment of repurchase agreements, and (g) key information gaps in the bank reporting
system.
To address these problems, recommendations were made to improve the following definitions: net international
reserves, foreign assets, foreign liabilities, loans to other resident sectors, claims on the central government,
government deposits, central bank liabilities to commercial banks, and deposits included in broad money. The
missions also recommended (a) introducing the standardized report forms─1SR for central bank’s accounts and
2SR for ODCs’ accounts to be reported to the IMF; (b) that two new schedules for reporting of data by
commercial banks be introduced to fully satisfy compilation needs, in particular with respect to the sectoral
breakdown and application of residency criterion in the classification of financial instruments used by the ODCs
in their activities; and (c) the expansion of the ODCs to include other deposit-taking financial institutions, such
as Tanzania Investment Bank, Tanzania Postal Bank, Twinga Bancorp Limited, Mufindi Community Bank, and
Mwanga Community Bank.
Balance of payments statistics: Foreign trade data are prepared by Fund staff missions on the basis of customs
data provided by the Bank of Tanzania (BOT), which in turn are compiled by the Tanzania Revenue Authority
(TRA) based on customs records. A balance of payments statistics mission in May 2002 found continued and
significant under-recording of trade and a dearth of information on services. The authorities acknowledged these
problems in their response to the data ROSC report published in March 2004 and indicated that the BOT plans
to commission a joint study by the NBS and the TRA to determine the magnitude of underrecorded trade and
design an appropriate method of estimation. Re-exports are now included in trade data. Balance of payments
statistics are reported annually to STA for publication in the IFS, along with the annual International Investment
Position (IIP).
Tourism revenues are estimated using the model that was developed from the International Visitor’s Exit Survey
conducted in 2001. Information on official grant and loan receipts is prepared by Fund staff based on contacts
with official agencies. The data on current and capital transfers (grants) are estimates, based on data provided
by the Ministry of Finance and United Nations Development Program projections. Disaggregation of the data
has improved, but more work is needed including on the coverage and periodicity of data.
Data on private “financial” flows are scarce. Some information on private banking sector flows can be derived
from the monetary survey, but private “financial” flows are not adequately captured through the International
Transaction Reporting System and are largely reflected in “errors and omissions.” However, the authorities have
made commendable progress in collecting information on certain components. The results of the Private Capital

14
Flows Survey for 2000 and 2004 have now been incorporated into the balance of payments and IIP accounts,
which improved estimates of foreign direct investment inflows as well as dividend payments and distributed
branch profits. The Private Capital Flows Survey is designed to capture information on foreign direct investment
and also asks investors to report committed and projected (for the near future) direct investment flows.
Data on the gross and net official reserves of the Bank of Tanzania are provided monthly with a short lag, and
are available to the Fund with higher frequency on request. Similarly, data on the foreign assets and liabilities of
the banking system are provided with relatively short lags.
Significant improvements in the quality of external debt data have been made in the context of the creditor
reconciliation exercise under the HIPC Initiative. At present, all multilateral and Paris Club debts (accounting
for about 80 percent of total external debt) have been fully reconciled. However, less progress has been made in
reconciling debt owed to other bilateral and commercial creditors. Information on external debt not guaranteed
by the public sector, mostly private sector debt, is also limited and not captured in a timely manner.
East AFRITAC has provided assistance in international investment position statistics, most recently in March
2007. The missions have worked on training, questionnaires, and revised guidelines for international transaction
dealers.

II. Data Standards and Quality
Subscriber to the Fund’s General Data Dissemination
System (GDDS). GDDS metadata were posted on the
IMF’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board
(DSBB) in July 2001 and were updated in September
2007. Tanzania is participating in the SDDS and
government finance statistics modules of the Fund’s
GDDS Project for Anglophone Africa (funded by the
U.K. Department for International Development
(DFID)).

A mission to prepare the data module for the Report
on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC)
was completed in October 2002. The report was
published in March 2004.

TANZANIA: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(AS OF END-APRIL 2009)
Date of latest
observation

Frequency of
6
data

Frequency
of
6
reporting

Frequency of
6
publication

D, M

D, M

D, M

D, M

D, M

M

May 2009

May. 2009

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

March 2009

April 2009

Reserve/Base Money

May 2009

May 2009

D, M

D, M

M

Broad Money

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

M

Interest Rates

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

...

...

...

...

...

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

March 2009

April 2009

M

M

Q

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

February 2009

March 2009

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

February 2009

March 2009

M

M

M

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

February 2009

March 2009

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

2008

May 2009

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

February 2009

March 2009

M

M

M

A

A

A

International Investment Position

2007

…

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
7
soundness

Data Quality Accuracy
8
and reliability

LO, LO, LO, LO

LO, O, O, O, LO

O, LO, O, LO

LNO, LNO, LNO, O, O

LNO, LNO, LNO,
LO

LO, O, O, LO, O

LO, LO, LO, LO

LO, LNO, O, LNO, LNO

LO, LO, LO, LO

LNO, LNO, O, LO, LO

15

Exchange Rates

2

1

Date received

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)..
7
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published March 23, 2004 and based on the findings of the October 8–23, 2002 mission for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The
assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely
not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
8
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and
statistical outputs, and revision studies
2

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/72
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 2, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with
The United Republic of Tanzania
On May 29, 2009 the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Tanzania. 1
Background
Tanzania sustained high rates of broad-based economic growth with generally low inflation over
the past decade. Real GDP growth averaged about 7 percent a year during 2000–08, with
substantial contributions from the mining, manufacturing, construction, and services sectors.
Inflation was kept solidly in check for much of this period, but accelerated in 2008 (13.5 percent
at end-year), driven mainly by lagged effects of the spike in international food and fuel prices
and adverse regional food supply shocks. In contrast, nonfood inflation remained modest
(5.8 percent). Sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, together with a favorable
global environment and debt relief, provided the foundation for this successful outcome.
Despite the strong macroeconomic performance, progress on poverty reduction was mixed.
There were substantial improvements in education and health outcomes, a significant increase
in household assets, and improved residences. Nonetheless, the incidence of income poverty
has declined only modestly.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
The current global financial crisis and recession have begun to have a significant impact on
Tanzania in 2009. Weakened demand for exports of goods and services—notably traditional
cash crops and tourism—and a contraction of foreign investment are hitting key sectors of the
economy. Real GDP growth is expected to drop to 4-5 percent this year, and downside risks
remain. Moreover, Tanzania’s recovery from this economic slowdown is likely to be gradual, as
demand for its exports and foreign investment are expected to lag behind a global recovery.
The economic slowdown has weakened government revenue performance. After five years of
robust growth, revenues have stagnated (relative to GDP) and are falling well short of the
budget target in the current fiscal year (July–June). To maintain expenditures as budgeted, the
overall fiscal deficit (before grants) is expected to widen to 10½ percent of GDP in 2009/10,
providing some fiscal stimulus to the economy. The economic slowdown is also expected to
affect the financial system. While banks are currently well-capitalized and non-performing loans
have remained at a low level, credit risk is likely to increase. The balance of payments is also
under pressure, as the positive effects from the decline in international oil prices and strong gold
prices have been more than offset by lower receipts from falling exports of other goods and
services and reduced capital inflows.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Tanzanian authorities for a good track record of sound
macroeconomic policies and structural reforms. This strong performance has helped to sustain
high rates of economic growth with generally low inflation for several years, as well as create
sufficient fiscal space to allow for policy actions to help counter the impact of the current global
economic crisis. A broadening in the domestic revenue base, together with substantial donor
assistance, allowed for a strong increase in government spending over the past decade,
particularly on programs to reduce poverty. Directors were concerned, however, that despite
some important gains, progress in poverty reduction has been mixed.
Directors noted that the global financial crisis is having a serious impact on Tanzania. Real GDP
growth is expected to fall significantly in 2009, as key sectors of the economy, including
exported cash crops and tourism, face a severe downturn. Cutbacks in foreign direct investment
and other financing will also weaken aggregate demand. Directors agreed that the authorities’
expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in the current situation are appropriate to cushion the
effects of the crisis on Tanzania. At the same time, they emphasized that short-term policies
must not jeopardize Tanzania’s hard-won economic stability. Fiscal stimulus should remain
consistent with long-term fiscal and debt sustainability, monetary easing should not put at risk
medium-term price stability, and international reserve losses should be contained, consistent
with external stability. In this context, Directors encouraged the authorities to make progress in
strengthening their medium-term fiscal policy framework.
Directors observed that the banking sector is sound but vulnerabilities remain in some areas.
Banks are well capitalized and non-performing loans remain at a low level. Nonetheless, the

3
economic slowdown will raise banks’ credit risks, notably through their exposure to export crop
financing and personal loans, which have been growing rapidly in recent years. Welcomed
steps have already been taken to raise supervisory standards, but more can be done to
broaden monitoring to all financial institutions, and reinforce cross-border coordination between
host country and home country supervisors. Directors stressed the crucial importance of having
an effective system in place for financial supervision of the rapidly growing pension funds, and
encouraged the authorities to accelerate progress in this area.
Executive Directors stressed the importance of raising Tanzania’s medium-term growth
potential, underpinned by continued implementation of structural reforms. They welcomed the
ongoing preparations for the update of the national poverty reduction strategy (MKUKUTA), and
agreed with the authorities’ key priorities to raise agricultural productivity and improve
Tanzania’s ailing infrastructure. This will require further improvements in the revenue base as
well as significant financing, including from the public sector. Concessional financing remains
the preferred funding source, consistent with medium-term debt sustainability.
Directors emphasized that strong public financial management is critical to ensuring that public
spending is as effective as possible and to avoiding the re-accumulation of unsustainable public
debt. Important steps have already been taken, for example to strengthen budgeting and public
procurement practices, but further scope remains to raise value for money.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4
Tanzania: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006/07–2010/11
2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

2010/11

Prel.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP growth (calendar year, at market prices)1
Real GDP growth (fiscal year, at market prices)
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
External sector
Export, f.o.b (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Imports, f.o.b. (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Nominal effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -)2
Real effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -)2

6.7
6.9
6.3
5.8

7.1
7.3
8.4
9.3

7.5
6.2
12.0
11.0

5.0
5.3
7.7
6.0

5.7
6.4
5.2
5.0

2,060
-4,336
-6.6
19.2
1.7
-4.9

2,609
-5,667
6.2
13.3
-7.4
3.9

2,891
-5,955
7.3
1.8
14.1
5.6

2,860
-5,841
-1.2
7.4
9.7
...

2,961
-6,001
2.1
-2.5
-3.8
...

-3.2

5.7

15.1

...

...

20.1
12.2
36.3
36.2
4.1
16.0

18.1
4.6
41.0
34.7
3.9
8.2

22.0
2.7
46.4
39.8
3.7
11.0

20.0
1.2
36.6
28.7
3.5
…

…
…
…
…
…
…

3

Money and credit
Broad money (M3)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to nongovernment sector
Velocity of money (GDP/M3; average)
4
Treasury bill interest rate (in percent; end of period)

(Percent of GDP)
Public Finance
Revenue (excluding grants)
Total grants
Expenditure (including adjustment to cash)
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Domestic financing
Stock of domestic debt (end of period)

14.1
4.9
23.9
-8.9
1.2
12.8

15.9
6.9
24.4
-6.9
-1.5
13.4

15.8
5.5
26.3
-10.5
1.2
12.5

16.3
5.7
27.2
-10.9
1.6
12.6

16.8
5.5
27.7
-10.9
1.0
12.2

Savings and investment1
Resource gap
Investment
Government
Nongovernment5

-13.1
27.6
8.4
19.3

-16.9
29.6
10.0
19.7

-16.9
31.8
10.7
21.1

-15.9
30.8
11.6
19.2

-15.6
31.9
12.2
19.7

Gross domestic savings

14.5

12.8

14.9

14.9

16.3

-13.2
-9.9

-14.0
-10.6

-12.0
-8.9

-12.6
-9.3

-12.3
-8.8

External sector
Current account balance (excluding current transfers)
Current account balance (including current transfers)

(Millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
Current account balance (excluding current transfers; deficit -)
Overall balance of payments (deficit -)
Gross official reserves
In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
External debt (percent of GDP)

-2,005
286
2,157
3.6
20.5

-2,675
501
2,660
4.2
24.8

-2,580
-132
2,766
4.4
25.1

-2,844
-108
2,748
4.2
25.3

Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Data are on calendar year basis. For example, 2005/06 data are for calendar year 2005.
Figures for 2008/09 reflect change up to March 2009.
3
Figures for 2008/09 reflect new series based on the Fund's 2000 Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual.
4
End-year (June) monthly weighted-average yield of 35-, 91-, 182-, and 364-day treasury bills. For 2008/09, figure is for April 2009.
5
Including change in stocks.
2

-2,996
-84
2,663
3.9
26.7

5

Press Release No. 09/190
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 29, 2009

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves US$336 Million Exogenous Shocks Facility
Arrangement for Tanzania and Completes Fifth Review Under the Policy Support
Instrument
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today approved a 12-month,
SDR 218.79 million (about US$336 million) arrangement for Tanzania under the Fund’s
Exogenous Shocks Facility (ESF) to cushion the country from the effects of the global
economic crisis. The first disbursement amounting to SDR 159.12 million (about
US$244 million) is immediately available.
The IMF financing will bolster Tanzania’s foreign reserves and support its balance of
payments, which have been undermined by a 26-percent fall in the price for cotton, a major
export, and by a severe downturn in tourism and foreign direct investment.
The ESF is designed to provide policy support and financial assistance to low-income
countries facing exogenous but temporary shocks. It is available to countries eligible for the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)—the IMF's main instrument for financial
assistance to low-income countries—but that do not have a PRGF-supported program in
place. Financing terms are equivalent to a PRGF arrangement and are more concessional than
under other IMF emergency lending facilities.
The IMF’s Executive Board also completed the fifth review under Tanzania’s Policy Support
Instrument (PSI), in which Fund staff work with the authorities to design effective economic
programs without a formal financing arrangement.
Following the Executive Board’s discussion of Tanzania, Mr. Murilo Portugal, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Tanzania’s track record of sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms over the
past decade has helped to sustain high rates of economic growth with generally low inflation.
However, despite some important gains, progress in poverty reduction has been mixed.

2

“The global financial crisis is having a serious impact on Tanzania. Real GDP growth is
expected to fall significantly in 2009, as key sectors of the economy, including exported cash
crops and tourism, face a severe downturn and cutbacks in foreign investment weaken
aggregate demand. The authorities’ expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in the current
situation are appropriate to cushion the effects of the crisis. But short-term policies must not
jeopardize Tanzania’s hard-won economic stability, which requires containment of
inflationary pressures and long-term fiscal sustainability.
“The banking sector is sound, but vulnerabilities remain in some areas. Banks are well
capitalized and non-performing loans remain at a low level. But the economic slowdown will
raise banks’ credit risk, and the steps already taken to raise supervisory standards need to be
reinforced, especially for the fast-growing pension funds.
“Raising Tanzania’s medium-term growth potential must remain paramount. The ongoing
preparations for the update of the national poverty reduction strategy (MKUKUTA)
scheduled to be completed in early 2010 are timely and welcome. Key priorities include
raising agricultural productivity and improving Tanzania’s ailing infrastructure, which will
require significant financing. Concessional financing remains the preferred funding source,
consistent with medium-term debt sustainability. Strong public financial management will be
critical to ensuring value for money and to avoiding the re-accumulation of unsustainable
debt,” Mr. Portugal said.

Statement by Samuel P.O. Itam, Executive Director for
United Republic of Tanzania
May 29, 2009
Introduction
1.
My Tanzanian authorities have persevered with prudent macroeconomic policies and
deepened structural reforms inspite of the challenging external environment. Reflecting this stance,
they remain confident that the impacts of the external shocks that have dampened economic growth
and worsened balance of payments will be reversed in the medium-term as appropriate measures are
implemented and the external environment improves. To meet the short-term balance of payments
needs, Tanzania is requesting a twelve-month arrangement under the high access component of the
ESF. My authorities are thankful to the Fund for the constructive engagement and support, and
appreciate staff’s forthright policy dialogue and advice under the program supported by the PSI.
2.
At end-December 2008, all the quantitative assessment criteria were observed, with the
exception of the ceiling on government’s net domestic financing, which was narrowly missed.
Further, implementation of structural benchmarks was broadly on track, and program targets for
2009 are expected to be achieved. In view of the strong performance under the program, the
authorities request Directors’ support for the completion of the fifth review of the PSI and the
associated waiver.
Recent economic developments
3.
Tanzania’s impressive economic performance, that had been uninterrupted over the past
decade reflective of the continuous economic reforms, is now threatened by the adverse effects of
the global economic slowdown. Real GDP growth, that was 7.5 percent in 2008 on account of
strong performance in the key economic sectors, is now estimated to decline significantly to 4-5
percent in 2009 as a result of a severe external shock on Tanzania’s exports. Deterioration in the
external environment has generated significant pressures on the country’s balance of payments.
International reserves have since declined substantially as a result of falling exports and reduced
capital inflows.
.
4.
The fiscal outturn in 2008/09 reflects the challenges the country is facing. Revenue is
estimated to stagnate relative to GDP, resulting in a budgetary shortfall of 2 percent of GDP. This is
despite consistent efforts to broaden the tax base, implement structural reforms expeditiously, and
strengthen customs and tax administration. Though the authorities are determined to sustain the
level of spending under the major recurrent expenditure categories, the revenue shortfall may impact
on the overall budget execution. However, lower rates of treasury bills yields continued to generate
significant interest cost savings, and development expenditure has benefited from accelerated
disbursement of foreign project financing. Hence, the deterioration in the overall fiscal balance is
expected to be only about 1 percentage point of GDP over the program target.
5.
The monetary framework of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) has continued to be guided by
its strategy that includes a mix of policy instruments for sterilization of liquidity and broadening of
monetary policy transparency. To that end, treasury bills and bonds auctions were complemented

2
with frequent sales of foreign exchange and increased use of repo instruments. As a result, reserve
money growth remained on track, and the Treasury bills yields remained at their lowest levels.
Despite the tighter monetary policy stance, the banking system continued to meet the strong demand
for private sector credit. Inflation, which had edged up in 2008 due to the surge in global food and
fuel prices, is expected to moderate in response to declining global prices, and sustained prudent
fiscal and monetary policies.
6.
The country’s financial system has remained resilient to the global financial crisis, mainly
due to its limited exposure and well supervised and capitalized banks. However, the exposure of the
banking system to trade financing (crops, horticulture, and other products) and personal loans poses
significant risks from the effects of the economic downturn. The high proportion of foreign owned
banks in the banking system also poses additional risks in terms of the potential for curtailing
operations by these banks as economic uncertainties and the global financial crisis persist.
Policy response
7.
On the fiscal front, the authorities have opted for a small fiscal stimulus in order to
minimize the adverse effects of the current economic slowdown, but remain committed to a nearand medium-term macroeconomic framework that aims at minimizing the downside risks, and
restoring growth to its previous trajectory. To achieve these objectives, measures are to sustain
budgetary spending levels for the 2008/09 financial year, scale-up investment in infrastructure to
shore-up economic growth, and deepen structural reforms to improve the business environment. To
maintain spending at the budgeted levels and to boost spending on infrastructure and programs that
directly raise agricultural productivity, the fiscal anchor will be shifted from a net domestic finance
of zero to a modest 1.2 percent of GDP. The authorities will take additional fiscal stimulus measures
in the context of the 2009/10 budget to further address the second-round effects of the global
economic crisis, support the recovery of the economy and implement their poverty reducing
policies. While aiming at providing adequate fiscal stimulus in light of the country’s low level of
public debt, the authorities are mindful of the need to maintain debt sustainability and overall
macroeconomic stability.
8.
These fiscal measures will be further supported by the easing of the stance of monetary
policy. This will facilitate maintenance of credit to the private sector at the current levels for the
medium-term. To achieve the objective of anchoring its monetary policy on low and stable inflation,
the BoT will further bolster its open market operations, maintain a flexible exchange rate policy,
rely substantially on foreign exchange sales for sterilization of liquidity, and continue to improve
liquidity forecasting. The BoT is also committed to maintain the transparency of its policy stance
and promote orderly financial markets. Coordination between fiscal and monetary policies will be
further strengthened to obtain an appropriate policy mix for liquidity management and to anchor
inflation expectations and increase absorption of public funds, while minimizing interest rate and
exchange rate
volatility.
9.
The scaling up of investments in infrastructure and social sectors is part of the overall
strategy to raise productivity and long-term growth. Increased allocations will be financed by the

3
resources from development partners and other financing options including sovereign bonds, publicprivate partnerships (PPPs), and domestic borrowing. To this end, the authorities are preparing a
medium-term public investment program (MPIP) to guide its investment in infrastructure, with
particular focus on transportation, energy and water sectors. As indicated earlier, the authorities are
particularly mindful of the potential fiscal and debt sustainability implications of the various
financing options, and, to that end, projects to be included in the MPIP shall be based on detailed
economic and social impact appraisals. Further, debt management will be strengthened to handle
exotic debt instruments (PPPs, bonds, etc.).
10.
The gains achieved so far on structural reforms will be consolidated. In particular
progress on PFM, financial sector, public accountability and macroeconomic stability are to be
accelerated. Also, the authorities are determined to continue improving the overall investment
climate that will further facilitate private sector development, attract and retain FDI, boost domestic
entrepreneurship and sustain high economic growth. In addition to prudent macroeconomic and
financial policies, the implementation of the reform program will be deepened. The capacities of
procurement units in all ministries and the public debt management units in all institutions are being
strengthened to deal adequately with the evolving environment.
11.
The BoT is also undertaking a fundamental review of its core functions, with a view to
developing and implementing a strategy for refocusing its operations in the near term. In this regard,
the review of the existing regulatory framework governing capital account transactions has been
completed and, on this basis, the BoT has prepared an action plan for a gradual and realistic
liberalization of capital account transactions. The authorities are especially mindful that capital
account restrictions have, thus far, sheltered the economy from the inherent shocks but remain open
to benefit from the experiences of the successful liberalizers.
12.
The authorities are committed to strengthen implementation of the second-generation
financial sector reforms with a view to deepening and broadening financial intermediation. To this
end, they have implemented a number of measures including enacting the Social Security Bill that
creates a single Social Security Regulatory Authority for the pension sector and assigned to the BoT
the responsibility of establishing investment guidelines, and a legal framework for mortgage
financing. In preparation of the guidelines, the BoT has made commitment to expeditiously assess
the financial health of the pension funds, and has prepared an initial financial stability report.
Conclusion
13.
The authorities’ continued commitment to strong policies under the program has yielded
robust economic performance, with substantial progress on all fronts, but most of these are now
under threat from the impact of the global financial and economic crisis. They are aware of these
risks and have responded appropriately with a mix of modest fiscal stimulus and monetary policy
easing, as well as further reforms to consolidate the progress. In the near term, the authorities are
determined to ensure that the program focuses on sustaining macroeconomic stability, enhancing
domestic resource mobilization, promoting broad-based and pro-poor growth, and increasing
investment in infrastructure and core MDG clusters. In line with the MKUKUTA objectives and
Tanzania Vision 2025, the authorities are determined to ensure that the economy returns to its

4
growth trajectory in the near- to medium-term. Going forward, continued engagement with the
Fund and the support of development partners will enable the achievement of Tanzania’s
development goals, including poverty reduction and the MDGs. The authorities will continue to
assess the impact of the global economic crisis on their economy with a view to sharpening
responses.

