May 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/154

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

Colombia: 2005 Article IV Consultation and Fourth Review Under the Stand-By
Arrangement, Requests for Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria and the
Completion of the Fourth Review, and Request for Stand-By Arrangement—Staff
Reports; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board
Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Colombia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV
consultation with Colombia and the fourth review under the Stand-By Arrangement, and requests for
a new Stand-By Arrangement, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

the staff reports for 2005 Article IV Consultation and the fourth review under the Stand-By
Arrangement, requests for waiver of nonobservance of performance criteria and the
completion of the fourth review, and request for Stand-By Arrangement, prepared by a staff
team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on February 17, 2005, with the officials of
Colombia on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the
time of these discussions, the staff reports were completed on April 14, 2005. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its April 29, 2005, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Colombia.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Colombia*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of Colombia*
Selected Issues Paper
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*May also be included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
COLOMBIA
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005
Consultation with Colombia
Approved by José Fajgenbaum and Carlo Cottarelli
April 14, 2005
Two staff reports. The policy discussions covered a broad assessment of policies and objectives
from a medium-term perspective as well as issues related to the Fund-supported programs. This report
presents the discussions for the Article IV consultation. It is a complement to the paper that reviews
performance under the current SBA and presents the authorities’ request for a new SBA.
Financial sector assessment. An FSAP update mission visited Bogotá in October 2004 and prepared
an FSSA for consideration by the Executive Board.
2002 Article IV Consultation. At the conclusion of the last Article IV discussion, Directors urged
strict implementation of policies aimed at fiscal consolidation and debt reduction. They emphasized
the importance of streamlining the tax system and of reducing the size of the public sector; and
encouraged steps to increase labor market flexibility for raising growth in a sustained way. Directors
also commended the central bank for its skillful management of the inflation targeting regime, and
welcomed progress achieved in strengthening the banking system.
Exchange system. The exchange rate regime is a managed float. In 2004, Colombia accepted the
obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. The authorities have not indicated a timetable to
remove the special foreign exchange regime for hydrocarbons exporters and the tax on remittances
abroad of nonresident income. Staff does not recommend the approval of these restrictions.
Statistical issues. Colombia’s statistical base is adequate for effective program monitoring and
surveillance. However, the timeliness and comprehensiveness of fiscal data need to be improved.
Discussions. A staff team held discussions in Bogotá during December 1–10, 2004 and during
February 3–17, 2005. The team met with the Minister of Finance, the General Manager and the Board
of Directors of the Banco de la República, the Director of the National Planning Department, other
senior government officials, and representatives of the private sector and labor unions. The staff team
comprised R. Rennhack (Head), R. Garcia-Saltos, O. Hendrick (all WHD), I. Adenauer (FAD), and J.
Wiegand (PDR). C. Schnure (WHD), J. Cayazzo (MFD), and J. Acevedo (MFD-consultant) joined
the first stage. Li Lian Ong (ICM) joined the second stage. J. Fajgenbaum (WHD) participated in the
February policy discussions. Mr. Steiner, Alternate Executive Director for Colombia, participated in
all policy discussions.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. From Crisis to Recovery.........................................................................................................4
II. Assessing The Medium-Term Policy Strategy......................................................................6
A. Strengthening Growth and Employment...................................................................7
B. Sustaining Fiscal Structural Reforms........................................................................7
C. Continuing to Reduce Inflation ...............................................................................11
D. Creating A More Effective Financial Sector...........................................................13
III. Short-Term Macroeconomic Outlook................................................................................14
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................15
Boxes
1. The Economic Crisis of 1999 ..............................................................................................17
2. Security Situation.................................................................................................................18
3. Pension Reforms ..................................................................................................................19
4. Poverty .................................................................................................................................20
5. Financing Higher Investment...............................................................................................21
6. Inflation Targeting (IT) Regimes in Latin America ............................................................22
7. Financial System Stability Assessment Update: Main Findings .........................................23
8. The Financial Transactions Tax (FTT) ................................................................................24
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators .......................................................................25
2. Medium-Term Outlook........................................................................................................26
3. Selected Vulnerability Indicators.........................................................................................27
4. Summary Balance of Payments, 2000–08 ...........................................................................28
5. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–2010.........................................................29
6. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–2010.................................................30
7. Social Indicators...................................................................................................................31
Appendices
I. Fund Relations......................................................................................................................32
II. Relations with the World Bank ..........................................................................................34
III. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank .....................................................36
IV. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................38

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Since 1999, Colombia has been pursuing a medium-term strategy based on fiscal
consolidation, lowering inflation, and strengthening the financial system. By 2003–04,
substantial progress had been achieved in these areas, and economic performance improved
significantly.
Nonetheless, there are still important challenges to continue to strengthen economic
performance. These include the need to translate steady economic growth into continued
declines in unemployment and poverty, sustain the pace of fiscal consolidation; and continue
to strengthen financial supervision and deepen domestic capital markets.
Overall, it was agreed that the policy strategy had worked well and was well suited to
meet these challenges. Policies would continue to seek to sustain real growth of 4 percent a
year, while gradually lowering inflation to 2–4 percent a year. Fiscal policy will keep public
debt on a sustainable path. The central bank would continue to target inflation, while
maintaining the flexible exchange rate regime to help the external sector adapt to possible
shifts in conditions.
Public debt would decline to close to 40 percent of GDP by 2010. The authorities estimate
that a primary surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP is consistent with this path, but they stand ready
to adjust the primary surplus as needed to achieve this objective. It was agreed that the
agenda for fiscal structural reforms over the medium term includes tax policy, pensions,
domestic pricing of gasoline and diesel, social spending, revenue sharing, and public
investment.
Monetary policy would continue to be conducted in the context of the inflation targeting
framework, together with the flexible exchange rate regime. The staff supported the
authorities’ goal of reducing inflation by ½ percent point a year until annual inflation reaches
the range of 2–4 percent.
The staff judged that external competitiveness seemed broadly adequate. In 2004, export
growth was broad based and the external current account deficit was low. To prevent a
recurrence of past episodes of large real appreciations followed by economic difficulties, the
central bank had been purchasing foreign exchange since late 2003. However, they
emphasized that the Banco de la República would always give top priority to achieving its
inflation target. The staff urged the authorities to guard against excessive foreign exchange
intervention, which could raise inflation or create quasi-fiscal costs from sterilization.
The authorities agreed with the main conclusions of the FSSA update. The
Superintendency of Financial Institutions intends to continue strengthening the legal and
regulatory framework, especially by improving the measurement of market and other risks
and of the value of foreclosed assets. The government is seeking congressional approval of a
securities market law designed to deepen domestic capital markets.

-4-

I. FROM CRISIS TO RECOVERY
1.
Since 1999, economic policies have sought to strengthen the economy, in the
aftermath of the country’s worst economic crisis in 30 years (Box 1). 1 The strategy
focused on fiscal consolidation, lowering inflation, and strengthening the financial system. In
mid-1999 the government of President Pastrana designed an economic emergency program
to re-establish a credible policy framework. The authorities aimed at cutting the public sector
deficit from 5½ to 1½ percent of GDP within three years to return public debt to a
sustainable path. This effort was supported by structural fiscal reforms to strengthen the
finances of subnational governments, which had accumulated high debt levels in previous
years, and to improve the tax and pension systems. In September 1999, the Banco de la
República switched to a flexible exchange rate regime, and adopted an inflation targeting
framework to anchor inflationary expectations. The crawling exchange rate band—which
Colombia had maintained for most of the 1990s—had proved ineffective in reducing
inflation and too costly to sustain in the presence of volatile private capital inflows. Congress
approved a banking reform to strengthen financial supervision, and the government
intervened a number of insolvent financial institutions.
2.
The efforts worked well initially but encountered difficulties in 2002. The fiscal
tightening advanced through early 2002, although the fiscal targets were eased in 2001 due to
slower economic growth and increased security requirements. President Pastrana had been
attempting to negotiate a peace agreement with the guerillas, but this effort collapsed in
February 2002, coinciding with a deterioration in the security situation (Box 2). Public
spending increased in the run up to the May 2002 elections. In addition, Colombia was
affected by concerns about developments elsewhere in the region, which curtailed access to
international capital markets for a number of emerging market countries. Together these
factors contributed to a sharp depreciation of the currency and raised the country risk
premium to a peak of 1,100 basis points in October 2002.
3.
In August 2002 the administration of President Uribe took office and
strengthened economic policies. It quickly reversed the deterioration in the fiscal position
through several revenue measures (a one-time wealth tax, an income tax surcharge, and a
broadening of the VAT base) and expenditure restraint. Two pension reforms were also
adopted, reducing the actuarial deficit of the pension system from 207 percent of GDP to
187 percent of GDP. Other reforms focused on restructuring and downsizing the nonfinancial
public sector, improving financial supervision, and privatizing or liquidating the remaining
public banks. Congress also approved in December 2002 a labor market reform that extended
regular daytime working hours, lowered the overtime premium for work on Sundays and
holidays, reduced severance payments, and cut nonwage costs for certain employee groups.
1

The Fund has provided support through a three-year Extended Fund Facility approved in December 1999 and
a two-year Stand-By Arrangement approved in January 2003.

-5-

In addition, the Uribe administration established a policy known as democratic security to try
to resolve the civil strife.
4.
Initially the recovery proceeded slowly but in 2003–04 economic performance
improved significantly (Table 1).
•

Real economic growth recovered to 4 percent a year in 2003–04, compared with a
4 percent decline in real GDP in 1999. The national unemployment rate declined
from 20 percent at end-2000 to 12 percent at end-2004, while the poverty rate
declined from almost 60 percent in 1999 to 52 percent in 2003.

•

The combined public sector deficit was reduced from 5.5 percent of GDP in 1999 to
an unexpectedly low 1.3 percent of GDP in 2004, reflecting an unanticipated rise in
the export price of oil to US$36 per barrel and an unusually large surplus of the
autonomous local and regional governments. This outturn—together with the real
appreciation of the peso during 2004—helped reduce public debt to 53 percent of
GDP by end-2004. Also, public sector deposits reached 10 ½ percent of GDP by end2004.

•

Inflation declined from 9 percent during 1999 to 5.5 percent during 2004—the lowest
level in decades—owing to an output gap that reached 4–5 percent in 1999–2000 as
well as the effective implementation of the inflation targeting framework.

•

The external sector strengthened, led by sustained growth in exports and a recovery in
capital inflows. During 2004, the peso appreciated by 11 percent in real effective
terms, prompting the central bank to purchase US$2.9 billion (about one-third of the
stock of base money) to limit the appreciation. By end-2004, net international
reserves reached US$13.2 billion (123 percent of short-term external debt on a
remaining maturity basis).

•

The health of the financial system recovered, as loan quality improved and bank
profits increased. The nonfinancial corporate sector had reduced leverage and
managed currency risk more prudently, encouraged by the flexible exchange rate
regime.

5.
Nonetheless, there are still important challenges to continue to strengthen
economic performance:
•

It would be important to continue to find ways to ensure that sustained growth
translates into further declines in unemployment and poverty.

•

Ongoing fiscal consolidation is needed to continue reducing Colombia’s public debt,
which remains relatively high and vulnerable to a weakening of the peso.

-6-

•

While the financial system is healthy, domestic capital markets are shallow and
illiquid. This, together with distortionary taxes on financial transactions, has led to a
high cost of capital and deterred investment. The mortgage sector has been stagnant,
and since 1999 banks have increased their exposure to government securities.

•

The economy remains vulnerable to the risk that the global economic environment
becomes less favorable, especially if high world oil prices slow global demand.

•

It is crucial to keep economic policies on track during the upcoming political
transition—elections are scheduled for March (congress) and May
(presidential) 2006—to ensure that the country continues to build the credibility of its
commitment to strong policies.
II. ASSESSING THE MEDIUM-TERM POLICY STRATEGY

6.
The Article IV consultation discussions provided the opportunity to assess
whether the policy strategy followed since 1999 was appropriate. Overall, the staff and
the authorities agreed that this strategy had worked well and should be sustained in the
coming years to address the remaining challenges.
7.
Looking forward. the authorities’ policies over the medium-term seek to sustain
real growth of 4 percent a year, while gradually lowering inflation to 2–4 percent a year
(Tables 2-4). The government would continue with fiscal reforms to sustain a primary
surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP, and it would aim to rely increasingly on domestic currency
borrowing to limit the vulnerability of the debt profile to exchange rate fluctuations. The
central bank would continue to target inflation. The flexible exchange rate regime would
allow the external sector to adapt to shifts in conditions—such as the prospect of a significant
decline in the volume of oil exports starting in 2007—and to allow exports to diversify
further. The external current account deficit would range from 2½ to 3 percent of GDP
through 2010, which could be financed with sustainable net capital inflows. Net international
reserves would remain at about 110 percent of short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis.
Under these assumptions, public debt is projected to decline to 42.7 percent of GDP by 2010,
while total external debt would fall to 32 percent of GDP.
8.
This outlook is subject to several risks, including the effects of a currency
depreciation on public debt: (i) in the event of an exchange rate shock (assumed for
illustrative purposes to be a permanent 30 percent depreciation of the peso vis-à-vis the
U.S. dollar in 2006), public debt would reach 54 percent of GDP by 2010 and external debt
would amount to 41 percent of GDP (Tables 5 and 6); (ii) a combination of adverse fiscal
shocks—high real interest rates, low real economic growth and a weak primary balance—
would push public debt up to 54 percent of GDP by 2010; and (iii) a combination of adverse
external shocks—higher real interest rates, lower GDP measured both in local currency and
in U.S. dollars, and a wider external current account deficit—would raise external debt to
49 percent of GDP by 2010.

-7-

A. Strengthening Growth and Employment
9.
The authorities noted that a key challenge was to lay the foundation for faster
growth, while maintaining real growth of 4 percent a year. 2 The authorities commented
that the civil strife deters faster growth by raising security costs and uncertainty, which in
turn reduce investment and factor productivity. The estimates of the effect on the conflict on
economic activity range from lowering the level of GDP by 4 percent to cutting annual
growth by up to 2 percent a year. The authorities see a need for continued fiscal reforms,
including by making the tax system more efficient, and steps to deepen the financial system
to help lower the cost of capital and encourage investment and growth.
10.
The authorities noted that another challenge would be to reduce unemployment
further. In February 2005, national unemployment amounted to 14.0 percent, compared with
15.4 percent a year earlier. Studies suggest that the natural rate of unemployment in
Colombia is about 10–12 percent. This high level of structural unemployment reflects several
factors, including high nonwage labor costs, a relatively high minimum wage, labor market
regulations, and an excess supply of lower-skilled workers. Also, the civil strife had created
many refugees, adding to unemployment.3 The authorities noted that the labor reform
of 2002 had increased the flexibility of labor contracts and improved human capital
formation through apprenticeships. They pointed to evidence indicating that the reform had
already stimulated additional growth in employment and added that the benefits of this
reform would still be felt in the coming years. Staff agreed that the first results of the reform
were encouraging.
B. Sustaining Fiscal Structural Reforms
11.
The authorities’ medium-term fiscal framework presented to Congress in
June 2004 aims to reduce public debt to 39 percent of GDP by 2015. The authorities
estimated that—based on the current outlook—a primary surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP over
the medium term would be consistent with this path. The staff recommended that taking
advantage of the favorable global economy, especially the high world oil prices, to raise the
primary surplus to 3.0 percent of GDP and reduce public debt more quickly. The authorities
noted that they wanted to support a sustainable path for public debt, and would adjust the
primary surplus if necessary to achieve this objective. They added that a significant share of
any oil price windfall would be saved in 2005–06.
12.
The authorities and the staff considered that the pace of fiscal adjustment was
sensitive to the political climate. While the broad goal of fiscal discipline enjoyed sufficient
political support, there was often a strong debate about the nature of the fiscal measures. For
2

This is broadly in line with estimates of growth in potential GDP.

3

These issues are discussed in Chapter 1 of the Selected Issues Paper.

-8-

example, on several occasions the government had proposed to reform the tax structure by
narrowing the number of VAT rates and broaden the base of the VAT and income taxes.
However, Congress has resisted steps that could have been perceived as effectively raising
the VAT. In December 2003, it approved increases in the wealth tax and the financial
transaction tax. In December 2004, the government withdrew its tax proposal in the face of
strong congressional opposition. In addition, the constitutional court has used its broad
mandate to rule on economic policies. For example, in 2003, the court nullified part of the
VAT increase approved in December 2002 and it required the government to increase public
wages by at least the rate of inflation in the previous year. In 2004, the court nullified part of
the 2002 pension reform (the shortening of the transition period to the new pension regime
adopted in 1994), which raised the actuarial deficit of the pension system by 17 percent of
GDP.
13.
Structural fiscal issues also present significant challenges. The revenues of the
state oil company (Ecopetrol) are likely to decline as oil production is projected to fall by
10 percent a year in the period 2005–10, assuming no discoveries of major oil fields that
would reverse the decline in proven reserves. The central government (central administration,
social security, and decentralized agencies) must contend with rigid noninterest expenditures.
The authorities added that, if the demobilization talks were to proceed well, the government
would need to provide financial support to help ex-combatants reintegrate into civilian life.
14.
Against this background, the authorities and staff discussed the medium term
agenda for fiscal structural reforms:
•

Tax reform. With total public revenues of about 32 percent of GDP, the authorities
and the staff saw little need for net revenue enhancing measures. However, it was
agreed that the current structure of taxes complicated tax collection and discouraged
growth. For example, the value added tax includes 8 different rates, many more than
in neighboring countries, and a narrow base, with only about 50 percent of eligible
goods subject to this tax. Also, the tax system relies on several distortionary taxes,
such as the financial transactions tax with a tax rate of 0.4 percent (one of the highest
in the region) and a bank stamp tax of 1.5 percent—a very high rate in the context of
low inflation. The authorities still believe that simplifying the VAT and the income
taxes and phasing out distortionary taxes are important medium-term measures.

•

Spending rigidities. Congress is currently considering a revised budget code
designed to cut expenditure rigidities by scaling back revenue earmarking (which
applies to about 50 percent of tax revenues), trimming the carry over of spending
commitments from year to year, and restricting the ability to make multi-year
spending commitments. This revised code is an important step forward but will not
resolve all of the difficulties with expenditure management. For this reason, the staff
encouraged the authorities to continue to find ways to enhance the flexibility of
spending further.

-9-

•

Pensions. Congress approved the government’s pension reforms in December 2002
and May 2003 that reduced the actuarial deficit to about 190 percent of GDP (Box 3).
Even with these reforms, the central government’s net pension costs are projected to
rise sharply through 2015. In July 2004, the government introduced a constitutional
amendment aimed at lowering the actuarial deficit further to about 160 percent of
GDP and at reducing net pension costs starting early next decade. The authorities
agreed that additional pension reforms would be needed over the medium term.
However, they added that it would be very difficult to reduce the actuarial deficit
below 140 percent of GDP, reflecting payments to current retirees and to workers
who accumulated benefits under the PAYG system. As a result, the nonpension
balance of the public sector would have to continue to strengthen over time.

•

Domestic fuel prices. The government’s system of regulating the prices of regular
gasoline and diesel has led to an implicit subsidy of about 1 percent of GDP a year for
the past five years. The government has been setting wholesale prices well below
international levels, which discourages investment by Ecopetrol in upgrading its
refining capacity or in exploration and production. Retails prices are also regulated at
a fixed margin over the wholesale price to allow for taxes and distribution costs. At
the retail level, the price of regular gasoline is the same as in the United States, while
diesel is significantly cheaper. Over the past two years, the authorities have been
raising these domestic prices faster than inflation to try to cut the implicit subsidy, but
these adjustments have not kept pace with the rise in world oil prices since late 2003.
The staff urged the authorities to deregulate the wholesale and retail prices of
gasoline and diesel over the next few years as a way to eliminate the subsidy and to
ensure efficient pricing of gasoline and diesel at all stages of production. The
authorities agreed that price deregulation would be an important medium-term
reform. However, in the near term, the authorities preferred to retain the current
system, which sought to gradually bring domestic wholesale prices in line with
international levels to help insulate domestic consumers from price fluctuations.

•

Strengthening social spending. The authorities noted that an important share of
social spending (which includes subsidies estimated at 7 percent of GDP excluding
pensions)—such as public childcare centers, primary education and subsidized health
insurance—has benefited the poor. However, they added that other programs—such
as subsidies for tertiary education and housing—have tended to help the middle and
upper classes. The authorities intend to channel social spending more effectively and
agreed that there may be some scope to trim some poorly targeted subsidies. The
government is preparing a poverty reduction strategy to help Colombia achieve its
Millennium Development Goals (Box 4).

- 10 -

•

Revenue sharing. 4 Transfers from the central administration to local and regional
governments are constitutionally mandated to increase by 2 percentage points in real
terms in the period 2002–05, and by 2.5 percentage points during 2006–08. Starting
in 2009, revenue sharing is to return to the pre-2002 system, with transfers growing in
line with the average growth in the central government’s current revenues for the
preceding four years. Also transfers—now about 35 percent of current revenues—
may not be less than 42 percent of current revenues—the share in 2001. The staff and
the authorities agreed that—provided current revenues grow in line with GDP—this
would lead to a significant increase in the central administration deficit starting
in 2009 and in the CPS deficit as well, if local and regional governments were to
spend the additional transfers. Staff calculations suggest that holding these transfers
constant in real terms would strengthen the central government balance and the
overall fiscal position, if the current legal framework continues to restrain the ability
of local and regional governments to run deficits. The authorities felt it was too soon
to consider modifications to the revenue sharing framework, but intend to prepare by
December 2005 a study that evaluates the current system.

•

Strengthening other aspects of fiscal decentralization. An FAD mission on
decentralization recommended that the authorities strengthen the monitoring,
information flow, and coordination of budgetary policies among different levels of
the government. In particular, the mission recommended that the authorities establish
an agency that would monitor and coordinate the budgets of the different levels of
government. The authorities underlined that the fiscal responsibility laws adopted
earlier this decade have controlled spending and indebtedness of regional and local
governments, which ran a large overall surplus in 2004. Moreover, the constitution
granted a high degree of autonomy to local and regional governments, which made it
difficult to create a centralized agency with any meaningful authority. However, the
authorities are taking steps to strengthen the quality of information on the operations
of all levels of government.

•

Public investment. Colombia participated in the FAD pilot project on public
investment. The authorities have been emphasizing the need to increase the level of
public investment to improve infrastructure in certain sectors (Box 5). They agreed
fully that any plan to strengthen public investment must be consistent with the
medium-term policy framework. They noted that investment of several public
companies is constrained by the fiscal targets for the overall public sector, and would
prevent these enterprises from carrying out productive investments. Staff encouraged
the authorities to intensify the use of public-private partnerships (PPPs) to finance

4

This issue is discussed in more detail in Chapter 2 of the Selected Issues paper.

- 11 -

infrastructure investments, provided these projects had strong rates of return and an
appropriate degree of risk transfer to the private sector. Staff also urged the authorities to
increase the commercial orientation of public enterprises, including Ecopetrol.
C. Continuing to Reduce Inflation
15.
Staff and the authorities agreed that the inflation targeting (IT) framework had
been useful (Box 6). In a country, such as Colombia, with a long history of moderate
inflation, this framework helps guide the market’s inflation expectations, which—the
authorities noted—are now broadly in line with the inflation target for 2005. Over the
medium term, the Banco de la República intends to lower inflation by ½ percentage point
each year until annual inflation reaches the range of 2–4 percent, broadly in line with
inflation in Colombia’s trading partners.
16.
The staff and the authorities agreed that the flexible exchange rate regime
adopted in September 1999 had served Colombia well. Since 1999, the external sector has
experienced several shocks. Colombia’s terms of trade have been volatile, reflecting in part
strong fluctuations in the world price of oil. The flexibility of the exchange rate has allowed
for continued export growth and diversification, and kept the external current account deficit
at sustainable levels.5 The depreciation of the peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar helped sustain
modest economic growth in 2002, when access to international capital markets was sharply
curtailed for part of the year. The staff noted that since 1999 the private sector appears to
managing its foreign exchange risk more carefully. Nonfinancial corporations had cut their
peso exposure, while pension funds had built up foreign currency assets, including holdings
of Colombian government securities denominated in U.S. dollars.6 Hedging of exchange rate
risk has grown sharply since 1997, and by 2004, forward contracts in foreign exchange were
equivalent to about 60 percent of all international trade transactions.7 Looking forward, the
authorities noted that the flexible regime would help the external sector adapt to the prospect
of declining oil exports over the next few years by encouraging a further diversification of
exports.
17.
The staff noted that external competitiveness seemed broadly adequate. Exports
performed well 2004—growing by more than 20 percent—even while the peso appreciated
significantly in real effective terms. While traditional exports benefited from high commodity
prices, industrial exports—which account for almost 40 percent of the total—also increased
5

Petroleum and coal are Colombia’s most important export products, accounting for 25 and 11 percent of the
total in 2004. Other important exports products are chemical goods (10 percent of total exports), coffee
(6 percent), textiles (6 percent), and flowers (5 percent).
6

A balance sheet analysis is discussed in Chapter 3 of the Selected Issues Paper.

7

An analysis of hedging in Colombian financial markets is presented in Chapter 4 of the Selected Issues paper.

- 12 -

significantly, aided by the economic recovery in neighboring Venezuela. At end-2004, the
peso was 15 percent more depreciated in real effective terms than in September 1999.
REER Indicators 1/
(Index: 1994=100)
150

150
Nontraditional exports 2/
Comparator U.S. market 3/
IMF definition
Total trade 4/

140
130

140
130

120

120

110

110

100

100

90

90

80

80
70

70
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999 2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sources: Central Bank of Colombia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Using CPI.
2/ Using weights from nontraditional exports and imports from 20 trading partners.
3/ Relative to 23 countries that compete with Colombia in the U.S. market.
4/ Relative to the main 20 trading partners.

18.
The authorities were concerned that continued appreciation could present
difficulties for external competitiveness. They commented that previous episodes of
sustained real appreciation, such as in the early 1980s and the mid-1990s, had often been
followed by difficulties. They noted that exports were projected to grow slowly in 2005,
partly reflecting the lagged effects of the real effective appreciation in 2004. There was also
concern that a strong currency could adversely affect the competitiveness of legitimate crops
in the agricultural sector, which employ many low-income workers who might otherwise be
involved in the cultivation of illicit crops. For this reason, they had been intervening in the
foreign exchange market since late 2003. However, they emphasized that the Banco de la
Republica would always give priority to achieving its inflation target. The staff urged the
authorities to guard against excessive foreign exchange intervention, which could create
inflationary pressures or add to quasi-fiscal costs.
19.
The authorities noted that trade liberalization has helped strengthen external
competitiveness. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Colombia lowered its average tariff from
more than 40 percent to the current level of about 11 percent, and now there are no
economically significant nontariff barriers. As a result, exports have doubled from 8 percent
of GDP in 1987-88 to over 16 percent of GDP in 2004, with strong diversification into
exports of industrial and other nontraditional products. In this period, non-oil exports doubled
from about 6 percent of GDP to 12 percent of GDP. Colombia, together with Peru and
Ecuador, is negotiating a free-trade agreement with the United States, with a view to
liberalizing trade further.

- 13 -

20.
The authorities agreed with staff that it would be important to continue to
facilitate the development of market-based hedging mechanisms. While hedging has
increased significantly since 1997, the market is very short term, with 80 percent of forward
contracts maturing one month. The staff suggested several steps to strengthen the use of
hedging instruments. The establishment of a single reference interest rate would allow for
more credible valuation of derivatives contracts and improve disclosure in the financial
statements. Also easing the limit on banks’ foreign currency cash position (which has not
been allowed to be in a negative balance since March 2004) would give banks more
flexibility to take forward positions with offsetting spot transactions. The authorities have
requested technical assistance in this area from the Fund’s International Capital Markets
Department.
21.
The government purchased net international reserves to prepay an expensive
emergency loan from the IDB in the amount of US$1.25 billion in early April 2005.
After this operation, net international reserves amounted to 110 percent of short-term debt
with a remaining maturity. The authorities and the staff agreed that this would still provide an
adequate reserve cushion. The central bank emphasized that the government was purchasing
the reserves, using the proceeds from issuance of government securities, and that the central
bank was not granting a credit to the government.
D. Creating A More Effective Financial Sector
22.
The authorities agreed with the main conclusions of the FSSA update (Box 7).
They noted that the efforts to improve financial supervision and restructure weak banks,
together with the economic recovery, had strengthened the financial system.
23.
The Superintendency of Financial Institutions (SIF) intends to continue
strengthening the legal and regulatory framework. It plans to address the challenges
associated with the new risk-based provisioning system, in part by expanding its technical
staff significantly over the next few years to monitor the risk assessments of financial
institutions. The authorities noted that this new framework would allow for a more accurate
measurement of market and other risks and of the value of foreclosed assets, which would
probably lead to some increase in provisioning and capital. They supported the
recommendation to grant more autonomy to the SIF, but added that in 2003 Congress had
rejected a draft law to grant budgetary independence to the SIF.
24.
The authorities agreed that banks held a large and growing share of their assets
in government securities, increasing their exposure to interest rate and liquidity risk.
This situation reflected in part limited opportunities for loans or investment to the private
sector. However, they added that banks were exposed to less credit risk.
25.
The authorities commented that the mortgage sector remained stagnant for
several reasons. Demand for mortgages was weak, as many home buyers were still reluctant
to acquire mortgage debt even 5–6 years after the crisis. Also several judicial and regulatory
decisions have discouraged banks from offering mortgages. During the 1999 crisis, the

- 14 -

constitutional court ordered a retroactive change in the indexation formula used in
mortgages, leading to a significant decline in the outstanding value of mortgages. In addition,
the court set a limit on the real interest rate on most mortgages. Moreover, completing a
foreclosure often takes up to 5 years. The authorities noted that many mortgage banks have
recovered by diversifying into consumer and corporate lending and that the few remaining
weak mortgage banks were operating under restructuring plans. They added that the program
to securitize mortgages that began in 2003 would help mortgage banks restructure their
balance sheets further.
26.
The authorities shared the view that domestic capital markets could play a more
important role in financing investment. For this reason, the government submitted to
Congress a new securities market law, with approval expected by June 2005, and was
drafting a new corporate accounting law. These laws would provide more security and
transparency to securities trading by protecting investors’ rights, improve contract
enforcement, and reduce regulatory arbitrage. Both the staff and the authorities agreed that
several distortions—such as the financial transactions tax and the bank stamp tax of
1½ percent—contributed to financial disintermediation (Box 8).
III. SHORT-TERM MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK
27.
Economic policies in 2005–06 have been framed in the context of this mediumterm strategy. The specific goals are to support real economic growth of 4 percent a year
and lower inflation to 5 percent during 2005 and to 3–5 percent during 2006. The CPS deficit
would amount to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2005, assuming an export price of oil of US$31 per
barrel as a prudent baseline and a gradual decline in the surplus of local and regional
governments to historical levels. In 2006, the CPS deficit would decline to 2.0 percent of
GDP, lowering public debt to about 50 percent of GDP by end-2006. These targets will be
lowered by a significant share of any oil price windfall. Monetary policy would continue to
be conducted in the context of an inflation targeting framework, and the exchange rate
regime would remain flexible. The external current account deficit would rise to about 2½ to
3 percent of GDP in 2005–06, reflecting a fall in the volume of oil exports as well as the
lagged effects of the real exchange rate appreciation during 2004. Net international reserves
would remain comfortable at US$12.3 billion in 2005 (110 percent of short-term debt on a
remaining maturity basis), reflecting the reserves purchased to prepay the IDB loan.
28.
The authorities will seek to advance structural reforms already before Congress.
They intend to press for congressional approval by June 2005 of several measures: (i) the
revised budget code; (ii) the constitutional amendment to reduce the actuarial deficit of the
pension system; and (iii) the new securities market law. They noted that Congress is now
considering the draft law for the legal framework for demobilization of paramilitaries and
other combatants, and may consider a possible free trade agreement with the United States in
the second half of 2005.

- 15 -

29.
The authorities will continue to build support for the rest of the structural
reform agenda. However, they commented that it would be difficult to introduce new
reforms to congress ahead of the elections.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
30.
The economic policy strategy of fiscal consolidation, lowering inflation and
strengthening the financial system has been effective. This approach has benefited from
the favorable global economic environment in recent years. Since 1999, real economic
growth has recovered, while unemployment and poverty have declined. Inflation has fallen to
the lowest level in decades. The external sector has strengthened, with sustained export
growth and restored access to international capital markets. The financial system has returned
to a sound position.
31.
The authorities’ intention to maintain this strategy in the coming years is
welcome. Their framework is wisely based on an outlook for steady economic growth,
which—together with the effects of the 2002 labor reform—should contribute to further
reductions in unemployment. The plan to maintain fiscal discipline to lower public debt to
39 percent of GDP by 2015 will help diminish risks further. The central bank will continue to
target inflation in the context of a flexible exchange rate regime. Financial supervision will
continue to strengthen and the new securities market law, if approved, would help broaden
domestic capital markets.
32.
The main challenge to this strategy comes from the need to sustain the pace
structural fiscal reforms to keep public debt on a sustainable path. The reforms already
presented to Congress—the revised budget code and the pension reform—will play an
important role in containing expenditure growth. Over the medium term, reforms will be
needed in several areas. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to continue to build
support for steps to simplify the VAT and the income tax and scale back distortionary taxes.
The constitutional amendment for pension reform currently before Congress represents an
important step forward to reduce the actuarial deficit further. It would be crucial to consider
additional pension reforms as quickly as feasible to help limit the expected rapid rise in net
pension costs. The staff encourages the authorities to deregulate the domestic prices of
gasoline and diesel over the medium term to eliminate the implicit subsidies and to allow for
efficient pricing of these products. The system of fiscal decentralization needs to be
strengthened by modifying the revenue sharing mechanism, which presents a significant risk
and weakens the credibility of the authorities’ fiscal strategy. The staff urges the authorities
to consider steps to limit the increase in transfers—preferably to the rate of inflation—to
strengthen the medium-term position of the central administration and of the combined
public sector. The staff also encourages the authorities to establish an agency that would help
ensure a close coordination of fiscal policy at all levels of government.
33.
The inflation targeting framework has helped guide inflation expectations.
During 2004, the central bank achieved the lowest inflation rate in decades and expectations

- 16 -

for 2005 are broadly in line with the inflation target. The plan to gradually reduce inflation to
the range of 2–4 percent a year is appropriate.
34.
The flexible exchange rate regime has served Colombia well. Over the medium
term, continued exchange rate flexibility will be essential to help the economy adjust to the
prospect of a significant decline in oil production and exports. The staff judges that external
competitiveness is broadly adequate, in view of the broad-based growth in exports in 2004
and the sustainable level of the external current account deficit. The staff sees the
appreciation of the peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar during 2004 as a market-based response to
increased confidence in the Colombian economy and a favorable external environment. The
staff urges the authorities to guard against pressures for excessive foreign exchange
intervention, which could generate inflationary pressures or raise quasi-fiscal costs through
sterilization operations. In this regard, the staff agrees that continued trade liberalization
would strengthen export competitiveness further.
35.
The financial system has recovered from the 1999, owing to the government’s
financial restructuring operations as well as the economic recovery. It will be important
to continue to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework for financial supervision. The
new securities law will encourage a deepening of domestic capital markets. Also phasing out
the financial transactions tax and the bank stamp tax would promote financial intermediation.
With more opportunities for lending and investment, banks would be able to gradually
diversify their portfolio away from government securities and limit their risk to interest rate
fluctuations and to the sovereign. In the mortgage sector, decisions intended to protect
borrowers are actually making it more difficult for borrowers to acquire housing.
36.
Colombia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4.
However, the authorities have not indicated a timetable for removing the two remaining
restrictions. For this reason, staff does not recommend approval of these restrictions.
37.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation will be held on the 24-month
cycle, subject to the provision of decision No. 127 94, (02/76) on Article IV consultations.

- 17 -

Box 1. The Economic Crisis of 1999
In the 1970s and 1980s, Colombia’s real economic growth averaged 4 percent a year.
Inflation—anchored by a crawling peg with the US dollar—was moderate but stable, ranging
from 20–30 percent a year. In the
Real GDP Growth and Inflation
mid 1990s growth accelerated, supported
8
by strong private capital inflows owing to
Real GDP growth
6
(i) foreign direct investment in the oil
Inflation (right scale)
sector, (ii) large scale privatizations, and
4
(iii) financial inflows following steps to
2
liberalize the capital account.
Capital flows reversed abruptly in the
aftermath of the Asian and Russian
crises of 1997/98, forcing a sharp
adjustment of the current account. In
late 1998, the crawling exchange rate band
came under intense pressure. At first, the
Central Bank defended the arrangement
with high interest rates, causing severe
stress for the financial sector. A banking
crisis ensued, which was concentrated in
poorly supervised public banks and
mortgage lending institutions. In
September 1999, the Central Bank floated
the peso. The sharp devaluation that
followed reinforced financial stress for
many companies, which had accumulated
sizeable foreign currency liabilities.

35
30
25
20

0

15

-2

10

-4

5

-6

0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Current Account and Net Inflows
10

Private net inflows/GDP (incl. FDI)
Public net inflows/GDP (incl. reserves)
Current account deficit/GDP

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

In 1999, real GDP fell for the first time
in more than 30 years. The economic
downturn coincided with an deterioration
in Colombia’s security situation. Moreover,
public debt increased sharply, owing in part
to the effect of the depreciation on foreign
currency debt and the cost of recapitalizing
the banking system. In late 1999, the
sovereign lost its investment grade rating
for foreign currency debt over concerns
about the sustainability of Colombia’s
long-term fiscal position.

Public Sector Debt and Fiscal Deficit
80
70
60

External debt/GDP
Domestic debt/GDP
Fiscal deficit/GDP (left scale)

8
7
6

50

5

40

4

30

3

20

2

10

1
0

0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

- 18 -

Box 2: Security Situation
Colombia’s civil strife—whose roots go back to the 1950s—reached a peak in the
late 1990s and early 2000s. All indicators of violence—such as homicides, kidnappings, and
acts of economic sabotage—rose to extremely high levels. About one-third of the country’s
municipalities were controlled by the guerillas by 2000.
There are three main illegal armed groups, with about 30,000 combatants. The FARC
(Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) is a peasant-based guerilla group that started as a
communist militia and now comprises about 15,000 fighters. The ELN (National Liberation
Army) grew out of Cuba-inspired student protests and now counts about 5,000 guerilla
fighters. The AUC (United Autodefense Forces of Colombia) is a loose association of
paramilitary organizations with an estimated 10,000 fighters. Some paramilitaries served
originally to protect landholdings against the FARC and the ELN. All three groups are
considered terrorist organizations by the United States and the European Union. They finance
themselves with kidnappings, robberies, and extortion. Moreover, the FARC and the AUC are
deeply involved in the drug trade, with each group earning US$100–300 million a year from
this source.
After taking office in August 2002, the Uribe administration laid out a democratic
security strategy. The government stepped up pressure on insurgents by strengthening the
army, increasing police presence in rural areas, and granting the military a wide range of police
powers. It also eradicated coca plantations to undercut the financial base of the illegal armed
groups. It also initiated demobilization negotiations with groups that agree to end hostilities.
Thus far, the policy has yielded notable successes:
•

Between 2002 and 2004, this policy resulted in sharp declines in homicides and
kidnappings and in acreage devoted to coca cultivation. Also, by 2004 all
municipalities were under government control.

•

Demobilization talks have started with the paramilitaries, and by end-2004,
several thousand paramilitary fighters had handed in their weapons. Congress is
currently debating a legal framework for demobilization to decide criminal penalties
for ex-combatants, determine how to fund reparations to the victims of the violence,
and establish programs to help ex-combatants reintegrate into civilian life.

•

However, the FARC has shown no interest in entering into peace talks, and
intensified its attacks on the Colombian military in early 2005

- 19 -

Box 3. Pension Reforms
•

In December 1993, Congress approved a pension reform that sought to provide adequate and
sustainable retirement benefits for workers. It strengthened the pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system by
raising contributions and reducing retirement benefits. It also established a fully funded, private
system that coexists with the PAYG system. With a few exceptions, workers can choose either
system and have the right to change systems once every three years.

•

However, this reform excluded the generous special pension regimes for certain kinds of
employees, such as teachers. It also established a long transition period for workers already
participating in the PAYG system.

•

As a result, the actuarial deficit of the pension system reached 210 percent of GDP by 2002. In
December 2002 and May 2003, Congress raised contribution rates and cut retirement benefits
again and shortened the transition period. However, the constitutional court subsequently
reinstated the original transition period, leaving the government with significant increases in net
pension costs over the next decade and an actuarial deficit close to 190 percent of GDP.
Colombia: Social Security, 2003-2015 1/
(in percent of GDP)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2015

Contributions

1.3

1.8

1.8

1.8

1.7

1.7

1.6

1.6

1.4

Benefits

5.5

6.0

6.4

6.4

6.5

6.7

6.8

7.0

7.3

Deficit

-4.2

-4.2

-4.6

-4.6

-4.8

-5.0

-5.2

-5.4

-5.9

Source: Ministry of Finance.
1/ Net pension costs of ISS, excluding transfers from the central
administration.
•

In June 2004, the government presented a constitutional amendment for pension reform that
proposes inter alia to eliminate all special pension regimes and remove the 14th monthly pension
payment for new retirees, which would lower the actuarial deficit to 160 percent of GDP and
reduce net pension costs starting next decade. The proposed amendment also clarifies the
definition of acquired rights to pave the way for possible additional pension reforms. Congress
must decide on this reform by June 2005.

•

The authorities noted that—even after the government exhausts all reform efforts—the actuarial
deficit will remain at 140 percent of GDP, reflecting payments to current retirees and to workers
who accumulated benefits under the PAYG system.

- 20 -

Box 4. Poverty
In the past 25 years, progress in alleviating poverty has been modest. Despite robust
growth and large increases in subsidies and transfers, Colombia’s poverty rate declined from
59 percent in 1978 to 52 percent in 2003. By regional standards, poverty and income inequality
in Colombia are high. Other social indicators, however—such as access to safe drinking water,
life expectancy and infant mortality—compare favorably with neighboring countries.
Labor market rigidities limit formal employment and contribute to poverty. These include
high nonwage labor costs, extensive labor market regulation, and a lack of high-skilled
workers. Studies suggest that the structural unemployment rate is 10–12 percent. Moreover,
about one-third of the workforce is underemployed, but preliminary evidence indicates that the
reforms passed in the 2002 to increase labor market flexibility have encouraged more formal
employment.
Another source of poverty is the civil strife. The number of internal refugees (“desplazados”)
increased sharply in the late 1990s, and is estimated at about 2–3 million—out of a total
population of 45 million. Desplazados are often from rural areas and have little formal
education. As a consequence, they depend heavily on work in the informal economy and
humanitarian assistance from NGOs, such as church support groups, as well as from the
government.
Colombia: Social Indicators
Indicators
Poverty (% Pop)
Extreme Poverty (% Pop)
Income Inequality (Gini coef.)
Net Primary school enrollment rate
Male (% age group)
Female (% age group)
Access to improved water resources
(% of population)
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)

51.8
16.6
0.56
87.0
87.0
86.0

Latin
America and
Caribbean
36.0
…
0.50
94.0
94.0
95.0

Colombia’s
2015
Goals
35.7
9.5
…
100.0
100.0
100.0

91.0
7.0
72

86.0
9.0
71

…
5.0
…

19
86

28
…

17
45

1996-2003

- 21 -

Box 5. Financing Higher Investment
Colombia has sustained relatively high public infrastructure investments,
compared with other countries in the region. In recent years, public investment has
averaged 7½ to 8 percent of GDP, well above the average for Argentina, Brazil,
Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay. About two-thirds of this investment is carried out by local
and regional governments. Access to basic household services such as water,
sanitation, and electricity is high by regional standards. However, the World Bank has
found that Colombia’s infrastructure lags behind other Latin American countries in
areas such as paved roads.
The government is assessing ways to finance higher infrastructure investment
while safeguarding public debt sustainability. One option is to make more use of
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs)—private investment under PPPs is not reflected in
the public sector accounts. Since the early 1990s, Colombia has been one of the most
active countries in Latin America in developing PPPs. There have been some 150
contracts for private participation, leading to estimated investments on the order of
US$5 billion since 1991. Contractual approaches have included BOTs, concessions,
joint ventures, and licenses. A sophisticated methodology has been developed to
evaluate contingent liabilities of the public sector, which are published in the
government’s medium-term fiscal framework.
Another option is to increase the commercial orientation of public enterprises.
In 2004, ISA, an electricity transmission company, was excluded from the definition of
the public sector, after its commercial orientation was determined against a set of
preliminary criteria proposed by Fund staff. ISA has significant private ownership,
strong protection of minority shareholder rights, an arms-length relationship with the
government, and a sound financial condition.

- 22 -

Box 6: Inflation Targeting (IT) Regimes in Latin America
Colombia is one of the five countries in Latin America and 20 countries worldwide that conduct
monetary policy based on an IT framework. IT is intended to help discipline policy discussions
and communicate policy actions to the public. This framework entails: (i) a stated commitment to
price stability as principal goal of monetary policy; (ii) an explicit target for inflation; (iii) a high
degree of transparency with regard to monetary policy formulation; and (iv) some mechanism for
accountability.
Key Characteristics of the Inflation Targeting Regime Among Latin American Countries
Brazil
1. Adoption Date
2. Prior policy framework
3. Current Target

4. Time Horizon
5. Official Forecasts
a) Inflation
b) Output Gap
c) GDP Growth
d) Policy Rate

Chile

Jun. 1999
Soft peg

Jan. 2001
Soft peg (crawling band
and 'weak' IT)
4.5%± 2.5% annual CPI 2-4% annual CPI centered
inflation
on 3%

Mexico

Colombia

Peru

Jan. 1999
Soft peg, followed by
'weak' IT, 1995-98
3%± 1% annual CPI
inflation

Sep. 1999
Soft peg (band)

Jan. 2002
Monetary and 'weak'
IT.
2.5%± 1% annual CPI
inflation

End-year

12-24 months

Unspecified

4.5-5.5% (2005),
3-5% (2006)
annual
CPI inflation
12-months

9 quarters- fan chart
no
5 quarters- fan chart
constant

8 quarters- fan chart
no
6 quarters- fan chart
no

no
no
1 year
no

8 quarters
8 quarters
annual
no

12- months
1 year
no
1 year
constant

Sources: Kuttner K. (2004), in the "Future of Inflation Targeting", Reserve Bank of Australia, 2004.; and central banks' websites.

Colombia’s performance under IT compares favorably with other IT countries. Albagli and
Schmidt-Hebel (2004) looked at the typical deviation of actual inflation from the target and the typical
large inflation episode for countries with IT in the period 1990-2003. Switzerland, England, Chile, and
Sweden are among the most accurate IT countries, with fewer episodes of target misses and shorter
spells of deviations.
IT Performance Rankings According to Inflation Deviations and Large Deviations Episodes
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

11.4
8.6
5.8

6.8

8 .8

9.0

9.6

12.4

12.9

14.1

14.6

15.5

16.3

17.3

9.8

6.9

4.6
2.9

3.0

S o urc e : Alba gli a nd S c hm idt-He be l (2004), B y Ho w M uc h a nd Why Do Infla tio n Ta rge te rs M is s The ir Ta rge ts ? , pa pe r
pre s e nte d a t the C o nfe re nc e "S tra te gie s fo r Im ple m e nting M o ne ta ry P o lic y in the Am e ric a s : The R o le o f Infla tio n Ta rge ting",
s po ns o re d by the F e de ra l R e s e rve o f Atla nta , Oc to be r 2004.

- 23 -

Box 7. Financial System Stability Assessment Update: Main Findings
•

Since the 1999 FSAP, financial sector legislation has been improved, the
banking system has been recapitalized, and the supervisory framework has
been revamped. The financial sector appears relatively stable and resilient to
potential adverse shocks. However, the banking system still faces considerable
challenges. Solvency and profitability of commercial banks have improved, but
provisioning for nonperforming loans could be strengthened, especially in the
mortgage sector. Bank capital adequacy may be overstated by some over-valuation
of foreclosed assets and under-estimation of market risk. The mortgage sector has
improved its performance, but a few institutions remain weak.

•

The legal and regulatory framework could be strengthened further. The
Superintendency of Banks needs to keep pace with the technical and administrative
requirements of implementing the new risk-based system for determining capital
and provisioning standards. The Superintendency would benefit from greater
autonomy and independence, and the legal framework needs to effectively protect
bank supervisors and the Superintendent. Some of the funds lent for bank
recapitalization have been prepaid and the prospects for repayment of remaining
Deposit Insurance Fund (FOGAFIN) credits appear favorable as most recapitalized
banks have regained market access or are backed by prominent financial holding
companies. However, the two largest institutions are still under FOGAFIN control.

•

Banks allocate a significant share of their portfolios to government securities.
The government response to the crisis and the lower demand for credit have
increasingly transformed credit risk exposure into a market risk or sovereign risk
exposure. The government’s success in lengthening the maturity of its debt has, to a
large extent, transferred interest rate and liquidity risk from the public sector to the
banking sector.

•

Credit risk and interest rate risk are the main vulnerabilities. The impact of the
greatest interest rate shock on capital would come from a precipitous rise in the
yield curve. Foreign exchange risk appears limited, while equity price risk affects
mostly finance corporations.

•

Private capital markets continue to be illiquid and shallow, with most
resources channeled through the banking sector. This reflects the scarce supply
of investment securities by local corporations, and deficiencies in clearance and
settlement systems. In this context, the modernization of the securities markets
regulatory framework is critical to increase liquidity, stimulate investment and
promote economic growth. The corporate insolvency regime introduced under
emergency conditions during the crisis has not yet been replaced by new
instruments more favorable to financial intermediation.

- 24 -

Box 8. The Financial Transactions Tax (FTT)
The FTT was introduced in 1998 as a transitory measure to finance the fiscal cost of the banking
crisis. The tax rate was set initially at 0.2 percent and then raised to 0.3 percent in 2001 (and made
permanent) and further to 0.4 percent in 2004. It is mostly levied on transactions through savings and
checking accounts, credit cards and loan disbursements.

Money Multiplier (M3) and Number of Checks
Processed

Tax Collection and Produtivity of the FTT
Tax collection
Productivity (right axis)

0.9

Share of GDP

3.8

0.9

3.4

0.8

3.2

0.8

3.0

0.7

2.8

0.7

2.6

0.6

2.4

0.6

2.2

0.5

2.0
12/99

12/00

12/01

12/02

12/03

12.5

3.6

M3/Monetary base
Number of checks (right axis)

11.5
10.5
Productivity

1.0

12/04

FTT at 0.3%

9.5
8.5
7.5

FTT at 0.2%

6.5
5.5
4.5

FTT at 0.4%

3.5
1/94 5/95 9/96 1/98 5/99 9/00 1/02 5/03 9/04
Money Multiplier and FTT Collection,
December 1999 to December 2004

Currency in Circulation
% of monetary base
% of GDP (right axis)

80
70

FTT at 0.2%

90

1.0

80
70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20
1/94 5/95 9/96 1/98 5/99 9/00 1/02 5/03 9/04

0.9
Share of GDP

90

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
3.5

4.5

5.5

6.5

M3/Monetary Base

Sources: DIAN; Banco de la República; and Fund staff estimates.
1/

23
21
19
17
15
13
11
9
7
5
3

Kirilenko, A. and Perry, V. (2004), “On the Financial Disintermediation of Bank Transaction Taxes,” mimeo.

7.5

Million of checks

The FTT contributes to financial disintermediation. Kirilenko and Perry (2004),1/ using data for
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela, found that on average the FTT has resulted in a
permanent erosion of the tax base—disintermediation—ranging from 4 cents for every dollar of revenue for
Venezuela to 44 cents for Colombia. This disintermediation has undermined the productivity of the FTT as a
revenue source in Colombia.

- 25 -

Table 1. Colombia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Rev. Prog.

Prel.

Proj.
2005

2006

(Percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (average)
Consumer prices (end of period)

2.9
12.1
9.2
8.7

1.5
6.2
8.0
7.6

1.9
6.5
6.3
7.0

4.0
8.2
7.1
6.5

4.0
5.9
6.0
5.5

4.0
7.0
5.9
5.5

4.0
5.3
5.2
5.0

4.0
4.3
4.8
4.5

External sector (on the basis of US$)
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -)

14.0
8.1
1.1
10.0
14.8
-2.6

-6.4
10.6
0.9
10.5
-7.3
1.5

-4.1
-1.6
-4.4
-1.6
0.3
-17.4

11.2
9.8
2.6
5.2
3.9
-5.2

11.2
15.1
2.9
7.6
1.1
…

23.6
19.9
6.7
13.3
9.3
11.4

-0.1
15.7
0.7
16.9
0.2
…

3.2
2.7
6.5
2.5
-3.3
…

Central administration
Revenue
Expenditure

25.7
11.9

20.8
16.7

10.1
12.6

13.9
6.8

15.4
10.7

16.0
15.7

10.1
13.2

8.3
8.8

-2.1
-8.6

7.0
1.7

5.3
4.0

6.5
9.2

10.2
11.5

16.7
12.2

11.1
14.6

10.3
14.0

11.5
7.7
3.6
0.7
(In percent of GDP)
-5.7
-5.7
-6.4
-3.5
-3.5
-4.2
0.9
1.5
0.4
-3.4
-3.2
-3.7
1.6
2.3
0.6
1.2
0.9
3.1
0.5
0.0
-0.1
47.7
51.8
60.2
13.7
14.5
14.2
14.6
13.2
12.6
0.9
-1.4
-1.7
46.1
47.5
52.3
26.3
28.5
31.9
111.5
98.4
106.1

7.9
1.4

…
…

7.7
2.2

…
…

…
…

-5.4
-3.2
1.7
-2.7
1.0
1.8
-0.1
56.0
14.9
13.5
-1.5
46.0
29.6
127.3

-5.6
-2.8
2.2
-2.8
1.7
0.8
0.3
52.1
15.5
13.4
-2.2
43.7
28.6
124.4

-5.5
-1.7
2.7
-1.3
-0.3
1.7
0.0
52.9
14.0
12.9
-1.0
37.1
24.1
110.4

-6.1
-2.5
2.7
-2.5
-0.5
3.0
-0.1
50.4
15.3
12.5
-2.8
35.9
22.7
110.5

-6.2
-2.1
2.7
-2.0
0.5
1.5
0.0
49.8
17.0
14.4
-2.6
36.2
22.5
116.3

56.4
33.4
15.0
10.6

47.7
23.8
15.9
11.2

35.5
18.4
12.0
8.3

52.1
30.9
14.5
10.3

45.2
23.6
14.2
10.2

Money and credit 1/
Broad money
Credit to the private sector
Interest rate (90-day time deposits; percent per year)
Nominal
Real
Central administration balance
Nonfinancial public sector balance
NFPS primary balance
Public sector balance
Foreign financing
Domestic financing 2/
Privatization
Public debt 3/4/
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings
Current account (deficit -)
External debt
Of which : public sector
NIR in percent of short-term debt

13.4
4.2

(In percent of exports of goods, services, and income)
External debt service
Of which : public sector
Interest payments
Of which : public sector

50.1
21.7
15.9
8.9

50.2
28.2
16.3
10.4

64.0
37.0
16.8
11.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Overall balance of payments
Net official reserves 4/
Net official reserves (in months
of imports of goods and services)

870
8,800

1,217
9,982

138
10,507

-184
10,524

712
11,408

2,583
13,195

-855
12,340

313
12,653

6.6

7.8

7.6

6.5

7.2

7.1

6.5

6.3

Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ All annual changes in foreign currency stocks valued at constant exchange rate.
2/ Includes the quasi-fiscal balance of Banco de la Republica, sales of assets, phone licenses, and statistical discrepancy.
3/ Includes bonds issued to recapitalize financial institutions.
4/ Program definition. Assumes no purchases under the current SBA arrangement. Includes valuation changes.

- 26 -

Table 2. Colombia: Medium-Term Outlook
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

I. Output and Prices
(Annual percentage changes)
Real GDP

2.9

1.5

1.9

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

Consumer prices
End of period
Period average

8.7
9.2

7.6
8.0

7.0
6.3

6.5
7.1

5.5
5.9

5.0
5.2

4.5
4.8

3.5
4.0

3.0
3.3

3.0
3.0

3.0
2.5

(In percent of GDP, unless indicated otherwise)
II. Saving and investment
Gross national saving
Private sector
Public sector

14.6
10.0
4.5

13.2
8.3
5.1

12.6
9.2
3.3

13.5
8.0
5.5

12.9
6.4
6.5

12.5
7.5
5.0

14.4
8.9
5.5

14.8
8.4
6.4

15.3
8.7
6.6

15.9
9.1
6.9

16.3
9.2
7.0

Gross domestic investment
Private sector
Public sector capital expenditure

13.7
5.8
7.9

14.5
6.2
8.3

14.2
6.1
8.1

14.9
6.4
8.5

14.0
6.1
7.8

15.3
7.8
7.5

17.0
9.5
7.5

17.5
9.1
8.4

17.9
9.5
8.4

18.5
10.1
8.4

18.8
10.4
8.4

External current account balance
Private sector
Public sector

0.9
4.2
-3.4

-1.4
1.9
-3.2

-1.7
1.9
-3.6

-1.5
1.2
-2.6

-1.0
0.3
-1.3

-2.8
-0.3
-2.5

-2.6
-0.6
-2.0

-2.7
-0.7
-2.0

-2.6
-0.8
-1.8

-2.6
-1.0
-1.5

-2.5
-1.2
-1.4

III. Nonfinancial and consolidated public sector
Nonfinancial public sector
Revenue
Expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Primary balance
Overall balance

28.0
31.5
23.6
7.9
0.9
-3.5

29.6
33.3
24.9
8.3
1.5
-3.5

Combined public sector balance

-3.4

-3.2

29.6
33.8
25.6
8.1
0.4
-4.2

30.7
33.6
25.2
8.5
1.7
-3.2

31.6
33.1
25.4
7.8
2.7
-1.7

31.2
33.7
26.2
7.5
2.7
-2.5

31.3
33.4
25.8
7.5
2.7
-2.1

31.0
33.2
24.8
8.4
2.6
-2.3

31.1
33.2
24.8
8.4
2.6
-2.1

31.1
33.0
24.6
8.4
2.6
-1.9

31.0
32.7
24.3
8.4
2.6
-1.8

-3.7

-2.7

-1.3

-2.5

-2.0

-2.0

-1.8

-1.5

-1.4

3.3
5.9

3.3
8.9

3.2
8.9

3.2
10.8

3.2
7.1

3.2
6.1

3.2
6.3

-1.0
1.0
17.4
16.3
3.3
-0.3
3.7
2.7

-2.8
-1.3
15.1
16.4
2.0
-0.5
2.5
-0.8

-2.6
-1.3
15.7
17.0
2.9
0.5
2.3
0.3

-2.7
-2.0
15.4
17.4
3.1
0.5
2.7
0.4

-2.6
-1.9
15.8
17.7
3.0
0.2
2.8
0.5

-2.6
-1.7
16.3
18.0
3.0
0.3
2.7
0.5

-2.5
-1.4
17.0
18.5
3.0
0.4
2.5
0.4

IV. Financial system
Velocity (GDP / broad money)
Real growth in private sector credit

3.2
-16.3

3.2
-5.8

3.3
-2.2

3.5
1.9

External current account balance
Trade balance
Exports
Imports
Capital and financial account balance
Public sector
Private sector
Overall balance

0.9
3.1
16.4
13.2
0.0
0.5
-0.5
1.0

-1.4
0.7
15.7
15.0
3.0
1.8
1.3
1.5

-1.7
0.3
15.1
14.8
1.6
0.4
1.2
0.2

Total external debt
Public debt
Private debt

46.1
26.3
19.8

47.5
28.5
19.0

52.3
31.9
20.4

46.0
29.6
16.3

37.1
24.1
13.0

35.9
22.7
13.1

36.2
22.5
13.7

35.6
21.9
13.6

34.1
20.8
13.2

32.9
20.0
12.9

31.9
19.3
12.7

Total public debt
Domestic debt
External debt

47.7
21.4
26.3

51.8
23.2
28.5

60.2
28.3
31.9

56.0
26.4
29.6

52.9
28.8
24.1

50.4
27.7
22.7

49.8
27.3
22.5

48.2
26.2
21.9

46.2
25.4
20.8

44.5
24.5
20.0

42.7
23.5
19.3

174,896
6.6

188,559
3.7

204,530
1.9

230,091
1.2

255,984
1.8

280,267
3.2

304,051
3.8

332,333
4.3

359,876
4.7

386,199
5.0

413,546
5.0

V. Balance of payments
-1.5
0.5
17.1
16.6
1.0
0.5
0.5
-0.2
VI. Debt

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of Col$)
U.S. LIBOR

Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

- 27 -

Table 3. Colombia: Selected Vulnerability Indicators

2000
Key economic and market indicators
Real GDP growth (in percent)
CPI inflation (period average, in percent)
Short-term (ST) interest rate (in percent)
EMBI secondary market spread (bps, end of period)
Exchange rate NC/US$ (end of period)

Financial sector (FS) 10/
Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)
NPLs in percent of total loans
Provisions in percent of NPLs
Return on average assets (in percent)
Return on equity (in percent)
FX deposits held by residents (in percent of total deposits)
FX loans to residents (in percent of total loans)
Net open forex position (in percent of capital) 11/
Government debt held by FS (percent of total FS assets)
Credit to private sector (percent change)
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP in billions of U.S. dollars

2002

2003 2004 1/

2.9
1.5
1.9
4.0
4.0
8.7
7.6
7.0
6.5
5.5
10.4
10.2
5.9
7.0
2.1
668.2 602.0 679.1 431.0 332.0
2229.2 2291.2 2864.8 2778.2 2389.8

External sector
Exchange rate regime
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
0.9
Net FDI inflows (percent of GDP)
2.5
Exports (percentage change of US$ value, GNFS)
14.0
Real effective exchange rate ( [year] = 100)
99.8
Gross international reserves (GIR) in US$ billion
9.0
GIR in percent of ST debt at remaining maturity (RM) 2/
111.5
GIR in percent of ST debt at RM and banks' FX deposits.
Net international reserves (NIR) in US$ billion
8.8
Total gross external debt (ED) in percent of GDP
46.1
o/w ST external debt (original maturity, in percent of total ED
7.0
ED of domestic private sector (in percent of total ED)
43.0
ED to foreign official sector (in percent of total ED)
Total gross external debt in percent of exports of GNFS
118.1
Gross external financing requirement (in US$ billion) 3/
8.8
Public sector (PS) 4/
Overall balance (percent of GDP)
Primary balance (percent of GDP)
Debt-stabilizing primary balance (percent of GDP) 5/
Gross PS financing requirement (in percent of GDP) 6/
Public sector gross debt (PSGD, in percent of GDP)
o/w Exposed to rollover risk (in percent of total PSGD) 7/
Exposed to exchange rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 8/
Exposed to interest rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 9/
Public sector net debt (in percent of GDP)

2001

Free Floating
-1.4
-1.7
-1.5
3.1
1.5
1.1
-6.4
-4.1
11.2
105.2
87.5
88.4
10.2
10.7
10.7
98.4 103.3 127.3

Latest
2005 1/ observation
4.0
5.0
3.9
364.6
2367.8

Proj.
Proj.
Oct-04
Jan-05
Jan-05

-1.0
2.7
23.6
102.1
13.4
110.4
116.8
13.2
37.1
12.7
35.4
25.3
113.8
11.9

Managed
Float
-2.8
2.1
-0.1
94.9
12.5
110.5
...
12.3
36.0
13.0
35.5
...
108.9
14.3

Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Dec-04
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.
Proj.

-2.5
2.7
2.5
9.9
50.4
...
48.0
0.0
50.4

Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj.
Proj.
date
Proj

...
...
...
...

10.0
47.5
8.0
40.0

10.5
52.3
9.4
39.0

10.5
46.0
8.8
35.6

134.9
10.2

134.9
11.7

129.7
11.2

-3.4
1.0
...
8.3
47.7

-3.2
1.8
...
9.5
51.8

-3.6
0.9
...
10.0
60.2

-2.6
2.1
...
9.8
56.0

55.1

55.1

53.2

53.2

47.7

51.8

60.2

56.0

-1.3
3.1
...
5.5
52.9
12.9
49.1
...
52.9

13.2
10.6
56.6
-2.3
-20.7
0.4
13.1
-1.4
7.8
-8.6

13.0
10.2
77.5
0.1
1.1
0.5
11.0
4.8
11.4
1.7

12.6
9.2
86.5
1.1
9.6
0.4
11.6
7.8
18.4
4.0

13.1
6.8
83.5
2.5
17.0
0.0
8.8
4.3
18.0
9.2

14.0
3.6
111.3
2.7
23.4
2.0
6.1
4.8
22.2
12.2

...
...
...
...
14.6

Sep-04
Sep-04
Jun-04
Sep-04
Sep-04
Sep-04
Sep-04
Sep-04
Sep-04
Proj.

83.8

82.0

81.6

80.0

97.4

112.3

Proj.

1/ Staff estimates, projections, or latest available observations as indicated in the last column.
2/ Net international reserves in percent of ST debt at remaining maturity (RM) provided.
3/ Current account deficit plus amortization of external debt.
4/ Public sector covers: general government, public enterprises, and quasi-fisca operations of the central bank.
5/ Based on averages for the last five years for the relevant variables (i.e., growth, interest rates).
6/ Overall balance plus debt amortization.
7/ ST debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt, domestic and external, excluding external debt to official creditors. (Short term)
8/ Debt in foreign currency or linked to the exchange rate, domestic and external, excluding external debt on concessional terms. (Short
9/ ST debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt at variable interest rates, domestic and external. (Short term)
10/ Financial sector includes banks and excludes credit unions and public sector specialized institutions.
11/ Sum of on- and off-balance sheet exposure.

- 28 -

Table 4. Colombia: Summary Balance of Payments, 2000-2008
2000

2001

2002

2003

Current account balance

737

-1,114

-1,371

-1,191

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Coffee
Petroleum products
Non-traditional
Other
Imports, f.o.b.

2,633
13,722
1,069
4,569
6,200
1,884
11,090

579
12,848
764
3,285
6,613
2,186
12,269

239
12,316
772
3,275
6,287
1,982
12,077

Services (net)

-1,282

-1,433

Income (net)
Interest (net)
Of which : public sector
Other Income (net)

-2,286
-1,663
-889
-623

-2,615
-1,738
-1,087
-877

1,673

2004
Prog.

Proj.
2006

Est.

2005

2007

2008

-1,978

-1,013

-3,150

-2,858 -3,122 -3,131

435
13,693
806
3,383
6,120
3,383
13,258

-222
15,039
913
3,991
6,560
3,575
15,260

1,016
16,918
1,012
4,227
7,793
3,886
15,902

-1,500
16,905
1,129
3,795
7,789
4,192
18,405

-1,465
17,446
1,145
3,443
8,634
4,223
18,911

-1,466

-1,513

-1,632

-1,568

-1,785

-1,845 -1,957 -2,076

-2,848
-1,905
-1,262
-944

-3,446
-2,001
-1,452
-1,445

-3,423
-2,282
-1,660
-1,141

-4,123
-2,037
-1,429
-2,086

-3,669
-2,026
-1,555
-1,643

-3,576
-1,883
-1,436
-1,693

-3,071
-1,815
-1,383
-1,256

-3,189
-1,893
-1,460
-1,297

2,354

2,704

3,334

3,299

3,661

3,804

4,027

4,246

4,467

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Current transfers (net)
Financial account balance

-2,340
17,607
1,207
1,885
10,197
4,318
19,947

-2,332
19,254
1,280
1,862
11,567
4,545
21,586

24

2,475

1,303

810

2,690

3,245

2,295

3,171

3,600

3,697

402
1,243
1,662
3,238
1,576
-40
-379
-259
-841

1,443
1,915
3,462
5,743
2,281
-35
-1,512
-1,534
-473

363
495
-1,093
2,469
3,561
-30
1,617
1,567
-131

428
720
1,457
4,915
3,459
-30
-707
-570
-293

1,450
1,513
748
2,723
1,975
-26
792
792
-63

-327
60
934
2,889
1,955
-50
-825
-939
-387

-515
-481
-613
3,145
3,759
-29
161
161
-35

576
842
-347
1,922
2,269
-29
1,218
1,218
-267

551
596
509
2,776
2,267
-29
116
116
-45

290
315
383
3,370
2,986
-29
-40
-40
-26

-378
28
2,069
465
-109
-479
-1,453
-406

1,032
1,063
2,509
0
-211
126
-1,360
-31

939
1,113
1,258
0
-160
-970
985
-174

382
823
855
0
-319
-726
1,012
-441

1,240
1,063
1,265
0
-278
-243
319
176

3,572
3,067
2,646
0
107
-1,109
1,423
505

2,811
2,392
2,343
0
-214
337
-75
418

2,595
2,596
2,137
0
-133
567
25
-1

3,049
2,838
2,372
0
-71
700
-163
211

3,407
3,000
2,537
0
-235
614
84
408

Net errors and omissions

108

-143

207

197

0

351

0

0

0

0

Changes in GIR 3/
Changes in NIR, program definition 3/

870
687

1,217
1,182

138
525

-184
17

712
883

2,583
2,671

-855
-855

313
313

478
478

566
566

Current account balance

0.9

-1.4

-2.2

-1.0

-2.8

-2.6

-2.7

-2.6

8.1

6.5

6.7

6.6

6.4

Public sector (net)
Nonfinancial public sector
Medium- and long-term (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Other long-term flows
Short term 1/
Of which : change in public assets
Financial public sector
Private sector (net)
Nonfinancial private sector (net)
Direct investment
Of which : Privatization
Leasing finance
Long-term loans
Short term 2/
Financial private sector (net)

(In percent of GDP)
-1.7

-1.5

(In months of imports of goods and services)
Gross international reserves 4/

6.8

8.0

7.8

6.6

7.2

Sources: Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes movements of short-term assets owned by the public sector abroad.
2/ Includes net portfolio investment.
3/ Does not include valuation changes of reserves denominated in other currencies than U.S. dollars.
4/ Not including Fund purchases under the standby arrangement.

2.9
-5.8
6.7
12.8
9.0
4.1
2.6

7.4
9.4

1.5
3.4
7.7
-4.6
11.4
2.0
3.0

9.0
10.9

260.1

1.5
-3.8
-2.0
-7.8
18.3
10.5
-3.0
1.2
3.4
-0.6
-1.5
5.3

47.5

2001

1.9
-14.9
6.4
-5.7
1.1
1.6
1.8

11.5
16.2

263.3

4.8
7.4
-1.6
-7.6
19.9
12.2
-1.8
10.8
3.5
-1.1
8.3
-2.6

52.3

Actual
2002

4.0
11.5
6.5
9.8
12.8
1.5
1.0

11.2
13.5

244.5

-6.3
-6.8
-1.5
-6.9
18.8
11.9
-1.0
-4.3
2.9
-1.8
-5.4
0.5

46.0

2003

4.0
24.4
6.6
21.9
24.4
1.4
2.5

10.7
10.0

209.4

-8.9
-12.0
-1.4
-6.3
17.7
11.5
-2.5
-8.1
2.3
-1.4
-9.0
3.1

37.1

2004

2.1
1.4
7.1
6.3
1.1
0.3
2.4

10-Year
Historical
Average
2.6
12.5
0.6
9.4
21.1
2.9
1.1

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9

35.9

4.0
-2.0
6.8
0.0
18.5
-0.4
2.1

15.3
14.0

206.3

-1.2
-0.7
0.4
-4.1
17.4
13.3
-2.1
1.0
2.5
-1.5
...
-0.5

35.9

2005

2007

4.0
1.0
6.5
0.9
6.1
-0.5
2.1

14.5
12.7

205.8

-0.6
-0.7
0.5
-3.4
17.3
13.9
-2.1
0.9
2.2
-1.4
...
0.1

35.6

4.0
2.6
7.1
8.6
9.2
-0.2
2.1

15.9
13.0

193.4

-1.5
-0.8
0.2
-3.4
17.6
14.2
-2.1
1.0
2.4
-1.3
...
-0.7

34.1

4.0
1.9
7.4
8.4
8.5
-0.2
2.1

16.5
12.8

182.4

-1.2
-0.8
0.2
-3.4
18.0
14.6
-2.1
1.1
2.4
-1.3
...
-0.4

36.8
38.8
45.1
41.5
43.6
47.1

33.9

36.9
40.9
58.1
46.1
53.6
46.2

32.9

35.4
39.1
55.4
44.6
51.6
44.1

31.6

34.2
37.7
53.2
43.5
50.0
42.4

30.3

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

4.0
-4.3
6.6
3.0
2.9
-0.2
2.0

14.0
12.9

201.1

0.3
-0.8
0.2
-4.2
18.0
13.8
-2.0
1.0
2.4
-1.4
...
1.1

32.9

Projections
2008
2009

I. Baseline Projections
36.2

2006

33.3
36.6
51.5
42.7
48.9
41.2

29.2

4.0
2.0
7.5
10.3
9.9
-0.2
2.0

17.7
12.9

170.5

-0.9
-0.7
0.2
-3.6
18.7
15.1
-2.0
1.1
2.3
-1.2
...
-0.2

31.9

2010

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
ε = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and α = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 5/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

229.1

0.6
-2.2
-4.1
-10.2
20.1
9.9
-2.6
4.6
3.1
-1.4
2.8
2.8

2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
9
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

46.1

1 External debt

2000

Table 5. Colombia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

-1.6
-1.9
-2.7
-1.5
-2.1
-2.1

-1.4

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/

4.0
0.2
7.0
5.2
9.2
-0.3
2.1

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-1.6

- 29 -

R e a l in te r e s t r a te is a t h is to r ic a l a v e r a g e p lu s tw o s ta n d a r d d e v ia tio n s in 2 0 0 5 a n d 2 0 0 6
R e a l G D P g r o w th is a t h is to r ic a l a v e r a g e m in u s tw o s ta n d a rd d e v ia tio n s in 2 0 0 5 a n d 2 0 0 6
P r im a r y b a la n c e is a t h is to ric a l a v e r a g e m in u s tw o s ta n d a r d d e v ia tio n s in 2 0 0 5 a n d 2 0 0 6
C o m b in a tio n o f B 1 -B 3 u s in g o n e s ta n d a r d d e v ia tio n s h o c k s
O n e tim e 3 0 p e r c e n t r e a l d e p r e c ia tio n in 2 0 0 5 9 /
1 0 p e rc e n t o f G D P in c r e a s e in o th e r d e b t-c r e a tin g flo w s in 2 0 0 5

2 .9
1 2 .3
0 .2
-1 5 .9
1 2 .1
-5 .5
-0 .9

5 .9
5 .0

1 7 0 .3

6 .4
1 .9
-0 .9
2 8 .0
2 7 .1
3 .3
-1 .1
-0 .1
-1 .0
4 .4
-0 .5
-0 .5
0 .0
0 .0
4 .5

4 7 .7
2 6 .3

1 .5
1 1 .3
5 .1
-2 .7
6 .2
5 .5
-1 .3

6 .3
5 .1

1 7 5 .4

4 .1
0 .9
-1 .3
2 9 .5
2 8 .2
2 .3
1 .6
2 .2
-0 .7
0 .7
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
3 .1

5 1 .8
2 8 .5

2001

1 .9
9 .4
2 .9
-2 0 .0
6 .4
4 .5
-0 .5

8 .4
6 .8

2 0 5 .3

8 .5
7 .1
-0 .5
2 9 .3
2 8 .9
7 .5
0 .4
1 .3
-0 .9
7 .1
0 .1
0 .1
0 .0
0 .0
1 .3

6 0 .2
3 1 .9

A c tu a l
2002

4 .0
8 .9
0 .8
3 .1
8 .2
1 .9
-1 .9

7 .5
6 .0

1 8 5 .2

-4 .2
-4 .7
-1 .9
3 0 .2
2 8 .3
-2 .8
-1 .9
0 .2
-2 .1
-0 .9
0 .1
0 .1
0 .0
0 .0
0 .5

5 6 .0
2 9 .6

2003

4 .0
8 .9
1 .9
1 6 .3
7 .0
5 .2
-3 .0

3 .7
3 .6

1 6 7 .1

-3 .1
-8 .1
-3 .0
3 1 .6
2 8 .6
-5 .2
-1 .2
0 .8
-2 .0
-4 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
5 .0

5 2 .9
2 4 .1

2004

5 1 .6
5 0 .4

5 0 .4
5 0 .4
5 0 .4
5 0 .4
5 0 .4
5 0 .4

5 0 .4

4 .0
1 0 .2
4 .9
...
5 .3
4 .1
-2 .5

6 .1
6 .9

1 6 1 .9

-2 .5
-2 .1
-2 .5
3 1 .1
2 8 .7
0 .3
0 .3
2 .3
-1 .9
...
0 .1
0 .1
0 .0
0 .0
-0 .4

5 0 .4
2 2 .7

2005

P r o j e c t io n s
2007
2008

4 .0
1 0 .7
5 .6
...
5 .1
2 .9
-2 .6

4 .5
5 .1

1 5 5 .6

-1 .6
-1 .9
-2 .6
3 1 .0
2 8 .3
0 .6
0 .6
2 .5
-1 .8
...
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .3

4 .0
1 0 .6
6 .4
...
4 .1
4 .5
-2 .6

4 .2
5 .1

1 4 8 .8

-2 .0
-1 .5
-2 .6
3 1 .1
2 8 .5
1 .0
1 .0
2 .8
-1 .8
...
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
-0 .4

4 6 .2
2 0 .8

4 .0
1 0 .5
7 .3
...
3 .2
3 .9
-2 .6

3 .9
5 .0

1 4 3 .3

-1 .7
-1 .2
-2 .6
3 1 .1
2 8 .4
1 .4
1 .4
3 .1
-1 .7
...
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
-0 .5

4 4 .5
2 0 .0

2009

5 2 .7
5 0 .4

5 0 .6
5 5 .8
5 5 .1
5 4 .6
5 9 .6
5 9 .8

4 9 .6

5 0 .9
4 8 .1

4 7 .8
6 5 .4
5 7 .2
5 6 .3
5 6 .6
5 6 .8

4 5 .7

5 0 .2
4 7 .0

4 6 .2
6 8 .6
5 5 .9
5 4 .9
5 5 .2
5 5 .5

4 3 .3

4 9 .5
4 6 .0

4 4 .5
7 1 .9
5 4 .6
5 3 .4
5 3 .9
5 4 .1

4 0 .9

4 .0
1 0 .6
7 .6
...
3 .0
3 .7
-2 .6

3 .5
4 .8

1 3 8 .1

-1 .7
-1 .1
-2 .6
3 1 .0
2 8 .3
1 .5
1 .5
3 .1
-1 .7
...
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
-0 .6

4 2 .7
1 9 .3

2010

= s h a re o f fo re ig n -c u r r e n c y

5 2 .0
4 9 .4

4 9 .8
6 2 .7
5 8 .9
5 8 .0
5 8 .2
5 8 .5

4 8 .0

I I . S tr e s s T e s t s f o r P u b lic D e b t R a tio

4 .0
1 0 .1
5 .8
...
4 .3
4 .0
-2 .6

4 .5
5 .0

1 5 9 .3

-0 .6
-1 .8
-2 .6
3 1 .3
2 8 .7
0 .7
0 .7
2 .6
-1 .9
...
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
0 .0
1 .2

4 8 .2
2 1 .9

I . B a s e lin e P r o j e c t io n s
4 9 .8
2 2 .5

2006

1 / In d ic a te c o v e r a g e o f p u b lic s e c to r , e .g ., g e n e r a l g o v e r n m e n t o r n o n fin a n c ia l p u b lic s e c to r . A ls o w h e th e r n e t o r g r o s s d e b t is u s e d .
2 / D e r iv e d a s [ ( r ٛg - g +
ٛ r ] /( 1 + g + + g ) ) tim e s p r e v io u s p e rio d d e b t r a tio , w ith r = in te re s t ra te ; = g r o w th r a te o f G D P d e fla to r ; g = r e a l G D P g ro w th ra te ;
d e n o m in a te d d e b t; a n d = n o m in a l e x c h a n g e r a te d e p r e c ia tio n ( m e a s u re d b y in c r e a s e in lo c a l c u r r e n c y v a lu e o f U .S . d o lla r) .
3 / T h e r e a l in te r e s t r a te c o n trib u tio n is d e r iv e d fro m th e d e n o m in a to r in fo o tn o te 2 / a s r - π (1 + g ) a n d th e r e a l g r o w th c o n tr ib u tio n a s -g .
( 1 + r) .
4 / T h e e x c h a n g e r a te c o n trib u tio n is d e r iv e d fr o m th e n u m e ra to r in fo o tn o te 2 / a s
5 / F o r p r o j e c tio n s , th is lin e in c lu d e s e x c h a n g e r a te c h a n g e s .
6 / D e fin e d a s p u b lic s e c to r d e fic it, p lu s a m o r tiz a tio n o f m e d iu m a n d lo n g -te rm p u b lic s e c to r d e b t, p lu s s h o r t-te r m d e b t a t e n d o f p r e v io u s p e r io d .
7 / D e r iv e d a s n o m in a l in te r e s t e x p e n d itu re d iv id e d b y p r e v io u s p e r io d d e b t s to c k .
8 / T h e k e y v a ria b le s in c lu d e r e a l G D P g r o w th ; r e a l in te r e s t r a te ; a n d p r im a r y b a la n c e in p e r c e n t o f G D P .
9 / R e a l d e p r e c ia tio n is d e fin e d a s n o m in a l d e p r e c ia tio n ( m e a s u re d b y p e rc e n ta g e fa ll in d o lla r v a lu e o f lo c a l c u rr e n c y ) m in u s d o m e s tic in fla tio n ( b a s e d o n G D P d e fla to r ).
1 0 / A s s u m e s th a t k e y v a r ia b le s ( re a l G D P g r o w th , re a l in te r e s t ra te , a n d o th e r id e n tifie d d e b t-c re a tin g flo w s ) r e m a in a t th e le v e l o f th e la s t p r o j e c tio n y e a r .

C 1 . P e r c a p ita r e a l G D P is c o n s ta n t fr o m 2 0 0 5 th r u 2 0 1 0
C 2 . P rim a r y b a la n c e fa lls b y 0 .5 o f G D P fro m 2 0 0 6 th r u 2 0 1 0

C . C o u n t r y S p e c if ic t e s ts

B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.
B6.

B . S tressT ests

A 1 . K e y v a ria b le s a r e a t th e ir h is to r ic a l a v e r a g e s in 2 0 0 5 -0 9 8 /

A . A lt e r n a t iv e S c e n a r io s

R e a l G D P g ro w th ( in p e rc e n t)
A v e r a g e n o m in a l in te r e s t r a te o n p u b lic d e b t ( in p e rc e n t) 7 /
A v e r a g e re a l in te r e s t ra te ( n o m in a l r a te m in u s c h a n g e in G D P d e fla to r , in p e r c e n t)
N o m in a l a p p r e c ia tio n ( in c r e a s e in U S d o lla r v a lu e o f lo c a l c u r r e n c y , in p e rc e n t)
I n fla tio n r a te ( G D P d e fla to r, in p e r c e n t)
G ro w th o f r e a l p rim a r y s p e n d in g ( d e fla te d b y G D P d e fla to r , in p e rc e n t)
P r im a ry d e fic it

K e y M a c r o e c o n o m ic a n d F is c a l A s s u m p t io n s

G r o s s f in a n c in g n e e d 6 /
in b illio n s o f U .S . d o lla r s

P u b lic s e c to r d e b t-to -r e v e n u e ra tio 1 /

2 C h a n g e in p u b lic s e c to r d e b t
3 I d e n tifie d d e b t-c r e a tin g flo w s ( 4 + 7 + 1 2 )
4
P r im a ry d e fic it
5
R e v e n u e a n d g r a n ts
6
P r im a ry ( n o n in te r e s t) e x p e n d itu r e
7
A u to m a tic d e b t d y n a m ic s 2 /
8
C o n trib u tio n fr o m in te re s t ra te /g r o w th d iffe re n tia l 3 /
9
O f w h ic h c o n trib u tio n fr o m r e a l in te r e s t r a te
10
O f w h ic h c o n trib u tio n fr o m r e a l G D P g r o w th
11
C o n trib u tio n fr o m e x c h a n g e r a te d e p r e c ia tio n 4 /
12
O th e r id e n tifie d d e b t-c r e a tin g flo w s
13
P r iv a tiz a tio n re c e ip ts ( n e g a tiv e )
14
R e c o g n itio n o f im p lic it o r c o n tin g e n t lia b ilitie s
15
O th e r (s p e c ify , e .g . b a n k r e c a p ita liz a tio n )
1 6 R e s id u a l, in c lu d in g a s s e t c h a n g e s ( 2 -3 ) 5 /

1 P u b lic s e c to r d e b t 1 /
o /w fo r e ig n -c u r r e n c y d e n o m in a te d

2000

T a b le 6 . C o lo m b ia : P u b lic S e c to r D e b t S u s ta in a b ility F ra m e w o r k , 2 0 0 0 -2 0 1 0
(In p e r c e n t o f G D P , u n le s s o th e r w is e in d ic a te d )

1 .7
2 .7
2 .1
2 .0
2 .0
2 .0

- 1 .0

D e b t -s t a b iliz in g
p r im a r y
b a la n c e

4 .0
1 0 .4
6 .3
...
4 .2
3 .8
-2 .6

P r o j e c te d
A verage

D e b t -s t a b iliz in g
p r im a r y
b a la n c e 1 0 /
1 .6

- 30 -

- 31 -

Table 7. Colombia: Social Indicators

Income per capita in U.S. dollars
Income share highest 20 percent/ lowest 20 percent

1988

1995

1999

2004

1,297
17.6

2,562
17.2

2,212
20.2

2,094
20.3

65
29
3.3
78.7
5.0

60
21
2.8
77.7
5.2

64
23
2.6
89.8
3.7

51.8
16.6
7.9
90
5.8

97
95

98
96

99
97

91
86

(In percent of relevant population)
Poverty rate 1/
Extreme poverty rate 1/
Illiteracy rate (12 years or older) 2/
Complete primary school (ages 12 to 17) 3/
Child labor, ages 10 to 14 2/
Access to public utilities
Water 4/
Sewerage 4/

Sources: United Nations Development Programme: Human Development Report 2004; and Carlos
Eduardo Velez, Poverty Report, The World Bank, 2002.
1/ 2004 figure refers to 2003.
2/ 2004 figure refers to 2002.
3/ 2004 figure refers to 2001.
4/ 2004 figure refers to 2000.

- 32 -

APPENDIX I

COLOMBIA: FUND RELATIONS
(As of February 28, 2005)

I.

Membership Status:
Joined: December 27, 1945
Status: Article XIV

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
774.00
488.20
285.80

% Quota
100.00
63.08
36.93

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
114.27
117.15

% Allocation
100.00
102.

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
1,548.00
1,957.00

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
0.00
0.00

Type
SBA
EFF
VI.

Approval
Date
Jan. 15, 2003
Dec. 20, 1999

Expiration
Date
April 14, 2005
Dec. 19, 2002

Projected Obligations to Fund (in SDR Million):
Type

20005

2006

Forthcoming
2007

2008

2009

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

- 33 -

VII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Under the safeguards policy, Colombia was subject to a safeguards assessment with respect
to its current Stand-By Arrangement with the Fund. Staff concluded a safeguards assessment
mission on April 10, 2003 and the final report was approved by management on
May 14, 2003. The assessment noted no significant vulnerabilities.
VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangement:
In September 1999 the Banco de la República floated the peso. The authorities accepted the
obligations of Article VIII in August 2004. At end-February 2005, the exchange rate was
Col$2,324 per U.S. dollar.
IX.

Last Article IV Consultation:

The 2002 Article IV consultation was concluded on January 15, 2003.
X.

FSAP Participation:

The Executive Board discussed the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) in 1999.
XI.

Statistics: Colombia subscribes to the SDDS.

XII.

Recent Technical Assistance:

Dept.

Purpose

Time of Delivery

FAD

Advice on the reform of the budget code

March 2003

FAD

Follow-up on the reform of the budget code

November 2003

MFD

Inflation forecast under inflation target framework

May 2004

FAD

Assessment of fiscal decentralization

May 2004

XIII. Resident Representative: None.
XIV. Fourth Amendment: Colombia has accepted this amendment.

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

Colombia: Relations with the World Bank 1
The World Bank and Colombia’s Development Strategy
Colombia’s National Development Plan is built on four pillars: (i) provide security to all
Colombians; (ii) foster sustainable economic growth and employment generation under
macroeconomic and price stability; (iii) build a more equitable society; and (iv) increase the
transparency and efficiency of the State. The World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) strategy seeks to
support Colombia’s quest for development and peace. The Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) for Colombia was discussed by the Bank’s Board in January 2003 and since then,
Colombia has received US$1.5 billion in loans to date. Between 50–60 percent of the lending
program would consist of fast-disbursing operations. A CAS Progress Report will be
prepared for July 2005.
The World Bank Program for FY 2005–06
In line with the CAS, since June 2004, the IBRD has continued the preparation of adjustment
loans to support fiscal adjustment, financial sector adjustment, the labor and social sector
reform, and environmental management. Labor and social sector reforms are being supported
by a technical assistance loan that aims at improving knowledge, developing effective
instruments, and strengthening ability to carry out such reforms. The environment adjustment
loan is being complemented by a technical assistance loan to support the inclusion of
environmental and social policies in government programs and to strengthen the capacity of
the major relevant institutions.
The IBRD will also support a program in the infrastructure sector, covering water supply and
sanitation services and a project to reduce Colombia's vulnerability to natural disasters in
terms of state fiscal liability. IFC focuses on supporting new forms of public-private
partnership. MIGA focuses on the provision of political risk guarantees for private sector
investments; hands-on technical assistance for investment promotion intermediaries; and the
dissemination of information on investment opportunities in Colombia.
Bank-Fund Collaboration in Specific Areas
The WBG is helping Colombia implement its reform agenda in the following areas of BankFund collaboration:
•
•
•
•
•

1

Fiscal adjustment, notably reforming the tax system, strengthening tax administration,
implementing a fiscal responsibility law, and reforming the public sector.
Reform of the pension and social security systems.
Foster financial sector and capital market developments.
Broaden and deepen the scope of Colombia’s anticorruption program.
Combat money laundering.

Prepared by World Bank staff. Questions may be addressed to Ms. Keta Ruiz, Senior Country Officer, at
(202) 473-0137 or kruiz@worldbank.org.

- 35 -

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and grants)
As of March 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Closed Projects
Active Projects

163
15

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
Of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
Of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

303.4
0.0
10,045.1
8,423.8
10,348.5
8,423.8

Of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

674.9
0.3
675.2

Loan Information (IBRD)
As of March 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Fiscal Year*
Total disbursements
Repayment amount
Net disbursements

2001
264
225
39

2002
369
243
126

2003
948
223
725

2004
491
205
286

2005
403
156
247

* Fiscal Year: July 1–June 30.

IFC Operations
As of January 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Loans Equity (+Quasi) Participation
Total commitments
Total undisbursed

299.6
102.2

129.0
19.8

117.2
95.2

Total
545.8
217.2

- 36 -

APPENDIX III

COLOMBIA: RELATIONS WITH THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK1
(As of February 25, 2005)
I. Background and Objectives
In September 2003, the IADB Board of Directors approved the Bank’s strategy for Colombia
for the period 2003–2006. The strategy identifies three overarching objectives: (i) lay the
foundations for economic revival and jump-starting growth; (ii) foster social progress and
make sure society’s most vulnerable are protected; and (iii) strengthen governance and
further modernization of the State. These objectives constitute the framework for the Bank
activities in Colombia.
To help reinvigorate the economy the Bank will foster competitiveness and will support
agricultural development and natural resources management. To foster social progress and
ensure that society’s most vulnerable are protected, Bank’s actions will improve social
protection systems and will promote the coverage, quality, and efficiency of essential social
services. In the governance and modernization of the State area the Bank will support
national public sector reforms and local governments management capacity building,
moreover, the Bank will promote initiatives to foster transparency and combat corruption,
and will support judicial branch reforms.
From the Bank’s standpoint, the implementation of the strategy is constrained by the
country’s fiscal deficit and the armed conflict. Both constraints have implications for the size
of the lending program, the mix of lending and non-lending products, and the prospects for
achieving the strategy objectives.
II. LENDING
As of February 25, 2005 the country’s portfolio consists of 26 loans an amount equivalent to
US$1,901 million. These resources are distributed among 24 investment loans (US$
901 million) and two policy-based loans (US$1,000 million). In addition, the country
portfolio with Colombia includes 45 non-reimbursable technical cooperation
(US$25,7 million) and four small projects (US$1.67 million). Through the Multilateral
Investment Fund (MIF), which finances private sector investment projects, Colombia has 30
non-reimbursable operations (US$18.3 million).
In 2004 six loans for US$737 million were approved. These operations include policy-based
loans to support the Public Utilities Reform (US$600 million). In 2005, the Bank estimates
the approval of seven investment loans by US$ 626.1 million (in the areas of transportation,
health, citizens security, energy and agriculture) and a policy-based loan by US$ 400 million
to support the Country’s Competitiveness Strategy.
__________________
1

Prepared by IADB staff. Questions may be addressed to Mr. Luis Giorgio, Country Officer, at (202) 623-1663
or giorgio@iadb.org.

- 37 COLOMBIA: FINANCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of February 28, 2005)
I. IDB OPERATIONS
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Commitments Disbursements

Undisbursed
amounts

Agricultural and rural development

92.1

83.1

9.0

Modernization of State
Social Investment
Education
Health
Sanitation
Natural resource management
Urban development and household
Transportation
Grand total

692.7
312.2
26.0
472.0
49.4
55.4
180.0
21.7
1,901.5

248.8
218.8
13.9
265.0
31.3
30.4
14.8
14.3
920.4

443.9
93.4
12.1
207.0
18.1
25.0
165.2
7.4
981.2

II. IDB LOAN TRANSACTIONS
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004* 2005**

Gross
disbursement
Amortization,
interest and
contributions

412.9

952.4

241.2

785.3

151.8 2,011.7

332.0

835.2

369.1

445.8

473.2

408.2

819.4 1,017.5

648.6

534.1

Net cash flow

43.8

506.6

-232.0

377.1

667.6

-316.6

301.1

(*) Preliminary.
(**) Projections.
Source: IADB.

994.2

- 38 -

APPENDIX IV

COLOMBIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
The data provided by the authorities are generally adequate for surveillance. Colombia has
subscribed and is in observance of the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and its
metadata are posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB).
Colombia takes flexibility option on the timeliness of the production index and it is also
taking the extensive branch banking system flexibility for the timeliness of the data on the
analytical accounts of the banking sector.
Real sector
The National Department of Statistics (DANE) is responsible for the compilation of the
national accounts, though the Banco de la República (BR) compiles the financial accounts.
In 1999, the DANE revised the national accounts by moving the base year from 1970
to 1994, incorporating transactions in the free trade zones, and including part of the illegal
activities.
Government finance statistics
The Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (MFPC) is responsible for the compilation on
public revenue, expenditure, and financing data. While significant progress has been made,
there is still a need to improve the timeliness and coverage of fiscal data, develop timely and
reliable data on the finances of local governments, and improve monitoring of floating debts
by gradually extending the coverage from the central government to other public sector
entities.
A technical assistance mission of the Statistics Department (STA) of the IMF in the area of
Government Finance Statistics (GFS) visited Bogotá in 2002. This mission found that the
General Accounting Office (GAO) has made good progress in the development of a single
accounting database for the public sector. Currently, the GAO is using this revised chart of
accounts for the preparation of the GFS classification keys. These classification keys follow
the analytical framework of the GFS Manual 2001 and are used for the preparation of GFS to
be published in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (GFSY). The GAO accounting
database is used to convert accounting data to the GFS classifications on both the accrual and
cash bases.
Monthly data have been reported for publication in IFS and, annual data on the consolidated
central government on accrual and cash basis have been reported for publication in the 2004
GFS Y. The last year for which data have been reported is 2002.
Financial sector statistics
The BR is in charge of compiling data on the financial sector , while the Superintendency of
Banks and the Superintendency of Securities compile data in their respective areas. Fund

- 39 -

APPENDIX IV

technical assistance missions have placed special emphasis on issues of data quality,
interagency cooperation, and procedures to ensure data consistency.
Balance of payments and external debt
The BR is in charge of compiling and disseminating balance of payments data. Quarterly
data are produced since 1994, and the BR adopted the BPM5 standard in 1998. Balance of
payment statistics have been extended to cover transactions in the free trade zones. Improved
surveys, particularly in the service sector, have enhanced coverage and consistency. Financial
account data are now based on actual disbursement rather than registers. Monthly data on
public sector short-term external debt , and the calculation of interest payments for the
private sector debt need to be improved.
The BR compiles and disseminates data on International Investment Position statistics and
the Data Template on International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity.

Including currency and maturity composition.

Sept. 2004

Jun. 2004

Gross External Debt

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

M

Q

M

D

M

D

D

M

D

Frequency
of
1
Data

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

M

Q

M

W

M

W

W

M

W

Frequency
of
1
Reporting

2

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

M

Q

M

D

M

W

W

M

D

1

Frequency of publication

Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Bi-monthly (B); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
3
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
4
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
5
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
6

1

Feb. 2005

Q3/2004

GDP/GNP

Feb. 2005

Dec. 2004

Oct. 2004

Feb. 2005

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

Dec. 2004

Jun. 2004

6

Feb. 2005

03/21/05

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

3/5/05

3/5/05

3/5/05

3/5/05

3/5/05

3/9/05

3/5/05

Date
received

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central
Government

4

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General
5
Government

Consumer Price Index

Interest Rates

4

1/31/05

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System
2/28/05

1/31/05

Central Bank Balance Sheet

3

1/31/05

Broad Money

2/28/05
1/31/05

2

2/28/05

Reserve/Base Money

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange Rates

Date of latest
observation

As of March 29, 2005

Colombia: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance

- 40 -

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
COLOMBIA
Fourth Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement, Requests for Waiver of
Nonobservance of Performance Criteria and
the Completion of the Fourth Review, and Request for Stand-By Arrangement
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by José Fajgenbaum and Carlo Cottarelli
April 14, 2005
Two staff reports. The policy discussions covered issues related to the Fund-supported programs as well as
a broader assessment of economic policies in the context of the Article IV consultation. This report reviews
performance under the current Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) and presents the policies and objectives to be
supported by the proposed SBA. It is a complement to the companion report on the Article IV consultation
discussions.
Current arrangement. In January 2003, the Board approved a SBA in the amount of SDR 1,548 million
(100 percent of quota at an annual rate). In March 2005, the arrangement was extended to May 14, 2005. The
authorities have treated the arrangement as precautionary. Colombia has no outstanding credit to the Fund
(Appendix I).
Completion of fourth review. All quantitative performance criteria at end-2004 were observed. The
authorities are requesting waivers for the nonobservance of the structural performance criterion on
congressional approval of the revised budget code and for nonobservance of the continuous performance
criterion on the introduction of multiple currency practices. On this basis, the authorities are requesting
completion of the fourth review under the current program. The staff supports the authorities’ requests.
Proposed new arrangement. In their letter to the Managing Director dated April 13, 2005, the authorities
are requesting continued support from the Fund through a new SBA for a period of 18 months and in the
amount of SDR 405 million (35 percent of quota on an annual basis). The authorities want this arrangement
to provide a smooth exit from Fund’s financial assistance by supporting their policies for 2005–06, which
aim at continuing to reduce the vulnerabilities of the economy and strengthening the basis for sustained real
economic growth. The staff supports the authorities’ request.
Discussions. A staff team held discussions in Bogotá during December 1–10, 2004 and January 25 and
February 3–17, 2005. The team met with the Minister of Finance, the General Manager and the Board of
Directors of the Banco de la República, the Director of the National Planning Department and other senior
government officials and representatives of the private sector. The staff team comprised R. Rennhack
(Head), R. Garcia-Saltos, O. Hendrick, (all WHD), I. Adenauer (FAD), and J. Wiegand (PDR). C. Schnure
(WHD), J. Cayazzo (MFD) and J. Acevedo (MFD-consultant) joined the December mission. Li Lian Ong
(ICM) joined the second mission. Mr. Fajgenbaum (WHD) participated in the final policy discussions in
February. Mr. Steiner, Alternate Executive Director for Colombia, participated in all policy discussions.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Recent Economic Developments and Review of Performance Under
Current Arrangement ..................................................................................................5

II.

The 2005–06 Economic Program ..................................................................................8
A.
Fiscal Policy.......................................................................................................9
B.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ............................................................13
C.
Financial Sector ...............................................................................................15
D.
Medium-Term Outlook....................................................................................15
E.
Program Modalities and Risks .........................................................................17

III.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................18

Figure
Output Gap and Inflation .........................................................................................................14
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators ...............................................................21
Operations of the Combined Public Sector..................................................................22
Operations of the Central Administration....................................................................23
Public Debt and Deposits.............................................................................................24
Monetary Indicators .....................................................................................................25
Banking System Indicators ..........................................................................................26
Summary Balance of Payments ...................................................................................27
Medium-Term Outlook................................................................................................28
External Debt Sustainability Framework.....................................................................29
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework.............................................................30
External Financing Requirements and Sources ...........................................................31
Schedule of Purchases Under the SBA........................................................................32
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund....................................................................33

Appendices
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.

Fund Relations .............................................................................................................34
World Bank Relations..................................................................................................36
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank...............................................38
Work Program ..............................................................................................................40
Stand-By Arrangement ................................................................................................41

-3-

Contents

Page

Attachment
Letter of Intent .........................................................................................................................45
Annexes
I.
II.

Memorandum of Economic Policies............................................................................46
Technical Memorandum of Understanding .................................................................59

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Performance under the current program continued to be very good. Economic
performance continued to improve in 2004, broadly in line with the program. All quantitative
performance criteria at end-2004 were observed and most structural benchmarks were met.
The staff supports the authorities’ request for completion of the fourth review under the
current arrangement and for two waivers.
The authorities are requesting continued Fund support for their economic policies in
2005–06. The proposed arrangement would be a Stand-By Arrangement for 18 months,
ending soon after the next government takes office. It would be in the amount of
SDR 405 million (35 percent of quota on an annual basis), well below access under the
current arrangement. This would provide a transparent and sound policy framework during
the upcoming political cycle and allow for a gradual exit from formal Fund support.
The program would preserve the macroeconomic framework supported by the current
arrangement. Real GDP would rise by 4 percent a year in 2005–06, while inflation would
decline to 5 percent in 2005 and to 3–5 percent in 2006. Net international reserves would be
equivalent to 110 percent of short-term debt at the end of both years.
Fiscal policy in 2005–06 is consistent with reducing public debt to close to 40 percent of
GDP by 2010. The combined public sector deficit would amount to 2.5 percent of GDP in
2005 and decline to 2.0 percent of GDP in 2006. As a result, public debt would decline to
about 50 percent of GDP by end-2006. These targets will be reduced by a significant share of
any oil price windfall, lowering public debt further.
The government will press for congressional approval of the revised budget code and
the constitutional amendment for pension reform by June 2005. However, it will be
difficult to introduce new structural reforms ahead of the elections in March and May 2006.
Congress is currently considering an important political reform and may consider a possible
free trade agreement with the United States later in 2005.
The Banco de la República stressed that it would assign top priority to the inflation
objective. The authorities agreed to narrow the consultation band for the inflation target to
+/- 1 percentage point. They remain fully committed to the flexible exchange rate regime,
although intervention policy could be considered at times.
The authorities will strengthen the financial system further. They will Granahorrar to the
point of sale by end-2005. Bancafé was restructured with a view to eventually bringing this
institution to the point of sale. A governance framework for public banks will be put in place
by September 2005. A new securities market law is before Congress.
The staff supports the authorities’ request for a new Stand-By Arrangement, as the
policies envisaged under the program are consistent with reaching its objectives.

-5-

I. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE UNDER
CURRENT ARRANGEMENT
1.
Economic performance improved in 2004, reflecting strong policy implementation as well as the favorable external environment. Real GDP grew by 4 percent, while
inflation declined to 5.5 percent during 2004, the lowest rate in decades (Table 1). The
external current account deficit fell to 1.0 percent of GDP in 2004, owing to strong export
performance. At the same time, net capital inflows rose sharply, as the country risk premium
stayed below 400 basis points for most of the year—well below the peak of 1,100 basis
points in October 2002. Reflecting these developments and intervention by the Banco de la
República, net international reserves reached US$13.2 billion (123 percent of short-term debt
on a remaining maturity basis) by end-2004.
Key Fiscal Trends
2.
In 2004, a moderate oil windfall and
(In percent of GDP)
an unusually high surplus by the autonomous
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
local and regional governments led to an
CPS balance
-3.4
-3.2
-3.7
-2.7
-1.3
unusually strong fiscal position. The average
Of which
price of Colombia’s exports rose unexpectedly to
Ecopetrol operating surplus
3.0
2.5
2.3
2.9
3.5
Local and regional overall
US$36 per barrel, generating additional income
balance
-0.1
0.1
0.4
0.2
1.6
for the state petroleum enterprise (Ecopetrol).
Also, 2004 was the first year in office for local
and regional governments, which ran unusually large overall surpluses probably because of
delays in developing plans for spending. As a result, the combined public sector (CPS) deficit
declined from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to 1.3 percent in 2004—well below the adjusted
program target of 2.1 percent of GDP (Tables 2 and 3; Memorandum of Economic Policies
(MEP), Table 1).1 The primary surplus increased from 1.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to
2.7 percent of GDP in 2004. This fiscal outturn, together with a significant appreciation of
the peso in 2004, reduced public debt from 60 percent of GDP at end-2002 to 53 percent by
end-2004. In addition, public sector deposits rose sharply from 8 percent of GDP at end-2002
to 10½ percent by end-2004, well above historical levels (Table 4).

3.
In 2004, total public revenues rose from 30.7 percent of GDP in 2003 to
31.6 percent of GDP in 2004. Several tax packages and pension reforms adopted in 2002
and 2003, together with better tax administration, boosted tax revenues to 20.3 percent of
GDP in 2004, from 19.5 percent in 2003. Also, the operating surplus of the state petroleum
enterprise (Ecopetrol) benefited from the rise in world oil prices. Also the domestic prices of
gasoline and diesel—which are regulated—were increased faster than inflation to try to
reduce the implicit subsidy with respect to international prices. Total public expenditures fell
1

The program target of 2.5 percent of GDP was adjusted downward by 0.4 percent of GDP
for deposits made into the Petroleum Stabilization Fund (FAEP) related to higher world oil
prices. The program also allowed for additional investment financed by privatization
proceeds, but these proceeds never materialized.

-6-

from 33.6 percent of GDP in 2003 to 33.1 percent in 2004. Current spending remained stable
at 25 percent of GDP, despite the rising transfers to the private sector related to pensions.
Fixed capital formation fell by over 1 percentage point of GDP to 7.3 percent of GDP.
4.
The authorities continued to pursue structural reforms (MEP, Table 2). The
government is fully committed to reducing the actuarial deficit of the pension system, which
remains at 187 percent of GDP even after the reforms of 2002 and 2003. In June 2004, it
submitted a constitutional amendment (which requires approval by two consecutive sessions
of Congress) designed to reduce the actuarial deficit to about 160 percent of GDP. This
reform would inter alia eliminate most of the generous special pension regimes and clarify
the definition of acquired pension rights to pave the way for additional reforms, if necessary.
The revised budget code—which is expected to strengthen expenditure management and also
requires approval by two sessions of Congress—passed in the first session of Congress but
was delayed in the second session. Congressional approval was a structural performance
criterion. The authorities intend to secure approval of the revised budget code by June 2005,
which will be a structural performance criterion under the proposed arrangement. The
government continued to reduce staffing in the public sector and to restructure public
enterprises, as part of the effort to modernize the state. Colombia, together with Ecuador and
Perú, continued to discuss a free trade agreement with the United States. However, the plan
to improve the reporting of the financing of the public sector was not implemented. Also, in
spite of the government’s efforts, the public procurement law has not advanced in congress,
and instead the government adopted several decrees and regulations that strengthened this
area.
5.
The Banco de la República lowered inflation as targeted in 2004, while slowing
the strengthening of the peso in 2004 (Table 5). In early 2004, the central bank lowered its
policy interest rates on two occasions by a total of 50 basis points to 6.75 percent. In
December 2004, it eased monetary policy further by lowering its interest rate on
expansionary monetary operations to 6.5 percent while closing its window for contractionary
operations. During 2004, the central bank also intervened in the foreign exchange market,
purchasing US$2.9 billion (about 35 percent of base money) and sterilizing about half of
these purchases. The government scaled back net external financing of the CPS deficit to
minus 0.4 percent of GDP, compared with 1.0 percent in 2003, to improve the currency
composition of public debt and to ease upward pressures on the peso.

-7-

Exchange Rate Trends
6.
Additional measures to help contain
the appreciation of the peso were introduced
170
3,500
in December 2004. To try to lower short-term
Real effective exchange rate
160
capital inflows, foreign investors were required
Nominal rate (COP per U.S.
3,000
to hold newly acquired portfolio investments for
dollar, right scale)
150
2
at least one year. Interest payments, capital
2,500
140
gains on assets, and dividends could still be
transferred abroad at any time without penalty.
130
2,000
To help exporters of bananas and flowers, the
120
authorities granted subsidies of Col$200 per
U.S. dollar to those exporters that reduce their
1,500
110
exposure to foreign exchange risk through
forward transactions and other means. The
100
1,000
estimated fiscal cost of this subsidy is less than
90
0.1 percent of GDP a year. The eligibility period
500
for this subsidy expired on February 28, 2005.
80
Fund staff determined that the subsidies
0
70
constitute a multiple currency practice by
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
creating the potential for some exporters to
benefit from a more depreciated exchange rate
in forward transactions in foreign exchange.
During 2004, the peso appreciated by 16 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and by 11 percent
in real effective terms.
Key Banking System Indicators
7.
The health of the financial system
(In percent)
continued to improve (Table 6). The solvency
and profitability of the banking system have
1999
2002
recovered, reflecting economic growth, a
11.3
12.6
successful recapitalization scheme, and improved Capital adequacy ratio (with market risk)
supervision. Nonperforming loans declined to
Nonperforming loans as a share of
total loans
12.4
9.2
3.6 percent of total loans by late 2004 and were
fully covered by provisions. In 2004, credit to the Return on assets
-3.5
1.1
private sector continued to grow strongly, after
11.9
19.7
falling sharply between 1999 and 2002. The bank Liquid assets to total assets
Spread between lending and
restructuring agency (FOGAFIN) continued to
4.4
7.4
deposit rates
trim the government’s participation in the
Sources: Superintendencia Bancaria; IFS; and Fund staff estimates.
banking system by selling several banks that
were intervened in 1999. It also brought Bancafé
(the country’s fourth largest bank) to the point of sale in February 2004, but no bids were
received, probably because of the bank’s high labor costs. Progress continued in
implementing risk-based financial supervision and actions to combat money laundering.
2

On March 2, 2005, it was announced that this control will be removed in six months.

Sep.
2004
14.0

3.6
2.7
18.0

7.3

-8-

8.
The external sector performed well (Table 7). The rise in world oil prices boosted
oil exports to US$4.2 billion (4½ percent of GDP) in 2004, even as the volume of oil exports
declined. Non-oil exports grew by 23 percent in 2004, partly on the strength of world coal
prices as well as marked growth in nontraditional exports. Also remittances from Colombians
living abroad reached US$3.5 billion (3½ percent of GDP) in 2004, making this one of the
Colombia’s largest sources of foreign exchange. While the public sector registered a modest
capital outflow, the private sector experienced a surge in net inflows, reflecting in part higher
net foreign direct investment. The overall balance of payments surplus reached
US$2.7 billion (about 2¾ percent of GDP).
9.
The political situation remains stable, although uncertainty could rise in the run
up to the elections in March (congress) and May (president) 2006. President Uribe has
sustained approval ratings on the order of 70 percent since taking office in August 2002,
partly for his success in promoting an economic recovery and improving the security
situation. In late 2004, Congress approved a constitutional amendment to allow for reelection of presidents, which would enable President Uribe to run in May 2006. However, the
constitutional court is reviewing challenges to this amendment, and is expected to issue its
ruling later this year.
10.
The security situation continues to improve but remains fragile. The
government’s program of democratic security has helped reduce numerous indicators of
violence, which has improved confidence. Since 2003, the government has been involved in
demobilization talks with the paramilitary forces and recently submitted legislation to
establish possibly reduced penalties for crimes committed by ex-combatants and to develop a
program to help former combatants re-enter civilian life. However, the guerilla armies are
still engaged in hostilities.
II. THE 2005–06 ECONOMIC PROGRAM
11.
The authorities have designed their economic policies for 2005–06 to continue to
reduce the vulnerability of the economy and promote steady economic growth. While
economic performance improved in 2003–04, public debt remains high and sensitive to
exchange rate fluctuations. The authorities are requesting continued Fund support to help
provide a transparent policy framework during the upcoming political transition. The new
arrangement would also allow for a gradual exit from formal Fund support. The program
seeks to:
•

Continue fiscal consolidation by achieving a primary surplus in 2005–06 consistent
with reducing public debt to close to 40 percent of GDP by 2010;

•

Move forward with fiscal structural reforms, including the approval of the budget
code and the pension reform;

-9-

•

Retain the commitment to the inflation targeting framework, which aims to lower
inflation to the range of 2–4 percent a year over the medium term;

•

Continue strengthening the financial system, including by improving bank
supervision further, bringing Granahorrar to the point of sale and seeking
congressional approval of the new securities law.
Macroeconomic Framework: Main Elements 2003-10
2003

2004
Rev. Prog.

Rev.

2005

Projection
2006
2007

2010

(Annual percentage change)
Real growth
Inflation 1/

4.0
6.5

4.0
5.5

4.0
5.5

4.0
5.0

4.0
4.5

4.0
3.5

4.0
3.0

-1.0
2.7
-1.3
52.9
10.6

-2.8
2.7
-2.5
50.4
…

-2.6
2.7
-2.0
49.8
…

-2.7
2.7
-1.8
48.2
…

-2.5
2.7
-1.4
42.7
…

12.3

12.7

13.1

14.9

40.5

38.0

36.0

34.0

(In percent of GDP)
External current account balance
NFPS primary balance 2/
Combined public sector balance 2/ 3/
Total public debt
Public deposits

-1.5
1.7
-2.7
56.0
8.6

-2.2
2.5
-2.5
52.1
…

(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Net international reserves 4/

10.5

10.4

13.2

(In U.S. dollars per barrel)
Crude oil, spot price 5/

28.9

....

37.8

1/ For 2007 and beyond, inflation projection consistent with achieving medium-term inflation target of 2-4 percent a year
2/ At projected WEO price of oil in 2005-06, adjusted to reflect Colombia export price.
3/ Excludes the effect of the program adjustor for any oil windfall.
4/ Takes into account the prepayment of the IDB loan in 2005.
5/ Petroleum price is average of spot prices for UK Brent, Dubai, and West Texas Intermediate.

12.
The program would give continuity to the macroeconomic framework supported
by the current arrangement. Real GDP is projected to grow by 4 percent a year, reflecting
an expansion in domestic demand. Inflation is targeted to fall to 5 percent during 2005 and to
3–5 percent during 2006. The external current account deficit is projected to rise to close to
2½ to 3 percent of GDP a year in 2005–06, while net international reserves are targeted at
US$12.3 billion during 2005 (110 percent of short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis),
following the prepayment of an emergency loan from the Inter-American Development Bank
of US$1.25 billion in early April 2005.
A. Fiscal Policy
13.
Fiscal policy in 2005–06 is to be consistent with the medium-term framework
presented to Congress in June 2004 (MEP, paragraphs 10–12). The specific objectives
are to limit the CPS deficit to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2005, which is in line with the budget
approved by Congress in October 2004. This target assumes an average export price of oil of

- 10 -

US$31 per barrel as a conservative baseline. Also, the authorities explained that the
unusually low deficit in 2004 also resulted from an unusually large surplus by the
autonomous local and regional governments. For 2006, the authorities intend to submit to
Congress by July 2005 a budget for 2006 consistent with a CPS deficit of 2.0 percent of
GDP, and this action will be a structural performance criterion. With this fiscal profile,
public debt would decline to about 50 percent of GDP by end-2006. Also it is expected that
the public sector would gradually run down its stock of deposits from the unusually high
level at end-2004.
14.
These deficit targets are subject to an adjustor for any oil windfall (Technical
Memorandum of Understanding (TMU), Paragraph 9).3 These targets will be reduced by
a significant share of any windfall arising from average export prices above US$31 per
barrel, lowering public debt further. This adjustment will prevent a possible increase in nonoil spending above its sustainable path, which is important in view of the expected decline in
oil production.
15.
In 2005, the authorities expected revenues to decline slightly to 31.2 percent of
GDP, owing to a decline in non-tax revenue. Tax revenues are expected to remain broadly
stable in relation to GDP. The operating surplus of Ecopetrol is projected to remain constant
in relation to GDP, as the government has sped up the real increases in the domestic prices of
gasoline and diesel with a view to trimming the implicit subsidy further, which would be
offset by the ongoing decline in production as well as the assumed decline in the average
export price of oil.
16.
Total expenditure is projected to rise to 33.7 percent of GDP in 2005. Current
spending would rise in relation to GDP, reflecting continued growth in transfers to the
private sector for pensions and higher interest payments. Also the wage bill would remain at
6.8 percent of GDP, as wages have been increased in line with expected inflation in 2005 and
the workforce has risen, mainly in the area of defense. Fixed capital formation is projected to
increase to 8.1 percent of GDP, allowing for a moderate recovery of investment spending by
local and regional governments.4 The central government would be prepared to adjust its
spending as needed to achieve the fiscal target. If investment spending by local and regional

3

The fiscal targets may also be adjusted upwards by up to 0.5 percent of GDP for the grant
element of concessional financing of expenditures related to the demobilization process.
Previously this adjustor allowed for increased military spending financed concessionally.
4

While these entities are unlikely to raise current spending rapidly because of the limits
imposed by the legal framework for decentralization, they could use the deposits built up by
end-2004 to finance a rapid increase in investment. Earlier this decade Congress limited
current spending by these governments to current revenues and allowed borrowing to finance
investment only if their financial indicators meet certain minimum standards.

- 11 -

governments stays below projections, possibly because of capacity constraints, the central
government could undertake additional investment projects.
17.
In this context, the staff and the authorities agreed on steps to strengthen the
information on the operations of local and regional governments. The authorities will
aim to publish comprehensive quarterly data by December 2005. As a first step, they will
review the quality of the existing information by June 2005, and if necessary will issue
regulations to improve information reporting by September 2005.
18.
The decline in the CPS deficit in 2006 is expected to be achieved mainly through
restraint on current expenditure. The government’s proposed pension reform—if
approved—would yield some fiscal savings starting in 2006 by eliminating the 14th monthly
pension payment for new retirees. The revised budget code—also if approved—would allow
for other savings in current expenditure. The wage bill would remain stable in relation to
GDP. These steps would help more than offset a small decline in revenues arising from a fall
in the operating surplus of Ecopetrol due to lower oil production. The authorities stressed that
these projections were preliminary but remained committed to developing the measures
necessary to reach the stated target.
19.
The authorities agreed not to grant any further export subsidies (MEP,
paragraph 15). However, they emphasized that the subsidies for agricultural exports granted
by many industrialized countries put developing countries such as Colombia at a competitive
disadvantage. In this context, they indicated that they may seek other options to support the
agricultural sector within the program fiscal target.
20.
To reduce the public sector’s exposure to exchange rate fluctuations, the
government will reduce its net foreign currency financing to minus 0.5 percent of GDP
in 2005 (MEP, paragraph 13). This will be monitored by an indicative quarterly target. The
government may consider additional placements through a global bond denominated in
pesos, with the investor bearing the exchange rate risk. This bond has brought in
US$825 million since November 2004. The prepayment of the emergency loan from the IDB
will also improve the currency profile of the debt.
21.
The authorities clarified that the government’s forward transactions in foreign
exchange—which started in February 2005—were a debt management tool (MEP,
paragraph 13). The government wanted to buy foreign exchange forward, with an offsetting
spot market sale, to minimize the cost of holding foreign currency assets, which reached
about US$1.1 billion by end-2004. The government will publish the details of these
operations to provide for full transparency and to help limit the potential fiscal risk. It will
also provide the Banco de la República with a schedule of its planned forward transactions to
ensure consistency with monetary and exchange rate policy. The government also agreed to
limit its forward sales of foreign exchange to US$100 million.

- 12 -

Fiscal structural reforms
22.
The authorities commented that the upcoming elections will limit the scope for
structural reforms after mid-2005, although efforts in a number of areas will continue
(MEP, paragraph 18). They noted that Congress was considering important legislation
related to the demobilization process and that the free trade agreement with the United States
could enter the legislative agenda in the second half of 2005. In this context, they intend to
continue to advance key structural fiscal reforms:
•

Revised budget code. The authorities are seeking congressional approval of the
revised budget code by June 2005, which is a structural performance criterion under
the program. This step should help scale back revenue earmarking, budgetary
carryovers, and multiyear spending commitments.

•

Pension reform. The government is working for congressional approval of its
proposed constitutional amendment by June 2005.

The government will also try to privatize several smaller public enterprises. The government
intends to bring Ecogas—the public enterprise that operates the country’s natural gas
pipelines—to the point of sale in 2005. It will also hire an investment bank to prepare to
bring several regional electricity firms to the point of sale in 2006. Together these public
enterprises have an estimated book value of 0.8 percent of GDP.
23.
The authorities will continue to lay the foundation for other structural reforms
that could be implemented after 2006 (MEP, paragraph 19). They firmly believe that a
more efficient tax code would encourage faster economic growth. On two occasions, the
government proposed legislation to broaden the base of the VAT and the income tax and to
reduce the high number of VAT rates, but both proposals encountered strong political
resistance. The authorities will continue to look for ways to build a consensus for tax reform.
The government is also aware that the current revenue sharing mechanism places a burden on
the central government, especially starting in 2009, and will prepare a study evaluating the
current mechanism by December 2005.5 The government is evaluating ways to channel its
network of subsidies more effectively to the poor, possibly leaving some room to trim
poorly-targeted subsidies.

5

Currently transfers to local governments are mandated by the constitution to grow by
2 percent in real terms in 2005, 2½ percent in real terms in 2006–08 and in line with the
growth in current revenues subsequently, which would likely imply even faster real growth.

- 13 -

B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
24.
The Banco de la República reaffirmed its commitment to achieving the inflation
target of 5 percent during 2005 (MEP, paragraphs 19-20). The authorities explained that
their technical analysis of inflation justified the shift in the stance of monetary policy in
December 2004. In particular the output gap had remained wider than expected at over
1 percent and inflation in nontraded goods prices had been stable at about 5½ percent since
mid-2004 (Figure). They noted that market expectations of inflation during 2005 were
broadly in line with the central bank’s target, and stressed that the central bank is prepared to
tighten monetary policy if necessary by raising the interest rate on its expansionary monetary
operations, re-opening its window for contractionary operations and continuing to sterilize
foreign exchange purchases. For this reason, the authorities agreed to narrow the consultation
band for the inflation target to +/- 1 percentage point and to provide staff with the central
bank’s internal monthly inflation report on a
regular basis. 6
Export Growth by Product
(In annual percentage increase)

25.
There was a discussion of the
30
authorities’ concerns about the strength of
the peso. The staff pointed out that many
20
different exports—a wide range of
nontraditional products as well as oil, coal, and
10
other traditional products—performed well in
2004. Also the peso remained 15 percent more
0
depreciated in real effective terms than in
September 1999, when Colombia adopted the
-10
flexible exchange rate regime. The authorities
noted that they remain fully committed to the
-20
flexible exchange rate regime and agreed that
T otal exports
their approach since end-2003 could be
T raditional
-30
Agriculture, fishing, forestry
characterized as a managed float. This approach
Industrial
reflected the need to avoid past episodes of
-40
sustained real appreciations followed by
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
difficult periods. However, they stressed that the
Source: Department of National Planning (DANE).
central bank would continue to assign top
priority to the inflation objective. In March, the
central bank purchased US$170 million,
compared with US$600 million in January–
February. Inflation declined further to 5.0 percent year-on-year in March 2005.
6

The current program has a consultation band of +/- 2 percentage points. If inflation falls
outside this band, Colombia must complete a consultation with the Fund to bring the program
back on track.

- 14 -

Figure. Output Gap and Inflation
Output Gap
0

% from potential GDP

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
1999Q4

2000Q3

2001Q2

2002Q1

2002Q4

2003Q3

2004Q2

2005Q1

Inflation
14
Headline
Tradable
Non-tradable

Annual percentage change

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
12/99

6/00

12/00

6/01

12/01

6/02

12/02

Sources: Central Bank of Colombia; and DANE.

6/03

12/03

6/04

12/04

- 15 -

C. Financial Sector
26.
The authorities will strengthen financial supervision further (MEP, paragraphs
22–24). They are continuing to gradually phase in a new risk-based approach to capital
adequacy and loan-loss provisions in line with Basle II principles. In this context, they intend
to improve the measurement of market risk and of the value of foreclosed assets, and intend
to devote sufficient resources to ensure the success of the new approach. They are also
strengthening the framework for consolidated supervision and are unifying the supervision of
the financial sector and securities markets to limit the possibilities for regulatory arbitrage.
The financial superintendency is continuing to monitor the situation of the weak mortgage
banks, which continue to operate under restructuring plans that require additional
provisioning and capital as necessary.
27.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to reducing the public sector’s
involvement in the financial system (MEP, paragraph 25). They noted that FOGAFIN had
made significant progress in divesting many of the institutions intervened following the 1999
crisis. FOGAFIN has already started the process of divesting Granahorrar, which will be
brought to the point of sale by end-2005. In early March 2005, FOGAFIN divided Bancafé
into two banks. One bank (named Bancafé) will be liquidated to allow for the restructuring of
the generous labor contract. The other bank (called Granbanco-Bancafé) was created to
manage the good assets and deposits of Bancafé, and will be staffed by some of the
employees of the old Bancafé at competitive compensation levels. The authorities intend to
eventually bring the new bank (Granbanco-Bancafé) to the point of sale. A framework for
governance of Granbanco–Bancafé and the other publicly-owned bank—Banco Agrario—
will be developed by September 2005.
28.
The government will also seek congressional approval of the new securities
market law by June 2005 to help deepen local capital markets (MEP, paragraph 26).
The authorities also intend to facilitate the development of hedging instruments in the
financial system.
D. Medium-Term Outlook
29.
The baseline medium-term scenario is based on cautious assumptions (Table 8).
These include a moderate real depreciation of the peso in 2006–10, owing in part to a mild
deterioration in the terms of trade and lower oil export earnings; a gradual decline in
inflation; and a slight reduction in the country’s risk premium.

- 16 -

Baseline Scenario: Assumptions
Prel.
2004

2005

4.0
5.5
9.2
1.8

4.0
5.0
5.4
3.2

4.0
4.5
-6.4
3.8

4.0
3.5
-4.0
4.3

4.0
3.0
-0.7
5.0

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.7

400

380

383

354

290

Projections
2006
2007

2010

(In percent)
Real GDP
Inflation
Average real peso depreciation (-)
LIBOR
(In percent of GDP)
Primary public sector balance
(In basis points)
Country risk premium
Source: Fund staff estimates and projections.

30.
Economic policies would remain strong over the medium term. The government
would continue with fiscal reforms to sustain a primary surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP, and it
would aim to rely increasingly on domestic currency borrowing to limit the vulnerability of
the debt profile to exchange rate fluctuations. The central bank would continue to target
inflation. The flexible exchange rate regime would allow the external sector to adapt to shifts
in conditions—such as the prospect of a significant decline in the volume of oil exports
starting in 2007—and to allow exports to diversify further. The external current account
deficit would range from 2½ to 3 percent of GDP through 2010, which could be financed
with sustainable net capital inflows. Net international reserves would remain at about
110 percent of short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis.
31.
Under these assumptions, Colombia’s public and external debt profiles are
sustainable. Public debt is projected to decline to 42.7 percent of GDP by 2010, while total
external debt would fall to 32 percent of GDP.
Public Debt: Baseline and Alternative Scenarios
(In percent of GDP)
Prel.
2004

2005

Projections
2006
2007

2010

Baseline

52.9

50.4

49.8

48.2

42.7

Alternative
Primary balance falls by 0.5 of GDP from 2006 thru 2010
Per capita real GDP is constant from 2005 thru 2010
One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006

52.9
52.9
52.9

50.4
51.6
50.4

50.4
52.7
59.6

49.4
52.0
58.2

46.0
49.5
53.9

Source: Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 17 -

32.
A shock of a sharp exchange rate depreciation would present the biggest risk to
the public debt outlook (Tables 9 and 10). With a permanent 30 percent nominal
depreciation of the peso in 2006, public debt would increase by more than 10 percentage
points of GDP, compared with the baseline. Average real growth of 2½ percent (constant per
capital GDP) would leave public debt at about 50 percent of GDP. A deterioration in the
primary fiscal balance by ½ percent of GDP—which could be triggered by a drop in
petroleum prices of US$15 per barrel, or a 10 percent increase in interest payments (absent
compensating fiscal measures)—would slow the pace of debt reduction but without reversing
the declining trend.
E. Program Modalities and Risks
Current arrangement
33.
The authorities are requesting the completion of the fourth and final review
under the current arrangement. All quantitative performance criteria at end-2004 were
observed with ample margins, and most but not all structural benchmarks were met. The
authorities are requesting a waiver for the nonobservance of the structural performance
criterion on congressional approval of the revised budget code. The staff supports this
request. The authorities remain committed to adopting this measure, but with a delay that
does not affect significantly the overall strength of the program. They are also requesting a
waiver of the continuous performance criterion on the nonintroduction of multiple currency
practices. The staff supports their request for this waiver, because the eligibility period for
the export subsidies that gave rise to the multiple currency practice ended on February 28,
2005. The current arrangement would be cancelled before approval of the proposed one.
Proposed arrangement
34.
Access would be SDR 405 million (35 percent of quota per year)—about onethird of the access under the current arrangement (Table 11). This is consistent with the
progress made in reducing the vulnerabilities of the economy. The first purchase, equivalent
to SDR 193.5 million (25 percent of quota), would be available upon Board approval, and the
remaining amount would be available in 5 purchases of SDR 42.3 million each (Table 12).
The arrangement would end in October 2006, after the next government takes office in
August 2006. The authorities intend to treat the arrangement as precautionary.
35.
Quarterly performance criteria will apply to the overall deficit of the combined
public sector, net international reserves (NIR) of the central bank, inflation and shortterm external public debt. If inflation falls outside a band of +/- 1 percentage point,
Colombia will need to complete a consultation with the Fund to resume purchases under the

- 18 -

Stand By Arrangement. The net disbursement of foreign currency public debt is subject to an
indicative quarterly target. Adjustors to these targets are explained in the Technical
Memorandum of Understanding. There will be semi-annual program reviews to be completed
by September 2005, March 2006, and September 2006.
36.
Structural conditionality. The authorities have already adopted the prior action to
require banks to strengthen their reporting of their operations with the nonfinancial public
sector, which is crucial to improve the timeliness and quality of the information on the
financing of the combined public sector. There will be structural performance criteria on the
approval of the revised budget code by June 2005 and on the submission of a 2006 budget to
Congress by June 2005 that is consistent with a CPS deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP. Structural
benchmarks include congressional approval of the constitutional amendment for pension
reform and of the new securities law, steps to strengthen the information on the operations of
local and regional governments, and bringing Granahorrar to the point of sale. Further
structural measures for 2006, if necessary, would be introduced at the time of the second
review.
37.
Colombia would be able to repay the Fund, if all purchases were made under the
proposed arrangement (Table 13). Fund credit would be equivalent to 0.6 percent of GDP
in 2006. Debt service to the Fund would peak at 3.2 percent of exports of goods and
nonfactor services in 2006.
38.
There are several risks to the program. The debt sustainability analysis shows that
public debt is sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations and other shocks. The surplus of local
and regional governments could decline faster than expected. A deterioration in the security
situation could harm confidence and slow growth. Pressures for increased public spending
could mount in the run up to the 2006 elections. The external environment could worsen,
especially if a surge in world oil prices slows the growth in the global economy. (These risks
are also discussed in the companion report on the 2005 Article IV consultation).
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
39.
The authorities’ sound policy implementation has continued to reduce
vulnerabilities and foster economic growth. Real GDP increased steadily in 2003–04,
helping reduce unemployment. Inflation declined to the lowest level in decades. The external
sector strengthened, with a low current account deficit and strong capital inflows in 2004.
Fiscal consolidation, together with the real appreciation of the peso, lowered gross public
debt from 60 percent of GDP at end-2002 to 53 percent by end-2004, together with a sizable
increase in public deposits. The staff supports the authorities’ requests for two waivers and
for the completion of the fourth review under the current arrangement.
40.
The proposed program serves an important purpose. It seeks to support the
authorities’ macroeconomic framework—especially with regard to fiscal policy and public
debt reduction—during the upcoming political transition. By maintaining sound economic

- 19 -

policies in the coming 18 months, the country will strengthen its credibility further and
continue to reduce economic vulnerabilities, which are crucial to achieve sustained economic
growth. While economic performance improved in 2003–04, the country still faces risks
arising from several factors, including high public debt that is sensitive to exchange rate
fluctuations, a fragile security situation and a possible deterioration in the global economic
environment.
41.
Fiscal policy in 2005–06 will stay on the path to reduce public debt to close to
40 percent of GDP by 2010. The target for the CPS deficit in 2005 is based on a
conservative outlook for the average export price of oil. It also incorporates the reasonable
assumption that the overall surplus of the autonomous local and regional governments will
decline. If spending by these entities is less than expected, the central government could have
room for additional investment projects. However, the central government will need to be
ready to adjust its spending if necessary to achieve the fiscal target. To monitor the position
of the local and regional governments, the authorities need to improve the quality of
information on their operations as quickly as possible.
42.
The authorities have decided to save a significant share of any windfall arising
from higher world oil prices to help non-oil public spending on a sustainable path. If
world oil prices stay at current levels, this savings would most likely lead to a faster than
envisaged decline in public debt in relation to GDP.
43.
The staff welcomes the authorities’ decision not to grant any further export
subsidies. It shares the authorities’ concern that subsidies and other trade barriers in many
industrialized countries hampers economic activity by slowing export growth in developing
countries. However, the staff encourages the authorities to limit budgetary support to the
agricultural sector, which could distort relative prices and put pressure on the budget.
44.
The agenda of structural fiscal reforms under the proposed program is realistic,
in view of the upcoming political transition. The authorities will press ahead with key
reforms that have already been submitted to Congress. Also Congress has begun to debate
one important political issue—the legal framework for the demobilization process—and may
begin to consider a possible free trade agreement with the United States later this year.
Having said this, it is crucial to secure approval of the proposed reforms by June 2005. The
revised budget code will make an important start in addressing spending rigidities, including
the revenue earmarking which led to higher spending in 2004 in response to the strong
performance of tax revenues. After this code is approved, the government will need to
continue to find ways to reduce these rigidities further. The pension reform is also crucial,
given the high actuarial deficit of the pension system. Moreover, the staff strongly
encourages the authorities to seek opportunities ahead of the elections to continue to advance
reforms in tax policy and pensions, if possible. Given the recent run up in world oil prices, it
would be advisable to increase domestic prices of gasoline and diesel at a faster pace.
45.
Monetary policy will remain directed at reducing inflation. The Banco de la
República met its inflation target for 2004 in a complicated environment and it has

- 20 -

reaffirmed that it continues to attach top priority to lowering inflation further. The staff notes
that the central bank stands ready to tighten monetary conditions as necessary. While
exchange rate policy since end-2003 can be characterized as a managed float, the central
bank is still committed to the flexible exchange rate regime that has served Colombia well
since its adoption in 1999. The staff would have preferred less foreign exchange intervention
during 2004 and notes that the best way to support export competitiveness—if concerns do
arise—is to continue to reduce the burden of public debt, while undertaking structural
reforms. In this regard, the staff urges the authorities to monitor closely the effect of foreign
exchange intervention to ensure that inflationary pressures do not build up. The plan to
prepay the emergency loan from the IDB will help lower the government’s debt servicing
costs and exposure to exchange rate risk with a limited reduction in the reserve cushion.
46.
The authorities are continuing to strengthen the financial system. It will be
important to adopt by June 2005 the new securities law, which will help deepen local capital
markets further and promote faster economic growth. FOGAFIN has been successful in
reducing the public sector’s participation in the financial system. The staff welcomes the
decision to bring Granahorrar to the point of sale by end-2005. The recent decision to
restructure Bancafé is an important step forward that resolves a crucial and complex issue.
The staff also welcomes the authorities’ commitment to establish a governance framework
for Bancafé and Banco Agrario by September 2005, and it urges the authorities to bring
Bancafé to the point of sale as soon as possible.
47.
The staff support the authorities’ request for a Stand-By Arrangement in the
amount of SDR 405 million for a period of 18 months. The authorities remain committed
to continue to strengthen economic performance by consolidating the fiscal position,
reducing inflation further, and continuing to improve financial supervision. Their policies are
adequate to achieve the program objectives.

- 21 -

Table 1. Colombia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Rev. Prog.

Prel.

Proj.
2005

2006

(Percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (average)
Consumer prices (end of period)

2.9
12.1
9.2
8.7

1.5
6.2
8.0
7.6

1.9
6.5
6.3
7.0

4.0
8.2
7.1
6.5

4.0
5.9
6.0
5.5

4.0
7.0
5.9
5.5

4.0
5.3
5.2
5.0

4.0
4.3
4.8
4.5

External sector (on the basis of US$)
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -)

14.0
8.1
1.1
10.0
14.8
-2.6

-6.4
10.6
0.9
10.5
-7.3
1.5

-4.1
-1.6
-4.4
-1.6
0.3
-17.4

11.2
9.8
2.6
5.2
3.9
-5.2

11.2
15.1
2.9
7.6
1.1
…

23.6
19.9
6.7
13.3
9.3
11.4

-0.1
15.7
0.7
16.9
0.2
…

3.2
2.7
6.5
2.5
-3.3
…

Central administration
Revenue
Expenditure

25.7
11.9

20.8
16.7

10.1
12.6

13.9
6.8

15.4
10.7

16.0
15.7

10.1
13.2

8.3
8.8

-2.1
-8.6

7.0
1.7

5.3
4.0

6.5
9.2

10.2
11.5

16.7
12.2

11.1
14.6

10.3
14.0

11.5
7.7
3.6
0.7
(In percent of GDP)
-5.7
-5.7
-6.4
-3.5
-3.5
-4.2
0.9
1.5
0.4
-3.4
-3.2
-3.7
1.6
2.3
0.6
1.2
0.9
3.1
0.5
0.0
-0.1
47.7
51.8
60.2
13.7
14.5
14.2
14.6
13.2
12.6
0.9
-1.4
-1.7
46.1
47.5
52.3
26.3
28.5
31.9
111.5
98.4
106.1

7.9
1.4

…
…

7.7
2.2

…
…

…
…

-5.4
-3.2
1.7
-2.7
1.0
1.8
-0.1
56.0
14.9
13.5
-1.5
46.0
29.6
127.3

-5.6
-2.8
2.2
-2.8
1.7
0.8
0.3
52.1
15.5
13.4
-2.2
43.7
28.6
124.4

-5.5
-1.7
2.7
-1.3
-0.3
1.7
0.0
52.9
14.0
12.9
-1.0
37.1
24.1
110.4

-6.1
-2.5
2.7
-2.5
-0.5
3.0
-0.1
50.4
15.3
12.5
-2.8
35.9
22.7
110.5

-6.2
-2.1
2.7
-2.0
0.5
1.5
0.0
49.8
17.0
14.4
-2.6
36.2
22.5
116.3

56.4
33.4
15.0
10.6

47.7
23.8
15.9
11.2

35.5
18.4
12.0
8.3

52.1
30.9
14.5
10.3

45.2
23.6
14.2
10.2

Money and credit 1/
Broad money
Credit to the private sector
Interest rate (90-day time deposits; percent per year)
Nominal
Real
Central administration balance
Nonfinancial public sector balance
NFPS primary balance
Public sector balance
Foreign financing
Domestic financing 2/
Privatization
Public debt 3/4/
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings
Current account (deficit -)
External debt
Of which : public sector
NIR in percent of short-term debt

13.4
4.2

(In percent of exports of goods, services, and income)
External debt service
Of which : public sector
Interest payments
Of which : public sector

50.1
21.7
15.9
8.9

50.2
28.2
16.3
10.4

64.0
37.0
16.8
11.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Overall balance of payments
Net official reserves 4/
Net official reserves (in months
of imports of goods and services)

870
8,800

1,217
9,982

138
10,507

-184
10,524

712
11,408

2,583
13,195

-855
12,340

313
12,653

6.6

7.8

7.6

6.5

7.2

7.1

6.5

6.3

Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ All annual changes in foreign currency stocks valued at constant exchange rate.
2/ Includes the quasi-fiscal balance of Banco de la Republica, sales of assets, phone licenses, and statistical discrepancy.
3/ Includes bonds issued to recapitalize financial institutions.
4/ Program definition. Assumes no purchases under the current SBA arrangement. Includes valuation changes.

- 22 -

Table 2. Colombia: Operations of the Combined Public Sector
(In percent of GDP)
2000

2001

2002

2004
2003 Rev. Prog.

Prel.

Proj.
2005

2006

Total revenue

28.0

29.6

29.6

30.7

31.1

31.6

31.2

31.3

Current revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
Financial income
Operating surplus of public enterprises
Of which : Ecopetrol 1/
Other

28.0
17.3
10.7
1.0
4.2
3.0
5.5

29.6
19.2
10.4
1.3
4.2
2.5
4.8

29.6
19.2
10.4
0.9
4.0
2.3
5.4

30.7
19.5
11.3
1.1
4.6
2.9
5.6

31.1
20.0
11.1
1.0
4.2
2.6
5.9

31.6
20.3
11.3
1.0
4.8
3.4
5.4

31.2
20.5
10.8
1.0
4.7
3.1
5.1

31.3
20.5
10.8
1.0
4.7
3.0
5.1

Total expenditure and net lending 2/

31.5

33.3

33.8

33.6

33.6

33.1

33.7

33.4

Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services 3/
Interest
External
Domestic
Transfers to private sector
Of which: from social security
Other 4/

23.6
7.2
3.3
4.4
1.6
2.8
9.0
5.5
-0.3

24.9
7.5
3.5
5.0
2.3
2.8
9.8
6.5
-0.9

25.5
7.5
3.4
4.5
2.1
2.4
9.7
6.7
0.2

25.2
7.4
3.3
4.9
2.2
2.7
9.8
6.9
-0.1

26.4
7.5
3.4
5.0
2.0
3.0
10.9
7.7
-0.4

25.4
6.8
3.3
4.5
1.8
2.7
10.4
7.1
0.4

26.2
6.8
3.7
5.1
2.0
3.2
11.0
7.5
-0.4

25.8
6.8
3.5
4.7
1.8
2.9
10.8
7.6
0.0

Capital expenditure
Fixed capital formacition (cash basis)
Other (including floating debt) 4/
Transfers

7.9
8.1
-0.3
0.1

8.3
8.0
0.2
0.1

8.1
7.9
0.0
0.2

8.5
8.4
0.0
0.1

7.2
7.6
-0.5
0.1

7.8
7.3
0.4
0.1

7.5
8.1
-0.7
0.1

7.5
7.4
0.0
0.1

Net lending

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

-0.1

0.0

0.0

Statistical discrepancy

0.0

0.2

-0.1

-0.3

0.0

-0.3

0.0

0.0

0.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

Additional Investment Projects 5/
Nonfinancial public sector balance

-3.5

-3.5

-4.2

-3.2

-2.8

-1.7

-2.5

-2.1

Quasi-fiscal balance (BR cash profits)
Fogafin balance
Net cost of financial restructuring 6/

0.5
0.0
-0.4

0.7
0.2
-0.7

0.8
0.3
-0.6

0.6
0.3
-0.4

0.3
0.1
-0.4

0.5
0.3
-0.4

0.2
0.2
-0.4

0.2
0.2
-0.2

Overall balance

-3.4

-3.2

-3.7

-2.7

-2.8

-1.3

-2.5

-2.0

3.4
1.6

3.2
2.3

3.7
0.6

2.7
1.0

2.8
1.7

1.3
-0.3

2.5
-0.5

2.0
0.5

Overall financing
Foreign, net
Of which
Changes in assets held abroad (-increase)
Domestic, net
Financial system 7/
Bonds 8/
Change in floating debt and accrual
adjustments
Privatization (including concessions) 9/

-0.1
1.2
-0.5
2.3

-1.9
0.9
-1.1
2.8

1.9
3.1
-1.4
3.9

-0.7
1.8
-0.6
2.5

0.9
0.8
0.5
1.0

-1.0
1.7
0.3
2.1

0.1
3.0
1.2
2.3

1.1
1.5
-0.1
1.8

-0.6
0.5

-0.7
0.0

0.7
-0.1

-0.2
-0.1

-0.7
0.3

0.7
0.0

-0.9
-0.1

0.0
0.0

Memorandum items:
NFPS savings
NFPS primary balance
NFPS non-oil balance
NFPS non-oil primary balance

4.4
0.9
-5.5
-1.1

4.7
1.5
-5.3
-2.1

4.1
0.4
-5.9
-1.4

5.6
1.7
-5.2
-0.3

4.6
2.2
-4.4
0.6

6.3
2.7
-3.9
0.6

5.0
2.7
-4.2
0.9

6.3
2.7
-3.9
0.8

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Banco de la República; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes higher domestic and diesel prices announced by the authorities.
2/ Expenditure reported on commitments basis.
3/ From year 2000 includes the unpaid bills of the Social Security Institute (ISS).
4/ Includes adjustments to put spending on commitment basis and the change in unpaid bills of selected nonfinancial public enterprises.
5/ These projects will be implemented only if privatization proceeds materialize.
6/ Interest payments on public banks restructuring bonds and mortgage debt relief related costs.
7/ Includes changes in public sector loans and deposits in the financial system.
8/ Includes changes in holdings of public securities by banks and nonbanks.
9/ Includes nonrecurrent fees from telecommunications licensing.

-5.7
-2.7

Overall balance

Memorandum item:
Primary balance
-2.2

-5.7

0.8

3.8
1.3
2.5

15.8
3.0
1.5
3.5
1.6
1.9
-0.9
8.6

20.4

14.7
13.2
5.3
5.9
5.3
0.6
1.1
0.8
0.0
1.5
0.3
1.2

14.7

2001

-2.9

-6.4

0.6

2.5
1.3
1.2

18.2
3.0
1.5
3.5
1.7
1.7
0.7
9.5

21.4

15.0
13.4
5.3
5.8
5.3
0.5
1.0
0.7
0.7
1.6
0.3
1.3

15.0

2002

-1.4

-5.4

0.4

3.0
1.1
2.0

17.4
3.0
1.5
4.0
1.9
2.1
-0.1
9.0

20.9

15.4
14.1
6.0
6.3
5.9
0.5
1.0
0.7
0.0
1.4
0.2
1.1

15.4

Est.
2003

-1.3

-5.6

0.3

2.5
0.5
2.0

18.2
3.1
1.6
4.4
1.8
2.6
-0.3
9.5

21.0

15.4
14.0
5.7
6.7
6.2
0.5
0.9
0.7
0.0
1.4
0.3
1.1

15.4

2004
Rev. Prog.

-1.7

-5.6

0.1

3.4
1.5
1.9

18.1
2.9
1.5
3.9
1.7
2.2
0.5
9.4

21.7

16.0
14.7
6.1
6.4
6.0
0.4
0.9
0.9
0.4
1.3
0.2
1.1

16.0

Est.

1/ Excludes proceeds of financial transaction tax in 1999 from revenue and expenditure.
2/ Includes change in the budget carryover. A negative number corrects for current cash payments of expenditures incurred in previous periods.
3/ Includes interest payment to the rest of the nonfinancial public sector.

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Banco de la República; and Fund staff estimates.

0.5

15.3
2.9
1.3
3.0
1.2
1.8
-0.1
8.2

Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest
External
Domestic
Other expenditure 2/
Current transfers 3/

Net lending

18.8

Total expenditure and net lending

3.0
1.0
2.1

13.0
11.2
4.3
5.3
4.8
0.5
1.0
0.6
0.0
1.8
0.5
1.3

Current revenue
Tax revenue 1/
Net income tax and profits
Goods and services
Value-added tax
Gasoline tax
International trade
Financial transaction tax
Stamp and other taxes
Nontax revenue
Property income
Other

Capital expenditure
Fixed capital formation 2/
Capital transfers

13.0

Total revenue

2000

(In percent of GDP)

Table 3. Colombia: Operations of the Central Administration

-1.6

-6.3

0.1

2.7
0.7
2.1

19.7
2.9
1.5
4.7
1.9
2.9
-0.4
10.9

22.6

16.3
14.9
6.1
6.4
6.0
0.5
0.9
0.9
0.5
1.4
0.2
1.2

16.3

2005

Proj.

-1.8

-6.4

0.2

2.9
0.8
2.1

19.4
2.9
1.5
4.6
1.7
2.8
0.0
10.4

22.5

16.1
14.9
6.3
6.5
6.1
0.5
0.8
0.8
0.4
1.2
0.2
1.0

16.1

2006

- 23 -

- 24 -

Table 4. Colombia: Public Debt and Deposits
(In percent of GDP)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

Total outstanding gross debt 1/
Domestic debt
External debt

47.7
21.4
26.3

51.8
23.2
28.5

60.2
28.3
31.9

56.0
26.4
29.6

52.9
28.8
24.1

Nonfinancial public sector gross debt
Domestic debt
External debt

42.8
18.9
24.0

47.0
20.1
26.9

55.2
24.9
30.3

52.0
23.4
28.6

49.6
26.2
23.4

Financial public sector gross debt
Domestic debt
External debt

4.9
2.6
2.3

4.7
3.1
1.6

5.1
3.4
1.6

4.0
3.0
1.0

3.3
2.6
0.7

Total public sector deposits
Domestic
Foreign

7.6
4.5
3.1

9.3
4.4
4.9

8.2
4.8
3.4

8.6
4.9
3.7

10.6
6.4
4.2

Nonfinancial public sector deposits
Domestic
Foreign

7.6
4.5
3.1

9.3
4.4
4.9

8.2
4.8
3.4

8.6
4.9
3.7

9.9
6.4
3.5

Financial public sector deposits
Domestic
Foreign

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.0
...
0.0

0.7
0.0
0.7

Total outstanding net debt 1/
Domestic debt
External debt

40.1
17.0
23.1

42.4
18.8
23.6

52.0
23.5
28.5

47.4
21.5
25.9

42.2
22.4
19.9

Nonfinancial public sector net debt
Domestic debt
External debt

35.2
14.4
20.9

37.7
15.7
22.1

47.0
20.1
26.9

43.4
18.6
24.9

39.7
19.8
19.8

4.9
2.6
2.3

4.7
3.1
1.6

5.1
3.4
1.6

4.0
3.0
1.0

2.6
2.5
0.0

2.3
174,896

1.7
188,559

2.0
204,530

1.5
230,091

2.2
255,984

Financial public sector net debt
Domestic debt
External debt
Memorandum items:
Floating Debt
GDP (Billions of COL Pesos)

Source: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes floating debt

- 25 -

Table 5. Colombia: Monetary Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Rev. Prog.

Prel.

Proj.
2005

2006

(In billions of Colombian pesos, unless otherwise stated)
Central bank
Net international reserves 1/
billions of US$
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
TES
Other, including deposits and REPOs
Net credit to financial system
Other
Monetary base
Currency in circulation
Banking system reserves

19,239
8.8
-8,529
2,913
2,752
160
2,678
-14,119
10,710
7,276
3,434

23,027
10.0
-11,379
1,716
2,016
-300
1,927
-15,022
11,648
8,349
3,298

29,576
10.5
-15,471
2,097
2,363
-267
3,198
-20,766
14,105
9,993
4,111

29,544
10.5
-12,929
2,866
3,193
-327
4,673
-20,469
16,615
11,953
4,662

31,260
11.2
-12,679
3,628
4,022
-394
3,674
-19,981
18,581
13,737
4,844

31,533
13.2
-12,273
-199
975
-1,174
3,512
-15,586
19,260
13,799
5,461

31,682
12.3
-9,316
3,938
4,074
-136
4,428
-17,682
22,366
15,371
6,996

35,421
12.7
-10,975
3,700
3,835
-136
6,289
-20,963
24,447
16,954
7,493

Banking system
Net foreign assets 1/
billions of US$
Net domestic assets
Net credit to public sector
Credit to private sector
Other net
Broad money 2/

18,353
8.4
36,634
10,957
45,261
-19,585
54,987

21,499
9.3
37,354
11,465
46,049
-20,159
58,853

27,012
9.6
34,989
13,021
47,891
-25,922
62,001

28,714
10.3
37,296
14,277
52,287
-29,268
66,010

30,084
10.8
44,942
10,786
59,064
-24,909
75,026

29,150
12.2
47,892
13,340
58,661
-24,109
77,043

28,050
10.9
57,537
18,370
67,218
-28,051
85,587

31,469
11.2
62,933
18,415
76,649
-32,131
94,401

-4.3
11.5
14.9
13.0
10.2

-6.6
12.2
15.5
15.9
16.7

37.7
14.6
11.4
16.1
11.1

0.2
14.0
10.3
9.3
10.3

4.4
24.0
5.6
7.6
30.5

5.2
22.9
5.4
7.5
30.1

6.6
24.0
5.5
8.0
30.5

6.1
25.2
5.6
8.0
31.0

(Annual percentage change)
Credit to public sector, net
Credit to private sector
Currency
Monetary base
Broad money 2/

35.2
-8.6
16.3
10.0
-2.1

4.6
1.7
14.8
8.8
7.0

13.6
4.0
19.7
21.1
5.3

9.7
9.2
19.6
17.8
6.5

(Percent of GDP)
Credit to public sector, net
Credit to private sector
Currency
Monetary base
Broad money 3/

6.3
25.9
4.2
6.1
31.4

6.1
24.4
4.4
6.2
31.2

6.4
23.4
4.9
6.9
30.3

6.2
22.7
5.2
7.2
28.7

(Annual percentage change)
Central bank inflation target 3/
Consumer price index
Exchange rate (+ depreciation)

10.0
8.8
19.0

8.0
7.6
2.8

6.0
7.0
25.0

5.9
6.5
-3.0

5.5
...
...

5.5
5.5
-14.0

4.5-5.5
5.0
...

3-5
4.5
...

2.9

2.6

2.1

2.2

2.4

2.4

2.7

2.7

Memorandum item:
Broad money/net international reserves

Sources: Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Assets on and liabilities to nonresident entities. Net international reserves include liabilities in foreign currency to resident entities. Exclude valua
effect.
2/ Currency in circulation plus deposit liabilities of the private sector.
3/ 2003 target was revised upward by 0.4 percentage point in account of the first round effect of the VAT reform.

- 26 -

Table 6. Colombia: Banking System Indicators 1/
(In percent)
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 2/

Capital adequacy ratio (with market risk) 3/
Regulatory Tier I capital to risk weighted assets
Capital to assets
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital

13.2
9.2
11.3
15.6

13.0
9.3
11.2
5.6

12.6
9.7
11.0
1.1

13.1
10.5
11.5
-3.8

14.0
11.4
11.9
-10.5

Nonperforming loans to total loans 4/ 5/
Classified loans 5/
Specific provisions to classified loans and leases
Sectoral distribution of loans to total loans 5/
commercial
consumer
housing
Foreign currency loans to total loans

10.6
18.7
27.7

10.2
18.1
37.5

9.2
16.0
43.0

6.8
12.1
47.6

3.6
7.9
54.0

58.7
14.1
27.2
8.1

58.4
15.6
26.0
7.0

61.9
15.6
21.7
7.4

62.8
18.0
18.1
4.7

65.8
19.1
14.1
5.2

Return on average equity
Return on average assets
Interest margin to gross income
Noninterest expenses to gross income
Personnel expenses to noninterest income

-20.7
-2.3
38.1
93.7
36.2

1.1
0.1
32.7
85.6
37.3

9.6
1.1
35.5
80.7
38.3

17.0
1.9
37.4
69.8
38.4

23.4
2.7
39.5
59.8
41.5

Liquid assets to total assets 6/
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities 7/
Customer deposits to total (noninterbank) loans
Spread between reference lending and deposit rates
Spread between highest and lowest interbank rates
Foreign currency liabilities to total liabilities

12.9
20.4
122.3
6.6

16.5
25.2
136.1
8.3

19.7
30.2
136.1
7.4

18.7
29.0
136.0
7.4

18.0
28.1
126.2
7.3

9.1

8.6

7.0

6.2

6.0

-1.4

4.8

7.8

4.3

4.8

Net open position in equities to capital
Net open position in foreign exchange to capital

Sources: Superintendencia Bancaria; IFS; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excluding credit unions and public sector special institutions (IOE).
2/ Data to Sept. 2004 except data on foreign currency loans and liabilties, which are to June 2004. Returns
are annualized as necessary.
3/ Market risks requirements, effective only as of 2001, are weighted 60 percent until 2003, 80 percent
in 2003, and 100 percent thereafter.
4/ Loans past-due 90 days or more (120 days or more in the case of mortgages).
5/ Loan data includes leases as of 2004.
6/ Liquid assets include cash, deposits in other financial institutions and interbank repos, and securities
held for trading.
7/ Customer deposits used as proxy for short-term liabilities.

- 27 -

Table 7. Colombia: Summary Balance of Payments, 2000-2006
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prog.

Est.

Proj.
2005

2006

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Coffee
Petroleum products
Non-traditional
Other
Imports, f.o.b.

737
2,633
13,722
1,069
4,569
6,200
1,884
11,090

-1,114
579
12,848
764
3,285
6,613
2,186
12,269

-1,371
239
12,316
772
3,275
6,287
1,982
12,077

-1,191
435
13,693
806
3,383
6,120
3,383
13,258

-1,978
-222
15,039
913
3,991
6,560
3,575
15,260

-1,013
1,016
16,918
1,012
4,227
7,793
3,886
15,902

-3,150
-1,500
16,905
1,129
3,795
7,789
4,192
18,405

-2,858
-1,465
17,446
1,145
3,443
8,634
4,223
18,911

Services (net)

-1,282

-1,433

-1,466

-1,513

-1,632

-1,568

-1,785

-1,845

Income (net)
Interest (net)
Of which : public sector
Other Income (net)

-2,286
-1,663
-889
-623

-2,615
-1,738
-1,087
-877

-2,848
-1,905
-1,262
-944

-3,446
-2,001
-1,452
-1,445

-3,423
-2,282
-1,660
-1,141

-4,123
-2,037
-1,429
-2,086

-3,669
-2,026
-1,555
-1,643

-3,576
-1,883
-1,436
-1,693

1,673

2,354

2,704

3,334

3,299

3,661

3,804

4,027

Financial account balance
Public sector (net)
Nonfinancial public sector
Medium- and long-term (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Other long-term flows
Short term 1/
Of which : change in public ass
Financial public sector

24
402
1,243
1,662
3,238
1,576
-40
-379
-259
-841

2,475
1,443
1,915
3,462
5,743
2,281
-35
-1,512
-1,534
-473

1,303
363
495
-1,093
2,469
3,561
-30
1,617
1,567
-131

810
428
720
1,457
4,915
3,459
-30
-707
-570
-293

2,690
1,450
1,513
748
2,723
1,975
-26
792
792
-63

3,245
-327
60
934
2,889
1,955
-50
-825
-939
-387

2,295
-515
-481
-613
3,145
3,759
-29
161
161
-35

3,171
576
842
-347
1,922
2,269
-29
1,218
1,218
-267

Private sector (net)
Nonfinancial private sector (net)
Direct investment
Of which : Privatization
Leasing finance
Long-term loans
Short term 2/
Financial private sector (net)

-378
28
2,069
465
-109
-479
-1,453
-406

1,032
1,063
2,509
0
-211
126
-1,360
-31

939
1,113
1,258
0
-160
-970
985
-174

382
823
855
0
-319
-726
1,012
-441

1,240
1,063
1,265
0
-278
-243
319
176

3,572
3,067
2,646
0
107
-1,109
1,423
505

2,811
2,392
2,343
0
-214
337
-75
418

2,595
2,596
2,137
0
-133
567
25
-1

Net errors and omissions

108

-143

207

197

0

351

0

0

Changes in GIR 3/
Changes in NIR, program definition

870
687

1,217
1,182

138
525

-184
17

712
883

2,583
2,671

-855
-855

313
313

-1.5

-2.2

-1.1

-2.9

-2.6

7.2

8.1

6.5

6.7

Current transfers (net)

(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance

0.9

-1.4

-1.7

(In months of imports of goods and services)
Gross international reserves 4/

6.8

8.0

7.8

6.6

Sources: Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes movements of short-term assets owned by the public sector abroad.
2/ Includes net portfolio investment.
3/ Does not include valuation changes of reserves denominated in other currencies than U.S. dollars.
4/ Not including Fund purchases under the standby arrangement.

- 28 -

Table 8. Colombia: Medium-Term Outlook
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

I. Output and Prices
(Annual percentage changes)
Real GDP

2.9

1.5

1.9

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

4.0

Consumer prices
End of period
Period average

8.7
9.2

7.6
8.0

7.0
6.3

6.5
7.1

5.5
5.9

5.0
5.2

4.5
4.8

3.5
4.0

3.0
3.3

3.0
3.0

3.0
2.5

(In percent of GDP, unless indicated otherwise)
II. Saving and investment
Gross national saving
Private sector
Public sector

14.6
10.0
4.5

13.2
8.3
5.1

12.6
9.2
3.3

13.5
8.0
5.5

12.9
6.4
6.5

12.5
7.5
5.0

14.4
8.9
5.5

14.8
8.4
6.4

15.3
8.7
6.6

15.9
9.1
6.9

16.3
9.2
7.0

Gross domestic investment
Private sector
Public sector capital expenditure

13.7
5.8
7.9

14.5
6.2
8.3

14.2
6.1
8.1

14.9
6.4
8.5

14.0
6.1
7.8

15.3
7.8
7.5

17.0
9.5
7.5

17.5
9.1
8.4

17.9
9.5
8.4

18.5
10.1
8.4

18.8
10.4
8.4

External current account balance
Private sector
Public sector

0.9
4.2
-3.4

-1.4
1.9
-3.2

-1.7
1.9
-3.6

-1.5
1.2
-2.6

-1.0
0.3
-1.3

-2.8
-0.3
-2.5

-2.6
-0.6
-2.0

-2.7
-0.7
-2.0

-2.6
-0.8
-1.8

-2.6
-1.0
-1.5

-2.5
-1.2
-1.4

III. Nonfinancial and consolidated public sector
Nonfinancial public sector
Revenue
Expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Primary balance
Overall balance

28.0
31.5
23.6
7.9
0.9
-3.5

29.6
33.3
24.9
8.3
1.5
-3.5

Combined public sector balance

-3.4

-3.2

29.6
33.8
25.6
8.1
0.4
-4.2

30.7
33.6
25.2
8.5
1.7
-3.2

31.6
33.1
25.4
7.8
2.7
-1.7

31.2
33.7
26.2
7.5
2.7
-2.5

31.3
33.4
25.8
7.5
2.7
-2.1

31.0
33.2
24.8
8.4
2.6
-2.3

31.1
33.2
24.8
8.4
2.6
-2.1

31.1
33.0
24.6
8.4
2.6
-1.9

31.0
32.7
24.3
8.4
2.6
-1.8

-3.7

-2.7

-1.3

-2.5

-2.0

-2.0

-1.8

-1.5

-1.4

3.3
5.9

3.3
8.9

3.2
8.9

3.2
10.8

3.2
7.1

3.2
6.1

3.2
6.3

-1.0
1.0
17.4
16.3
3.3
-0.3
3.7
2.7

-2.8
-1.3
15.1
16.4
2.0
-0.5
2.5
-0.8

-2.6
-1.3
15.7
17.0
2.9
0.5
2.3
0.3

-2.7
-2.0
15.4
17.4
3.1
0.5
2.7
0.4

-2.6
-1.9
15.8
17.7
3.0
0.2
2.8
0.5

-2.6
-1.7
16.3
18.0
3.0
0.3
2.7
0.5

-2.5
-1.4
17.0
18.5
3.0
0.4
2.5
0.4

IV. Financial system
Velocity (GDP / broad money)
Real growth in private sector credit

3.2
-16.3

3.2
-5.8

3.3
-2.2

3.5
1.9

External current account balance
Trade balance
Exports
Imports
Capital and financial account balance
Public sector
Private sector
Overall balance

0.9
3.1
16.4
13.2
0.0
0.5
-0.5
1.0

-1.4
0.7
15.7
15.0
3.0
1.8
1.3
1.5

-1.7
0.3
15.1
14.8
1.6
0.4
1.2
0.2

Total external debt
Public debt
Private debt

46.1
26.3
19.8

47.5
28.5
19.0

52.3
31.9
20.4

46.0
29.6
16.3

37.1
24.1
13.0

35.9
22.7
13.1

36.2
22.5
13.7

35.6
21.9
13.6

34.1
20.8
13.2

32.9
20.0
12.9

31.9
19.3
12.7

Total public debt
Domestic debt
External debt

47.7
21.4
26.3

51.8
23.2
28.5

60.2
28.3
31.9

56.0
26.4
29.6

52.9
28.8
24.1

50.4
27.7
22.7

49.8
27.3
22.5

48.2
26.2
21.9

46.2
25.4
20.8

44.5
24.5
20.0

42.7
23.5
19.3

174,896
6.6

188,559
3.7

204,530
1.9

230,091
1.2

255,984
1.8

280,267
3.2

304,051
3.8

332,333
4.3

359,876
4.7

386,199
5.0

413,546
5.0

V. Balance of payments
-1.5
0.5
17.1
16.6
1.0
0.5
0.5
-0.2
VI. Debt

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of Col$)
U.S. LIBOR

Sources: Colombian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

2.9
-5.8
6.7
12.8
9.0
4.1
2.6

7.4
9.4

1.5
3.4
7.7
-4.6
11.4
2.0
3.0

9.0
10.9

260.1

1.5
-3.8
-2.0
-7.8
18.3
10.5
-3.0
1.2
3.4
-0.6
-1.5
5.3

47.5

2001

1.9
-14.9
6.4
-5.7
1.1
1.6
1.8

11.5
16.2

263.3

4.8
7.4
-1.6
-7.6
19.9
12.2
-1.8
10.8
3.5
-1.1
8.3
-2.6

52.3

Actual
2002

4.0
11.5
6.5
9.8
12.8
1.5
1.0

11.2
13.5

244.5

-6.3
-6.8
-1.5
-6.9
18.8
11.9
-1.0
-4.3
2.9
-1.8
-5.4
0.5

46.0

2003

4.0
24.4
6.6
21.9
24.4
1.4
2.5

10.7
10.0

209.4

-8.9
-12.0
-1.4
-6.3
17.7
11.5
-2.5
-8.1
2.3
-1.4
-9.0
3.1

37.1

2004

2.1
1.4
7.1
6.3
1.1
0.3
2.4

10-Year
Historical
Average
2.6
12.5
0.6
9.4
21.1
2.9
1.1

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9
35.9

35.9

4.0
-2.0
6.8
0.0
18.5
-0.4
2.1

15.3
14.0

206.3

-1.2
-0.7
0.4
-4.1
17.4
13.3
-2.1
1.0
2.5
-1.5
...
-0.5

35.9

2005

2007

4.0
1.0
6.5
0.9
6.1
-0.5
2.1

14.5
12.7

205.8

-0.6
-0.7
0.5
-3.4
17.3
13.9
-2.1
0.9
2.2
-1.4
...
0.1

35.6

4.0
2.6
7.1
8.6
9.2
-0.2
2.1

15.9
13.0

193.4

-1.5
-0.8
0.2
-3.4
17.6
14.2
-2.1
1.0
2.4
-1.3
...
-0.7

34.1

4.0
1.9
7.4
8.4
8.5
-0.2
2.1

16.5
12.8

182.4

-1.2
-0.8
0.2
-3.4
18.0
14.6
-2.1
1.1
2.4
-1.3
...
-0.4

36.8
38.8
45.1
41.5
43.6
47.1

33.9

36.9
40.9
58.1
46.1
53.6
46.2

32.9

35.4
39.1
55.4
44.6
51.6
44.1

31.6

34.2
37.7
53.2
43.5
50.0
42.4

30.3

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

4.0
-4.3
6.6
3.0
2.9
-0.2
2.0

14.0
12.9

201.1

0.3
-0.8
0.2
-4.2
18.0
13.8
-2.0
1.0
2.4
-1.4
...
1.1

32.9

Projections
2008
2009

I. Baseline Projections
36.2

2006

33.3
36.6
51.5
42.7
48.9
41.2

29.2

4.0
2.0
7.5
10.3
9.9
-0.2
2.0

17.7
12.9

170.5

-0.9
-0.7
0.2
-3.6
18.7
15.1
-2.0
1.1
2.3
-1.2
...
-0.2

31.9

2010

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
ε = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and α = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 5/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

229.1

0.6
-2.2
-4.1
-10.2
20.1
9.9
-2.6
4.6
3.1
-1.4
2.8
2.8

2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
9
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

46.1

1 External debt

2000

Table 9. Colombia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

-1.6
-1.9
-2.7
-1.5
-2.1
-2.1

-1.4

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/

4.0
0.2
7.0
5.2
9.2
-0.3
2.1

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-1.6

- 29 -

2.9
12.3
0.2
-15.9
12.1
-5.5
-0.9

5.9
5.0

1.5
11.3
5.1
-2.7
6.2
5.5
-1.3

6.3
5.1

175.4

4.1
0.9
-1.3
29.5
28.2
2.3
1.6
2.2
-0.7
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.1

51.8
28.5

2001

1.9
9.4
2.9
-20.0
6.4
4.5
-0.5

8.4
6.8

205.3

8.5
7.1
-0.5
29.3
28.9
7.5
0.4
1.3
-0.9
7.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
1.3

60.2
31.9

Actual
2002

4.0
8.9
0.8
3.1
8.2
1.9
-1.9

7.5
6.0

185.2

-4.2
-4.7
-1.9
30.2
28.3
-2.8
-1.9
0.2
-2.1
-0.9
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.5

56.0
29.6

2003

4.0
8.9
1.9
16.3
7.0
5.2
-3.0

3.7
3.6

167.1

-3.1
-8.1
-3.0
31.6
28.6
-5.2
-1.2
0.8
-2.0
-4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

52.9
24.1

2004

51.6
50.4

50.4
50.4
50.4
50.4
50.4
50.4

50.4

4.0
10.2
4.9
...
5.3
4.1
-2.5

6.1
6.9

161.9

-2.5
-2.1
-2.5
31.1
28.7
0.3
0.3
2.3
-1.9
...
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.4

50.4
22.7

2005

4.0
10.7
5.6
...
5.1
2.9
-2.6

4.5
5.1

155.6

-1.6
-1.9
-2.6
31.0
28.3
0.6
0.6
2.5
-1.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3

48.2
21.9

4.0
10.6
6.4
...
4.1
4.5
-2.6

4.2
5.1

148.8

-2.0
-1.5
-2.6
31.1
28.5
1.0
1.0
2.8
-1.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

46.2
20.8

I. Baseline Projections

Projections
2007
2008

4.0
10.5
7.3
...
3.2
3.9
-2.6

52.7
50.4

50.6
55.8
55.1
54.6
59.6
59.8

49.6

52.0
49.4

49.8
62.7
58.9
58.0
58.2
58.5

48.0

50.9
48.1

47.8
65.4
57.2
56.3
56.6
56.8

45.7

3.9
5.0

143.3

-1.7
-1.2
-2.6
31.1
28.4
1.4
1.4
3.1
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

44.5
20.0

2009

50.2
47.0

46.2
68.6
55.9
54.9
55.2
55.5

43.3

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

4.0
10.1
5.8
...
4.3
4.0
-2.6

4.5
5.0

159.3

-0.6
-1.8
-2.6
31.3
28.7
0.7
0.7
2.6
-1.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.2

49.8
22.5

2006

1/ Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
8/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
9/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
10/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

C1. Per capita real GDP is constant from 2005 thru 2010
C2. Primary balance falls by 0.5 of GDP from 2006 thru 2010

C. Country Specific tests

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 9/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005

B. StressTests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 8/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

170.3

6.4
1.9
-0.9
28.0
27.1
3.3
-1.1
-0.1
-1.0
4.4
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
4.5

2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

47.7
26.3

1 Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2000

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 10. Colombia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010

49.5
46.0

44.5
71.9
54.6
53.4
53.9
54.1

40.9

4.0
10.6
7.6
...
3.0
3.7
-2.6

3.5
4.8

138.1

-1.7
-1.1
-2.6
31.0
28.3
1.5
1.5
3.1
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

42.7
19.3

2010

1.7
2.7
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0

-1.0

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance

4.0
10.4
6.3
...
4.2
3.8
-2.6

Average

Projected

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/
1.6

- 30 -

- 31 -

Table 11. Colombia: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000-2006
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

2005

2006

1. Gross financing requirements

8,801

10,226

11,655

11,180

11,865

14,249

14,338

External current account deficit

-737

1,114

1,371

1,191

1,013

3,150

2,858

Debt amortization
Medium and long term debt
Public sector
Private sector
Short-term debt 1/
Public sector
Private sector

8,668
5,728
2,128
3,601
2,940
672
2,267

7,894
5,380
2,824
2,556
2,514
199
2,315

10,146
7,023
3,821
3,202
3,122
320
2,802

10,173
6,681
3,670
3,011
3,492
429
3,063

8,269
4,903
2,100
2,804
3,365
224
3,141

11,953
6,951
3,796
3,155
5,002
389
4,614

11,167
5,912
2,561
3,352
5,254
389
4,866

870

1,217

138

-184

2,583

-855

313

2. Available financing

8,801

10,226

11,655

11,180

11,865

14,249

14,338

Foreign direct investment (net)

2,069

2,509

1,258

855

2,646

2,343

2,137

Medium and long-term debt disbursements
Public sector
of which : multilaterals
Private sector

5,645
3,238
...
2,407

7,904
5,763
...
2,141

4,239
2,518
856
1,720

6,485
4,934
2404
1,551

4,357
2,904
1,194
1,452

6,076
3,148
1,992
2,928

5,374
1,947
...
3,427

Public sector use of external assets

-259

-1,534

1,567

-570

-939

161

1,218

Short-term debt 2/
Public sector
Private sector

2,514
199
2,315

3,122
320
2,802

3,492
429
3,063

3,365
224
3,141

5,002
389
4,614

5,254
389
4,866

5,304
389
4,915

Other capital flows (net) 3/

-1,169

-1,775

1,099

1,044

799

414

306

Exceptional financing and arrears
of which: IMF 4/

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

3. Financing gap

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

9,006
9,004
8,800

10,245
10,192
9,982

10,844
10,841
10,507

10,674
10,668
10,524

13,264
13,258
13,195

12,409
12,403
12,340

12,721
12,715
12,653

Gross reserves accumulation

Memorandum items (in stocks):
Gross international reserves
Net international reserves (traditional concept) 5/
Net international reserves (program definition) 6/

Proj.

Sources: Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Original maturity of less than 1 year. Stock at the end of the previous period.
2/ Original maturity of less than 1 year. Stock at the end of the current period.
3/ Includes all other net financial flows, and errors and omissions.
4/ Assumes no purchases under the Stand-by Arrangement.
5/ The traditional balance of payments concept of net international reserves, which excludes central bank short term foreign liabilities and liabilities
to the Fund.
6/ In contrast to the traditional concept, foreign currency liabilities of the central bank to residents are excluded (among other things). A complete
definition is given in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (Country Report 03/135).

42.30

42.30
42.30

42.30
42.30

405.00

September 15, 2005

December 15, 2005

March 15, 2006

June 15, 2006

September 15, 2006

Total

Source: Fund staff estimates.

193.50

May 2, 2005

Date

52.3

5.5

5.5

5.5

5.5

5.5

25.0

Amount
(In millions of SDR ) (In percent of quota)
Conditions

Observance of end-June 2006 performance criteria and
completion of third review.

Observance of end-March 2006 performance criteria.

Observance of end-December 2005 performance criteria
and completion of second review.

Observance of end-September 2005 performance criteria.

Observance of end-June 2005 performance criteria and
completion of first review.

Board approval.

Table 12. Colombia: Schedule of Purchases Under the SBA, 2005-2006

- 32 -

- 33 -

Table 13. Colombia: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2005-10 1/
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Fund repurchases and charges
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports of goods and NFS
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota
In percent of overall debt service
In percent of gross foreign reserves

5.6
8.5
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.1
0.1

11.4
17.3
0.1
0.0
1.5
0.1
0.1

13.1
19.9
0.1
0.0
1.7
0.1
0.1

74.4
113.2
0.5
0.1
9.6
0.7
0.8

185.5
282.1
1.2
0.2
24.0
1.8
1.9

144.3
219.2
0.9
0.2
18.6
1.3
1.5

Fund credit outstanding
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports of goods and NFS
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota
In percent of overall debt service
In percent of gross foreign reserves

299.8
456.2
2.4
0.4
38.7
3.1
3.5

405.0
616.2
3.2
0.6
52.3
4.6
4.6

405.0
616.4
3.1
0.5
52.3
4.6
4.5

343.3
522.3
2.4
0.4
44.4
3.4
3.7

167.0
253.9
1.1
0.2
21.6
1.6
1.7

26.2
39.8
0.2
0.0
3.4
0.2
0.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise stated)
Memorandum items
Exports of goods and NFS
Quota (millions of SDRs)
GDP
U.S. dollar per SDR (WEO projection)
Public sector external debt
Overall external debt service
Overall external debt
Gross foreign reserves

18,984
774
112,270
1.522
24,825
14,492
39,258
12,861

19,550
774
111,156
1.522
24,486
13,347
39,378
13,334

19,725
774
114,634
1.522
25,034
13,528
40,604
13,812

21,426
774
121,814
1.521
25,323
15,168
41,764
14,284

23,228
774
129,073
1.520
25,739
15,939
42,942
14,603

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Projections assume that scheduled purchases under the proposed Stand-By Arrangement are made.

25,625
774
136,886
1.519
26,340
17,192
44,241
14,999

- 34 -

APPENDIX I

COLOMBIA: FUND RELATIONS
(As of February 28, 2005)

I.

Membership Status:
Joined: December 27, 1945
Status: Article XIV

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
774.00
488.20
285.80

% Quota
100.00
63.08
36.93

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
114.27
117.15

% Allocation
100.00
102.

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
1,548.00
1,957.00

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
0.00
0.00

Type
SBA
EFF
VI.

Approval
Date
Jan. 15, 2003
Dec. 20, 1999

Expiration
Date
April 14, 2005
Dec. 19, 2002

Projected Obligations to Fund (in SDR Million):
Type

20005

2006

Forthcoming
2007

2008

2009

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

0
0.01
0.01

- 35 -

VII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Under the safeguards policy, Colombia was subject to a safeguards assessment with respect
to its current Stand-By Arrangement with the Fund. Staff concluded a safeguards assessment
mission on April 10, 2003 and the final report was approved by management on May 14,
2003. The assessment noted no significant vulnerabilities.
VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangement:
In September 1999 the Banco de la República floated the peso. The authorities accepted the
obligations of Article VIII in August 2004. At end-February 2005, the exchange rate was
Col$2,324 per U.S. dollar.
IX.

Last Article IV Consultation:

The 2002 Article IV consultation was concluded on January 15, 2003.
X.

FSAP Participation:

The Executive Board discussed the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) in 1999.
XI.

Statistics: Colombia subscribes to the SDDS.

XII.

Recent Technical Assistance:

Dept.

Purpose

Time of Delivery

FAD

Advice on the reform of the budget code

March 2003

FAD

Follow-up on the reform of the budget code

November 2003

MFD

Inflation forecast under inflation target framework

May 2004

FAD

Assessment of fiscal decentralization

May 2004

XIII. Resident Representative: None.
XIV. Fourth Amendment: Colombia has accepted this amendment.

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

COLOMBIA: WORLD BANK RELATIONS7
The World Bank and Colombia’s Development Strategy
Colombia’s National Development Plan is built on four pillars: (i) provide security to all
Colombians; (ii) foster sustainable economic growth and employment generation under
macroeconomic and price stability; (iii) build a more equitable society; and (iv) increase the
transparency and efficiency of the State. The World Bank Group’s (WBG’s) strategy seeks to
support Colombia’s quest for development and peace. The Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) for Colombia was discussed by the Bank’s Board in January 2003 and since then,
Colombia has received US$1.5 billion in loans to date. Between 50–60 percent of the lending
program would consist of fast-disbursing operations. A CAS Progress Report will be
prepared for July 2005.
The World Bank Program for FY 2005–06
In line with the CAS, since June 2004, the IBRD has continued the preparation of adjustment
loans to support fiscal adjustment, financial sector adjustment, the labor and social sector
reform, and environmental management. Labor and social sector reforms are being supported
by a technical assistance loan that aims at improving knowledge, developing effective
instruments, and strengthening ability to carry out such reforms. The environment adjustment
loan is being complemented by a technical assistance loan to support the inclusion of
environmental and social policies in government programs and to strengthen the capacity of
the major relevant institutions.
The IBRD will also support a program in the infrastructure sector, covering water supply and
sanitation services and a project to reduce Colombia's vulnerability to natural disasters in
terms of state fiscal liability. IFC focuses on supporting new forms of public-private
partnership. MIGA focuses on the provision of political risk guarantees for private sector
investments; hands-on technical assistance for investment promotion intermediaries; and the
dissemination of information on investment opportunities in Colombia.
Bank-Fund Collaboration in Specific Areas
The WBG is helping Colombia implement its reform agenda in the following areas of BankFund collaboration:
•
•
•
•
•
1

Fiscal adjustment, notably reforming the tax system, strengthening tax administration,
implementing a fiscal responsibility law, and reforming the public sector.
Reform of the pension and social security systems.
Foster financial sector and capital market developments.
Broaden and deepen the scope of Colombia’s anticorruption program.
Combat money laundering.

Prepared by World Bank staff. Questions may be addressed to Ms. Keta Ruiz, Senior Country Officer, at
(202) 473-0137 or kruiz@worldbank.org.

- 37 -

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and grants)
As of March 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Closed Projects
Active Projects

163
15

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
Of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
Of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)

303.4
0.0
10,045.1
8,423.8
10,348.5
8,423.8

Of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

674.9
0.3
675.2

Loan Information (IBRD)
As of March 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Fiscal Year*
Total disbursements
Repayment amount
Net disbursements

2001
264
225
39

2002
369
243
126

2003
948
223
725

2004
491
205
286

2005
403
156
247

* Fiscal Year: July 1–June 30.

IFC Operations
As of January 1, 2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Loans Equity (+Quasi) Participation
Total commitments
Total undisbursed

299.6
102.2

129.0
19.8

117.2
95.2

Total
545.8
217.2

- 38 -

APPENDIX III

COLOMBIA: RELATIONS WITH THE
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK1
(As of February 25, 2005)
I. Background and Objectives
In September 2003, the IADB Board of Directors approved the Bank’s strategy for Colombia
for the period 2003–2006. The strategy identifies three overarching objectives: (i) lay the
foundations for economic revival and jump-starting growth; (ii) foster social progress and
make sure society’s most vulnerable are protected; and (iii) strengthen governance and
further modernization of the State. These objectives constitute the framework for the Bank
activities in Colombia.
To help reinvigorate the economy the Bank will foster competitiveness and will support
agricultural development and natural resources management. To foster social progress and
ensure that society’s most vulnerable are protected, Bank’s actions will improve social
protection systems and will promote the coverage, quality, and efficiency of essential social
services. In the governance and modernization of the State area the Bank will support
national public sector reforms and local governments management capacity building,
moreover, the Bank will promote initiatives to foster transparency and combat corruption,
and will support judicial branch reforms.
From the Bank’s standpoint, the implementation of the strategy is constrained by the
country’s fiscal deficit and the armed conflict. Both constraints have implications for the size
of the lending program, the mix of lending and non-lending products, and the prospects for
achieving the strategy objectives.
II. LENDING
As of February 25, 2005 the country’s portfolio consists of 26 loans an amount equivalent to
US$1,901 million. These resources are distributed among 24 investment loans (US$
901 million) and two policy-based loans (US$1,000 million). In addition, the country
portfolio with Colombia includes 45 non-reimbursable technical cooperation
(US$25,7 million) and four small projects (US$1.67 million). Through the Multilateral
Investment Fund (MIF), which finances private sector investment projects, Colombia has 30
non-reimbursable operations (US$18.3 million).
In 2004 six loans for US$737 million were approved. These operations include policy-based
loans to support the Public Utilities Reform (US$600 million). In 2005, the Bank estimates
__________________
1

Prepared by IADB staff. Questions may be addressed to Mr. Luis Giorgio, Country Officer, at (202)
623-1663 or giorgio@iadb.org.

the approval of seven investment loans by US$ 626.1 million (in the areas of transportation,
health, citizens security, energy and agriculture) and a policy-based loan by US$ 400 million
to support the Country’s Competitiveness Strategy.

- 39 -

COLOMBIA: FINANCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of February 28, 2005)
I. IDB OPERATIONS
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Commitments Disbursements

Undisbursed
amounts

Agricultural and rural development

92.1

83.1

9.0

Modernization of State
Social Investment
Education
Health
Sanitation
Natural resource management
Urban development and household
Transportation
Grand total

692.7
312.2
26.0
472.0
49.4
55.4
180.0
21.7
1,901.5

248.8
218.8
13.9
265.0
31.3
30.4
14.8
14.3
920.4

443.9
93.4
12.1
207.0
18.1
25.0
165.2
7.4
981.2

II. IDB LOAN TRANSACTIONS
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004* 2005**

Gross
disbursement
Amortization,
interest and
contributions

412.9

952.4

241.2

785.3

151.8 2,011.7

332.0

835.2

369.1

445.8

473.2

408.2

819.4 1,017.5

648.6

534.1

Net cash flow

43.8

506.6

-232.0

377.1

667.6

-316.6

301.1

(*) Preliminary.
(**) Projections.
Source: IADB.

994.2

- 40 -

APPENDIX IV

COLOMBIA: WORK PROGRAM

Mission to conduct first review of SBA
program.

July 2005.

Board discussion of First review.

September 2005.

- 41 -

APPENDIX V

COLOMBIA: STAND-BY ARRANGEMENT
Attached hereto is a letter (the “Letter”), with an annexed Memorandum of Economic
Policies (the “Memorandum”) and a Technical Memorandum of Understanding (the
“Technical Memorandum”), dated April 13, 2005, from the Minister of Finance and Public
Credit and the General Manager of the Bank of the Republic requesting a Stand-By
Arrangement and setting forth:
(a)
the objectives and policies that the authorities of Colombia intend to pursue
for the period of this Stand-By Arrangement; and
(b)

understandings of Colombia with the Fund regarding reviews that will be
made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program, and of the policies
and measures that the authorities of Colombia will pursue for the remaining
period of this Stand-By Arrangement.

To support these objectives and policies the International Monetary Fund grants this stand-by
arrangement in accordance with the following provisions:
1.
For the period from May 2, 2005 to November 2, 2006, Colombia will have the right
to make purchases from the Fund in an amount equivalent to SDR 405 million, subject to
paragraphs 2, 3, 4, and 5 below, without further review by the Fund.
2.
(a)
Purchases under this Stand-By Arrangement shall not, without the consent of
the Fund, exceed the equivalent of SDR 193.5 million until September 15, 2005, the
equivalent of SDR 235.8 million until December 15, 2005, the equivalent of SDR 278.1
million until March 15, 2006, the equivalent of SDR 320.4 million until June 15, 2006 and
the equivalent of SDR 362.7 million until September 15, 2006.
(b)
None of the limits in (a) above shall apply to a purchase under this Stand-By
Arrangement that would not increase the Fund’s holdings of Colombia’s currency subject to
repurchase beyond 25 percent of quota.
3.
Colombia will not make purchases under this Stand-By Arrangement that would
increase the Fund’s holdings of Colombia’s currency subject to repurchase beyond 25
percent of quota:
(a)

during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicate
that:
(i)

the ceiling on the overall deficit of the combined public sector, or

(ii)

the floor on the net international reserves of the central bank, or

(iii)

the ceiling on the net disbursement of short-term external debt of the
Public Sector, or

- 42 -

as specified in Table 3 of the Memorandum and as further specified,
respectively, in Section IV.A, Section VI.A, and Section VI.C of the
Technical Memorandum is not observed; or
(b)

until Colombia has consulted with the Fund as provided for in Section V of
the Technical Memorandum; or

(c)

until Colombia has consulted with the Fund as provided for in Section VI.A of
the Technical Memorandum; or

(d)

if Colombia fails to carry out its intentions with respect to the following
structural performance criteria:
(i)
By June 30, 2005 approve the changes to the budget law as specified
in Table 4 of the Memorandum, or
(ii)
By July 31, 2005, submit to Congress a 2006 budget as specified in
Table 4 of the Memorandum; or

(e)

after September 14, 2005, March 14, 2006 and September 14, 2006, until the
reviews contemplated in paragraph 75 of the Memorandum are completed; or

(f)

if at any time during the period of the Stand-By Arrangement, Colombia
(i)

imposes or intensifies restrictions on the making of payments and
transfers for current international transactions, or

(ii)

introduces or modifies multiple currency practices, or

(iii)

concludes bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with
Article VIII, or

(iv)

imposes or intensifies import restrictions for balance of payments
reasons, or

When Colombia is prevented from purchasing under this Stand-By Arrangement because of
this paragraph 3, purchases will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between
the Fund and Colombia and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances
in which such purchases can be resumed.
4.
Colombia will not make purchases under this Stand-By Arrangement during any
period in which Colombia: (i) has an overdue financial obligation to the Fund or is failing to
meet a repurchase expectation (a) in respect of a noncomplying purchase pursuant to
Decision No. 7842-(84/165) on the Guidelines on Corrective Action, or (b) in respect of a
purchase in support of debt and debt service reduction operations pursuant to Decision No.
9931-(89/167), or (c) pursuant to subparagraph 17 and 31 of Decision No. 8955-(88/126) on

- 43 -

the Compensatory Financing Facility, or (d) in respect of a purchase under Decision No.
11627-(97/123) SRF on the Supplemental Reserve Facility and Contingent Credit Lines, or
(e) pursuant to paragraph 1(b) of Decision No. 5703-(78/39) or paragraph 10(a) of decision
No. 4377-(74/114); or (ii) is failing to meet a repayment obligation to the PRGF Trust
established by Decision No. 8759-(87/176) PRGF, or a repayment expectation to that Trust
pursuant to the provisions of Appendix I to the PRGF Trust Instrument.
5.
Colombia’s right to engage in transactions covered by this Stand-By Arrangement
can be suspended only with respect to requests received by the Fund after: (a) a formal
ineligibility, or (b) a decision of the Executive Board to suspend transactions, either generally
or in order to consider a proposal, made by an Executive Director or the Managing Director,
formally to suppress or limit the eligibility of Colombia. When notice of a decision of formal
ineligibility or of a decision to consider a proposal is given pursuant to this paragraph 5,
purchases under this arrangement will be resumed only after consultation has taken place
between the Fund and Colombia and understandings have been reached regarding the
circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed.
6.
Purchases under this Stand-By Arrangement shall be made in the currencies of other
members selected in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Fund, unless, at the
request of Colombia, the Fund agrees to provide SDRs at the time of the purchase.
7.
Colombia shall pay a charge for this Stand-By Arrangement in accordance with the
decisions of the Fund.
8.
(a)
Colombia shall repurchase the amount of its currency that results from a
purchase under this Stand-By Arrangement in accordance with the provisions of the Articles
of Agreement and decisions of the Fund, including those relating to repurchases as
Colombia’s balance of payments and reserve position improves.
(b)
Any reductions in Colombia’s currency held by the Fund shall reduce the
amount subject to repurchase under (a) above in accordance with the principles applied by
the Fund for this purpose at the time of reduction.
9.
During the period of the Stand-By Arrangement Colombia shall remain in close
consultation with the Fund. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of
officials of the Fund to Colombia or of representatives of Colombia to the Fund. Colombia
shall provide the Fund, with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the
progress of Colombia in achieving the objectives and policies set forth in the attached Letter
and annexed memoranda.
10.
In accordance with paragraph 76 of the Memorandum, Colombia will consult the
Fund on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the
Government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation because of the criteria
in paragraph 3 above have not been observed or because the Managing Director considers
that consultation on the program is desirable. In addition, after the period of the arrangement
and while Colombia has outstanding purchases in the upper credit tranches, the government

- 44 -

will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the Government or at the
request of the Managing Director, concerning Colombia’s balance of payments policies.

Attachment

- 45 -

ATTACHMENT
Bogotá, Colombia
April 13, 2005

Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
Dear Mr. de Rato:
The government remains fully committed to promoting faster sustainable and equitable
economic growth through the implementation of a strong economic program in 2005 and
2006, which is explained in the attached Memorandum of Economic Policies and Technical
Memorandum of Understanding.
We are requesting the Fund’s support for this program through a new 18-month Stand-By
Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of SDR 405 million (35 percent of quota on an annual
basis), with these resources to become available on a quarterly basis. The government will
treat the new arrangement as precautionary. We would also like to cancel the SBA that
expires on May 14, 2005 simultaneously with the approval of the new program.
We are also requesting completion of the final review under the current Stand-By
Arrangement. All quantitative performance criteria at end-2004 have been observed and most
structural benchmarks have been met (Tables 1 and 2). In this regard, we are requesting a
waiver of the condition for the completion of the fourth review calling for congressional
approval of the revised budget code. We will strive to have this legislation approved by
Congress by June 2005, which will be a structural performance criterion under the new
arrangement. We are also requesting a waiver for the nonobservance of the performance
criterion on the nonintroduction of a multiple currency practice, which was created by the
subsidies for banana and flower exports introduced in December 2004. The deadline for
applying for these subsidies was February 28, 2005. Now no one is eligible for these
subsidies.
Sincerely yours,

__________/S/_________________
Alberto Carrasquilla
Minister of Finance
and Public Credit

Annexes

___________/S/_______________
Gerardo Hernandez
Acting General Manager
Banco de la República

- 46 -

ANNEX I

MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC POLICIES
Introduction
48.
When it took office in August 2002, this government embarked on a medium-term
strategy to foster steady economic growth by reducing the vulnerability of the economy. As a
result, real economic growth rose from 1.9 percent in 2002 to 4 percent a year (about
2½ percent a year in per capita terms) in 2003–04. The urban unemployment rate declined
from17.6 percent at end-2002 to 15.4 percent at end-2004. Inflation declined from 7 percent
during 2002 to 5.5 percent during 2004, as targeted. The external current account deficit fell
to about 1 percent of GDP in 2004, aided by high world prices of oil and coal and a recovery
in exports to Venezuela. At the same time, net capital inflows picked up sharply to 3.3 percent of GDP in 2004. To reduce the external vulnerability of the economy and to limit the
upward pressures on the peso, the Banco de la República made significant purchases of
foreign exchange, raising net international reserves to US$13.2 billion (123 percent of shortterm debt on a remaining maturity basis).
49.
Economic reforms—centered on fiscal discipline—were an essential component of
this strategy. Congress approved a number of the government’s initiatives to strengthen the
medium-term sustainability of the fiscal position, with a view to reducing public debt to less
than 45 percent of GDP by 2010. Through revenue enhancements as well as improved
administration, tax revenues rose from 19.2 percent of GDP in 2002 to 20.3 percent of GDP
in 2004. Pension reforms in December 2002 and May 2003 helped lower the actuarial deficit
of the pension system from 207 percent of GDP to 187 percent of GDP. At the same time, the
central government continued to exercise expenditure restraint, while local and regional
governments—benefiting from several laws adopted earlier this decade that strengthened
Colombia’s system of decentralization—continued to run moderate surpluses.
50.
In 2004, the combined public sector (CPS) deficit experienced an unusually sharp
decline to 1.3 percent of GDP, compared with an adjusted program target of 2.1 percent of
GDP8 and a deficit of 3.7 percent of GDP in 2002 (Table 3). The central government (which
comprises the central administration, social security and decentralized agencies) performed
broadly as expected, registering a deficit of 3.7 percent of GDP. This unusually low CPS
deficit in 2004 reflects several temporary factors. Local and regional governments spent
considerably less than budgeted, and ran exceptionally large surpluses. Also, the operating
surplus of Ecopetrol (the state petroleum enterprise) was unusually high, as the average
export price of Colombia’s oil rose to US$36 per barrel.This fiscal consolidation, together
with the real appreciation of the peso, helped reduce total public debt from 60 percent of

8

According to the program, the fiscal deficit target for 2004 was reduced by 130 percent of
the increase of deposits of the Oil Stabilization Fund (FAEP), which capture part of the
windfall arising from higher than expected world oil prices.

- 47 –

ANNEX I

GDP at end-2002 to 53 percent of GDP by end-2004.9 Also public sector deposits rose from
about 8 percent of GDP at end-2002 to 10 ½ percent of GDP by end-2004, and public debt
net of deposits fell from 52 percent of GDP to 43 percent of GDP in this period.
51.
Since August 2002, the government’s program to modernize public administration
has limited the growth in public spending. These efforts have resulted in the closing of 33
public entities and the restructuring of several others, leading to the elimination of about
27,000 positions. Other important steps include modifying the labor regime of the Social
Security Institute (ISS), restructuring the state telecommunications company, public hospitals
and health clinics and public electricity companies, and introducing on-line procurement
systems.
52.
The Banco de la República used its inflation targeting framework effectively in a
challenging environment. In 2003, it reduced inflation through increases in its policy interest
rate complemented by well-timed and moderate foreign exchange sales designed to calm
expectations, following the sharp depreciation of the peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar between
mid-2002 and early 2003. In 2004, the Banco de la República met its inflation target, while
mitigating the strong upward pressures on the peso. The amount of the foreign exchange
purchases were consistent with the inflation target.
53.
The financial system has strengthened. The solvency and profitability of the banking
system has recovered, reflecting economic growth, a successful recapitalization scheme, and
improved supervision. Nonperforming loans declined to about 4 percent of total loans by
end-2004 and are fully covered by provisions. Some of the funds lent for bank
recapitalization by the Deposit Insurance Fund (FOGAFIN) have been prepaid. Several
smaller banks intervened in 1999 were sold in 2004 and in early 2005. Progress has
continued in implementing the risk-based financial supervision, valuation mechanisms have
been introduced to unify application of mark-to-market regulations, and actions to combat
money laundering have continued.
54.
The government’s democratic security policy also was an integral part of the strategy.
There are many signs—such as a reduction in guerilla attacks, kidnappings, increased road
travel and fewer incidents of economic sabotage—that the security situation has improved
considerably since 2002. This helped strengthen confidence, which in turn encouraged
investment and economic growth.
Economic Program for 2005–06
55.
The government’s economic strategy will continue to aim at supporting steady
economic growth over the medium term, which will help reduce unemployment and poverty
9

The IMF definition of public debt differs from data published by the Colombian
government, which is net of the public sector’s external financial assets.

- 48 –

ANNEX I

further. Fiscal consolidation will remain at the center of this strategy, as further declines in
the public debt burden will support growth by strengthening confidence and lowering interest
rates.
Macroeconomic Framework: Main Elements 2003-10
2003

2004
Rev. Prog.

Rev.

2005

Projection
2006
2007

2010

(Annual percentage change)
Real growth
Inflation 1/

4.0
6.5

4.0
5.5

4.0
5.5

4.0
5.0

4.0
4.5

4.0
3.5

4.0
3.0

-1.0
2.7
-1.3
52.9
10.6

-2.8
2.7
-2.5
50.4
…

-2.6
2.7
-2.0
49.8
…

-2.7
2.7
-1.8
48.2
…

-2.5
2.7
-1.4
42.7
…

12.3

12.7

13.1

14.9

40.5

38.0

36.0

34.0

(In percent of GDP)
External current account balance
NFPS primary balance 2/
Combined public sector balance 2/ 3/
Total public debt
Public deposits

-1.5
1.7
-2.7
56.0
8.6

-2.2
2.5
-2.5
52.1
…

(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Net international reserves 4/

10.5

10.4

13.2

(In U.S. dollars per barrel)
Crude oil, spot price 5/

28.9

....

37.8

1/ For 2007 and beyond, inflation projection consistent with achieving medium-term inflation target of 2-4 percent a year
2/ At projected WEO price of oil in 2005-06, adjusted to reflect Colombia export price.
3/ Excludes the effect of the program adjustor for any oil windfall.
4/ Takes into account the prepayment of the IDB loan in 2005.
5/ Petroleum price is average of spot prices for UK Brent, Dubai, and West Texas Intermediate.

56.
For 2005–06, economic policies have been designed to support real GDP growth of
4 percent a year and to reduce inflation to a range of 4½ to 5½ percent during 2005 and to a
point within the range of 3–5 percent in 2006. The external current account deficit is
projected to rise to close to 3 percent of GDP in 2005–06, reflecting falling volumes of oil
exports, the effect of slower global growth and a return to more normal expansion in exports
to Venezuela. Net capital inflows are expected to stay at around 3 percent of GDP in each
year. Net international reserves are projected to stay at US$12.2 billion by end-2005
(107 percent of short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis), reflecting the recent purchase
by the government of US$1.25 billion to prepay an emergency loan from the Inter-American
Development Bank. The quarterly targets for net international reserves (with an adjustor for
sales of foreign exchange of up to US$2 billion) are presented in the TMU.
Fiscal policy
57.
The medium-term fiscal framework that was presented to Congress in June 2004 (in
accordance with the Fiscal Responsibility Law approved in 2003) aims to reduce net public
debt to 38 percent of GDP by 2015. It added that the combined public sector would need to
raise its primary surplus to 2½ to 3 percent of GDP starting in 2005 to reach this objective.

- 49 –

ANNEX I

58.
The program fiscal targets are consistent with this framework. These targets assume
that spending by local and regional governments will return to normal levels following a
sharp and unexpected decline in 2004. In this context, the combined public sector deficit
(CPS) will amount to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2005 (Table 3). The central government stands
ready to adjust its spending if necessary to achieve the program target, and if spending by
local and regional governments turns out lower than expected, there will be scope for
enhanced investment in high quality projects by the central government. In 2006, the CPS
deficit would decline further to 2.0 percent of GDP. By July 2005, the government will
present a 2006 budget to Congress that is consistent with this objective, which will be a
structural performance criterion. In 2006, the primary surplus would reach 2.7 percent of
GDP, which—together with a reduction of public sector deposits to more normal levels—
would lower public debt to below 50 percent of GDP by end-2006.
59.
The government needs to ensure that spending stays on a sustainable path, even if
world prices of oil reach unusually high levels. The 2005 fiscal target is based on an average
export price of Colombia’s oil of US$31 per barrel and the underlying average export price
of oil in 2006 will be based on an independent estimate of the long-term world price of oil.
To ensure that the public sector saves a significant share of any oil windfall, the targets for
the CPS deficits for 2005–06 will be adjusted downward as explained in the TMU when the
average export price of oil exceeds these baseline prices.
60.
The government will seek to continue reducing the vulnerability of the public
finances to exchange rate fluctuations. In 2005, it will seek to limit net foreign currency
financing to minus 0.3 percent of GDP, in line with the indicative quarterly limits presented
in the TMU. The government has also begun to manage its exchange rate risk more actively.
It has already issued US$825 million through a global peso-denominated bond, with the
investor bearing the exchange risk. It has also begun to conduct forward transactions in
foreign exchange. The government will provide a transparent accounting of the stock of all
its foreign currency derivative transactions and positions, including an estimate of the
possible fiscal impact of adverse movements in the exchange rate. To continue to ensure that
these operations are consistent with monetary and exchange rate policy, the government will
provide the Banco de la República with a schedule of its planned forward operations. The
government will limit the stock of its net forward sales of foreign exchange to no more than
US$100 million.
61.
In 2005, public revenues are projected to decline slightly to 31 ¼ percent of GDP.
Tax revenues will remain broadly stable at close to 21 percent of GDP, reflecting the
buoyancy of tax revenues and the success of our tax administration efforts. Also, the
government will continue to scale back the subsidies for domestic prices of gasoline and
diesel, which cost over 1 percent of GDP in foregone revenue in 2004. This will help offset
the revenue impact of the continued decline in Ecopetrol’s oil production.
62.
Total public expenditure is expected to rise to 33.7 percent of GDP in 2005. The
government will restrain the growth in spending on wages and goods and services, but will
remain under pressure from rising pension costs. In December 2004, the government granted

- 50 –

ANNEX I

export subsidies for exporters of bananas and flowers that hedge their exchange rate risk,
with an estimated fiscal cost of less than 0.1 percent of GDP. The eligibility period for this
subsidy expired on February 28, 2005. After this date, the government will not grant any
further export subsidies but may seek other options to assist the agricultural sector within its
budget constraint.
63.
The government believes public investment, especially in infrastructure, plays an
important role in the growth process. The government will continue to strengthen the quality
of investment by increasing the commercial orientation of public enterprises and by relying,
where possible, on projects carried out by public-private partnerships (PPPs). The
government will complete the valuation of contingent liabilities arising from PPPs by
including all past liabilities, in particular those stemming from infrastructure investment, and
will present this valuation in the medium-term fiscal framework for the 2006 budget. It will
also set up a pilot program to assess the results of a group of completed investment projects,
with a view to establishing over time a centralized system for project evaluation.
64.
The deficit of the central government—which comprises the central administration,
social security and the decentralized agencies—would rise moderately to 4.0 percent of GDP
in 2005 and to 4.3 percent of GDP in 2006. Total revenues would remain broadly stable at
about 23.0 percent of GDP, while total expenditures would rise slightly in relation to GDP
reflecting increased pension payments.
65.
For 2005–06, we intend to press ahead with the following structural fiscal reforms
(Table 4):
•

Budget code. Congress is currently considering the reform of the budget code, which
seeks to reduce expenditure rigidities by scaling back revenue earmarking (which
amounts to 50 percent of tax revenues), budgetary carryovers, and multi-year
spending commitments. Building on the fact that the reform was already voted upon
favorably at the House committee level, we will make every effort to secure approval
of the revised code by June 2005, and this action will be a structural performance
criterion. Once approved, we will enact the necessary regulations to implement this
reform as quickly as possible and no later than December 2005. We will also strive to
continue to reduce remaining expenditure rigidities.

•

Pension reform. In spite of the steps that have already been taken, the actuarial deficit
of the pension system remains very high at almost 190 percent of GDP, partly
because the constitutional court ruled against the transition rules that had been
approved in December 2002. Also, the pension reserves of ISS were depleted in 2004,
placing an extra burden on transfers from the central administration. To continue to
press ahead with this reform, in July 2004, the government submitted a constitutional
amendment that proposed to eliminate all special pension regimes and the 14th
monthly pension payment for new retirees and to set a cap on the maximum pension.
These reforms will yield crucial benefits for the long term by reducing the actuarial
deficit of the pension system to about 160 percent of GDP. The elimination of the 14th

- 51 –

ANNEX I

monthly pension payment for new retirees will yield moderate fiscal savings starting
in 2006. The proposed amendment also clarifies the interpretation of acquired rights,
a critical element for any future changes to the regime’s parameters. The government
will press hard to secure congressional approval of its proposed reform by June 2005.
The government recognizes that additional reforms will be needed over the medium
term to reduce the actuarial deficit further.
•

Privatization. The government intends to bring Ecogas, which operates the country’s
natural gas pipelines, to the point of sale in 2005. It will hire an investment bank to
begin to prepare to bring several regional electricity firms (Empresa de Energía de
Cundinamarca, Electrificadora del Meta, Empresa de Energía de Boyaca,
Electrificadora de Santander and Centrales Eléctricas del Norte de Santander SA) to
the point of sale by June 2006. Together these public enterprises have an estimated
value of about 0.8 percent of GDP.

•

Improving information on operations of all levels of government. More complete, upto-date information on the operations of all levels of government will allow for better
monitoring of the fiscal position and for better coordination of monetary and fiscal
policy. By June 2005, the government will review the quality of the information on
the local and regional governments provided by the Contaduria. By September 2005,
the government will issue the regulations needed to improve the quality of the
information reported on the operations of the local and regional governments. The
progress in improving the quality of this information will be discussed in the context
of the first program review. By December 2005, the government will publish the
upgraded information on the operations of all levels of government.

66.
After 2006, the public sector will continue to face important challenges in its efforts
to reduce public debt further. For this reason, this government will begin to lay the
foundation for crucial medium-term reforms, especially in the areas of tax policy, subsidies,
and revenue sharing. A more efficient tax system—with a simplified structure of VAT rates
and a much broader VAT base and no distortionary taxes such as the financial transactions
tax and the bank stamp tax—would support faster economic growth. Since 1991, Colombia
has developed an extensive network of subsidies that has helped improved the quality of life
for the most vulnerable members of the population, yet poverty remains too high. The
government will seek to find more effective ways to target these subsidies to the poor, and
there may be some scope to trim the cost of the subsidies that tend to benefit the middle and
upper classes. The current mechanism for setting domestic prices of gasoline and diesel
creates an implicit subsidy that implies a revenue loss for the public sector, especially
Ecopetrol, and the government intends to liberalize domestic fuel prices over the medium
term. The mechanism for transferring revenues to local and regional governments presents a
potential risk to the finances of the central government, starting in 2009. By December 2005,
the government will publish a report that evaluates the current system of sharing revenues
with local and regional governments.

- 52 –

ANNEX I

Monetary and exchange rate policy
67.
The Banco de la República is fully committed to reducing inflation to a range of
4½ to 5½ percent during 2005, within the inflation targeting framework adopted in the late
1990s. In December 2004, in light of evidence that inflationary pressures had eased, the
central bank relaxed the stance of monetary policy by reducing its repo interest rate and
closing its window for contractionary monetary operations. If necessary to meet the inflation
target, the Banco de la República will tighten monetary policy by raising its repo interest rate
and re-opening the window for contractionary operations.
68.
The Banco de la República remains committed to a flexible exchange rate regime,
which is helpful for the economy to adjust to shifts in external conditions. Since 2004, the
exchange rate regime could be characterized as a managed float, as the central bank stepped
up its intervention to limit the speed and depth of the appreciation of the peso. However, the
Banco de la República will continue to attach top priority to achieving its inflation target.
Financial sector
69.
Colombia is pioneering a new risk-based approach to credit risk regulation and
supervision. Banks are making good progress in developing models for their risk assessment,
which will be used to determine capital adequacy and provisioning requirements in
accordance with the Basle II capital principles. The new capital and provisioning standards
will be implemented gradually over the next several years. In this context, the government
will ensure that the Superintendency of Financial Institutions will have sufficient resources to
hire the qualified technical staff that it needs to implement this new system.
70.
The quality of the mortgage loan portfolio is improving gradually as the economy and
housing prices recover further. Some banks with significant amounts of mortgages will
continue to operate under restructuring, which—if necessary—could call for increases in
provisioning and capital.
71.
The Superintendency of Financial Institutions will advance in designing the
framework for consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates. The government is in the
process of unifying the supervisory framework of financial institutions, currently under
responsibility of the Superintendency of Financial Institutions and the Superintendency of
Securities. This will allow for a more effective monitoring of the financial system and limit
the possibilities for regulatory arbitrage.
72.
The government has made important strides in resolving the situation of the distressed
banks following the crisis of 1999. Since then, FOGAFIN (Financial Institution Guarantee
Fund) has spent considerable effort in liquidating six of these banks, merging two and selling
another four. Last year, the auction of Banco Aliadas earned 1.7 times the bank’s book value.
The government remains fully committed to divesting the financial institutions that were
intervened in 1999 and remain under the control of FOGAFIN. To this end, it has begun the
privatization process of Granahorrar which will be brought to the point of sale by December
2005 (a structural benchmark). Regarding Bancafé, after the failed privatization process

- 53 –

ANNEX I

implemented in early 2004, the government initiated a thorough restructuring program with
the aim of improving the bank´s efficiency and bringing performance indicators in line with
its private sector peers. Under this program, the bank closed 40 of its 278 branches in 2004,
reduced staff from 4,100 to 3,550 and cut operating expenses substantially. In March 2005,
the staff was reduced further to 3,200 and a process of restructuring began to lower labor
costs further, with a view to eventually bringing this institution to the point of sale. In the
meantime, the government wants to ensure that the new Bancafé and the other public bank—
Banco Agrario—will continue to be managed efficiently. Therefore, the government will
establish by September 2005 a corporate governance framework for the new Bancafé and
Banco Agrario. In this regard, the authorities have requested technical assistance from the
Monetary and Financial Systems Department from the Fund.
73.
The government will seek congressional approval of the new securities law by June
2005. This law will help modernize local capital markets by clarifying the principle of
finality in securities trading, reducing counter-party risk in securities transactions, and
facilitating the establishment of centralized clearing and settlement systems for both
exchange rate and fixed income derivatives markets.
74.
The government will continue to foster the development of hedging instruments to
strengthen risk management in the financial system. For this purpose, we will request
technical assistance from the Fund to establish the road map for developing hedging
instruments.
Other Issues
75.
This program would have semi-annual reviews, which would be completed by
September 2005, March 2006, and September 2006. The first review will evaluate the
progress under the program so far, and will look at the pace of spending by local and regional
governments. The second review will focus on reaching detailed understandings on policies
for 2006, including specific plans for structural reforms during 2006. The third review will
concentrate on economic performance in 2006 under the program.
76.
The government believes that the policies set forth in this Memorandum of Economic
and Financial Policies (MEFP) are adequate to achieve the objectives of its program, and as
usual we will maintain a close policy dialogue with the Fund. We stand ready to take
additional measures, as necessary, to achieve the objectives of the program. The Fund’s
management or the authorities can request a consultation on the stance of policies when
appropriate.

- 54 -

ANNEX I

Table 1. Colombia: Performance Criteria Under 2003-2004 Program 1/
Performance
Criteria
Dec. 31, 2003

2004
Performance Criteria
Jun. 30
Sept. 30

Mar. 31

Dec. 31

Cumulative flows from beginning of calendar year
(In billions of Colombian pesos)
Overall balance of the combined public sector
Ceiling 2/
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

-6,375
-6,225
150

-1,178
-956
222

-1,460
-64
1,396

-1,462
1,713
3,175

-5,394
-3,447
1,947

8.0
6.0
4.0
6.2

8.0
6.0
4.0
6.1

7.7
5.7
3.7
6.0

7.5
5.5
3.5
5.5

9,902
11,019
1,117

10,300
11,379
1,079

10,400
11,929
1,529

10,540
13,197
2,657

Inflation rate 3/
(12-month inflation rate)
Inflation - Consultation band
Upper limit
Target
Lower limit
Outturn

7.9
5.9
3.9
6.5
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Net international reserves of the Banco
de la Republica
Floor 4/
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

10,202
10,524
322

Cumulative net disbursement from beginning of calendar year
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Net disbursement of medium- and long-term
external debt by the public sector
Ceiling
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)
Change in the outstanding stock of shortterm external debt of the public sector
Ceiling
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

1,850
716
1,134

800
26
774

1,300
-237
1,537

1,750
-735
2,485

1,800
-289
2,089

100
-274
374

200
-81
281

200
-65
265

200
102
98

200
167
33

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Definitions of concepts and adjustments to the performance criteria are explained in the technical memorandum of understanding
attached to the staff report for Colombia’s request for a Stand-by Arrangement (EBS/02/210).
2/ The ceiling has been adjusted downward by 130 percent of the gross deposits to the Petroleum Stabilization Fund. This adjustment is
Col$22.1 billion in March, Col$189.97 billion in June, and Col$387.6 billion in September, and Col$705.6 billion in December.
3/ Deviations from the quarterly path for inflation will trigger consultations with the Fund, as set out in the technical memorandum
of understanding.
4/ Floor for December 2003 and March 2004 adjusted downward by US$338 million, the accumulated foreign exchange sales through
the options intervention mechanism.

- 55 -

ANNEX I

Table 2. Colombia: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under 2003-2004 Program
Structural Performance Criteria

Status

Submitting to Congress a revision of the Budget Code (Ley Orgánica del
Presupuesto). This revision will give the ministry of finance greater control over the
expenditure level and budget execution with the purpose of achieving more
transparency and higher budgetary flexibility. Specific measures will include (a) the
adoption of budget classification according to international standards that fits into
the context of Colombia’s legal framework; (b) a requirement to include in the
annual budget law information on tax expenditures, quasifiscal activities, subsidies,
contingent fiscal liabilities, medium-term fiscal projections, and a fiscal
sustainability analysis; (c) the establishment of a midyear budget report to
Congress.

Was structural
performance criterion
for end-October 2003.

July 31, 2004

The 2005 budget submitted to Congress will provide for a CPS deficit of 2 to
2½ percent of GDP and will include a presentation of expenditure according to a
standard international classification system.

Done.

Prior to
completion of
fourth review

Congressional approval of the changes to the Budget Code. The revision will
(a) adopt a budget classification according to international standards that fits into
the context of Colombia’s legal framework; (b) require that the annual budget law
include information on tax expenditures, quasifiscal activities, subsidies, contingent
fiscal liabilities, medium-term fiscal projections, and a fiscal sustainability analysis;
(c) establish a midyear budget report to Congress; (d) gradually phase out most
revenue earmarking not mandated by the constitution by subjecting these
earmarking provisions to explicit sunset provisions; (e) limit the budget carry over
by eliminating the “reserva presupuestal”; and (f) limit the power of the government
to make spending commitments for future years on projects not authorized under
the Development Plan.
Structural Benchmarks

Not met.

December 31,
2002

Issuance of a decree to eliminate existing vacancies in the public service with
immediate effect, and also to close vacancies created by retiring staff.

Done October 2002.

March 31,
2003

Approval by CONPES (Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Social) of the
Social Security Institute’s financial sustainability plan for its health service. The
plan will clearly identify the fiscal effect of each of its elements and be consistent
with eliminating the deficit of the ISS health system by 2007.

Done March 2003.

June 30, 2003

Congressional approval of the Fiscal Responsibility Law.

Done June 2003.

Presentation to Congress of a revision of Law 80 to improve management of
government contracts. The objective is to curb corruption in government
procurement, improve transparency in public contracting, promote e-procurement, and design and implement a standard methodology specifying bidding
terms and conditions for typical contracts.

Done with a delay in July
2002.

October 31,
2003

Implementation of a reform of the special pension regime for teachers that
reduces the actuarial deficit of the regime for teachers at least in a proportion
similar to that proposed by the government for the special regime.

Done Dec.16, 2003.
Waiver approved.

Done in May 2003.

July 31, 2003

Implement reform of special pension regime for the military that will make the
regime more equitable.

Done July 2003.

December 31,
2003

CONPES to finalize a plan to streamline the management of government
property under which an asset management unit will be set up to define and
implement a management plan based on consolidated inventories and develop a
program for inventory assessment.

Done October 2003.

Congressional approval of the modifications of Law 80 to improve management
of government contracts.

Not met.

Bring Bancafé to point of sale.

Done with a delay in
February 2004. No bids
received.

- 56 –

ANNEX I

Structural Benchmarks
March 31,
2004

Completion of a CONPES document to strengthen the government’s legal
defense service to take effect by 2005.

Done November 2003.

June 30, 2004

The government will issue a plan to improve the statistical reporting system for
the financing of the nonfinancial public sector deficit.

Done.

A financial evaluation of ISS health will be undertaken, in order to determine
whether additional actions beyond those established in Decree 1750 of June 2003
are required.

Done.

July 31, 2004

Submit to Congress a constitutional amendment to eliminate special pension
regimes, end 14th monthly pension and cap maximum pension at no more than
25 minimum salaries.

Done.

September 30,
2004

Full implementation of CONPES plan to eliminate the deficit of the ISS health
system by 2007.

Done.

Implementation of the plan to strengthen the governments’ legal defense
services.

Done.

CONPES will publish a strategy for strengthening the current system of fiscal
decentralization.

Not met. By December
2005 government will
publish study that
evaluates revenue sharing
system.

Adoption of the following measures to improve tax administration: (i) establish
an integrated taxpayers’ current account, which records all of a taxpayer’s
payments in a single account; (ii) begin to close enterprises that evade taxes; and
(iii) begin to report persons with tax arrears to credit bureaus.
December 31,
2004

Done.

FOGAFIN will announce auction for Granahorrar.

December 2005.

Restructuring of Bancafé will be completed.

Done with delay in March
2005.

Implement plan to improve reporting of financing of public sector.
Done with delay. Prior
action for new program
adopted in March 2005.
Resubmit to Congress the modifications to Law 80 to improve management of
government contracts.
Done.

- 57 -

ANNEX I

Table 3. Colombia: Performance Criteria for 2005-2006 Program 1/
2005
Outturn
Dec. 31, 2004

Indicative
Targets
Mar. 31

Performance Criteria
Jun. 30
Sept. 30

Dec. 31

I. Performance Criteria
Cumulative flows from beginning of calendar year
(In billions of Colombian pesos)
Overall balance of the combined public sector
Ceiling 2/
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

…
-3,447
…

-1,606
…
…

-1,514
…
…

-3,403
…
…

-6,890
…
…

6.5
5.5
4.5
5.0

6.3
5.3
4.3
…

6.2
5.2
4.2
…

6.0
5.0
4.0
...

…
13,195
…

12,215
…
…

12,215
…
…

12,215
…
…

12,215
…
…

…
…
…

200
…
…

200
…
…

200
…
…

200
…
…

-650
…
…

-750
…
…

Inflation rate 3/
(12-month inflation rate)
Inflation - Consultation band
Upper limit
Target
Lower limit
Outturn

…
…
…
5.5
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Net international reserves of the Banco
de la Republica
Floor
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)
Change in the outstanding stock of shortterm external debt of the public sector
Ceiling
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

II. Indicative Targets
Cumulative net disbursement from beginning of calendar year
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Net disbursement of foreign currency
debt to the public sector
Ceiling
Outturn
Margin (+) or shortfall (-)

...
…
…

300
…
…

-800
…
…

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Banco de la Republica; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Definitions of concepts and adjustments to the performance criteria are explained in the technical memorandum of understanding
(TMU) attached to the staff report for Colombia’s request for a Stand-by Arrangement (EBS/05/---).
2/ The ceiling for December 2004 has been adjusted downward by Col$994 billion, 130 percent of the gross deposits to the
Petroleum Stabilization Fund during 2004.
3/ Deviations from the quarterly path for inflation will trigger consultations with the Fund, as set out in the TMU.

- 58 -

ANNEX I

Table 4. Colombia: Structural Conditionality Under the 2005-2006 Program SBA
Prior Action
Issue circular that requires banks to treat the annexes pertaining to their
operations with the nonfinancial public sector as part of their reports on their
balance sheets.

Status
Done.

Structural Performance Criteria
June 30, 2005

Congressional approval of the changes to the Budget Code. The revision will
(a) adopt a budget classification according to international standards that fits into
the context of Colombia’s legal framework; (b) require that the annual budget
law include information on tax expenditures, quasifiscal activities, subsidies,
contingent fiscal liabilities, medium-term fiscal projections, and a fiscal
sustainability analysis; (c) establish a mid-year budget report to Congress;
(d) gradually phase out most revenue earmarking not mandated by the
constitution by subjecting these earmarking provisions to explicit sunset
provisions; (e) limit the budget carry over by eliminating the “reserva
presupuestal”; and (f) limit the power of the government to make spending
commitments for future years on projects not authorized under the Development
Plan.

July, 31 2005

Submission to Congress of 2006 budget consistent with combined public sector
deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP in 2006.

Structural Benchmarks
June 30, 2005

Congressional approval of a constitutional amendment to eliminate special
pension regimes, end 14th monthly pension and cap maximum pension at no
more than 25 minimum salaries.
Congressional approval of new securities law.

September 30,
2005

Issue the regulations needed to improve the quality of information reported for
the operations of local and regional governments.

December 31,
2005

Publish a report evaluating the current system of sharing revenue among the
different levels of government.
Issue regulations to implement the revised budget code.
Bring Granahorrar to the point of sale.

March 30,
2006
June 30, 2006

Approval was a condition
for completion of final
review under previous
program.

- 59 -

ANNEX II

COLOMBIA—TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
This Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) presents the concepts,
specific performance criteria, and the format for periodic reporting to the Fund, as well as the
assumptions that apply under the program supported by the stand-by arrangement.
IV. FISCAL TARGETS
A. Performance Criterion on the Overall Deficit of the
Combined Public Sector1
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Ceiling
(In Billions of Colombian Pesos)

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Overall deficit of the combined public sector
From January 1, 2005 to:
March 31, 2005 (indicative target)
June 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
September 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
December 31, 2005 (performance criterion)

1,606
1,514
3,403
6,890

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
1

As measured by the net financing defined in the text below. The combined public sector is defined in the
text below.

2.
The overall balance of the combined public sector (CPS) is defined as the sum of
the overall balances of the nonfinancial public sector (NFPS), the operating cash result
(quasi-fiscal balance) of the Banco de la República (BR), the overall balance of the Fondo de
Garantías de Instituciones Financieras (FOGAFIN), and the net fiscal costs borne by the
central administration and the rest of the NFPS related to financial sector restructuring. The
NFPS consists of the general government and the public enterprises. The general government
includes the central government and the territorial governments. The central government
includes the central administration, the social security system; and the national decentralized
agencies. The net fiscal costs borne by the central administration and the rest of the NFPS
related to financial sector restructuring (not part of the NFPS balance) are defined to include
interest payments and amortization of the bonds used to compensate financial entities for the
mortgage debt reductions approved by the Congress in December 1999, the interest payments
on the bonds used to recapitalize public banks, the costs of closing Caja Agraria, and any
additional fiscal charges (including interest costs) related to the recapitalization,
restructuring, liquidation, and privatization of financial entities.

- 60 -

ANNEX II

The Combined Public Sector
NFPS1 + FOGAFIN + quasi-fiscal BR + net fiscal costs borne by the NFPS related to bank
restructuring
NFPS = general government (GG) + public enterprises (PE)
GG
= central government (CG) + territorial governments (TG)
CG
= central administration (CA)+ social security (SS) + national decentralized agencies (DA)
TG
= territorial governments + territorial decentralized agencies
_______________________
1
Excludes net fiscal costs borne by NFPS related to bank restructuring.

CPS

=

3.
For any given calendar quarter, the overall CPS balance is measured, in Colombian
pesos, as the sum of: (i) its net domestic financing; (ii) its net external financing; and
(iii) privatization proceeds, as defined below.
4.
The CPS net domestic financing comprises (i) the change in its net credit from the
financial system, excluding bonded debt; (ii) net proceeds from the placement, with the
domestic financial system and other private sector residents, of bonds (issued or guaranteed
by any CPS entity) denominated in domestic or foreign currency or indexed to any foreign
currency, excluding any valuation changes; (iii) the change in the budget carryover (rezago
presupuestario, which includes cuentas por pagar and reservas de apropiación) of the
central administration; and changes in the floating debt (cuentas por pagar) of the social
security system (Instituto de Seguro Social, Cajanal, and Caprecom) and main public
enterprises: Ecopetrol, Telecom, the national electricity companies, and the national coffee
fund; (iv) the change in the amount of public funds administered by Fiduciarias; and (v) the
operating cash result of the BR. Any capitalization of interest on new issues of government
bonds after September 1, 1999 and the accrual of the inflationary component of indexed
bonds will be included—on a quarterly basis—as interest expenditure for the purpose of
measuring the CPS deficit.
5.
The financial system comprises the banking sector, mortgage banks, finance
corporations (corporaciones financieras), FEN, IFI, finance and leasing companies
(compañías de financiamiento comercial), Bancoldex, Finagro, and Findeter. The banking
sector comprises the BR and the commercial banks.
6.
The CPS net external financing is defined as the sum of (i) disbursements of grants
and project and nonproject loans, including securitization (titularización) of public sector
export receipts; (ii) proceeds from bonds issues to nonresidents (issued or guaranteed by any
CPS entity) denominated in domestic or foreign currency or indexed to any foreign currency;
(iii) the net changes in short-term external debt including prepayment of exports; and (iv) any
change in arrears on external interest payments; minus (v) net increase in the financial assets
held abroad by the CPS; (vi) cash payments of principal on current maturities for bonds and
loans; (vii) cash payment to settle any external arrears; (viii) any prepayment of external
debt; and (ix) the value of any new leasing contracts entered into by the public sector during

- 61 -

ANNEX II

the program period, which is defined as the present value at the commercial interest reference
rate (CIRR) (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments expected to be made during
the period of the lease contract excluding those that cover the operation, repair, or
maintenance of the property.
7.
Privatization proceeds are defined as the cash payments received by the CPS from
the sale of the government’s ownership stake in enterprises. Nonrecurrent fees
(e.g., prepayments) received by the CPS for concessions to operate public services, such as in
the telecommunications sector, are treated as privatization proceeds. For purposes of the
program, such fees will be accounted for over the concession period, distributed in equal
quarterly amounts. Proceeds from the the sales of the government’s shares in public
enterprises will be considered as privatization. To the extent that the purchasers of public
enterprises assume their debts, the net financing used by these enterprises during the program
period until their sale will be deducted from the net financing of the CPS; if the CPS assumes
the debt, the net financing used by the enterprise during the program period before the sale
will remain outstanding as part of the financing of the CPS.
8.
The joint operation between TELECOM and a resident firm, which is a subsidiary of
a foreign company, will be registered in the fiscal accounts on an accrual basis. The
operation involves the acquisition by TELECOM from a resident firm of fixed assets
(represented by installed telephone lines) financed by a loan from the resident firm that will
accrue interest. The breakdown of the debt service between amortization and interest
payments, to be accrued in the fiscal accounts, will be determined by the internal rate of
return corresponding to the cash payments to be made during the period of the joint
agreement.
9.

Adjustment

(i)
The quarterly ceilings on the combined public sector deficit will be adjusted
upward (larger deficit), and the indicative target on net disbursements of public sector foreign
currency and foreign currency indexed debt (see below) will be adjusted upward by the value
of the grant element of any concessional loan disbursements or the full value of grants up to a
maximum of 0.5 percent of GDP or US$500 million for 2005 as a whole, in support of the
government’s projects related to post-conflict, which include support for refugrees
(“desplazados”) and programs to reincorporate former insurgents (“reinsertados”) into
civilian life. The program does not envisage any concessional financing for this purpose. A
loan will be considered concessional if it has at least a 35 percent grant element at the time of
loan approval using the commercial interest reference rate (CIRR) as discount rate. The value
grant element of the loan will equal the grant element in percentage terms multiplied by the
total value of the disbursements in U.S. dollars during the period.
(ii)
The cumulative quarterly ceilings on the combined public sector deficit will
be adjusted downward by the net oil export revenues in excess of the baseline set out in the
table below, net of additional royalties relative to the baseline and net of the net financial
costs of export coverage. Net oil export revenues are defined to include proceeds from

- 62 -

ANNEX II

exports of crude oil and petroleum derivatives minus the value of domestic purchases and
imports of crude oil. The net financial costs of export hedging apply to oil sold as part of
one-year contracts, and refers to the difference between the contractual price and the actual
spot price. The baseline for net oil export revenues and royalties are specified in U.S. dollars,
but all amounts in this adjustor will be valued in pesos at the following average exchange
rates: Col$2,596 per U.S. dollar for the first quarter of 2005; Col$2,620 per U.S. dollar for
the second quarter of 2005; Col$2,643 pesos per U.S. dollar for the third quarter of 2005; and
Col$2,668 per U.S. dollar for the fourth quarter of 2005. All adjustments will be made within
a quarter, which means that the ceiling on the cumulative CPS deficit in a quarter will be
adjusted downward by the amount of the windfall in the same quarter. There will be no
upward adjustment to the ceiling on the CPS deficit.
Baseline Assumption for Oil Windfall

From January 1, 2005 to March 31, 2005
From January 1, 2005 to June 30, 2005
From January 1, 2005 to September 30, 2005
From January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2005

Net export revenue
(In millions of
U.S. dollars)

Royalties
(In millions of
U.S. dollars)

321.4
603.2
926.0
1287.0

221.5
436.4
635.9
831.9

10.
Exchange rate conversion. (i) For the CPS balance, all revenue, expenditure and
financing items denominated in foreign currency will be converted into Colombian pesos at
the average exchange rate prevailing in the month when the transaction took place.
V. MONETARY TARGETS
11.
Reflecting the BR’s inflation targeting framework for monetary policy, quarterly
targets for 2005 have been established for the 12-month rate of consumer price inflation,
measured by the Indice de precios al consumidor (IPC) compiled by the Departamento
Administrativo Nacional de Estadisticas (DANE). The authorities will complete
consultations with the Fund (Executive Board) on the proposed policy response before
requesting purchases from the Fund in the event that the observed year-on-year rate of
inflation at the end of each quarter were to deviate from the programmed quarterly baseline
target by 1 percentage point or more, as set out in the table below. The BR will provide Fund
staff with monthly information and analysis of inflationary developments including inflation
forecasts, and keep the staff informed of all policy actions taken to achieve the inflation
objectives of the program.

- 63 -

ANNEX II

Performance Criterion on Inflation1
Inflation
(12-Month Percentage Change)
March 31, 2005 (indicative target)
June 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
September 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
December 31, 2005 (performance criterions)
1

5.5
5.3
5.2
5.0

These performance criteria trigger consultations with the Fund, as noted above.

VI. EXTERNAL TARGETS
A. Performance Criterion on NIR of the BR
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Target1
(In Millions of U.S. Dollars)

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Outstanding stock as of:
March 31, 2005 (indicative target)
June 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
September 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
December 31, 2005 (performance criterion)3

12,215
12,215
12,215
12,215

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
1

These performance criteria are explained in Table 1 of the TMU. NIR is defined in paragraph 13.

12.
The NIR of the BR (reservas de caja) are equal to the U.S. dollar value of gross
foreign reserves of the BR minus gross foreign reserve liabilities.
13.
Gross foreign reserves of the BR comprise (i) gold; (ii) holdings of SDRs; (iii) the
reserve positions in the FLAR and the Fund; and (iv) all foreign currency-denominated
claims of the BR on nonresident entities excluding accrued, but unpaid, interest on reserve
assets and valuations. Gross foreign reserves exclude capital participation in international
financial institutions (including Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF), IDB, IBRD, IDA,
BCIE, and the Caribbean Development Bank), the holdings of nonconvertible currencies, and
holdings of precious metals other than gold. The pesos andinos are considered to be part of
Colombia’s gross foreign reserves.
14.
Gross foreign reserve liabilities of the BR are defined as the sum of (i) all foreign
currency-denominated liabilities of the BR with an original maturity of one year or less
excluding accrued, but unpaid, interest on liabilities (causaciones); (ii) liabilities to the Fund,

- 64 -

ANNEX II

(iii) any position in derivatives that represent a claim on gross foreign reserves; (iv) any
purchases from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR); (v) any increase in medium- and
long-term external debt of the BR over and above US$2.6 million, which is the level of the
outstanding debt on December 31, 2004; and (vi) any foreign currency liabilities of the BR to
residents, including financial institutions.
15.
The government's exposure in derivative markets. The ministry of finance and
public credit will publish on a weekly basis the gross and net operations in futures, forwards
and other derivative contracts (involving the Colombian peso, vis-à-vis a foreign currency)
as well as its cash position in foreign exchange.
16.
Adjustment. The quarterly NIR targets may be adjusted downward by up to
US$2.0 billion in the event of central bank for foreign exchange intervention. In the event
that NIR declines by US$1.0 billion during any 30-day period through foreign exchange
intervention, the authorities will complete consultations with the Fund (Executive Board) on
the proposed policy response before requesting purchases from the Fund.
B. Indicative target on the Net Disbursement of Public Sector Foreign Currency Debt1
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Ceiling
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Cumulative net disbursement of public sector foreign currency debt
sector from January 1, 2005 to:
March 31, 2005
June 30, 2005
September 30, 2005
December 31, 2005

300
-800
-650
-750

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
1

The public sector includes the CPS as defined above and the financial public sector, including second-tier
banks. In calculating compliance with the ceiling, the reduction/accumulation of the public sector’s U.S. dollar
assets in both spot and derivative markets will raise/lower net disbursements. Debt is defined in point 9 of the
Guidelines on Performance Criteria with respect to foreign debt (Executive Board Decision No. 12274–00/85,
August 24, 2000).

17.
This ceiling applies to the net disbursement (gross disbursement minus
amortization/redemptions) of foreign currency and foreign currency indexed public sector
(financial and nonfinancial) debt. It does not apply to debt in foreign currency that is indexed
to the peso.
18.
Guarantees. The government will maintain the policy of not guaranteeing private
sector external debt.
19.
Exchange rate conversion. (i) changes in the foreign currency debt will be valued in
U.S. dollars at the exchange rate of that currency with respect to the U.S. dollar prevailing at
the time of each transaction; (ii) the net international reserves at end-2004 are valued at

- 65 -

ANNEX II

cross-exchange rates prevailing at end-2004 and reserves held in interest-bearing securities
are valued at market prices prevailing at end-2004; any accumulation of reserves after end2004 will be accounted for at the U.S. dollar value at the time of acquisition; (iii) all
references of foreign currency debt to GDP in relation to GDP are calculated at the endperiod exchange rate of the Colombian peso with respect to the U.S. dollar.
C. Performance Criterion on Net Disbursement of
Short-Term External Debt of the Public Sector1
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Ceiling
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
Cumulative net disbursement of short-term external debt of the public
sector from January 1, 2004 to December 31, 2004 (performance criterion)
Cumulative net disbursement of short-term external debt of the public
sector from January 1, 2005 to:
March 31, 2005 (indicative target)
June 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
September 30, 2005 (performance criterion)
December 31, 2005 (performance criterion)

13

200
200
200
200

⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
1

Short-term debt defined as all debt with an original maturity of one year or less, excluding normal
trade financing. Public sector includes the PS as defined above and the financial public sector except
transactions that affect the reserve liabilities of the BR. The term “debt” has the meaning set forth in point 9 of
the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with respect to Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274-00/85, August 24,
2000).

IV. Reporting Under The Program
The regular reporting will include the following:
Monthly reporting
(i) Financial sector
(a)
Monthly inflation report (within 15 days following presentation to the
Board of Directors of the Banco de la Republica)
(b)
Banco de la República intervention in the foreign exchange market in
the preceding month (within 15 days).
(ii) Fiscal sector (within 6 weeks)
(a)
(b)
(c)

Net borrowing of the central administration.
Cash operations of the treasury (which includes floating debt).
Operations of the Central Administration including transfers.

- 66 -

ANNEX II

Quarterly reporting
(i) Performance criteria: Definitive information on the observance of the program
targets not later than 7 weeks after the end of the quarter.
(ii) Fiscal Net Borrowing on the combined public sector deficit, distinguishing
between external financing, domestic financing, the financial system, and
privatization receipts, not later than 7 weeks after the end of the quarter. This will
include data on privatization revenue, which will include gross receipts, costs of
privatization and the resulting cash receipts received by the treasury and the
assumption of debts by the government in connection with the privatization.

Net accumulation of foreign currency assets in derivative markets
Non-financial public sector
Financial public sector

-

120
120
0

314
314
0

545

Net accumulation of foreign currency assets in spot markets
Non-financial public sector
Financial public sector

-

450
450
0

Margin

Disbursements in foreign currency indexed to the Colombian peso
Non-financial public sector
Financial public sector

-

0
0
0

300

Disbursements in Colombian pesos indexed to foreign currency
Non-financial public sector
Financial public sector

+

639
644
1006
362
-5
1
6

-245

Program target (ceiling)

Net foreign currency financing
Non-financial public sector
Disbursements
Amortization
Financial public sector
Disbursements
Amortization

+

Net accumulation foreign currency debt

Q1
Proj.
Actual

257

-800

0
0
0

-257
-257
0

450
450
0

0
0
0

-864
-844
1537
2381
-20
1
21

-1057

Q2
Proj.
Actual

(In millions of U.S. dollars, cumulative from the beginning of the year)

166

-650

0
0
0

-99
-99
0

450
450
0

0
0
0

-465
-444
2311
2755
-21
3
24

-816

Q3
Proj.
Actual

Colombia: Quantitative Indicator on Net Public Financing in Foreign Currency or Indexed to Foreign Currency

187

-750

0
0
0

-1458
-1458
0

450
450
0

0
0
0

-695
-662
3080
3742
-33
4
37

-937

Q4
Proj.

Actual

- 67 -

Press Release No. 05/95
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
April 29, 2003

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves US$ 613 million Stand-By Arrangement for Colombia
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved today an 18-month,
SDR 403 million (about US$ 613 million) Stand-By Arrangement to support Colombia's
economic program through November 2006. An amount equivalent to SDR 193.5 (about
US$292.2 million) will be made immediately available, with the remaining balance distributed in
five equal installments of SDR 42.3 million (about US$ 64 million ). However, the authorities
intend to treat the arrangement as precautionary, and therefore do not intend to draw on the credit
available.
The Board has also completed the fourth and final review under an SDR 1.55 billion (about
US$2.34 billion) Stand-By Arrangement that was approved on January 15, 2003 (see Press
Release No. 03/04), and which will end effective May 2, 2005 at the authorities’ request.
In completing the review, the Board approved Colombia’s request for waivers of the nonobservance of two performance criteria. No drawings were made under the expiring arrangement
either.
Following the Executive Board’s discussion of Colombia, Anne O. Krueger, First Managing
Director and Acting Chair, made the following statement:
“Colombia’s economic performance continued to improve during 2004, reflecting strong policy
implementation as well as the favorable external environment. Economic activity showed solid
growth, unemployment and poverty fell, and inflation declined to the lowest level in decades.
The external sector strengthened, aided by broad-based export growth as well as sizable net
capital inflows. The combined public sector deficit fell sharply in 2004, supported by
unexpectedly high world oil prices as well as a large surplus of the autonomous local and
regional governments. This helped reduce the public debt further.
“For 2005-06, economic policies seek to sustain this strong performance. The successor 18month Fund arrangement will allow for a gradual exit from Fund financial support. Fiscal policy
continues to aim at reducing the public debt. In line with this objective, the government is
targeting a decline in the combined public sector deficits in 2005 and 2006, based on prudent
assumptions about the world oil price and the overall balance of the local and regional
governments. The authorities also intend to save most of any oil price windfall. Monetary policy

-2-

will target a gradual decline in inflation in 2005-06, in the context of a managed float exchange
rate policy.
“Structural reforms continue to advance. The authorities intend to press for congressional
approval by June 2005 of the revised budget code, the constitutional amendment for pension
reform, and the new securities market law. The authorities are continuing to strengthen the
financial system. In particular, one state-owned bank was restructured in March 2005,
and another one will be brought to the point of sale by end-2005. The government intends to
continue building political support for key medium-term reforms, such as strengthening tax
policy and improving the system of revenue sharing. These policies will help lay the foundation
for continued growth with stable prices over the medium term”, Ms. Krueger said.
Program Summary
Colombia performed very well under the program approved in January 2003. The authorities’
sound policy implementation continued to reduce vulnerabilities and foster economic growth.
Real GDP increased steadily in 2003-04, helping reduce unemployment. Inflation declined to the
lowest level in decades and the external sector strengthened, with a low current account deficit
and strong capital inflows in 2004. Fiscal consolidation, together with the real appreciation of the
peso, lowered gross public debt from about 60 percent of GDP at end-2002 to about 53 percent
by end- 2004, together with a sizable increase in public deposits. Likewise, the financial sector
continued to perform well.
The new program seeks to support the authorities’ macroeconomic framework–especially with
regard to fiscal policy and public debt reduction-during the upcoming transition to a new
government to take office in August 2006. By maintaining sound economic policies in the
coming 18 months, the country will strengthen its credibility further and continue to reduce
economic vulnerabilities, which are crucial to achieve sustained economic growth.
The program envisages real GDP to rise by 4 percent a year in 2005-6, while inflation would
decline to 5 percent in 2005 and to 3-5 percent in 2006. Net international reserves are projected
to stay at around US$ 12.2 billion by end-2005.
Fiscal policy in 2005-06 will stay on the path to reduce public debt to close to 40 percent of GDP
by 2010. The fiscal targets assume that spending by local and regional governments will return to
normal levels following a sharp and unexpected decline in 2004. The combined public sector
deficit would amount to 2.5 percent of GDP in 2005 and decline to 2.0 percent in 2006. As a
result, public debt would decline to about 50 percent of GDP by end- 2006. These targets will be
reduced by a significant share of any price windfall, lowering public debt further.
The government intends to continue to advance key structural fiscal reforms, which include a
constitutional amendment to the pension regime, a new securities law, and a reform of the budget
code. The government will bring the state-owned bank Granahorrar to the point of sale, and will
also try to privatize some small electricity firms with an estimated book value of 0.8 percent of
GDP.

-3-

Colombia is an original member of the IMF; its quota is SDR 774 million (about US$1.17
billion); and it has no outstanding use of IMF credit.
Colombia: Selected Economic Indicators
2000 2001 2002
(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

2003

Prel.
2004

Proj.
2005

National income and prices
Real GDP

2.9

1.5

1.9

4.0

4.0

4.0

Consumer prices (end-of-period)

8.7

7.6

7.0

6.5

5.5

5.0

Nominal exchange rate (end-of-period, depreciation +)

19.0

2.8

25.0

-3.0

-14.0

...

Real effective exchange rate (depreciation-)

-2.6

1.5

-17.4

-5.2

11.4

...

Broad money

-2.1

7.0

5.3

6.5

16.7

11.1

Credit to the private sector

-8.6

1.7

4.0

9.2

12.2

14.6

4.2

3.6

0.7

1.4

2.2

...

Money and credit 1/

Real interest rate (90-day time deposits; percent per year)

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Current account (deficit-)

0.9

-1.4

-1.7

-1.5

-1.0

-2.8

46.1

47.5

52.3

46.0

37.1

35.9

26.3

28.5

31.9

29.6

24.1

22.7

6.6

7.8

7.6

6.5

7.1

6.5

Gross domestic investment

13.7

14.5

14.2

14.9

14.0

15.3

Gross national savings

14.6

13.2

12.6

13.5

12.9

12.5

Combined public sector balance

-3.4

-3.2

-3.7

-2.7

-1.3

-2.5

Nonfinancial public sector balance

-3.5

-3.5

-4.2

-3.2

-1.7

-2.5

Central administration balance

-5.7

-5.7

-6.4

-5.4

-5.5

-6.1

Public sector debt 2/ 3/

47.7

51.8

60.2

56.0

52.9

50.4

External debt
Of which: public sector
Net official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services)
Savings and investment

Public finances

Sources: Colombian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

Statement by Roberto Steiner, Alternate Executive Director for Colombia
April 29, 2005

1.
On behalf of my authorities I would like to thank management and staff for the
continued support and advice they have provided Colombia. My authorities broadly agree
with the staff’s medium-term views expressed in the Article IV papers and appreciate several
suggestions included in the FSSA. Colombia has comfortably complied with all quantitative
performance criteria as well as with most structural measures. The few structural issues that
have not been implemented on a timely basis are part of the new program.
2.
Since taking office in late 2002, the government has made significant progress in reestablishing macroeconomic stability, fostering broad-based private sector led growth, and
reverting the deteriorating trend in most social indicators. Strong program implementation
has allowed for a reduction in the fiscal deficit and in the debt burden, a gradual and
continued decline in inflation, a replenishment of NIR, the strengthening of the financial
system, and the streamlining of state institutions. Timely policies have been supported by
ample liquidity in global financial markets since 2003 and more recently by a favorable
evolution of the terms of trade. These positive external shocks, however, have to be
contrasted with an unsettled regional political situation and with the need to garner political
and financial backing for the government’s internal democratic security strategy. My
authorities believe that, progress notwithstanding, continued Fund support will be important
in the midst of the upcoming political transition. The new program, which should facilitate
Colombia´s exit from Fund supported arrangements, will once again be treated as
precautionary.
Growth and unemployment
3.
Over the last two years GDP growth averaged 4 percent. This is Colombia’s best
performance in a decade. In 2004, growth was broad-based. While construction (up 10.7
percent) and manufacturing (4.8 percent) were among the most dynamic sectors, no sector
grew less than 2.1 percent. Domestic demand was up 5.4 percent, and the investment to GDP
ratio reached its highest level in six years. In dollar terms exports advanced 31 percent, with
robust growth in both traditional and non-traditional components. Growth is being supported
by ample credit, low and stable interest rates, and an improved business environment.
Consumer and investor confidence surveys indicate that growth should remain reasonably
strong in 2005. Notably, investor perceptions are at their highest level in twelve years.
Colombia has made important progress in improving its business environment. According to
the World Bank’s Doing Business in 2005, during the latest year for which information is
available, Colombia was the second most successful reformer in a ranking of 145 countries.
4.
Unemployment has gone down significantly –from 20 percent in 2000 to 12 percent
in 2004-- but remains high. My authorities concur with staff that the 2002 reforms made the
labor market more flexible, while protecting vulnerable segments of the population. Formal
employment has expanded, underemployment has declined, the share of workers receiving
social security benefits has gone up, and the duration of unemployment has shortened. Still,
non-wage labor costs are high; the minimum wage is biased upward because of a

-2Constitutional Court decision mandating yearly hikes equivalent to no less than previous year
inflation; there is a mismatch between abundant workers with low skills and the rapid pace of
technological change in an increasingly open economy; and the security situation, though
improving, has displaced hundreds of thousands of low-skilled agricultural workers to urban
areas. The agenda going forward includes further efforts to enhance human capital, garner
social consensus for reducing non-wage labor costs, and continue to improve security.
5.
With growth having stabilized around potential, the challenge is to increase the latter.
This will require attention along several dimensions. First, recent achievements in restoring
macro stability have to be consolidated. Second, several structural impediments to growth
have to be removed. Third, further improvements in security are needed. Finally, progress is
being achieved in negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States. The new Fund
arrangement aims squarely at further enhancing macroeconomic stability, and also deals with
some structural issues impeding growth –including a new securities law.
Fiscal policy
6.
Colombia´s fiscal position has improved markedly since 2002. The CPS deficit
declined from 3.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to 1.3 percent in 2004, while the gross debt to
GDP ratio of the non-financial public sector went from 60.2 to 52.9 during the same period.
External public debt as a proportion of total debt declined from 53 to 45.6 percent. Recently,
Colombia successfully placed a global bond denominated in pesos, to an extent not matched
by any other sovereign at this stage. The deficit target for 2005 (2.5 percent of GDP) takes
into account the fact that the recent over-performance of local governments is not sustainable
and that the price of oil has been budgeted to decline in 2005. The improvement in the fiscal
position has required action in the revenue as well as in the expenditure fronts. A series of
reforms increased tax revenue by slightly more than 1 percentage point of GDP. Expenditure
restraint has been more elusive; the bulk of outlays –social security, transfers to territorial
entities, and debt service—is inflexible, while military expenditure had to be increased.
7.
While the government has been able to raise the tax burden, the tax code remains
distorted. Income rates are high, there are several VAT rates applied to a narrow base, and
wealth and financial transaction taxes do not favor savings or financial intermediation.
Government efforts to broaden the VAT base have been supported by the Congress but
turned down by the Constitutional Court on grounds that they do not pass the test of equity.
The government agrees with staff that a major overhaul of the tax code is needed, but
believes this politically challenging endeavor does not appear feasible in the near term.
8.
With regard to expenditure, the government has concentrated efforts in three areas:
pensions, reforming state institutions, and approving a new budget code within the scope of
the fiscal responsibility law. As to pensions, important reforms were passed in 2002 and
2003. Unfortunately, the Constitutional Court reversed some of the changes, including its
decision to go back to the transition period approved in 1993 on grounds that the government
cannot take away an acquired right. As a result, the government decided to introduce in 2004
a constitutional amendment to cap pensions at no more than 25 minimum wages, do away
with one monthly pension payment for new retirees, bring forward the full transition to the
new regime from 2014 to 2008, and clearly define the concept of acquired rights. This

-3reform, which requires eight votes in Congress, received four in the previous legislature and
a fifth vote last week, albeit postponing the transition to 2010. It should be approved by June.
9.
Reforming state institutions has been a priority of this administration. Ministries have
been merged, redundant institutions suppressed, and no less than 27 thousand positions
eliminated. The reform of over 150 government institutions has produced savings of no less
than 10 percent of GDP in NPV terms. While the government has been unable to garner
congressional support for amending the procurement law, through administrative decisions it
has introduced meaningful changes to enhance the transparency and efficiency of how the
government undertakes business with the private sector. Likewise, important measures have
been taken to enhance the government’s legal defense capabilities, which should provide
important fiscal savings by reducing the costs of lawsuits brought against the government.
10.
A key component of the reform of state institutions is the creation of a national
hydrocarbon agency (ANH), outside of the state-owned oil company (Ecopetrol). ANH sets
policy, while Ecopetrol competes in a level playing field with private operators. ANH has
reformed contracts with foreign operators, significantly reducing “government take” in the
oil business. As a result, exploration has increased rapidly, and in probabilistic terms it is
now expected that the decline in oil production will cease after 2007. Efforts to make
Ecopetrol a commercially run enterprise include the politically charged decision of reducing
subsidies to gasoline and diesel. At the retail level, gasoline prices are now similar to those in
the U.S., something not typical of an oil exporting country. My authorities see merit in staff’s
proposal to deregulate gasoline prices in the medium term. In the meantime, they remain
committed to continue reducing subsidies. Telecom, the state communications company also
went through a major re-structuring operation. The new concern (Coltel) is profitable,
following changes that implied fiscal savings of more than 8 percent of GDP in NPV terms.
11.
Colombia’s budget is inflexible. Since early 2004 the government submitted to
Congress a draft legislation to reduce earmarking and restrict the ability to make multi-year
spending commitments. The reform has received one positive vote in the lower house. It is
expected that it will receive the required additional three during this legislature.
12.
Looking ahead, further reforming the rules governing decentralization constitutes a
major challenge. Transfers from the central government to territorial entities, which used to
be linked to the growth of current revenue, are now linked to inflation plus a real increase of
2 percent a year. Unfortunately, the law calls for going back to the previous scheme in 2009.
The government, analysts, and broad segments of congress believe that reverting to the
previous scheme would be a mistake. The government has expressed publicly that the best
alternative is to cap transfers in real terms at the level reached by 2008. This charged public
debate should eventually lead to the introduction of legislation on this critical matter, and for
that purpose the government has agreed to publish by December 2005 a report evaluating the
current revenue sharing system.
13.
Important steps have been taken to improve macroeconomic management at the
regional level. In 2000 a law was passed limiting operating expenses to a percentage of
revenue and establishing corrective adjustment programs with the Ministry of Finance for
governments not complying with the ceilings. A 2003 law requires all levels of government

-4to present each year a consistent 10-year macroeconomic framework, and establishes that at
the sub-national level the primary surplus has to ensure debt sustainability. As a result, the
overall balance of sub-national governments has improved, and in 2004 the surplus at the
regional level explains in part the over-performance of the consolidated public sector.
14.
Progress notwithstanding, the decentralization scheme has problems –in addition to
those related to revenue sharing. Coordination mechanisms among levels of government
should be strengthened, and reporting and monitoring of sub-national governments must be
improved. Also, clearer distribution of expenditure responsibilities to avoid duplication
would be helpful. The staff finds the sectoral distribution of transfers too rigid, leaving
minimal discretion to local governments. While my authorities see merit in this point, it is
also the case that health and education needs are prevalent throughout the country, so that
earmarking, while diminishing flexibility, facilitates the achievement of shared social goals.
Finally, my authorities agree with the staff that transfers could be re-designed in order to
provide better incentives at the local level, but do not agree that there is evidence that the
transfer system discourages local tax collection. Empirical research on the relationship
between transfers and taxes show that at the Department level the evidence is mixed, while at
the Municipal level taxes (particularly on real estate) have increased together with transfers.
Monetary and exchange rate policy
15.
It was only a few years ago that Colombia was dubbed by Dornbusch and Fischer as
“the moderate inflation country par excellence”. In 2004, inflation was 5.5 percent, the target
established by the central bank. Colombia is well on its way to achieving in a few year´s time
the goal of stabilizing inflation in a range of 2-4 percent, similar to that of its trading
partners. The inflation targeting framework has served Colombia well, and the central bank is
convinced of the benefits of a floating exchange rate regime.
16.
In 2004, Colombia was confronted with sizable capital inflows, and observed
appreciation pressures unlike any other emerging market. Notwithstanding the fact that the
central bank intervened in the foreign exchange market, the peso appreciated 14 percent
against the U.S. dollar. Intervention allowed the central bank to increase its level of reserves
from $10.5 to $13.2 billion, further strengthening the economy’s resilience to shocks.
Foreign exchange intervention has been partially sterilized, as my authorities are of the view
that there has been an increase in money demand, and that inflation is not in jeopardy if this
enhanced demand is accommodated. In 2004, monetary policy was further eased with three
reductions in the policy interest rates totaling 75 bps and with the closing of the window for
contractionary operations later in the year.
17.
The central bank’s March inflation report supports the view that the recent monetary
easing has been fully consistent with the established inflation target for 2005 and with a
further gradual reduction in inflation in 2006. First, the output gap continues to be positive.
Second, expectations from surveys and those implicit in financial instruments are consistent
with the 5 percent target. Third, there is no pressure coming from wages, with 2/3 of wage
negotiations implying wage increases of between 5 and 6 percent in 2005. Fourth, non-traded
goods inflation is currently very near the established target for the year. Finally, the exchange
rate is expected to remain stable. The central bank has announced that it will continue

-5intervening in the foreign exchange market as necessary and that its contractionary window
will for now remain closed. The bank is confident with the consistency of its policy stance,
and has agreed to narrow the inflation consultation band under the new arrangement. In
March y-o-y inflation was 5 percent, the established target for end 2005.
18.
In late 2004, the government decided that the unstable nature of portfolio investments
from abroad could jeopardize the stability of the financial system. It introduced a requirement
for portfolio investments to remain in Colombia for at least one year. Interest payments,
capital gains, and dividends can be transferred abroad without penalty. The government has
recently announced that it will soon eliminate this restriction, whose temporary nature is
justified as a means to deal with what is seen as an essentially temporary phenomenon.
Financial sector
19.
Following a profound crisis in 1999, Colombia´s financial sector has improved quite
remarkably. Banks are well-capitalized and profitable, non-performing loans have decreased
significantly, provisions surpass 100 percent of NPLs, and credit to the private sector is
increasing at a healthy pace. While the recovery of the financial sector to a certain extent
reflects the cyclical position of the economy, policy actions have played a critical role as
well. The government’s opportune intervention and management of distressed institutions
has allowed for the prompt recovery of those that were viable, and the closing of those that
were not. Several private institutions that received public sector support have been able to
prepay their obligations, while many of the institutions that were taken over by the
government have been re-privatized. Colombia has pioneered a risk-based provisioning
system (SARC) and is gradually taking the steps necessary to adopt Basel II.
20.
My authorities see the need of further reducing public sector participation in the
financial sector. In 2004 they unsuccessfully attempted to privatize Bancafe, and remain
committed to bringing it to the point of sale. For that purpose, a restructuring program is
underway which, by removing labor and pension liabilities, should make the new bank
(Granbanco-Bancafe) attractive to potential buyers. The reform of Granahorrar is well on its
way, and it should be brought to the point of sale later in the year. In the meantime, the
government is devoted to enhancing governance practices in the new Granbanco-Bancafe as
well as in Banagrario, and for that purpose has requested technical assistance from the Fund.
21.
The updated FSSA has provided valuable information and policy recommendations.
The report rightly notes that, recent progress notwithstanding, problems remain in a few
institutions, particularly among mortgage banks. My authorities agree with staff that it is
important to enhance the technical capability of the supervisor, particularly in the area of risk
evaluation. My authorities reminded staff that it had unsuccessfully tried to advance in
Congress the principles of enhancing the independence of the supervisory agency and of
granting immunity to supervisors. My authorities have a different view regarding staff’s
claim that assets are over-valued, a statement that fails to recognize important recent
advances in valuation mechanisms both by the supervisory agency and by the central bank.
Finally, my authorities believe that stress tests undertaken by staff involve scenarios that are
too extreme, not supported by Colombia’s historical financial developments.

-6Vulnerabilities and risks
22.
My authorities commend staff for an excellent paper on balance sheet mismatches,
noting, however, that it uses data up to 2003, and all indications are that vulnerabilities
declined significantly in 2004 --public debt went down, its currency composition improved,
the currency strengthened, and interest rates declined. The paper shows that while public debt
remains high, albeit declining, corporate vulnerabilities have receded and households have
build up a sizable net financial position. The financial sector is less exposed to currency risk
through the household and corporate sectors, but its exposure to the sovereign has increased.
Staff argues for more asset diversification on the part of non-bank financial institutions, and
my authorities believe that the securities reform being considered by Congress is a step in
that direction, as it will facilitate the diversification of corporate financing sources, including
by fostering the issuance of equity. Staff provides interesting suggestions as to how to further
promote hedging mechanisms and my authorities have requested technical assistance from
the Fund in order to move from the diagnosis to the implementation stage.
23.
According to staff, downside risks include a public debt level that is still high; a faster
than anticipated decline in the surplus of local governments; a deterioration in security; a
deterioration in the external environment; and expenditure pressures due to the electoral
cycle. These points are well-taken, and the government is working on those areas that are
under its control. In particular, continued fiscal consolidation is the cornerstone of the new
arrangement. With regard to security, the notable issue is not so much whether it is “good” or
“bad”, but rather whether it is improving or not. All indicators suggest that not only has
security increased markedly, but also that all key actors have internalized the importance of
enhancing it. What used to be the agenda of the government has now become the agenda of
the Colombian people. In terms of security, if anything, risks are on the upside. Finally, it is
evident that the external situation has been good and that it is bound to eventually deteriorate
somewhat. My authorities are aware of this and have taken measures to strengthen the fiscal
position, improve the currency composition of debt, increase the NIR position, and, more
importantly, continue with the remarkable diversification of the economy. In a country where
not long ago coffee represented around 50 percent of exports, oil –at current high prices—is
now the largest export item, accounting for less than 25 percent of total exports.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/62
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 9, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with
Colombia
On April 29, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Colombia.1
Background

Since 1999 Colombia’s economic policies have sought to strengthen the economy in the
aftermath of the country’s worst economic crisis in 30 years. The strategy focused on fiscal
consolidation, lowering inflation, and strengthening the financial system. The government
that took office in August 2002 improved the fiscal position through several revenue
measures (a one-time wealth tax, an income tax surcharge, and a broadening of the VAT
base) and expenditure restraint. Two pension reforms were also adopted, reducing the
actuarial deficit of the pension system from 207 percent of GDP to 187 percent of GDP.
Other reforms focused on restructuring and downsizing the nonfinancial public sector,
improving financial supervision, and privatizing or liquidating the remaining public banks.
Congress also approved in December 2002 a labor market reform to encourage
employment in the formal sector. In addition, this administration established a policy known
as democratic security to try to resolve the civil strife.

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.
1

-2-

Initially the recovery proceeded slowly but in 2003–04 economic performance improved
significantly:
•

Real economic growth recovered to 4 percent a year in 2003–04. The national
unemployment rate declined from 20 percent at end-2000 to 12 percent at end2004, while the poverty rate declined from almost 60 percent in 1999 to 52 percent
in 2003.

•

The combined public sector deficit was reduced from 3.4 percent of GDP in 2000 to
an unexpectedly low 1.3 percent of GDP in 2004, reflecting an unanticipated rise in
the export price of oil to US$36 per barrel and an unusually large surplus of the
autonomous local and regional governments. This outturn—together with the real
appreciation of the peso during 2004—helped reduce public debt to 53 percent of
GDP by end-2004. Also, public sector deposits reached 10.5 percent of GDP by
end-2004.

•

Inflation declined to 5.5 percent during 2004—the lowest level in decades—owing to
the effective implementation of the inflation targeting framework.

•

The external sector strengthened, led by sustained growth in exports and a
recovery in capital inflows. During 2004, the peso appreciated by 11 percent in real
effective terms, prompting the central bank to purchase US$2.9 billion (about onethird of the stock of base money) to limit the appreciation. By end-2004, net
international reserves reached US$13.2 billion (123 percent of short-term external
debt on a remaining maturity basis).

•

The health of the financial system continued to improve. The solvency and
profitability of the banking system have recovered, reflecting economic growth,
a successful recapitalization scheme, and improved supervision. Nonperforming
loans declined to 3.6 percent of total loans by late 2004 and were fully covered by
provisions. The bank restructuring agency (FOGAFIN) continued to trim the
government’s participation in the banking system by selling several banks that were
intervened in 1999. Progress continued in implementing risk-based financial
supervision and actions to combat money laundering.

Executive Board Assessment

Executive Directors commended the authorities’ pursuit of sound macroeconomic policies
and structural reforms in recent years, which has contributed to a significant improvement
in Colombia’s macroeconomic performance and social indicators despite a difficult security
environment. Economic growth has rebounded; inflation, unemployment, and the public
debt have declined; the balance of payments position has improved, in part because of

-3-

buoyant export growth; and confidence in the economy has strengthened, as reflected in
increased capital inflows, the appreciation of the domestic currency, and a lowered country
risk premium.
At the same time, Directors noted that unemployment, poverty, and the public debt remain
high. In addition, while welcoming the reduction in the foreign currency component of the
public debt through the issuance of peso-denominated bonds in international capital
markets, Directors emphasized that external vulnerabilities still loom large due to rollover
and foreign exchange risks. They therefore welcomed the authorities’ intention to maintain
the strategy of fiscal consolidation and steadfast pursuit of structural reform in the coming
years, in order to strengthen the foundations for economic growth and to further reduce
inflation and the ratio of public debt to GDP.
Directors agreed that the authorities’ main challenge in implementing the economic
strategy will be to maintain the pace of fiscal reforms. They considered the reforms
currently before Congress—the revised budget code and the pension reform—to be
important for containing expenditure growth and increasing the flexibility of expenditure
management. However, they stressed that several other reforms will be needed over the
medium term, on both revenue and expenditure.
On revenue, Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to continue to build support for a
more efficient tax system while broadening the tax base and improving tax administration.
They encouraged the authorities to slow the increases in revenue transfers from the
central administration to subnational governments, and to strengthen fiscal coordination
among the different levels of government. On expenditure, Directors called for a
streamlining of current expenditure to make room for more productive capital expenditure.
They welcomed efforts to increase the effectiveness of social spending through better
targeting of subsidies to the poor. They also urged additional pension reform to limit the
expected rapid rise in net pension costs, and gradual deregulation of the domestic prices
of gasoline and diesel over the medium term. Directors encouraged further improvements
in debt management, especially by increasing reliance on domestic currency borrowing, to
reduce vulnerabilities.
Directors commended the prudent conduct of monetary policy. They noted that the inflation
targeting framework has helped lower inflation expectations, and welcomed the authorities’
commitment to reduce inflation to the range of 2–4 percent a year over the medium term.
Directors considered that the flexible exchange rate regime has served Colombia well.
It has helped maintain Colombia’s external competitiveness, as evidenced by the broadbased growth of exports and the sustainable level of the external current account deficit.
Most Directors urged the authorities to guard against excessive foreign exchange
intervention aimed at curbing the appreciation of the currency, as this could create
uncertainty regarding the objective of monetary policy, generate inflationary pressures,
and raise quasi-fiscal costs through sterilization operations. They encouraged the
authorities to phase out, as planned, the temporary capital controls instituted in December

-4-

2004. Directors welcomed the improved management of foreign exchange risk by the
private sector, and encouraged the authorities to continue to facilitate the development of
market-based hedging mechanisms.
Directors commended the government’s financial restructuring operations, which have
helped strengthen the financial system since 1999. They encouraged continued efforts to
improve financial supervision, as recommended in the Financial System Stability
Assessment Report. Key measures would include provision of sufficient autonomy to the
Superintendency of Banks and adoption of risk-based regulations in line with the Basel II
core principles. Directors encouraged the authorities to continue to reduce the role of the
public sector in the banking system, and, in this regard, commended the decision to divest
one large state-owned bank and to consider the divestment of another state-owned bank.
They considered the new securities market law to be an important step toward deepening
the domestic capital market, and urged the phase-out of the financial transactions tax and
the bank stamp tax to promote financial intermediation.
Directors welcomed Colombia’s acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3,
and 4. They urged the authorities to establish a timetable for removing two remaining
exchange restrictions.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued
after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive
Board in a particular case.

-5Colombia: Selected Economic Indicators

2000

2001

Prel.

Proj.

2002

2003

2004

2005

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
Real GDP

2.9

1.5

1.9

4.0

4.0

4.0

Consumer prices (end-of-period)

8.7

7.6

7.0

6.5

5.5

5.0

Nominal exchange rate (depreciation+, end of period)

19.0

2.8

25.0

-3.0

-14.0

...

Real effective exchange rate (depreciation-)

-2.6

1.5

-17.4

-5.2

11.4

...

Broad money

-2.1

7.0

5.3

6.5

16.7

11.1

Credit to the private sector

-8.6

1.7

4.0

9.2

12.2

14.6

4.2

3.6

0.7

1.4

2.2

...

Money and credit 1/

Real interest rate (90-day time deposits; percent per year)

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Current account (deficit-)

0.9

-1.4

-1.7

-1.5

-1.0

-2.8

46.1

47.5

52.3

46.0

37.1

35.9

26.3

28.5

31.9

29.6

24.1

22.7

6.6

7.8

7.6

6.5

7.1

6.5

Gross domestic investment

13.7

14.5

14.2

14.9

14.0

15.3

Gross national savings

14.6

13.2

12.6

13.5

12.9

12.5

Combined public sector balance

-3.4

-3.2

-3.7

-2.7

-1.3

-2.5

Nonfinancial public sector balance

-3.5

-3.5

-4.2

-3.2

-1.7

-2.5

Central administration balance

-5.7

-5.7

-6.4

-5.4

-5.5

-6.1

Public sector debt 2/ 3/

47.7

51.8

60.2

56.0

52.9

50.4

External debt
Of which: public sector
Net official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services)
Savings and investment

Public finances

Sources: Colombian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ All annual changes in foreign currency stocks valued at constant exchange rate.
2/ Includes bonds issued to recapitalize financial institutions.
3/ Program definition. Assumes no purchases under the current SBA. Includes valuation changes.

