November 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/353

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Australia: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; and Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with Australia, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 25, 2004, with the officials of Australia on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on August 30, 2004. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of October 27, 2004 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its October 27, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
AUSTRALIA
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the
2004 Consultation with Australia
Approved by David T. Coe and Michael Hadjimichael
August 30, 2004

•

The 2004 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Sydney, Melbourne, and
Canberra during June 17–25, 2004.

•

The staff team consisted of Messrs. Coe (Head), Senhadji, Salgado, Edimon (all
APD), and Wei (RES). Mr. Callaghan (Executive Director) attended the meetings in
Sydney and Canberra. The mission met with Treasurer Costello, Reserve Bank of
Australia Governor Macfarlane, Treasury Secretary Henry, other senior government
officials, and representatives of labor unions, business and financial sectors, and
academia.

•

At the conclusion of the 2003 Article IV consultation on October 22, 2003 (IMF
Country Report 03/337), Executive Directors attributed Australia’s robust economic
growth with low inflation to the enhanced resilience of the economy, gained through
prudent macroeconomic policies conducted within transparent policy frameworks and
steadfast implementation of structural reforms. Directors regarded Australia’s fiscal
position as fundamentally sound, but noted the potential for significant pressures
associated with longer-term population ageing. They praised the authorities’ strategy
to cope with these pressures by raising labor force participation rates and productivity
growth. In particular, Directors considered further reform of the personal income tax
system and a comprehensive overhaul of the complex system of income support to be
essential elements of the authorities’ strategy. Macroeconomic and structural policies
are sound and are consistent with Fund advice.

•

Australia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and it
maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers
for current international transactions. Australia publishes high-quality economic and
financial data on a timely basis, and subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination
Standard.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary.....................................................................................................................3
I.

Overview.............................................................................................................................4

II.

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ...................................................................5
A. Recent Developments ...................................................................................................5
B. Economic Outlook ........................................................................................................8

III.

Policy Discussions ..............................................................................................................9
A. Macroeconomic Policies...............................................................................................9
B. Structural Policies .........................................................................................................11
C. Financial Sector Issues..................................................................................................14
D. Trade Policy and Official Assistance............................................................................16

IV. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................16
Boxes
1. The House Price Surge in Australia....................................................................................20
2. The 2004 Budget.................................................................................................................21
3. What Accounts for the Turnaround in Australia’s Terms of Trade....................................22
4. Current Account Reversals in Industrial Countries ............................................................23
5. Australia and the Pacific Island Countries..........................................................................24
Figures
1. Comparisons of Macroeconomic Performance, 1990–2003...............................................25
2. Selected Real Economic Indicators, 1995–2004 ................................................................26
3. Inflation and Labor Market Indicators, 1995–2004............................................................27
4.
Fiscal Indicators, 1998/99–2007/08....................................................................................28
5.
Selected Monetary Indicators, 1995–2004 .........................................................................29
6. Balance of Payments and External Liabilities, 1995–2004 ................................................30
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999–2005 ..................................................31
2.
Selected Fiscal Indicators, 1998/99–2007/08 .....................................................................32
3. Balance of Payments, 1998–2004.......................................................................................33
4. Medium-Term Scenario, 2004–09 ......................................................................................34
5. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 1999-2009 ........................................................35
Annexes
I.
Economic Vulnerability Assessment ..................................................................................36
II. Fund Relations ....................................................................................................................41
III. Statistical Issues ..................................................................................................................42

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Background
•

The expansion is now entering its 13th year, with unemployment falling to a level not
seen since the early 1980s. After slowing in the first half of 2003, economic growth
rebounded, underpinned by continued buoyancy of domestic demand, an improvement in
the external environment, and a gradual recovery from the drought. For the year as a
whole, economic growth was 3 percent, inflation stayed within the Reserve Bank of
Australia’s (RBA) target range of 2−3 percent, and the fiscal position remained strong.
However, the current account worsened due to Australia’s relatively strong cyclical
position, a substantial appreciation of the Australian dollar, and the drought.

•

Growth is expected to increase to about 3¾ percent this year, with inflation
remaining within the official target range. The main risk to the outlook relates to
overheating in the housing market, but recent indicators suggest a soft landing is likely.
Other risks include a re-emergence of drought, sustained high oil prices, or a weakening
of external demand. While no single risk appears to pose a significant threat in the short
term, a combination of external and domestic shocks could shake confidence and spark a
sharp increase in household saving rates that could severely weaken GDP growth. There
is also upside potential if domestic demand remains robust as net exports strengthen and
fiscal stimulus comes on stream.

Policy Discussions
•

The mission broadly endorsed the current macroeconomic policy settings. The staff
supports the RBA’s decision to keep monetary policy on hold since the two 25 basis
point increases in the policy interest rate late last year. The RBA’s wait-and-see stance is
appropriate in light of subdued inflation pressures and remaining uncertainties in the
housing market. While public finances remain sound, the authorities agreed with the
mission that the small surpluses projected in the 2004 Budget hinge on continued
buoyancy of fiscal revenue growth. In the short run, the stimulatory effect of the fiscal
package could complicate monetary policy implementation if it comes into play when
domestic demand growth is still significantly above trend. Over the longer term, the
government intends to address fiscal problems stemming from population ageing through
structural reforms to increase productivity growth and labor force participation.

•

There do not appear to be significant vulnerabilities in the financial system.
Although banks have substantial exposure to the housing market, stress tests indicate that
even a large decline in house prices would not have systemic implications for the banking
system.

•

Australia is a strong supporter of multilateral trade liberalization. With little
progress on the multilateral front until recently, however, the authorities have pursued a
number of free trade agreements, although they are aware of the risk that bilateral
agreements may dilute efforts to conclude successfully the WTO negotiations.

-4-

I. OVERVIEW
1.
Australia continues to reap the benefits of sustained implementation of
appropriate macroeconomic policies and structural reforms. These benefits are apparent
in strong economic growth, low inflation, and substantial declines in the unemployment rate
and public indebtedness. Reforms, a transparent framework for macroeconomic policies, and
a floating exchange rate have also made the Australian
6
Real GDP
economy much more flexible and resilient, as
5 (Annual percentage change)
Australia
demonstrated by the longevity of the current expansion
4
despite a series of severe domestic and external shocks.
OECD
2.
The expansion is now entering its 13th year,
with unemployment falling to a level not seen since the
early 1980s. Growth is expected to increase to about
3¾ percent this year, with inflation remaining comfortably
within the official target range. The main risk to the
outlook relates to overheating in the housing market and
the associated build-up in household indebtedness, but
recent indicators suggest a soft landing is likely. Although
deposit-taking institutions have substantial exposure to the
housing market, stress tests indicate that even a large
decline in house prices would not have systemic
implications for the banking system.
3.
Monetary policy has been kept on hold since the
two 25 basis point increases in the policy interest rate
late last year, and the public finances are sound. The
Reserve Bank of Australia’s (RBA) wait-and-see stance is
appropriate in light of subdued inflation pressures and
remaining uncertainties in the housing market. The 2004
Budget projects continued small surpluses, while still
having room for a package of tax cuts and expenditure
initiatives. Over the longer term, the government intends
to address fiscal problems stemming from population
ageing through structural reforms to increase productivity
growth and labor force participation.

6
5
4
3

3
G7
2

2

1

1

0

0
-1

-1
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

16

16

Consumer Price Index
14 (Annual percentage change)

14

12

12

10

10

8

8
OECD

6
4

6
4

G7

2

2
Australia

0
1990

1992

1994

0
1996

1998

2000

2002

12

Unemployment Rate
11 (In percent)

Australia

9

7

11
10

10

8

12

9
8

OECD
G7

6
4.
In the short run, Australia is likely to continue
5
to outperform most OECD countries in terms of
economic growth, as it has since the early 1990s. In the 4
longer term, however, there is no guarantee that growth 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
will remain strong, not least because of the prospective demographic transition to an
older population. Just as structural reforms boosted the Australian economy out of the
economic doldrums of the 1970s and 1980s, it is necessary in a world of rapid technological
change and globalization to continue the reform process to maintain growth in the future.
Indeed, there is no reason why Australia should not aspire to even higher growth to close the
productivity gap with the most advanced economies.

7
6
5
4

-5-

5.
The staff support the authorities’ ambitious agenda of reforms to raise
productivity and labor force participation to meet the challenges of an ageing
population. If successfully implemented, this would move Australia to the forefront of
defining international best practice in the area of structural policies to address the economic
implications of ageing, as it is now in the area of macroeconomic policies. There is a risk,
however, that the comparatively strong recent economic performance will engender
complacency, which will sap the political will and public support for further structural
reforms.
6.
Prime Minister John Howard is expected to call for federal elections before
2005. The governing Liberal-National Party Coalition was elected to its third consecutive
term in November 2001 with a majority in the House of Representatives but not in the
Senate.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
A. Recent Developments
7.
After slowing in the first half of 2003, economic growth rebounded, underpinned
by continued buoyancy of domestic demand and a gradual recovery from the drought.
For the year as whole, real GDP growth was 3 percent, only moderately lower than the
3.8 percent in 2002. Buoyant domestic demand continued to offset weak net exports and a
large decline in agricultural output, which dropped by 33 percent in the year to March 2003.
The strength in domestic demand was broad based, with consumption, housing investment,
and business investment all growing at above-trend rates. Domestic spending in 2003 was
underpinned by supportive financial conditions, substantial increases in household wealth
from the surge in dwelling prices—prices for established houses grew in real terms by about
16 percent a year in 2002 and 2003—and rising equity prices. A strong labor market―the
unemployment rate fell to 5.6 percent in 2003―and a rebound in farm incomes in the second
half of 2003 also boosted domestic demand. In contrast, net exports have been a drag on
GDP growth over the past couple of years, reflecting the combined effects of strong
10
8

10 40

Contribution of Demand Components to Growth
(In percent)

8

Real GDP growth 1/
Domestic demand
Net exports

6

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

2000

2001

(In percent)

30

30

6

4

2002

1/ Quarterly 12-month percent change.
Source: Data provided by the Australian authorities.

2003

2004

40

Annual Housing Price Growth

Real
Nominal

20

20

10

10

0

0

-4 -10

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

Source: Data provided by the Australian authorities.

1998

2000

2002

-10

-6-

domestic demand, a weak external environment, a substantial appreciation of the Australian
dollar, and the drought. Notwithstanding the rebound in agricultural output and a firming of
external demand in the second half of 2003, the current account deficit deteriorated from
4.4 percent of GDP in 2002 to 6 percent in 2003.
8.
Despite a weaker-than-expected
12
Housing Finance Commitments
first quarter of 2004, the expansion
(In billions of dollars; seasonally adjusted)
retained significant momentum.
10
Quarterly GDP growth slowed from
Total dwellings
Total dwellings excl. refinancing
1.3 percent in the last quarter of 2003 to
0.2 percent in the first quarter of 2004.
8
However, domestic demand remained
strong with a seasonally adjusted annual
6
rate of growth of 5 percent, only slightly
lower than the 5¼ percent in the last
quarter of 2003. The housing sector
4
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
appeared to cool somewhat in late 2003
Source: Data provided by the Australian authorities.
and early 2004, with declining prices in
some markets and easing in the auction clearance rate, building approvals, and lending for
housing. While exports firmed in the first quarter of 2004, reflecting a strong rebound in
agriculture, a boost in imports pushed net exports to a record low, subtracting 3¾ percentage
points from GDP growth.
9.
Australia’s recent inflation
10
10
CPI: Tradables vs. Nontradables
performance has been marked by
(Annual percentage change)
8
8
contrasting influences from strong
Tradables
Nontradables
domestic demand on the one hand and a
6
6
Overall
substantial appreciation of the Australian
dollar on the other. After a temporary
4
4
spike in March 2003, reflecting mainly a
2
2
run-up in energy prices, overall CPI
inflation gradually declined to the lower
0
0
bound of the RBA’s target range of
-21999
2–3 percent in the first quarter of 2004,
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004 -2
Source:
Data
provided
by
the
Australian
authorities.
before edging up to 2½ percent in the
second quarter due to the easing of the Australian dollar and a surge in oil prices. However,
the overall inflation measure masks very different trends in tradables and nontradables
inflation. While CPI inflation for nontradable goods has remained above 4 percent since
March 2003, price increases for tradable goods have declined sharply since March 2003 due
to the large appreciation of the Australian dollar. More recently, there has been a pick up in
tradable good prices associated with the ongoing boom in commodity prices and easing of
the Australian dollar.
10.
The Australian dollar appreciated significantly during the past two years. From
its low in April 2001 to its recent peak in February 2004, the Australian dollar strengthened
by 65 percent against the U.S. dollar. On a trade-weighted basis, the currency appreciated by
41 percent, reflecting the weakness in the U.S. dollar, which dragged along closely-linked
currencies of some of Australia’s trading-partners, a widening in interest rate differentials
due to Australia’s more favorable cyclical position, and strong commodity prices. This

12

10

8

6

4

-7-

appreciation also reflected a bounce back from the Australian dollar’s significantly
undervalued level in 2001. Indeed, at the
110
0.90
Bilateral Exchange Rates
February 2004 peak, the Australian dollar
U.S. dollar per Australian\dollar (left scale)
100
was only 21 percent above its ten-year
0.80
Euro per\Australian dollar (left scale)
Yen per Australian\dollar (right scale)
average against the U.S. dollar (20 percent
90
above on a trade-weighted basis).1 From
0.70
February to July 2004, the Australian dollar
80
eased but remained 6 percent above its ten0.60
70
year average against the U.S. dollar
(9 percent on a trade-weighted basis). The
0.50
60
RBA took advantage of the currency’s
strength to rebuild its official reserves—
0.40
50
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
which had declined to the unusually low
Source: International Monetary Fund.
level of US$3½ billion in early 2002—
which increased by US$11¾ billion during the two years to February 2004, with little change
in subsequent months. Official reserves net of swap commitments were US$17.1 billion in
June 2004, equivalent to 1½ months of imports of goods and services.
11.
Monetary policy has successfully managed the countervailing influences on
inflation and the heightened uncertainty during 2003. The Official Cash Rate (OCR)
remained unchanged during the first three
10
4.0
Nominal Interest Rates
quarters of 2003, reflecting the balancing of
(In percent)
3.5
conflicting risks to the outlook at the time.
9
3.0
The RBA had to contend with, on the one
8
2.5
Bond spread over
hand, the potential for protracted weakness
U.S. long term rates
2.0
in the external environment, further
(right scale)
90-day bank bill
7
(left scale)
appreciation of the Australian dollar, and
Cash rate
1.5
(left scale)
uncertainty about the recovery from the
6
1.0
drought, and, on the other hand, continued
0.5
5
rapid growth in housing credit (Box 1).
0.0
While keeping interest rates unchanged, the
4
-0.5
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
RBA has actively sought to raise public
Source: International Monetary Fund.
awareness about the unsustainability of the
housing market boom. By the end of 2003, however, with external risks to the Australian
economy abating, domestic demand growing faster than expected, signs of recovery in the
agricultural sector emerging, and the housing sector continuing to expand at an unsustainable
rate, the RBA increased the OCR by 25 basis points in both November and December. The
RBA kept the OCR unchanged at its policy meetings in the first half of 2004 based on
emerging signs of easing domestic spending, a cooling in the housing market, and subdued
inflation pressures.

1

The real effective exchange rate of the Australian dollar was estimated to be overvalued by at most 10 percent
in the March 2004 CGER assessment, although this overvaluation would have declined as the currency has
subsequently depreciated.

-8-

12.
The December 2003 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) depicted
a stronger outlook than in the 2003 Budget.2 The near-term economic outlook had
improved with the global recovery taking hold, an easing in drought conditions, and
continued strength in the domestic economy. As a result, increases in expenditure due to
additional policy measures announced since the 2003 Budget were more than offset by
higher than expected revenue, reflecting significantly higher estimated corporate tax revenue.
Consequently, the 2003 Budget estimate of a Commonwealth cash surplus of $A 2.2 billion
(0.3 percent of GDP) for 2003/04 was revised upward in the December 2003 MYEFO to
$A 4.6 billion (0.6 percent of GDP). The projected medium-term Commonwealth fiscal
surplus was also raised marginally.
13.
The 2004 Budget contained a $A 37 billion package of additional tax cuts and
new expenditure initiatives over five years (an average of about 0.9 percent of GDP
each year), while maintaining a modest cash surplus through the medium term. The
centerpiece of the Budget was the government’s More Help for Families package, which
provides assistance to Australian families, continues the government’s ongoing structural tax
reform, and enhances incentives to save for retirement (Box 2). An underlying cash surplus
of $A 2.4 billion (0.3 percent of GDP) was estimated for 2004/05, compared with $A
3.8 billion in the December 2003 MYEFO. Small underlying cash surpluses of between 0.2
and 0.4 percent of GDP were projected to continue for the foreseeable future, and
Commonwealth net debt was projected to turn negative in 2007/08.
B. Economic Outlook
14.
Strong momentum in domestic demand, recovery from the drought, and an
improving external environment are expected to boost real GDP growth to near
potential of about 3¾ percent in 2004. The long awaited rebalancing of sources of growth
is expected during the second half of the year, with domestic demand growth gradually
returning to trend and net exports becoming an alternative engine of growth. The two interest
rate increases in late 2003 seem to have dampened dwelling investment and household
consumption, although recent data show an acceleration in retail trade due to the new
Maternity Payment disbursed on July 1, 2004. And while business investment remains
strong, surveys of investment intentions for 2004−05 suggest that the investment cycle has
reached its peak. The gradual cooling of domestic demand is expected to be, at least partially,
offset by a pick up in external demand for nonagricultural exports and a rebound in
agricultural output. The recent moderation of the Australian dollar will further strengthen the
contribution of net exports to economic growth.
15.
There are a number of important risks to the near-term outlook. The main risk
centers on the housing market and the associated build up of household indebtedness. The
RBA has been very alert to this risk during the past few years and has taken a number of
measures, including raising interest rates, to contain it. Scattered evidence in late 2003 and

2

The 2003 Budget was released in May 2003, covering the financial year 2003/04 that ended June 30, 2004,
and was updated in the December 2003 MYEFO.

-9-

early 2004 suggests a soft landing in the housing market. There are other risks: a reemergence of drought; sustained high oil prices; a weakening of external demand, perhaps
associated with a slowdown in China;3 and building inflation pressures from a tight labor
market, a further depreciation of the currency, or a combination of both. But none of these, in
isolation, is likely to pose a significant risk in the short term. A combination of external and
domestic shocks, however, could shake confidence and spark a sharp increase in household
saving rates that could severely weaken domestic demand; if this were to occur when the
expected recovery in net exports fails to emerge, the impact on GDP growth could be
marked. While such a worst-case scenario cannot be ruled out, it is not the most likely
outcome. These downside risks are balanced by the upside potential of domestic demand
remaining robust as net exports strengthen and fiscal stimulus comes on stream.
16.
Medium-term prospects remain favorable. Australia’s transparent and effective
monetary and fiscal policy frameworks, healthy public finances, and the government’s
commitment to carry forward its pro-growth strategy should sustain growth around
Australia’s potential of 3¾ percent. This suggests that the current, historically low
unemployment rate of about 5½ percent may remain broadly unchanged. The current account
deficit is projected to decline to 4 percent of GDP as the effects of the drought dissipate, the
economy returns to its medium-term growth path, the pick-up in global economic activity
takes hold, and favorable terms of trade developments continue (Box 3). However, the
persistent current account deficit and relatively high household debt continue to be potential
vulnerabilities to the Australian economy.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
17.
The authorities and the staff broadly agree on the appropriate settings for
macroeconomic policies in the short-to-medium term and on the key elements in the
authorities’ strategy to deal with Australia’s longer-term policy challenges. The policy
discussions focused on the uncertainties surrounding the outlook, the appropriate monetary
and fiscal policy mix, and longer-term fiscal pressures on public spending associated with
rapidly increasing healthcare costs and the ageing of the population.
A. Macroeconomic Policies
Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate
18.
The RBA has kept monetary policy on hold since the two 25 basis point increases
in the Official Cash Rate late last year. With the economy continuing to grow at a brisk
pace, even in the face of a cooling housing sector, pressures on underlying inflation may start
to build during the second half of 2004 as the restraining influence from the earlier
appreciation of the exchange rate fades. These considerations prompted the RBA to signal in
its August Monetary Policy Statement that Australian interest rates would likely have to
3

Staff analysis suggests that a hard landing in China—based on a scenario where a sharp slowdown in
investment growth leads to a 10 percentage point decline in China’s import growth and a decline in world
commodity prices―could result in a half to 1 percentage point decrease in Australia's GDP, although the full
effects would be mostly felt only after a few years.

- 10 -

increase at some stage in the current expansion. This tightening could come soon if wage
growth―which has been relatively subdued so farincreases, oil prices remain high, the
Australian dollar depreciates further.
19.
The authorities noted that exchange rate flexibility has cushioned the Australian
economy from external shocks, with economic agents adapting well to large exchange
rate swings, including through hedging practices. At the same time, they believe that
intervention in the foreign exchange market may be warranted to help reverse an apparent
overshoot in the exchange rate in either direction; or to calm a disorderly market, which
could lead to significant ask-bid spreads and loss of liquidity.4 The foreign exchange reserves
used to intervene had fallen to an unusually low level in early 2002. As noted, the RBA took
advantage of favorable market conditions to rebuild its stock of reserves until mid-February
2004, but has remained on the sidelines subsequently as the Australian dollar eased. Looking
ahead, conditions seem favorable for a gradual depreciation of the Australian dollar toward
its long-term average value, with a global pick up in economic activity and the expected
increase in world interest rates. While recent exchange rate cycles suggest considerable
persistence, econometric evidence indicates that the exchange rate tends to converge to its
equilibrium level rather quickly when hit by large shocks.5
Fiscal Policy
20.
Although fiscal policy remains fundamentally sound, the new package unveiled
in the 2004 Budget could pose some risk to the medium-term outlook. Owing to the
strength of the economy and buoyancy of revenue, the underlying cash balance is projected
to remain positive for the foreseeable future despite the package of tax cuts and new
expenditure initiatives in the budget. However, this relatively favorable outlook hinges on
significantly stronger revenue than projected in December 2003, by a cumulative
$A 29 billion over five years, which is expected to largely offset the cost of the new package.
The authorities are cognizant of the risks to the fiscal outlook and would take appropriate
measures if revenue turns out weaker than projected. The mission noted that the short-term
stimulatory effect of the $A 37 billion package, of which $A 14 billion is earmarked
for 2004/05 and 2005/06 (an average of about 0.9 percent of GDP each year), could
complicate monetary policy formulation if it comes into play when growth of domestic
demand is still significantly above potential. The authorities believe that the stimulus from
the package will be relatively small,6 and, in any case, that is appropriate in view of the
downside risks.

4

The RBA’s intervention policy is described in http://www.rba.gov.au/Education/exchange_rate.html

5

See “Speed of Convergence of the Real Exchange Rate to Equilibrium,” in the accompanying Selected Issues
paper.
6

For 2004/05, the staff estimates the fiscal impulse from the package at about 1 percent, which is consistent
with estimates from market participants. The authorities estimate the impact to be somewhat less, perhaps ½
percent of GDP.

- 11 -

B. Structural Policies
21.
Notwithstanding the relatively positive medium-term outlook, Australia faces
significant long-term spending pressures due to increasing healthcare costs and
population ageing. The Intergenerational Report published as part of the 2002 Budget
identified the sources of these fiscal pressures and estimated their potential magnitude to be a
financing gap of about 5 percent of GDP in the Commonwealth budget by 2042, assuming no
policy or behavioral changes. Compared with other industrialized countries, Australia is well
placed to respond to these intergenerational pressures, because of the strength of its fiscal
position. However, a measured and timely response to the challenges highlighted in the
Intergenerational Report will render them much more manageable.
22.
While Australia has narrowed the productivity gap with respect to leading
industrial countries, perseverance with
0.84
0.84
Labor Productivity Ratio: Australia vs. the United States
structural reforms is needed to make
0.82
0.82
further progress. The strong performance
over the past decade arose from the
0.80
0.80
concerted efforts of successive governments
0.78
0.78
to improve both the microeconomic and
7
macroeconomic environment in Australia.
0.76
0.76
In particular, product and labor market
0.74
0.74
liberalization has spurred competition,
increased efficiency, and encouraged the
0.72
0.72
adoption of productivity-enhancing
1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000
Source: OECD
information and communication
technologies. As a result, competitiveness
has improved, potential growth has increased—perhaps by as much as 1 percentage point8—
and business cycle fluctuations have been dampened, keeping actual growth close to
potential. In a world of rapid technological change and globalization, it is necessary to
continue the reform process to close the productivity gap with the most advanced economies
and maintain adequate rates of growth to face the long-term challenges of an ageing
population.

7

See “Trade Liberalization and Economic Growth: Australia’s Experience,” in the accompanying Selected
Issues paper.

8

Average real GDP growth increased from 2.7 percent in the decade prior to structural reforms (1975−84) to
3.9 percent in the past decade.

- 12 Labor and Productivity Indicators
(Average growth rates, in percent)
Labor Productivity 1/

GDP per capita

TFP 2/

Labor Force Participation Rate 3/

1970-85

1985-95

1995-02

1970-85

1985-95

1995-02

1985-95

1995-02

1970-85

1985-95

1995-02

Australia

1.8

1.9

2.4

1.8

1.3

2.5

1.2

2.1

60.9

61.9

62.9

Canada
United Kingdom
United States

2.1
1.7
2.4

1.3
2.3
2.0

2.2
2.2
1.7

1.7
2.7
1.6

0.9
2.0
1.2

1.8
2.0
2.0

0.0
1.2
0.8

1.0
0.9
1.1

63.6
62.0
62.3

66.2
63.0
66.0

65.5
62.8
66.9

Source: OECD productivity database.
1/ GDP per hour worked.
2/ Based on 'harmonised' price indices for information and communication technology capital goods.
3/ Labor force as a percent of population aged 15–64.

The government has outlined five complementary policy areas that could lift
23.
labor force participation and promote productivity growth:9
Better incentives for work. The challenge is to redesign the tax and income support
systems to encourage higher workforce participation while providing an adequate and
well-targeted safety net. The current income support system remains complex and
costly, and imposes high effective marginal tax rates (EMTRs) on individuals moving
from income support to work. The system also needs to be better targeted by
tightening eligibility for income support programs. In particular, the Disability
16
Support Pension (DSP) program has
Unemployed and on Disability
(In percent of Labor Force)
grown rapidly, with 6¾ percent of the
12
labor force in the program in 2003,
exceeding the unemployment rate of
5½ percent. One of the criteria to qualify 8
Recipients of
for the DSP is continuing inability to
Unemployment Benefits
work 30 or more hours a week, which is
4
almost twice as many hours as the 16
Recipients of
Disability Support Pension
hours a week worked on average by part0
time workers in Australia. A government
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
proposal to tighten eligibility for the DSP
Source: Australian Treasury
continues to be blocked in the Senate. To
avoid encouraging people to leave the workforce early, the government has also
proposed to amend the superannuation laws to relax the requirement that workers
between the ages of 55 and 65 must leave work before they can access their
superannuation benefits. Finally, the 2004 Budget contains new measures to reduce
disincentives to participation, including tax cuts in the form of a further increase in
thresholds for marginal tax rates affecting medium- and high-income families
(following a more modest increase last year),10 and reductions in taper rates on family
tax benefits.

•

9

Australia’s Demographic Challenges, Australian Government, February 2004 and Budget 2004.

10

Despite the recent increases in tax thresholds, the top marginal tax rate of 47 percent applies at a relatively
low income threshold of $A 80,001, about twice average income.

16

12

8

4

0

- 13 -

•

Enhancing flexibility in the workplace. The government agenda of proposed
amendments to the Workplace Relations Act continues to simplify procedures,
increase labor market flexibility, and link wages and work conditions to productivity.
However, the wage bargaining system needs further simplification, including a
reduction in the overlap of the federal and state award systems and a diminished role
of the award system in setting the minimum wage, which has contributed to a
relatively high unemployment rate for low-skilled workers.11 While the government
has secured passage of some industrial relations legislation over the past few years,
several of its proposals were blocked in the Senate.12 New government initiatives
include enhancing the Job Network Program designed to help unemployed workers
find a new job, extending the government’s childcare program, and introducing
legislation to remove age discrimination for federal government jobs.

•

Improving the capacity for work. The government has aimed to reduce skill
mismatch in the labor market by improving the education system, enhancing training,
promoting a closer relationship between the education system and the business sector,
and maintaining a competitive tax system to attract and retain talented people.

•

Investment in science, innovation, and infrastructure. The 2004 Budget extends
the government’s Backing Australia’s Ability, a science and innovation program, by
$A 5.3 billion (following a $A 3 billion package in 2001). The 2004 Budget also
includes a new infrastructure investment program, AusLink, with an additional
$A 1.9 billion over the next 5 years allocated to upgrade the Australian road and rail
systems.

•

Enhancing competitiveness of product markets. Central, state, and territory
governments agreed in 1995 to implement a range of competition reforms under the
National Competition Policy (NCP) framework to boost long-run economic growth.
There have been substantial benefits from the implementation of the NCP and other
competition related reforms, including in the electricity, gas, road transport, and water
sectors. The Government has recently asked the Productivity Commission to inquire
into the impact of competition policy reforms undertaken to date, and to identify
priority areas for further competition reform.

11

Even though the award system has been significantly simplified over recent years, it still covers 20 areas or
conditions, including wages, working conditions, leave policy, etc.
12

Including an amendment to the unfair dismissal laws to minimize their impact on employment, a proposal to
simplify bargaining procedures, and a proposal to improve the processes around the union right of entry to
workplaces.

- 14 -

24.
Controlling government outlays on healthcare is also necessary to close the longterm fiscal gap. The interaction of an ageing population, technological innovation in the
healthcare sector, and the “luxury
16
16
goods” nature of healthcare
Health Care Expenditure as a Share of GDP
US
(in percent)
services—which implies that the
Australia
12
12
share of income spent on healthcare
services increases with the level of
8
8
Norw ay
Mexico
income per capita—will boost
demand for healthcare services and
4
4
put significant pressure on public
0
0
expenditure. The recent amendment
0
5,000
10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000
to the Pharmaceutical Benefit
GDP per capita ($US PPP)
Source: Australian Treasury
Scheme (PBS), the fastest growing
component of healthcare spending,
will increase patient co-payment and safety net thresholds by 21 percent starting January 1,
2005,13 helping contain the growth of public spending. Although the 2004 Budget includes
more resources for preventive health, which could reduce future healthcare costs, additional
measures are needed to preserve the long-run viability of the healthcare system.
C. Financial Sector Issues

25.
The financial system is sound, with a strong risk management culture. Banks, the
most important financial intermediaries from a systemic risk perspective, are, in general, well
capitalized, very profitable, and carry few bad debts. This reflects the long-running
expansion of the domestic economy and the important improvements in risk management
following the problems of the early 1990s. In the non-banking sector, the insurance and
superannuation industries have also benefited from the robust economic environment, the
recovery in equity markets, and a global increase in insurance premia due to heightened
geopolitical uncertainties.
The financial system is well positioned to withstand a possible correction in the
26.
housing market. While there are indications of increased risk in mortgage portfolios, it is
difficult to envisage scenarios in which developments in the housing market alone could pose
a systemic risk to the financial system. Recent stress tests by the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority (APRA) indicate that even if house prices fell by 30 percent and
mortgage default rates increased dramatically, more than 90 percent of deposit-taking
institutions would continue to meet minimum regulatory capital requirements.14 For the small
number of institutions that fell below the minimum, the breach was estimated to be small.
An abrupt consolidation of household balance sheets could be more damaging.
27.
This could be prompted by a combination of shocks triggering a significant increase in
13

Patients reaching the Safety Net thresholds within a calendar year qualify for receiving PBS items at a
cheaper price, or free of charge, for the rest of the calendar year.
14

More details are provided in
http://www.apra.gov.au/Insight/loader.cfm?url=/commonspot/security/getfile.cfm&PageID=6643

- 15 -

mortgage interest rates and high unemployment. In turn, this would have a negative impact
on banks’ balance sheets. Assessing the likelihood of such a scenario is complicated by the
fact that there have been few instances, either in Australia or elsewhere, in which balancesheet adjustment by the household sector has been a major factor shaping an economic
downturn. In previous episodes, adjustments by the corporate sector and by financial
institutions have typically been the source of difficulties, and the risk of problems emanating
from these sectors appears to be quite small.
Australia’s vulnerability to adverse external shocks remains low (Annex I). The
28.
external current account deficit has widened, mainly reflecting the sharp appreciation of the
Australian dollar and the relatively strong cyclical position of the economy. The low and
declining level of public debt, the relatively stable source of external financing, and the
strong risk management culture in Australia’s financial institutions limit Australia’s external
vulnerability.15 Nevertheless, sustained current account deficits and the build-up of external
debt, although mainly held by the private financial sector, could leave Australia potentially
vulnerable to shifts in market sentiment, suggesting the need for careful monitoring (Box 4).
Corporate and banking sector balance sheets are generally sound and have proven to be
resilient to large swings in exchange and interest rates. While debt servicing remains
manageable, households could be subject to more stress than in the past in the event of a
substantial increase in both interest rates and unemployment.
Key recommendations of the Royal Commission that investigated the collapse of
29.
Heath International Holdings Insurance Ltd. (HIH) have been implemented. In response
to the HIH Report, the government amended the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
Act 1998 with the objective of strengthening the governance of APRA, clarifying its role in
the financial system, enhancing its disclosure and conflict of interest framework, and
promoting closer cooperation with other financial regulators, the Reserve Bank of Australia,
and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. In addition, the Corporate Law
Economic Reform Program (Audit Reform and Corporate Disclosure) Act 2004 which
became law on July 1, 2004—aims to enhance auditor independence, achieve better
disclosure outcomes, and improve enforcement arrangements for corporate misbehavior.
Preparations for the implementation of Basel II are underway. In 2003, APRA
30.
issued preliminary guidelines for the adoption of internal risk models to calculate regulatory
capital requirements in accordance with the new Basel Accord proposals scheduled for
implementation by 2007. APRA does not expect the different approaches for computing
capital requirements in Basel II to change the current competitive environment. APRA
intends to conform wherever possible to the international consensus on the new Accord, but
will amend components when necessary to reflect unique Australian circumstances.

15

Stress tests using the external sustainability framework template do not suggest major concerns (Table 5). A
large exchange rate depreciation produces a sizable jump in the external debt to GDP ratio. However, the
experience in the late 1990s underscores the resilience of the Australian economy to such shocks. Moreover, in
the event of a substantial depreciation, the mitigating influence of having foreign currency debt positions that
are predominantly hedged is not captured in the framework.

- 16 -

31.
Australia is in full compliance with the recommendations of the FATF on money
laundering, following the passage of the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
Act 2002. Australia has also ratified and implemented the OECD Convention on Combating
the Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions.
The authorities are interested in participating in a Financial Sector Assessment
32.
Program (FSAP). They indicated during the Article IV consultation in June 2004 that,
pending the Treasurer’s clearance, Australia would likely participate in a FSAP in 2005–06.
This is an opportune time given the consolidation trend in international financial markets and
the structural shift in the Australian banking sector toward the housing sector.
D. Trade Policy and Official Assistance

33.
Trade liberalization has been aggressively, and often unilaterally, pursued over
the past two decades as an integral aspect of Australia’s growth strategy. Further
liberalization is in the pipeline as tariffs are reduced to a maximum of 5 percent on passenger
motor vehicles by 2010, and on textiles, clothing, and footwear, by 2015. Australia is a
strong supporter of multilateral trade liberalization and seeks to play a constructive role in the
Doha Round. With multilateral negotiations stalemated until recently, however, Australia has
concluded negotiations for free trade agreements with Singapore, Thailand, and the United
States, and is exploring possible agreements with China, ASEAN, and other countries. In
addition, Australia has recently provided tariff- and quota-free access for all goods from least
developed countries. The authorities are aware of the risks that bilateral agreements may
contribute to a proliferation of regional trade blocs, reduce the political will for further
unilateral trade liberalization, and dilute efforts on the multilateral front in the context of the
WTO. They are determined, however, to only conclude high quality bilateral agreements, and
may extend commitments in bilateral agreements to all trading partners.
34.
Australia is the dominant regional power and has long enjoyed close political
and economic relationships with the Pacific island countries (Box 5). This role has been
enhanced over the past year with Australia’s involvement in Papua New Guinea and the
Solomon Islands, which reflected increasing concerns about the lack of sustainable economic
progress despite large amounts of external assistance. Australian aid allocations to the Pacific
region increased by 60 percent in the 2004–05 Budget. About one-half of the total assistance
to the region is expected to go to Papua New Guinea and about one-fourth is expected to be
allocated to the Solomon Islands. Overall, Australia provided 0.25 percent of GNP for ODA
in 2003, in line with the average for industrial countries but well below the 0.7 percent
United Nations target, which Australia remains committed to achieve.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL

35.
Australia continues to reap the benefits of sustained implementation of
appropriate macroeconomic policies and structural reforms. These benefits are apparent
in strong economic growth, low inflation, and substantial declines in the unemployment rate
and public indebtedness. Reforms, a transparent framework for macroeconomic policies, and
a flexible exchange rate have also made the Australian economy much more flexible and
resilient to shocks.

- 17 -

The short-to medium-term outlook remains favorable. The expansion is now
36.
entering its 13th year, with unemployment falling to levels not seen since the early 1980s, and
prospects for the expansion to continue are good. Growth is expected to become better
balanced during the year, with a cooling in the strong momentum of domestic demand,
primarily reflecting a welcomed slowing in dwelling investment and household consumption,
and a pick up in net exports as the global economy strengthens and agricultural output
rebounds from the drought. It is expected that inflation will remain comfortably within the
official target range and that the current account deficit will narrow as a percent of GDP.
There is a broad consensus that the main risk to the short-term outlook centers
37.
on the housing market and the associated build up of household indebtedness. The RBA
has been alert to this risk for some time, and has taken a number of steps, including jaw
boning and a couple of taps on the monetary brakes to bring the market off the boil. Scattered
evidence suggests a soft landing in the housing market, which is what most observers now
expect. While no single risk appears to pose a significant threat in the short term, a
combination of external and domestic shocks could shake confidence and spark a sharp
increase in household saving rates that could severely weaken domestic demand; if this
happened when the expected recovery in net exports failed to emerge, GDP growth could
decline sharply. While such a worst-case scenario cannot be ruled out, it is not the most
likely outcome. Balancing these downside risks is the upside potential of domestic demand
remaining robust as net exports strengthen and fiscal stimulus comes on stream.
In any case, macroeconomic policy is well placed to respond in either direction to
38.
unexpected conjunctural developments. For the time being, the RBA’s wait and see stance
remains appropriate, given benign inflation and remaining uncertainties in the housing
market. However, with a monetary policy stance still mildly accommodative and the
dampening effect on inflation of the earlier exchange rate appreciation weakening, the
stimulatory effect of the fiscal package may complicate monetary policy implementation if it
comes into play when domestic demand growth is still robust and external demand is
strengthening. On the other hand, if significant downside risks should materialize, fiscal
policy has ample room to allow the automatic stabilizers to run their course, or to provide
additional discretionary stimulus. There is also a risk that fiscal revenue turns out to be lower
than projected in the budget, in which case the execution of the $A 37 billion package of tax
cuts and new spending initiatives in the 2004 Budget should be reviewed.
Australia has demonstrated that a flexible exchange rate along with good risk
39.
management practices can significantly increase the resilience of the economy. The
flexible exchange rate has helped the Australian economy weather severe external shocks,
including the Asian crisis, a global recession, and wide fluctuations in commodity prices.
Australia’s experience has also shown that large swings in exchange rates do not necessarily
have adverse economic effects if foreign exchange risk is well managed. Accordingly, the
staff supports the authorities’ policy to limit foreign exchange interventions to situations
where the exchange rate is clearly misaligned or to calm disorderly market conditions.
Australia faces significant long-term spending pressures due to increasing
40.
healthcare costs and population ageing. The fiscal package in the 2004 Budget is
consistent with the government’s long-term objective of lifting labor force participation and
promoting productivity growth. In addition, the recent passage of changes to the

- 18 -

Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme will help contain healthcare cost. Future budgets and
legislation will need to continue to target areas expected to deliver the highest boost to longterm growth, including: measures to further improve labor market flexibility; reforms to the
welfare system to improve work incentives; measures to enhance the competitiveness of
product markets, based in part on the forthcoming review of national competition policy by
the Productivity Commission; and investment in education, training, research and
development, and infrastructure.
The authorities are right to place higher productivity and labor force
41.
participation at the center of their strategy to achieve higher growth and close the longterm fiscal gap. Measures have been taken recently to address some of these issues,
including a reduction in effective marginal tax rates for low income families returning to
work, and allowing older workers to start drawing down certain superannuation income
streams without having to cease work. These are important steps that should be
complemented with stronger incentives to remain in the labor force through tighter eligibility
requirements for the Disability Support Pension and other income support programs. Further
broad-based measures to increase labor market flexibility are also needed, including a
reduction in the overlap of the federal and state award systems and a diminished role for the
award system in setting the minimum wage, which has contributed to a relatively high
unemployment rate for low-skilled workers.
Trade liberalization has been aggressively, and often unilaterally, pursued over
42.
the past two decades as an integral aspect of Australia’s growth strategy. Further
liberalization of the more protected sectors is in the pipeline. Australia is a strong supporter
of multilateral trade liberalization and its pursuit of bilateral free trade agreements is
consistent with and supportive of its multilateral efforts. The authorities are aware of the
risks that bilateral agreements may contribute to a proliferation of regional trade blocs,
reduce the political will for further unilateral trade liberalization, and dilute efforts to
conclude successfully the WTO negotiations. IMF staff is encouraged by the authorities’
determination to only conclude high quality bilateral agreements, and urge the authorities to
extend commitments in bilateral agreements to all trading partners.
The financial system is sound, with a strong risk management culture. Banks are
43.
generally very profitable and well capitalized. Although deposit taking institutions have a
substantial exposure to the housing market, APRA stress tests indicate that even a substantial
decline in housing prices would not have systemic implications for the banking system. The
IMF staff commends APRA for actively preparing the Australian financial system for the
implementation of Basel II, and welcomes the authorities’ interest in participating in a future
Financial Sector Assessment Program.
A hallmark of Australia’s recent economic management has been the
44.
comprehensiveness of structural reforms and the consistent implementation of stable
macroeconomic policies conducted in a transparent framework. Reforms have been
complementary and mutually reinforcing, and hence more likely to succeed. Trade
liberalization, for example, has been a catalyst for improved competition, paving the way for
reforms in competition policy. Similarly, the RBA’s inflation targeting framework and the
government’s prudent fiscal policies have created an environment of low and stable inflation
that has made industrial relations less contentious and eased labor market reforms. Low and

- 19 -

stable inflation has also helped to ensure that relative prices provide accurate signals about
where resources can be put to their most productive uses. It is important to continue this
comprehensive approach in coming years to meet the medium-term challenges of an ageing
population.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Australia take place on
45.
the standard 12-month cycle.

- 20 -

Box 1. The House Price Surge in Australia
House prices have increased rapidly in Australia. From the end of 2001 through the first quarter
of 2004, prices of established houses surged at an average annual rate of 17¾ percent in nominal terms
(14½ percent in real terms). Over the longer term, prices have increased by almost 125 percent (85 percent
in real terms) since the last housing cycle trough in March 1996. According to estimates by the Reserve
Bank of Australia (RBA), the ratio of housing asset values to incomes is now relatively high in Australia
by international standards, whereas a decade ago the ratio was comparable to that observed in other
countries.1
While there have been previous pronounced house price cycles—including in the early and
late 1970s and a very sharp increase in the late 1980s—the current cycle has several unusual
features. First, it has occurred in a period when overall inflation was low and continued over a longer
period than previous upswings. Thus, the cumulative increase in both real and nominal terms has been
much larger.2 Second, the current boom is nationwide, unlike earlier ones that were specific to regions.
Third, the current upswing has been focused on residential properties (including apartments), whereas
previous episodes had included commercial properties, where prices have not yet recovered to peaks
reached in the late 1980s. Fourth, very strong demand by household investors to buy rental residential
properties has played an important role in the current boom, despite low rental yields and high vacancy
rates. Loans for investment properties now account for over 40 percent of new housing loans approved by
financial institutions and about one-third of banks’ outstanding loans—both high by international
standards—compared with about 15 percent of new and outstanding loans in the early 1990s.
The recent house price boom in Australia is not
unusual compared to booms in other countries.
Since 1996, house prices have increased sharply in
several other advanced countries, led by Ireland and
the United Kingdom. Around 70 percent of
Australians own their homes, which compares with
house ownership rates in other industrial countries,
ranging from 40 percent in Germany to over
80 percent in Spain.

Nominal House Prices
(1996Q1=100)

350

IRE

300
250

UK

200

AUS

150

USA

100

NZL

KOR

50
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

A recent report by Australia’s Productivity
Commission concludes that house prices have risen more than would be explained by longer-term
fundamentals, which include population growth, smaller household size, land supply constraints,
household income and wealth gains, the structural reduction in inflation and interest rates, and financial
innovations that have eased household access to credit.3 The report suggests that factors such as negative
gearing (that is, for income tax purposes, the ability to deduct expenses on investment properties,
including comparatively favorable depreciation charges, against all forms of income), changes to capital
gains and other income taxes since 1999, the First Home Owners Scheme (designed to offset the impact of
the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax in 1999), and expectations of further price appreciation by
households (including investors) have interacted to boost demand for residential properties.
____________________

1

See RBA, “Submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry on First Home Ownership,” Occasional Paper
No. 16, November 2003.
2
For comparison, the cumulative increase in the late 1980s was 53 percent in nominal terms and 36 percent in
real terms, based on data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
3
See Productivity Commission, First Home Ownership, Inquiry Report No. 28, March 2004, which also
proposes policy changes that could reduce price pressures. See also IMF, “The Determinants of Property Prices
in Australia,” Chapter I in Australia—Selected Issues, Country Report No. 03/336, October 2003.

- 21 -

Box 2. The 2004 Budget
The Budget forecasts continued growth for the Australian economy, with low unemployment and low
inflation. GDP growth is projected to moderate slightly from 3¾ percent in 2003/04 to 3½ percent
in 2004/05. The fiscal outlook for Australia remains positive, with a forecast underlying cash surplus
of $A 2.4 billion in 2004/05 and a small surplus for the following three years.
The centerpiece of the 2004 Budget is the government’s More Help for Families package which
provides assistance to Australian families, continues the government’s ongoing structural tax reform,
and enhances incentives to save for retirement. The total package amounts to $A 36.7 billion over
five years (an average of about 0.9 percent of GDP each year) and consists of three elements:
•

Family Package
The More Help for Families package costs $A 19.2 billion over five years. The package
increases assistance to families and rewards work by relaxing the income test to qualify for
family tax benefits. In addition, a new Maternity Payment of $A 3,000 was introduced on
July 1, 2004, which will be increased to $A 4,000 on July 1, 2006 and to $A 5,000 on
July 1, 2008.

•

Tax Cut
Building on the tax cut provided last year, the 2004 Budget seeks to reduce the disincentive
of high marginal tax rates through a two-step reduction in personal taxes worth
$A 14.7 billion over the next four years. The tax cut increases the thresholds above which
incomes are taxed at 30 percent, 42 percent, and 47 percent. This will ensure that over
80 percent of taxpayers face a top marginal tax bracket of no more than 30 percent.
New Personal Tax Rates
Previous Tax Threshold
Income Ranges ($A)
0–6,000
6,001–21,600
21,601–52,000
52,001–62,500
62,501+

•

New Tax Threshold Income Ranges ($A)
From July 1, 2004
0–6,000
6,001–21,600
21,601–58,000
58,001–70,000
70,000+

From July 1, 2005
0–6,000
6,001–21,600
21,601–63,000
63,001–80,000
80,000+

Tax Rate
(In Percent)
0
17
30
42
47

Incentives for Retirement Saving
The 2004 Budget also improves incentives for low- and middle-income people to save for
their retirement through superannuation, with a total cost of $A 2.7 billion. The maximum
benefit under the superannuation co-contribution scheme was increased to $A 1,500 to
match a $A 1,000 personal contribution. The superannuation surcharge rate for high-income
earners will be progressively reduced from 15 percent to 7½ percent in 2006–07.

- 22 -

Box 3. What Accounts for the Turnaround in Australia’s Terms of Trade?
The conventional wisdom, suggested first by Raul Prebisch in 1950, has been that there is a secular decline in the
prices of primary products relative to the prices of manufactured goods, implying a secular decline in the terms of trade
of commodity exporting countries. During the past decade or so, however, there is some evidence of a break in this trend for
some commodity exporting countries. One reason for this could be the increased importance of trade in intermediate goods
and the rising importance of low-wage countries such as China as major exporters of manufactured products. This could
effectively lead to a “commoditization” of some manufactured products that may subject them to the same forces
determining commodity price trends.
The terms of trade (TOT) for Australia, a commodity producer, have turned around after following a declining trend
until 1986. Since 1987, the TOT have improved by 40 percent. Does this improvement represent a temporary deviation from
the declining trend, or a turnaround that could last for a long time?
1.5

Australia's Terms of Trade
F itte d line , 1959 - 1986

Export price / Import price

Several explanations have been suggested for the TOT
improvement. First, the world demand for commodities has
increased dramatically in recent years in part due to the rapid
industrialization in China that has fanned its voracious appetite for
raw materials. Second, the prices of the manufactured products that
Australia imports have been declining rapidly, perhaps reflecting
“commoditization” or faster-than-average productivity gains in the
manufacturing of telecommunication equipment and computer
hardware, which are important components of Australia’s imports.
The two explanations for the import price decline need not be
mutually exclusive as China is a major exporter of these products.

F itte d line , 1987 - 2004
1.3

1.1

0.9

% Contribution

The improvement in the Australian TOT can be decomposed
0.7
59 63 67 71 75 79 83 87 91 95 99 03
into the change in export prices relative to the change in
import prices. The export price change can be further
Ye a r
decomposed into changes in the prices of commodity exports
(XPCOM), the prices of exported products that involve only a simple transformation of raw materials (XPSTP), and the
prices of elaborately transformed manufactured products (XPETP).
Similarly, the import price change can be decomposed into changes
Decomposing the Improve me nt in the TO T
in the prices of those products of which China is a major world
120
(1987 Q 1 - 2004 Q 1)
exporter (MPChina) and the prices of all other products
100
(MPOthers). The figure describes the percentage contributions to
80
the improvement in the Australian TOT from each of the five
60
components.1
D
40
20
0
-20

A

B
C

E

-40
Fac to rs a ffe c ting te rms o f trade
A: Ris e in XP Com B : Ris e in XP STP C: Ris e in XP ETP
D: Fall in MP China E: Fall in MP Others

The rapid decline in the prices of Australia’s imports of goods
at which China is a major world exporter is the single most
important contributing factor to the steady improvement in the
TOT. The rise in the world market prices for the commodities that
Australia exports is the second most important factor. On the other
hand, two factors have dampened the improvement in its overall
terms of trade: a decline in the export prices of the elaborately
transformed products, and a rise in the import prices of those
products which China does not export on a large scale.

A number of factors suggest that the improvement in Australia’s TOT may continue for some time. Given its vast rural
population, China’s industrialization and urbanization process is likely to last for a sustained period, feeding into a steady
demand for raw materials and a prolonged downward pressure on the prices of the manufactured products that China exports
or will soon export on a large scale. In addition, other currently poor economies, especially India, are poised to repeat the
Chinese experience and become more important trading nations.
Details are in a forthcoming IMF Working Paper, “Accounting for the Turnaround in the Terms of Trade for Australia,” by
Shang-Jin Wei.

1

- 23 Box 4. Current Account Reversals in Industrial Countries
Some economists and policy makers have argued that an increase in the current account deficit that
results from decentralized (optimal) decisions on private saving and investment made by private
agents should not matter or be a concern, including for public policy. Often called the “Lawson
Doctrine,” this view, however, has come into question owing to a number of currency crises and sharp
current account reversals that have occurred in emerging market and industrial countries in recent years.1
The issue is of particular relevance to Australia in the current conjuncture with the current account deficit
around 6 percent of GDP, a government fiscal surplus, and low and declining public sector debt.
The average characteristics of industrial countries that have experienced large current account
reversals can be summarized as follows:2
• Typically, the reversal involves a cyclical slowdown with decreasing income and GDP growth
(possibly, related to monetary tightening) and a real exchange rate depreciation. There is no
significant evidence that the current account deficit itself triggers the cyclical slowdown.
• Although countries that suffered a reversal had a fiscal deficit on average, a number of these
countries maintained fiscal surpluses, and fiscal balances on average were not deteriorating prior to
the reversal. Subsequent to the reversal, however, fiscal balances deteriorated.
• Interest rates increased before the reversal and subsequently fell back following the reversal.
• The increase in the current account deficit prior to the reversal reflected on average decreased
national (and private) saving with a stable domestic investment rate. The current account
adjustment during the reversal was on average due to a sharp fall in investment with saving only
rising slightly.
• Net exports recovered substantially during the current account reversal, owing to increasing
exports as a share of GDP. Imports also increased, but to a lesser degree, as a share of GDP.
Possible explanations for breakdown of the “Lawson Doctrine” include:
• Private saving and investment decisions could be distorted, including due to policy or market
failures. Examples of these include excessively optimistic expectations about changes to permanent
income that lead to over-consumption and over-borrowing after major policy regime changes (such
as from financial sector deregulation) and/or from asset market bubbles (through the associated
wealth effects); and the Harberger externality—private borrowers may not internalize the
increasing marginal social cost of external borrowing that arises from the upward-sloping supply of
foreign capital.
• Private sector liabilities are often contingent public sector liabilities, either because creditors force
governments to absorb private sector debts in the aftermath of a crisis or through fiscal policy that
may need to be used in the event of a current account adjustment for counter-cyclical purposes or to
resolve financial sector crises.
• In a Ricardian equivalence (or forward-looking rational expectations) framework, current account
deficits are always the result of private sector decisions, independent of fiscal policy.
• A worsening current account deficit may be a reflection of, or lead to, an unsustainable
appreciation in the real exchange rate. An overvalued exchange rate, in turn, could be distortionary.
_______________________________________
1
The “Lawson Doctrine” is generally attributed to Nigel Lawson, the British Chancellor, who commented
on the current account deficit in the United Kingdom in the late 1980s. However, it was also expressed
earlier by others, including Jeff Sachs and Max Corden.
2
Characteristics cited in this box are based on Caroline Freund, 2000, “Current Account Adjustment in
Industrialized Countries,” International Finance Discussion Paper 692, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, and Sebastian Edwards, 2004, “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current
Account Reversals, and Sudden Stops,” NBER Working Paper 10276. Current account reversals are defined
in several ways in the literature but primarily refer to current account deficits that were reduced substantially
during one to three-year periods with lower levels of the deficits sustained for a number of years afterwards.

- 24 -

Box 5. Australia and the Pacific Island Countries
Australia has long enjoyed close political and economic relationships with the Pacific island countries
and is the dominant regional power. This role has been enhanced over the past year as a result of its
involvement in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands. Short-term economic developments in
Australia mainly affect the Pacific island countries through tourism. More important medium-term issues
are trade liberalization, external assistance, and a possible currency union. In this regard, a prosperous
Australian economy benefits the island countries.
Foreign Trade: Australia accounts for a major share of exports and imports of the island economies, based
on well established trading relationships. Over the medium term, a major factor will be the impact of the
Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations, one aim of which is to develop trade among the island
countries with Australia; this will be crucial for the Fiji garments sector. With regard to island imports,
there are indicators that, in light of the Australian dollar appreciation over the past two years, a few traders
have been seeking cheaper Asian sources.
Tourism: This is the main area in which Australian economic developments could have an impact on the
Pacific island economies. Australia is the main source of visitors to the region, especially for Fiji and
Vanuatu, and as passengers on cruise ships. The perception of the region as a safe haven has helped the
tourist industry since 9/11.
External Aid: Australian aid allocations to the Pacific region increased by 60 percent to ($A 569 million)
in the 2004 budget; Papua New Guinea accounts for 53 percent and the Solomon Islands for 24 percent of
the total. Taking into account the importance of the recent Enhanced Cooperation Program with Papua New
Guinea and the Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands, it is unlikely that the aid program will
be reduced in the short run.
Foreign Direct Investment: Pacific island investments in Australia are extremely small and limited
primarily to equity holdings by superannuation funds and property purchases from Papua New Guinea
sources. Australian investments in the region are mainly related to mineral projects in Papua New Guinea,
including the prospective but uncertain Queensland gas pipeline.
Currency Issues: Provided that the economic policies of the Pacific island countries converge and their
overall resilience to external shocks is enhanced by appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, structural
reforms, and trade diversification, there could be scope to strengthen financial links between Australia and
the island region. At least for the next several years, it seems improbable that there will be radical moves
toward regional financial integration; there appears to be no strong view among the island authorities that
monetary union would promote the growth of output, employment, and productivity. However, the possible
adoption of the Australian dollar as the regional currency has been raised by some island Finance Ministers
and Central Bank Governors, and by a 2003 Australian Senate Inquiry.

- 25 -

Figure 1. Australia: Comparisons of Macroeconomic Performance, 1990–2003

6
5

6

REAL GDP

(Annual percentage change)

5

Australia

4

4

OECD
3

16
14

16

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX
(Annual percentage change)

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

3

G7

2

2

1

1

OECD

6

0

0

4

6
4

G7

2

2

Australia
-1 1990

25
24

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

-1

25

INVESTMENT 1/
(In percent of GDP)

0 1990

24

1992

1994

1996

24

22

OECD

22

OECD

21

G7

20

19

20

20

19

19

20

19

Australia

G7
17

18

110

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

18

110

NET PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT

100 (In percent of GDP)

90

Canada

70

60

60

United States

50

40

40

30

30

20

New Zealand 2/

10
0

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

20

2003

0

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

15

120

NET EXTERNAL LIABILITIES
(In percent of GDP)

100

100

New Zealand
80

80

60

60

Australia

40

40

Canada

20

20

United States

10

Australia 2/
1996

120

1992

80

70

50

17

15 1990

100

90
80

0

23

22
21

2002

GROSS NATIONAL SAVING

22

Australia

2000

(In percent of GDP)

24

23

1998

0 1990

1992

1994

1996

Sources: Data provided by the Australian authorities; IMF; IFS; WEO; and OECD.
1/ Gross fixed capital formation.
2/ Fiscal year.

1998

2000

2002

0

- 26 -

Figure 2. Australia: Selected Real Economic Indicators, 1995–2004

7

GDP GROWTH

Annual percent change
Quarterly percent change (s.a.)

6

7

10

6

8

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
-1

8

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

CONSUMPTION AND SAVING

(Annual percent change)

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

0

-2

-2

-1

-4

8

30

(Annual percent change)

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Private consumption

4

2

2

0

0

40

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT

15

40

30

0

1998

1999

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

10

30

PUBLIC CONSUMPTION AND INVESTMENT

20

20

10

10

0

0

-20

Investment, equipment
Investment, dwellings
Non dwelling construction 3/
1997

1995

(Annual percent change)

0

1996

25

15

10

20

1995

30

20

-4

20

-40

-4

20

(Annual percent change)

-20

2003

-2

Household saving ratio 2/
(4-quarter moving average)
1996

2002

Saving
Investment

6

4

1995

2001

TOTAL SAVING AND INVESTMENT

25

-4

8

Domestic demand
Net exports 1/

(In percent of GDP)

6

-2

10

DOMESTIC DEMAND AND NET EXPORTS

-10

2000

2001

2002

2003

-40

-20

-10

Consumption, public
Investment, public 3/
1995

1996

1997

Source: Data provided by the Australian authorities.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ Net household saving as a percent of household disposable income.
3/ Adjusted for sale of second-hand assets between sectors.

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-20

- 27 -

Figure 3. Australia: Inflation and Labor Market Indicators, 1995–2004
7
6

7

CONSUMER PRICES
(Annual percentage change)

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

Trimmed mean inflation 1/
Headline inflation

35

115

115

110

110

105

105

PPI: Preliminary commodities
PPI: intermediate commodities
PPI: final commodities

1
100
0

0
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

ASSET PRICES

120

COMMODITY PRODUCER PRICES
(1998/99=100)

6

5

-1

120

-1

95

35

7

1999

2000

2001

2002

100

95

2003

7

NOMINAL WAGES
(Annual percent change)

(Annual percent change)
25

25

15

15

6

6

Average weekly
ordinary time
earnings

5
5

5

-5

-5

5

4

Stock market index
House prices 2/

-15

-25

8
6

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

-15

2001

2002

2003

PRODUCTIVITY AND UNIT LABOR COSTS
(Annual percent change)

Productivity
growth 4/

4

4

3

3

Wage cost index 3/

-25

2

8

6

6

5

4

4

2

2

3

0

0

2

-2

1

-4

0

-6

-1

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

11

EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT
Growth in employment
(annual percent change)
(left scale)

Unemployment rate
(in percent)
(right scale)

2

10

9

8

7
-2

Real unit
labor cost

-4
-6

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

6

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

5

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ The “trimmed mean” is calculated as the weighted mean of the central 70 percent of the quarterly price
change distribution of all CPI components, with the annual rates based on quarterly calculations. The jump in
2000 CPI reflects the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax .
2/ Weighted average of 8 capital cities, established houses.
3/ The Wage Cost Index is only available from September 1997.
4/ Output per hour worked, nonfarm market sector.

- 28 Figure 4. Australia: Fiscal Indicators, 1998/99–2007/08 1/
(In percent of GDP)
28

28

COMMONWEALTH
Expenses
Revenue

26

26

24

24

22

22

Projections
20 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 20
2.5

2.5

FISCAL BALANCE 2/

2.0

2.0

Commonwealth
State territories 3/

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5
Projections

-1.0 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 -1.0
40

40

PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT

35

35

30

Commonwealth general govt debt, net
30
Total public sector debt, net 3/

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
Projections

-5 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 -5

Source: Australian budget for 2004/05.
1/ Revenue, expenses, and fiscal balance are on accrual basis.
2/ Fiscal balance is equal to revenue less expenses less net capital expenses.
3/ Data only available to 2003/04.

- 29 -

Figure 5. Australia: Selected Monetary Indicators, 1995–2004
10

4.0

NOMINAL INTEREST RATES
(In percent)

8

INFLATION EXPECTATIONS AND REAL INTEREST RATES

8

(In percent)

3.5

9
3.0
8

7

Bond spread over
U.S. long term rates
(right scale)
Cash rate
(left scale)

6

2.0
4

4
1.5

90-day bank bill
(left scale)

6

1.0
0.5

2

90-day real
bill rate

2

Financial sector
inflationary
expectations 2/

5
0.0
4

24

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

MONEY AND CREDIT GROWTH

2004-0.5

0

24

250

(12-month percent change, in nominal terms)

20

200

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0

250

YIELD CURVE

(10 year bond less 3-month bill yield, in basis points)

200

20

Housing credit
Private sector
credit

16

6

Consumers'
inflationary
expectations 1/

2.5

16

12

12

8

8

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0

-50

-50

Broad money
4

115

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES
(January 1995=100)

110

4

-100

115

0.90

1995

1996

1997

1998

100

100

Real (INS)

95

2001

2002

2003

90

85

85

80

80

100

90
0.70

95

90

2004-100

110

U.S. dollar per Australian\dollar (left scale)
Euro per\Australian dollar (left scale)
Yen per Australian\dollar (right scale)

0.80
105

2000

BILATERAL EXCHANGE RATES

110

105

1999

80
0.60
70
0.50

60

Nominal (INS)
75

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

75

0.40

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics; Reserve Bank of Australia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Melbourne Institute Survey, expectation of inflation over next year (median response).
2/ Calculated as the spread between long-term non-indexed and indexed government bonds.

2002

2003

200450

- 30 -

Figure 6. Australia: Balance of Payments and External Liabilities, 1995–2004
4

4

CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE
(In percent of GDP)

Trade in goods
and services 1/

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

Net income
-4

-4

-6

-6

Current account 1/
-8

30

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

EXPORT AND IMPORT PRICES IN $A (GOODS)

25
20

25

TRADE IN GOODS AND SERVICES 1/
(Annual percent change, constant prices)

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

Exports
Imports

-5

-8

-10

30

30

1995

1996

1997

-5

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-10

30

EXPORT VOLUME GROWTH
(Annual percent change)

(Annual percent change)
20

20

20

20

10

10

10

10

0

0

0

0

-10

-20

9

Exports
Imports
Terms of trade
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-10

-10

-20

-20

9

NET CAPITAL INFLOWS

80

(4-quarter moving average, in percent of GDP)

Manufacturing
Commodities
Services
1995

1996

1997

-10

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-20

80

EXTERNAL LIABILITIES
(In percent of GDP, end of period)
Net external equity liabilities
Net external debt liabilities

6

6

60

3

3

40

40

-1

20

20

-4

0

-1

-4

Financial Account Balance
Equity
Debt
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

60

2003

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics; and Reserve Bank of Australia.
1/ June 1997 exports includes the sale of gold by the Reserve Bank equivalent to 1.5 percent of 1997QII
GDP.

0

- 31 -

Table 1. Australia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2005
Nominal GDP (2003): $A757 billion (US$514 billion)
Population (2003): 19.94 million
GDP per capita (2003): US$ 25,777
Quota (in millions): SDR 3,236
Proj.
2004
2005

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Output and demand (percent change)
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Fixed investment
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

4.3
5.6
4.9
7.0
4.5
9.1

3.2
2.2
3.1
1.5
11.2
7.8

2.5
1.3
2.8
-1.1
1.6
-4.2

3.8
6.5
4.2
15.5
0.3
11.5

3.0
6.2
4.3
9.6
-2.3
11.3

3.7
4.0
3.9
2.8
5.5
8.7

3.3
2.1
2.0
0.1
7.5
-0.2

Inflation and unemployment (in percent)
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

1.5
6.9

4.5
6.3

4.4
6.8

3.0
6.4

2.8
6.1

2.8
5.7

2.5
5.9

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
General government saving
Private saving 1/
Gross capital formation

18.7
4.7
14.0
24.7

19.6
2.9
16.8
23.1

19.5
2.7
16.8
20.7

18.7
2.9
15.9
23.1

18.9
3.1
15.9
24.8

19.1
2.6
16.5
24.4

18.9
2.6
16.3
23.7

Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP) 2/
Commonwealth budget
Revenue
Underlying expenditure 4/
Underlying cash balance 4/
Fiscal balance (accrual basis)

24.7
24.0
0.7
0.6

26.5
24.4
2.1
2.1

24.0 3/
23.1 3/
0.9
0.9

22.8
22.9
-0.1
-0.5

23.4
22.4
1.0
0.8

22.8
22.3
0.6
0.4

22.6
22.3
0.3
0.1

Money and credit (end of period)
M1 (percent change)
M3 (percent change)
Private domestic credit (percent change)
Interest rate (90-day bill, in percent)
Government bond yield (10-year, in percent)

9.7
9.4
11.0
5.7
7.0

9.4
4.9
11.8
6.2
5.5

21.3
14.6
8.8
4.2
6.0

-9.3
10.3
11.9
4.8
5.5

8.7
13.7
14.7
5.5
5.6

4.3
10.3
15.1
5.5
5.8

0.0
11.8
15.5
5.4
5.6

Balance of payments (in percent of GDP)
Current account
of which: Trade balance

-5.7
-2.5

-4.0
-1.2

-2.4
0.5

-4.4
-1.3

-6.0
-2.9

-5.3
-2.5

-4.8
-2.1

Terms of trade (percent change)

-0.9

5.4

1.4

2.3

4.0

7.0

-2.9

External assets and liabilities (in percent of GDP)
Net external liabilities
Gross short-term external debt
Net short-term external debt
Gross official reserves

55.1
33.2
17.3
5.5

53.8
40.1
22.5
5.2

53.5
39.8
23.7
5.3

56.7
40.7
22.8
5.2

59.5
36.8
17.6
4.6

60.9
...
...
4.0

63.1
...
...
3.8

0.654
56.4
100.3
83.3

0.554
51.7
92.0
79.3

0.509
50.2
89.8
79.2

0.566
52.0
92.9
83.1

0.750
62.9
110.1
99.2

0.717
60.2
111.4
100.5

0.723
61.7
106.9
96.3

Exchange rate (end of period)
US$/$A
Trade-weighted index
Nominal effective exchange rate 7/
Real effective exchange rate 7/

Sources: Data provided by the Australian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes public trading enterprises.
2/ Fiscal year ending June 30.
3/ The sharp drop in 2001 reflects tax reform, including income tax cuts, the removal of the Wholesale Sales Tax,
and the reduction in grants to States.
4/ Underlying expenditure and balance exclude asset sales and other one-off factors; cash basis.
5/ May 2004.
6/ July 2004.
7/ IMF, Information Notice System index (1990 = 100).

5/
5/
5/
6/
6/

6/
6/
5/
5/

- 32 -

Table 2. Australia: Selected Fiscal Indicators, 1998/99-2007/08 1/
(In percent of GDP)

1998/99

1999/00 2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

Estim.
2003/04

2004/05

Projections 2/
2005/06 2006/07

2007/08

Fiscal accounts (accrual basis) 3/
Commonwealth government
Revenue
Tax
Income tax
Individuals and other witholding
Indirect and other tax
Non-tax

25.7
…
…
…
…
…

26.6
24.4
18.8
13.6
5.6
2.2

24.1 4/
22.5
18.1
11.7
4.4
1.5

22.7
21.0
16.6
12.1
4.4
1.8

23.2
21.6
17.4
12.1
4.2
1.6

23.0
21.5
17.5
12.0
3.9
1.5

22.5
21.3
17.5
12.0
3.8
1.2

22.2
21.0
17.4
11.9
3.6
1.2

22.2
21.0
17.5
12.0
3.5
1.2

22.1
20.9
17.6
12.1
3.3
1.2

Expenses
Salaries and wages
Payments for supply of goods and services
Current transfers
Other expenses

24.8
…
…
…
…

24.7
…
…
16.0
…

23.4 4/
1.4
4.9
14.4
2.7

23.3
1.4
4.8
14.2
2.9

22.4
1.4
4.9
13.7
2.4

22.6
1.5
4.9
13.8
2.4

22.4
1.4
5.0
13.7
2.3

22.1
1.4
4.9
13.7
2.2

22.0
1.3
4.8
13.7
2.1

21.9
1.3
4.8
13.7
2.1

Net capital investment

0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Fiscal Balance 5/

0.6

2.1

0.9

-0.5

0.8

0.4

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

-0.1

0.0

0.4

0.1

-0.1

…

…

…

-0.5

0.5

0.1

-0.1

-0.1

-0.2

…

…

…

…

0.5

3.0

0.8

-0.5

1.2

0.4

…

…

…

…

24.7
24.0
0.7

26.5
24.4
2.1

24.0 4/
23.1 4/
0.9

22.8
22.9
-0.1

23.4
22.4
1.0

22.8
22.3
0.6

22.6
22.3
0.3

22.3
22.1
0.2

22.1
21.8
0.4

22.1
21.6
0.4

11.9
-12.9

8.6
-6.2

6.4
-6.2

5.3
-6.7

3.9
-6.8

3.2
-5.4

2.9
-5.0

2.5
-4.7

0.8
-4.0

-0.8
-3.7

State, Territory, and local government balance
Public Non-financial corporations balance
Non-Financial Public sector balance 6/
Fiscal Accounts (cash basis) 7/
Commonwealth government
Revenue
Underlying expenditure
Underlying cash balance 8/
Memorandum items:
Commonwealth government net debt 9/ 10/
Commonwealth government net worth 9/

Sources: Commonwealth of Australia: Budget Strategy and Outlook, 2004/05.
1/ Fiscal year ends June 30.
2/ Projections as presented in the Budget Strategy and Outlook , 2004/05 .
3/ Accrual data are reported on a consistent basis with Government Financial Statistics (GFS). GST related transactions are excluded since the
Commonwealth government conducts them on behalf of states and territories.
4/ The drop in 2000/01 reflects tax reform, including income tax cuts, the removal of the Wholesale Sales Tax, and the reduction in grants to States.
5/ The fiscal balance is equal to revenue less expenses less net capital investment and measures the government's net lending.
6/ The Commonwealth, state, and public enterprise balances may not add up to the public sector balance due to the effect of consolidation.
7/ Due to a break in the series following the introduction of the new accrual accounting standards, cash receipts and payments data from 1999/00
are not directly comparable with earlier years.
8/ The cash equivalent of the fiscal balance.
9/ Staff estimate; adjusted to exclude the above-normal dividend from the RBA in 1999/2000.
10/ Assumes the sale of the government's remaining shareholding in Telstra.

- 33 -

Table 3. Australia: Balance of Payments, 1998-2004
(In percent of GDP)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Proj

-4.9

-5.7

-4.0

-2.4

-4.4

-6.0

-5.3

Trade balance
Exports
Imports

-1.4
15.4
-16.9

-2.5
14.3
-16.8

-1.2
17.0
-18.2

0.5
17.8
-17.3

-1.3
16.3
-17.6

-2.9
14.0
-16.9

-2.5
13.9
-16.4

Net services
Total credits
Total debits

-0.3
4.5
-4.8

-0.2
4.4
-4.7

0.1
4.9
-4.8

-0.1
4.6
-4.7

-0.2
4.3
-4.5

-0.1
4.1
-4.2

0.3
4.5
-4.2

Net income
Receipts
Payments

-3.1
1.8
-4.9

-2.9
1.9
-4.8

-2.8
2.4
-5.3

-2.8
2.2
-5.1

-2.9
2.0
-5.0

-2.8
1.9
-4.8

-3.1
1.9
-4.9

Net transfers

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

5.0

5.7

3.6

2.0

4.6

6.0

…

Capital account

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.2

…

Financial account
Direct investment transactions: net
Equity (net)
Debt (net)

4.8
0.7
0.5
0.2

5.5
0.9
0.0
0.9

3.5
3.3
1.3
2.0

1.9
-2.0
-0.7
-1.2

4.4
1.8
0.0
1.8

5.9
-1.3
-1.1
-0.2

…
…
…
…

Portfolio investment transactions: net
Equity (net)
Debt (net)

0.8
2.3
-1.5

3.1
0.9
2.2

0.7
-2.8
3.6

2.8
0.8
2.0

0.8
-2.5
3.3

7.5
1.1
6.4

…
…
…

Financial derivatives (net)

-0.3

0.4

-0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

…

3.5

1.1

-0.3

0.9

1.8

-0.7

…

0.0

0.0

0.3

0.4

-0.1

-0.1

…

Current account balance

Capital and financial account

Other transactions (net)
Net errors and omissions

(Assets and liabilities at end-period)
Net external liabilities
Net external equity liabilities
Foreign equity investment in Australia
Australian equity investment abroad
Net external debt
Net public sector
Net private sector
Gross external debt
of which: $A denominated
Gross external lending

55.1
14.3
46.7
-32.4
40.8
7.4
33.4
62.9
23.5
-22.1

55.1
13.9
52.2
-37.3
41.2
3.0
38.3
65.0
23.9
-23.7

53.8
6.9
48.7
-40.5
46.8
2.3
44.5
72.9
26.5
-26.1

53.5
6.9
52.4
-44.0
46.6
1.6
44.9
73.4
24.9
-26.8

56.7
8.0
47.9
-39.0
48.6
2.2
46.4
76.4
27.4
-27.8

59.5
12.8
51.2
-38.4
47.4
1.1
46.3
77.0
26.6
-29.6

…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…

Short-term net external debt (residual maturity basis)
Short-term gross external debt
Short-term gross external lending

17.4
30.6
-13.2

17.3
33.2
-15.9

22.5
40.1
-17.6

23.7
39.8
-16.1

22.8
40.7
-17.9

17.6
36.8
-19.2

…
…
…

25.0
10.1
14.9
2.3
19.5
11.6

33.6
22.6
10.9
2.7
23.1
7.5

34.0
24.9
9.1
2.7
18.9
5.1

36.7
29.5
7.2
2.7
19.4
3.8

36.4
25.8
10.5
2.7
19.6
3.7

32.6
25.8
6.8
2.3
16.3
1.6

…
…
…
…
…
…

Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (in $A billion)
RBA outstanding forward contracts (in $A billion)
Net official reserves (in $A billion)
Gross official reserves in months of imports
Gross official reserves to ST foreign currency denominated debt (percent)
Net official reserves to ST foreign currency denominated debt (percent)

Source: Data provided by the Australian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 34 -

Table 4. Australia: Medium-Term Scenario 2004-09

1993-2002
Average

Real economic indicators (percent change)
GDP
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Total investment
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Projections
2006
2007

2005

2008

2009

3.9
4.2
3.7
6.8
2.5
7.9

3.2
2.2
3.1
1.5
4.5
6.3

2.5
1.3
2.8
-1.1
4.4
6.8

3.8
6.5
4.2
15.5
3.0
6.4

3.0
6.2
4.3
9.6
2.8
6.1

3.7
4.0
3.9
2.8
2.8
5.7

3.3
2.1
2.0
0.1
2.5
5.9

3.7
2.9
3.3
3.3
2.5
5.8

3.7
2.9
3.1
3.2
2.5
5.6

3.8
3.5
3.1
4.6
2.5
5.5

3.8
3.4
3.1
4.7
2.6
5.5

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
General government saving
Private saving 1/
Gross capital formation

18.6
1.4
17.2
22.8

19.6
2.9
16.8
23.1

19.5
2.7
16.8
20.7

18.7
2.9
15.9
23.1

18.9
3.1
15.9
24.8

19.1
2.6
16.5
24.4

18.9
2.6
16.3
23.7

18.2
2.8
15.5
22.9

18.1
2.8
15.3
22.6

18.3
2.8
15.4
22.6

18.4
3.9
14.6
22.4

Fiscal indicators (percent of GDP) 2/
Commonwealth Budget
Revenue
Underlying expenditure
Underlying balance (cash basis)
Fiscal balance (accrual basis)
Public sector net debt 3/

23.9
24.9
-1.3
…
13.1

26.5
24.4
2.1
2.1
8.6

24.0
23.1
0.9
0.9
6.4

22.8
22.9
-0.1
-0.5
5.3

23.4
22.4
1.0
0.8
3.9

22.8
22.3
0.6
0.4
3.2

22.6
22.3
0.3
0.1
2.9

22.3
22.1
0.2
0.1
0.8

22.1
21.8
0.4
0.2
-0.8

22.1
21.6
0.4
0.3
-2.8

22.1
21.6
0.4
0.3
-3.0

Balance of payments (percent of GDP)
Balance on goods and services
Balance on income and transfers
Current account balance

-1.0
-3.2
-4.2

-1.1
-2.9
-4.0

0.4
-2.8
-2.4

-1.5
-3.0
-4.4

-3.0
-2.9
-6.0

-2.3
-3.1
-5.3

-1.5
-3.3
-4.8

-1.4
-3.3
-4.7

-1.1
-3.4
-4.5

-0.9
-3.4
-4.3

-0.6
-3.4
-4.0

6.0
7.4
0.9
1.5
0.7

11.0
7.4
5.4
13.0
6.8

1.3
-4.1
1.4
8.4
5.9

-0.2
11.4
2.3
-3.4
-4.4

-1.2
10.7
4.0
-6.4
-6.9

6.1
8.4
7.0
0.2
-3.2

7.5
-0.2
-2.9
1.6
4.6

9.6
5.2
-3.6
-2.4
1.2

9.1
5.4
-1.4
-0.6
0.8

7.3
6.1
-0.8
0.1
0.8

7.3
5.8
-0.1
0.5
0.6

54.6

53.8

53.5

56.7

59.5

60.9

63.1

64.8

65.9

66.5

66.4

Trade in goods and services (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade
Export price
Import price
External liabilities (percent of GDP)
Net external liabilities

Sources: Data provided by the Australian authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes public trading enterprises.
2/ Fiscal year basis ending June 30.
3/ Assuming the sale of the government's remaining shareholding in Telstra.

3.2
-6.2
4.3
12.8
3.5
-1.1
1.3

160.0
42.3

333.5

7.9
2.3
1.1
1.1
21.8
23.0
-1.3
2.4
2.9
-2.1
1.6
5.6

72.8

2000

3.8
7.5
3.7
2.6
12.1
-2.0
0.3

171.4
42.8

371.5

2.9
-2.3
2.0
1.5
20.5
22.0
-0.3
-4.0
2.5
-2.5
-4.0
5.2

76.3

2002

3.0
23.3
3.5
11.9
21.9
-3.8
0.7

217.6
42.6

424.7

0.1
-6.5
3.8
3.0
18.0
21.0
-0.7
-9.6
2.1
-1.8
-10.0
6.6

76.4

2003

3.9
2.1
4.4
5.7
7.1
-1.9
1.9

10-Year
Historical
Average
0.8
10.7
0.9
8.9
9.6
1.3
1.2

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

76.7
76.7
76.7
76.7
76.7
76.7

76.7
76.7

3.7
13.9
3.8
19.7
15.2
-2.9
1.2

268.2
44.4

420.5

0.3
1.6
2.9
2.3
18.2
20.5
-1.2
0.0
2.4
-2.4
...
-1.4

76.7

2004

2006

3.7
1.0
4.2
6.6
6.1
-1.5
1.3

319.4
50.2

421.0

2.1
0.5
1.5
1.4
19.4
20.8
-1.3
0.3
3.2
-2.8
...
1.6

3.7
1.4
4.4
8.0
6.0
-1.1
1.4

341.1
51.0

417.3

1.5
0.3
1.1
1.0
19.9
20.9
-1.4
0.6
3.4
-2.8
...
1.2

83.0

3.8
2.0
4.4
7.7
6.9
-0.8
1.4

362.2
51.1

393.8

-3.3
-0.1
0.8
0.9
20.2
21.1
-1.4
0.5
3.4
-3.0
...
-3.3

81.1
80.3
89.3
82.2
87.3
97.3

75.4
80.0

84.6
83.6
105.4
87.2
102.0
99.7

76.4
82.0

86.1
85.2
107.3
88.6
103.8
101.4

77.5
83.5

82.7
81.7
102.0
85.2
99.7
96.7

74.8
80.2

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

3.3
-2.6
4.0
5.0
0.7
-1.7
1.3

305.8
50.3

417.7

2.8
0.9
1.7
1.5
19.0
20.5
-1.3
0.5
3.0
-2.5
...
1.9

81.5

79.7

Projections
2007
2008

I. Baseline Projections
79.5

2005

82.8
81.9
102.4
85.2
99.8
97.0

76.0
80.4

3.8
2.7
4.4
7.9
6.4
-0.7
1.4

368.4
48.7

389.9

0.2
-0.3
0.7
0.6
20.5
21.1
-1.4
0.4
3.3
-2.9
...
0.5

79.8

2009

-3.1
-3.1
-4.2
-3.2
-3.7
-3.9

-3.1
-3.1

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 7/

3.7
3.1
4.2
9.2
6.9
-1.4
1.3

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 7/
-3.1

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B5. Combination of 2-5 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

B. Bound Tests

2.5
-7.6
3.5
-3.0
-9.6
0.3
1.6

165.1
46.1

327.8

0.5
1.9
-0.3
-0.4
22.4
22.0
-1.6
3.7
2.7
-2.0
3.0
-1.4

73.4

Actual
2001

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 5/
A2. Country-specific shock in 2005, with reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation 6/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

4.3
3.2
4.3
1.5
7.0
-3.2
3.5

142.8
36.6

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

346.1

2.1
-1.7
3.2
2.7
18.8
21.5
-3.5
-1.4
2.5
-2.5
-1.4
3.7

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

64.9

External debt

1999

Table 5. Australia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 1999-2009
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

- 35 -

- 36 -

ANNEX I

AUSTRALIA—ECONOMIC VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT
Australia’s vulnerability assessment remains broadly unchanged from the last
1.
assessment, and the economy remains well placed to manage adverse external shocks.16
While net foreign liabilities remain high, external debt has become more concentrated in
private financial corporations with its maturity has shortened, reflecting increased
intermediation of flows by banks. The foreign currency component of external debt has risen,
although the associated currency risk is mitigated through substantial hedging. Corporate and
banking sector balance sheets remain strong, and they have proven to be resilient to large
swings in exchange and interest rates in the recent past. Although household balance sheets
have expanded in recent years, net worth is comparatively high, and households have proved
resilient to past interest rate swings. Housing remains the biggest household asset, and
housing debt, which has risen rapidly in the last few years, is the major household liability
and a major asset of the banking system. With higher indebtedness and given a rapid rise in
housing prices over the past few years, households could be at risk to a major price
correction (especially in the investor housing segment of the market), and there could be
spillover effects on the banking system.
A.

External Position

2.
Net external liabilities have increased from 55 percent of GDP to 60 percent of
GDP over the last five years (Table 1). During this period, the composition of liabilities
shifted more toward debt, and financial corporations accounted for a growing proportion of
both gross external debt and claims. The private sector now accounts for 88 percent of total
external debt, of which financial corporations are the biggest component. Public sector debt
declined significantly in recent years, and the ratio of net interest payments to exports has
declined steadily, reflecting the relatively lower interest rate environment.
Through 2002, the maturity
3.
profile of the external debt
shortened, and there was an
increase in the foreign currency
component, but these trends
reversed somewhat in 2003. The
medium-term rise in the share of the
financial sector’s external debt has
led to a shortening in the maturity
profile of Australia’s external debt, as

Australia: External Debt Statistics
(In percent of GDP)

Gross external debt
Public sector
Private sector
of which: Private financial corporations
Australian dollar-denominated
Foreign currency-denominated
Short term
Australian dollar-denominated
Foreign currency-denominated

1998

1999

62.8
14.7
48.1
35.2
23.4
39.4
30.6
8.4
22.2

64.1
11.4
52.7
40.7
23.8
40.3
33.2
9.1
24.1

End-December
2000
2001
72.3
10.4
61.9
46.6
26.6
45.7
40.0
12.5
27.6

72.9
9.8
63.1
49.3
25.0
47.9
39.8
12.6
27.3

2002

2003

77.1
9.8
67.4
52.8
26.7
50.4
40.8
12.8
28.0

77.1
8.8
68.3
55.1
26.7
50.5
36.9
10.7
26.2

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics and RBA.

16

This annex updates the vulnerability assessment provided in Australia: 2003 Article IV
Consultation, IMF Staff Country Report No. 03/337, 2003. That assessment concluded that
there were no major vulnerability concerns.

#2301861 v3 - Australia: 2004: Staff Report: Art.IV: BUNDLE November 5, 2004 (5:15 PM)

- 37 -

ANNEX I

the financial sector raises most of its funds at shorter maturities than the government and
corporate sectors. At the same time, the share of gross debt denominated in foreign currency
has remained broadly flat at under 65 percent in recent years. Australia’s foreign currency
exposure is mitigated by a high degree of hedging. A 2001 survey by the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS), showed that foreign currency
Australia: Total Foreign Currency Exposure 1/
(In billions of Australian dollars, as of June 30, 2001)
assets of Australian entities exceeded foreign
Net position
Net position
Foreign
Foreign
on foreign
currency liabilities at end-June 2001.17 Private
on foreign
equity
currency
currency
currency debt
assets
exposure
derivatives
corporations appeared to have relatively minimal
Banks
-117
31
109
23
direct exposure to exchange risk; a significant
Other financial
-28
84
8
64
corporations
portion of their overseas borrowing was hedged
Official sector
RBA
36
0
-29
7
naturally. Banks, in contrast, made substantial use
General government
1
0
-9
-7
CBA
-8
0
9
1
of derivatives to hedge their foreign currency
Other corporations
-50
114
-3
61
exposure. The market for these instruments appears Total economy
-165
228
85
149
to be reasonably deep and has proven to be resilient 1/ Negative indicates a short foreign currency position.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
given the large swings in the value of the Australian
dollar over the past several years.
B. Sectoral Balance Sheets
Corporate Sector

4.
Financial indicators suggest that the nonfinancial corporate sector in Australia
remains sound. The debt-to-equity ratio in the non-financial corporate sector has been
gradually increasing in the last few years
Australia: Non-Financial Corporate Financial Indicators
to over 80 percent in end-June 2003.
(In percent)
While this increase raises some concerns,
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
it is noteworthy that the ratio is about half
Balance sheet indicators (end-June)
its level in the early 1990s. Moreover,
Debt-equity ratio
70.6
66.2
66.1
72.3
76.7
80.5
Debt (in percent of GDP)
73.3
76.8
79.6
82.2
76.8
76.2
debt as a share of GDP has been reduced
Profitability indicators 1/
Operating income/sales
25.3
26.0
26.0
24.6
25.1
26.4
significantly during 2002-03. Operating
Return on permanent capital
10.3
10.0
10.8
9.1
9.0
9.4
EBITDA
interest
cover
(times)
5.1
5.3
5.7
4.8
5.0
4.9
margins have improved and the interest
Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics, S&P's Australia and New Zealand CreditStats,
cover ratio indicates a good position. The
June 2003, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Survey median ratios based on Standard and Poor's survey of Australian and New Zealand
return on permanent capital has declined
companies. Australian companies comprise around 85 percent of the survey.
in recent years primarily due to debtfunded acquisitions or investments.

17

The survey captures around 90 percent of total foreign currency assets and liabilities.

- 38 -

ANNEX I

Households

5.
Household balance sheets have continued to expand in recent years. During 19962003, household assets increased substantially with land and dwellings values accounting for
70 percent of the increase the ratio. In
Australia: Household Balance Sheet
(As a percentage of gross disposable income)
contrast, financial assets remain below
End-June
peak levels reached in 2000-2001, as
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
shares and pension funds have lost value.
Net worth
465
482
492
496
503
516
Since the mid-1990s, household liabilities Total assets
567
587
606
609
629
658
Non-financial assets
321
327
337
340
363
394
have also surged with debt for housing
Dwellings and land
281
288
298
303
327
358
Financial assets
245
260
269
269
266
264
accounting for 84 percent of the increase.
Deposits
57
57
56
56
59
64
Shares
41
50
49
57
54
46
Pension funds
100
107
119
115
111
110
Overall, household net worth increased by
Other
47
46
45
42
43
44
75 percent of gross disposable income,
Total liabilities
101
104
114
113
126
142
Housing debt
63
67
74
76
86
100
with the corresponding net wealth
Interest payments
6.1
6.1
6.9
6.9
6.5
7.3
elasticity on annual private consumption
Dwellings
4.1
4.2
4.7
4.8
4.7
5.5
18
estimated to be between 3-5 percent.
Household net savings
2.2
2.2
1.5
3.1
1.2
-2.3
Interest payments on mortgages have also
Source: Reserve Bank of Australia.
increased to 7¼ percent of disposable
income. Households’ easier access to credit and the relatively lower interest rate environment
have driven Australia’s total household debt from a low level by international standards to
levels comparable to those in the United Kingdom, and slightly higher than in the United
States, although the overall gearing ratio (ratio of liabilities to assets) is still relatively low.19
Housing prices have risen significantly since the mid-1990s (see Box 1). In real
6.
terms, the house price index (weighted average for the 8 capital cities) increased by
16¼ percent in 2003 alone—the highest
Established House Price Index (June 1986=100)
500
annual increase since 1989. House price
increases in some cities, such as Adelaide,
400
Real
Nominal
Brisbane, and Canberra, have been even
300
higher. Historically, housing prices have not
been subject to major downward corrections
200
after periods of very rapid increases.
100
However, unlike the past, the current surge is
Jun-86 Jun-88 Jun-90 Jun-92 Jun-94 Jun-96 Jun-98 Jun-00 Jun-02
being driven to an important extent by demand
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics
for investment housing, which tends to be
concentrated in the central business districts of the major cities and may be more at risk of a
price correction. Spillover effects to other segments of the housing market from such a
correction could significantly weaken household balance sheets.
18

See IMF, “Housing, Consumption, and Output,” Chapter II in Australia—Selected Issues,
Country Report No. 03/336, October 2003.

19

“Household Debt: What the Data Show”, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, March 2003.

- 39 -

ANNEX I

Banks

7.
Australia’s banking sector performance remains very strong. With a robust
domestic economy, Australian banks remained solidly profitable in 2003; return on assets for
the four major banks was over
Australia: Banks' Balance Sheet Indicators
1 percent and return on equity was
(Share of total assets)
20
16½ percent. The banking
End-December
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
system is also well capitalized,
Loans
69.3
71.0
69.5
69.7
69.6
67.0
maintaining total capital of around
Loans to persons
39.0
39.3
41.2
42.2
41.4
42.0
10 percent and tier-one capital of
Housing loans
32.6
32.8
35.2
36.3
35.1
35.8
Commercial loans
26.0
26.7
25.1
24.6
25.6
23.4
7½ percent of risk-weighted assets.
Profitability measures 1/
The overall asset quality of the
Net interest margin 2/
2.9
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.2
Return on average assets
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.2
1.1
banking system remains very high,
Return on average equity
15.0
18.0
19.4
15.6
18.2
16.4
with the ratio of impaired assets to
Capital adequacy ratios 3/
Tier 1 capital
7.6
7.8
7.1
7.7
7.8
7.6
total assets only about 0.4 percent,
Total capital
10.3
10.1
9.8
10.5
9.9
10.1
and provisions have increased to
Impaired assets
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.6
0.4
General and specific provisions 4/
114.7
120.2
132.1
107.1
109.8
138.3
almost 140 percent of impaired
Net foreign currency liabilities
8.0
9.6
11.9
11.7
10.5
9.5
assets. The strength of the
Sources: Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and Bankscope database.
Australian banks is reflected in
1/ Simple average for the four major banks (National Bank, Commonwealth Bank, Westpac,
and Australia and New Zealand bank).
their ratings by independent credit
2/ Ratio to average interest earning assets.
3/ Percent of of risk-weighted assets.
rating agencies—all of the four
4/ Percent of impaired assets.
major banks have a credit rating of
AA- or better. However, housing loans comprise about half of total bank loans.
Notwithstanding the very low delinquency rates faced by banks on housing loans (less than
one percent), a major correction to housing prices could have some spillover effects into the
banking system.

20

The four major banks accounted for around 80 percent of banking system loans.

- 40 -

ANNEX I

Table 1. Australia: External Debt and Reserve Indicators
(In percent of GDP)
End-December
1998
Net external liabilities
Net external equity liabilities
Foreign equity investment in Australia

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

55.0

55.3

54.3

54.7

58.0

60.1

14.3

14.9

8.2

8.4

8.9

12.1

46.6

52.2

48.8

52.3

47.8

50.4

-32.3

-37.3

-40.6

-43.9

-38.9

-38.3

Net external debt

40.8

40.4

46.1

46.3

49.0

48.0

Net public debt

7.4

3.0

2.3

1.6

2.2

1.1

Net private debt

33.4

37.4

43.8

44.7

46.8

46.9

Australian equity investment abroad

Gross external debt
Gross external lending
Short-term net external debt (residual maturity basis)
Short-term gross external debt
Short-term gross external lending
Net interest payment to exports

62.8

64.1

72.3

72.9

77.1

76.4

-22.1

-23.7

-26.2

-26.7

-28.1

-28.3

17.4

17.0

22.1

23.6

22.6

18.4

30.6

33.2

40.0

39.8

40.7

37.3

-13.2

-16.3

-17.9

-16.2

-18.1

-18.9

9.1

10.5

10.1

9.4

8.8

8.7

Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (in $A billion)

25.0

33.6

34.0

36.5

38.1

44.3

RBA outstanding forward contracts (in $A billion)

10.1

22.6

24.9

29.5

25.0

26.4

Net official reserves (in $A billion)

14.9

10.9

9.1

7.0

13.1

17.9

2.3

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.8

3.3

19.5

23.0

18.9

19.3

18.5

21.7

Gross official reserves (in months of imports)
Gross official reserves to short-term
foreign currency denominated debt (percent)

Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics, Reserve Bank of Australia, and Fund staff estimates.

- 41 -

ANNEX II

AUSTRALIA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of June 30, 2004)
A. Financial Relations
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 08/05/1947; Article VIII
General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Financial Transaction Plan transfers (net)

SDR Million
3,236.40
2,064.19
1,172.24
40.00

Percent Quota
100.0
63.78
36.22

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings
Designation plan

SDR Million
470.55
120.02
0.00

Percent Allocation
100.00
25.51

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

Financial Arrangements:

None

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

II.

V.
VI.

B. Nonfinancial Relations
VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement. Australia accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4 on July 1, 1965 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions
on payments and transfers for current international transactions. Exchange rates are market
determined, but the Reserve Bank of Australia retains discretionary power to intervene. On
July 30, 2004, the U.S. dollar/Australian dollar exchange rate was US$0.6986=$A 1.00. There
are no taxes or subsidies on purchases or sales of foreign exchange. Australia has notified the
Fund under Decision 144 of the imposition of exchange restrictions vis–à–vis Iraq, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In late 1999,
Australia imposed restrictions on financial transactions with the Taliban (the Islamic State of
Afghanistan), and the UNITA movement in Angola.
VIII. Restrictions on Capital Transactions. Australia maintains a capital transactions regime
that is virtually free of restrictions. Two main restrictions on foreigners require: authorization for
significant ownership of Australian corporations; and approval for acquisition of real estate.
IX.
Last Article IV Consultation, and Consultation Cycle. Discussions for the 2004
Article IV consultation were held in Sydney, Melbourne, and Canberra from June 17 to June 25,
2003. The 2003 consultation (IMF Country Report 03/337) was completed by the Executive
Board on October 22, 2003 (SUR/03/106). Australia is on the standard 12–month consultation
cycle.
X.
Fourth Amendment. Australia has accepted the Fourth Amendment to the Articles of
Agreement.

- 42 -

ANNEX III

AUSTRALIA—STATISTICAL ISSUES

8.
Australia publishes a wide array of economic and financial data. It has subscribed to
the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and its metadata are posted in the
Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB).
During 2001, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) undertook a number of
9.
projects and initiatives, including the release of a new price measure called Price Index of
Domestic Final Purchases (DFP) on an experimental basis, development of new measures of
labor underutilization, and improvements in its business indicators survey by merging three
previous surveys into one quarterly economic activity survey.
C. Real Sector
Prices

10.
The ABS released the experimental DFP in July 2001. The index reflects purchases of
Australian residents (households, governments, and businesses), and includes import prices
and excludes export prices. The series is confined to final market purchases, and, thus, avoids
the issue of multiple counting of price impacts which would result if prices of intermediate
stages of production were included.1 The items and weights for this economy-wide measure
of prices are derived from the 1994–95 input-output tables. The series is still in the
consultative stage, and is not expected to be published on an ongoing basis until the second
half of 2004. With an objective of developing overall labor cost indices, ABS plans to
publish in November of 2004 new annual nonwage cost indices, which cover superannuation,
workers’ compensation, annual leave, and payroll tax. Over the next few years, ABS’
program includes updating a set of weights into the CPI, based largely on the 2003–04
household expenditure survey, and introducing indices measuring the change in the prices of
financial services in the CPI. From now to mid-2005, for each quarter ABS will release
experimental indices for financial services and expects to include them into the headline CPI
from the third quarter of 2005.
Labor

11.
In February 2002, the ABS released two new measures of labor underutilization. In
conjunction with existing unemployment statistics, the new measures provide a broad view
of labor underutilization. The two new measures are: (i) the labor force underutilization rate,
which is the unemployed plus the underemployed as a percentage of the labor force; and
(ii) the extended labor force underutilization rate, which includes the unemployed, plus the
underemployed, plus two groups that are marginally attached to the labor force—persons
actively looking for work, who are not available to start work in the reference week but
available to start work within four weeks, and discouraged job seekers—as a percentage of
1

Price changes of intermediate purchases are provided by the Stage of Production producer
price index introduced in July 2000.

- 43 -

ANNEX III

the 'extended' labor force (i.e., the labor force plus the two marginally attached groups).
Currently, the new series are available on an annual basis back to 1994, but ABS is working
to create a quarterly series for the labor force underutilization rate, which should be available
by mid-2004.
5.
The ABS also made some changes to its labor force survey questionnaire in
April 2001 to better reflect contemporary labor market developments, as well as
developments in international standards and practices for collecting labor force statistics.
New or extended information was introduced on job tenure, underemployment, hours
worked, duration of unemployment, and marginal attachment to the labor force.
Other

6.
The ABS has made improvements to its business indicators survey. From the third
quarter of 2001, the ABS has merged the Survey of Company Profits, the Survey of
Inventories, Sales and Services, and the private sector component of the Survey of
Employment and Earnings into a single survey called the Quarterly Business Indicators
Survey (QBIS).2 The changes are expected to improve consistency and coherence of the
statistics, particularly for the purposes of compiling the quarterly national accounts, and to
enable a better understanding of the reasons for the changes in economic activity. It also
significantly reduces the overall statistical reporting burden on businesses and also
considerably reduces the sampling error associated with the estimates.
D. Fiscal Sector

7.
The Australian Commonwealth (central) Government has introduced accrual
budgeting with the 1999/2000 Budget estimates that were released in May 1999. Australia’s
Consolidated Financial Statements now contain a complete set of financial statements and
various summary measures of government performance prepared on an accrual basis in
accordance with applicable Australian Accounting Standards. Separate Government Finance
Statistics (GFS) statements are produced for the budget and mid-year updates of the
estimates and the final budget outcomes publications. The ABS has been producing quarterly
GFS estimates for many years as an input into the quarterly national accounts. In
March 2004, the ABS published quarterly data on the operations of general government and
nonfinancial public corporations, excluding data on financing.
Australia is a regular reporter of GFS data for publication in IFS and the GFS
8.
Yearbook. Cash data from the Department of Finance Monthly Financial Statements are used
for publication in IFS.

2

An annual economic activity survey has been in place since the early 1990s for the
compilation of the annual national accounts.

- 44 -

ANNEX III

E. Financial Sector

Due to changes in legislation and new reporting arrangements for banks, the Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) suspended publication of the Australian Banking
Statistics beyond March 2002. APRA announced its intention to produce a similar
publication in 2003, and began publishing Monthly Banking Statistics in March 2004. The
Monthly Banking Statistics, however, uses slightly different definitions, in particular: (i) it
contains only resident data while the Australian Banking Statistics contained both resident
and nonresident data; (ii) it includes the Australian-dollar equivalent of foreign currency
transactions, while the Australian Banking Statistics excluded foreign currency data; and
(iii) it discloses intra-group deposits and loans as separate items, while the Australian
Banking Statistics included intra-group deposit and loan data in totals.
F. External Sector

ABS has improved the timeliness of the international investment position (IIP) statistics by
releasing the data one quarter earlier. There have also been revisions to IIP data as a result of
improved reporting and the identification and correction of errors. The estimates in the
July 2004 issue of the Balance of Payment and International Investment Position are
presented on a calendar year basis, which will allow for better analysis in terms of
international comparisons as data for most other countries are available on a calendar year
basis. In addition, quarterly External Debt Statistics are now also available in the Balance of
Payment and International Investment Position publication.

D

C

E

C

D

Frequency of
Reporting 1/

Source of data 2/

Mode of reporting 3/

Confidentiality 4/

Frequency of
publication
M

C

E

N 5/

M

M

07/07/04

06/04

Official
Reserves

M

C

E

N

M

M

07/30/04

06/04

Reserve/
Base Money

W

C

E

N

W

W

07/30/04

06/30/04

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

M

C

E

N 5/

M

M

07/30/04

06/04

Broad
Money

D

C

E

C

D

D

08/02/04

08/02/04

Interest
Rates

Q

C

E

N 5/

Q

Q

07/28/04

06/04

Consumer
Price
Index

M

C

E

N 5/

M

M

07/07/04

05/04

Exports/
Imports

Q

C

E

N 5/

Q

Q

06/21/04

Q1/04

Current
Account
Balance

Q

C

E

N 5/

M

M

06/17/04

03/04

Overall
Govt
Balance

Q

C

E

N 5/

Q

Q

06/03/04

Q1/04

GDP/
GNP

1/ D-daily; W-weekly; M-monthly; Q-quarterly; or A-annually.
2/ A-direct reporting by central bank, ministry of finance, or other official agency; N-official publication or press release; P-commercial publication; C-commercial electronic data provider; or E-EIS.
3/ E-electronic data transfer; C-cable or facsimile; T-telephone; M-mail; or V-staff visits.
4/ A-for use by the staff only; B-for use by the staff and the Executive Board; C-unrestricted use; or D-embargoed for a specific period and thereafter for unrestricted use.
5/ A less detailed breakdown of these items is obtained from Reuters before the official publication is received.

D

08/02/04

Date received

Frequency of data 1/

08/02/04

Date of latest
observation

Exchange
Rates

(As of August 2, 2004)

Australia—Core Statistical Indicators

Q

C

E

N 5/

Q

Q

05/20/04

3/04

External
Liabilities

- 45 ANNEX III

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
October 27, 2004
1.
This statement contains information that has become available since the Staff Report
was circulated to the Executive Board on August 31, 2004. This information does not alter
the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
In the October 9 national election, Prime Minister John Howard’s Liberal-National
coalition won a fourth three-year term with an increased majority in the lower house.
Following the election the new government announced that its chief goals are maintaining
strong economic growth, reforming the industrial relations system, protecting national
security, and pursuing free-trade agreements with other countries.
3.
The Departments of Treasury and Finance issued a Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal
Outlook in early September. The fiscal surplus in 2003/2004 was 0.3 percent of GDP higher
than previously expected, owing to both higher tax revenue and lower expenditure. Projected
fiscal surpluses for the next four years were also revised upwards, mainly reflecting stronger
revenue performance based on the stronger-than expected tax revenue in 2003/2004 and
higher nominal GDP in 2004/2005. The fiscal surplus for 2004/05 is now projected at $A
3.6 billion (0.4 percent of GDP), compared with the May budget forecast of $A 0.7 billion.
Fiscal surpluses during 2005–08 are also expected to exceed the previous forecast by about
0.4–0.5 percent of GDP each year.
4.
Strong domestic demand continued to sustain forward momentum during the second
quarter, while the drag on growth from the deficit in net exports weakened. GDP growth in
the second quarter picked up slightly to 0.6 percent from 0.5 percent in the first quarter. With
exports continuing to recover and import growth retreating after the boost in the first quarter,
the deficit on net exports narrowed to 2 percent of GDP in the second quarter from
3½ percent of GDP in the first quarter. More recently, retail trade growth has slowed to
6 percent (y/y) during June-August, compared with 10 percent peaks early in the year.
Unemployment remains low.
5.
Recent indicators are insistent with a soft landing in the housing market. The price
index for established houses fell 1.2 percent in the second quarter after an increase of
2.5 percent in the first quarter. This was the first fall in this index since the third quarter in
2000, although regional markets behaved unevenly as prices fell in Sydney and Canberra but
continued to rise in other capital cities. Building approvals and the value of new lending on
housing have continued to decline in the past few months; the overall decline in lending in
August was driven by a drop in lending to investors, with lending to owner occupiers boosted
by the return of first-time buyers to the market.
6.
At its regularly scheduled meeting in early October, The Reserve Bank of Australia
left the target for the cash rate unchanged at 5.25 percent for the tenth consecutive month.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/124
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 8, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with Australia
On October 27, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Australia.1
Background
The expansion is now entering its 13th year, with unemployment falling to levels not seen since
the early 1980s. After slowing in the first half of 2003, economic activity rebounded,
underpinned by continued buoyancy of domestic demand and a gradual recovery from the
drought. For the year as a whole, real GDP growth was 3 percent, only moderately lower than
the 3.8 percent in 2002, as strong domestic demand continued to offset weak net exports and
a large decline in agricultural output. The strength in domestic demand was broadly based,
with consumption, housing and business investment all growing at above-trend rates.
Domestic spending was underpinned by supportive financial conditions, substantial increases
in household wealth from a surge in dwelling prices, a strong labor market, and a rebound in
farm incomes. The buoyant domestic economy and the substantial appreciation of the
Australian dollar led to a deterioration of the current account deficit from 4.4 percent of GDP
in 2002 to 6 percent in 2003. A boost in imports pushed net exports to a record low in the first
quarter of 2004, before net exports recovered as imports retreated in the second quarter. As a
result, GDP growth was weaker than expected, although the economy retained significant
momentum.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepres a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2Headline inflation, which has remained within the Reserve Bank of Australia’s target range of
2–3 percent, masks very different trends in tradables and nontradables inflation. While CPI
inflation for nontradable goods was around 4 percent, price increases for tradable goods
declined sharply since March 2003 due to the large appreciation of the Australian dollar.
Recent data show that the dampening effect on inflation from tradable goods may be eroding
due, to a large extent, to the recent easing of the Australian dollar.
Monetary policy was kept on hold during the first three quarters of 2003, reflecting conflicting
risks to the outlook at the time. The RBA had to contend with the potential for protracted
weakness in the external environment, further appreciation of the Australian dollar, uncertainty
about the recovery from the drought, on the one hand, and continued rapid growth in housing
credit on the other. By the end of 2003, however, with external risks abating, domestic demand
growing faster than expected, signs of recovery in the agricultural sector emerging, and the
housing sector continuing to expand at an unsustainable rate, the RBA increased the Official
Cash Rate (OCR) by 25 basis points in both November and December. The RBA kept the
OCR unchanged at its policy meetings in the first three quarters of 2004, based on emerging
signs of easing domestic spending, a cooling in the housing market, and subdued inflation
pressures.
The centerpiece of the 2004 Budget is the government’s More Help for Families package,
which provided assistance to Australian families, continued the government’s ongoing
structural tax reform, and enhanced incentives to save for retirement. It contained additional
tax cuts and new expenditure initiatives of $A 37 billion over five years (an average of about
0.9 percent of GDP each year), while maintaining a modest cash surplus of less than
½ percent of GDP each year through the medium term. The Commonwealth net debt was
projected to turn negative by 2007/08.
Forward-looking indicators of economic activity point to continuing strength, albeit with some
moderation, in domestic demand and there are some signs of slowing in the housing sector.
Real GDP growth is projected near potential of about 3¾ percent in 2004. The gradual cooling
of domestic demand is expected to be, at least partially, offset by a pick up in external demand
and a rebound in the agricultural sector, bringing about the long awaited rebalancing of
sources of growth. The main risk to the outlook centers on the housing market and the
associated build-up in household indebtedness, but recent indicators suggest a soft landing is
likely. Medium-term prospects remain favorable.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for Australia’s strong performance, with six
years of budget surpluses, falling public debt, low inflation, high and rising productivity, and a
long period of uninterrupted growth that has underpinned a dynamic job market.They attributed
this performance to the authorities’ exemplary record of macroeconomic and financial
management and implementation of structural reforms, carried out in a transparent economic
policy formulation framework.

-3Directors concurred that the outlook for the economy remains favorable. A sharp correction in
the housing market, further increases in oil prices, and a weakening of external demand are
factors that could affect the positive outlook, but Directors felt that these downside risks were
balanced by the upside potential of domestic demand remaining buoyant. Directors agreed
that growth is likely to be rebalanced, with domestic demand growth gradually slowing and net
exports picking up as the global economy strengthens and agricultural output recovers from
the drought. They noted, in particular, recent data that are consistent with a soft landing in the
housing market and cooling of domestic demand.
Directors commended the authorities’ successful management of monetary policy—based on
inflation targeting—in the face of diverging pressures from a strong housing market and robust
domestic demand, on the one hand, and weakness of net exports and an appreciation of the
Australian dollar, on the other. They pointed out that the main risk in the short term centers on
the housing market and the associated buildup of household indebtedness, and considered
that the measured actions of the Reserve Bank of Australia, including some tightening of the
official cash rate target in late 2003, contributed to a welcomed cooling in the market.
They viewed the RBA’s current wait-and-see stance as appropriate in light of subdued inflation
pressures and remaining uncertainties in the housing market.
Directors agreed that the flexible exchange rate combined with a strong risk management
culture have helped increase the resilience of the Australian economy. The significant
appreciation of the Australian dollar during the past two years mainly reflected a weak
U.S. dollar, strong commodity prices, Australia’s more favorable cyclical position compared
with other industrial countries, and a bounce back from the Australian dollar’s undervalued
level in 2001. Directors supported the authorities’ policy to limit foreign exchange interventions
to situations where the exchange rate is clearly misaligned or to calm disorderly market
conditions.
Directors regarded Australia’s fiscal position as fundamentally sound, and noted that revenue
had remained stronger than expected during the first half of 2004. They endorsed the
authorities’ medium-term strategy of aiming for a balanced budget over the business cycle to
support sustainable economic growth. They called attention to the significant long-term
spending pressures due to increasing healthcare costs and population ageing, and welcomed
the recent amendment to the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme, which will help contain the
growth of healthcare spending.
Directors supported the envisaged structural reforms in the 2004 Budget to promote labor
force participation and productivity growth in order to achieve higher growth, close the potential
long-term fiscal gap, and address the challenge of an ageing population. They welcomed the
measures to reform the tax and income support system to provide better incentives to work,
such as reducing effective marginal tax rates for low-income families returning to work,
allowing older workers to access their superannuation benefits without having to stop working,
and tightening the eligibility requirement for the Disability Support Pension. Directors also
welcomed the government’s plans to take additional measures to further increase labor market

-4flexibility, reform the welfare system, enhance competitiveness, and invest in research and
development and infrastructure, in order to further strengthen long-term growth prospects.
Directors commended the soundness of Australia’s financial system and strong risk
management culture. They welcomed the steps that had been taken to strengthen financial
supervision, including the latest legislative changes on insurance industry supervision and
audit reform. Directors concurred that developments in the housing market are unlikely to pose
systemic risk to the financial system, as indicated by the Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority’s recent stress tests. While a combination of external and domestic shocks could
result in a sharp increase of household savings and weaker GDP growth that would have a
negative impact on banks’ balance sheets, such a “worst case scenario” is unlikely. At the
same time, Directors pointed to potential risks stemming from the sustained high current
account deficit and the build-up of private external debt, and advocated close monitoring of
corporate and banks’ balance sheets. Directors commended the authorities for their
preparation for the implementation of Basel II regulatory capital requirements, and welcomed
their interest in participating in a Financial Sector Assessment Program in the near future.
Directors praised the authorities for their commitment to trade liberalization. Australia’s pursuit
of bilateral free trade agreements was seen as supportive of the country’s multilateral
liberalization efforts. Directors commended the authorities for their recent unilateral decision to
provide complete duty- and quota-free market access to the least developed countries, and
were encouraged by the envisaged further liberalization of the more protected sectors.
Directors welcomed Australia’s constructive involvement in neighboring Pacific Island
countries, including a significant increase in aid allocation to the region in the 2004 budget.
They noted that the authorities remain committed to achieving the UN official development
assistance target.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after
Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in
a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation with Australia is also available.

-5-

Table 1. Australia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2003
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Output and demand (percent change)
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Fixed investment
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

5.2
6.6
4.6
8.2
0.0
6.0

4.3
5.6
4.9
7.0
4.5
9.1

3.2
2.2
3.1
1.5
11.2
7.8

2.5
1.3
2.8
-1.1
1.6
-4.2

3.8
6.5
4.2
15.5
0.3
11.5

3.0
6.2
4.3
9.6
-2.3
11.3

Inflation and unemployment (in percent)
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

0.9
7.7

1.5
6.9

4.5
6.3

4.4
6.8

3.0
6.4

2.8
6.1

19.0
3.9
15.1
23.9

18.7
4.7
14.0
24.7

19.6
2.9
16.8
23.1

19.5
2.7
16.8
20.7

18.7
2.9
15.9
23.1

18.9
3.1
15.9
24.8

24.2
24.0
-1.0
-0.4

24.7
24.0
0.7
0.6

26.5
24.4
2.1
2.1

24.0
3
23.1
0.9
0.9

22.8
22.9
-0.1
-0.5

23.4
22.4
1.0
0.8

Money and credit (end of period)
M1 (percent change)
M3 (percent change)
Private domestic credit (percent change)
Interest rate (90-day bill, in percent)
Government bond yield (10-year, in percent)

6.1
7.0
10.3
4.8
5.0

9.7
9.4
11.0
5.7
7.0

9.4
4.9
11.8
6.2
5.5

21.3
14.6
8.8
4.2
6.0

-9.3
10.3
11.9
4.8
5.5

8.7
13.7
14.7
5.5
5.6

Balance of payments (in percent of GDP)
Current account
of which: Trade balance

-4.9
-1.4

-5.7
-2.5

-4.0
-1.2

-2.4
0.5

-4.4
-1.3

-6.0
-2.9

Terms of trade (percent change)

-4.1

-0.9

5.4

1.4

2.3

4.0

External assets and liabilities (in percent of GDP)
Net external liabilities
Gross short-term external debt
Net short-term external debt
Gross official reserves

55.1
30.6
17.4
4.3

55.1
33.2
17.3
5.5

53.8
40.1
22.5
5.2

53.5
39.8
23.7
5.3

56.7
40.7
22.8
5.2

59.5
36.8
17.6
4.6

0.614
53.3
95.3
78.4

0.654
56.4
100.3
83.3

0.554
51.7
92.0
79.3

0.509
50.2
89.8
79.2

0.566
52.0
92.9
83.1

0.750
62.9
110.1
99.2

Saving and investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
General government saving
1
Private saving
Gross capital formation
Fiscal Indicators (in percent of GDP)
Commonwealth budget
Revenue
4
Underlying expenditure
4
Underlying cash balance
Fiscal balance (accrual basis)

Exchange rate (end of period)
US$/$A
Trade-weighted index
5
Nominal effective exchange rate
5
Real effective exchange rate

2
3

Sources: Data provided by the Australian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1
Includes public trading enterprises.
2
Fiscal year ending June 30.
3
The sharp drop in 2001 reflects tax reform, including income tax cuts, the removal of the Wholesale Sales Tax, and the
reduction in grants to States.
4
Underlying expenditure and balance exclude asset sales and other one-off factors; cash basis.
5
IMF, Information Notice System index (1990 = 100).

