March 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/106

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001

January 29, 2001

The Kingdom of Swaziland: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with The Kingdom of
Swaziland, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on November 9, 2005, with the officials of The Kingdom of
Swaziland on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the
time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on January 23, 2006. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its February 8, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for The Kingdom of Swaziland.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
THE KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Swaziland
Approved by David Andrews and Juha Kähkönen
January 23, 2006
Consultation process
•

The 2005 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Mbabane during October 26November 9, 2005. The staff team comprised Messrs. Wang (Head), Gons, and Haacker, and
Ms. Masha (all AFR). Mr. Mamba (Advisor to the Executive Director) participated in the
discussions. Staff worked closely with overlapping technical assistance missions from the
Monetary and Financial Systems Department (MFD) and the World Bank.

•

Discussions were held with Prime Minister A.T. Dlamini, the Cabinet chaired by Deputy
Prime Minister Shabangu, Finance Minister Sithole, Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS)
Governor Dlamini, other officials, and representatives of the private sector and donor
community. The mission conducted outreach activities (seminars) with parliamentarians, CBS
and government officials, and donor representatives on fiscal consolidation and monetary and
exchange rate policies under the Common Monetary Area (CMA).

•

The discussions focused on the key policy challenges facing Swaziland: (i) reversing the
unsustainable fiscal trends that threaten to deplete official reserves and undermine the
exchange rate parity under the CMA; (ii) restoring external competitiveness and creating the
conditions for sustainable growth; and (iii) making progress in the fight against HIV/AIDS and
poverty.

•

At the conclusion of the 2004 Article IV consultation on February 16, 2005, Directors
underscored the importance of addressing the impediments to higher growth and broadbased improvements in living standards. They emphasized the need for fiscal and wage cost
restraint in the face of adverse external developments. Directors identified improvements in
governance, restoration of the rule-of-law, and implementation of wide-ranging structural
reforms as essential conditions for restoring external competitiveness and stimulating growth.

Exchange system
•

Swaziland has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2-4, of the Articles of
Agreement, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments
and transfers for current international transactions.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................5
II. Recent Economic Developments ..........................................................................................7
III. Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................10
A. Outlook, Future Challenges, and Strategy ..............................................................10
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................13
C. External Sector and Monetary Policies ...................................................................17
D. Structural Reforms ..................................................................................................18
E. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance Issues ...............................................19
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................20
Boxes
1. External Shocks, Policy Responses, and Economic Performance In Small Countries
of the Common Monetary Area .........................................................................................8
2. Sugar Sector and Reform of the EU Price Regime............................................................12
3. Key Policy Measures to Restore Fiscal Sustainability ......................................................15
Figures
1. Main Economic Indicators.................................................................................................23
2. CMA Countries: Social Indicators, 2003...........................................................................24
Tables
1. Basic Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002-2009 ......................................................25
2. Summary of Central Government Operations, 2003/04-2009/10......................................26
3. Monetary Survey, 2002-2005 ...........................................................................................27
4. Commercial Banks' Performance Ratios ...........................................................................28
5. Balance of Payments, 2003-2009 ......................................................................................29
6. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2000-2005...............................................................30
7. Millennium Development Indicators, 1990-2003..............................................................31

-3-

Appendices
I. Relations with the Fund....................................................................................................32
II. Relations with the World Bank Group.............................................................................34
III. Statistical Issues................................................................................................................35
IV. Social and Demographic Indicators..................................................................................38
V. Debt Sustainability Analysis.............................................................................................39
VI. Medium-Term Scenarios ..................................................................................................42
Appendix Tables
V.1. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010............................................40
V.2. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010 ...................................................41

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Background
Economic activity has weakened since 2002, reflecting the impact of the real appreciation
of the exchange rate in 2002-04, the removal of textile quotas in January 2005, and a
prolonged drought. Poverty is widespread, aggravated by food shortages in parts of the
country and a severe HIV/AIDS epidemic.
Fiscal imbalances have widened in the last two fiscal years. The overall fiscal deficit rose
to 4.3 percent of GDP in 2004/05, driven primarily by a sharp increase in civil service wages.
Spending pressures have continued to rise unabated in 2005/06. The deficits have been
financed in large part by drawing down government financial assets and accumulating
domestic arrears. As a result, official reserves declined to 1.1 months of imports by endSeptember 2005.
Swaziland is susceptible to a range of potentially permanent shocks over the medium
term: anticipated reductions in the preferential prices for sugar exports to the EU, the
expected removal of the AGOA provision allowing the use of third-country fabrics in 2007,
and the forecast decline in SACU tariff revenues as a result of trade liberalization.
Policy Discussions
The authorities agreed that the current fiscal stance is not sustainable. In addition to
immediate measures to deal with the government’s cash flow problem for the remainder
of 2005/06, the staff urged a sharp reduction of the deficit in the 2006/07 budget and over the
medium term, in view of the lack of access to concessional external financing, little room for
domestic borrowing, the need to settle large payment arrears and contingent liabilities, and
the need for rebuilding reserves. The staff emphasized the need for providing fiscal space to
support poverty reduction.
The staff stressed that key policy reforms needed to be implemented without delay to
underpin the fiscal consolidation. The authorities agreed that rightsizing the civil service is
crucial for restoring fiscal sustainability but noted difficulties in implementation when the
economy is stagnant. They also agreed that reform of the public expenditure system would
help strengthen fiscal discipline. The staff urged the authorities to speed up the establishment
of a Revenue Authority and the introduction of a broad-based VAT.
The authorities agreed that under the current exchange rate arrangement, Swaziland
would have to rely on fiscal adjustment and structural reforms to restore
competitiveness. There was broad consensus during the discussions that maintaining the
exchange rate peg under the CMA is of vital importance to the economy. To improve the
investment climate, the staff stressed the importance of privatizing the large number of
public enterprises and improving economic governance. The latter should include enacting
the anti-corruption legislation and enforcing internal and financial audits of public entities.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Swaziland is a small, open economy, with close trade and financial ties with
South Africa. It is a member of the South African Customs Union (SACU) and the Common
Monetary Area (CMA).1 The Swazi lilangeni exchanges at parity with the rand, which is also
legal tender in the country. There are no exchange controls between CMA countries. Trade
among SACU countries is free of tariffs and duties.2 About half of fiscal revenues come from
Swaziland’s share in the SACU joint customs and excise pool. South Africa absorbs about
60 percent of Swazi exports, and provides 80 percent of the country's imported goods and
services, including most electricity and all petroleum products. Remittances from migrant
workers are an important source of income for Swaziland, amounting to about 5 percent of
GDP in recent years.
2.
Economic growth in Swaziland has weakened over the past decade. Since South
Africa democratized in 1994, Swaziland has lost part of its attractiveness to foreign
investors. As foreign direct investment inflows declined, real GDP growth fell from
3.6 percent in the 1990s to just over 2 percent since 2000. Swaziland’s economy is based
mainly on agriculture and agro-processing. In recent years, the garment sector, benefiting
from preferences under the US African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), has emerged
as one of the largest employers in the country. At its peak, in early 2004, it provided about
one quarter of formal sector jobs.
3.
Although Swaziland is a low middle-income country, poverty is widespread,
aggravated by food shortages in parts of the country and a severe HIV/AIDS epidemic.3
A highly skewed income distribution, persistent drought, and an inefficient internal market
for agricultural products have contributed to shortfalls in food production. The World Food
Program estimates that about 20 percent of the population are in need of food aid
during 2005/06. HIV prevalence is among the highest in the world.4 As a consequence,

1

CMA members include Namibia, Lesotho, Swaziland, and South Africa. SACU members include
the CMA countries plus Botswana.

2

Employment of Swazi workers in South Africa requires a work permit.

3

A recent Household Income and Expenditure Survey estimates that 69 percent of the population live
below the national poverty line (of E 4.1 or about US$0.65 per day). However, these results are
difficult to interpret, as the sample average consumption level is only about 20 percent of the national
average.

4

Data from a recent survey among women attending antenatal clinics suggests that HIV prevalence
may have risen further in 2004 to 43 percent overall (peaking at 56 percent for the 25-29 age group).
The number of AIDS orphans is estimated to have risen to 65,000 by 2003, corresponding to
12 percent of the young population (2004 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic (Geneva: UNAIDS)).

-6-

overall mortality has doubled since the 1990s, and life expectancy has dropped from 57 years
around 1990 to 33 years.
The HIV/AIDS Epidemic Has Resulted in Dramatic Losses in Life Expectancy
50

65

HIV prevalence rate
(In percent of women attending
antenatal clinics)

40

Life expectancy at birth
(In years)

60
55

30

50
45

20

40
10
35
0

30
1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

1/Source:
PercentMinistry
rate among
women
attending
antenatal9th
clinics
of Health
and
Social Welfare,
Round of National HIV
Serosurveillance.

1950-55

1960-65

1970-75

1980-85

1990-95

2000-05

Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population
Division (2005). World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision.

4.
A constitution, which had been eight years in the making, was signed by the
King in July 2005. The new constitution, expected to become effective in January 2006,
represents an improvement to the legal framework. It stipulates various individual rights,
including provisions to protect private property, and provides a clearer separation of the
executive, legislative, and judicial powers. The rule-of-law crisis that had undermined
investor confidence in 2004 has been largely resolved after the government retracted its
earlier decision to reject a Court of Appeals ruling regarding a property dispute that triggered
the resignation of the judges.
5.
Fund advice in recent years has focused on policies to address the impediments
to higher growth and broad-based improvements in living standards. The Fund has
emphasized the need for fiscal consolidation in order to maintain macroeconomic stability
and preserve the exchange rate peg, and for structural reforms, most notably in the financial
sector and public enterprises. While in broad agreement with the advice, the authorities noted
the implementation difficulties they are facing (e.g., downsizing the civil service when
unemployment is already high and poverty is worsening). They also stated that Fund policy
advice would be more effective if Swaziland’s implementation capacity could be further
strengthened with external assistance and capacity building support.

-7-

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
6.
Real GDP growth slowed to 2.1 percent 5.5
Projections
in 2004 and is expected to weaken further to
Real GDP growth
5.0
(In percent)
4.5
South Africa
1.8 percent in 2005 (Table 1). A prolonged
4.0
Lesotho
drought affected agricultural output, particularly 3.5
Namibia
maize, the main staple crop, and cotton.5 The
3.0
real appreciation of the lilangeni since 2002 and 2.5
2.0
high oil import prices hurt Swaziland’s main
1.5
Swaziland
exports (sugar, wood pulp, and garments) and
1.0
manufacturing activities. In addition, the
0.5
removal of the textile quotas since January 2005 0.0 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.
has led to factory closures and significant job
6
losses in the garment sector, further worsening
the unemployment rate (estimated at 30 percent). Compared to other small CMA countries
that have faced similar or more severe exogenous shocks, Swaziland is lagging behind in
adjustment and output recovery (Box 1).
7.
The lilangeni, which is pegged at par to 130
3
Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates,
4
the South African rand, appreciated by
120 Jan 2001-Sep 2005
5
24 percent in real effective terms between
110
Real effective exchange rate,
6
(left
scale,
2000=100)
January 2002 and December 2004. The
100
7
strength of the rand, while adversely affecting
8
90
9
exports, helped to offset the impact of rising
80
10
world oil prices, contributing to lower inflation
70
11
Nominal Exchange rate, lilangeni per US$
through end-2004. In part owing to the lowering
60
(right scale)
12
of interest rates by the South African Reserve
13
50
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Bank (SARB), the lilangeni depreciated against
Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics and staff estimates.
the US dollar in 2005, partially offsetting the
earlier real appreciation. Annual inflation edged up to over 6 percent at end-November 2005,
reflecting exchange rate movements and the pass-through of high oil import prices.7
5

Maize is primarily cultivated by subsistence farmers on nonirrigated Swazi Nation Land (which
accounts for 60 percent of land area). In part due to the drought, production levels in Swazi Nation
Land in 2004 were only about 60 percent of the 1999 levels. Title Deed Land is held by freehold
tenure, has exclusive access rights, is generally well irrigated and used for large scale commercial
(e.g., sugar cane) farming.

6

More than 15,000 jobs (over 50 percent of jobs in the garment sector) were estimated to have been
lost in the last two years.

7

The gasoline price at the pump was about US$2.82 per gallon in Swaziland at end-August 2005,
8 percent higher than the average retail price in the U.S. During 2004 and the first half of 2005, fuel
price increases exceeded the changes in the overall Consumer Price Index by 2 percentage points.

-8-

BOX 1. EXTERNAL SHOCKS, POLICY RESPONSES, AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
IN THE SMALL COUNTRIES OF THE COMMON MONETARY AREA
Under the CMA, all three small member
countries—Lesotho, Namibia, and
Swaziland—peg their currency to the South
African rand at par. The rand is legal tender
throughout the CMA, circulating side by
side with national currencies in the three
smaller countries. With the CMA providing
a common framework for monetary and
exchange rate policies, fiscal policy is the
main tool for macroeconomic stabilization in
the small CMA countries. During
2004/05-05/06, all three countries have
received large one-off SACU revenues.
External shocks: During 2002-2004, the
nominal appreciation of the rand against the
US dollar was about 40 percent, resulting in
a 13-25 percent real effective appreciation in
the three countries. However, reflecting the
different production and trade structures,
terms of trade movements varied. While
Lesotho and Namibia have suffered heavy
losses since 2002, Swaziland’s terms of
trade experienced little change, reflecting its
more diversified export base and the fact that
its main export, sugar, has enjoyed
preferential prices in the EU market.

140
120

Terms of Trade
(2000 = 100)

Projections

Swaziland

100

Namibia

80
Lesotho
60
2001/02
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Fiscal Balance
(In percent of GDP)

Projections

Lesotho
Namibia
Swaziland
2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

8
7
6

2005/06

Official Reserves
(In months of imports)

5

2005/06
Projections

Lesotho
Namibia
Swaziland

4
3
2
1
0
2001/02
140
120
100
80

2002/03

Government Debt
(In percent of GDP)

2003/04

2004/05

2005/06
Projections

Lesotho
Namibia
Swaziland 1/

60
40

20
Policy Responses: In response to the severe
0
shocks to its textile sector, Lesotho saved the
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
2004/05
2005/06
SACU windfalls (see Footnote 7), ran a
Source: Country authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
budget surplus, and prepaid high interest rate 1/ From 2003/04 - 2005/06 government debt includes domestic payment arrears.
external debt. Namibia managed to sharply reduce its fiscal deficit by 3.5 percentage points
of GDP in 2004/05, while targeting further fiscal tightening in 2005/06. In contrast,
Swaziland’s fiscal deficit has been widening, driven by sharp increases in the wage bill and
other spending, and financed by running down external reserves and an accumulation of
domestic arrears.

Economic performance: Lesotho has maintained a relatively high level of reserves, and
sharply reduced the public debt-to-GDP ratio. Namibia has managed to maintain a higher
import cover of official reserves than Swaziland and a good growth performance.
Swaziland’s official reserves have declined to the lowest level among CMA members. Real
GDP growth has continued to weaken, further diverging from that in South Africa, the engine
of growth in the region.

-9-

8.
Fiscal imbalances have widened in the last two fiscal years (Table 2 and Figure 1).
In 2004/05, despite a large one-time windfall in SACU revenues8 (4.2 percent of GDP) and
efforts to increase domestic revenue by removing some tax exemptions,9 the deficit
(including grants) rose to 4.3 percent of GDP, significantly higher than the originally
budgeted deficit of 2.8 percent of GDP, as the wage bill and other current expenditures were
sharply increased through three supplementary budgets. Spending pressures have continued
to rise unabated in 2005/06, as the wage increase granted in 2004 became fully effective and
was extended to all branches of the civil service, increasing the total wage bill to 15 percent
of GDP. Moreover, a supplementary budget was adopted in the third quarter of the fiscal year
to authorize wage increases for parliamentarians and other politicians, further widening the
budget deficit.
9.
The deficits have been financed by external and domestic borrowing, drawing
down of government financial assets, including the Capital Investment Fund (CIF), and
an accumulation of domestic arrears. The latter increased from an estimated 0.8 percent of
GDP at end-2003/04 to over 2 percent of GDP at end-2004/05. With usable deposits
(excluding deposits earmarked for specific projects) virtually exhausted by endSeptember 2005, the government is facing a serious cash flow problem. Funding for
budgeted poverty reduction programs has been adversely affected.
10.
Monetary developments have reflected those in South Africa. In line with interest
rate reductions in South Africa, the CBS reduced its discount rate to 7 percent in April 2005.
Market yields on treasury bills have moved downward and interest rate spreads relative to
South Africa have remained small, as new issues of treasury bills essentially have been
contained to roll over falling due maturities in order to avoid higher borrowing costs on
short-term debt, notwithstanding the government’s large financing needs. Available data
suggest that financial soundness indicators of the banking system remain strong (Table 4).10

8

Under the revenue sharing rules agreed in 2002, SACU members receive an additional allocation if,
after two years, SACU actual revenue collection turns out to have been higher than the estimates used
for the earlier distribution.
9

Income tax exemptions for parastatals and on benefits in kind were largely removed in 2004/05.

10

The banking system comprises four commercial banks, three of which South African (accounting
for about 80 percent of commercial bank assets). Nonbank financial institutions include a building
society, insurance companies, public and private pension funds, and credit cooperatives.

- 10 -

11.
In the face of shocks to exports
and strong pressure to finance the fiscal
deficit, gross international reserves
(which include the CIF) declined from
1.9 months of imports at end-2003 to
1.1 months at end-September 2005, the
lowest level among CMA members
(Table 5). Other reserve adequacy
indicators such as the ratio to short-term
debt or to the monetary base have also
deteriorated. In the meantime, public debt,
which is mostly on nonconcessional terms,
has increased to 22 percent of GDP,
including domestic debt excluding
outstanding domestic payment arrears.11

4000
3500

5

International Reserves
(In millions of Rands)
CIF

4

3000
In months of imports
(right scale)

2500

3

2000
2

1500
1000

1

500
0

0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

12.
The authorities issued a “Poverty Reduction Strategy and Action Plan” in
October 2004. The document spells out policies with the overall objective of halving the
poverty rate from the level in 1995 by 2015. However, little progress has been made toward
this and other Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There are indications that the share
of the population living below the national poverty line has been increasing in the last several
years. According to the Ministry of Health, the HIV infection rate among women attending
antenatal clinics increased from 39 percent in 2002 to 43 percent in 2004. While there have
been modest improvements in the area of education, Swaziland’s key social indicators
compare unfavorable with those of other countries in the region (Table 7 and Figure 2).
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
A. Outlook, Future Challenges, and Strategy
13.
The government’s cash flow problems loom large in Swaziland’s near-term
economic outlook. Domestic payment arrears adversely affect the private sector’s working
capital and, ultimately, tax compliance. Uncertainty regarding the government’s ability to
meet its obligations as budgeted may also have a dampening effect on services and
construction activities, which were boosted by increased government expenditures in the last
two years. The near-term outlook is also weakened by delayed and likely inadequate

11

Swaziland, a low middle-income country, is not eligible for credits on IDA terms and has received
relatively little official development assistance. It has no outstanding use of Fund resources and is not
HIPC-eligible. Domestic government debt amounted to about 3 percent of GDP in 2005, of which
over 80 percent were treasury bills (with a maturity less than one year), held mostly by commercial
banks.

- 11 -

rainfalls, the ban on beef exports to the EU,12 the real effective appreciation of the lilangeni,
and the erosion of trade preferences for garment exports. Prolonged high oil import prices are
also putting pressure on the productive sectors, prices, and the balance of payments. The
authorities projected a further slowdown in economic growth and a worsening of the external
current account in 2006.
14.
Over the medium term, Swaziland is susceptible to a range of potentially
permanent shocks: anticipated reductions in the preferential prices for sugar exports to the
EU by 36 percent over the next four years (Box 2); the eventual elimination of the new
restraints on textile imports in the United States and the EU; the expected removal in 2007 of
the AGOA provision allowing the use of third-country fabrics; and the forecast decline in
SACU tariff revenues as a result of trade liberalization.13 The HIV/AIDS epidemic is
exacting a heavy toll on society, and the high infection rate contributes to higher mortality
rates, a loss of productivity and real income, and mounting fiscal pressures.
15.
The authorities agreed that a strategy to achieve more rapid economic growth
and broad-based improvements in living standards needs to address three key
challenges: (i) reversing the unsustainable fiscal trends which threaten to deplete official
reserves, undermine the exchange rate parity under the CMA, and compromise the
government’s ability to address development priorities; (ii) restoring external
competitiveness; and (iii) addressing the high prevalence of poverty and HIV/AIDS. The staff
emphasized that fiscal consolidation would help maintain macroeconomic stability and
provide the fiscal space to support poverty reduction.
16.
To illustrate the policy choices the authorities are facing, the staff developed two
alternative medium-term scenarios (Appendix VI). The first one (baseline scenario)
assumes that policy implementation continues to be lacking. The fiscal imbalances would
worsen further and domestic payment arrears increasingly plague the enterprise sector.
Without structural reforms to address the loss of external competitiveness, economic
activities will remain depressed. Under such a scenario, official reserves are eventually
depleted and the viability of the exchange rate parity arrangement is threatened. In addition
to fiscal pressures, a major, unanticipated deterioration of the terms of trade or a sudden loss
of the public’s confidence in the exchange rate parity could hasten the breakdown of the
exchange rate peg.
12

Since April 2005, after the country failed to produce the paperwork needed to track the origin of
slaughtered cattle.
13

The potential impact of these shocks could be mitigated by several considerations: Swaziland’s
sugar industry is relatively competitive in the world market; the adverse effects of the expiry of the
AGOA third-country fabric provision might be offset by the SACU-US free trade agreement now
under negotiation; and the reduction of SACU tariffs for imports from the EU under a free trade
agreement could be gradual and over a long period.

- 12 -

BOX 2. SUGAR SECTOR AND REFORM OF THE EU PRICE REGIME
Swaziland’s sugar industry consists of commercial and a large number of small-holder
sugar cane farms, sugar processing subsectors, and related trade and service businesses.
Sugar also constitutes the basis for the production of soft drink concentrates and other
beverages, the largest exports of Swaziland, as well as ethanol and other derivative
products. While the sector per se accounts for about 15-20 percent of GDP and exports,
it indirectly affects a much larger part of the national economy.
Swaziland: The Impact of the Reduction in the EU Sugar Price
The reform of the European
Current 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Union (EU) Sugar Regime:
Sugar Price (In Euro/ton)
Currently, Swaziland exports
sugar to the EU under two
Prevailing within EU
632
506
458
411
404
Applicable to Swazi exports:
preferential agreements: the
Sugar Protocol
524
498
498
434
335
Sugar Protocol (100-130,000 tons
Special Preference Sugar
497
472
472
412
318
Cumulative reduction, in percent
0
5
5
17
36
per year) and the Special
Impact on Swaziland (In millions of Euro)
Preference Sugar (SPS, 40,000
tons per year). The anticipated
Total Exports
87
83
83
72
56
Under Sugar Protocol
67
64
64
56
43
reform would reduce the prices
Under Special Preference Sugar
20
19
19
16
13
Total Losses (in millions of Euro)
0
4
4
15
31
applicable to Swazi exports by
Swaziland Sugar Association and EU
36 percent over four years. It also Source:
1/ So called institutional price. 2/ Assumes the continuation of SPS beyond 2006.
opens the possibility of a higher
export volume from developing
countries including Swaziland to the EU, as the reform cuts the quotas for EU producers
by 2.8 million tons.
1/

2/

Possible impact on Swaziland: The loss of export earnings from the EU reform are
estimated at €50 million over the 4-year period, but could be much more substantial and
more imminent if the SPS access expires in 2006. In addition, tax revenue would be
adversely affected; small-holder farmers and millers may face financial difficulties,
aggravating rural poverty.
The authorities’ response: Key elements of the strategy are: to further reduce costs by
providing training and financing for small-holder farmers; to seek higher access to the
EU market for Swazi sugar; to address specific adverse consequences of the reform
process, especially on small-holder growers and the environment; to move to higher
value-added products and diversify export markets. Public investment in sugar-related
projects would help. For instance, the Lower Usuthu Small-holder Irrigation Project
could substantially increase annual net income of some 640 small-holder farms in the
newly developed Komati and Usuthu river basins by reducing their vulnerability to
drought.

- 13 -

Swaziland: Medium-Term Scenario, 2005-2009
(In percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Without Measures
Real GDP growth
Fiscal balance, including grants (fiscal year)
Current account balance
Gross official reserves (millions of US dollars)
Public debt

1.8
-4.3
-1.6
230
21.9

1
-5.4
-2.4
205
25.2

1
-6.2
-3
162
29.5

0.9
-6.6
-3.1
111
35

0.9
-7
-3.7
38
40.1

Reform Policies Scenario 1/
Real GDP growth
Fiscal balance, including grants (fiscal year)
Current account balance
Gross official reserves (millions of US dollars)
Public debt

1.8
-4.3
-1.6
230
21.9

2.2
-1.1
-0.9
242
21.5

2.6
-0.2
-0.6
261
20.2

3.2
0
-0.5
313
19.1

3.3
0
-1.1
382
17.6

Sources: Fund sources and staff simulation.
1/ Assuming that strong policy reforms will help attract private investment, both domestic and foreign,
particularly to tourism and related services and construction activities.

17.
Fiscal consolidation and improvement in economic governance play a central
role in the second, “reform policy,” scenario. Under the assumption of decisive actions to
implement the civil service reform and improve public expenditure management, the bulk of
the fiscal adjustment would initially come from the spending side. In subsequent years,
measures to broaden the tax base and strengthen revenue collection would go into effect. The
public savings-investment balance would reverse the recent deteriorating trend, contributing
to improvements in the gross national savings-investment balance. Implementation of the
necessary structural reforms will help improve the business climate, attract donor financing,
and enable Swaziland to benefit from strong growth in South Africa. GDP growth could rise
to 3-4 percent over the medium term, benefiting from higher investment, including foreign
direct investment, and higher efficiency of public investment.14 Official reserves would be
rebuilt gradually along with improvements in the balance of payments.
B. Fiscal Policy
18.
The authorities agreed that the current fiscal policy stance is not sustainable and
measures are urgently needed to ensure that the government meet its payment
obligations on a timely basis for the remainder of 2005/06. The staff pointed out that
resorting to short-term borrowing and deposit withdrawals provided some breathing space in
the recent past, but it has become increasingly difficult to do so without incurring
significantly higher borrowing costs or further reducing the country’s official international
reserves. It is therefore imperative for the authorities to undertake immediate measures that
14

The recessionary effect of fiscal retrenchment on domestic output is likely to be limited because of
the very high import propensity of spending. A fall in government expenditure would be offset in
large part by an increase in net exports resulting from a reduction in imports.

- 14 -

would help contain expenditures and prepare the ground for a more fundamental adjustment
in the context of the 2006/07 budget (Box 3). In this context, the staff emphasized the
importance of starting to “rightsize” the civil service, noting that the Voluntary Retirement
Program had been envisaged earlier and the associated costs have already been included in
the 2005/06 budget. The authorities were receptive to the staff’s recommendations,
particularly on prioritizing expenditures, including investment projects, and tightening
control of non-wage current expenditure.
19.
The staff urged a sharp reduction of the deficit in the 2006/07 budget. It argued
that with virtually no access to international capital markets on acceptable terms, little room
for domestic financing, substantial contingent liabilities, in particular from the seriously
under-funded Swaziland Public Pension Fund (PSFP),15 and low economic growth,
maintaining fiscal and debt sustainability will require a substantial reduction of the fiscal
deficit, below the government’s earlier medium-term target of 2 percent of GDP.16 Indeed,
under the current exchange rate arrangement, any fiscal deficits in excess of available
external financing will carry the risk of worsening the international reserve position. This is
because domestic money demand may not be adequate to accommodate increased
government borrowing, and also because Swaziland’s import propensity is high. In view of
the need to clear payment arrears and to rebuild the country’s international reserves, and in
the absence of concessional external financing, the staff supported the Ministry of Finance’s
intention to aim for a balanced budget in the next several years. For 2006/07, fiscal
adjustment of at least 3 percentage points of GDP will have to be made to limit the deficit to
available external financing and the adjustment will have to rely heavily on expenditure
measures.17 The authorities agreed with the need for a sharp adjustment but noted that their
efforts may encounter substantial resistance given the rigidity of many expenditure programs
and the need to finance the implementation of the new constitution. Subsequent to the
mission, in their Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement issued in December 2005, the
authorities announced that they aim to cut down the fiscal deficit to 2 percent of GDP in the
next two years and achieve a balanced budget in 2008/09.

15

Total assets at end-June 2005 amounted to E 4.1 billion (about 24 percent of GDP), of which
67 percent were invested in equities. According to the latest actuarial evaluation, the pension fund’s
assets covered 52 percent of its liabilities at end-March 2004. According to PSPF representatives, the
funding level has since increased modestly, reflecting higher contributions due to the recent salary
increases.
16
17

An updated fiscal and external debt sustainability analysis is contained in Appendix V.

See Box 3 for the key measures to achieve the adjustment objectives. Projected external financing
includes disbursements from the African Development Bank for the Komati Downstream
Development and other projects.

- 15 -

BOX 3. KEY POLICY MEASURES TO RESTORE FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY
Based on discussions with various ministries and the CBS, the staff team made the following
recommendations:
Immediate Measures: (i) prioritize budgeted expenditures, giving priority to wages and
salaries, debt service, and utilities; (ii) start rightsizing the civil service by implementing the
Voluntary Retirement Program aiming to retire about 1,300 public employees aged 55 and
above, adopting a Cabinet decision to eliminate 1,000 vacant positions resulting from natural
attrition, and continuing the policy of zero growth for budgetary positions; (iii) tighten control of
foreign travel and use of government cars; (iv) halt funds for capital projects that have not yet
started or are not directly productive and are not funded by donors, in line with a priority list
prepared by the Ministry of Economic Planning and Development; (v) strengthen control of
expenditure commitments by setting monthly spending ceilings for all line ministries and issuing
expenditure warrants accordingly, based on availability of funds; (vi) refrain from approving
new supplementary budgets and meet justifiable additional spending needs, for example, for
scholarships, within the existing resource envelope; (vii) transfer all foreign assets of the CIF to
the CBS balance sheet to strengthen reserve management.
Medium-term Measures: (i) aim for a balanced budget, in the absence of concessional external
financing. Budgets over the medium term should aim to support rebuilding of official foreign
reserves to cover at least three months of imports; (ii) establish the Revenue Authority and
introduce a broad-based VAT; (iii) rightsize the civil service to a sustainable level and reduce
the number of ministries from 17 to 14 or less, in line with an earlier study commissioned by the
government. Introduce a performance-based pay system; (iv) privatize state-owned companies
that can be privatized to increase efficiency and service delivery; (v) improve the public
procurement system by requiring competitive bidding, undertake periodic internal audits and
financial audits of all spending entities.
Possible Impact in 2006/07: Implementation of civil service reform and consolidation of
ministries could help reduce wages and other expenditures by about 1 percent of GDP.
Restructuring of public enterprises, including the Central Transport Administration by reducing
its car fleet and other costs, could lower spending on goods and services and subsidies by nearly
1 percent of GDP. Rationalization of the public investment program could help reduce capital
expenditures by up to 1.5 percent of GDP. These estimates are in line with the assessment of the
World Bank staff team assisting expenditure management and control.

20.
The authorities indicated their intention to strengthen revenue mobilization.
They have planned since 2003 to combine the Department of Customs and Excise and the
Income Tax Commission into a unified Revenue Authority and then to introduce a broadbased VAT. However, these reforms have been postponed, with the introduction of VAT
slipping from 2006/07 to 2007/08. The staff urged the authorities to speed up the reforms and
implement other measures as envisaged, including the removal of tax exemptions on rental
income, a sales tax amendment to close loopholes, and the enforcement of tax collections
from non-compliant entities.

- 16 -

21.
On the expenditure side, the authorities agreed that containing the wage bill
through implementation of the civil service reform is crucial for restoring fiscal
sustainability. They explained, however, that the recent wage increases to levels competitive
with those of the private sector were needed to retain qualified public sector workers and
were meant to be implemented in conjunction with rightsizing the civil service. They
acknowledged that rightsizing the civil service to a sustainable level (of about 20,000, from
the current 28,000) will require persistent efforts and would be difficult to implement if the
economy remains stagnant. The staff urged the authorities to press ahead with this important
reform because further delay would only make the eventual correction more costly.
The Civil Service Wage Bill in a Regional Context
Civil Service Wage Bill
(In percent of GDP)

16

60

14

Civil Service Wage Bill
(In percent of current expenditure)

50

12

40

10
8

30

6

20

4
2

10

0
Botswana

Lesotho

Namibia

Swaziland

sub-Saharan
Africa

0
Botswana

Lesotho

Namibia

Swaziland

Source: IMF staff estimates.

22.
As an integral part of fiscal consolidation and to effectively address poverty, the
staff encouraged the authorities to reorient expenditures in favor of HIV/AIDS and
other pro-poor programs, including by increasing the share of capital expenditure for
poverty reduction. The latter will require curtailing capital expenditures on projects that do
not make a direct contribution to productive activities and are currently beyond the domestic
financing capacity (e.g., a new international airport and a theme park). The authorities
responded by stating that on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis, public investment projects
yielding no positive economic return should not be undertaken.
23.
The authorities recognized that weak expenditure controls, especially the lack of
effective control of expenditure commitments on the level of line ministries, have
resulted in budget overruns and accumulation of domestic arrears. They informed the
staff that the Integrated Financial Information System, which was expected to become
operational by end-2005, would provide the information base for improving expenditure
management. They also concurred with the staff’s recommendation to undertake a review to
identify all outstanding payment arrears by each spending unit, as an initial step in a
comprehensive reform aimed at preventing the reoccurrence of arrears. The staff stressed the
importance of overhauling the public expenditure system with technical assistance. It further
pointed out that enhanced fiscal transparency and quality of the budgeting process for
ministries and departments would help prioritize expenditure, increase accountability and
strengthen fiscal discipline.

- 17 -

C. External Sector and Monetary Policies
24.
The authorities were of the view that the exchange rate peg with the South
African rand provides a framework for monetary policy, helps maintain price stability,
and facilitates trade and investment within the CMA. However, as the exchange rate is
beyond the control of Swaziland, the consequences of the real appreciation of the exchange
rate and reduction of trade preferences needed to be addressed by other means. The
authorities agreed that under these circumstances, Swaziland will have to rely on fiscal
adjustment and structural reforms to restore competitiveness. In the latter context, the staff
pointed out that labor costs in Swaziland are higher than in many competing African and
Asian countries. Swaziland’s competitiveness has also been weakened by low investor
confidence (see paragraph 28), cumbersome business regulations especially concerning trade
licensing and entry permits, unreliable power supply and expensive telecommunications.
Although Swaziland’s corporate tax (30 percent) is comparable to that of South Africa and
lower than the rates in neighboring Lesotho, Namibia and Mozambique, Swaziland has too
many taxes, some of which are difficult to collect, and the general sales tax is costly to payer
and the government.18 Efforts therefore will have to be made to boost labor productivity,
reduce domestic costs, and improve the investment climate. The authorities noted their
adjustment strategy in the important sugar sector (Box 2) and informed the staff that they
have allocated additional resources (E 30 million), notwithstanding their fiscal difficulties,
for workers’ training and other skill-enhancing programs following the Job Creation Summit
in July 2005.
25.
The authorities made it clear that they would continue to maintain an open trade
and exchange system. As a member of SACU, Swaziland has free-trade relations with
regional partners while sharing common external trade policies. In the context of SACU,
Swaziland is actively pursuing free trade arrangements and trade partnerships, including with
the European Union and the United States. SADC (excluding South Africa) is also
negotiating a free-trade agreement with the European Union, based on and extending the
Cotonou Agreement.19 The staff encouraged the authorities to work with SACU partners to
lower SACU’s external tariffs, focusing on tariff “peaks” on manufactured products.
26.
On monetary policy, staff stressed the importance of prudently managing the
CBS’s net domestic assets. Under the CMA, Swaziland does not have an independent
monetary policy. Demand for the lilangeni depends importantly on the public’s confidence in
18

Swaziland is the only country in SACU that does not have a VAT. Tax reform is discussed in
paragraph 20. For an analysis of Swaziland’s investment environment, see The Swaziland Investor
Roadmap (USAID, 2005).
19

South Africa is a SADC member, although, as a non-ACP country, it is not a party to the
Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations with the EU. South Africa already has a free trade
agreement with the EU.

- 18 -

the exchange rate parity arrangement. Containing the CBS’s net domestic assets by limiting
the government’s net position at the CBS is essential to ensure that domestic currency issued
by the central bank is adequately backed by foreign reserves. The authorities shared the
staff’s view that the level of official reserves at present is inadequate; their objective is to
increase the reserves to cover at least three months of imports. They noted that such a policy
objective cannot be achieved without a prudent fiscal policy. The authorities informed staff
that, with MFD technical assistance, the CBS has initiated the process of bringing their
reserve management in line with international best practice, including improving the liquidity
and security of the reserves.
D. Structural Reforms
27.
The authorities agreed that the efficiency of the Swazi economy could be
enhanced by restructuring and privatizing the large number of public enterprises.20 The
government approved a Privatization Policy for Swaziland in 2004 and has submitted the
Swaziland Railway Privatization Bill to Parliament. However, no public enterprises have
been privatized so far. The staff pointed out that to speed up the public enterprise reform,
progress needed to be made in identifying enterprises which could be privatized, developing
the necessary regulatory frameworks, and establishing a concrete timetable for this process.
The staff team noted that the privatization of key utilities could enhance private sector
development, help improving the competitiveness of the Swazi economy through lower costs
of key services, and contribute to fiscal consolidation by lowering expenditures for goods
and services supplied by these enterprises, as well as subsidies.
28.
The authorities expressed determination to fight corruption and improve
economic governance. They recognized that misuse of public resources and corruption not
only increase the costs of public services but also worsen the investment climate, deterring
potential investors. 21 They indicated that decisive actions would be taken soon on some
major cases. The staff team noted that the authorities’ efforts would be greatly enhanced by
strengthening the relevant institutions. It advised that the Anti-Corruption Unit be
empowered, through the draft Anti-Corruption legislation, to investigate and charge suspects,
including senior officials. It also recommended that the anti-corruption bill, which has been
submitted to Cabinet, be enacted as soon as possible. To increase transparency and
accountability, the staff strongly recommended periodic internal financial audits for all
entities that are part of the consolidated government budget.
20

Swaziland currently has 45 public enterprises covering a broad range of activities, including
transportation, telecommunication, utilities, agriculture, services, and trade. Some of these enterprises
are de facto monopolies in their sectors and key suppliers of goods and services to the government.

21

The “Corruption Perception Index” by Transparency International, an NGO, ranks Swaziland (103
of out of 153 countries) much lower than the other SACU countries (between rank 32 and 70), and
somewhat lower than neighboring Mozambique (rank 97).

- 19 -

29.
Regarding financial sector reform, the authorities have focused on measures to
modernize the financial legal framework, strengthen the supervision of financial
institutions, and improve the efficiency of the payment system. They have made progress
in advancing their legislative agenda. The recently enacted Insurance Bill has opened up the
insurance sector for competition. Parliament approved the Financial Institutions Bill, which,
once signed into law, will help strengthen corporate governance in banks. Additional
legislative items pending parliamentary approval include the Financial Services Regulatory
Authority Bill and the Securities Bill. A Real Time Gross Settlement system is being
implemented to modernize the national payment system. Based on a mutual evaluation in the
Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering (AML/CFT) Group, the authorities are
working to strengthen their AML/CFT regime, including the relevant legal framework.
30.
To reduce poverty, the authorities have concentrated their efforts in improving
food security, extending the reach of anti-HIV/AIDS programs, and improving access
to primary education. They informed staff that they have made some progress in improving
the domestic food market by restructuring the National Maize Corporation and the new
constitution will open the possibility to lease Swazi Nation Land for 99 years, which would
facilitate access to credit by small-holder farmers. The National Emergency Response
Council reported that Swaziland will meet the target under the WHO’s “3 by 5” initiative
(providing at least 13,000 AIDS patients with antiretroviral treatment by end-2005). It also
recently launched a program to provide food and social support to orphans. The latest data
show for the first time a decline in HIV prevalence for the 15-19 age group (from
32.5 percent in 2002 to 29.3 percent in 2004), suggesting that prevention efforts are
beginning to take effect.22 On education, the right to free primary education was included in
the new constitution,23 and the government has been funding scholarships for orphans. To
make further progress, the staff encouraged the authorities to prepare concrete anti-poverty
projects (including their costing) in line with their Action Program for the Reduction of
Poverty, so that these projects can be incorporated in the national budget or used to attract
external funding. In addition, the authorities need to strengthen their implementation capacity
to ensure efficient use of the $20 million grant awarded by the Global Fund for the period of
July 2005-June 2008.
E. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance Issues
31.
Although Swaziland participates in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination
System (GDSS) and posted its metadata on the GDDS bulletin board in February 2003,
22

Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, 2005, 9th Round of National HIV Seroprevalence Among
Women Attending Antenatal Care Services and Health Facilities in Swaziland 2004 (Mbabane,
Swaziland).
23

The right would be effective three years after the adoption of the new constitution, and would be
subject to resource availability.

- 20 -

deficiencies in the quality of economic data have remained pervasive and hamper
effective surveillance (Appendix III). The staff noted severe inconsistencies in the national
accounts, particularly the data on indirect taxes used for the estimation of GDP. In response,
the Central Statistical Office indicated its intention to correct the discrepancies and, with
technical assistance, to revise the GDP figures in early 2006.24
32.
The authorities confirmed that Swaziland’s economic adjustment and reform
need technical assistance. Areas that are particularly in need of external support include
civil service reform, public expenditure management reform, including developing a strategy
for the resolution and prevention of payment arrears, national accounts and balance of
payments statistics, as well as central bank operations.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
33.
Swaziland’s economic performance has deteriorated over the last two years.
Economic growth has slowed, reflecting a substantial real appreciation of the exchange rate
that has weakened external competitiveness, the elimination of textile quotas, and a persistent
drought. The fiscal deficit has widened, despite large windfalls in SACU receipts, and has
been increasingly financed by the accumulation of domestic payment arrears. The fiscal
imbalances have led to losses of foreign reserves, which have declined to a critically low
level. At the same time, the very high HIV/AIDS prevalence rate is exacting a heavy toll on
society, food shortages persist in part of the country, and poverty remains widespread.
34.
The key policy challenges facing the authorities are to restore fiscal
sustainability and external competitiveness so that progress can be made in reducing
poverty. There is an urgent need to promptly embark on an adjustment and reform strategy
centered on fiscal consolidation and improvements in economic governance. As such a
strategy has already been discussed within the country and with development partners in the
past, the critical issue now is implementation. Further delays will make the eventual
correction more costly and enlarge the growth gap between Swaziland and South Africa and
other countries in the region.
35.
The cash flow problem in the implementation of the 2005/06 budget is not
merely a temporary liquidity problem; it reflects structural fiscal imbalances
accumulated over the last few years. While fundamental reforms are required to reduce the
deficit, the authorities need to forcefully implement immediate measures to ensure that the
government meet its payment obligations on a timely basis for the remainder of the fiscal
year. Initiating the steps as envisaged earlier to start rightsizing the civil service would lay
the ground for fiscal adjustment in the context of 2006/07 budget. The staff regrets that a new
supplementary budget was adopted, which will further increase the wage bill.
24

Swaziland’s GDP data since 1994 are likely to be revised downward but the country is expected to
remain a low middle-income country.

- 21 -

36.
The 2006/07 budget will be critical in restoring public finances to a sustainable
path. With little room for domestic financing, large payment arrears and contingent
liabilities, and low economic growth, in the absence of concessional external financing, the
authorities will have to sharply reduce the budget deficit, below the government’s earlier
medium-term target of 2 percent of GDP. To restore fiscal sustainability and rebuild official
reserves, the authorities should aim for a balanced budget in the next few years. The staff
shares the authorities’ concern about the currently low level of official reserves and supports
the authorities’ objective to rebuild reserves to at least three months of imports over the
medium term.
37.
To achieve the fiscal adjustment, the authorities need to undertake the necessary
revenue reforms, rightsize the civil service to a sustainable level, and strengthen the
growth orientation of public investment. As SACU revenues are projected to decline,
strong efforts are needed to increase domestic revenues. Key measures should include
establishment of the Revenue Authority and the introduction of a broad-based VAT. On the
expenditure side, it is important that the authorities follow through with measures to rightsize
the civil service and rationalize the government structure, in line with their civil service
reform programs. Revamping the public investment program by reducing expenditures on
projects that are not expected to contribute directly to productive activities and reorienting
expenditures in favor of pro-poor programs will make the budget more growth-enhancing.
38.
The staff strongly support the authorities’ intention to reform the public
expenditure management system. Weak expenditure controls, including at the line ministry
levels, have contributed to the rising fiscal deficits and payment arrears. While the
introduction of the Integrated Financial Information System would help, improving fiscal
discipline will also require institutional reforms to strengthen various components of the
public expenditure management and control system. The staff encourages the authorities to
seek technical assistance in order to make progress in this important area.
39.
With the exchange rate of the lilangeni pegged at par to the rand under the
CMA, the authorities will have to rely on fiscal adjustment and structural reforms to
restore external competitiveness. Regarding the latter, efforts to increase labor
productivity, reduce domestic costs for the export sector, and improve the investment climate
will be crucial. The authorities’ recent initiatives to support workers’ training and skill
enhancing are encouraging. While Swaziland’s sugar industry is relatively competitive in the
world market, there is scope for further cost reduction, particularly in small-holder farms,
and diversification of products and markets.
40.
To improve the investment climate and support fiscal consolidation, the
authorities need to press ahead with restructuring and privatization of the large
number of public enterprises and reforms to strengthen governance. The privatization of
key utilities could enhance private sector development, help improve the competitiveness of
the Swazi economy through lower costs of key services, including those provided to the
government. Staff encourages the authorities to enact the anti-corruption legislation as soon

- 22 -

as possible and institute periodic internal and financial audits for all entities benefiting from
the consolidated government budget.
41.
The staff welcomes the recent steps by the CBS to strengthen its operations,
including reserve management, and to develop Swaziland’s financial system. It supports
the authorities’ intention to strengthen official foreign reserve position but such a task will
have to be supported by a prudent fiscal policy. The agreement to transfer the government’s
Capital Investment Fund to the central bank to strengthen the management of official
reserves is welcome. To further promote development of Swaziland’s financial sector, staff
encourages the authorities to finalize and enact key pieces of financial legislation, including
the Financial Service Regulatory Authority Bill, the Securities Bill, the National Clearing
and Settlements Bill, and the AML/CFT Bill.
42.
The staff welcomes the authorities’ commitment to improving the national
accounts statistics. The review and revision of the GDP data should be given high priority,
as the shortcomings in economic data, most notably in the national accounts and the balance
of payments, are compromising economic policy decision making and monitoring.
43.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 23 -

Figure 1. Swaziland: Main Economic Indicators
Real GDP growth
(In percent)

Central Government Operations 1/
(In percent of GDP)
40

3.5

6
Expenditure and net lending
(left scale)

35

Non-agricultural real GDP
3.0

4

30
2

25

2.5

Revenues and grants
(left scale)

20
2.0

15

1.5

-2

Budget balance
(right scale)

10

Real GDP

0

-4

5
1.0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-6

2005

00/01

01/02

CPI Inflation, Dec 2000-Aug 2005
(Annual percentage change)

02/03

03/04

04/05

Interest Rates
(In percent) 2/

16

16

Swaziland discount rate
South African repo rate

14

14

12
10

12

8

10

6
4

8

2

6

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland; and South African Reserve Bankl
1/ Fiscal year beginning April 1.
2/ End of period 2000-2004, through September, 2005.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

- 24 -

Figure 2. CMA Countries: Social Indicators, 2003
GDP per capita
(In US dollars)

4,000

87

Literacy rate, adult total
(In percent of people ages 15 and above)

86

3,500

85

3,000

84

2,500

83

2,000
82

1,500
81

1,000

80

500

79

0

78

Lesotho

Namibia

South Africa

Swaziland

Public health expenditure
(In percent of GDP)

6

Lesotho

60

5

50

4

40

3

30

2

20

1

10

0

Namibia

South Africa

Swaziland

Life expectancy at birth (In years)

0

Lesotho

Namibia

South Africa

Swaziland

Lesotho

Namibia

South Africa

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2005; United Nations Population Division.

Swaziland

- 25 -

Table 1. Swaziland: Basic Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002-2009

2002

2003
Est.

2004
Est.

2005
Proj.

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless stated otherwise)
National Income and Prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP per capita at constant prices
GDP deflator
CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)

2.9
0.3
12.6
11.7
11.5

2.4
0.1
12.1
7.4
4.6

2.1
-0.1
3.4
3.4
3.2

1.8
0.1
4.5
4.5
5.1

1.0
-0.7
5.8
5.8
5.7

1.0
-0.5
5.5
5.5
5.3

0.9
-0.4
5.0
5.0
4.7

0.9
-0.5
4.5
4.5
4.5

External sector
Current account balance (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Export volume, f.o.b.
Import volume, f.o.b.
Real effective exchange rate 1/

57.6
16.0
-9.2
6.0

36.3
3.3
-9.8
13.0

40.0
2.8
-2.4
3.0

-43.5
2.7
-3.7
...

-65.8
2.0
0.1
...

-84.2
-3.5
-5.3
...

-91.5
2.9
2.1
...

-112.7
1.0
1.2
...

Money and credit
Broad money
Prime lending rate (in percent; end of period)
Interest rates on 12-month time deposits (in percent; end of period)
Discount Rate ( end of period)

13.1
16.5
9.5
13.5

14.1
11.5
4.2
8.0

10.4
11.0
4.1
7.5

10.5
10.5
3.5
7.0

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

(In percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Of which: government
Gross domestic investment
Of which: government

24.6
3.0
19.8
7.4

19.9
3.3
18.0
5.7

19.0
3.4
17.4
7.7

16.8
3.6
18.5
8.0

15.0
2.5
17.3
7.9

14.0
1.6
16.9
7.9

12.8
1.2
15.9
7.9

12.2
0.8
15.9
7.9

Central government finances (fiscal year) 2/
Total revenue and grants
Of which: South African Customs Union (SACU) receipts
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure and net lending
Central government balance (including grants)
Primary balance (including grants)
Government debt 3/

26.3
12.4
30.8
23.4
-4.5
-3.3
21.9

26.3
12.6
29.0
23.1
-2.7
-1.6
19.9

29.3
16.8
33.6
26.0
-4.3
-3.3
18.0

30.7
17.8
35.0
27.1
-4.3
-2.7
21.9

29.0
16.0
34.3
26.5
-5.4
-3.9
25.2

28.2
15.3
34.5
26.7
-6.2
-4.6
29.5

28.1
15.2
34.7
26.9
-6.6
-4.7
35.0

28.0
15.1
35.1
27.2
-7.0
-4.8
40.1

External sector
Current account balance
Trade balance (merchandise goods)
Capital and financial account balance
Overall balance
External debt

4.8
7.6
-6.6
-2.2
29.4

1.9
2.2
-3.7
-2.3
21.7

1.6
-1.3
0.4
-0.7
22.6

-1.6
-3.9
0.1
-0.7
21.6

-2.4
-4.0
1.7
-0.7
23.5

-3.0
-3.8
1.5
-1.5
25.8

-3.1
-3.6
1.4
-1.7
27.9

-3.7
-3.7
1.3
-2.4
30.1

12,560
-25
260
2.7
217
2.3
351

14,422
-21
265
1.9
212
1.5
413

16,262
45
262
1.3
258
1.3
571

17,363
-32
230
1.1
226
1.1
589

18,467
-20
205
0.9
200
0.9
650

19,536
-41
162
0.7
158
0.7
735

20,531
-50
111
0.5
107
0.5
822

21,467
-72
38
0.2
33
0.1
908

Memorandum items:
GDP in current prices (in millions of emalangeni) 4/
Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Net official international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Total external debt (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Swazi authorities; and staff projections.
1/ IMF Information Notice System trade-weighted; end of period.
2/ The fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
3/ Reflecting the effects of several factors including exchange rate movements.
4/ Under review by the CSO; data on indirect taxes used for estimation of GDP may contain errors and are subject to downward revisions based on the review.

- 26 -

Table 2. Swaziland: Summary of Central Government Operations, 2003/04-2009/10 1/
2003/04 2004/05
Est.

2005/06 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Budget

Proj.

(In millions of emalangeni)
Total revenue and grants
Tax revenue
SACU receipts
Non-SACU revenue
Nontax revenue

3,908
3,661
1,878
1,782
110

4,842
4,628
2,773
1,855
98

5,050
4,861
2,796
2,065
114

5,417
5,202
3,137
2,065
114

5,440
5,212
3,018
2,194
121

5,605
5,364
3,047
2,317
128

5,862
5,609
3,177
2,432
134

6,109
5,844
3,301
2,543
140

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest payments
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditure
Net lending

4,314
3,437
1,669
1,003
174
592
818
59

5,554
4,295
1,964
1,421
168
742
1,259
3

5,943
4,561
2,642
916
254
749
1,382
0

6,168
4,786
2,642
1,016
279
849
1,382
0

6,433
4,965
2,806
973
284
902
1,468
0

6,824
5,274
2,963
1,027
331
952
1,550
0

7,215
5,589
3,110
1,078
401
999
1,627
0

7,612
5,910
3,253
1,128
485
1,045
1,701
0

Primary balance
Overall balance (including grants)
Overall balance (excluding grants)

-232
-406
-543

-544
-712
-828

-639
-893
-968

-472
-751
-852

-708
-992
-1,100

-888
-1,218
-1,332

-953
-1,353
-1,472

-1,018
-1,503
-1,627

406
77
329

712
255
457

893
100
793

751
150
601

992
200
792

1,218
250
968

1,353
250
1,103

1,503
250
1,253

2,955
2,455
500

3,102
2,462
640

4,005
2,887
1,118

3,857
2,887
970

4,716
3,460
1,256

5,815
4,059
1,756

7,235
4,815
2,419

8,653
5,469
3,184

Financing
Foreign (net)
Domestic (net) 2/
Government debt
Foreign
Domestic

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
Total revenue and grants
Tax revenue
SACU receipts
Non-SACU revenue
Nontax revenue
Grants

26.3
24.6
12.6
12.0
0.7
0.9

29.3
28.0
16.8
11.2
0.6
0.7

28.6
27.6
15.8
11.7
0.6
0.4

30.7
29.5
17.8
11.7
0.6
0.6

29.0
27.8
16.1
11.7
0.6
0.6

28.3
27.1
15.4
11.7
0.6
0.6

28.2
27.0
15.3
11.7
0.6
0.6

28.1
26.9
15.2
11.7
0.6
0.6

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Of which:
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest payments
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditure

29.0
23.1

33.6
26.0

33.7
25.9

35.0
27.1

34.3
26.5

34.5
26.7

34.7
26.9

35.1
27.2

11.2
6.7
1.2
4.0
5.5

11.9
8.6
1.0
4.5
7.6

15.0
5.2
1.4
4.2
7.8

15.0
5.8
1.6
4.8
7.8

15.0
5.2
1.5
4.8
7.8

15.0
5.2
1.7
4.8
7.8

15.0
5.2
1.9
4.8
7.8

15.0
5.2
2.2
4.8
7.8

Primary balance
Overall balance (including grants)
Overall balance (excluding grants)

-1.6
-2.7
-3.7

-3.3
-4.3
-5.0

-3.6
-5.1
-5.5

-2.7
-4.3
-4.8

-3.8
-5.3
-5.9

-4.5
-6.2
-6.7

-4.6
-6.5
-7.1

-4.7
-6.9
-7.5

2.7
0.5

4.3
1.5

5.1
0.6

4.3
0.9

5.3
1.1

6.2
1.3

6.5
1.2

6.9
1.2

Domestic (net)

2.2

2.8

4.5

3.4

4.2

4.9

5.3

5.8

Government debt
Foreign
Domestic

19.9
16.5
3.4

18.8
14.9
3.9

22.7
16.4
6.3

21.9
16.4
5.5

25.2
18.5
6.7

29.4
20.5
8.9

34.8
23.2
11.7

39.8
25.2
14.7

0.8
14,882
48.6

2.0
16,538
45.7

...
17,639
57.9

...
17,639
55.2

...
18,734
56.5

...
19,785
56.2

...
20,765
55.7

...
21,716
55.0

Financing
Foreign (net)

Memorandum items:
Payment arrears
GDP at current prices (in millions of emalangeni)
Wages and salaries (in percent of current expenditure)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff projections.
1/ Without corrective policy measures. The fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31.
2/ Including domestic payment arrears estimated at 2 percent of GDP for 2004/05. For 2005/06 onwards, including financing gaps.

- 27 -

Table 3. Swaziland: Monetary Survey, 2001-2005
2001

2002

1/

2003

2004

2005
Sept.

(In millions of Emalangeni)
Monetary authorities
Net foreign assets
Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS)
Of which : Capital Investment Fund (CIF), managed by CBS.
Government
Net domestic assets
Central government (net)
CBS claims on government
Government deposits with CBS
Domestic
Foreign 2/
Private sector
Commercial banks (net)
Other items (net)
Reserve money

2,771
2,389
1,537
382
-2,517
-2,112
0
-2,112
-193
-1,919
15
0
-420
254

1,873
1,863
1,220
10
-1,544
-1,300
57
-1,357
-127
-1,230
13
0
-257
329

1,405
1,378
713
27
-975
-1,031
83
-1,113
-374
-739
12
0
44
430

1,450
1,243
667
207
-973
-933
252
-1,185
-311
-874
10
0
-50
477

1,461
1,452
569
9
-973
-864
187
-1,051
-473
-578
8
0
-117
488

Commercial banks
Net foreign assets
Reserves
Domestic credit
Central government (net)
Claims on Government
Government deposits
Private sector
Other items (net)
Private sector deposits

866
110
1,443
60
60
0
1,384
-332
2,086

715
176
1,985
215
215
0
1,770
-519
2,357

469
194
2,614
286
287
0
2,328
-613
2,664

490
211
3,344
331
332
2
3,013
-1,100
2,946

304
211
3,836
326
345
19
3,510
-1,275
3,076

Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
Domestic credit
Central government (net)
Private sector
Other items (net)

3,636
-654
-2,053
1,399
-681

2,588
699
-1,084
1,783
-685

1,874
1,595
-744
2,340
-500

1,941
2,421
-602
3,023
-1,084

1,765
2,980
-538
3,518
-1,308

Broad money
Currency in circulation 3/
Deposits

2,301
135
2,166

2,602
155
2,447

2,969
213
2,756

3,278
236
3,042

3,437
271
3,166

(Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money) 4/
Broad money
Net foreign assets
Domestic credit
Central government (net)
Private sector
Other items (net)
Memorandum items:
Currency/broad money (percent)
Reserve money/deposits (percent)
Money multiplier (broad money/reserve money)
Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS); and Fund staff estimates.
1/ End-of-year data.
2/ Counterpart of government external assets in rand and in CIF.
3/ Excludes rand in circulation.
4/ For September 2005, change from December 2004.

10.7
42.1
-9.9
-16.7
6.8
-21.5

13.1
-45.5
58.8
42.1
16.7
-0.1

14.1
-27.5
34.5
13.1
21.4
7.1

10.4
2.2
27.8
4.8
23.0
-19.6

4.9
-5.4
17.1
2.0
15.1
-6.8

5.9
11.7
9.1

6.0
13.5
7.9

7.2
15.6
6.9

7.2
15.7
6.9

7.9
15.4
7.0

- 28 -

Table 4. Swaziland: Commercial Banks' Performance Ratios, Dec. 2003 - Sept. 2005

2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

2005
Sept.

(In percent)
Performance Ratios
Basle capital ratio (Tier 1)
Basle capital ratio (Tier 2)
Asset Quality
Loans to deposit ratio 1/
Earning assets to total assets
Nonperforming loans to total loans 1/
Reserve for losses to total loans
Liquidity Ratios
Liquid assets to total deposits
Available reserves to total deposits
Liquid assets to total assets
Profitability Ratios
Net income to average total assets (Return on Assets)
Net income to average total equity (Return on Equity)
Total expenses to total income

14
20

14
16

15
17

75
90
2
9

73
87
3
8

83
92
2
7

19
18
14

18
19
14

17
20
13

4
29
60

3
20
64

3
20
68

Source: Central Bank of Swaziland.
1/ Excluding the Swaziland Development and Savings Bank, which is owned by the government and
offers both development finance and commercial banking services after its recapitalization and relaunch
by the government in 2001.

- 29 -

Table 5. Swaziland: Balance of Payments, 2003-2009 1/
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified)

2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

2009

36.4

40.0

-43.5

-65.8

-84.2

-91.5

-112.7

42.8
1,484.9
-1,442.1

-32.0
1,877.9
-1,909.9

-104.4
1,889.3
-1,993.7

-111.0
1,964.6
-2,075.5

-106.9
1,923.1
-2,029.9

-105.7
2,014.2
-2,119.9

-110.3
2,071.9
-2,182.2

-49.3
156.5
-205.7

-52.4
482.3
-534.7

-86.6
495.8
-582.4

-89.8
513.9
-603.7

-87.3
499.7
-587.0

-92.2
527.4
-619.6

-94.5
540.5
-635.0

-6.5

-84.4

-191.0

-200.8

-194.2

-197.9

-204.8

-3.6
143.5
-147.1
-18.1

31.9
160.8
-128.9
-24.9

25.3
162.6
-137.3
-28.7

30.3
171.7
-141.4
-32.9

22.9
168.5
-145.6
-36.7

27.7
178.1
-150.4
-41.1

21.7
175.6
-153.9
-45.4

46.4
145.4
-99.0

92.4
213.0
-120.6

122.3
255.3
-133.1

104.6
246.4
-141.7

87.0
238.8
-151.8

78.7
242.9
-164.2

70.4
247.1
-176.7

-28.5

28.7

23.4

45.7

42.8

41.5

40.2

0.0

-0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-28.5
-70.7
-2.2
44.4

29.2
64.9
-11.0
-24.7

23.4
51.4
-3.2
-24.8

45.7
53.4
-2.8
-4.9

42.8
51.6
-2.8
-6.0

41.5
49.8
-2.9
-5.4

40.2
48.2
-3.0
-4.9

Errors and omissions

-28.8

-23.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

-20.9

45.3

-20.1

-20.1

-41.5

-50.0

-72.5

1.9
-0.3
-3.7
211.5
1.5
264.8
1.9

1.6
-3.3
2.6
257.6
1.3
261.8
1.3

-1.6
-7.1
1.9
225.9
1.1
230.2
1.1

-2.4
-7.3
1.9
200.3
0.9
204.5
0.9

-3.0
-6.8
1.8
157.7
0.7
161.9
0.7

-3.1
-6.7
1.7
106.7
0.5
110.9
0.5

-3.7
-6.8
1.6
33.3
0.1
37.5
0.2

1.1
412.9
352.2
60.7
21.7
1,907
6.64
7.56

1.1
571.0
501.0
70.0
22.6
2,521
5.63
6.45

1.2
589.4
525.5
63.9
21.9
2,686
6.33
6.36

1.3
649.7
581.5
68.3
23.5
2,765
6.73
6.64

1.5
734.6
657.1
77.5
25.8
2,847
6.82
6.82

1.6
821.5
733.9
87.6
27.9
2,943
6.94
6.94

1.7
907.6
808.9
98.6
30.1
3,010
7.09
7.09

Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Services (net)
Exports of services
Imports of services
Goods and services balance
Income (net)
Income (credits)
Income (debits)
Of which : interest
Transfers (net)
Official sector (mainly SACU receipts) 2/
Private sector

Capital and financial account balance
Capital account balance
Financial account balance (excluding reserve assets)
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Other investment

Memorandum items:
Current account/GDP (in percent)
Goods and services balance/GDP (in percent)
Direct Investment/GDP (in percent)
Net official reserves (end of period)
In months of imports of goods and services
Gross official reserves (end of period)
In months of imports of goods and services
External debt service (in percent of exports of goods
and services)
Total external debt
Public
Private
Total external debt/GDP (in percent)
GDP at current prices (at market exchange rates)
Lilangeni per U.S. dollar (end of period)
Lilangeni per U.S. dollar (period average)
Sources: Central Bank of Swaziland; and staff projections.
1/ Without corrective policy measures.
2/ SACU: Southern African Customs Union.

- 30 -

Table 6. Swaziland: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2000-2005
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Aug.

Financial indicators
Public sector debt 1/
Broad money (M2; percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)
Ratio of domestic credit to GDP
Treasury-bill yield 2/
Treasury-bill yield (real) 3/

154.0
-6.6
5.7
99.6
8.3
1.9

230.5
10.7
5.0
115.7
7.2
-3.6

239.6
13.1
28.3
172.1
8.6
-2.9

147.7
14.1
32.8
142.1
10.6
6.0

109.9
10.4
30.2
143.1
7.9
4.7

...
12.6
14.3
...
6.8
...

External indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) 4/
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) 4/
Terms of trade (percent change, 12-month basis)
Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance
Of which : inward portfolio investment (debt securities, etc.)
other investment (loans, trade credits, etc.)
inward foreign direct investment
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets of the banking sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign liabilities of the banking sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net foreign assests of the banking sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official reserves in months of imports of goods and services
Ratio of reserve money to reserves (in percent)
Ratio of broad money to reserves (in percent)
Ratio of reserves to short-term debt (in percent)
Total short-term external debt to net reserves
Total external debt
Ratio of total external debt to exports of goods and services (in percent)
Nominal exchange rate (lilangeni per U.S. dollar; period average)

12.7
7.1
-3.8
-5.4
11.6
0.0
20.0
45.6
338.5
86.4
14.3
72.1
3.0
10.8
81.1
54.7
...
195.0
31.6
6.9

2.0
0.0
0.5
-4.5
-7.6
0.0
33.8
19.4
267.4
73.6
2.2
71.4
2.4
7.8
71.0
57.6
...
277.4
24.9
8.6

-2.0
-15.8
-0.7
4.8
-24.0
0.0
92.8
78.4
259.5
91.6
8.8
82.8
2.7
14.7
116.1
44.5
...
253.8
30.9
10.5

65.9
58.9
-1.5
6.2
6.9
0.0
-0.5
-24.2
264.8
78.5
7.8
70.7
1.8
24.5
168.9
35.4
...
143.8
21.9
7.6

29.9
35.7
0.6
4.6
-23.6
0.0
-0.2
17.5
261.8
94.4
7.3
87.1
1.3
32.4
222.4
26.0
...
127.5
23.4
6.4

Financial market indicator
Stock market index (e.o.p.)

138.0

205.7

165.9

153.6

157.4

...

Memorandum items:
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Nominal exchange rate (lilangeni/U.S. dollar, end-of-period)

1,390
7.57

1,261
12.13

1,194
8.64

1,907
6.64

2,521
5.63

...
...

1/ National government debt.
2/ End of period.
3/ Backward-looking with actual CPI.
4/ Customs-based data, in current U.S. dollar prices.

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
262.0
64.6
10.0
54.6
1.1
26.5
203.6
28.1
...
...
...
6.3 (Jan-Oct 05)

- 31 Table 7: Swaziland: Millennium Development Indicators, 1990 - 2003
1990

1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 a day (%)
Poverty gap at $1 a day (%)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%
Prevalence of child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)

..
..
..
..
10.0

4. Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12 months)
5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% ages 15-49) 1/
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

2002

2003

..
..
2.7
16.0

..
..
..
10.3
12.0

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
91.2

..
..
..

94.4
101.8
31.6
3.0

..
..
31.3
3.0

2015 target: raise net enrollment to 100
87.9
76.2
85.1

93.7
74.4
88.0

76.7
73.9
90.8

2015 target: raise education ratio to 100

3. Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

2001

2015 target: halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates

2. Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (%)
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)

1995

96.2
100.9
35.1
..

95.4
101.5
33.2
3.0

93.5
101.8
29.6
..

2015 target: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds from 1990 level
110.0
77.0
85.0

110.0
78.0
94.0

142.0
101.0
72.0

149.0
106.0
72.0

153.0
105.0
94.0

2015 target: reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
..
..

..
56.0

370.0
70.0

..
..

..
..

2015 target: halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

39.5
..
35,000.0
989.0
..

..
..
..
996.8
33.7

38.8
..
65000.0
1082.9
34.6

27.0
..
..
0.6
..
..
..

..
2.3
..
0.5
..
..
..

30.3
2.0
..
0.4
..
..

..
3.5
..
..
52.0
52.0

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
17.2
..

43.6
23.2
..

..
85.3
15.7

..
95.0
24.2

..
128.54
28.74

71.6
5.3
56.6
5.7

76.0
4.9
57.6
4.0

80.3
4.4
45.4
2.2

80.9
4.2
43.7
2.0

..
4.20
43.7
1.43

7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation (% of population)
Access to secure tenure (% of population)
8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (% of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Adult literacy rate (% of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Aid (% of GNI)
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators Database, 2005.

- 32 -

APPENDIX I

Swaziland: Relations with the Fund
(As of November 30, 2005)
I.

Membership Status:

Joined September 22, 1969;

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR Million

% Quota

50.70
44.15
6.56

100.0
87.1
12.9

SDR Million

% Allocation

6.43
2.48

100.0
38.5

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Article VIII

Projected Payments to the Fund:
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0.12
0.12

0.12
0.12

0.12
0.12

0.12
0.12

0.12
0.12

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not applicable

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement

The lilangeni (plural: emalangeni) continues to be pegged at parity to the South African rand,
which – alongside with the Lilangeni – is also legal tender. The intervention currency is the
U.S. dollar; exchange rates for the U.S. dollar are based on the floating middle rate of the
South African rand against the U.S. dollar. The rate on Dec. 31, 2005 was E 1 = US$ 0.1581.
VIII.

Article IV Consultation

Swaziland is on the standard 12-month cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions
were held in Mbabane in October/November 2004. The staff report (www.imf.org) was
considered by the Executive Board on February 18, 2005.

- 33 -

IX.

APPENDIX I

Technical Assistance

FAD provided technical assistance in 1997 to Swaziland on tax reform. A technical
assistance mission visited Swaziland in 1999 to advise on a new income tax bill.
In 1998, LEG assisted Swaziland in drafting a new income tax bill and amendments to the
Sales Tax Act. In January 2004, LEG carried out a Legislative Draft/FIU Mission to
Swaziland. In March 2004, LEG and MFD carried out a joint mission on AML/CFT at the
Central Bank of Swaziland, and in May 2004, a follow up mission was undertaken on
Legislative drafting /FIU.
MFD (then MAE) provided technical assistance in 1997 to assist in the drafting of the
Financial Institutions Act, and, in 1998, MFD provided an advisor to strengthen bank
supervision at the Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS). Until January 2000, MFD had provided
a long-term general advisor to the CBS. A multi-topic mission visited Mbabane in
February 2003 to provide technical assistance in further strengthening the CBS and the
financial system, focusing on monetary and foreign exchange operations, development of the
government securities market, the payment system, and banking supervision. A follow-up
mission in July 2003 provided advice on implementing some of the recommendations
regarding the development of the government securities market, and the strengthening
monetary and foreign exchange operations at the CBS. In March 2004, a mission on
AML/CFT for the central bank was undertaken, and in July a workshop for Senior Bank
Supervisors in East and Central Africa was undertaken. In July, MFD participated in a
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST) Initiative to develop a single
supervisory body for most non-bank financial institutions in Swaziland. While it is not a
Fund-led project, MFD is assisting the FIRST Initiative in overseeing the project. Following
a TA mission on foreign exchange operations and foreign exchange reserves management in
January 2005, a long-term resident expert will advise the CBS on reserves management (now
scheduled for Oct. 2005 – April 2006). A multi-topic mission took place in November 2005,
to follow up on central bank accounting, central bank organization and financial sector
supervision.
An STA mission visited Swaziland in 1998 with the objectives of identifying weaknesses in
the statistical system and assisting in capacity building, particularly relating to the national
accounts and other real sector data. An STA mission visited Swaziland in April 1999 to assist
with balance of payments statistics; another STA mission also visited Swaziland in
April 1999 to establish an action plan for improving government finance statistics. An initial
mission in July 2002 made progress with the implementation of GDDS. It was followed by a
GFS mission in July 2003. In 2004, STA GDDS related missions took place in June-July
(Government Finance Statistics), July (National Accounts Statistics), and October
(Consumer Prices); a follow-up mission on consumer prices took place in September 2005.
X.

Resident Representative

None

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

Swaziland: Relations with the World Bank Group
(As of December 2005)
Since 1962 the World Bank Group has approved 17 IBRD loans, two IDA credits, and seven IFC
investments (loans and equity) for a total of US$136.9 million. Total IDA commitments amounted to
US$8.4 million; IBRD commitments amounted to US$104.8 million (of which US$97.1 million was
disbursed, US$4.4 million was cancelled). The IDA/IBRD assistance has been for a broad range of
operation in several sectors: roads, education, power, water supply/sewerage, rural and urban
development, and development finance.
The last CAS for Swaziland was approved by the Board of Directors in 1994. Currently there are no
loans for Swaziland. The last operation, an IBRD loan for an Urban Development Project
(US$29 million) closed in March 2005, achieving its development objectives despite long preparation
and implementation delays. An Implementation Completion Report (October 2005) could serve as a
basis for a follow up project. Two projects managed under the Cities Alliance facility, focus on slumupgrading and housing finance. The Mbabane Upgrading and Finance Project is developing a plan to
upgrade all informal settlements in the city, and the African Union Housing Finance Initiative aims to
increase access to housing institutions to develop appropriate finance products to support upgrading
activities.
Recent assistance has focused on providing policy advice and conducting a range of analytical
economic and sector work (ESW), including the on-going Public Expenditure Review (PER),
financial sector study, education sector reform analysis with strong emphasis on the effect of HIV on
education of orphans and vulnerable children; reviews of the regulatory framework for public utilities
and services; and PPIAF study on the railway regulatory framework with view of advising on
concession strategy and model. Preparatory work is well advanced for a GEF-funded project for
Biodiversity Conservation and Participatory Development (BCPD).
The Bank has been providing assistance through an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) Grant to
assist the NERCHA (National Emergency Response Committee for HIV/AIDS) in capacity building,
monitoring and evaluation of HIV/AIDS programs. Since FY03 under special arrangements, and for
the first time ever, the Bank has been providing technical assistance (TA) to assist Swaziland in the
implementation of its national programs and use of Global Fund resources, working in close
cooperation and coordination with all donors active in Swaziland.
IFC: The committed portfolio in Swaziland amounts to $10.6 million (5 projects) including projects
in textiles, food and beverage, pulp and paper, chemicals as well as finance and insurance.
MIGA: Swaziland joined MIGA in 1990. The outstanding portfolio consists of two contracts of
guarantee in the infrastructure sector with a total gross exposure of US$46.6 million and a net
exposure of US$23.3 million. The estimated total amount of foreign direct investment facilitated by
MIGA in Swaziland is $84.4 million.
WBI: Swaziland is not actively targeted by WBI programs, but has been invited to send participants
(between 40 and 50 a year) to events held in other countries. In FY05, the largest participations were
in Trade (13), Public-private Partnerships in Infrastructure (12), and Private Sector Development (7),
for a total of 52 participants for the year.

- 35 -

APPENDIX III

Swaziland: Statistical Issues
Deficiencies in the quality of economic data are pervasive and hamper internal policymaking
and effective surveillance. The authorities provide available data to the Fund with a lag of
1 to 2 months, except for the national accounts and international trade data, which are
reported with irregular periodicity and substantial lags, and are subject to frequent revisions.
As one of fifteen countries participating in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System
(GDDS) Project for Anglophone African Countries, Swaziland has undertaken to use the
GDDS as a framework for the development of national statistical systems. The Anglophone
Africa project (funded by the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID)) aims
to assist participating countries to implement plans for improvement identified in the
metadata, to meet GDDS recommended statistical practices. GDDS metadata for Swaziland
were posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board on February 11, 2003.
These metadata, except for the financial sector, were updated in October 2005.
Real sector
National accounts suffer from serious shortcomings. For example, data on GDP by sector of
origin are available in current prices only up to 2001; data on GDP by expenditure at
constant prices are not available. For national accounts data, missions rely on estimates
provided by the Central Statistical Office (CSO). Another shortcoming is that unemployment
data are not reported on a regular basis. A follow-up STA GDDS mission in July 2004
assisted in improving national accounts by reviewing existing data and methodologies and
developing new data sources. The CSO is currently revising its GDP series, to address
serious inconsistencies noted during the 2005 Article IV consultation discussions.
Prices
The consumer price index (CPI) was significantly revised in 1998. Monthly consumer price
data are published by the CSO with a one-month lag. For International Financial Statistics
(IFS) purposes, the CPI is reported for the all-income group. Swaziland has received
technical assistance on CPI compilation in the context of the GDDS initiative.
Government finance statistics
Fiscal data are provided to AFR staff only during missions and/or following budget
announcements. Missions in 2003 and 2004 under the GDDS Project for Anglophone Africa
reviewed the compilation of fiscal statistics and introduced the GFSM 2001 framework. A
mission in November 2005 reviewed progress implementing the recommendations of these
missions, and made further recommendations to improve the coverage, classification, and
dissemination of fiscal statistics. In addition, a detailed action plan for GFS-related work, and
a plan for increasing adoption of the GFSM 2001 methodology were prepared. The Ministry

- 36 -

APPENDIX III

of Finance reported fiscal data for 2001-03 to STA, in GFSM 2001 format, for publication in
the 2005 GFS Yearbook.
Monetary statistics
The Central Bank of Swaziland (CBS) reports monetary and financial statistics (MFS) to
STA on a timely and regular basis. The monetary statistics technical assistance mission
conducted in November 2004 concluded that, although some progress had been made in
commercial bank data reporting, several problems in the classification and sectorization of
the CBS accounts remained. Moreover, the Swaziland Building Society (SBS) was not yet
reporting data to be included in the coverage of the other depository corporations. The
mission made recommendations on the classification of the CBS accounts and assisted the
authorities in improving the report forms and accompanying instructions for commercial
banks and the Swaziland Building Society to report monetary data to the CBS. The mission
assisted in developing the standardized forms for reporting monetary statistics to STA that
could serve as the basis to set up an integrated database for monetary statistics to be used by
STA, AFR, and the authorities. A follow-up mission is scheduled for March 2006 to review
and finalize the new depository corporations survey, covering the commercial banks and
Swaziland Building Society, and finalize the monetary statistics integrated database. An
MFD multi-topic mission scheduled in November 2005 addressed central bank accounting
issues.
Balance of payments statistics
The CSO publishes data on foreign trade on a quarterly basis, but the lack of sufficient
computer resources continues to result in long lags in the production of trade data, especially
regarding imports. Missions use trade data provided by the CBS. The CBS publishes balance
of payments statistics on a half-yearly and annual basis. It now adheres to a methodology
consistent with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. However, there is a
need to examine the quality and coverage of data for all components of the balance of
payments. Though a new BOP reporting system was launched in October 2003, this measure
has not translated into improved timeliness and availability of data.
An IMF technical assistance mission in October 2005 focused on the development of
quarterly balance of payments statistics, harmonization of treatment of SACU and pension
transactions, clarification of the legal basis for balance of payments data collection, ways to
increase private sector response, and improvement of data on Swazis working abroad and
tourism.

- 37 -

APPENDIX III

SWAZILAND: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(As of January 9, 2006)
Date of
latest
observation

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
Publication
6

Exchange Rates

Jan 2006

Jan 2006

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

Nov 2005

Jan 2006

M

Q

Q

Reserve/Base Money

Nov 2005

Jan 2006

M

Q

Q

Broad Money

Nov 2005

Jan 2006

M

Q

Q

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Nov 2005

Jan 2006

M

Q

Q

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Nov 2005

Jan 2006

M

Q

Q

Dec 2005

Jan 2005

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

Oct 2005

Dec 2005

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

Aug 2005

Nov 2005

M

I

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

Aug 2005

Nov 2005

M

I

A

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

April 2005

Oct 2005

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

2004

Nov 2005

Q

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2004

Nov 2005

Q

A

A

GDP/GNP

2004

Nov 2005

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

Mar 2005

Oct 2005

A

A

A

Interest Rates

1

Date
received

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA).
2

- 38 -

APPENDIX IV

Swaziland: Social and Demographic Indicators
Area (sq. km.)
Population

17,364
1.1 million

Population
Population growth rate
Life expectancy at birth (in years)
Infant mortality rate (per thousand)
Urban Population (% total)
Population younger than 15
(in percent of total population)
GDP per capita (in US dollars)
Access to safe water (2002)
Percent of total population
urban
rural

Population Density (per sq. km.)

64.3

Health
1.6
33
105
27.4
42.1

1,722

52
87
42

Population per physician (2000)
Public health expenditure (2002,
in percent of GDP)
HIV prevalence rate (ages 15-49)

5,675
3.6
39

Education (2002)
Adult literacy rate (in percent)
Primary school enrollment
(net, in percent)

80.9
75.3

Poverty Indicators (1994)
Labor Statistics (in thousands)
Labor Force
Formal Employment (thousands)
Private Sector
Public Sector

410

Share of income, lowest 20 percent
(in percent)
GINI Index

2.1
61

94
60
33

Sources: International Financial Statistics; World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2005,
United Nations, World Population Prospects, 2004 Revision; and national authorities. Data refer
to 2003, unless otherwise indicated.

- 39 -

APPENDIX V

Debt Sustainability Analysis
Swaziland’s Debt: Total public debt is estimated at 22 percent of GDP by end-2005, of which
external debt accounted for 17 percent of GDP.25 Most of the public external debt is owed to
bilateral and multilateral creditors, with maturities ranging from 15 – 20 years. The largest portfolio
of debt is owed to the African Development Bank. Since 2001, external debt has declined, falling
from 25 percent of GDP. However, the decline is not the result of fiscal adjustment, but mainly
reflects an appreciation of the exchange rate.
Debt Sustainability Analysis: The analysis covered the years 1994 – 2004 and 2005-2010. The
main assumptions are that, without policy reforms, annual real GDP growth would decline
gradually from about 2.1 percent during 2004 to below one percent by 2010. The nominal exchange
rate will depreciate by an average of 2.3 percent per year during the period. In line with
developments in South Africa, the GDP deflator will increase by an average of 5 percent. Nominal
external interest rate will average 9.7 percent during the period. Import and exports will maintain
their trend growth of 3.0 and 2.6 percent per annum, respectively, while the noninterest current
account will average 1.0 percent.
The Result: Based on current fiscal trends, public debt would rise to 44 percent of GDP by 2010,
and the external debt-to-GDP ratio to 24.2 percent in 2010. Gross external financing needs26 rises
from US$68 million in 2005 to US$147 million or 4.6 percent of GDP by the end of the projection
period. While in the historical period, the main driver of the debt dynamics was the exchange rate,
variations in the interest rate, and the feedback from higher debt to higher interest payments are the
key determinants of the outcome during the projection period.
Sensitivity Analysis: Under a scenario that assumes that the key variables are at their historical
averages in 2005-10, public debt declines to 14.5 percent of GDP and external debt to 5.4 percent of
GDP by end 2010. This reflects the recent deteriorations in the fiscal balance, and the fact that
Swaziland’s terms of trade were, on average, more favorable in 1995-2004. External debt appears
most sensitive to a current account shock: the debt ratio increases to 35.1 percent by the end of the
projection period, the highest under any of the stress tests. Changes in Swaziland’s terms of trade
can also have a significant effect on external debt – a deterioration in the terms of trade of 5 percent
could result in an increase in the external debt ratio of over 5 percent of GDP by end-2009.

25

Not including domestic arrears, for which reliable data do not exist, and which are estimated at around
2 percent of GDP at end-2004/05.
26

Includes scheduled interest payments and amortization, and the noninterest current account.

1.6
4.8
-6.0
-37.6
10.8
4.2
2.2

2.9
5.8
-6.8
40.4
12.6
2.0
3.4

6.4
0.1

83.5

-4.0
-5.8
3.4
27.3
30.7
-9.2
-2.3
-1.7
-0.7
-6.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8

22.8
20.3

Actual
2002

2.4
6.1
-6.0
30.1
12.1
-4.1
1.6

5.7
0.1

72.1

-3.3
-4.4
1.6
27.1
28.7
-6.1
-1.7
-1.3
-0.5
-4.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.2

19.5
16.2

2003

2.1
6.0
2.6
17.9
3.4
25.8
3.3

8.1
0.2

57.2

-2.5
1.0
3.3
29.8
33.1
-2.4
0.1
0.5
-0.4
-2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-3.5

17.0
13.6

2004

1.8
10.1
5.6
...
4.5
4.7
2.7

21.7
21.7

9.4
0.3

69.5

4.6
3.3
2.7
31.2
33.9
0.6
0.6
0.9
-0.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3

21.7
16.4

2005

1.0
7.6
1.8
...
5.8
-1.3
3.9

19.8
21.4

12.1
0.3

85.2

3.3
4.1
3.9
29.4
33.3
0.1
0.1
0.3
-0.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

25.0
18.8

2006

1.0
7.2
1.6
...
5.5
0.1
4.6

17.9
23.6

13.8
0.4

101.3

3.9
4.8
4.6
28.6
33.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
-0.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.8

29.0
20.7

0.9
7.1
2.2
...
5.0
0.0
4.7

16.7
26.2

16.1
0.5

118.5

4.8
5.0
4.7
28.5
33.2
0.3
0.3
0.6
-0.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

33.7
22.7

Projections
2007
2008

0.9
7.1
2.6
...
4.5
0.1
4.8

15.4
28.9

19.2
0.6

136.7

5.1
5.3
4.8
28.4
33.2
0.5
0.5
0.8
-0.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

38.8
24.7

2009

0.9
6.5
2.0
...
4.5
0.1
4.8

14.5
31.7

22.2
0.7

155.1

5.2
5.2
4.8
28.4
33.2
0.4
0.4
0.7
-0.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

44.0
26.6

2010

1/ Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

Source: Staff simulations

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005-2010

2.6
3.7
-8.0
-18.7
11.6
-3.6
0.8

4.8
0.1

3.5
0.0

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

93.4

75.8

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

4.6
12.7
2.2
28.7
30.9
10.5
-1.5
-1.2
-0.3
12.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-8.1

1.9
2.9
0.8
29.3
30.1
2.1
-1.9
-1.5
-0.5
4.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.1

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

26.8
26.1

22.2
21.5

2001

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2000

Table V.1. Swaziland: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

-1.1
0.7

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
0.9

- 40 APPENDIX V

2.9
-7.9
5.2
-2.0
-15.8
6.2
7.5

2.4
55.8
9.7
44.8
44.9
3.1
-3.7

2.1
21.3
8.0
43.8
48.4
2.6
2.6

2.0
4.8
12.1
1.1
5.4
0.0
1.9

1.0
2.4
9.5
3.9
4.0
-0.8
1.9

19.6

15.4

92.1
3.3

21.0

2.0
0.3
0.8
7.2
88.9
96.1
-1.9
1.4
1.5
-0.2
...
1.7

18.7

2006

1.0
2.7
9.3
-2.2
-2.3
-1.2
1.8

22.4

13.5

119.5
4.1

24.6

1.9
0.9
1.2
6.7
83.8
90.5
-1.8
1.5
1.7
-0.2
...
0.9

20.6

2007

0.9
3.2
9.8
4.9
4.7
-1.1
1.7

25.9

12.0

137.4
4.6

27.3

2.5
1.2
1.1
6.6
84.3
90.9
-1.7
1.7
1.9
-0.2
...
1.3

23.0

0.9
2.3
9.9
2.8
2.8
-1.4
1.5

28.8

9.2

170.9
5.5

29.5

1.8
1.9
1.4
6.6
84.0
90.6
-1.5
2.0
2.2
-0.2
...
-0.1

24.8

0.9
2.4
9.7
5.8
3.8
-0.3
1.4

29.5

5.4

146.7
4.6

28.1

-0.7
1.0
0.3
5.0
86.0
91.0
-1.4
2.1
2.3
-0.2
...
-1.7

24.2

Estimates/Projections
2008
2009
2010

0.0

-3.7

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
0.0

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
ε = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and α = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

Source: Staff simulations

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
1.6
-10.7
3.6
2.0
0.0
-3.6
3.7

67.5
2.5

18.8

2.4
-0.6
0.0
7.1
88.5
95.6
-1.9
1.3
1.6
-0.3
...
3.0

16.7

2005

16.7

20.9
0.8

15.2

-2.8
-7.4
-2.6
3.3
93.6
97.0
-2.6
-2.2
1.1
-0.3
-3.0
4.6

14.2

2004

Terms of trade deteriorate by 5 percent

24.5
1.3

19.8

-2.9
-5.6
-3.1
0.3
86.1
86.4
3.7
-6.2
1.2
-0.3
-7.1
2.8

17.0

2003

16.7

0.6
0.0

21.0

-4.6
-11.0
-6.2
0.3
94.9
95.2
-7.5
2.7
1.3
-0.7
2.1
6.4

19.9

Actual
2002

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/

2.6
-1.7
3.2
12.7
7.1
-4.7
5.3

102.8
8.2

110.3
7.9

Gross external financing need (in millions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

26.7

28.8

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

1.0
3.3
3.6
15.4
91.8
107.1
-3.7
3.3
0.9
-0.4
2.8
-2.2

2.7
-0.1
4.7
15.6
81.6
97.2
-5.3
0.5
0.7
-0.5
0.4
2.8

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

24.5

23.5

2001

Baseline: External debt

2000

Table V.2. Swaziland: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000-2010
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

- 41 APPENDIX V

- 42 -

APPENDIX VI

Medium-Term Scenarios
The mission analyzed two scenarios for the medium-term economic outlook: a “baseline” scenario
that assumes unchanged policies, and a “reform” scenario that assumes the implementation of
reform policies that include fiscal adjustment and the implementation of structural reforms to raise
economic efficiency.
Baseline Scenario
The “baseline” medium-term scenario assumes a continuation of current policies and developments,
in particular:
•

a continued expansionary fiscal policy;

•

wages and salaries remaining, as a percentage of GDP, at the high level attained in 2005;

•

a reduction in SACU revenue on account of continued trade liberalization; and

•

a further decline in foreign reserves.

Reform Scenario
At the core of the reform program is a fiscal adjustment which, in the absence of concessional
external financing, envisages a move to a balanced budget. Strong policy reforms are assumed to
enable the country to mobilize external financing on acceptable terms, which would allow a more
gradual adjustment path, as indicated in the attached table. Measures under the reform program
include:
•

a reduction in the wage bill as a share of GDP by completing the civil service restructuring
program, including a voluntary retirement scheme implemented in early 2006, and measures
to reduce the numbers of budgeted positions;

•

the introduction of a Revenue Authority and a broad-based VAT, which will result in an
increase in domestic revenues;

•

improvements in governance and public expenditure management, which will not only
improve the delivery of public services, but also help attract some external grants to address
urgent social needs;

•

policy measures to encourage private sector development and reduce the role of the state in
the economy.

- 43 -

APPENDIX VI

As a consequence of these measures,
•

the improved macroeconomic outlook and business confidence will encourage investment,
and will result in higher economic growth, especially in the outer years of the projection
horizon;

•

the budget deficit declines to about 2 percent of GDP in the 2006/07 budget, and approaches
zero in the 2008/09 budget; and

•

gross international reserves will increase to just under 2 months of import coverage by 2009.

- 44 -

APPENDIX VI

Swaziland: Medium-Term Scenarios, 2002-2009

2004

2005

2006

2007
2008
Projections

2009

Unchanged Policies Scenario
(Annual percentage change)
National Income and Prices
GDP at constant prices
CPI (period average)

2.1
3.4

1.8
4.5

1.0
5.8

1.0
5.5

0.9
5.0

0.9
4.5

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings

17.4
19.0

18.5
16.8

17.3
15.0

17.0
14.0

15.9
12.8

15.9
12.2

Central government finance (fiscal year)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Central government balance (including grants)
External financing (net)
Government debt

29.3
33.6
-4.3
1.5
18.0

30.7
35.0
-4.3
0.9
21.9

29.0
34.3
-5.4
1.1
25.2

28.2
34.5
-6.2
1.3
29.5

28.1
34.7
-6.6
1.2
35.0

28.0
35.1
-7.0
1.2
40.1

1.6
261.8
1.3
571

-1.6
230.2
1.1
589

-2.4
204.5
0.9
650

-3.0
161.9
0.7
735

-3.1
110.9
0.5
822

-3.7
37.5
0.2
908

3.2
5.0

3.3
4.5

External sector
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Gross official international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official international reserves (in months of imports)
Total external debt (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Reform Scenario

(Annual percentage change)
National Income and Prices
GDP at constant prices
CPI (period average)

1.8
4.5

2.2
5.8

2.6
5.5

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Gross national savings

18.5
16.8

17.0
16.1

17.7
17.1

18.5
18.0

18.5
17.4

Central government finance (fiscal year)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Central government balance (including grants)
External financing (net)
Government debt

30.7
35.0
-4.3
0.9
21.9

29.4
30.5
-1.1
1.3
21.9

29.2
29.4
-0.2
0.8
20.6

29.1
29.1
0.0
1.0
19.4

29.1
29.1
0.0
1.0
17.8

-1.6
230.2
1.1
589

-0.9
242.0
1.1
624

-0.6
261.0
1.2
629

-0.5
313.0
1.3
638

-1.1
382.0
1.6
635

External sector
Current account balance
Gross official international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official international reserves (in months of imports)
Total external debt (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Source: Swazi authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/19
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 24, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation
with Swaziland
On February 8, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the 2005 Article IV consultation with Swaziland.1
Background
Economic growth in Swaziland has weakened over the past decade. More recently, real
GDP growth decelerated to 2.1 percent in 2004 and an estimated 1.8 percent in 2005.
A prolonged drought affected agricultural output, particularly maize, the main staple
crop, and cotton. The real effective appreciation of the exchange rate of 24 percent
in 2002–04 and high oil import prices hurt Swaziland’s main exports (sugar, wood pulp,
and garments) and manufacturing activities. In addition, the removal of textile quotas in
industrialized countries in January 2005 has led to factory closures and significant job
losses in the garment sector, further worsening the unemployment rate (estimated at
30 percent).

The fiscal deficit has increased in the last two fiscal years. In 2004/05, despite a
large one-time windfall in South African Customs Union revenues and efforts to
increase domestic revenue by removing some tax exemptions, the wage bill and
other current expenditures were sharply increased, resulting in a deficit (including
grants) of 4.3 percent of GDP, significantly higher than the original budget of
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions
with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and
financial information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments
and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the
basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion,
the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive
Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's authorities.

-2-

2.8 percent of GDP. Spending pressures have continued to rise in 2005/06,
because of the full-year effect of the civil service wage increase granted in 2004,
and further wage increases through a supplementary budget in the third quarter of
the fiscal year, further widening the budget deficit. The deficits have been financed
by external and domestic borrowing, drawing down of government financial assets,
including the Capital Investment Fund (CIF), and an accumulation of domestic
arrears. As the budgeted obligations exceed inflows of revenues and available
financing, the government is facing a serious cash flow problem.
Monetary developments have reflected those in South Africa. In line with interest
rate reductions in South Africa, the Central Bank of Swaziland reduced its discount
rate to 7 percent in April 2005. Market yields on treasury bills have moved downward
and interest rate spreads relative to South Africa have remained small, as new
issues of treasury bills have been contained to avoid incurring higher short-term
borrowing costs, notwithstanding the government’s large financing needs. Available
data indicate that the banking system, which is dominated by South African banks,
remains strong.
In the face of shocks to exports and strong pressure to finance the fiscal deficit,
gross international reserves (which include the Capital Investment Fund) declined
from 1.9 month of imports at end-2003 to 1.1 months of at end-September 2005,
the lowest level among members of the Common Monetary Area (CMA). In the
meantime, public debt (excluding outstanding domestic payment arrears), which is
mostly on nonconcessional terms, has increased to 22 percent of GDP.
The authorities completed a “Poverty Reduction Strategy and Action Plan” in
October 2004. The document spells out policies with the overall objective of halving
the 1995 poverty rate by 2015. However, little progress has been made toward this
and other Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There are indications that the
share of the population living below the national poverty line (less than US$1/day)
has been increasing in the last several years. According to the Ministry of Health,
the infection rate among women attending ante-natal clinics increased from
39 percent in 2002 to 43 percent in 2004. The latest data show, however, that
preventive measures may begin to have effect as HIV/AID infection rate for the
15-19 age group has declined by 3 percentage points to 29 percent for the first time.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that Swaziland’s economic performance had deteriorated
over the past two years. Output growth had slowed as a result of a substantial real
appreciation of the lilangeni that undermined external competitiveness, the
elimination of textile quotas by industrial countries, and a persistent drought.
In addition, the fiscal deficit had widened and had been increasingly financed
through accumulation of domestic payment arrears, while foreign reserves had
declined to a critically low level. At the same time, the very high HIV/AIDS

-3-

prevalence rate was exacting a heavy toll on society, food shortages persisted in
parts of the country, and poverty remained widespread.
Directors considered that the key policy challenges facing the Swazi authorities were
to restore fiscal sustainability and external competitiveness so that progress could
be made in reducing poverty. They noted that these challenges were complicated by
the prospects of a further loss of trade preferences and declining revenues from the
South African Customs Union. In light of the pressing challenges, Directors urged
the authorities to embark promptly on an adjustment strategy centered on fiscal
consolidation and structural reforms and noted that the key elements of such a
strategy had already been discussed within the country and with development
partners. Directors underscored that further delays would make the eventual
correction more costly and widen the growth gap between Swaziland and South
Africa and other countries in the region.
Directors stressed the urgency of sharply reducing the budget deficit during the
remainder of this fiscal year and emphasized that the 2006/07 budget would
constitute a critical step towards placing public finances on a sustainable path.
Looking ahead, they called on the authorities to aim for a balanced budget in the
next few years given the absence of concessional external financing, the existence
of large payment arrears and contingent liabilities, the limited scope for domestic
financing, and low economic growth.
To achieve the fiscal adjustment, Directors emphasized the need for expenditure
controls and reforms in the civil service, public investment, and fiscal revenue areas.
They noted that weak expenditure controls, including at the line ministry levels,
had contributed to the rising fiscal deficits and payment arrears. In this context,
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to reform the public expenditure
management system and encouraged the authorities to seek technical assistance in
this important area. Directors urged the authorities to follow through with measures
to rightsize the civil service and rationalize the government structure, in line with
their civil service reform program. Directors also considered that expenditure needed
to be re-oriented to productive investment and pro-poor programs, while strong
efforts were needed to increase domestic revenue, including through the
establishment of a Revenue Authority and the introduction of a broad-based VAT.
Directors underscored that, with the lilangeni pegged to the South African rand
under the Common Monetary Area arrangement, the authorities would need to rely
primarily on structural reforms to support fiscal consolidation and restore external
competitiveness. They urged the authorities to press ahead with measures to
increase labor productivity, reduce domestic costs for the export sector, and improve
the investment climate. In this regard, the authorities’ recent initiatives to support
workers’ training and enhance their skills were encouraging.

-4-

To improve the investment climate, Directors emphasized the need to restructure
and privatize the large number of public enterprises, as well as reforms to strengthen
governance. The privatization of key utilities could enhance private sector
development, and help improve the competitiveness of the Swazi economy through
lower costs of key services, including those provided to the government.
Directors encouraged the authorities to enact anti-corruption legislation as soon as
possible and institute periodic internal and financial audits for all entities benefiting
from the consolidated government budget.
Directors welcomed the recent steps by the Central Bank of Swaziland to strengthen
its operations—including reserve management—and to further develop Swaziland’s
financial system, but noted that efforts to strengthen the official foreign reserve
position would depend critically on a prudent fiscal policy stance. Directors also
encouraged the authorities to enact legislation to strengthen the supervision of
financial institutions.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to strengthen the provision of economic
data to enable timely economic policy decision making and monitoring. They noted
in particular the authorities’ commitment to improve the national accounts and
balance of payments statistics.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued
after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive
Board in a particular case.

-5-

Swaziland: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–05

2001

External economy
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Current account balance 1/
(In percent of GDP)
Gross official international reserves
(In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)

2003

2004

2005
Est.

(Annual percentage change)

Domestic economy
Real GDP
Consumer price inflation (period average)

2002

1.6
7.5

2.9
11.7

2.4
7.4

2.1
3.4

1.8
4.8

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
1,043
-1,125
-57
-4.5
267
2.4
1.3

1,032
-941
58
4.8
260
2.7
1.4

1,485
-1,442
36
1.9
265
1.9
1.1

1,878
-1,910
40
1.6
262
1.3
1.1

1,889
-1,994
-44
-1.6
232
1.1
1.2

Financial variables

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Total government revenue and grants 2/
Total government expenditure and net lending 2/
Overall government balance (incl. grants) 2/
Change in broad money (in percent)
Interest rates (in percent) 3/

27.6
30.6
-3.1
10.7
6.3

Sources: Swazi authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Including transfers.
2/ Fiscal years (April 1-March 31).
3/ For 12-month time deposits.

26.3
30.8
-4.5
13.1
9.5

26.3
29.0
-2.7
14.1
4.2

29.3
33.6
-4.3
10.4
4.1

30.7
35.0
-4.3
10.5
3.5

Statement by Peter J. Ngumbullu, Executive Director for The Kingdom of Swaziland
and Bhadala T. Mamba, Advisor to Executive Director
February 8, 2006
Introduction
1. I would like to extend appreciation of the Swazi authorities to the Fund staff and
management for the candid and constructive discussion and advice during the Article
IV consultation Mission. The Mission held widespread discussions with various
stakeholders in the economy and presented its findings to the authorities who are
thankful for the opportunity to exchange views during these meetings and are mindful
and equally concerned about the many challenges facing the country. They have
always valued the Board and Fund advice on these issues and are in broad agreement
with staff’s analysis and policy recommendations contained in the staff paper. The
authorities also appreciate the excellent and timely technical assistance provided by
the Fund on a number of areas. They value the productive and enlightening
presentation made by staff to senior government officials at a seminar held during the
mission, which focused on Growth and Fiscal Consolidation over the Medium-term
and the Common Monetary Area and Improving External Competitiveness.
2. Swaziland has had to deal with a convergence of a multi-pronged set of challenges
driven by persistent and unabating humanitarian crisis, arising from food shortages
resulting from continued erratic weather patterns, worsening HIV/AIDS pandemic,
increasing incidence of poverty and negative changes in international trade
arrangements affecting the country’s major exports, particularly sugar and textiles.
While marginal improvements in food production were realized during the 2005 crop
season, the World Food Program (WFP) still estimates that 227,000 people will need
food aid by the end of the 2006 crop season. The country’s poverty incidence has
risen from 66 to 69 percent according to a recent Household and Income and
Expenditure Survey. Furthermore, over and above shocks to the important textile and
sugar sectors, the country’s fiscal performance has also been precarious, resulting in
increased expenditures, creating an unsustainable fiscal trend and decline in the
country's foreign reserve holdings to historically low levels. The overall balance of
payments position since 2000 has become negative, as a result of increased net capital
outflows. The authorities are aware of the persistent decline in economic performance
and are committed to deal with the deteriorating socio-economic situation and take
measures to address the existing structural fiscal imbalances and reform the public
expenditure management system, improve the investment climate, enhance
restructuring and privatization of public sector enterprises and restore macroeconomic
stability through serious implementation of the reform agenda.
Recent Economic Developments
3. The Swazi economy is largely driven by the agriculture and manufacturing sectors.
Although contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined over the years, it remains a

-2crucial supporter of the manufacturing sector, which is agro-based. The agricultural
sector, however, remains vulnerable to exogenous factors like the prevalence of
natural disasters such as drought and is highly dependent on climatic and international
market developments, including exchange rate movements, the world business cycle,
in particular, increases in oil prices, as well as changes in international prices of major
exports. There has been recently rapid growth of the services sector alongside the
expanding manufacturing sector, which is attributable to the continued growth in
government activities in trade, banking, finance and transport. The delayed rains
during the 2005/06 season and drought, having spanned a number of years, has dealt a
harsh blow to the efforts of rural farmers. This delay is likely to prolong the already
bad food security situation in the country.
4. The country is also facing challenges in the international trading environment, which
are adversely affecting the economy. The textile sector experienced major shocks
with an estimated 15,000 jobs lost in 2005 and a number of firms that were exporting
to the USA under the American Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA) closed their
operations and left the country. The sugar industry also faced similar shocks
following the renegotiation of the country’s preferential access to the EU, which
resulted in laying-off several hundreds of workers in this sector. These developments
further worsened the dire unemployment situation in a country with a youthful
demographic structure, requiring fundamental and comprehensive structural changes
to be crafted and implemented through collaborative efforts and cooperation between
the private sector, the country’s development partners and the government. The
sluggish economic growth recorded in recent years has not been able to match the
population growth rate of 2.9 percent, indicating that the real per capita income has
been on a declining trend.
Fiscal Developments
5. The authorities are in the process of finalizing the 2006/07 budget, which will focus
broadly on the following priority areas:
•
•
•

revitalization of the economy and pursuing sound macro-economic
management;
poverty reduction and decisive action on the HIV/AIDS pandemic; and
reverse the humanitarian crisis by dealing with the food security problem.

6. In addition, the Government in presenting this year’s Medium Term Budget Policy
Statement (MTBPS), adopted an inclusive approach to generate comments and inputs
into the budgetary process from the general public, civil society and politicians. The
authorities realize that there are limited avenues to deal with the deteriorating
economic situation other than steadfastly adopting a tight fiscal stance, persistently
implementing a broad structural reform agenda aimed at improving business
environment and competitiveness. The government has clearly outlined these
intentions in the recent Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, which aims at
achieving a 2 percent budget deficit in 2006/07. This framework also envisages

-3achievement of a balanced budget in 2008/09, through implementation of the
following reforms:
•

•
•

Civil Service reforms aimed at offering an early voluntary retirement for those
civil servants who are 55 years and above in 2006. Furthermore, freezing
civil service vacancies, and releasing about E250 million for other priority
expenditures, stop creating new posts in the civil service and offer no cost of
living adjustments for the remaining civil servants;
Cutting capital expenditure by E200 million; and
Lowering the budget ceiling through cuts in recurrent expenditures and
expenditure on goods and services of at least 5 percent.

7. While implementing this strategy, the authorities have committed themselves to
continue to address, through the budget, some of the social challenges facing the
country. They intend to increase expenditure on priority social sectors including
health and education in dealing with the increasing poverty, worsening HIV/AIDS
pandemic and providing services for the growing number of orphan and vulnerable
children (OVC). The authorities plan on improving health care service delivery as
well as capacity building of this sector by designing appropriate and properly
developed projects and programmes. They expect that this will result in an increase in
the share of budget to the health sector by about 2 percent.
8. The budgetary tight situation is going to be temporarily propped-up by a slight
increase on revenue receipts from internal revenues and an additional EI.1 billion
expected from SACU receipts for 2006/07. Though this SACU windfall will augment
the authorities’ revenue collection efforts, such flows are not expected in the near
future and hence their commitment to an austere fiscal strategy. To further
consolidate these efforts, they also plan on establishing a Revenue Authority in the
coming financial year and also introduce a broad-based VAT in the medium term.
Economic Resuscitation Plans and Medium-term outlook
9. The authorities recognize that, substantial and sustainable poverty reduction can only
be achieved in the context of a growing economy requiring improved environment for
conducive private sector investment that will create employment and further achieve
diversification. Therefore, expectations on future growth will be anchored on
focusing on key areas or pillars of the economy through pursuing fiscal and structural
reforms, and supporting the key agricultural and manufacturing sectors, embracing
good governance principles premised on transparent and accountable systems, and
promoting human capital development.
10. The government is committed to fostering and facilitating a conducive environment
for a private sector-driven economic recovery to take place. It plans to ensure these
efforts succeed, coupled with efficiency in the use of public resources, and better
service delivery. Paramount to this effort is the deregulation and commercialization of
some industries especially communication, insurance, water and electricity sectors,

-4which are expected to provide the much needed impetus for a comprehensive
economic recovery.
11. The government held a Job Creation Summit in July 2005, where significant amount
of money, totaling about E1.6 billion, was pledged for job creating activities and the
authorities are making the necessary preparations to ensure that these pledges and
investments support capacity building of the SMEs and the informal sector,
particularly in the area of business management as well as providing credit as start-up
capital. It is expected that this initiative will contribute significantly to employment
creation. The government’s medium-term strategy is to continue with the ongoing
initiatives towards employment generation such as Lower Usuthu, Maguga project,
the Millennium Projects, rollout of the SMEs policy and improve efforts at attracting
FDI, amongst others.
12. The authorities remain committed to regional integration efforts and have been
participating in a number of SACU-led international trade negotiations, which aim at
creating new markets for the country’s trade arrangements with the USA, EU and
MERCUSOR, among others. They are also committed to developing new exportoriented industries and reduce relying predominantly on the traditional sugar and
textile manufacturing sectors.
Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Developments
13. Swaziland is currently involved in a broad-based financial sector reform exercise
involving legislative reforms and modernization of the financial sector. Several pieces
of legislation aimed at improving financial sector development were passed in
parliament in the last year, including amendments to the Financial Institutions Act
and the Insurance Act. Additional legislation is expected to be passed in 2006,
including the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AML/CFT), Securities Bill, Financial
Services Regulatory Authority, and the National Clearing and Settlement Systems
Bills.
14. The authorities believe that the decision to maintain the peg of the local currency to
the South African rand has provided stability and helped usher financial discipline.
While the recent appreciation of the rand against major international currencies
undermined the country’s competitiveness, they believe that the CMA arrangement
has helped in keeping inflation low.
Structural Reforms
15. The authorities’ formulation exercise of the constitution, which will usher the country
into a new governance dispensation that would lead to political and legal reforms
conducive to attracting investments into the country, is in its final stages of
completion. Improvement of the business climate and reduction of the role of
government in the mainstream of the economy is seen as key to the success of the
proposed reforms.

-5-

16. The National HIV/AIDS coordinating unit (NERCHA) continues to deliver
commendable service in augmenting government activities in this critical area. The
unit has established several structures and working committees to deal with the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. Unfortunately, the HIV/AIDS prevalence continues to rise and
worsening the poverty situation. The government with the support of other donors
and the Global Aids Fund has made commendable progress in fighting the scourge
and in dealing with the sick by rolling out an anti-retroviral program, as well as
dealing with the rising orphan population and embarking on civic education campaign
and also strengthened home-based care. The successful roll-out of the anti-retroviral
drugs achieved the set target of 13,000 people receiving drugs by the end of 2005.
The fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic has been hampered by rising turnover in
the nursing profession with most of them leaving the country to go and work abroad.
The pandemic has reached crisis proportions and needs further concerted effort by the
authorities and the international community.
17. In response to the declining social indicators the authorities are planning on
introducing a national program for Universal Primary Education to ensure basic
education for all. This Program is being phased and has started with provision of free
text books for primary schools and will be followed up by subsidized education for
the first four grades of primary schooling in the coming year so that every child can
attend school. This process is undertaken in collaboration with the Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare, with particular focus on dealing with the rising number of OVCs.
Conclusion
18. The Swazi authorities remain committed to fundamental structural reforms in both the
public and private sectors; and are prepared to review all existing systems and
structures to enable implementation of a comprehensive recovery package aimed at
reversing the economic malaise. They aim at fully taking advantage of all sectors in
which the country has a natural comparative advantage, such as sugar, pulp, and
minerals, and improve labour productivity and competitiveness.
19. Income distribution in Swaziland is very skewed and as more people fall into the
poverty trap, there is a further worsening of the social indicators. Consequently, the
authorities believe that it is important to review the current classification of the
country as a middle income country so that it can benefit from concessional resources
given the deterioration in the country’s socio-economic situation. The international
community and the IFIs need to assist and cooperate with the authorities to address
the existing unique circumstances and challenges being faced, especially on
HIV/AIDS and achieving the MDGs by 2015.
20. The HIV/AIDS pandemic, given its multi-pronged consequences, is the single-most
significant threat to achieving sustainable macroeconomic stability due to its
devastating effect on the most productive human resource base of the country, with a

-6youthful demographic structure. Given the magnitude and depth of the challenges
facing the country, the authorities look forward to working with other cooperating
partners in their efforts to deal with the challenges it faces including fighting poverty,
dealing with unemployment and forging a sustainable growth path.

