© 2009 International Monetary Fund

April 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/127

Georgia: 2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the Stand-By
Arrangement—Staff Report; Press Release and Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Georgia.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2009 Article IV
consultation with Georgia and second review under the stand-by arrangement, the following
documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under
the Stand-By Arrangement, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that
ended on February 11, 2009, with the officials of Georgia on economic developments and
policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on March 10, 2009. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A Press Release and a Public Information Notice (PIN), summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its March 23, 2009, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the IMF arrangement and the Article IV consultation, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Georgia.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Georgia*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
GEORGIA
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation and
Second Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by David Owen (MCD) and Dominique Desruelle (SPR)
March 10, 2009
•

Relations with the Fund: The 2008 Article IV consultation was postponed due to
political developments and regional tensions (the last consultation was concluded in
March 2006). An 18-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) for SDR 477.1 million
(317 percent of quota) was approved on September 15, 2008 in the wake of the August
armed conflict with Russia. A first purchase of SDR 161.7 million ($250 million) was
disbursed upon approval. The authorities chose not to make the available purchase after
the first review.

•

Main Issues: Exchange rate and monetary policies should be geared to supporting
external stability and restoring confidence, which were undermined by the armed conflict
and the impact of the global crisis on foreign inflows, trade, and remittances. The
authorities’ commitment to allow more exchange rate flexibility, which was delayed by
concerns about market uneasiness, is a key piece in this strategy. A fiscal stimulus
package largely financed by official inflows will limit the slowdown in economic
activity. Increasing bank vulnerabilities should be closely monitored, and crisis
preparedness strengthened.

•

Response to Fund Advice: Past advice focused on safeguarding macroeconomic
stability amid significant resource inflows and political tensions. The authorities’ policies
were broadly consistent with Fund advice and, importantly, reflected their determination
to advance an ambitious reform agenda. Some medium-term challenges remain, including
strengthening institutions, reducing the dependence on foreign inflows, promoting
investment in tradable sectors, and combating poverty.

•

Team: A. L. Coronel (Head), C. Dieterich, H. Floerkemeier (all MCD), E. Kazarian
(MCM), A. Sadikov (SPR), and E. Gardner (incoming Senior Resident Representative).

•

Exchange Rate Regime: The regime has been reclassified as “stabilized” from
“floating,” based on the exchange rate policy introduced since the conflict.

•

Statistics: Economic data are broadly adequate for surveillance and program monitoring.
Georgia participates in the GDDS.

2
CONTENTS

PAGE

Executive Summary.................................................................................................................. 4
I. Recent Developments and Outlook ....................................................................................... 5
A. Recent Political and Economic Developments ............................................................. 5
B. Performance Under the Program .................................................................................. 8
C. Macroeconomic Outlook .............................................................................................. 8
II. Policy Discussions.............................................................................................................. 10
A. Using Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies to Support External Sustainability...... 10
B. Addressing Financial Sector Vulnerabilities .............................................................. 12
C. Embedding the Fiscal Stimulus in the Medium-Term Framework ............................ 13
III. Risks to the Economic Outlook ........................................................................................ 15
IV. Other Issues ...................................................................................................................... 15
V. Program Issues ................................................................................................................. 156
VI. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................. 16
Boxes
1.
External Stability Assessment.................................................................................... 19
2.
Financial Sector Developments and Vulnerabilities.................................................. 20
Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Real Sector Developments and Outlook .................................................................... 21
External Sector Developments................................................................................... 22
Export Sector Indicators ............................................................................................ 23
Exchange Rate Developments ................................................................................... 24
Fiscal Sector Developments of the General Government.......................................... 25
Monetary Developments............................................................................................ 26
Recent Banking Sector Developments....................................................................... 27

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2007–13 .......................................................... 28
Annual Consolidated Government Operations, 2007–13 .......................................... 29
Quarterly Consolidated Government Operations, 2008–09....................................... 30
Summary Balance of Payments, 2007–13 ................................................................. 31
Accounts of the National Bank of Georgia, 2007–09................................................ 32
Monetary Survey, 2007–09........................................................................................ 33

3
7.
8.
9.
10.

External Vulnerability Indicators, 2007–13............................................................... 34
Indicators of Fund Credit, 2007–17 ........................................................................... 35
External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2007–13 ......................................... 36
Schedule of Reviews and Purchases .......................................................................... 37

Attachments
I.
II.

Letter of Intent ........................................................................................................... 38
Technical Memorandum of Understanding ............................................................... 45

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Georgian economy—seriously affected by the August armed conflict with Russia—
is now feeling the impact of the global downturn. GDP contracted in the second half of
2008, resulting in real growth of 2 percent for the year as a whole, down from 12½ percent in
2007. Inflation slowed considerably as global commodity prices receded and domestic
demand contracted. External imbalances remained large, and official inflows—which partly
replaced the declining private capital inflows—financed a large fiscal deficit. Mounting
depreciation pressures led to a lari devaluation in November, but the NBG’s efforts to
stabilize the exchange rate at the new level have required continued interventions. Money
and credit growth slowed sharply, the profitability and quality of bank loans deteriorated, and
deposit and loan dollarization increased.
2009 will be another difficult year as the recession in economic partners unfolds.
Reflecting limited funding sources and continued regional tensions, growth will remain
subdued. The external imbalances should begin to correct and inflation will be manageable.
Nonetheless, depreciation pressures and a halt in domestic credit amid limited foreign
exchange inflows and a barely adequate level of international reserves will challenge
macroeconomic management. The authorities are determined to support economic activity
through a donor-financed fiscal stimulus, but they are faced with risks associated with the
needed exchange rate adjustment, and current and potential financial sector vulnerabilities.
The recent introduction of foreign exchange auctions should facilitate the move to a
more flexible exchange rate regime to preserve macroeconomic and external stability.
The additional strains that flexibility may impose on the financial sector is preferable to the
costs of a disorderly exit from the peg that could be triggered by a continuous loss of
reserves. Over the medium term, exchange rate flexibility will help to correct the current
overvaluation of the real exchange rate, strengthen competitiveness, and reduce
vulnerabilities posed by the structurally high current account deficit.
Close coordination between fiscal and monetary policies is also needed to support
macroeconomic management. The interest rate instrument and the pacing of fiscal spending
should be used in a coordinated fashion to contain pressures in the foreign exchange market.
The tightening of credit conditions and the weakening of the real economy have exposed
vulnerabilities in the banking sector. This highlights the need for close supervisory
oversight, measures to bolster depositor confidence through increased transparency and
adequate safety nets (e.g. a deposit insurance scheme), and development of a contingency
plan to respond to financial sector stress.
Program risks have increased mostly on account of possible adverse macro-financial
interactions. Rising political tensions and the challenging global outlook could further
damage investor confidence, reduce private capital inflows, and negatively affect trade,
investment, remittances, and donor support. Should these risks materialize, economic growth
would falter and credit contract further, and the authorities’ policy response would need to
combine exchange rate flexibility with fiscal tightening.

5
I. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
A.

Recent Political and Economic Developments

1.
During recent years, Georgia achieved high economic growth buoyed by large
capital inflows. Foreign direct investment (FDI) responded to an improved business
environment and aggressive privatization, and portfolio investment was mobilized with a first
Eurobond issue in 2008. Economic growth reached double digits, was broad based (albeit led
by non-tradable sectors, in particular, financial services and construction), and supported by
generally sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms that resulted in a simplified
tax system, a liberalized customs regime, and reduced corruption and red tape.
2.
Nevertheless, strong capital inflows along with deteriorating political conditions
created a challenging economic environment. Signs of overheating emerged as fiscal
imbalances increased, domestic credit expanded rapidly, and the external current account
deficit widened significantly. This resulted in real appreciation pressures and rising inflation.
Mounting political tensions, mainly reflecting perceptions of an uneven distribution of the
benefits of growth, fueled public discontent, culminating in civil unrest in late 2007. Political
stability was restored and the government’s power base consolidated through successive wins
in the presidential and parliamentary elections in early 2008, but tensions with neighboring
Russia increased and led to the early-August 2008 armed conflict.
3.
External and domestic political conditions have remained tense. Russian troops
have largely pulled out of undisputed Georgian territory but remain present in South Ossetia
and Abkhazia. While international diplomatic efforts have helped calm the situation,
significant uncertainty remains. The economic downturn adds to the dissatisfaction with the
causes and consequences of the conflict. In response, the president has promised increased
attention to social issues. The cabinet was reshuffled in December. The new prime minister
resigned after only three months in office, and the minister of finance was appointed prime
minister in early February. A new NBG president was appointed on February 26.
4.
Economic growth suffered a dramatic decline in the second half of 2008 and
external imbalances remain large, but
Georgia: 12-Month CPI Inflation
inflation pressures have receded (Table 1).
(In percent)
14

•

Annual real GDP growth slowed to
8 percent in the first half of 2008, after
having reached 12½ percent in 2007
and an average 9 percent in 2003–06.
With the double impact of the armed
conflict and the global crisis, GDP
contracted by 4 percent in the third
quarter and is estimated to have
dropped further in the fourth quarter of
the year, resulting in real growth of
only 2 percent in 2008 (Figure 1).

Overall inflation

12
10
8
6
4

Non-food, non-utility inflation 1/

2
0
-2
Dec-06

Apr-07

Aug-07

Dec-07

Apr-08

Aug-08

Source: Department of Statistics of Georgia.
1/ Utility includes transportation, housing, and electricity.

Dec-08

6
•

Inflation peaked at 12¾ percent in August due to temporary transportation and
supply disruptions associated with the conflict, but slowed to 5½ percent by
December, as global food and energy
Unemployment Rates (In percent, 2007) 1/
prices (which account for more than half
18
of the CPI basket) receded and demand
weakened sharply. Inflation slowed
15
further in January to 4½ percent.
12

•

Unemployment has increased, with
significant lay-offs reported in the
construction, financial, and retail sectors,
and poverty remains widespread at 21¼
percent.1

9
6
3
0
Azerbaijan

Russia

Kazakhstan Armenia

Georgia

Serbia

•

The external current account deficit is estimated to have reached 22½ percent of
GDP in 2008 (Figure 2), but narrowed substantially during the second half of the year
(by some $500 million or 4 percent of GDP) led by large official inflows since
September and lower earnings of nonresidents. The trade balance remained broadly
unchanged relative to the first half of the year as a severe drop in metal exports
(Figure 3) was broadly offset by lower FDI-related imports and petroleum prices.
Private capital inflows, which had been financing the current account deficit, dropped
from $1.7 billion during the first half of the year to an estimated $450 million during
the second half.

•

Gross official reserves fell immediately after the conflict but gradually recovered to
$1.48 billion (3 months of next year’s projected imports) at end-2008, despite
significant central bank intervention in the market. The increase was aided by donor
support, the SBA purchase, and transfers from the Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs)2
to government accounts in the National
Georgia: REER and NEER
Bank of Georgia (NBG).
(Index, 2000=100)
140

5.
The shock to confidence, fall in
foreign inflows, and strengthening of the
dollar (to which the local currency had been
pegged) resulted in depreciation pressures
on the lari (Figure 4). After a 12 percent
nominal appreciation vis-à-vis the dollar in the
year through July 2008, a temporary peg was
introduced during the August conflict in an
effort to maintain public confidence and

130
120

REER
NEER

110
100
90
80
70
60
1995
1997
1999
Jan
Jan
Jan
Source: IMF Institute.

2001
Jan

2003
Jan

1

2005
Jan

2007
Jan

While no official 2008 data are currently available, the authorities have reported an unemployment rate of 14
percent in early 2009. Unemployment figures may be underestimated, as employment statistics are weak and
about two thirds of the working-age population is counted as ‘self-employed’.

2

Most proceeds from a $500 million Eurobond issue in April 2008 were deposited in SWFs.

7
macroeconomic stability. The authorities devalued the currency by about 17 percent in midNovember after substantial foreign reserve losses due to intervention in support of the peg.
However, since then the NBG has allowed only minimal exchange rate flexibility, again at a
significant cost in terms of intervention (about US$400 million between the November
devaluation and end-February). Despite the devaluation, the REER appreciated in 2008 due
to high domestic inflation, the nominal appreciation earlier in the year, and larger
depreciations of main trading partners’ currencies vis-à-vis the dollar.
6.
The fiscal deficit widened markedly in 2008, but the composition of spending
improved in the second half of the year (Figure 5). Tax revenue declined significantly in
August but recovered moderately later, broadly in line with program projections. Spending
shifted from high defense and election outlays in the first half of the year to conflict-related
reconstruction, social spending (including emergency assistance for a large number of
internally displaced people), and infrastructure investments.
Georgia: Deposit Interest Rate (In percent, Dec. 07-Jan. 09)
7.
Monetary conditions reflected the
deteriorating economic situation (Figure
12
6). Before the conflict, monetary policy
10
focused on resisting inflationary pressures by
180-days
allowing exchange rate appreciation and
8
increasing interest rates. In the wake of the
Total
6
conflict, the declining demand for local
currency and significant NBG intervention in
4
the foreign exchange market led to a
Dec-07
Mar-08
Jun-08
Sep-08
Dec-08
contraction of the monetary base. Banks
Source: National Bank of Georgia.
stopped new lending despite the NBG’s
liquidity injections, reduced reserve
requirements, and policy rate cuts by a cumulative 500 basis points between August and
February. Deposit rates rose somewhat despite the sharp decline in the policy rate, and the
deposit base suffered losses as confidence weakened and demand for cash increased.

8.
The tightening of credit conditions and weakening of the real economy have
exposed vulnerabilities in the banking sector (Figure 7). Liquidity and solvency ratios
have deteriorated but remain satisfactory overall, partly due to liquidity support from the
NBG. The level of nonperforming loans (NPL) has increased sharply and the need for greater
loan-loss provisioning, together with higher funding costs and lost interest income, have
severely impacted profitability. Additional vulnerabilities are the dependence on external
financing and high banking sector concentration.

8
Georgia: Prudential Indicators of Commercial Banks, 2005–09
2005

Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)
Nonperforming loans (in percent of total loans)
Loans in foreign exchange (in percent of total loans)
Net open foreign exchange position 1/
Liquidity ratio (in percent)
Return on equity

17.5
3.8
76.2
7.5
33.3
14.9

2006

20.6
2.5
73.8
3.7
41.5
15.3

2007

16.0
2.6
68.6
5.0
37.2
9.6

Mar.

2008
Jun.
Sep.

Dec.

2009
Jan.

17.5
3.0
65.9
3.5
36,8
10.2

15.7
3.4
64.9
1.5
33.3
8.9

13.9
12.8
72.8
1.7
28.3
-12.6

14.7
13.7
73.5
4.1
30.2
-5.2

17.0
9.9
67.5
1.5
30.4
-2.9

Source: National Bank of Georgia.
1/ Percent of total regulatory capital.

9.
The government introduced several structural reforms during the first half of
2008. Although tax rates are in line with other countries in the region, parliament amended
the tax code to reduce income and dividend tax rates gradually. Parliament also approved a
legal commitment to fiscal surpluses from 2009 (albeit counting privatization earnings as
fiscal revenues), and subsequently an exception for 2009 in light of the new spending needs.
The NBG is now legally committed to price stability as the main monetary policy objective,
its accountability system has been strengthened, and a downsizing process was implemented.
The Financial Supervisory Agency (FSA) became an independent legal entity, and a plan for
establishing an independent statistics agency by end-2009 was developed.
B.

Performance Under the Program

10.
All SBA performance criteria for end-December were observed. The quantitative
targets, the structural benchmark on budget submission to parliament, and the structural
performance criterion on preparing a revised LOLR facility regulation—to ensure that loans
are provided only to solvent institutions and that the FSA plays an active role in monitoring
the use of resources—were met (Tables 1 and 2 of the Letter of Intent). The impact on the
NIR target of greater-than-anticipated NBG intervention was offset by an accelerated
repatriation of government savings (from the SWF) and higher donor support. The fiscal
target was slightly adjusted upward to reflect the availability of additional financing.
C.

Macroeconomic Outlook

11.
2009 will be a difficult year for Georgia as the full impact of the global recession
on domestic activity and financing conditions unfolds. Reflecting limited funding sources
and continued regional tensions, staff projects that real GDP will continue to contract in the
first half of the year and recover somewhat in the second half, with growth averaging
1 percent for the year as a whole. Consumption is likely to fall due to higher unemployment
and lower wages and remittances, and private investment will shrink—in particular in
residential real estate, transport, and manufacturing. The fiscal impulse derived from the
switch from defense to capital spending and income tax reductions will benefit growth. The
projected increase in net exports will contribute to growth, but ultimately it is the mirror
image of lower domestic consumption and investment.

9
12.
The authorities deemed staff’s 2009 growth projection too pessimistic. The
authorities’ projections assume a sharp recovery in the second half of the year (annual growth
of 6 percent) and maintain the official forecast of 2–3 percent for the year as a whole. These
projections are based on growth estimates by sectors and a December survey to enterprises
on expected FDI and other capital inflows, rather than on demand-side calculations.3 While
uncertainty surrounding growth projections is high, staff preferred to build program
projections on a more cautious approach—especially considering that the sharp deterioration
of the global economic outlook may lead to further downward adjustments.

Millions of USD

Billions of USD

Georgia: Outflows from OECD and Emerging Market Economies and FDI Inflows to Georgia
13.
External imbalances
(In billions of U.S. dollars unless noted otherwise) 1/
are set for a significant
2000
2000
OECD (LHS)
correction in 2009, with the
Emerging Market Economies (LHS)
1600
1600
current account deficit
Georgia (RHS)
narrowing by 6 percentage
1200
1200
points of GDP relative to
800
2008. Demand for export
800
commodities and consumer
400
400
durables is projected to fall due
to the recessions in the main
0
0
2007
2008
2009
2010
trading partners (European
Sources: Georgian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Preliminary April 2009 WEO projections for OECD and emerging market economies; and
Union, United States, Turkey,
staff projections for Georgia.
Ukraine), while import
volumes are expected to decline even more sharply due to weaker domestic demand, and a
drop in private capital inflows and defense-related imports. Capital inflow projections are
estimated below the 2006 level and compare conservatively to the trend in capital outflow
projections in the latest World Economic Outlook. Remittances, which fell by 13 percent
year-on-year in January, are projected to decline by 10 to 15 percent, affected by the
deterioration of economic conditions in the main remitter countries and the depreciation of
the ruble.

14.
Inflation is projected at 7 percent in 2009, reflecting the offsetting effects of the
slowdown of economic activity and exchange rate movements. While energy commodity
prices are expected to remain subdued in the short term, early production forecasts suggest
that world food prices—in particular cereal prices—could increase from their current lows.
15.
The macroeconomic outlook is anticipated to improve over the medium term.
The recovery of real GDP growth (4–5 percent during 2010–13) is predicated on the revival
of private capital inflows and continued structural reform implementation, with moderate
inflation (about 5 percent). Under the baseline assumptions, the current account deficit would
decline to 12 percent of GDP by 2014. Narrowing the current account deficit to this level will
require substantial gains in competitiveness through continued structural reforms, trade

3

The authorities plan to review projections only after first quarter data are available. Staff will also reassess its
projections at that time.

10
facilitation through lower transportation costs, and the continuation of EU trade preferences.
II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
16.
The radical reduction in the main source of financing of Georgia’s fast growth is
posing challenging policy dilemmas for the authorities. Significant foreign inflows were
not only the main engine of growth, but also created an environment of fast credit expansion,
appreciation pressures, and overheating. Now the authorities have to deal with depreciation
pressures and a halt in credit to the private sector in the face of limited foreign exchange
inflows and a barely adequate level of international reserves. Handling these changed
circumstances involves the difficult choice between allowing exchange rate adjustment to
safeguard external stability and reducing domestic absorption. Furthermore, given the high
degree of uncertainty, there is a need to develop contingency plans to deal with potential
adverse events in the financial sector, and to maintain necessary cushions in the fiscal
accounts and in international reserves.
17.
Discussions centered on how to gear policies to deal with these challenges. Given
that the authorities are determined to support economic activity through a fiscal stimulus,
they are faced with the risks associated with the needed exchange rate adjustment. At the
same time, they need to address current and potential financial sector vulnerabilities, and
ensure that the fiscal stimulus does not threaten medium-term macroeconomic stability.
A.

Using Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies to Support External Sustainability

Exchange rate policy
18.
Staff emphasized that the exchange rate regime since the conflict has not been
consistent with external stability. Concerns that abandoning the exchange rate anchor
would undermine confidence and impair banks’ balance sheets have led the authorities to
postpone the needed move to exchange rate flexibility. However, in line with the FSA’s
assessment of financial sector stability and bank balance sheet resilience to exchange rate
movements, staff concluded that further moderate depreciation is not likely to create undue
systemic stress for the banking system. Against the backdrop of the recent foreign exchange
market pressures and the dollar strength in world currency markets, staff argued that failure
to limit interventions could lead to a much quicker depletion of reserves than the authorities
anticipated. The authorities acknowledged that the risks associated with moving more rapidly
toward flexibility are now outweighed by the potential costs of a forced exit from the peg.
They now seem more committed to greater exchange rate flexibility, which would imply
lower interventions going forward.
19.
To integrate market signals effectively into the pricing mechanism, the
authorities have recently introduced an auction-based system for the foreign exchange
market. The intervention system in use for more than a decade proved too rigid to allow
sufficient exchange rate flexibility in times of depreciation pressures. The new auction
mechanism, introduced in early March, is intended to give market forces a greater role in
setting the price, with a view to reaching faster and smoother convergence toward

11
equilibrium in the foreign exchange market and giving the market greater clarity about the
authorities’ policies.4 The auctioned amounts should be aligned with the quarterly program
NIR targets, which allow some room for intervention at the time the new system starts
operating, but significantly less later on. As the market embraces the new mechanism, the
NBG will abandon the existing system.
20.
Over the medium term, exchange rate flexibility will help to maintain
competitiveness and reduce vulnerabilities posed by the structurally high current
account deficit. Staff’s findings—subject to uncertainty related to data quality—point to an
overvalued real effective exchange rate, but there is no evidence that the overvaluation
causes external instability (Box 1). The overvaluation was exacerbated by the timing of the
switch to the temporary peg, just as the dollar started to appreciate substantially against most
trading partner currencies. The resulting effective appreciation was not fully corrected by the
November devaluation. Going forward, the authorities’ commitment to exchange rate
flexibility and structural reforms to enhance competitiveness should help correct the
overvaluation. Georgia’s track record in structural reforms has been impressive, and past
achievements should be complemented by improvements in the judicial system, property
rights protection, infrastructure, agricultural productivity, and governance. These reforms—
supported by large donor financing—are expected to foster private investment in the tradable
sector.
Monetary policy
21.
The post-conflict injection of liquidity was aimed at helping banks deal with
substantial deposit withdrawals. A part of the liquidity injections, in turn, fueled the
demand for foreign exchange, while another part was used by banks to build up
precautionary balances at the central bank. The authorities felt that there was no scope for
raising interest rates to resist the flight from local currency in the uncertain climate that
prevailed. They also felt that such an increase was not justified as an anti-inflationary policy
in the current environment, and would generate additional problems for private borrowers,
although most lending is in dollars.
22.
Staff suggested that, in the current less volatile environment, the interest rate
instrument could be used to contain pressures in the foreign exchange market. The
authorities argued that the demand for lari had become inelastic to moderate interest rate
changes, given expectations of further lari depreciation, and doubted that higher domestic
rates would contain the demand for dollars. They also acknowledged, however, that the
provision of additional liquidity to banks could fuel pressures in the foreign exchange
market, and that a more cautious approach to liquidity management was warranted in the
future, including by raising interest rates on central bank certificates of deposit, or rolling
back recent reductions in the reserve requirement, if needed.
4

By means of the auctions, the NBG announces the amounts it is willing to sell. These amounts are derived
from the NBG’s foreign exchange liquidity forecasts, which take into account weekly government and financial
sector requirements for external payments, as well as the shift from private sector inflows to donor funds
channeled through the NBG.

12
23.
Over the medium term, the NBG needs to strengthen the interest rate channel
and deepen financial markets. This would facilitate the planned move to formal inflation
targeting—a challenging task given current high dollarization. To this end, the NBG is
working on a comprehensive liquidity framework (structural benchmark for end-March
2009) to enhance liquidity forecasting and ensure a consistent use of policy rates to improve
market signaling. Financial sector development could be fostered by increased issuance of
debt instruments—including government treasury bills—with benchmark maturities across
the yield curve, and by preparing the regulatory and institutional framework for secondary
market development. The authorities agreed in principle, but noted the need to delay this
measure to avoid crowding out the already limited supply of bank credit to the private sector.
B.

Addressing Financial Sector Vulnerabilities

24.
The main vulnerabilities of the financial system stem from the asset side, while
rollover risks from external obligations appear to be largely contained. The rapid credit
growth in recent years, the impact of the conflict and the global economic slowdown on the
economy, and the November 2008 devaluation, have affected the quality of bank assets (Box
2). Vulnerabilities on the liability side include weakened depositor confidence and increasing
deposit dollarization, and lack of access to new private external financing.
25.
Additional exchange rate depreciation and the ongoing decline in asset prices
will likely further weaken bank balance sheets. While the banking system’s foreign
exchange position is roughly balanced, banks have extensive exchange rate exposure from
their dollar lending to unhedged borrowers. In addition, anecdotal evidence indicates that real
estate prices might have declined by about 15 to 20 percent. This would put additional
pressures on nonperforming loans, which have risen sharply, and thus on provisioning and
capital. The FSA is conducting bank stress testing and has requested Fund technical
assistance for this purpose.
26.
Commercial banks still have to fully adapt to limited international market access
and the impact of lower depositor confidence. As deposit growth lagged credit growth,
banks relied on substantial foreign borrowing in recent years. Although most of the debt
incurred by banks is long-term, short-term borrowing has increased rapidly in the past year,
leading to large external obligations maturing in 2009. While questions remain about the
capacity to refinance all debt maturing in 2009—estimated above $700 million—banks
should be able to roll over a significant part of these obligations through lending and equity
injections by the EBRD and IFC, and possibly through credit lines and guarantees from
official creditors. Mobilizing deposits will be crucial to ensure adequate bank funding in the
future and to pave the way for an eventual recovery of private sector credit growth. For the
moment, however, the increased risk aversion of banks is likely to act as a bigger constraint
on lending than bank liquidity.
27.
The deteriorating quality of bank loan portfolios and the recent experience of
deposit withdrawals highlight the need for strengthened vigilance over the banking
system. The FSA has required additional provisioning based on bank-by-bank assessments,
while stressing to staff that individual banks’ capital bases (including recent and planned
capital injections) would be sufficiently strong to buffer the expected rising provisioning

13
need for NPL. Staff warned that the deteriorating economic environment will pose additional
stress on bank capital and urged closer oversight, especially of systemically important banks.
Staff also recommended seeking additional capital assurances from foreign parent banks.
28.
Staff suggested considering measures to bolster depositor confidence. These
measures could include the establishment of adequate safety nets (e.g. a limited deposit
insurance scheme) and more timely public availability of banks’ financial information. The
authorities argued against deposit insurance at this juncture, as the level of insurance the
financial system could presently afford would not be helpful should a confidence crisis occur.
They also considered that deposit insurance could lower information incentives for
depositors. At the same time, they felt that confidentiality considerations precluded the
release of additional bank-specific data. Staff pointed out the benefits of complete and timely
information as a signaling device for depositors.
29.
To strengthen the response framework to potential solvency issues, staff restated
the importance of developing a contingency plan. The authorities have created a Joint
Financial Sector Committee, consisting of NBG and FSA staff, as the primary financial crisis
management group, and have decided to develop such a plan in cooperation with the
Ministry of Finance (structural performance criterion for end-June 2009). The plan will
establish the institutional framework for managing potential financial sector stress and
identify the most urgent policy and budgetary decisions for the containment of crisis
situations, including the decision on whether, when, and how to use public funds to
recapitalize ailing systemic banks, and the identification of the conditions under which the
use of early intervention tools would be indicated. The authorities intend to treat the plan as
an internal document not for publication.
C.

Embedding the Fiscal Stimulus in the Medium-Term Framework

30.
Implementation of the fiscal stimulus should be flexible in order to allow a quick
reaction to potential balance of payments pressures. The 2009 fiscal stimulus, to
compensate for the decline in private demand, is projected at about 3 percent of GDP.5 Most
of the stimulus is generated by a substantial expenditure switch from import-intensive
defense spending to domestic social and infrastructure spending and a cut in income tax
rates. Nevertheless, the fiscal deficit-to-GDP ratio is expected to decline somewhat in 2009
relative to 2008, reflecting lower than originally anticipated donor support. Spending is frontloaded and financed by a draw-down of government deposits at the NBG during the first half
of 2009. Staff supported the authorities’ swift fiscal policy response to the economic
slowdown, but cautioned that the timing of spending would need to be carefully attuned to
external stability needs. The authorities reassured staff that their close monitoring of
developments and smooth policy coordination will facilitate a quick reaction to any
deepening of external pressures.

5

The fiscal stimulus is calculated as the increase in non-defense, non-interest spending (close to 2 percent of
GDP) plus the drop in income tax revenue (about 1 percent of GDP).

14
31.
The authorities are preparing an ambitious fiscal reform framework for 2009
and beyond to strengthen budget planning, execution, and audit. The reforms include a
strengthened medium-term budget process, better integration of annual budgets into the
government’s medium-term objectives, and the establishment of uniform internal audit
standards in government agencies. As part of this exercise, the authorities will undertake a
comprehensive revision of budget legislation with the aim to submit a new budget code to
parliament (structural benchmark for end-July).6 While staff considers this a valid initiative
to improve spending efficiency, it cautioned against including rules and details into the code.
The legal framework should contain only budgetary principles to avoid undue rigidity in
managing budgetary issues.
32.
The commitment to reduce the fiscal deficit in the medium term remains in
place, but a clearer strategy has yet to be developed. Another exception to the existing
budget systems law, according to which the government is obliged to run fiscal surpluses, is
expected for 2010 when the implementation of major donor-financed infrastructure projects
will prevent a decline in the deficit. While supporting the existence of a fiscal rule, staff
argued that recent developments and future social and infrastructure needs are showing that
the current rule may be too rigid. Staff suggested a revision to take into account debt
sustainability considerations and cyclical fluctuations, complemented by a narrowly defined
escape clause, to provide a clearer medium-term perspective to fiscal policy. While the
authorities acknowledged the restrictiveness of the current rule, they stressed the benefits of a
clearly understood (if simplistic) rule to guide future policy making and to ensure fiscal
discipline.
33.
Georgia’s debt is expected to remain sustainable over the medium term.7 Despite
the substantial external financing in 2008–10 and the likely exchange rate depreciation, the
low initial indebtedness and the concessionality of official inflows limit the risk that debt
levels will become unsustainable. Roughly 40 percent of official financing is expected in
grants, and some loans are on concessional terms. As a result, public external debt is
projected to peak at around 30 percent of GDP in 2011 with its NPV amounting to 78 percent
of exports. Although nominal private sector external debt is set to remain broadly constant in
2009, debt ratios will rise on account of the economic contraction and exchange rate
depreciation. Assuming an improvement of global credit conditions in 2010, the private
sector should regain capital market access, resulting in a gradual build-up of private debt. In
terms of debt management, 2013 appears to be the most challenging year, as the $500 million
Eurobond matures and repurchases under SBA obligations peak.
6

This overhaul of all budget-related legislation replaces conditionality in the original program that required the
upgrading of the budget systems law to an organic law. The authorities were legally advised not to proceed with
the upgrade to an organic law.

7

A Fund stand-alone DSA was prepared in September 2008 at the time of the SBA request. The planned joint
LIC DSA was postponed at the request of the World Bank and will be conducted later in 2009.

15
III. RISKS TO THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
34.
Staff short-term projections are subject to significant downside risks. The
challenging global outlook, including the current recessions in key trading partners,
constitutes a major risk to trade and investment. A deeper than projected recession in Russia
or further depreciation of the ruble would hurt remittances, affecting particularly the poor.
There could also be a shortfall in disbursements of pledged donor support given donor
governments’ challenges at home and competing demand for IFI resources. Finally, rising
political tensions—either domestic or external—could further damage investor confidence,
reducing private capital inflows and postponing their recovery. Domestic tensions could also
weaken the authorities’ ability to move forward with stabilization measures and structural
reforms.
35.
Should some of these risks materialize, economic growth could falter,
unemployment rise, and credit contract further, while banking sector vulnerabilities could
turn into a full-blown crisis. An external financing gap would reemerge, necessitating
stronger policy adjustments and possibly additional external financing.
36.
The authorities’ policy response to these scenarios would need to combine
exchange rate flexibility with fiscal tightening. A reduction of the fiscal deficit, while
contractionary, would free resources to deal with potential problems in the banking sector
and reduce the need for foreign exchange interventions to limit lari depreciation by
alleviating balance of payments pressures. Spending cuts could focus on domestically
financed current and non-essential infrastructure spending, as cuts in donor-financed projects
would cause a loss in external financing, which in turn would aggravate the balance of
payments gap. To complement the adjustment, the authorities will have to seek further
financing sources.
37.
Medium-term risks revolve around the uncertainty regarding the timing and
strength of the recovery in capital inflows. The economy could suffer from a protracted
and deep decline in foreign investment if global confidence remains weak and investors
demonstrate increased risk aversion to Georgia. Under these circumstances, Georgia would
face a difficult external account adjustment, which would weaken the economic recovery. If,
on the other hand, Georgia manages to position itself as an attractive investment destination
among newly emerging markets and regional tensions abate, capital inflows could recover to
pre-conflict levels. Staff medium-term projections point to a cautiously optimistic resurgence
in capital inflows by 2011–12, albeit below the levels observed in 2007 and early 2008.
IV. OTHER ISSUES
38.
Current AML legislation in Georgia ensures transparency and governance in the
financial sector through strengthened monitoring of financial data and AML/CFT preventive
measures, including in relation to domestic bank deposits owned by Georgians but held in the
names of offshore entities.
39.
The authorities have implemented the recommendations of the 2008 update
safeguards assessment report within the agreed deadlines. In particular, the NBG’s Audit

16
Committee was reconstituted with only non-executive members, and the internal audit
department is now required to audit the monetary data reported to the Fund at each test date
and at the end of the financial year.
V. PROGRAM ISSUES
40.
The quantitative targets for 2009 were adjusted to reflect the updated
projections of donor support. While the end-March NIR target provides some cushion to
help stabilize the market following the introduction of the auctions, the end-June target—
which will be revised only under exceptional circumstances—contains very limited
intervention space and will thus test the authorities’ commitment to exchange rate flexibility.
The ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing new nonconcessional loans was revised upward
($850 million for 2009) to accommodate borrowing from official creditors (WB, EBRD,
EIB, and other multilateral and bilateral creditors) for projects pledged during the donor
conference in Brussels in accordance with the Joint Needs Assessment report.8 To better
capture the impact of unexpected shortfalls or surpluses in external financing, the revised
TMU introduces adjustors to the quantitative program targets.
41.
Use of Fund resources. The authorities and staff agreed that the balance of payments
projections should assume that the NBG would draw the amounts available at the completion
of the review (SDR 126.2 million). The authorities’ final decision will be made at a later
stage and will depend on developments in the foreign exchange market.
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
42.
Economic and financial conditions have become more challenging since the last
program review as Georgia has begun to be impacted by the global crisis. The slowdown
of world trade, weak commodity prices, as well as recessions and currency depreciations in
major trading partners will likely prolong and deepen the contraction of external demand.
Prospects for a recovery of private capital inflows, mainly FDI, have similarly weakened. On
the upside, Georgia expects to receive a large package of donor financing, although
uncertainties remain on the timing of disbursements, and there are risks that pledges will be
scaled back as donors reassess spending priorities.
43.
Despite the worsening of the external environment, the authorities’ strategy
designed in the summer of 2008 remains appropriate. Fiscal policy is assigned to support
demand within the constraints of available external financing, while exchange rate flexibility
is the primary instrument to ensure that external stability is maintained. However, projected
official financing now appears insufficient to cover what has turned into a deeper and longer
lasting external shock than was expected. This could require a larger adjustment—through
the exchange rate—than initially planned.
8

While these loans are not expected to meet the program’s criteria for concessional debt, they will be
contracted at more favorable terms than currently available for Georgia in private markets.

17
44.
Program risks have increased, mostly on account of possible adverse macrofinancial interactions. The banking sector as a whole is generally well capitalized and
external refinancing needs for 2009 have been largely addressed. However, profitability and
the quality of the loan portfolio have deteriorated and strains will continue through 2009.
Extensive loan dollarization creates additional vulnerabilities, and banks are tightening credit
despite liquidity injections from the central bank. This has led the authorities to delay the
move to exchange rate flexibility despite the obvious need to expedite external adjustment.
45.
The recent adoption of foreign exchange auctions is an important step toward
protecting international reserves and external stability. Central bank intervention through
the auctions, aligned with the program’s NIR targets, should result in an early move to
greater exchange rate flexibility by mid-2009. As the authorities noted, this approach carries
some risks due to its potential impact on the financial sector. However, these risks appear
manageable compared with the financial and economic costs of a forced and disorderly exit
from the peg that could be triggered by a continuous loss of reserves. Should pressures on the
exchange rate turn out to be too strong for the banking sector to absorb in the short run, the
current strategy may have to be rebalanced in favor of more fiscal adjustment. This scenario
highlights the need to identify non-critical spending that could be postponed.
46.
Aligning public spending with available official external financing remains the
other pillar of the authorities’ macroeconomic program. Although the surge in official
lending will raise public debt, it does not compromise medium-term debt sustainability. For
2009, the authorities have appropriately reduced the fiscal deficit target to reflect a
downward revision in expected official financing. The overall deficit-to-GDP ratio is now
projected to be somewhat lower than in 2008, but expenditure switching toward
infrastructure investment and better targeted social spending should nevertheless result in a
positive fiscal stimulus. At the same time, planned public expenditure management reforms
should increase the effectiveness of fiscal policy.
47.
Until now, the authorities have not considered monetary tightening necessary to
contain pressures on international reserves, but interest rate policy might have to be
used more actively going forward. Liquidity concerns kept the monetary authorities from
raising interest rates at the outset of the crisis. Also, in a very uncertain environment
dominated by exchange rate expectations, the view was that interest rate increases would not
be effective in curbing foreign exchange demand. Should balance of payments pressures
increase again, however, it would be important to deploy all available policy instruments
(including central bank refinancing, CD rates, and reserve requirements) in support of the
adjustment strategy. The planned improvement of the central bank liquidity framework is
very timely in this regard and should help enhance the effectiveness of interest rate policy.
48.
Strong supervisory vigilance over the banking system is crucial at this time of
stress and heightened uncertainty. The FSA has already taken appropriate actions by
requiring additional provisioning based on bank-by-bank assessments. It will also receive

18
Fund technical assistance to strengthen its stress-testing capability. Enhanced supervision
needs to be complemented by a quick reaction to adverse developments and effective
planning for possible systemic risks. The authorities’ commitment to developing such a plan
is crucial to the coherence of the overall strategy. The plan should consider the risks of
contingent fiscal liabilities arising from potential difficulties in the financial sector.
49.
While the severity of the challenges has focused attention on immediate actions,
policies also have to be consistent with, and supportive of, a sustained economic
recovery over the medium term. In this regard, the authorities’ commitment to
macroeconomic stability is backed by a strong track record as well as clear fiscal and
monetary medium-term mandates (i.e. a rule-based fiscal policy and an inflation objective).
Sustained economic growth will also require a significant improvement in competitiveness.
Georgia’s large current account deficits have been the counterpart of high investment rates
financed mostly by FDI. However, investments appear to have been mostly directed to the
non-tradable sector, where an upgrade of the domestic infrastructure was undoubtedly
needed, with little impact so far on export potential. Going forward, it will be important that
structural and macroeconomic policies enhance the environment for private investment in the
tradable sector so as to reduce the current account imbalance to more manageable levels.
50.
On the basis of Georgia’s performance under the SBA arrangement, staff
supports the authorities’ request for completing the second review. Staff also
recommends approval of the modification of program conditionality, as specified in the
Letter of Intent (¶13, ¶22, and Tables 1 and 2).
51.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 24-month
cycle.

19
Box 1. Georgia: External Stability Assessment
Net Internati onal Liabilities 1/, 2007
(In percent of GDP)

External Stability and Competitiveness
100
80
60
40
20
0

Es

to
ni
un a
ga
ry
La
tv
G
ia
eo
rg
Bu ia
lg
a
M r ia
ol
do
Sl
L
v
ov i thu a
ak
an
Re i a
Ka p u
za bl i
kh c
s
Ar ta n
m
e
Sl nia
ov
en
Uk i a
r
Az ai n
er
e
ba
ija
n

-20

H

The rapid increase in the current account
deficit since 2005 has contributed to the
build-up of external vulnerabilities. The
resulting erosion in Georgia’s net
international investment position (with net
liabilities of 70 percent of GDP by end-2007)
puts Georgia in a similar position as other
Eastern European countries with prolonged
high current account deficits.

So urce : Fund staff estimates based o n W EO data.
1/ Computed by using the Lane Milesi-Feretti (20 06) data se t, and updating
to p resent by adding subsequent current account deficits (WEO).

The composition of external financing and
the temporary nature of large current
account items mitigate concerns about external stability. Until the August conflict, the
current account deficit was primarily financed by FDI with high import content. The recent
surge in defense-related imports—expected to be temporary—also contributed to the high
import bill. Staff estimates that FDI and defense-related imports amounted to around 10 and
8½ percent of GDP in 2007, respectively. Going forward, as these temporary factors unwind,
the current account balance would be expected to converge to its underlying level, estimated at
about 13 percent of GDP.1
Exchange Rate Assessment

Staff does not find evidence of a significantly overvalued real exchange rate that could result in
external instability. Based on various approaches, overvaluation of the lari is estimated in the
14 to 18 percent range.2
•

The macro balance approach suggests a current account deficit norm of around 7
percent of GDP.3 The difference between the norm and the underlying current account
deficit indicates a REER overvaluation of 14 percent.4

•

The external sustainability approach points to a sustainable external deficit norm of
about 6 percent of GDP, assuming Georgia’s negative net international investment
position (IIP) will remain unchanged at some 70 percent of GDP, consistent with a 18
percent overvaluation.5

•

The equilibrium real exchange rate approach suggests overvaluation of around 17
percent.6

1

Staff assumes that FDI (as a percent of GDP) will moderate in the medium term as investment opportunities decrease. The FDI
import component will likely decline as onshore sourcing of inputs increases. Military spending as a share of GDP is expected to
fall to the average observed in comparable countries, and commodity import prices (oil and gas) will revert to their projected
medium-term levels.
2
As a general caveat, it is difficult to pinpoint the equilibrium exchange rate or the equilibrium current account for a transition
economy. Georgia has undergone significant structural changes since 2003 with rapid growth and realignment of trade and
investment links.
3
The macro balance approach is applied using CGER’s fixed-effects coefficients on fundamental variables and an estimate of the
country-specific constant for Georgia.
4
Staff use -0.36 for the Georgia-specific current account elasticity with respect to the real exchange rate. It is obtained by using a
Georgia-specific export elasticity of -1.25 based on a vector error correction model of Georgia’s exports and the CGER-based
import elasticity of 0.92 (a vector error correction model of Georgia’s imports did not yield stable and statistically significant
estimates).
5
The external sustainability approach stabilizes 2007 NFA, as proxied by Georgia’s international investment position in 2007. The
same current account elasticity is used.
6
Due to data limitations, the CGER equilibrium real exchange rate approach is adapted to use Georgia specific time-series in
AlShehabi and Ding (2008).

20
Box 2. Georgia: Financial Sector Developments and Vulnerabilities
The financial system is dominated by banks, although the non-bank financial sector has been
growing rapidly. There are currently 20 banks (17 of which are foreign-controlled), 18 credit unions,
27 microfinance organizations, 13 insurance companies, and 6 pension funds operating in Georgia.
The major insurance companies are associated with banks. Banking is highly concentrated, with two
dominating banks and about six medium-sized banks, which together account for more than 90
percent of total banking system assets.
Banking Sector Concentration:
Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
2,200

Loans

2,000

1,800

Assets

1,600

Deposits

1,400

Banks have aggressively expanded credit in
recent years, particularly in construction, real
estate, and consumer and mortgage lending.
Credit growth has outpaced deposit growth by a
wide margin. As a result, banks have
increasingly relied on external financing,
consisting to a large extent of foreign bank
loans and capital market financing.

The August 2008 armed conflict triggered a
sizeable short-term deposit outflow (14
percent of total deposits). The deposit base has
stabilized since September, and the FSA
attributes recent deposit withdrawals mainly to the need to finance day-to-day expenditures.
However, deposit dollarization has increased significantly owing to the November 2008 devaluation
of the lari (both through a shift of depositors from lari into dollar and due to the valuation effect).
1,200

1,000
Dec-05 Mar-06 Jun-06 Sep-06 Dec-06 Mar-07 Jun-07 Sep-07 Dec-07 Mar-08 Jun-08 Sep-08 Dec-08
Source: NBG.

Financial soundness indicators have shown significant worsening since late 2007. The capital
adequacy ratio decreased by 3 percentage points, nonperforming loans increased sharply, and the
liquidity ratio declined by 7 percentage points. This has affected bank profitability significantly,
resulting in a negative return on equity and on assets. The worsening of banking sector conditions is
attributed to the rapid credit growth in recent years, the conflict with Russia, the impact of the global
economic slowdown, and the November devaluation.
The banking sector is vulnerable to liquidity, refinancing, exchange rate, and credit risk:
•

Private external financing sources (with the exception of some capital injections from parent
banks) have largely dried up in the wake of the recent crisis, but the major banks have been
able to secure financing from international financial institutions and received significant
liquidity support from the NGB.

•

Deposit and credit dollarization is high (around 75 percent). Since the currency denomination
of assets largely matches that of liabilities, the direct exposure to exchange rate risk is
limited. Indirect exposure through the balance sheets of borrowers, however, is substantial.

•

In addition, available data suggest considerable credit risk stemming from credit
concentration in large borrowers, in particular with respect to foreign currency loans.

•

More than 40 percent of total loans are collateralized by real estate, the prices of which are
declining.

21
Figure 1. Georgia: Real Sector Developments and Outlook
...whose slowdown is projected to be in the middle range of
other transition economies...

Georgia's growth performance has been particularly dependent
on FDI...
20
10

25

FDI in percent of GDP, 2007

Change in FDI Growth Rates from 2007 to 2009
(In percent)

0
-10
-20
-30

20

15

120
Change in GDP Growth Rates from 2007 to 2009
(In percent)

10

80

-90

60

-140

40

-190

20

-240

0

ia
G
eo
rg
ia
R
om
an
ia
Ar
m
en
ia
Be
l
a
Ka
ru
s
za
kh
st
an
U
kr
ai
ne

rk
ey

Georgia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan

to
ni
a
La
tv
ia
Li
th
ua
ni
a
Tu
rk
ey
Ar
m
en
ia
G
eo
rg
Ka
ia
za
kh
st
an
Be
la
ru
s
R
om
an
ia
Bu
lg
ar
ia

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

... by lower exports, partly due to the drop in its main export
good, ferro-alloys,....
8
7
6
5

...and a decline in remittances which are particularly dependent
on Russia.
160 80

Exports and Changes in Prices of Main Exports
(In Billions of US Dollars and in Percent)

Growth in Remittances
(In Percent)

140

Exports of goods and services (LHS)

120 60

Change in prices of ferro-alloys (RHS)

100
80

4

2009
proj.

Es

in
e

Growth in Bank Credit to Private Sector
(Annual percent change)

100

-40

U
kr
a

La
tv

GDP growth in Georgia was particularly hard hit by the sharp
decline in credit growth, ...

which is consistent with the projected decline in GDP growth
rates.
60

Tu

Es
t

Li
th

Tu
rk
e
Be y
la
ru
Li
th s
ua
ni
a
R
om
an
ia
U
kr
ai
ne
Ar
m
en
ia
L
Ka atv
ia
za
kh
st
an
Es
to
ni
a
G
eo
rg
Bu ia
lg
ar
ia

ua
ni
a

0

on
i

which is consistent with the projected decline in GDP growth.

Bu

5

a
lg
ar
ia

-40
-50
-60
-70
-80

10

40

60

3

40

2

20

20

1

0

0

-20

-1
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj

0

-40 -20
2004

2005

Sources: Department of Statistics of Georgia, IFC, Georgian authorities, and Fund staff estimates.

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj

22
Figure 2. Georgia: External Sector Developments
Rising government spending and higher FDI have contributed to a
deterioration in the current account deficit...
30

60

2.4

Current Account, FDI and Exchange Rate
(In percent of GDP and GEL/USD)

20

as imports increased sharply while exports remained stable
relative to GDP.
Trade Balance for GNFS
(In percent of GDP)

40

2.2

Exchange rate (RHS)

20

10

2.0

0

0
-20

1.8
-10

-40

1.6

-20

-30

-60

Current account (percent of GDP, LHS)
FDI (percent of GDP, LHS)
2003

2004

2005

2006

Exports

1.4 -80

2007

2008 est. 2009 proj.

2003

The large trade deficit has been financed by higher private
capital inflows and...
2000

Imports
2005

2006

Trade balance
2007

2008 est. 2009 proj.

rising remittances, especially from Russia.
800

Net Private Capital Inflows to Georgia
(In millions of U.S. Dollars)

Remittances to Georgia by Source
(In millions of U.S. Dollars unless noted otherwise)
Ukraine (LHS)
Greece (LHS)
USA (LHS)
Other (LHS)
Russia (LHS)

700

FDI to Georgia

1500

2004

600

Equity flows, net
500

Loan disbursements
1000

400

8

Total (percent of GDP, RHS)

300
500

12

4

200
100

0

0

0
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
est.

2009
proj.

2005

Although it has not spurred exports yet, large FDI into
nontradable sectors is expected to enhance Georgia's
competitiveness over the medium term.
300

Sectoral Composition of FDI
(In percent)

30

250

2007

25

2008 Jan-Oct

The source of FDI has been broad-based, reducing
Georgia's exposure to a particular region.

40
35

2007

200

Q1-Q3 2008

150

20

FDI Inflows to Georgia by Source
(In millions of U.S. Dollars)
United Kingdom (LHS)
USA (LHS)
Turkey (LHS)
Russia (LHS)
Czech Republic (LHS)
Other (RHS)

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000

15

100
800

10

50

600

5
0

0

2005
O
er
th

s

c
ru

e
ic
rv
Se

t
ns

y

g
in
nk
Ba

Co

g
er
En

lE

s/

at
st

n
tio

nk
ba

ea
R

ng
di

d
an

a
ic
un
m

u
cl

n

x
/e

tio

om
t/c
or

ry

p
ns

st
du
In

a
Tr

e

Source: National Bank of Georgia.

-50

2007

2008 Q1-Q3

400
200

Figure 3. Georgia: Export Sector Indicators
While the CIS countries and EU remain the main destinations for
Georgian products, exports growth has been broad-based.

Georgia has gained market shares in world trade, but lost some
ground in Russia and Turkey.
500

100

Share of Georgia in Imports of Selected Trading Partners,
(2000=100)
World

400

300

Georgia's Average Annual Export Growth 1/
(Annualized growth, 2001-2007)

90
80

European Union

70

Turkey

60

Russia

50

United States

40

200

30

18.9

33.6
100

21.5
13.9

20
10

100

1.5

6.8

South
and
South
East
Asia

Other

3.7

0
-10

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Total

2007

Average 2000-01
20

Russia

Other
CIS

North
America

Export Specialization by Product
(Share in total exports, in percent)

30

Average 2006-07
World

Georgia

20
10
10
0
Vegetables Beverages Metal ores Chemical
and fruit
and
products
tobacco

Cement

Iron and
steel

Machinery

0
Vegetables
and fruit

Source: National Bank of Georgia.
1/ The numbers on the top of each column reflect shares in Georgia's exports.

Beverages
and tobacco

Metal ores

Chemical
products

Iron and steel

Machinery

23

40

Export Concentration by Product
(Sh
i t t l
t i
t)

Turkey

Reflecting this, Georgia remains specialized in resource-based slowgrowing sectors, such as metallurgy and food industry.

Despite large FDI, the export base has not changed dramatically.
30

EU

24
Figure 4: Georgia: Exchange Rate Developments
Several regional currencies have devalued in recent months:

Exchange rate pressures built up in the wake of the conflict...
80

150

400

UKR - Hryvna

130
120
110

RUS - Ruble

100
90
AZE - Manat

80

200

40

100
20
0
0
-100
-20
-200
-40

Daily
intervention

GEO - Lari

70

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

-80
Jan-08

Dec-08

...and the authorities pegged the lari to the dollar...
1.70

-500
Feb-08

Mar-08

120

Cumulative
intervention

May-08

Jun-08

Aug-08

Sep-08

Oct-08

Dec-08

Jan-09

120

(December 2007 = 100)

1.65

200

Lari/Dollar
1.60

EUR/USD

110

110

100
0

1.55

-100

1.50

Lari/Dollar

Cumulative Intervention (in millions of dollars)
(+= net purchases, -=net sales)

-400

...just when the dollar strengthened against other currencies,

400
300

-300

-60

ARM - Dram
60
Dec-04

300

Cumulative
intervention

60

Intervention (in millions of dollars)
(+= purchases, -= sales)

140

Cumulative Intervention (in millions of dollars)
(+= net purchases, -=net sales)

(December 2004 = 100)

100

100

-200
1.45
-300
90

1.40

-400
-500

90

GEL/USD

1.35
Feb-08Mar-08Apr-08 May- Jun-08 Jul-08 Aug08
08

Sep- Oct-08 Nov08
08

Dec- Jan-09Feb-09
08

Introduction of temporary lari peg to dollar
80
Jan-08

…which resulted in substantial international reserves losses...

Mar-08

Apr-08

May-08

Jun-08

Jul-08

Aug-08

Sep-08

Oct-08

Nov-08

Dec-08

Jan-09

Feb-09

…and redollarization of bank deposits.
4

2,000

80
Feb-08

2.2

90%

1,750

(in millions of dollar)

1,250

2

1,000

750

In months of next year's imports
(right scale)
1

500

0
Dec-03

Dec-04

Dec-05

Dec-06

Source: National Bank of Georgia.

Dec-07

Deposit dollarization
(const. 12/03 exchange rate)
(right scale)

0
Dec-08

80%

1.8

1.6

70%

GEL/USD
(left scale)

1.2
Dec-03

60%

Deposit dollarization
(right scale)

1.4

Gross international reserves
(left scale)

250

(in months of next year's imports)

2.0

3

1,500

50%
Dec-04

Dec-05

Dec-06

Dec-07

Dec-08

25
Figure 5. Georgia: Fiscal Sector Developments of the General Government
The fiscal deficit has been rising since 2004, partly financed by
privatization proceeds,....
40

Fiscal Deficit and Privatization Receipts
(In percent of GDP)

8

as expenditure growth exceeded revenue growth....

Tax Revenue and Expenditure
(In percent of GDP)

Tax revenue
Expenditure (capital and current)

30
4
20

0

10

-4

Fiscal deficit

Privatization

-8

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj.

2003

which nevertheless was impressive compared to other
countries in the region.
40

Tax Revenues
(In percent of GDP)

30

Georgia

Armenia

2004

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj.

External Financing
(In percent of GDP)

5

Azerbaijan

2005

For 2008, donor inflows will provide the necessary financing,
partly in form of grants.

Kazakhstan
External financing
3

20

Grants

1

10

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj.

-1
2003

120

1000

Real Growth Rate of Revenues
(12-month real growth rate in percent)

80

800

40

600

0

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj.

While defense expenditures declined since mid-2008, total
expenditures remained high,...

Looking at the recent past, revenue growth slowed down, but
recovered from the sharp, conflict related decline in August.

Total and Defense Expenditures of the State Government
(In millions of GEL)

Total expenditures
Defense expenditures

400

Revenues on domestic activity
-40

200

Revenues from imports

-80
2007m1

Total tax revenue
2007m5

2007m9

2008m1

2008m5

2008m9

0
2007m1

which leads to a large fiscal deficit even though the operational
balance has turned moderately positive again.
600

300

2008m9

Armenia

Azerbaijan

40

0

2008m5

Georgia

50

200
100

2008m1

Total Debt
(In percent of GDP)

60

400

2007m9

While Georgia's debt to GDP ratio is above other countries in the
region, it has remained at a comfortable level.
70

Total and Operational Balances
(In millions of GEL)

500

2007m5

30

-100
20

-200
-300

Total balance

-400

Operatioanl balance

-500

10
0

2006Q1

2006Q3

2007Q1

2007Q3

2008Q1

2008Q3

Sources: Georgian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008 est. 2009 proj.

26
Figure 6. Georgia: Monetary Developments
Money and credit growth have slowed significantly after a three-year boom...

...which has resulted in significant monetary...
25

100

Bank credit to private sector

60

Broad money

40

15

M2/GDP
10

20

RM/GDP
Reserve money

0
Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

5

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08
0
Dec-03

-20

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

...but also contributed to inflation.

...and financial deepening...

18

60

35

3-month lagged M3 growth and inflation
(y-o-y, in percent)

Credit/GDP

30

50

25

(in percent)

M3/GDP

20

(in percent)

(year-on-year growth in percent)

80

16

3-month lagged
broad money growth
(left scale)

14
12

40

10

20
30

8

15

Deposits/GDP

6

20
CPI Inflation
(right scale)

10

4

10

5

2

0
Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

0
Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

0
Dec-08

... is reflected in an increased liquidity preference,

The recent slowdown in financial intermediation...
100

50

600

45
Credit to private sector

500

40

Currency/M3
(left scale)

35
60

400

40

25

300

20
20

Currency/lari deposits
(right scale)

15

Bank deposits

10
0
Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

200

100

5
0
Dec-03

-20

...which reflects the increased uncertainty...

Jun-04

Dec-04

Jun-05

Dec-05

Jun-06

Dec-06

Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

0
Dec-08

...resulting from the armed conflict and global financial crisis.
3000

4500
4000

2500
Loans
2000

3000
(millions of lari)

(millions of dollars)

3500

2500
2000
1500

Deposits

Armed
conflict

1500

FX deposits
(const. Aug'08 exchange rate)

1000
Devaluation

Lari deposits

1000
500
500
0
Jan-08 Feb-08 Mar-08 Apr-08 May-08 Jun-08 Jul-08 Aug-08 Sep-08 Oct-08 Nov-08 Dec-08 Jan-09 Feb-09

Source: National Bank of Georgia

FX deposits

Armed
conflict
Devaluation

0
Jan-08 Feb-08 Mar-08 Apr-08 May-08 Jun-08 Jul-08 Aug-08 Sep-08 Oct-08 Nov-08 Dec-08 Jan-09 Feb-09

(in percent)

30
(in percent)

(year-on-year growth in percent)

80

27
Figure 7. Georgia: Recent Banking Sector Developments
...albeit with liquidity support from the NBG.

Solvency and liquidity indicators remain satisfactory,...
600

600

Reserve
deposits

500

40

Liquid assets/Total assets

500

(in millions of lari)

(in percent)

400

30

20

400

NBG CDs
outstanding

300

300

200

200

Capital/Risk-weighted assets

10

Loans
from NBG

100

0
Dec-06

Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

0
Dec-06

But the crisis has hit banks' profitability...

ROA
(left scale)
ROE
(right scale)

20%

14

15%

12

10%

10
(in percent)

3%

5%

0%

0%

-1%

-5%

4

-2%

-10%

2

Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

-15%
Dec-08

Dec-08

6

Special provisions/Total loans

0
Dec-06

Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

Dec-08

Sep-08

Dec-08

Consequently, banks temporarily suspended new lending.
7000

80

6000

60

5000

40

net interest income
(in millions of lari)

in millions of lari

Jun-08

NPL/Total loans

...and lost interest income.

20
0
-20

4000

3000

2000

net non-interest income

-40
-60
Dec-06

Dec-07

8

1%

-3%
Dec-06

Jun-07

...due to deteriorating asset quality and higher provisionings,

4%

2%

100

0

Dec-08

(in millions of lari)

50

1000

0

Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Jun-08

Source: National Bank of Georgia

Sep-08

Dec-08

Dec-06

Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Jun-08

28

Table 1. Georgia: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2007–13
2007
Prel.

2008
Est.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Real GDP growth
Population (million) 1/
Consumer price index, period average
Consumer price index, end-of-period
GDP per capita (US$)
Poverty rate (in percent)
Unemployment rate (in percent)

12.4
4.4
9.2
11.0
2,324
21.3

2.0
4.4
10.0
5.5
2,925
...

1.0
4.4
5.0
7.0
2,562
...

3.0
4.4
6.5
6.0
2,700
...

5.0
4.4
8.3
6.0
2,925
...

5.0
4.4
8.3
6.0
3,145
...

5.0
4.4
8.3
6.0
3,364
...

11.5

...

...

...

...

...

...

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and saving
Investment
Public
Private
Gross national saving
Public
Private
Saving-investment balance

28.1
3.4
24.7

23.7
8.4
15.3

22.0
7.9
14.1

22.8
6.9
15.9

23.2
5.4
17.8

23.5
4.4
19.1

23.5
2.8
20.7

8.1
4.2
3.8
-20.0

1.1
2.1
-1.0
-22.6

5.3
3.0
2.3
-16.7

5.2
1.9
3.2
-17.6

7.7
2.1
5.6
-15.5

9.3
2.5
6.9
-14.2

10.4
2.3
8.1
-13.1

29.3
25.0
4.2
9.0
-4.7
0.2
4.6

30.7
28.6
2.1
8.5
-6.4
0.1
6.3

29.5
26.5
3.0
8.7
-5.6
0.0
5.6

27.0
25.1
1.9
7.1
-5.1
0.0
5.1

26.0
23.9
2.1
5.5
-3.4
0.0
3.4

25.5
23.0
2.5
4.5
-2.0
0.0
2.0

25.3
23.0
2.3
4.1
-1.9
0.0
1.9

-0.9
0.2
5.2

-2.4
5.0
3.7

2.2
2.1
1.3

-0.3
4.3
1.1

0.1
2.9
0.4

0.3
1.7
0.0

1.0
0.9
0.0

Consolidated government operations
Revenue
Expenses
Operational balance
Capital spending and net lending
Total balance
Statistical discrepancy
Total financing
Domestic
External
Privatization receipts

(In percent of GDP)

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Monetary sector
Reserve money

25.6

-4.5

8.0

…

…

…

…

Broad money (including foreign exch. deposits)
Bank credit to private sector

49.6
71.3

7.0
31.0

9.0
6.0

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

External sector
Exports of goods and services (percent of GDP)
Annual percentage change

31.1
24.7

28.1
13.7

25.9
-19.3

30.6
24.7

32.2
14.6

33.1
12.3

33.5
10.3

57.9
34.1
-2,006
-19.6
1,361
2.2
17.1

57.9
25.9
-2,911
-22.6
1,480
3.0
9.5

51.7
-21.8
-1,879
-16.7
1,470
2.7
9.2

55.6
13.4
-2,096
-17.6
1,545
2.6
10.4

54.4
6.8
-2,012
-15.5
1,666
2.6
11.2

53.5
7.3
-2,005
-14.2
1,803
2.7
12.1

52.6
7.0
-2,021
-13.1
1,946
2.7
11.7

Imports of goods and services (percent of GDP)
Annual percentage change
Current account balance (in millions of US$)
In percent of GDP
Gross international reserves (in millions of US$)
In months of next year's imports of goods and services (excl. pipeline imports)
Foreign direct investment (percent of GDP)
Sources: Georgian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes Abkhazia residents.

Table 2: Georgia: Annual Consolidated Government Operations, 2007-13 1/
2007

2008
1st Rev.

2009
Act.

1st Rev.

2010

Proj.

2011

2012

2013

2007

Proj.

2008
1st Rev.

2009

Act.

(In millions of lari)

Revenues

2010

1st Rev. Proj.

2011

2012

2013

Proj.

(In percent of GDP)

5,790

5,854

6,287

5,961

5,939

6,331

6,867

7,518

29.3

29.9

30.7

29.8

29.5

27.0

26.0

25.5

25.3

Taxes
Other revenues
Grants

4,390
480
102

4,803
461
526

4,753
484
617

5,002
341
944

4,867
399
695

5,150
434
355

5,590
480
261

6,206
486
176

6,842
535
141

25.8
2.8
0.6

24.8
2.4
2.7

24.9
2.5
3.2

23.7
1.6
4.5

24.1
2.0
3.4

23.4
2.0
1.6

23.0
2.0
1.1

23.0
1.8
0.7

23.0
1.8
0.5

Current expenditure

4,254

5,245

5,452

5,010

5,351

5,513

5,813

6,206

6,842

25.0

27.1

28.6

23.7

26.5

25.1

23.9

23.0

23.0

676
1,580
399
14
851
636
98
39
59

1,023
1,766
421
12
1,264
631
128
69
59

1,007
1,840
394
12
1,287
788
123
64
59

1,119
1,070
416
10
1,525
657
213
155
58

1,159
1,094
470
14
1,376
1,027
213
155
58

1,247
1,090
510
15
1,495
909
247
184
63

1,281
1,127
515
16
1,632
957
283
213
70

4.0
9.3
2.3
0.1
5.0
3.7
0.6
0.2
0.3

5.3
9.1
2.2
0.1
6.5
3.3
0.7
0.4
0.3

5.3
9.6
2.1
0.1
6.7
4.1
0.6
0.3
0.3

5.3
5.1
2.0
0.0
7.2
3.1
1.0
0.7
0.3

5.7
5.4
2.3
0.1
6.8
5.1
1.1
0.8
0.3

5.7
5.0
2.3
0.1
6.8
4.1
1.1
0.8
0.3

5.3
4.6
2.1
0.1
6.7
3.9
1.2
0.9
0.3

718

545

402

1,277

610

426

519

661

676

4.2

2.8

2.1

6.0

3.0

1.9

2.1

2.5

2.3

1,524

1,703

1,623

2,747

1,751

1,554

1,339

1,205

1,231

9.0

8.8

8.5

13.0

8.7

7.1

5.5

4.5

4.1

1,465
59

1,612
91

1,508
114

2,630
117

1,600
151

1,521
33

1,319
20

1,196
9

1,223
8

8.6
0.3

8.3
0.5

7.9
0.6

12.4
0.6

7.9
0.7

6.9
0.2

5.4
0.1

4.4
0.0

4.1
0.0

-806

-1,158

-1,220

-1,470

-1,141

-1,128

-820

-544

-555

-4.7

-6.0

-6.4

-7.0

-5.6

-5.1

-3.4

-2.0

-1.9

33

0

24

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.2

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

774

1,158

1,196

1,470

1,141

1,128

820

544

555

4.6

6.0

6.3

7.0

5.6

5.1

3.4

2.0

1.9

-149
-30
-119
34
166
-132
0
889

-454
-63
-391
982
1,072
-53
-37
630

-460
-61
-399
957
1,073
-59
-58
697

464
-77
541
810
931
-157
37
196

454
-68
522
419
583
-204
40
269

-67
-67
0
943
1,046
-103
0
252

13
13
0
708
823
-116
0
100

73
73
0
472
624
-152
0
0

283
283
0
274
1,511
-1,237
0
0

-0.9
-0.2
-0.7
0.2
1.0
-0.8
0.0
5.2

-2.3
-0.3
-2.0
5.1
5.5
-0.3
-0.2
3.3

-2.4
-0.3
-2.1
5.0
5.6
-0.3
-0.3
3.7

2.2
-0.4
2.6
3.8
4.4
-0.7
0.2
0.9

2.2
-0.3
2.6
2.1
2.9
-1.0
0.2
1.3

-0.3
-0.3
0.0
4.3
4.8
-0.5
0.0
1.1

0.1
0.1
0.0
2.9
3.4
-0.5
0.0
0.4

0.3
0.3
0.0
1.7
2.3
-0.6
0.0
0.0

1.0
1.0
0.0
0.9
5.1
-4.2
0.0
0.0

16,999
876

19,353
1,684

19,080
1,813

21,126 20,231 21,987 24,356 26,981 29,746
2,414 1,836 1,483 1,081
719
696

5.2

8.7

9.5

11.4

9.1

6.7

4.4

2.7

2.3

Compensation for employees
Use of goods and services
Subsidies
Grants
Social expenses
Other expenses 2/
Interest
To nonresidents
To residents
Operational balance
Capital spending and net lending
Capital
Net lending
Total balance
Statistical discrepancy
Total financing
Domestic
Amortization
Use of deposits at the NBG and banks
External
Borrowing
Repayment
Use of Sovereign Wealth Fund resources
Privatization receipts
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP
Fiscal deficit excluding grants

Source: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Consolidated government includes central and local governments and the Sovereign Wealth Funds.
2/ Other expenses include spending of Legal Entities of Public Law, for example, schools, universities, and hospitals.

29

4,972

30
Table 3: Georgia: Quarterly Consolidated Government Operations, 2008-09 1/
2008
Q1
Q2
Actual Actual

Q3
Act.

2009
Q4
Act.

Annual
Actual

Q1
Proj.

Q2
Proj.

Q3
Proj.

Q4
Proj.

Annual
Proj.

(In millions of lari)
Revenues

1,309

1,402

1,319

1,824

5,854

1,068

1,295

1,677

1,921

5,961

Taxes
Direct
Indirect
Other revenues
Grants

1,123
520
603
157
29

1,265
565
700
119
18

1,183
517
666
91
45

1,182
511
670
117
526

4,753
2,113
2,639
484
617

947
400
547
57
65

1,116
473
643
80
100

1,183
493
690
114
380

1,621
527
1,094
149
151

4,867
1,893
2,974
399
695

Current expenditure

1,290

1,404

1,235

1,522

5,452

1,178

1,250

1,258

1,666

5,351

235
525
97
6
287
116
25
10
15

257
578
70
3
329
146
22
8
14

250
390
77
2
316
175
24
10
15

266
347
150
2
355
351
52
37
15

1,007
1,840
394
12
1,287
788
123
64
59

266
260
102
8
336
153
53
19
15

282
296
125
4
338
153
52
61
14

299
269
132
1
341
162
54
22
15

313
269
111
1
360
559
54
53
14

1,159
1,094
470
14
1,376
1,027
213
155
58

19

-2

84

302

402

-110

45

419

255

610

208

428

468

519

1,623

370

490

468

423

1,751

190
18

403
25

417
51

498
21

1,508
114

337
33

443
47

427
41

393
30

1,600
151

-189

-431

-384

-216

-1,220

-480

-444

-49

-168

-1,141

30

23

-60

30

24

0

0

0

0

0

159

407

444

186

1,196

480

444

49

168

1,141

-25
-15
-10
16
27
-10
0
168

-190
-19
-171
218
772
-13
-541
379

273
-4
277
110
59
-19
70
61

-516
-23
-494
613
216
-17
414
90

-460
-61
-399
957
1,073
-59
-58
697

303
-19
322
121
95
-14
40
56

302
-17
319
109
135
-27
0
34

21
-19
40
-9
124
-134
0
38

-171
-13
-158
199
228
-29
0
141

454
-68
522
419
583
-204
40
269

4182.5 4995.2

4826

5076

19,080

4,302

5,133

5,266

5,530

20,231

Compensation for employees
Use of goods and services
Subsidies
Grants
Social expenses
Other expenses
Interest
To nonresidents
To residents
Operational balance
Capital spending and net lending
Capital
Net lending
Total balance
Statistical discrepancy
Total financing
Domestic
Amortization
Use of deposits at the NBG and banks
External
Borrowing
Amortization
Use of Sovereign Wealth Fund resources
Privatization receipts
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Consolidated government includes central and local governments and the Sovereign Wealth Funds.

31
Table 4. Georgia: Summary Balance of Payments, 2007–13
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports
Imports
Services
Income (net)
Of which : interest payments
Transfers (net)
Of which : public sector
Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment (net)
Monetary authorities, net
General government
Portfolio investment (net)
Long-term loans received
Drawing
Repayment
Other, net
Private Sector, excl. FDI
Banks
Portfolio investment, net
Of which : equity liabilities
Loans received (net)
Other, net (currency and deposits, loans extended)
Other sectors
Portfolio investment, net
Long-term loans received (net)
Other, net

2007

2008
Est.

2009
1st rev.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

-2,006
-2,896
2,088
-4,984
161
39
-118
689
139

-2,911
-3,840
2,428
-6,268
14
-172
-228
1,088
426

-2,429
-3,391
2,420
-5,812
98
-135
-275
999
179

-1,879
-3,115
1,748
-4,863
209
-82
-287
1,110
452

-2,096
-3,332
2,190
-5,521
363
-32
-293
904
162

-2,012
-3,397
2,490
-5,887
509
-35
-332
911
108

-2,005
-3,547
2,768
-6,315
653
-18
-355
907
54

-2,021
-3,744
3,014
-6,757
801
-40
-411
961
52

128

100

495

133

148

97

93

75

2,307
1,676
-101
116
0
111
156
-45
5
616
569
21
34
653
-105
47
0
78
-31

2,738
1,177
-14
589
500
190
227
-37
-102
985
752
109
101
807
-164
233
69
133
32

2057
1,134
0
543
52
466
561
-95
25
380
315
188
116
-214
341
65
70
66
-71

1,571
1,032
0
235
0
211
323
-112
24
304
52
9
9
-168
211
252
32
287
-67

2,044
1,240
0
511
0
511
565
-54
0
294
229
84
14
59
85
65
34
5
26

2,095
1,451
0
376
0
376
435
-59
0
268
240
61
16
89
90
28
37
-13
4

2,278
1,716
0
269
0
269
345
-76
0
293
302
112
32
59
130
-8
51
-76
17

2,312
1,809
0
179
500
-321
277
-598
0
324
272
86
36
86
100
52
56
-26
21

Errors and omissions

-21

18

0

0

0

0

0

0

Overall balance

408

-55

123

-175

97

180

366

366

-408
-377
3
-34

55
-132
222
-35

-123
-95
-27
0

175
10
164
0

-97
-75
-22
0

-180
-121
-59
0

-366
-137
-229
0

-366
-143
-223
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

10,227
-19.6
-21.0
24.7
4.7
34.1
11.9
2,292
22.4
1,361
2.2
3,136
30.7
265
8.20
1,790
17.5
143
4.4

12,870
-22.6
-25.9
13.7
-3.8
25.9
4.8
2,163
16.8
1,480
3.0
4,581
35.6
763
21.1
2,668
20.7
161
4.5

13,163
-18.5
-19.8
-6.1
11.4
-8.1
5.4
1,514
11.5
1,473
2.2
4,617
35.1
993
26.6
3,057
23.2
169
4.5

11,269
-16.7
-20.7
-19.3
-4.9
-21.8
-7.9
1,336
11.9
1,470
2.7
4,851
43.0
1,140
39.0
2,935
26.0
227
7.8

11,881
-17.6
-19.0
24.7
14.9
13.4
6.5
1,534
12.9
1,545
2.6
5,599
47.1
875
24.0
3,556
29.9
189
5.2

12,972
-15.5
-16.3
14.6
9.2
6.8
3.9
1,719
13.3
1,666
2.6
6,053
46.7
1,109
26.6
3,894
30.0
247
5.9

14,164
-14.2
-14.5
12.3
8.5
7.3
5.7
2,009
14.2
1,803
2.7
6,191
43.7
1,552
33.1
4,033
28.5
464
9.9

15,428
-13.1
-13.4
10.3
8.0
7.0
5.6
2,133
13.8
1,946
2.7
6,434
41.7
2,142
41.4
4,115
26.7
1,027
19.9

Financing
Gross International Reserves (-increase)
Use of Fund Resources
Exceptional financing
Required financing (+ overfinancing)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
excluding official transfers (percent of GDP)
GNFS exports growth (percent)
GNFS exports volume growth (percent)
GNFS imports growth (percent)
GNFS imports volume growth (percent)
Net capital inflows to private sector
(in percent of GDP)
Gross international reserves (end of period)
(in months of next year GNFS imports)
External debt (nominal) /1
(in percent of GDP)
External debt service /1
(in percent of exports)
External public sector debt (nominal)
(in percent of GDP)
External public debt service
(in percent of exports)

1/ For private debt starting 2008, estimates are based on the survey conducted by the National Bank of Georgia and Fund staff assumptions.

Table 5. Georgia: Accounts of the National Bank of Georgia, 2007–09
2007
Mar.

Jun.

Sep.

Dec.

Mar.

Jun.

2008
Sep.
Act.

2009
Dec.
1st Rev.

Dec.
Act..

Mar.
Proj.

Jun.
Proj.

Sep.
Proj.

Dec.
Proj.

(In millions of lari)
Net foreign assets 1/

1,515

1,811

1,460

1,500

1,594

1,266

1,475

1,528

1,152

1,115

1,453

1,378

-58
128
785
737
48
-656
99
-237
-257
-49

-208
96
775
737
38
-680
99
-353
-373
-49

-431
10
775
737
38
-766
104
-448
-468
-96

38
329
776
737
39
-447
103
-304
-377
-90

-87
315
776
689
87
-461
3
-392
-467
-13

6
149
776
689
87
-627
3
-180
-180
34

468
400
778
689
89
-377
3
-18
-143
82

-7
-62
778
689
89
-839
3
-28
80

-96
-103
777
689
88
-880
4
132
-77
-129

242
219
777
641
136
-558
4
208
-75
-189

332
538
777
641
136
-239
4
32
-100
-242

96
578
777
641
136
-199
4
-262
-280
-225

174
420
777
641
136
-357
4
-42
-100
-208

1,153
858
231
64

1,308
967
140
200

1,380
1,081
66
233

1,499
1,310
1
187

1,414
1,287
0
126

1,600
1,413
0
187

1,734
1,399
0
335

1,469
1,366
0
103

1,432
1,291
0
141

1,394
1,252
0
142

1,447
1,295
0
152

1,549
1,348
0
201

1,552
1,350
0
202

17.2

42.6

67.5

38.0

2.7

8.9

-13.0

1.0

4.5

-26.3

-28.8

-5.2

-10.5

-20.6
-23.3
0.0
1.5
1.3

-33.1
-26.1
-0.1
-8.3
1.3

-51.8
-33.3
0.3
-16.2
-2.7

-12.5
-6.5
0.3
-4.1
-2.1

-8.3
-0.9
-6.6
-5.9
5.1

-2.2
-12.0
-6.6
8.2
8.2

28.7
4.8
-6.6
19.1
11.5

-3.0
-26.1
-6.6
18.4
11.3

-8.9
-28.8
-6.6
29.1
-2.6

23.6
22.5
0.0
5.3
-4.2

29.9
44.8
0.0
-7.0
-7.9

13.4
47.6
0.0
-27.5
-6.7

18.9
36.5
0.0
-12.2
-5.5

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Required reserves 2/
Balances on banks' correspondent accounts 3/

-3.4
-7.7
2.9
62.4

9.6
4.1
-37.7
411.7

15.6
16.3
-70.7
495.3

25.6
41.0
-99.5
377.7

-5.7
-1.8
-0.1
-32.4

6.8
7.8
-0.1
0.0

15.7
6.8
-0.1
79.3

-2.0
4.2
-0.1
-45.0

-4.5
-1.5
-0.1
-24.5

-2.7
-3.0
0.0
0.7

1.1
0.4
0.0
7.6

8.2
4.4
0.0
42.6

8.4
4.6
0.0
42.9

Memorandum items:
Net international reserves
(in millions of USD, at prog. exchange rates) 4/
Net domestic assets (in millions of lari, at prog. exchange rate)
Reserve money (in percent, 12-month growth)

460
163
17.8

658
156
25.2

807
162
25.8

…
…
25.6

…
…
22.6

1,055
42
22.4

848
452
25.7

851
214
-2.0

909
116
-4.5

633
310
-1.4

585
446
-9.6

769
240
-10.7

728
311
8.4

Net domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Claims on general government (incl. t-bills)
Nontradable govt. debt
Securitized debt (marketable)
Deposits
Claims on rest of economy
Claims on banks
Certificates of deposits and bonds
Other items, net
Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Required reserves 2/
Balances on banks' correspondent accounts 3/

(Percent contribution, compared to reserve money at the end of previous year)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Claims on rest of economy
Claims on banks
Other items, net

(Percentage change, relative to end of previous year)

Sources: National Bank of Georgia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ New classification of gross international reserves reported since the beginning of 2007.
2/ The required reserve regime was modified in May 2007. Under the new regime, the lari reserves are deposited at banks' corresponding accounts; the foreign-currency reserves have been gradually converted
into the required currency (USD) and included in the NFA as both asset and liability.
3/ Including the lari required reserves and overnight deposits from banks.
4/ Projections are based on projected exchange rates.

32

1,211

Table 6. Georgia: Monetary Survey, 2007–09
Mar.

2007
Jun.
Sep.

Dec.

Mar.

Jun.

2008
Sep.
Act.

Dec.
1st Rev.

Dec.
Est.

Mar.
Proj.

2009
Jun.
Sep.
Proj.
Proj.

Dec.
Proj.

(In millions of lari)
Net foreign assets 1/
NBG
Commercial banks

584
1,211
-627

772
1,515
-743

799
1,811
-1,012

274
1,460
-1,186

199
1,500
-1,301

-40
1,594
-1,634

-394
1,266
-1,660

-185
1,475
-1,660

-42
1,528
-1,570

-453
1,152
-1,605

-526
1,115
-1,642

-225
1,453
-1,678

-337
1,378
-1,715

2,091
3,228
107
3,122
-1,138

2,476
3,705
67
3,638
-1,229

2,910
4,251
-40
4,291
-1,341

3,706
5,032
293
4,739
-1,326

3,828
5,336
265
5,071
-1,508

4,228
5,682
85
5,598
-1,454

4,360
5,846
339
5,507
-1,486

4,195
5,495
-99
5,594
-1,300

4,300
5,921
-155
6,076
-1,621

4,695
6,201
167
6,034
-1,506

4,873
6,532
486
6,046
-1,658

4,707
6,694
526
6,168
-1,987

4,979
6,808
368
6,441
-1,830

2,674
1,365
762
1,912

3,248
1,646
851
2,397

3,709
1,928
952
2,756

3,981
2,132
1,152
2,829

4,027
2,259
1,123
2,904

4,188
2,417
1,235
2,952

3,966
2,257
1,196
2,769

4,009
2,165
1,116
2,894

4,258
1,854
1,083
3,176

4,242
1,794
1,063
3,178

4,347
1,828
1,117
3,230

4,481
1,873
1,179
3,302

4,642
1,922
1,177
3,464

-1.4

5.7

6.7

-13.0

-1.9

-7.9

-16.8

-11.5

-7.9

-9.7

-11.4

-4.3

-6.9

1.9
0.4
-11.5
11.9
1.5

16.4
18.3
-13.0
31.3
-1.9

32.7
38.8
-17.0
55.8
-6.1

62.6
68.1
-4.5
72.6
-5.5

3.1
7.6
-0.7
8.3
-4.6

13.1
16.3
-5.2
21.6
-3.2

16.4
20.4
1.1
19.3
-4.0

12.3
11.6
-9.9
21.5
0.6

14.9
22.3
-11.3
33.6
-7.4

9.3
6.6
7.6
-1.0
2.7

13.5
14.3
15.1
-0.7
-0.9

9.5
18.1
16.0
2.2
-8.6

15.9
20.8
12.3
8.6
-4.9

Broad money (M3)
Broad money, excl. forex deposits (M2)
Currency held by the public
Total deposit liabilities
Credit to the rest of the economy

0.5
-1.7
-7.9
4.3
11.3

22.0
18.5
2.9
30.7
29.7

39.3
38.8
15.1
50.3
52.9

49.6
53.5
39.2
54.2
68.9

1.2
6.0
-2.5
2.7
7.0

5.2
13.4
7.2
4.4
18.1

-0.4
5.9
3.9
-2.1
16.2

0.7
1.5
-3.1
2.3
18.0

7.0
-13.0
-6.0
12.3
28.2

-0.4
-3.2
-1.8
0.1
-0.7

2.1
-1.4
3.2
1.7
-0.5

5.2
1.0
8.9
4.0
1.5

9.0
3.7
8.7
9.1
6.0

Memorandum items:
M3 (in percent, 12-month growth)
M2 (in percent, 12-month growth)
Credit to the economy (in percent, 12-month growth)

33.5
25.6
52.6

42.2
31.5
55.8

53.2
51.4
62.8

49.6
53.5
68.9

50.6
65.4
62.4

28.9
46.8
53.9

6.9
17.1
28.3

0.7
1.5
18.0

7.0
-13.0
28.2

5.3
-20.6
19.0

3.8
-24.4
8.0

13.0
-17.0
12.0

9.0
3.7
6.0

M2 multiplier 2/
M3 multiplier 3/
M3 velocity

1.18
2.32
5.37

1.26
2.48
4.65

1.40
2.69
4.32

1.42
2.66
4.27

1.60
2.85
4.41

1.51
2.62
4.46

1.30
2.29
4.78

1.47
2.73
…

1.29
2.97
4.48

1.29
3.04
4.53

1.26
3.00
4.45

1.21
2.89
4.41

1.24
2.99
4.36

Foreign exchange deposits in percent of total deposits

68.4

66.8

64.6

65.4

60.9

60.0

61.7

63.7

75.7

77.0

78.0

79.0

78.5

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net claims on general government
Credit to the rest of the economy
Other items, net
Broad money (M3)
Broad money, excl. forex deposits (M2)
Currency held by the public
Total deposit liabilities

(Percent contribution, compared to broad money at the end of previous year)
Net foreign assets

(Percentage change, relative to end of previous year)

Sources: National Bank of Georgia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ New classification of gross international reserves reported since the beginning of 2007.
2/ M2 divided by reserve money.
3/ M3 divided by reserve money.

33

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net claims on general government
Credit to the rest of the economy
Other items, net

34
Table 7. Georgia: External Vulnerability Indicators, 2007-13
2007
Act.

2008
Est.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

24.7
34.1
-0.6

13.7
25.9
-1.5

-19.3
-21.8
-0.1

24.7
13.4
1.8

14.6
6.8
2.1

12.3
7.3
1.9

10.3
7.0
0.9

Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account (percent of GDP)
External public debt (percent of GDP)
in percent of exports of goods and services

-19.6
23.8
17.5
56.2

-22.6
22.0
20.7
73.7

-16.7
15.1
26.0
100.5

-17.6
18.5
29.9
97.7

-15.5
16.9
30.0
93.3

-14.2
16.7
28.5
86.1

-13.1
15.5
26.7
79.6

Debt service on external public debt
(in percent of exports of goods and services)
External debt (percent of GDP)
in percent of exports of goods and services

4.4
30.7
98.5

4.5
35.6
126.6

7.8
43.0
166.1

5.2
47.1
153.8

5.9
46.7
145.1

9.9
43.7
132.2

19.9
41.7
124.5

Debt service on external debt
(in percent of exports of goods and services)

8.2

21.1

39.0

24.0

26.6

33.1

41.4

1,361
2.2
43.4
283
549

1,480
3.0
32.3
...
646

1,470
2.7
30.3
...
...

1,545
2.6
27.6
...
...

1,666
2.6
27.5
...
...

1,803
2.7
29.1
...
...

1,946
2.7
30.2
...
...

Value of exports of goods and services, percent change
Value of imports of goods and services, percent change
Terms of trade (deterioration - )

Gross international reserves
in millions of USD
in months of next year's imports of goods and servces
in percent of external debt
in percent of short-term external debt
in percent of short-term external debt 1/

Sources: IMF Finance Department; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding currency and deposit liabilities of banks.

Table 8. Georgia: Indicators of Fund Credit, 2007–17
(In millions of SDR)

Existing Fund credit
Stock 1/
PRGF
SBA
Obligations
PRGF
SBA 2/
Prospective drawing under the SBA
Disbursements
Stock 1/
Obligations 2/
Principal (repurchases)
GRA charges (incl. level based and service surcharges)

Obligations to the Fund from existing and prospective
Fund credit 2/
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of gross reserves

2007

2008
Act.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

2014
Proj.

2015
Proj.

2016
Proj.

2017
Proj.

157.1
157.1

159.2
159.2

34.2
34.2

26.7
26.7

298.8
137.1
161.7
23.3
22.8
0.5

280.8
119.1
161.7
21.8
18.6
3.2

266.7
105.0
161.7
17.7
14.7
3.1

228.6
87.1
141.5
41.7
18.4
23.3

127.8
67.2
60.6
103.5
20.3
83.2

47.6
47.6
0.0
81.3
19.9
61.5

29.4
29.4
0.0
18.4
18.4
0.0

14.0
14.0
0.0
15.5
15.5
0.0

4.2
4.2
0.0
9.8
9.8
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
4.2
4.2
0.0

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

268.1
268.1
3.4
0.0
3.4

47.3
315.4
6.8
0.0
6.8

0.0
315.4
7.1
0.0
7.1

0.0
250.3
71.3
65.1
6.3

0.0
98.6
155.2
151.8
3.4

0.0
5.9
93.6
92.6
1.0

0.0
0.0
5.9
5.9
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

157.1
104.5
3.0
9.1
26.2

159.2
105.9
2.4
7.7
17.9

298.8
198.8
3.7
13.1
31.9

548.9
365.2
7.5
28.8
57.3

582.1
387.3
7.5
24.6
58.0

544.0
361.9
6.5
20.1
50.4

378.2
251.6
4.1
12.5
32.5

146.2
97.2
1.5
4.4
11.7

35.3
23.5
0.3
1.0
2.5

14.0
9.3
0.1
0.4
0.9

4.2
2.8
0.0
0.1
0.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

34.2
22.8
0.6
2.0
5.7

26.7
17.8
0.4
1.3
3.0

23.3
15.5
0.3
1.0
2.5

25.1
16.7
0.3
1.3
2.6

24.6
16.3
0.3
1.0
2.4

48.7
32.4
0.6
1.8
4.5

174.8
116.3
1.9
5.8
15.0

236.5
157.4
2.4
7.1
18.9

112.0
74.5
1.0
3.1
8.0

21.4
14.3
0.2
0.5
1.4

9.8
6.5
0.1
0.2
0.6

4.2
2.8
0.0
0.1
0.2

Sources: IMF Finance Department; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ End of period.
2/ Repayment schedule based on repurchase obligations and GRA charges.

35

Stock of existing and prospective Fund credit 1/
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
In percent of gross reserves

2006

36
Table 9. Georgia: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2007–13
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Total requirements
Current account deficit
Capital outflows: Repayments of long-term loans
Total sources
Capital flows
Public sector
Project grants
Long-term loan disbursements to public sector
Other 1/
Private sector
Foreign direct investment in Georgia
Long-term loan disbursements to private sector
Other net inflows 2/
Financing
IMF 3/
Change in arrears, net (- decrease)
Debt rescheduling, pre-payment (net) 4/
Advance Repayments
Change in reserves (- increase)
Financing gap
Memorandum items (in percent of GDP)
Total financing requirements
Total sources
Capital inflows
Exceptional financing
Change in reserves (- increase)

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

-2,270
-2,006
-264

-3,253
-2,911
-342

-2,532
-1,879
-653

-2,667
-2,096
-572

-2,636
-2,012
-624

-2,868
-2,005
-863

-3,453
-2,021
-1,432

2,270
2,638
128
68
156
-96
2,510
1,750
828
-68
9
43
-29
9
-14
-377

3,253
3,162
695
84
227
385
2,467
1,218
984
264
222
257
-8
0
-27
-132

2,532
2,330
460
113
323
24
1,871
1,032
763
75
192
192
0
0
0
10

2,667
2,742
686
121
565
0
2,056
1,240
435
381
0
0
0
0
0
-75

2,636
2,757
505
70
435
0
2,252
1,451
465
336
0
0
0
0
0
-121

2,868
3,005
410
65
345
0
2,595
1,716
526
353
0
0
0
0
0
-137

3,453
3,596
822
45
277
500
2,774
1,809
639
326
0
0
0
0
0
-143

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-22.2
22.2
25.8
0.1
-3.7

-25.3
25.3
24.6
1.7
-1.0

-22.5
22.5
20.7
1.7
0.1

-22.5
22.5
23.1
0.0
-0.6

-20.3
20.3
21.3
0.0
-0.9

-20.2
20.2
21.2
0.0
-1.0

-22.4
22.4
23.3
0.0
-0.9

Sources: Georgian Statistics Department; National Bank of Georgia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Including the receipts from bond issuance.
2/ Including errors and omissions.
3/ PRGF disbursements in 2006 and 2007; SBA purchases from 2008 on.
4/ Assumes rescheduling of 2003 arrears in 2004 and of principal maturities falling due during 2004-06. Includes
comparable treatment by non-Paris Club bilateral creditors.

Table 10. Georgia: Schedule of Reviews and Purchases
Availability Date

15-Sep-08
15-Nov-08
15-Feb-09
15-Jun-09
15-Sep-09
15-Dec-09
28-Feb-10

Condition

Approved the 18-month arrangement
Complete the first review based on end-September performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria
Complete the second review based on end-December performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria 1/
Complete the third review based on end-March performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria
Complete the fourth review based on end-June performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria
Complete the fifth review based on end-September performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria
Complete the sixth review based on end-December performance criteria and other relevant performance criteria

Total available

Available Purchases
(in millions of SDR)
161.7
63.1
63.1
47.3
47.3
47.3
47.3
477.1

Source: Fund staff.
1/ As the authorities did not draw the purchase that became available at the time of the first review, at the second review SDR 126.2 million will become available.

37

38
ATTACHMENT I. GEORGIA: LETTER OF INTENT
March 10, 2009
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
1.
In September 2008, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a Stand-By
Arrangement for Georgia to assist with the recovery from the economic dislocation caused
by the conflict between Georgia and Russia. This support proved invaluable in the months
immediately following the conflict and we are grateful to the IMF for the support.
2.
This letter of intent describes our economic strategy and the economic policies that
we plan to implement during the rest of 2009. In the face of the worsening global economic
and financial situation we are committed to implementing policies that will help protect the
stability of the external and financial sectors while containing the slowdown in economic
growth. We remain, of course, fully dedicated to carrying out the commitments made in the
letters of intent dated September 9 and November 28, 2008.
Recent Economic Developments
3.
Economic performance during the first half of 2008 was robust with an increase in
real GDP of 8.7 percent year-on-year. As in past years, this strong performance was due
mainly to large private capital inflows. In the first six months of 2008, private capital inflows
totaled nearly USD 1.7 billion and for the year as a whole these inflows were in the range of
USD 2-2.2 billion. Despite strong growth, disciplined monetary and fiscal policies kept
inflation in single digits at 9.8 percent for the 12 months ending in July.
4.
The military conflict with Russia in August 2008 caused serious economic, social and
political damage. The immediate economic consequence was the disruption of our transport
infrastructure, which severely hindered economic activity, and a slowdown in private foreign
inflows. The conflict, along with the serious deterioration of the global environment, has
badly affected almost all sectors of the economy. As a result, growth in the third quarter was
negative 3.9 percent and is expected to have contracted by another 1.8 percent in the fourth
quarter. For the year as a whole, we expect growth was around 2 percent.
5.
Not surprisingly, inflation has moderated significantly in recent months. Since
spiking to 12.8 percent in August last year, it has subsided to 4.4 percent for the 12 months
ending January 2009. This reflects credible monetary policy, declining commodity prices and
shrinking domestic demand.
6.
In the midst and aftermath of the conflict with Russia, we defended the exchange rate
for the lari. This was deemed necessary in order to maintain macroeconomic stability and

39
public confidence. In response to exchange rate pressures and reserve outflows in the context
of the worsening global economy and a strengthening dollar, however, we devalued the lari
by 16 percent in early November. While this measure eased pressure on the lari, it
contributed to an immediate increase in the dollarization of bank deposits and an increase in
the non-performing loans of banks.
7.
Going forward, we are confident that Georgia’s strong economic fundamentals,
commitment to further economic reform, policy flexibility and strong support from the
international donor community will allow us to overcome the current set of economic
challenges. Nonetheless, we recognize there are substantial downside risks in the current
environment and we are prepared to introduce the necessary policy changes should these
risks materialize.
Macroeconomic Policies for 2009
8.
Our major macroeconomic challenge continues to be the restoration of private capital
inflows to support growth. The significant financial support made available to Georgia by the
international community will be directed to capital expenditures necessitated by the conflict
as well as spending to establish a foundation for sustained economic growth over the
medium-term. These resources will help to support growth this year, but cannot be a full
substitute for private sector investment. To enhance further our appeal to investors, we
believe that maintaining macroeconomic stability and intensifying economic reforms must lie
at the heart of our strategy moving forward.
9.
Projecting economic growth in the present highly uncertain environment is difficult.
The deleterious effects of the global economic crisis will likely result in economic growth
this year that is less than originally projected. During the first half of 2009, the economy is
anticipated to contract. For the year as a whole, however, we are cautiously optimistic that
growth in 2009 will be positive, in the range of 2 to 3 percent, reflecting a modest recovery in
the second half of the year. The recovery will be due to the lower base at end-2008, the fiscal
impulse and a moderate level of private capital inflows. Whereas such inflows were slightly
more than USD 2 billion in 2008, we project they will be in the range of USD 1.2 to 1.4
billion this year (excluding donor inflows), which should be sufficient to support projected
growth.
10.
Our growth projection is in contrast to the estimates of the recent IMF mission. While
we value the opinion of the mission, we wish to observe that IMF growth projections have
consistently underestimated actual performance in Georgia. We have a more optimistic
growth projection than the IMF mission, but in the spirit of cooperation and recognizing the
downside risks, we have agreed to base program targets on an annual growth rate of one
percent.
11.
Fiscal policies will support the economic recovery with a stimulus package that
includes a moderate increase in total spending, a reduction in the rate of the profit tax, and a
shift from import-intensive defense spending to labor-intensive construction projects.
Particular emphasis will be given to capital projects, which improve our medium-term

40
competitiveness as the basis for future growth. These projects will be financed mainly from
the pledges of the international community. The fiscal deficit for 2009 is projected to be less
than 6 percent of GDP.
12.
Our expenditures will also be oriented to protecting the most vulnerable groups in
society. To this end, we increased the budget appropriations for social allowances. More
importantly, we enhanced the targeting of social benefits, especially in the health and
education sectors. All beneficiaries of social allowances are covered by a free health
insurance scheme since January 2009.
13.
Further, we are revising our fiscal legal framework in order to increase the efficiency
in public finance management. For this purpose, we are developing a new budget code and
will have a first draft ready and submitted to the cabinet in July of 2009 (structural
benchmark for end-July). The goal of creation of a new budget code is to make a budget
preparation process more inclusive, enhance the budget execution monitoring process and
move to performance driven policy though improving strategic planning.
14.
In 2008 we delayed law changes aiming mandatory surplus and expenditures capping
due to the challenging environment. If global trend continues we will delay the policy
enforcement in H2 of 2009 for 2011. However we are strongly committed to disciplined
fiscal policy and a budgetary surplus together with limited public outlays remain our priority
for longer term.
15.
The combination of a tight monetary stance in the first half of 2008 and the current
economic slowdown have significantly eased inflationary pressures. For 2009, we will
continue to monitor monetary conditions closely and project growth in reserve money of 8
percent, while the growth rates of broader monetary aggregates are expected to be around 4
percent for M2 and 9 percent for M3. End-period inflation is projected to be in the range of
6–7 percent for 2009.
16.
The National Bank of Georgia (NBG) will publish a liquidity framework (structural
benchmark for end-March 2009) that will improve liquidity forecasting and strengthen the
interest rate channel. The liquidity framework will elaborate on the link between the NBG’s
policy rate and the operational target. It will also include an assessment of how the Monetary
Operational Framework is used to steer money market rates toward the operational target.
The liquidity framework will also outline the set of monetary policy instruments and
procedures that comprise the Monetary Operational Framework as well as guidelines for and
objectives of short-term liquidity forecasting.
17.
The NBG board approved the revisions to the regulation on the lender of last resort
(LOLR) function at end-December 2008 (structural benchmark for end-December 2008). The
main revisions included a change that permits LOLR access only to those institutions that are
judged to be solvent but experiencing short-term liquidity problems, and refined the terms
and procedures for issuing LOLR loans.

41
18.
Exchange rate policy in recent months has posed difficulties, and our policy options
have been constrained by nervousness in the market. We believe that a short period of
exchange rate stability was essential for restoring confidence in the aftermath of the war and
global financial turmoil. It also allowed time for assessing economic developments and
prospects. We remain, however, fully committed to a flexible exchange rate policy. To this
end, we have limited the NBG’s interventions in the foreign exchange market and allowed
greater exchange rate flexibility to protect international reserves. Moreover, should it be
necessary to act decisively to withdraw liquidity, the NBG is prepared to raise interest rates
on central bank securities to stem demand for foreign exchange.
19.
As a device for making NBG interventions more market oriented, we introduced an
auction-based mechanism for central bank sales of foreign exchange. This will help to reduce
market interventions and will be conducive to achieving the programs objectives.
20.
The financial sector has performed well despite numerous shocks. The quick and
effective support from international financial institutions, has allowed the banking system to
refinance its maturing foreign liabilities. The increase in non-performing loans—from 1.8
percent of the system assets in October 2007 to 12.8 percent at end 2008—reflects the
deterioration in economic conditions. While it creates challenges, it does not pose a risk to
the stability of the financial system. Average capital adequacy in banks remains
satisfactory—about 14 percent—despite the recent need for additional provisioning. Taking
into consideration our conservative capital requirements (including high risk weights on
mortgages and foreign currency loans), and planned private sector injections of bank capital
in the coming months, we remain confident that the banking system will continue to be sound
and resilient.
21.
In the current environment, it is essential for FSA to continue monitoring individual
banks. To facilitate monitoring and analysis, the FSA is continuing to strengthen its
institutional capacity. As part of this effort, the FSA has recently requested technical
assistance from the IMF in area of stress testing. As part of this exercise and on an ongoing
basis, the FSA will provide all necessary bank-by-bank data, including capital adequacy
ratios, non-performing loans and current liquidity positions on a monthly basis, subject to the
provisions of Georgian law. It should be stressed that these data are especially sensitive and
must be subjected to the strictest confidentiality requirements by Fund staff.
22.
While we are confident that our macroeconomic strategy going forward is the
appropriate one, we see the potential downside risks. Consequently, we are in the process of
developing a financial stability plan. The plan will contain policy actions to respond to
potential situations of stress by defining the roles and responsibilities of the different
players—the NBG, the FSA and the government—under each circumstance, and will be
jointly prepared by the NBG, the FSA, and the Ministry of Finance. We will send this
document to Fund staff, again on the condition of strict confidentiality (structural
performance criterion for end-June 2009).

42
Program Monitoring
23.
All performance criteria for the Second Review under the Stand-By Arrangement
were met. We, therefore, request the completion of the second review. We will maintain the
usual close policy dialogue with the Fund and stand ready to take additional measures as
appropriate to ensure the achievement of the program objectives. In particular if the pressures
on Georgia stemming from the global economic crisis were to be stronger than anticipated,
the government would adjust its fiscal and exchange rate policy stance to maintain external
stability.
24.
The third and fourth reviews are expected to be completed by end-June 2009 and endSeptember 2009. We request the modification of the performance criteria for end-March and
end-June, 2009 (attached Tables 1 and 2). We also request that the program’s ceiling on
contracting or guaranteeing new nonconcessional debt by the public sector accommodate
borrowing from official creditors in view of the currently low interest rates, sustainable level
of the public debt, and large conflict-related infrastructure needs that could not be met fully
by concessional financing. This limit will be revised during subsequent reviews in case of
further borrowing needs in line with the priorities outlined in the Joint Needs Assessment
report. The next quarterly review will be based on end-March targets. To better capture the
impact of unexpected shortfalls or surpluses in external financing, the revised Technical
Memorandum of Understanding introduces adjustors to the program’s quantitative targets.
25.
We authorize the IMF to publish the Letter of Intent and its attachments as well as the
accompanying staff report.
Sincerely yours,
/s/
Nika Gilauri
Prime Minister of Georgia
/s/
Giorgi Kadagidze
President of the NBG

/s/
Kakha Baindurashvili
Minister of Finance

Table 1. Georgia: Quantitative Performance Criteria, 2008–09
Cumulative Change from End-June 2008
Sep-08
PC

Cumulative Change from End-December 2008

Dec-08

Act.

PC

Jun-09

Mar-09

Adjusted PC

Act.

First review

PC 1/

First review

Sep-09

PC 1/

PC 1/

(In millions of lari)
Ceiling on cash deficit of the consolidated government

537

425

627

760

619

229

480

517

924

973

850

250

850

850

310

329

446

240

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional
external debt by the public sector

0

0

250

...

...

250

Stocks at the end of the period
(In millions of lari)
Ceiling on net domestic assets (NDA) of the NBG 1/

765

452

214

...

116

295

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Floor on net international reserves (NIR) of the NBG

602

848

851

...

909

836

633

861

585

769

0

0

0

...

0

0

0

0

0

0

Sources: Georgian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Actual figures and quantitative targets are based on program exchange rates.
2/ The continuous performance criterion for external arrears is defined in paragraph 15 of the TMU.

43

Ceiling on accumulation of external arrears 2/

44
Table 2: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria

Proposed
Time Frame
(end of period)

Type of
Conditionality

Status

FSA and NBG to sign and implement a
memorandum of understanding to strengthen
cooperation.

End-Oct-08

Structural Benchmark

Observed

NBG to introduce revised LOLR facility.

End-Dec-08

Structural
Performance
Criterion

Observed

Submission to parliament of a state budget for 2009
with an overall fiscal deficit of no more than 3¾
percent of projected GDP (subject to an adjustor of
at most 3 percent of GDP as set out in the TMU).

End-Dec-08

Structural Benchmark

Observed

NBG to develop and publish a liquidity management
framework, including the introduction of a
refinancing mechanism as the main instrument to
provide liquidity.

End-Mar-09

Structural Benchmark

The NGB, the FSA, and the government to develop a
financial stability plan that will contain policy
actions to respond to potential situations of stress by
defining the roles and responsibilities of the different
players—the NBG, the FSA and the government—
under each circumstance.

End-Jun-09

Structural
Performance
Criterion

Appointment of the remaining members to the FSA
board.

End-Jun-09

Structural Benchmark

Submission of a new budget code to the cabinet to
make the budget preparation process more inclusive,
enhance the budget execution monitoring process,
and move to performance driven policy by
improving strategic planning.

End-Jul-09

Structural Benchmark

Action

45
ATTACHMENT II. GEORGIA: REVISED TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
March 10, 2009
1.

This memorandum sets out the understandings between the Georgian authorities and

the IMF staff regarding the definitions of quantitative and structural performance criteria and
indicative targets, as well as respective reporting requirements for the Stand-By Arrangement
(SBA). It replaces the technical memorandum of understanding dated November 28, 2008.
2.

These performance criteria and indicative targets are reported in Tables 1 and 2 of

the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), attached to the letter dated
November 28, 2008 and Table 1 attached to the Letter of Intent dated March 10, 2009. The
exchange rate for the purposes of the program of the Georgian lari to the U.S. dollar is set at
GEL 1.67 = $1. The corresponding cross exchange rates are provided in Table 1.
Consolidated Government and the Public Sector
3.

Definition: The consolidated government is defined as the central government, local

governments, extrabudgetary funds, public services providing general government system
LEPLs, and the Sovereign Wealth Funds (Future Generations and Stable Development
Funds). In case the government establishes extrabudgetary funds, they will be consolidated
within the consolidated government. The public sector consists of the consolidated
government and the National Bank of Georgia (NBG).
4.

Supporting material: The Treasury Department of the Ministry of Finance (MOF)

will provide to the IMF detailed information on monthly revenues, expenditures, and arrears
of the consolidated government. In addition, data will be provided on the cash balances in the
accounts of the Ministry of Finance.

46
Quantitative Performance Criteria, Indicative Targets, and Continuous Performance
Criteria: Definitions and Reporting Standards
I.
5.

Ceiling on the Cash Deficit of the Consolidated Government

Definition: The cash deficit of the consolidated government will be measured from

the financing side at current exchange rates, and will be defined as equal to total financing.
Total financing will be defined as the sum of (i) net domestic financing from banks and
nonbanks, (ii) net external financing, and (iii) privatization receipts.
•

Net domestic financing consists of bank and nonbank financing to the consolidated
government which will be defined as follows:
(i)

Loans provided by commercial banks to the consolidated government minus

accounts held by the consolidated government at commercial banks. These accounts
and loans will be monitored based on the NBG’s monetary survey. Any other
securities issued by the consolidated government (for example, promissory notes) are
also included in domestic financing.
(ii)

Loans provided by the NBG to the consolidated government minus accounts

of the consolidated government held at the NBG in lari and foreign currency.
Accounts that are outside of the MOF’s control are excluded from domestic
financing. These accounts include VAT refund account; earmarked grants account;
account for state agencies deposits; account for local government revenues for the day
to be transferred to their account; national disaster fund account; and investment grant
and credit account. As of December 31, 2008, cash balances in these accounts were
lari 768 million. These accounts will be monitored based on the changes in cash
balances as recorded by the Treasury Department.
(iii) Treasury bills that have been securitized and sold by the NBG, including the bills
that have been purchased by nonbanks.

47
•

Net external financing is defined as the total of loans disbursed to the consolidated
government for balance-of-payments support and project financing (capital
expenditure and net lending), net change in external arrears, change in the accounts of
the consolidated government abroad, including the accounts of the Sovereign Wealth
Fund, minus amortization. Amortization includes all external debt-related payments
of principal by the consolidated government. Amortization to external creditors via
third parties is accounted for at the time and in the amount of payment by the budget
to the third party, rather than at the time of recognition of amortization by the external
creditor.

•

Privatization receipts consist of all transfers of monies received by the central and
local governments in connection with the sale of central or local government assets,
including privatization proceeds which were transferred to the Sovereign Wealth
Funds. This includes receipts from the sales of shares, the sale of assets as well as
leases and the sale of licenses with duration of 10 years and longer.

6.

Supporting material:

•

Data on domestic bank and nonbank financing will be provided to the IMF by the
NBG and the Treasury Department of the MOF within four weeks after the end of the
month.

•

Data on external project financing as well as other external borrowing will be
provided to the IMF monthly by the Debt Unit at the MOF (specifying projects by
creditor) within two weeks of the end of each month.

•

Data will be provided at the actual exchange rates.

•

Data on the accounts of the Sovereign Wealth Funds will be provided by the NBG.

•

Data on privatization receipts will be provided by the Treasury Department of the
MOF to the IMF on a monthly basis within two weeks of the end of each month. The
data will be consistent with the revenue account(s) in the NBG.

48
•

Data on treasury bills that have been securitized and sold by the NBG, including the
bills that have been purchased by nonbanks, will be reported by the NBG on a
monthly basis within two weeks of the end of each month.
II.

7.

Floor on the Net International Reserves of the NBG

Definition: Net international reserves (NIR) of the NBG in U.S. dollars are defined

as foreign assets minus foreign liabilities of the NBG. Foreign assets of the NBG include
gold, gross foreign exchange reserves, SDR holdings, and the reserve position in the IMF.
Gross foreign exchange reserves of the NBG are defined as liquid, convertible currency
claims of the NBG on nonresidents that are readily available. Pledged or otherwise
encumbered assets, including (but not limited to) assets used as collateral (or guarantee for
third party external liabilities) are excluded from foreign assets. Foreign liabilities shall be
defined as outstanding liabilities to the IMF and any other liabilities of the NBG. This
defined, the definition of NIR excludes foreign assets stemming from foreign currency
deposits of financial institutions at the NBG. For program monitoring purposes, the stock of
foreign assets and foreign liabilities of the NBG shall be valued at program exchange rates as
described on paragraph 2 above. The stock of NIR amounted to $891.9 million as of
December 31, 2008 (at the program exchange rate).
8.

Adjustors:
The floor on the NIR of the NBG will be adjusted:

9.

•

(a) upward/downward by 50 percent for any excess/shortfall in the balance-ofpayments support loans and balance-of-payments support grants relative to the
projected amounts presented in Table 2.

•

(b) upward 100 percent for any shortfall in the amount of conversion for
government imports relative to the projected amounts presented in Table 2.

Supporting material: Data on net international reserves (both at actual and program

exchange rates); net foreign financing (balance of payments support loans, cash grants to the
consolidated government, amortization (excluding repayments to the IMF), interest payments
on external debt by the MOF and the NBG); conversions for government imports and
transfers of receipts from the Sovereign Wealth Funds will be provided to the IMF in a table

49
on the NBG's foreign exchange flows (which include details of inflows, outflows, and net
international reserves) on a weekly basis within three working days following the end of the
week.
III.
10.

Ceiling on Net Domestic Assets of the NBG

Definition: Net domestic assets of the NBG are defined as the difference between its

net foreign assets and reserve money. Thus defined, the net domestic assets are the sum of
net claims on the government (the sum of loans and treasury bills purchased by the NBG,
less deposits of the government with the NBG), claims on banks, claims on the rest of the
economy, and other items net (comprising the NBG capital accounts, net unclassified assets,
counterpart funds and exchange rate revaluation). Performance against the NDA target will
be measured at program exchange rates.
11.

Supporting material: The NBG will provide to the IMF its balance sheet, which

includes data on its net domestic assets, on a monthly basis within two weeks of the end of
each month. Data will be provided using both actual and program exchange rates.
12.

Adjustors:
The ceiling on the NDA of the NBG will be adjusted:

IV.

•

(a) downward/upward by 50 percent for any excess/shortfall in the balance-ofpayments support loans and balance-of-payments support grants relative to the
projected amounts presented in Table 2.

•

(b) downward 100 percent for any shortfall in the amount of conversion for
government imports relative to the projected amounts presented in Table 2.

Ceiling on Contracting or Guaranteeing of New Nonconcessional External Debt
by the Public Sector

13.

Definition: Nonconcessional external loans are defined as loans from lenders other

than the IMF with a grant element of less than 35 percent of the value of the loan. The grant
element is to be calculated by using currency-specific discount rates reported by the OECD

50
(CIRRs).1 For maturities of less than 15 years, the grant element will be calculated based on
six-month averages of commercial interest rates. For maturities longer than 15 years, the
grant element will be calculated based on 10-year averages. This performance criterion
applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the IMF's Guidelines on Performance
Criteria with Respect to External Debt (Decision No. 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000) but
also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not been received.2
Previously contracted nonconcessional external debt that has been rescheduled will be
excluded from the definition of “new debt” for the purposes of this performance criterion.
14.

Supporting material: Details of all new commitments and government guarantees

for external borrowing, with detailed explanations, will be provided by the MOF to the IMF
on a monthly basis within two weeks of the end of each month. Data will be provided using
actual exchange rates.

1

An electronic spreadsheet file that shows the relevant discount rates reported by the OECD (CIRRs) will be
provided on a periodic basis by IMF staff. A web-based grant element calculator is available at
http://www.imf.org/concessionality.

2

Point No. 9 of the IMF's guidelines reads as follows: “(a) For the purpose of this guideline, the term “debt”
will be understood to mean a current, i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a contractual arrangement
through the provision of value in the form of assets (including currency) or services, and which requires the
obligor to make one or more payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future
point(s) in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities incurred under the
contract. Debts can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as follows: (i) loans, i.e., advances of
money to obligor by the lender made on the basis of an undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the
future (including deposits, bonds, debentures, commercial loans and buyers' credits) and temporary exchanges
of assets that are equivalent to fully collateralized loans under which the obligor is required to repay the funds,
and usually pay interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future (such as repurchase
agreements and official swap arrangements); (ii) suppliers' credits, i.e., contracts where the supplier permits the
obligor to defer payments until some time after the date on which the goods are delivered or services are
provided; and (iii) leases, i.e., arrangements under which property is provided which the lessee has the right to
use for one or more specified period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total expected service life of the
property, while the leaser retains the title to the property. For the purpose of the Guideline, the debt is the
present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments expected to be made during the period of the
agreement excluding those payments that cover the operation, repair, or maintenance of the property. (b) Under
the definition of debt set out in point 9(a) above, arrears, penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from
the failure to make payment under a contractual obligation that constitutes debt are debt. Failure to make
payment on an obligation that is not considered debt under this definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will not
give rise to debt.”

51
V.

Continuous Performance Criteria on Nonaccumulation of External Arrears

15.

Definition: During the period of the arrangement, the consolidated government and

the NBG will not accumulate any new external payment arrears on debt service obligations to
official creditors. Official external payment arrears are defined as unpaid debt service by the
consolidated government and the NBG beyond 30 days after the due date. The performance
criterion on nonaccumulation of external debt is continuous.
16.

Supporting material: Details of official arrears accumulated on interest and

principal payments to creditors will be reported to the IMF within one week from the date of
the missed payment. Data will be provided using actual exchange rates.
Table 1. Program Exchange Rates
Currency Name

Currency/US$

SDR

Special Drawing Rights

0.65

GEL

Georgian lari

1.67

EUR

Euro

0.72

Table 2. Projected Balance-of-Payments Support Financing 1/
(in million U.S. Dollars)
Balance-of-payments

Balance-of-payments

support grants

support loans

March 31,2009

6.5

0

105.2

June 30, 2009

32.5

0

196.2

September 30, 2009

207.8

0

255.6

December 31, 2009

269.6

80.0

395.8

1/ Cumulative from the beginning of the calendar year.

Conversion for
government
imports

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

GEORGIA

2009 Article IV Consultation and Second Review
Under the Stand-By Arrangement
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
March 10, 2009

Contents

I.
II.
III.
IV.

Page

Relations with the Fund ............................................................................................2
Relations with the World Bank .................................................................................7
Relations with the EBRD ........................................................................................16
Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................20

2
ANNEX I. GEORGIA: RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of January 31, 2008)
I.

Membership Status: Georgia joined the Fund on May 5, 1992.

II. General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
150.30
312.00
0.01

Percent of Quota
100.00
207.58
0.01

III. SDR Department:
Holdings

SDR Million
4.84

Percent of Allocation
N/A

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-by Arrangements

SDR Million
161.70

Percent of Quota
107.58

PRGF Arrangements
V.

133.91

89.10

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount Approved
(SDR million)

9/15/08
6/4/04
1/12/01

3/14/10
9/30/07
1/11/04

477.10
98.00
108.00

Stand-By
PRGF
PRGF

Amount Drawn
SDR Million)
161.70
98.00
49.50

VI. Projected Payments to Fund (Expectation Basis):
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Principal

14.81

34.31

98.75

80.54

19.60

Charges/interest

3.39

3.15

2.46

1.07

0.28

Total

18.20

37.46

101.21

81.61

19.88

VII. Safeguard Assessments:
An update safeguards assessment of the National Bank of Georgia (NBG) required in
conjunction with the Stand-By Arrangement approved on September 15, 2008 was completed
on December 10, 2008. This assessment found that the NBG has developed its safeguards in

3
many respects, namely: (i) its financial statements comply with International Financial
Reporting Standards; (ii) the financial statements are audited by international firms in
compliance with International Standards on Auditing, and receive a "clean" opinion (latest
opinion is for the year ended December 31, 2007); and (iii) the audited financial statements
are published in the NBG's Annual Report and on its website. However, the NBG faces
emerging risks as it modernizes its reserve management practices and accounting systems,
and responds to the impact of the August conflict and the global financial crisis. To address
such risks, the NBG needs to modernize its audit oversight functions by reconstituting its
audit committee with only non-executive members, commission a quality assurance review
of its internal audit function, move to longer-term appointments of its external auditor to
improve audit efficiency and effectiveness, and require its internal audit department to audit
the monetary data reported to the Fund at each test date and at the financial year-end.
VIII.

Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI):

Not Applicable.
IX.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

Not Applicable.
X.

Exchange Arrangements:

(a) Since April 29, 1993, the Tbilisi Interbank Currency Exchange (TICEX), established by
the NBG and a group of commercial banks, has conducted periodic auctions to determine the
exchange rate of the domestic currency vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. These auctions are
conducted daily. Foreign exchange bureaus are allowed to buy and sell foreign currency bank
notes. A temporary de facto exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar was introduced in the wake
of the early August armed conflict. During the second week of November, the authorities
allowed a 16 percent depreciation of the lari. In March 2009, the authorities introduced an
auction-based system for the foreign exchange market.The new mechanism is intended to
give market forces a greater role in setting the price, with a view to reaching faster and
smoother convergence toward equilibrium in the foreign exchange market and giving the
market greater clarity about the authorities’ policies.
(b) Georgia maintains no exchange restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for
current international transactions except for exchange restrictions maintained for security
reasons, and notified to the Fund pursuant to Executive Board Decision No. 144-(52/51).
XI. Article IV Consultation:
The 2006 Article IV consultation was concluded on March 31, 2006.

4

XII. FSAP Participation:
Two FSAP missions visited Tbilisi during May 1–15, and July 24–August 7, 2001. An FSAP
update mission visited Tbilisi during February 15–28, 2006.
XIII. Technical Assistance:
See Table 1 of this Annex.
XIV. Resident Representative:
The sixth resident representative, Mr. Edward Gardner, is scheduled to take up his post on
March 15, 2009.
XV. National Bank of Georgia Resident Advisors:
Ms. Vance, MAE peripatetic banking supervision advisor to the NBG, commenced a series of
visits to Tbilisi in September 1997. Mr. Nielsen, an MAE advisor, provided technical
assistance to the NBG in May 1998. Mr. Viksnins was an MAE peripatetic advisor to the
NBG president starting in October 1999. Mr. Fish was resident advisor on banking
supervision from August 10, 1999 to January 31, 2002. Mr. Bernard Thompson provided
peripatetic technical assistance in accounting and internal audit in March and August 2000.
Mr. Wellwood Mason provided technical assistance on payment system issues on a
peripatetic basis in 2002 and 2003. Mr. Howard C. Edmonds served from September 2004 to
October 2007 as a resident advisor on banking supervision issues.
XVI. Ministry of Finance Resident Advisors:
Mr. Sharma was an FAD resident advisor and assisted the authorities in the development of a
Treasury beginning in May 1997. Mr. Sainsbury, an FAD advisor, assisted the ministry of
finance from June 1998 to November 1999. Mr. Chaturvedi was FAD resident advisor in
2001 and 2002 to assist the authorities in continuing the development of the Treasury and the
Treasury Single Account, in revising the legislative framework, expenditure control systems,
and budgeting issues. Between 2001 and 2003, Mr. Welling was an FAD peripatetic advisor
to assist the State Customs Department in preparing and introducing measures for the custom
reform and modernization program. In March 2005, Mr. Zohrab started advising the
authorities on treasury-related reforms, and his term ended in November 2006.

5

Table 1. Georgia: Fund Technical Assistance Missions, 2004–08
Subject

Type of Mission

Timing

Counterpart

Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD)
Tax Policy

Review of tax policy

Jun. 8–21, 2004

Ministry of Finance

Public Expenditure
Management

Assessment of
Treasury system.

Nov. 8–23, 2004

Ministry of Finance

Public Financial
Management

Expert assistance
(Zohrab)

Mar. 2005–Nov. 2006

Ministry of Finance

Tax Administration

Mission—review of
modernization
program

Nov. 8-21, 2005

Ministry of Finance

Tax Administration

Expert assistance

Jul. 9–14, 2006

Ministry of Finance

Tax Administration

Expert assistance
(Bosch)

Oct. 9–25, 2006

Ministry of Finance

Tax Administration

Follow-up mission

Jan. 17–30, 2007

Ministry of Finance

Tax Administration

Expert assistance
(Woodley)

Jan/Feb and Apr/May
2008

Ministry of Finance

Budget Classification
and Accounting
Reforms
Budget Classification
and Accounting
Reforms

Expert assistance
(Swarap)

Jun. 11-22, 2007

Ministry of Finance

Expert assistance
(Swarap)

Oct. 8-19, 2007

Ministry of Finance

Monetary and Capital Markets Department (MCM)
Government Securities
Market, Deposit
Insurance, Anti-Money
Laundering

Advisory

Apr. 20–30, 2004

National Bank of Georgia

Monetary Operations,
Banking Sector
Competition

Advisory

Oct. 24–Nov. 5,
2004

National Bank of Georgia

Liquidity Management;
Trends in Securities and
Insurance Sectors

Advisory

Apr. 18–29, 2005

National Bank of Georgia

FSAP Update

Assessment

Feb. 15–28, 2006

National Bank of Georgia

Monetary
Operations/Monetary
Policy/Foreign
Exchange

Advisory

Feb. 16–Mar. 2,
2007

National Bank of Georgia

6
Table 1. Georgia: Fund Technical Assistance Missions, 2004–08
Subject

Type of Mission

Timing

Counterpart

Consolidated
Supervision

Advisory

Dec. 4–14, 2007

National Bank of Georgia

Lender of Last Resort
Framework

Advisory

Dec. 11-17, 2008

National Bank of Georgia

National Accounts

Follow-up assistance

Apr. 26–May 7, 2004

State Department of
Statistics

National Accounts

Follow-up assistance

Apr. 18–29, 2005

State Department of
Statistics

Price Statistics

Follow-up assistance

May 23–Jun. 3, 2005

State Department of
Statistics

Balance of Payments
Statistics/International
Investment Position

Follow-up assistance

Jun. 15–28, 2005

State Department of
Statistics and National
Bank of Georgia

Price Statistics

Follow-up assistance

Jun. 20–Jul. 13,
2006

State Department of
Statistics

Balance of Payments

Follow-up assistance

Sep. 6–19, 2006

National Bank of Georgia

GDDS/Government
Finance Statistics

Follow-up assistance

Nov. 8–22, 2006

State Department of
Statistics, National Bank
of Georgia, Ministry of
Finance

Balance of Payments

Follow-up assistance

Jul. 9-20, 2007

National Bank of Georgia

Legal Department (LEG)
Tax Code

Follow-up assistance

Jan. 28–Feb. 9,
2001

Ministry of Finance, Tax
Inspectorate of Georgia

Tax Code

Follow-up assistance

Jul. 13–24, 2001

Ministry of Finance, Tax
Inspectorate of Georgia

7
ANNEX II. GEORGIA: IMF-WORLD BANK RELATIONS
Partnership in Georgia’s Development Strategy
1.
Georgia had a strong economic performance until August of 2008 when the conflict
with Russia broke out resulting in severe shocks to macroeconomic stability and a sharp
deterioration in investor and consumer confidence. GDP growth, which had averaged above
12 percent in 2007 and 8.6 percent in the first half of 2008, is projected to decline sharply in
the second half of 2008 and remain below 4 percent through 2009. Growth is largely affected
by the sharp decline in private capital inflows, which have been the main driver in the last
few years.
2.
The international community through an October 2008 Donors’ Conference led by the
World Bank and the European Commission responded positively by providing pledges of
financial support totaling $4.5 billion over the period of 2008–2010 to provide financial
assistance in light of the sudden decline in capital inflows; to help Georgia with its external
financing needs to maintain its macro stability; to assist with rebuilding of its damaged
infrastructure; and to help Georgia cope with the downturn of the economy and the
substantial social needs of its new and past displaced population.
3.
Georgia has been a member of the World Bank since 1992 and the International
Development Association (IDA) since 1993. With borrowings of $1062.5 million for
48 operations, Georgia is one of the largest IDA borrowers in the CIS. There are currently
sixteen IDA operations under implementation. The last World Bank Country Partnership
Strategy (CSP) of Georgia for FY06-09 was presented to the World Bank Board of Executive
Directors in September 2005. The CPS, built on the Economic Development and Poverty
Reduction Program (EDPRP) of the Government (its PRSP), was designed to assist Georgia
in implementation of its reform program. A CPS Progress Report to assess the mid-term
progress in the implementation of the CPS was presented to the Board in June 2008.
4.
Regarding the Poverty Reduction Support Operation series, four annual operations
during the last four years have been the cornerstone of the Georgia CPS Strategy. They have
supported further elaboration and implementation of the key elements of the Government’s
poverty reduction strategy as described in the PRSP (EDPRP) Progress Report. The Fourth
PRSO, the last in the series, was approved on May 27, 2008.
5.
In response to the August conflict and to help Georgia sustain its overall reform
program in the face of unanticipated strains to the 2008 budget, a Supplemental Financing to
Georgia’s PRSO IV in the amount of $40 million was processed on an expedited basis and
presented and approved by the IDA Board on October 2, 2008, along with a Municipal
Infrastructure Development Project in the amount of $40 million, which included an

8
additional component to provide funding for the housing needs of the newly displaced
population. In parallel, IDA responded to a request from the Government for the extension of
the East-West Highway to improve transport access in light of the infrastructure damage
caused by the conflict, by providing $20 million additional funding to the existing Second
East-West Highway which was approved by the Board on October 30, 2008.
6.
A Joint Staff Advisory Note was prepared, and together with the second PRSP
Progress Report were presented to the Boards of IDA and IMF in September 2006. The IMF
presented the Staff Report of the Sixth and final Review under the PRGF arrangement to the
IMF Board in August 2007. In the wake of the August events, an 18-month Stand-By
Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of $750 million was approved by the IMF Board on
September 15, 2008 to restore investor confidence, with its first purchase of $250 million
disbursed upon approval. The IMF conducted a first review mission of the SBA in early
November.
7.
The Fund has taken the lead in assisting Georgia in improving macroeconomic
stability and pursuing fiscal reforms. The World Bank has taken the lead in the policy
dialogue on structural issues, focusing on: (i) strengthening public expenditure management;
(ii) improving performance of the public sector; (iii) reducing corruption; (iv) deepening and
diversifying sources of growth; (v) protecting the environment; and (vi) reducing poverty.
8.
The PRSO program and Supplemental Financing to PRSOIV have focused on four
central reform areas: (i) strengthening public sector accountability, efficiency, and
transparency; (ii) improving electricity and gas sector services; (iii) improving the
environment for private sector development; and (iv) improving social protection, education
and health care services.
9.
Other support has come in the form of project support and analytic and advisory
activities across a broad spectrum of areas including education, health care, social protection,
energy, roads, water and sanitation, agriculture, agricultural research and extension, irrigation
and drainage, forestry, environment, biodiversity, enterprise development, municipal
development, judicial reform, and cultural heritage. A Public Expenditure Review (PER) was
prepared in 2002, and a Trade Study in 2003. A Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR) was prepared in 2002 and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
in 2003. A Country Fiduciary Assessment (CFA) was prepared in 2007. A series of annual
programmatic Poverty Assessments are being implemented with a report to be issued in
2008. A Programmatic Public Finance Policy Review (PPFPR) and a Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) are planned for FY09.
10.
Georgia became a shareholder and a member of IFC in 1995, and IFC has financed
projects in the financial, infrastructure, oil and gas, and manufacturing sectors. IFC’s

9
portfolio in Georgia as of January 2008 stands at about $93 million with seven clients. In the
financial sector, IFC has focused on supporting the development of the housing finance
market, providing investment and technical assistance to three leading banks—TBC Bank,
the Bank of Georgia, and Bank Republic. To reach small and medium enterprises, IFC helped
to establish ProCredit Bank of Georgia, the country’s first bank specializing in lending to
micro and small enterprises. IFC has also provided a credit line to TBC Leasing to support
the rapid growth of their portfolio of SME clients. In FY08, IFC also supported GRDC in
their financing of the development of office and retail space.
11.
IFC has also mobilized its investment assistance to provide stability to the Georgian
banking system, which is facing significant challenges following the August conflict as well
as funding constraints exacerbated by the current situation in international financial markets.
In partnership with EBRD and OPIC, a new investment project will provide Bank of Georgia,
the largest bank in Georgia, with the required capital to continue lending to Georgian
individuals and SMEs, which is critical for the further development of the Georgian
economy. Support to the banking sector would remain IFC’s first priority in the World Bank
Group’s post-conflict strategy in Georgia. IFC would continue to look for opportunities to
provide systemically important banks with a mix of equity, subordinated loans, trade lines
and senior debt funding. In addition, IFC would continue to support SME and microfinance
borrowers through the banks, as well as other emerging financial market leaders to deepen
the financial sector and increase the range of financial products available.
12.
In the real sector, IFC’s most recent transaction is a loan to TAV to support the
construction of new airport terminals in Tbilisi and Batumi. In oil transit, IFC has provided
equity and credit to local and international companies, including investments by British
Petroleum and other sponsors in the construction of the Baku- Supsa Early Oil Pipeline and
the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline. Other investment projects have been in electricity
distribution (AES-Telasi), mineral water (GGMW), and glass bottle production (Ksani Glass
Factory). In the real sector, IFC continues to look for opportunities to support the growth of
the private sector, particularly in export-oriented companies or those that support overall
private sector development. Sectors of interest include agrobusiness, infrastructure,
manufacturing, and the development of natural resources.
13.
IFC has also provided donor-supported technical assistance to strengthen its client
banks and introduce new financial products (including leasing and housing finance). IFC is
currently providing technical assistance in Georgia to improve the business climate and
corporate governance practices. The World Bank-IFC Doing Business report has ranked
Georgia as a top reformer in its Doing Business 2008 report, and the government is actively
engaged with IFC to make further progress on reforms to improve the business environment.

10
14.
The division of responsibilities between the World Bank and the IMF is described in
the next section. In a number of areas—for example, the social sectors, rural development,
environment, and infrastructure—the World Bank takes the lead in the dialogue and there is
no related conditionality in the IMF-supported program. The World Bank is also leading the
dialogue on private sector development and energy, and the World Bank analysis could serve
as an input into the Fund program. In other areas—the financial sector, public expenditure
management, and civil service reform—both institutions are working together. Finally, in
areas like monetary policy and domestic customs revenue, the IMF takes the lead.
IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
Areas in which the World Bank leads and there is no direct IMF involvement
15.
In the social sectors, IDA updates Georgia’s Poverty Assessment based on quarterly
household survey data. IDA’s focus has been to improve execution of budgetary expenditures
for health, education and poverty benefits and to raise the efficiency in the use of scarce
public resources. Through the Social Investment Fund credits, IDA is focusing in particular
on areas with high poverty levels to provide basic infrastructure to the poorest communities.
Through the PRSO program, IDA is strengthening the dialogue with the government on
social protection reform (safety nets, pensions, poverty benefits, labor market institutions and
policies). Under the PRSO program, a poverty benefit targeted for the extreme poor is being
implemented.
16.
In education, the Adaptable Program Credit of Education System Realignment &
Strengthening Program (APL #1 and APL #2) addresses a broad spectrum of educational
reform issues, aimed at improving learning outcomes of primary and secondary students
through curriculum reform, development of a national assessment and examination system,
training of teachers, provision of learning materials, and development of capacity to make
better use of physical, financial, and human resources. It also tackles key financing issues
through the introduction of a per capita based formula for financing basic education. The
second phase of the program provides continued assistance to the implementation of the
institutional and policy framework adopted under phase one of the program and includes
support to schools in emergency conditions. The PRSO program is supporting the
government’s efforts in institutionalizing systemic changes initiated with its education reform
strategy.
17.
In health, IDA credits support the government in improving provision of primary
health care services by providing training, equipment and supporting the health information
system as well as capacity building in management. IDA is supporting the provision of health
insurance coverage for the poor and has conducted the initial impact evaluation of this
program. IDA is engaged in policy dialogue with the government on health sector reform

11
through the PROS program, as well as health technical assistance by providing policy advice
on regulatory frameworks for health insurance market, provider payment issues and benefit
package.
18.
In infrastructure, support is being provided through the Secondary and Local Roads
Project, the First East-West Highway Improvement Project, and the Second East-West
Highway Improvement Project and its additional funding to finance improvement of
country’s main, secondary and local road infrastructure, as well as through the Municipal
Development and Decentralization Project II and the Social Investment Fund Project to
finance critical infrastructure needs at the municipal and community level. Under the latter
primarily school and health facility heating and repair, small hydropower schemes
rehabilitation, drinking water and sanitation rehabilitation, street lightning improvements, as
well as local transportation infrastructure rehabilitation has been targeted. The ongoing
Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility project is to facilitate infrastructure investments of
strategic importance and/or special complexity by providing technical assistance to assess the
feasibility and effectiveness of investments, focusing on energy and transport sectors.
Specifically, it targets preparation of First and Second East-West Highway Improvement
projects, preparation of Khudoni Hydro Power Plant project (if feasible).
19.
In rural development, IDA credits have supported development of private sector
farming and agro-processing improvements, agricultural credit, irrigation and drainage, and
agricultural research. IDA credits have also been supporting creation of local institutions,
such as rural credit unions and water users associations. A recently approved Rural
Development Project is set to develop the productivity and profitability of the private
agriculture sector with the aim to increase incomes and employment and reduce poverty in
rural areas.
20.
A recently closed Judicial Reform Project provided funds for development of new
court administration and case management procedures, rehabilitation and construction of
courthouses, a computerized network system, assistance for judicial training, and an
extensive public information and education outreach effort to inform citizens of their rights
and communicate the government’s reform efforts.
Areas in which the World Bank leads and its analysis could serve as input into the IMF
program
21.
The World Bank leads the dialogue on structural reforms through the PRSO program.
Institution building and technical assistance have been supported through the Structural
Reform Support Project. The World Bank also leads in the areas of:

12
a)
Private Sector Development. The PRSO program and IFC’s advisory work focus on
improving the investment climate and reducing constraints to private sector development in
Georgia. IDA has also been supporting private sector participation in other areas, such as
energy, urban services and agriculture. The IMF worked with the authorities to conduct audits
of the accounts of three major state-owned enterprises.
b)
Energy. The energy system was in poor condition, with unreliable supply and
unsustainable debts. However, under the PRSO program, the Georgian authorities have made
progress, and payment collections and service levels have improved substantially in the
power sector. The Government of Georgia worked with IDA and other donors, including the
Fund, to implement a series of short-term action plans and longer term steps to improve the
overall functioning of the sector. At the beginning of the PRGF program, the Fund focused
on reducing quasi-fiscal losses in the sector. The World Bank through the PRSO program
focused on improved bill collections, the handling of sector legacy debt, some sector
restructuring, and the pursuit of tariff policies at cost-recovery levels was facilitated by a
World Bank-assisted review of the tariff policy methodology. The Georgian authorities have
prepared and implemented Energy Sector Strategic Action Plans and updates thereof under
the PRSO program since 2005. In an ongoing operation, the World Bank finances a
feasibility study for a major, new hydropower plant that could add about 20 percent to the
country’s hydropower capacity.
c)
Public Sector Management. The PRSO program supports through its first pillar,
inter alia, improving public expenditure policies and management; implementing
procurement reform; strengthening public financial management accountability;
implementing intergovernmental fiscal reform; developing a strategy for administrative and
civil service reform; and implementing the National Anti-corruption Strategy. The Public
Sector Financial Management Reform Support Project (IDA grant pooled together with
resources from other donors) is to provide technical assistance and capacity building in
support of the first pillar of the PRSO program. The Fund provided technical assistance in
support of tax and customs administration reform.
d)
Municipal Finance. The Municipal Development and Decentralization Project II has
been assisting the government to review the current intergovernmental fiscal relation, and to
suggest an equalization transfer system to compensate for horizontal fiscal disparities across
local governments.
e)
Health Sector. The Structural Reform Support Project supported the GoG in
improving secondary health care services by reducing the surplus of hospitals and personnel,
providing the various types of the technical assistance in health care financing, HR
development, service provision, and quality of services. A number of medical facilities has

13
been renovated and equipped, and staff has been trained, to offer a decent quality of services
to the population of Georgia.
Areas of shared responsibility
22.

The World Bank and the Fund have worked jointly in the following main areas:

a)
Poverty Reduction Strategy. Both institutions have worked closely with the
government to support the implementation of the PRSP (or EDPRP as it is known in
Georgia), through seminars and workshops, direct staff input, and donor coordination. A
JSAN on the progress with implementation of the Government’s EDPRP was issued in
September 2006.
b)
Budget Planning and Execution. The PRSO program is supporting reforms to
improve public expenditure policies and management including development of an MTEF,
and strengthening public financial accountability. The Public Sector Financial Management
Reform Support Project is financing technical assistance and necessary investments to
support budget planning and management processes within the MoF and line ministries. The
Fund has focused on treasury reform within the Ministry of Finance.
c)
Financial Sector Reforms. The joint Financial Sector Assessment Program has
supported: (i) strengthening banking and non-banking supervision; (ii) introducing
international accounting standards; (iii) consolidating banks through higher capital
requirement ratios; (iv) anti money-laundering legislation; (v) strengthening the regulatory
environment and removing impediments for development of viable non-bank financial
institutions; and (vi) strengthening the payment system. IFC has worked to strengthen the
banking sector through investment and technical assistance, and has supported the
development of the financial leasing market through technical assistance. The Fund focused
on banking supervision, anti-money laundering legislation, and improvements in monetary
control instruments with extensive technical assistance from its Monetary and Capital
Markets Department.
Areas in which the IMF leads and its analysis serves as input into the World Bank
program
a)
Fiscal framework and reforms in tax policy and tax and customs administration.
The Fund’s focus on prudent fiscal policy has served as an important framework for IDA’s
work on public expenditure management. The Fund’s Fiscal Affairs Department has the lead
in the areas of tax policy and tax and customs administration reform.

14
b)
Economic statistics. IMF technical assistance has been conducive to improvements
in national accounts, prices, monetary and government financial statistics. The World Bank’s
grant on Statistical Capacity Building will build on the recommendations of Fund TA to
strengthen the quality of national accounts statistics.
Areas in which the IMF leads and there is no direct World Bank involvement
a)
Monetary Framework. The IMF collaborates closely with the NBG in the design
and implementation of a monetary program that aims at rebuilding international reserves
while keeping inflation low.
World Bank Group Strategy
On September 15, 2005, the World Bank Executive Board endorsed the new Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY06-09 designed to assist Georgia with deeper institutional
reform as well as more fundamental infrastructure improvements. A CPS Progress Report
assessing mid-term progress in the implementation of the CPS was presented to the Board in
June 2008. In general, the first two and a half years of the CPS period have been
characterized by rapid reform with most of the CPS goals achieved on schedule or earlier
than anticipated. The First PRSO, of a series of single tranche annual Poverty Reduction
Support Operations was approved in September 2005 ($13.5 million is a regular IDA credit
and $6.5 million is an IDA grant). The Second PRSO for $ 20 million of IDA credit was
approved by the World Bank’s Board in October 2006. The Third PRSO for $20 million of
IDA was approved by the World Bank’s Board in June 2007, and the Fourth PRSO, the last
in the series of PRSO was approved in May 2008.
A Supplemental Financing to Georgia’s PRSO IV in the amount of $40 million was
processed on an expedited basis and presented and approved by the IDA Board on October 2,
2008. Other recent operations include a $40 million Municipal Infrastructure Development
Project, which was approved on October 2, 2008, and a$20 million additional financing for
the Second East-West Highway Project approved on October 30, 2008.
The $19 million First East-West Highway Improvement Project and a $35 million Second
East-West Highway Improvement Project were approved in November 2006 and November
2007 respectively. A $15 million Education System Realignment & Strengthening Program
supported by the Japanese government co-financing grant in the amount of $4.9 million,, a $5
million Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility, a $3 million grant Public Sector Financial
Management Reform Support Project, a $24 million Reform Support Credit, a $20 million
Secondary and Local Roads Project, a $3.6 million Electricity Market Support Project, a $10
million Rural Development Project, $20 million PHC Development Project, $10 million
Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic Preparedness and Response Project and a $5

15
million Irrigation and Drainage Community Development Project Additional Funding for
flood control.
The World Bank continues its discussion with the government on a more comprehensive
medium-term reform strategy that would be supported by possible future programmatic
Development Policy Credit series and technical assistance operations.

16
ANNEX III. GEORGIA: RELATIONS WITH THE EBRD
(As of January 31, 2009)
1.
As of January 31, 2009 the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
had signed 114 investments in Georgia with cumulative commitments totaling $921.0 million. 1
Current Portfolio Stock equals to $653.2 million. The EBRD’s first operation, a power
rehabilitation project, was signed in December 1994. Since then, the pace and composition of
portfolio growth has varied significantly from year to year.
2.
During 2007 the Bank had signed 23 transactions in Georgia totaling $162.00 million.
The Bank provided a syndicated loan to ProCreditBank Georgia ($8 million); increased its equity
participation in Republic Bank, introduced a medium size co-financing facility (MCFF) in
Republic Bank and signed three sub operations under the facility in agriculture and health sectors
(total $9.35 million). MCFF has been successfully working for several years in one of the
country’s largest Bank TBC, with which the Bank signed six additional projects under the MCFF
in agriculture ($26 million), general industry ($1 million) and natural resources ($3 million)
sectors. The Bank financed mortgage lines to TBC Bank ($12 million) and Republic Bank ($ 4m)
and provided loans to the Republic Bank ($ 10 million), Cartu Bank ($7 million) and Basis Bank
($6 million) for on-lending purposes to medium, small and micro enterprises. The Bank
introduced Energy Efficiency facility in two Georgian Banks: TBC Bank ($10 million) and Cartu
Bank ($5 million).
3.
As at 31 December 2008 the Bank’s annual business volume reached $276.2 million
through its 28 transactions. The project examples include: $7.5 million loan to TBC Bank for
development of SMEs, additional mortgage loan ($20 million) to Republic Bank, the equity
investment in Basis Bank, equity increase and subordinated debt ($5 million) to Republic Bank.
In 2008 the Bank signed three operations in municipal and environmental infrastructure
development sector, namely: Batumi Public transport ($3.2 million), Kobuleti ($1.9 million) and
Borjomi ($1.9 million) water supply improvement projects. In October 2008 the Bank provided
$14 million loan to the company Geo Steel to finance construction and operation of 175 k ton
capacity steel mini-mill. In December 2008 the EBRD, along with the IFC provided Bank of
Georgia, the largest bank in the country, with $200 million loan facilities comprising of
convertible subordinated, non-convertible subordinated and senior loans intended to support
Bank of Georgia during a post-war period.
4.
The ratio of private sector projects in the portfolio now stands at 93 percent. The Bank
plans to focus primarily on private sector financing, but may also consider selected public sector
1

Evaluated at an exchange rate of $1.2827 per euro.

17
projects. The Bank will give preference to non-sovereign operations although, where sovereign
guarantees are required, donor co-funding on a grant basis will be sought.
5.
Georgia is part of the ‘Early Transition Countries’ (ETC) initiative. Launched in April
2004, the initiative aims to increase investments in the Bank’s seven poorest countries. The
initiative builds on international efforts to address poverty in these countries. Through this
initiative, the EBRD focuses its efforts on private sector business development and selected
public sector interventions. It aims to stimulate market activity by using a streamlined
approach to financing, focusing on smaller projects, mobilizing more investment, and
encouraging ongoing economic reform. The Bank will accept higher risk in the projects it
finances in the ETCs, while still respecting the principles of sound banking. Since launch of
the ETC initiative, the Bank’s annual business volume in Georgia has been increased five
times.

18
Table 1. Georgia: EBRD Portfolio for Georgia
As of January 31, 2009 (US$, million)
Project Name

Date of
Agreement

Outstanding
Amount

Bank Republic - MSE Loan
Bank Republic - MSME
Bank Republic Equity
Bank Republic Equity (Capital Increase)
Bank Republic Mortgage Loan
Bank Republic Mortgage Loan II
Bank Republic Subordinated Debt
Bank of Georgia - convertible subordinated debt
Bank of Georgia - subordinated debt
Bank of Georgia Senior Loan
Basis Bank Equity Investment - Georgian Financial Sector F/W
Batumi Public Transport Project
Borjomi Water Project
CEEP - Bank Republic
CEEP - Cartu Bank
CEEP - TBC
DIF - Alfapet
DIF - Delidor
DIF - Georgian Hazelnut Production Ltd.
DIF - Iberia Refreshments
DIF - Imedi L
DLF - BTM TEKSTIL
DLF - Georgian Hazelnut Production Ltd
DLF- Populi
ETC Non-Bank MFI Framework II - Constanta
ETC Non-Bank MFI Framework II - WV Credo
Enguri Hydro power Plant Rehabilitation project
Geo Steel
Georgia: Trans-Caucasian Rail Link Project
Georgian Financial Sector F/W - Basis Bank (MSME Loan)
Georgian Financial Sector F/W-Bank Republic MSE Loan

27-Apr 2006
12-Dec 2008
15-Sep 2006
23-Apr 2008
20-Dec 2006
22-Aug 2008
07-Jul 2008
30-Dec 2008
30-Dec 2008
30-Dec 2008
19-May 2008
02-Sep 2008
01-Dec 2008
19-Dec 2008
20-Dec 2007
30-Nov 2007
08-Dec 2007
17-Jun 2005
26-Oct 2006
25-Sep 2003
30-Dec 2006
21-Dec 2006
26-Oct 2006
31-Dec 2008
28-Nov 2006
07-Mar 2008
22-Dec 1998
20-Oct 2008
22-Dec 1998
21-Sep 2007
21-Dec 2007

2.1
10.0
7.6
1.3
7.8
14.0
5.0
26.0
24.0
50.0
3.8
3.2
1.9
5.0
5.0
5.0
0.1
1.4
0.8
3.1
1.5
2.2
2.8
13.1
2.8
1.5
25.7
14.0
4.4
6.0
12.0

Georgian Financial Sector F/W-Cartu Bank SME Loan
Georgian Financial Sector FW-TBC Bank Mortgage Line II
Georgian Property Debt FW - Tbilisi Central Train Station
Georgian Property Debt Facility - Green Building
Georgian Property Equity Investment
Georgian Wines & Spirits Ltd.
JSC Channel Energy Poti Port
Kobuleti Water
Kutaisi Water Project
MCFF - Bank Republic - Begi Co. II
MCFF - Bank Republic - Begi Company
MCFF - Bank Republic - Full Recourse
MCFF - Bank of Georgia Full Recourse Portion
MCFF - BoG Iberia Refreshments Sub-Loan (NRP)
MCFF - TBC - Tsiskvilkombinati II

20-Dec 2007
21-Dec 2007
28-Dec 2007
19-Mar 2007
29-Aug 2007
10-Mar 2005
19-Mar 2002
27-Jun 2008
15-Sep 2006
28-Dec 2007
28-Dec 2007
05-Dec 2008
14-Jun 2005
27-Sep 2006
21-Nov 2007

7.0
12.0
8.5
2.8
13.9
6.1
3.7
1.9
3.8
5.6
0.9
10.0
4.0
2.7
2.0

19
MCFF - TBC Bank - Jaokeni Company JSC
MCFF - TBC Bank EMBAWOOD Sub Loan
MCFF - TBC Bank JSC Full Recourse Portion
MCFF - TBC Bank Lomisi Ltd Sub-Loan (NRP)
MCFF - TBC Bank Tegeta Motors
MCFF - TBC Bank Wissol Sub-Loan (NRP)
MCFF - TBC Coca Cola Ltd. sub-loan
MCFF - TBC Tsiskvilkombinati
MCFF BOG - Renewable Energy Programme - Okami SHPP NRP
MCFF BOG - Renewable Energy Programme Lopota SHPP NRP
MCFF Bank Republic - Mediclub Georgia
MCFF TBC Bank - Goodwill
Poti Water Supply Project
Power Rehabilitation Project
ProCredit Georgia - Syndicated Loan
Regional TFP Basisbank (Guarantee & Pre-export)
Regional TFP: Bank Republic (Guarantee & Pre-export)
Regional TFP: Bank of Georgia (Guarantee & Pre-export)

04-Aug 2008
13-Jun 2007
13-Jun 2005
03-Aug 2005
01-Apr 2008
10-Oct 2007
02-Feb 2007
21-Nov 2007
21-Dec 2006
21-Dec 2006
30-Oct 2007
31-Oct 2007
15-Sep 2006
20-Dec 1994
21-Jun 2007
06-Nov 2007
15-Feb 2006
29-Jul 1999

3.0
0.8
2.1
1.2
6.8
5.6
5.1
2.1
0.1
0.2
2.5
7.5
3.2
1.6
8.0
0.3
0.0
20.1

Regional TFP: Cartu Bank
Regional TFP: TBC Bank (guarantee & pre-export)
Regional TFP: VTB Bank Georgia
TBC Bank - SME Credit Line
TBC Bank Mortgage Loan
TBC Bank SME Credit Line III
TBC Bank SME Line
TBC Leasing - Equity Investment
TBC Leasing, Senior Debt
Tbilisi International Airport
Tbilisi Public Transport Project
VTB Bank Georgia
VTB Bank Georgia (debt, equity)
VTB Bank Georgia Capital Increase

28-Apr 2006
17-Aug 1999
24-Dec 2000
19-Dec 2003
29-Jun 2006
26-Sep 2005
29-Jul 2008
01-Mar 2006
21-Dec 2005
17-May 2006
29-Jul 2005
09-Oct 2006
20-Nov 1997
09-Oct 2006

3.6
43.9
0.0
0.8
11.7
2.5
7.5
0.1
1.7
24.9
1.7
8.9
2.3
2.3

TOTAL
Aureos Central Asia Fund LLC
BIH
BSR Europe Co-Investment Facility
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) Pipeline
Baring Vostok Private Equity Fund
Caucasus Online
First NIS Regional Fund
Lukoil Overseas : South Caucasus Gas Pipeline
NIS Restructuring Facility

530.1
01-Dec 2008
18-Dec 2006
14-Aug 2006
03-Feb 2004
13-Dec 2000
22-Dec 2008
21-Nov 1994
28-Jul 2005
16-Mar 2000

0.8
0.0
9.0
53.1
0.1
30.6
0.0
29.4
0.0

TOTAL REGIONAL

123.0

GRAND TOTAL

653.2

20

ANNEX IV. GEORGIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance and
program monitoring. The Fund has provided technical assistance (TA) in the compilation of
macroeconomic statistics (Annex I, Table 1). Despite improvements in the areas of national
accounts, price, monetary, and government finance statistics, the quality of macroeconomic
statistics reflects insufficient resources and deficiencies in statistical methodologies and
coverage. Problems are particularly acute in the compilation of national accounts, balance of
payments, foreign trade, and fiscal statistics.
2.
The data module of the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC),
prepared in July 2002 was published on the Fund’s external website on May 27, 2003. A
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) mission in November helped finalize metadata
and on December 15, 2006 Georgia began participation in the GDDS. Since then the country
is working to meet the requirements of the Special Data Dissemination Standards.
Real sector statistics
3.
National accounts statistics follow the concepts and definitions of the System of
National Accounts 1993. Annual and quarterly GDP estimates are compiled by both the
production and expenditure approaches. Preliminary national accounts estimates are available
after 85 days, and final estimates after 13 months. The 2002 data ROSC mission found
several weaknesses regarding data sources, including poor coverage of units in terms of value
added for agriculture, retail trade, construction, catering, and services; limited administrative
sources to estimate the nonobserved economy; and inadequate data for imports and exports of
services (taken from the balance of payments). Follow-up missions in 2004 and 2005 found
that although the authorities have made good progress in addressing some of these issues,
there was scope for improving the constant price estimates and advancing the development of
the system of supply and use tables. On price statistics, both STA missions in May/June 2006
and August/September 2007 reported important progress regarding the development of
agricultural price indices, although inadequate funding was causing delays in implementation.
The authorities’ plans for improvements include the compilation of supply and use tables in
current and constant prices, as well as launching a PPI for agriculture.
Monetary and financial statistics
4.
A March 2002 STA mission found that the authorities had implemented many of the
recommendations of the December 2000 mission. The July 2002 data ROSC mission found
that most elements in the data quality assessment framework for monetary statistics were
fully or largely observed and recommended improvements in the statistical coverage of
nonbank depository corporations and the provision of documentation on metadata. It also

21
recommended increased transparency regarding access by governmental agencies to monetary
statistics prior to their release to the public.
5.
In accordance with the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual, the NBG has
begun compiling monetary data using the framework of the STA’s Standardized Report
Forms (SRF) and has been providing data regularly. These data have been published in the
IFS Supplement since September 2006. Beginning from December 2001, data published in
IFS have been revised in accordance with the SRF.
6.
A TA mission is scheduled for March 2009 to assist the NBG in developing a data
reporting and compilation framework for other financial corporations.
Government finance statistics
7.
Annual and monthly government finance statistics (GFS) compiled on a cash basis in
accordance with the methodology of the GFSM 2001 are reported to STA for publication in
the GFS Yearbook and International Financial Statistics, respectively. The country is well
advanced on a program of reform to their central and local government budget and
accounting systems to fully adopt the GFSM 2001 methodology and the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSASs), including the staged introduction of accrual
recording into transactions data, and an expansion in the range of items recorded in the
balance sheet. These reforms are documented in the paper Accounting Reform Strategy,
2007–17. The authorities’ commitment to the accounting reform strategy is set out in Decree
101 issued by the Minister of Finance on February 10, 2006. This decree approves the general
strategy, but implementation of some of the individual steps in the transition plan will require
amendments to the law of Georgia on the budget system (Budget System Law).
External sector statistics
8.
A September 2006 TA mission assisted the authorities to prepare an action plan for
the transfer of responsibility for the compilation of balance of payments statistics from the
DS to NBG; advised on the structure of the NBG’s new balance of payments division; and
developed a framework for the collection of source data. The mission also helped to further
develop the framework for compilation of an international investment position statement.
The balance of payments compilation function was transferred to NBG in January 2007,
although DS will remain the main provider of data for exports of goods and services and
direct investment. The transfer led to improvements in data quality.
9.
The STA Resident Statistics Advisor (RSA) stationed in Baku undertook six
peripatetic TA missions to Georgia during April 2007–October 2008. The work of the RSA
was focused on further improving Georgia’s data collection and compilation programs for
external sector statistics. The major remaining weaknesses in external sector statistics are: (i)
data sharing between the public institutions involved in producing external sector statistics is

22
not yet implemented, and (ii) the data collection system for private sector liabilities should be
improved.

GEORGIA: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(AS OF MARCH 9, 2009)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
7
Data

Frequency
of
7
Reporting

Frequency of
7
publication

Exchange Rates

03/06/09

03/02/09

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary
1
Authorities

03/05/09

03/09/09

D

D

M

Reserve/Base Money

03/05/09

03/09/09

D

D

M

Broad Money

03/05/09

03/09/09

D

D

M

Memo Items:
Data Quality—
Methodological
8
soundness

Data Quality—Accuracy
9
and reliability

O, LO, LO, O

O,O,O,O,LO

03/05/09

03/09/09

D

D

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the
Banking System

01/09

02/25/09

M

M

M

03/09/09

03/09/09

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

02/09

03/06/09

M

M

M

O,LO,O,O

LO,LO,O,O,O

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing —General
4
Government

12/08

01/28/09

M

M

M

LNO,LO,LNO,
O

LO,O,LO,O,O

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing —Central
Government

02/09

03/02/09

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and
5
Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/08

02/27/09

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

12/08

02/17/09

Q

Q

Q

O,LO,LO,LO

LNO, LNO,
LNO ,LNO, LNO

Exports and Imports of Goods and
Services

12/08

02/17/09

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

Q3/08

01/02/09

Q

Q

Q

O,LO,O,LO

LNO, LNO, LNO, LO, LO

Gross External Debt

12/08

02/27/09

Q

Q

Q

International Investment Position6

Q4/07

10/21/08

A

A

A

2

Interest Rates

1

23

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC (published on May 27, 2003, and based on the findings of the mission that took place during July 15 – 31,
2002) for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions,
scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
9
Same as footnote 8, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, assessment of source data, statistical techniques,
assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.
2

Press Release No. 09/83
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 24, 2009

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Completes Second Review under Stand-By Arrangement for Georgia and
Approves US$186.6 Million Disbursement

The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on March 23 completed the
second review of Georgia's performance under an 18-month Stand-By Arrangement totaling
SDR 477.1 million (about US$705.3 million). The completion of the review allows for the
immediate disbursement of an amount equivalent to SDR 126.2 million (about US$186.6
million).
The Arrangement was approved in September 2008 (see Press Release No. 08/208) to
support the Georgian authorities’ macroeconomic policies, rebuild gross international
reserves, and bolster investor confidence.
The Executive Board also concluded the 2009 Article IV consultation with Georgia. Details
of the findings will be published in a Public Information Notice in due course.
After the Executive Board's discussion on March 23, 2009, Mr. Takatoshi Kato, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, said:
“Economic and financial conditions have become more challenging since the last program
review, as Georgia feels the effects of the global crisis. Sharp declines in trade and workers’
remittances, weak commodity prices, and recessions and currency depreciations in major
trading partners are threatening domestic confidence and adversely affecting foreign direct
investment inflows, and growth prospects. The authorities plan to mitigate the impact of the
economic slowdown through a donor-financed fiscal stimulus and a reorientation of
expenditures.
“With the aim of aligning public spending with available official external financing, the
authorities have reduced the 2009 fiscal deficit target. To ensure that public spending has the
maximum impact on the population at large and to alleviate pressures on the poorest,

2

expenditures will be reoriented in favor of essential productivity-enhancing infrastructure
investment and targeted social support measures. A reform of expenditure management is
also being planned.
“The authorities are encouraged to use all the instruments of monetary policy, including the
interest rate and reserve requirements, as part of their adjustment strategy. In this regard, the
planned improvements in the central bank’s liquidity framework are timely, and should help
enhance the effectiveness of interest rate policy.
“Foreign exchange auctions have been introduced, an important step toward exchange rate
flexibility and the preservation of external stability. This will also help the authorities to
protect, and ultimately to rebuild, international reserves.
“Against the background of a deterioration in banks’ loan portfolios and the impact of a
sharp contraction in credit on bank profitability, strong supervisory vigilance over the
banking system will be crucial. In that vein, the Financial Supervisory Agency is
strengthening provisioning based on bank-by-bank assessments, and will stress-test banks
with technical assistance from the Fund. The authorities are encouraged to consider measures
to bolster depositor confidence and deal with possible systemic risks.
“Georgia’s economic policies are being crafted not only in response to the immediate crisis,
but also with a view to supporting sustained economic growth over the medium term. The
authorities are encouraged to build on their strong track record of reforms and their
commitment to fiscal prudence and low inflation. Special focus should be placed on
improving Georgia’s competitiveness, notably by enhancing the environment for private
investment in the tradable sector, and thus helping to reduce the current account deficit and
raise employment,” Mr. Kato said.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/37
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 27, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with
Georgia
On March 23, 2009 the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Georgia. 1
Background
With the double impact of the August 2008 armed conflict and the global crisis, real economic
growth suffered a dramatic decline from 12½ percent in 2007 to an estimated 2 percent in 2008,
after a sharp contraction in the second half of the year. Inflation slowed to 5½ percent at end2008 as global food and energy prices receded and demand weakened. The external current
account deficit is estimated to have reached 22½ percent of GDP in 2008 but narrowed
substantially in the second half of the year. Private capital inflows, which had been financing the
current account deficit, dropped from $1.7 billion during the first half of the year to an estimated
$450 million during the second half. Gross official reserves fell immediately after the conflict but
recovered later, aided by donor support, borrowing from the Fund under the Stand-By
Arrangement approved last September, and transfers from the sovereign wealth funds to
government accounts in the central bank.
The fiscal deficit widened markedly in 2008 but the composition of spending improved from high
defense and election outlays in the first half of the year to infrastructure and social spending in
the second half. Monetary policy, which focused on resisting inflationary pressures until the
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
conflict, had to deal the impact of declining demand for local currency on bank liquidity. The
central bank intervened heavily in the foreign exchange market to support the lari, and banks
stopped new lending despite central bank liquidity injections, reduced reserve requirements and
policy rate cuts.
The tightening of credit conditions and weakening of the economy exposed vulnerabilities in the
banking sector. Liquidity and solvency ratios deteriorated. The level of nonperforming loans
increased sharply and the need for loan-loss provisioning together with higher funding costs and
lost interest income have affected profitability.
The government introduced important structural reforms in the first half of 2008 , including a
gradual reduction of income and dividend taxes, and the introduction of rules to guide fiscal and
monetary policies in the medium term while ensuring public sector discipline and price stability.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that, following a long period of strong performance owing to the
implementation of sound economic policies and structural reforms, the Georgian economy has
been seriously affected by the August 2008 armed conflict, and now by the global downturn.
The combined shocks to the current and capital accounts are likely to be larger and more
prolonged than originally expected, increasing the external adjustment challenge and
diminishing near-term growth prospects. Directors endorsed the authorities’ economic strategy,
which assigns fiscal policy to support domestic demand and exchange rate flexibility to achieve
external stability. Structural reforms aim to secure sustained economic growth over the medium
term. Directors saw considerable downside risks to the economic outlook and recommended
that the authorities should stand ready to adapt their economic policies as warranted.
Directors supported the authorities’ plans to contain the economic slowdown through a donorfinanced fiscal stimulus and a reorientation of expenditures. The authorities have reduced the
targeted 2009 fiscal deficit in line with a downward revision in expected official external
financing, and have switched expenditure from imported defense goods toward essential
productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment and better targeted social spending. Directors
welcomed the planned expenditure management reforms.
Directors welcomed the move to foreign exchange auctions as an important step to achieving
greater exchange rate flexibility and protecting international reserves, which are relatively low.
They agreed with the authorities that exchange rate flexibility needed to be managed so as to
preserve confidence in the financial sector. Directors took note of the staff assessment that the
real effective exchange rate is overvalued. Over the medium term, the authorities’ commitment
to exchange rate flexibility and structural reforms to enhance competitiveness should help
correct the overvaluation, and reduce vulnerabilities posed by the large underlying current
account deficit.

3

Directors recommended that all instruments of monetary policy, including the interest rate and
reserve requirements, be employed in support of the authorities’ more cautious liquidity
management, which would ease pressures on the foreign exchange market. They welcomed
the planned improvement of the central bank’s liquidity framework, which should strengthen the
effectiveness of interest rate policy. Directors stressed the importance of closely coordinating
fiscal and monetary policies in order to contain pressures in the foreign exchange market.
Against the background of deterioration in banks’ loan portfolios and profitability, Directors
emphasized that close supervision will be crucial. They welcomed the Financial Supervisory
Agency’s actions to increase provisioning based on bank-by-bank assessments, and the
upcoming technical assistance from the Fund to strengthen its stress-testing capability.
Directors endorsed the authorities’ measures to bolster depositor confidence through increased
transparency and adequate safety nets. Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment to
developing a financial stability plan to respond to potential situations of stress.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Georgia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2004–2008
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Real Sector
Real GDP growth (percentage change)

5.9

9.6

9.4

12.4

2.0

GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

5,126

6,411

7,768

10,227

12,870

GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)

1,188

1,486

1,800

2,324

2,925

Period average

5.7

8.3

9.2

9.2

10.0

End-of-period

7.5

6.2

8.8

11.0

5.5

Revenue and grants

23.1

24.4

26.7

29.3

30.7

Expenditure and net lending

20.7

26.0

29.7

34.0

37.1

Overall balance (cash basis)

2.4

-1.6

-3.0

-4.7

-6.4

Reserve money (end-of-period growth rate, in percent)

44.3

19.7

19.2

25.6

-4.5

Broad money (end-of-period growth rate, in percent)

42.6

26.4

39.3

49.6

7.0

Broad money velocity

7.64

6.79

5.18

4.27

4.48

In millions of U.S. dollars

-344

-701

-1,174

-2,006

-2,911

In percent of GDP

-6.7

-10.9

-15.1

-19.6

-22.6

2,138

2,095

2,328

3,136

4,581

41.7

32.7

30.0

30.7

35.6

In millions of U.S. dollars

352

474

881

1,361

1,480

In months of imports of goods and services

1.3

1.3

1.8

2.2

3.0

1.92

1.81

1.78

1.66

1.48

Inflation (in percent)

Central government operations (in percent of GDP)

Monetary indicators

External Sector
Current account balance (including transfers)

External debt
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of exports of goods and services
Gross official international reserves

Exchange rate, lari/dollar, period average
Sources: Georgian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Statement by Age Bakker, Executive Director for Georgia
March 23, 2009
Recent developments
Following 8 years of strong performance, in which the economy has grown 7 percent on
average, GDP growth is estimated to have decelerated to around 2 percent last year. This figure
disguises a sharp contraction in the second half of 2008 owing to the armed conflict and the
unfolding global economic and financial crisis. Besides disrupting key sectors in the economy,
the conflict triggered a fall in confidence, bank deposits and private capital flows. Until
recently these inflows acted as the engine of growth and were attracted by Georgia’s sound
policies and appealing environment for doing business. In the aftermath of the conflict, the
authorities managed to stabilize the macroeconomic situation. The rapid response by the IMF
in September supported the authorities in their policies, and helped to catalyze other financial
support. In October 2008, the donor community pledged USD 4.5 bln over the years 20082010. All pledges for 2008 were disbursed, which provided room for countercyclical macro
policies. The authorities are grateful to the IMF for the support.
Notwithstanding efforts by the authorities and the international community, the global crisis
increasingly affected the economy in the final quarter of 2008. In response to growing
exchange pressures and reserve outflows, the authorities made a one-step devaluation of the
currency by about 17 percent in mid-November. Despite this devaluation, inflation has
subsided sharply, owing to slower economic activity as well as softer energy and food prices.
By the end of January 2009, inflation reached 4.4 percent, down from the 12 percent peak in
August 2008. As part of its planned transition to inflation targeting, the central bank has also
gained the legal foundation last year to commit itself to price stability.
Over the last few months deposits have recovered somewhat, indicating that savers entrust
their money to the banking sector. However, exchange rate uncertainties have contributed to
further dollarization of deposits, reversing the downward trend of previous years. On account
of the deteriorating real economy, declining real estate prices and the lari devaluation, non
performing loans in the banking sector have climbed steeply. In the face of uncertain
conditions, banks suspended new lending, despite the fact that the central bank significantly
relaxed liquidity conditions. Higher provisioning, steeper funding costs and lower lending
activity have negatively affected banks’ profitability. Liquidity and solvency ratios have also
come down, but they remain at comfortable levels.
Despite the difficult situation, the authorities have met all performance criteria for the 2nd
review by the end of December 2008. Besides meeting all quantitative criteria, the 2009 budget
was submitted to Parliament, and the Financial Stability Authority (FSA) and the central bank
signed and implemented a Memorandum of Understanding to enhance their cooperation in the
area of financial stability. Subject to a structural performance criterion, the central bank’s
lender of last resort facility was enhanced. These achievements reflect the authorities’

2
commitment to achieve the program’s objectives. The new Prime Minister, Minister of Finance
and Central Bank President will continue that commitment.
The outlook
The authorities will face a challenging year. Restoring private capital inflows and domestic
confidence remains a main priority. This task will not be easy in an environment of subdued
activity and ongoing global financial deleveraging. Portfolio investment and private external
borrowing are projected to fall steeply this year. Foreign direct investment is also expected to
slow relative to last year. However, an important part of these flows is still expected to come
due to the quasi-public dimension of these investments. With declining interest of private
investors and the expected fall in remittances, donor support will be critical in restoring
stability. Despite the more difficult external environment, major donors have for this year
either disbursed or reaffirmed their commitment to disburse their pledges.
Enhanced and sufficiently front-loaded donor support is expected to partially substitute for
private investment. Nevertheless, in view of the worsening external outlook and the credit
freeze by banks, staff expects the economy to grow by 1 percent in 2009. Relative to the
baseline of the 1st review, this implies a downward revision by 3 percentage points. The
authorities anticipate a recovery in the second half of 2009, reflecting a fiscal impulse and a
lower base in the second half of 2008. The significant cooling in consumer prices may also
help to restore consumers’ purchasing power.
Slower domestic demand growth and private capital inflows are expected to weaken import
growth. Import reduction is likely to more than offset falling exports revenues resulting from a
slump in commodity prices and a recession in Georgia’s main trading partners. These
developments are projected to narrow the current account deficit in 2009 by 6 percentage
points. While a deficit of 16.7 percent of GDP is still large, it is expected to be covered by
foreign direct investment, donor inflows, and the use of Fund resources.
The authorities’ policies
To support economic activity, the authorities are implementing a fiscal stimulus, which entails
a shift from import-intensive defense spending to social and capital spending. With this
stimulus package, the authorities expect to provide a cyclical impulse to the economy and
improve medium-term competitiveness. The 2009 budget deficit is projected to be close to 6
percent of GDP. In case donor money would fall short of expectations, which is considered
unlikely, the authorities will revise the 2009 deficit target downward. Despite higher fiscal
deficits since 2008, the rise in external public debt has been limited by favorable debt terms.
Projected at circa 25 percent of GDP for 2009, the level of public external debt also remains
manageable. In order to improve the process of budget planning, execution and auditing, the
authorities will introduce a new budget code. It is the aim to submit this code to cabinet later
this year.

3
Lower inflation has provided the room for considerable monetary easing. At the same time, the
authorities recognize that providing ample liquidity to banks adds pressures in the foreign
exchange market. In this context, they see merit in a more cautious liquidity provision.
Anticipating a future move to inflation targeting, the authorities are working on improving the
interest rate channel. By the end of March, the central bank is expected to introduce and
publish a new liquidity framework (structural benchmark), which aims to strengthen the link
between the policy rate and the operational target. Developing a liquid domestic securities
market will also aid the smooth conduct of monetary policy, but this will take time, particularly
in the current environment of diminished appetite for emerging market securities.
While recognizing the need to move to a more flexible exchange rate regime, the authorities
have so far only showed some flexibility. Their preference for moving gradually to flexibility
stems from the concern that a sudden abandoning of the exchange rate anchor would hurt
depositor confidence and would expose banks to negative balance sheet effects. However, in
the face of the worsening external environment and the current level of reserves, the authorities
have stepped up preparations for a swifter move to a flexible regime. During March they have
slowed the pace of interventions, and successfully introduced an auction-based mechanism for
selling foreign exchange. These steps are reflected in the NIR targets, which over the course of
this year leave significantly less scope for interventions.
The conflict and the global crisis have affected the banking sector. However, conservative
prudential policies have anchored the stability of the banking sector. Swift support from
international institutions, including EBRD and IFC, should also enable banks to cover their
maturing external obligations for 2009. While the FSA is confident about the strength of the
banking sector, it recognizes the need for monitoring the banking system very closely in a
situation of worsening loan quality. Based on this assessment, it has required banks to step up
loan-loss provisioning. In further enhancing the FSA’s analytical toolkit, the Fund will provide
technical assistance in stress testing banks’ balance sheets. To better prepare for contingencies,
the authorities are developing a financial stability plan for managing financial sector stress.
They are committed to finalize this plan by end-June.
In light of the performance under the SBA so far and the commitment to further policy
adjustments, the authorities request the completion of the 2nd review. They have indicated their
intention to draw the amounts that will become available at the completion of this review.

