January 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/8

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

November 17, 2004
January 29, 2001

November 29,
January 29, 2001
2004
2004
January 29, 2001

Lao People’s Democratic Republic: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on August 4, 2004, with the officials of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic on economic developments and policies. Based on information
available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on November 17,
2004. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its November 29, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Joint Staff Advisory Note of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Annex
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2004 Consultation
with the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Anthony Boote
November 17, 2004
•

A mission visited Vientiane during July 21–August 4 to conduct discussions for the 2004 Article IV
Consultation and continue discussions for the fourth review under the PRGF arrangement.

•

The staff team comprised Messrs. Bingham (head), Hussain, and Miniane (all APD), Aiyar (PDR)
and Maliszewski (FAD), and Ms. Del Rosario (Administrative Assistant, APD). Mr. Patrawimolpon
(OED) joined the discussions. The team was assisted by the resident representative Mr. Beaugrand
and coordinated closely with World Bank and AsDB staff.

•

The team met with Deputy Prime Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs Bouasone
Buophavanth, Minister of Finance Chansy Phosikham, Bank of the Lao P.D.R. Governor Phoumi
Thipphavone, Vice President of the National Assembly Mme Pany Yathotou, other senior officials,
and representatives of the private sector and civil society.

•

The present PRGF arrangement (SDR 31.7 million) was approved in April 2001, and was extended
by an additional year, through April 24, 2005, in September 2003 (Annex I). In concluding the
Article IV consultations in August 2002, Directors welcomed the strengthening macroeconomic
situation, but expressed concern about the slow progress on structural reforms, especially in the
fiscal area. These views were reaffirmed at the time of the third review in September 2003.
Discussions for the fourth PRGF review commenced in December 2003 and continued through
October 2004.

•

Staff reports on the PRGF arrangement have been published; the authorities have agreed to consider
publication of this report and its background papers, but have not yet indicated their consent.

•

Lao P.D.R.’s statistical base has significant limitations for surveillance purposes (Annex II).
STA has provided technical assistance to address weaknesses in the key statistical systems and
facilitate Lao P.D.R.’s participation in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).

•

Lao P.D.R. continues to avail itself of transitional arrangements under Article XIV. Staff have
conducted a review of exchange regulations to establish the remaining measures that would allow
Lao P.D.R. to accept Article VIII. These measures are discussed in paragraph 38 of this report.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary .........................................................................................................................4
I.

Background and Economic Setting......................................................................................5

II.

Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................10
A.
Fiscal Issues ...........................................................................................................10
B.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy.....................................................................13
C.
External Debt Management ...................................................................................14
D.
Structural Reform...................................................................................................15

III.

Medium-term Outlook and Debt Sustainability.................................................................18

IV.

Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................20

Boxes
1
Poverty Situation..................................................................................................................7
2.
Recent Revenue Developments and Outlook ....................................................................12
Figures
1.
Inflation and Exchange Rate, 1997–1999............................................................................5
2.
Trends in Revenue ...............................................................................................................6
3.
Consumer Price Inflation .....................................................................................................8
Chart
1.
Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–2004........................................................................22
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11a.
11b.
12.
13.
14.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–2005 .................................................23
Balance of Payments, 2001–2008......................................................................................24
External Debt and Debt Service, 2001–2008.....................................................................25
Monetary Survey, 2003–2005............................................................................................26
Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, 2003–2004 ............................27
General Government Operations, 2001/02–2004/05 .........................................................28
Structural Benchmarks Under Third Annual Program ......................................................29
Strategy for Structural Fiscal Reforms ..............................................................................30
Summary Macroeconomic Framework, 2001-2008 ..........................................................31
External Financing Needs and Sources, 2003–2008..........................................................32
External Sustainability Analysis of Public and Publicly
Guaranteed External Debt, 2003–2019...........................................................................33
Fiscal Sustainability Analysis of Public Debt, 2003–2019................................................34
Millennium Development Goals Indicators, 1990–2015...................................................35
Fund Position and Indicators of Fund Credit, 2003–2012.................................................36
Phasing of Disbursement Under the PRGF Arrangement .................................................37

-3-

Contents
Page
Annexes
I.
Fund Relations ...................................................................................................................38
II.
Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................41
III.
Fund-Bank Relations .........................................................................................................45
IV.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ....................................................................53
V.
Social Indicators.................................................................................................................54

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Lao P.D.R.’s recent macroeconomic performance has been relatively encouraging.
Macroeconomic conditions are stable and economic growth has been robust. The latest data
also suggest that poverty has continued to decline.
However, the pace of structural reform has remained slow, especially in the fiscal area.
While some headway has been made in reforming the state banks and state-owned
enterprises, progress in mobilizing revenues and strengthening expenditure management has
been slow, due to capacity constraints and a difficulty advancing reforms in a decentralized
fiscal structure.
The near-term outlook is favorable, but Lao P.D.R.’s high debt poses a risk to the
medium-term outlook. Moving towards a sustainable debt burden will require accelerated
progress on structural reform, especially with regard to revenue mobilization. Prudent debt
management will also be critical. Maintaining sustainable growth will require further
structural reform to encourage private sector development.
Policy discussions focused on macroeconomic policies and key structural reforms for
sustaining macroeconomic stability and reducing poverty:
•

Macroeconomic policies. Discussions focused on establishing a sound framework for
the 2004/05 budget, where there are concerns about a large increase in the wage bill,
and maintaining tight control over credit expansion at the state banks.

•

Fiscal reforms. The priority continues to be to advance structural reform to mobilize
revenues and improve expenditure management. Progress in both areas depends on
strengthening central control over fiscal management in the provinces. This may
require a more comprehensive reform of inter-governmental relations.

•

Banking reform. Staff encouraged the authorities to maintain progress in
restructuring the two state banks, as both banks remain vulnerable. Further progress is
also needed in strengthening bank supervision and improving the overall banking
environment, by encouraging greater competition in the banking system.

•

Enterprise reform. Staff welcomed the recent progress in reforming state-owned
enterprises, including steps taken to resolve the ongoing losses at Lao Airlines. Staff
encouraged the authorities to complete ongoing restructuring plans at the major
enterprises on schedule. Further efforts are also needed to promote private sector
activity and improve the investment climate.

Completion of the fourth PRGF review has been delayed pending the resolution of a
number of issues. These include clarification of the 2004/05 budget plan, the scope of tax
incentives under new investment laws, and progress on revenue and state bank reforms. Staff
are also seeking understandings on the external audit of the central bank’s accounts. Further
discussions on the fourth review are planned after the Article IV Consultation.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND AND ECONOMIC SETTING
Background
1.
In early 2001, when the current PRGF arrangement was approved, Lao P.D.R.
had just emerged from an acute period of macroeconomic instability. Although the Asian
crisis was a contributing factor, the domestic problems stemmed largely from a breakdown in
0
fiscal management in 1997–98. The
190
Figure 1: Inflation and Exchange Rate, 1997-1999
government, anxious to accelerate the pace
2,000
of development, launched a series of large
Exchange Rate
140
investments in irrigation aimed at
(Kip/US$, RHS)
achieving rice self-sufficiency. The
4,000
investments, though well-intentioned, were 90
unplanned and pushed through without
Inflation
6,000
(12-month percent change, LHS)
adequate financing arrangements. The
40
consequences were severe (Figure 1).
8,000
Heavy borrowing from the central bank
resulted in a rapid expansion of liquidity
10,000
-10
that caused a collapse of the kip and triple
Jan M ay Sep
Jan M ay Sep
Jan M ay
digit inflation.
1997 1997 1997 1998 1998 1998 1999 1999
2.
The government launched a successful stabilization program in late 1999, but
significant structural weaknesses remained. Monetary and fiscal policies were tightened,
along the lines recommended by Fund staff, and by early 2001 the kip had stabilized and
inflation had been reduced to single digits. However, the fiscal position was fragile: budget
revenues were low and over dependent on timber royalties, and recurrent spending, especially
on social programs and civil service wages, was highly compressed. The state commercial
banks (SCBs) were also insolvent, weighed down by high levels of nonperforming loans
(almost 90 percent of the SCB loans were nonperforming). The latter arose mainly from
noncommercial lending to state-owned enterprises (SOEs), although government arrears to
private borrowers were also a contributory factor. The high level of non performing loans
(NPLs) from SOEs1 reflected a poor repayment culture, as well as operational weaknesses
stemming (in part) from government interference in their pricing policies.
3.
The government requested the PRGF arrangement to help advance key reforms
to consolidate the recovery from the economic crisis. The primary objective was to
strengthen public finances to sustain the stabilization effort and provide a solid platform to
address Lao P.D.R.’s substantial development needs. Raising budget revenues and improving
expenditure management were the main priority, but the program also focused on reforming
SCBs and SOEs to strengthen the broader fiscal position. The program, which was closely
coordinated with programs of the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (Annexes III

1

SOEs accounted for about 80 percent of the SCBs’ non performing loans.

-6and IV), formed part of a broader strategy, articulated most recently in the government’s
PRSP,2 to raise Lao P.D.R. from the ranks of least-developed countries by 2020.

% of G.D.P.

4.
Three years on, Lao P.D.R.’s macroeconomic performance has been relatively
encouraging, but the pace of structural reform has been slow. After a brief hiatus in 2002,
macroeconomic stability has been restored and growth has been reasonably robust. The latest
data also suggest that poverty has continued to decline (Box 1). Some headway has been
made in reforming the SCBs and SOEs, although much remains to be done in both areas.
However, progress in strengthening fiscal
management has been slow and uneven, due
to capacity constraints and a difficulty
17
Figure 2: Trends in Revenue
advancing reforms in a decentralized fiscal
16
3
structure. In particular, a progressive
15
weakening of budget revenues since the start
14
of the program has raised concerns about the
13
sustainability of the fiscal outlook
12
(Figure 2).4 Also, expenditure management
11
Origina l P R GF
remains weak, undermining the capacity of
10
F irs t R e vie w
the government to deliver effective social
9
Third R e vie w
sector programs, and deficiencies in public
8
Ac tua l
debt management have persisted, hindering
7
efforts to exert greater control over the
1997/98
1999/00
2001/02
2003/04
contracting of public and publicly guaranteed
debt.
5.
Discussions for the fourth review, which have been ongoing since December 2003,
have focused mainly on reforms to strengthen the revenue base. With revenues declining
more sharply than expected in 2002/03,5 the focus has been on reversing this decline and
advancing key structural reforms to strengthen the revenue base over the medium-term. Time
was needed to forge an appropriate consensus on the reform strategy, as some of the revenue
reforms, particularly those related to reestablishing a national revenue administration strike at
the heart of center-provincial relations. As discussed below, although the authorities have
made progress over the last year, policy slippages in a few key areas have prevented the
completion of the fourth review at this time.
2

The PRSP’s official title is the National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES).

3

In 2001, the government launched a decentralization initiative to make provinces more self
reliant. The original intent was to introduce new fiscal arrangements only on a pilot basis, but
provinces were quick to assert control over revenues and expenditures, resulting in a
fragmentation of fiscal control.

4

The background papers discuss Lao P.D.R.’s revenue performance in greater detail.

5

The fiscal year runs from October to September.

-7-

Box 1. Lao P.D.R.: Poverty Situation
Lao P.D.R. has made progress in reducing poverty during the last decade. Poverty (as measured
by the percentage of population living below the poverty line) declined from 45 percent in 1992-93 to
39 percent in the late 1990s, and the latest survey suggests that it is now at 30 percent. High economic
growth has been a key factor behind poverty reduction. In addition, the results on the composition of
the consumption basket suggest a shift away from food items (especially own food consumption),
which is consistent with a growing economy.
Nevertheless, Lao P.D.R. remains as one of the poorest countries in the world with GDP per
capita estimated at around $369 for 2003. The majority of the population depends on subsistence
agriculture. Moreover, there is considerable variation in poverty across regions and between rural and
urban areas; the largest reductions were in urban areas, especially Vientiane, where poverty was more
than halved. In particular, the poverty gap between Vientiane and other regions widened significantly,
with the north of the country, where large groups of ethnic minorities are located, continuing to show
the highest incidence of poverty.
Poverty in Lao P.D.R. is also linked to a number of socio-economic characteristics. Data from
the latest survey shows a correlation between illiteracy and poverty. Households with illiterate heads
are disproportionately poorer. Also, poor households tend to be larger than non-poor households and
they tend to be concentrated in areas where infrastructure is less developed. There is also a link
between limited access to health care facilities and poverty. The proportion of people with temporary
health problems is higher for rural areas with limited access to healthcare facilities and transportation.
This contributes to poverty by limiting their ability to work and disrupting income generating
activities.
Income inequality in Lao P.D.R. is low compared to most other Asian countries. However, it has
increased, as measured by the Gini coefficient, providing further evidence that the benefits of
economic growth have not been sufficiently spread to the bulk of the population in poor rural areas.
The main causes of poverty include: (i) a legacy of physical devastation during the Vietnam war,
with unexploded ordinances still affecting half of the country’s territory; (ii) weak public service
delivery, especially in the health and education sectors; (iii) inadequate communication infrastructure;
and (iv) shortcomings in governance. Poor road access to markets, low productivity and insufficient
support services to farming especially in upland areas, limited access to credit and weak marketing
chains are the main bottlenecks facing the rural poor.
The government’s strategic goal is to graduate from the group of least developed countries
by 2020. The government’s strategy to achieve this goal rests on three key pillars: (i) the development
of a market oriented economy; (ii) building up the country’s infrastructure; and (iii) improving social
welfare through greater food security, extension of social services, and environmental conservation.
The government has finalized its National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES),
its equivalent of the PRSP. It provides a good framework on its strategy to reduce poverty and meet
other developmental objectives. The joint staff assessment to this report is also being discussed at the
Executive Board along with the staff report.

-86.
Preparations for the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) hydroelectric project are entering into
a critical phase. This huge project has the potential to significantly boost Lao P.D.R.’s
development provided that the resources it will generate are managed effectively. The
deadline for finalizing the project is approaching, as the consortium of investors has until
May 2005 to secure all the financing. The main outstanding issue concerns the financing of
the government’s equity stake in the project ($80–$100 million) and the provision of
partial-risk guarantees to cover creditors against sovereign risk. The government has
approached the World Bank and other agencies to assist with the remaining elements of the
financing package. In addition to a satisfactory macroeconomic situation, this support is
conditional on appropriate environmental and social safeguards, the establishment of effective
revenue management mechanisms, and assurances relating to Lao P.D.R.’s external debt
outlook.
Recent developments
7.
The economy has held up well in 2004 (Table 1). Although economic growth dipped
in 2003 to 5¼ percent, half a percentage point lower than in 2002, the latest indicators suggest
that activity has rebounded in 2004, with growth projected to rise to 6 percent of GDP.
Agriculture and hydroelectricity output have recovered from a drought in 2003, and tourism
has recovered from last year’s SARs outbreak. Manufacturing activity has also been boosted
by a pick-up in consumer demand, driven in part by buoyant informal sector activity.
8.
Inflation, which had surged into double digits in 2002, has been on a downward
trend since mid 2003 (Figure 3). With the kip
23
remaining stable, core inflation has fallen steadily 23 Figure 3: Consumer Price Inflation
(year
on
year
percentage
change)
over the last year to just over 6½ percent
20
20
(12-month basis). Sharp increases in food (mainly
17
rice), fuel and utility prices kept headline inflation 17
relatively high for most of 2004, but with food
14
14
prices starting to ease in recent months, headline
11
11
inflation has also began to decline, falling to
CPI
7½ percent in September. Despite the recent
8
8
increase in oil prices, headline inflation should stay
Core
5
5
in single digits for the remainder of the year,
Jun
Dec
Jun
Dec
Jun Sep
provided food prices remain subdued.
2002
2002
2003
2003
2004 2004
9.
The external position has improved, but Lao P.D.R.’s external debt remains high
(Table 2). Relatively brisk export growth, combined with buoyant donor and foreign direct
investment inflows, is expected to lift external reserves to around $240 million by end 2004,
sufficient to maintain reserve cover at around 4 months of imports. Public external debt has
continued to rise over the last couple of years, mainly as a result of concessional borrowing
from multilateral donors. Including Lao P.D.R.’s debt to Russia, the net present value (NPV)
of public external debt stands at 220 percent of exports (Table 3).
10.
Monetary policy has generally been restrained over the past year (Table 4). Net
domestic assets of the Bank of Lao P.D.R. (BoL) have been broadly stable. Both reserve
money and broad money have been growing relatively fast—broad money grew by 20 percent

-9in the year to September—but the recent decline in inflation suggests that this reflects mainly
an increase in demand for kip, prompted by the recent stability of the exchange rate.6 Tighter
credit controls under the bank restructuring program kept state bank credit within the program
path established for 2003/04 for much of the year. However, credit by the SCBs has expanded
rapidly in the last quarter, raising concerns that the previously tight controls on credit
allocations by the SCBs may be weakening, potentially undermining a key element of the
monetary policy framework (Table 5).
11.
The preliminary fiscal outturn for 2003/04 indicates that the budget deficit
declined to 3.9 percent of GDP, almost 2 percentage points lower than in 2002/03
(Table 6). The latest data suggest that revenues have performed relatively well, rising
from 11.1 to 11.3 percent of GDP. Stronger administrative efforts, combined with the full
year effects of last year’s increase in petroleum taxes, raised tax revenues (excluding timber
royalties) from 8.1 to 8.9 percent of GDP, despite the impact of tariff reforms related to the
ASEAN Free Trade Arrangement (AFTA). However, these gains were partly offset by lower
timber royalties and nontax revenues. Expenditures fell by 1.8 percent of GDP, due mainly to
lower foreign financed capital expenditures, following the completion of a number of large
projects. Domestic spending also contracted, as sharp cuts in the domestic capital budget,
following tight controls over new projects, more than offset higher current spending.
12.
The authorities have implemented most of the original structural benchmarks for
the fourth review, albeit some with delay (Table 7). The benchmarks related to onsite bank
inspections (performance criterion), improving the budget classification, and transferring tax
payers to the central large taxpayer unit were implemented on schedule. Implementing
regulations for the presidential decree on tax incentives were issued, albeit with considerable
delay.7 However, progress has been slower in the core fiscal reforms related to the
centralization of the customs and treasury departments. The amendments to the commercial
bank law to permit foreign banks to operate nationwide have yet to be finalized.
13.
Completion of the fourth review has been delayed pending the resolution of a
number of issues. These include: (i) clarification of the 2004/05 budget plan approved by the
National Assembly in mid October; (ii) confirmation that the scope of tax incentives provided
under new investment laws conforms with understandings reached on the presidential decree
on tax incentives; (iii) satisfactory progress in centralizing the customs administration; and
(iv) corrective actions to contain credit expansion at the SCBs. Staff have also sought
understandings on the external auditing of the BoL’s accounts and to update the status of the
rescheduling of Lao P.D.R.’s Russian debt. Discussions on these outstanding issues are still
ongoing and a staff team plan to visit Vientiane after the conclusion of the Article IV
Consultation to resume discussions on the fourth review.

6

However, dollarization is still high in Lao P.D.R., with foreign currency deposits remaining at
around two-third of total deposits in the banking system.

7

No tax incentives have yet been issued under Presidential Decree 01 (performance criterion).

- 10 -

II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
14.
The Article IV Consultation, which comes on the heels of the authorities’ PRSP,
provided an opportunity to take a medium-term perspective on reform. The joint staff
advisory note (JSAN) for the PRSP has been separately circulated for consideration by the
Executive Board (EBD/04/122). In line with the PRSP, discussions focused on fiscal reforms
to solidify macroeconomic stability, expand the revenue envelope, and improve expenditure
management, which are essential to the government’s goal of achieving growth with equity.
Complementary reforms in SCBs and SOEs were also addressed, as were potential sources of
growth and steps to meet the competitive challenges of regional integration.
A. Fiscal Issues
15.
Policy discussions focused on advancing the process of fiscal reform. The priority
was to reach understandings on the 2004/05 budget framework and to review the
government’s medium-term plans for structural reform.
2004/05 budget
16.
The staff reached understandings on a sound budget framework for 2004/05 in
August. The authorities agreed to aim at raising revenue from 11.3 to 11.6 percent of GDP.
The main tax measures included the reversal of the turnover tax reduction enacted
in 2002/03, and a rationalization of excise duties. On the spending side, the staff encouraged
the authorities to raise recurrent spending on health and education. Higher spending on the
wage bill (0.4 percent of GDP), consistent with a mid-year increase in base salaries of
20 percent, was also justified, given that civil service wages have remained low. The overall
budget framework was consistent with maintaining the budget deficit at around 4 percent
of GDP, which could be fully financed through concessional loans.
17.
The staff have expressed reservations about the budget plan as approved by the
National Assembly. The plan’s revenue target (12 percent of GDP) may be overambitious in
the absence of additional revenue-raising measures and the proposed reallocation of domestic
expenditures from capital to recurrent, in particular the large increase in the wage bill
(1.3 percent of GDP) may not be sustainable. Staff also encouraged the authorities to ensure
that world oil market prices were passed onto consumers without delay, as the budget could
ill-afford a loss of petroleum revenue.8 The authorities recognize that raising the wage bill
would need to be conditional on achieving the revenue targets in the budget and realizing
projected cost-savings in other areas of the budget. While staff are working with the
authorities to clarify the budget measures proposed in the budget plan, a preliminary analysis
indicates that the proposed increase in the wage bill may need to be phased in over a longer

8

There is evidence that the recent price hike may not have been fully passed onto consumers.

- 11 -

time period. 9 The staff therefore welcome the authorities’ intention to review the measures at
the time of the mid-year budget in April, and to recalibrate them if necessary.
Medium-term fiscal reform strategy
18.
The key elements of the medium-term fiscal strategy are well defined in the
10
PRSP. There is a broad consensus that revenue mobilization continues to be the main
priority and that efforts in this area need to focus on strengthening tax and customs
administration, which, inter alia, is essential for moving ahead with the VAT, the main tax
policy reform (Box 2). On the expenditure side the priority is to strengthen the planning and
execution of the government budget. Progress in both areas is dependent on strengthening
central government control over revenue administration and treasury operations in the
provinces. While progress can be made in the individual components, these reforms will
require a more comprehensive reform of inter-governmental relations.
19.
The main challenge on the revenue administration front has been to recentralize authority over the tax and customs administration. The focus in 2003/04 had
been on centralizing the customs department, starting with the seven main international
check points. Some advances have been made in restoring central authority over the staff and
revenues at the check points, but the reforms had encountered considerable resistance from
provincial governors. Nevertheless, the authorities were committed to the reforms and
indicated that the next steps were to: (i) place the provincial staff at the check points on the
government’s payroll; (ii) ensure all revenues were deposited directly into central
government bank accounts; and (iii) pass a new customs law that would formalize central
authority over the customs administration. Once the customs reforms became more deeply
entrenched, the authorities would start the process of bringing the provincial large taxpayer
units (LTUs) under central control. In the interim, work would proceed with improving the
operations of the individual LTUs and strengthening the capacity of the tax department
headquarters, with the assistance provided by the Swedish government (SIDA).
20.
Introduction of a VAT remains the main tax policy change in the medium-term.
The government intends to introduce this long-standing reform in January 2007. To this end,
the government has submitted a proposal to the National Assembly to introduce a single rate
VAT (10 percent). The staff welcomed this formal commitment to introducing a VAT and
encouraged the authorities to finalize and publish their plans for the main parameters of the
VAT and the detailed plan for its implementation. The authorities indicated that work on
such a plan was underway with assistance from SIDA and regional partners. In this context,
the staff also welcomed the reduction in the number of turnover tax rates (from three to two)
in the 2004/05 budget, as this is an important step towards a single rate VAT.

9

These proposed measures include a 20 percent increase in base salaries, as well as a significant
increase in pensions, benefits and allowances.

10

A comprehensive list of structural reforms and implementation steps recommended by staff is
presented in Table 8.

- 12 -

Box 2. Lao P.D.R.: Recent Revenue Developments and Outlook
The poor revenue performance since the start of the program in 2000/01 has been a major concern.
Instead of rising by 2 percentage points, as originally envisaged under the program, the revenue-to-GDP ratio
has declined significantly, falling to 11.1 percent of GDP by 2002/03, 2 percentage points below 1999/00.
The original revenue gain had been based on the assumption that the VAT would be introduced in 2003 and that
supporting administrative reforms would bolster revenue collections in the interim.
Although part of the decline reflected external factors, it has also reflected slow progress on revenue
reforms (including policy reversals). A significant part of the revenue decline is attributable to a sharp drop in
timber royalties, which fell by 1 percent of GDP following the imposition of an export ban on unprocessed logs.
A rationalization of the finances of state banks and state-owned enterprises has also reduced taxes from the state
sector (before recent reforms, state banks and SOEs continued to pay taxes despite running large underlying
losses). However, a deterioration in tax and customs administration, following a decision in 2000 to decentralize
fiscal management to the provinces, has been a major contributory factor. The revenue base has also been
eroded by tax incentives, such as a reduction in turnover tax rates for domestic producers in 2002/03, and an
extension of ad hoc exemptions on excises.
At the same time, it is now recognized that the original revenue objectives may have been too optimistic.
Indeed, once account is taken of the large subsistence agriculture sector in Lao P.D.R., the overall revenue
effort does not compare unfavorably with its neighbors in the region. The ratio of budget revenue to
nonagricultural GDP (excluding revenue from natural resources) is comparable to that in Vietnam and
significantly higher than in Cambodia. The challenge of overcoming acute capacity constraints may also have
been underestimated, although this has been secondary to the challenge of forging a consensus on key policy
reforms.
In light of these developments, the medium-term outlook for budget revenues has been revised
downwards significantly relative to that presented at the time of the third review (Table). Staff now
propose a medium-term revenue path that would raise the revenue-to-GDP-ratio by 1–1½ percent of GDP over
the next three years. This path allows for a more realistic timetable for the introduction of the VAT and takes
account of expected losses from the tariffs reduction under AFTA (estimated at 0.7 percent of GDP). It also
recognizes that the decline in timber royalties is only partly recoverable and the reduction in taxes from state
banks and enterprises will only be reversed once they have been placed on a sound financial footing.
Lao P.D.R.: Revenue Outlook, 2003/04–2007/08
2003/04
Program

2004/05

2005/06
2006/07
Projections

2007/08

(In percent of GDP)
Projected revenues

11.3

Changes (cumulative impact)
Adjustment in excise rates
Improved compliance/monitoring
Turnover tax reversals
Hydrosector profit tax (THPC)
Hydrosector dividends (EDL)
VAT
AFTA
Oxiana
Other 1/
Memorandum item:
Revenue outlook at 3rd Review

12.2

11.6

11.9

12.3

12.8

0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1

0.6
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1

-0.2
0.0
-0.1

-0.4
0.2
-0.3

0.9
0.1
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.3
-0.5
0.3
-0.3

1.4
0.1
0.7
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.5
-0.7
0.5
-0.3

12.3

13.0

13.3

...

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Reflects the effect of GDP growing faster than the tax base due to the impact of the large Oxiana
mining project.

- 13 -

21.
Limiting exemptions and other tax incentives is also important for broadening
the tax base. Staff welcomed the promulgation of regulations for the presidential decree on
tax incentives, which were issued in August and struck an appropriate balance between
promoting investment and protecting the revenue base. Staff welcomed in particular the
provisions strengthening the Ministry of Finance’s control over the administration of tax
incentives. But the new regulatory framework has recently been superseded by new
investment laws approved by the National Assembly in October. The staff have expressed
concern that the new investment laws might broaden the scope of tax incentives and weaken
the controls over their administration built into the presidential decree. While the staff still
need to review the laws, the authorities have assured the staff that they are broadly consistent
with understandings reached on the presidential decree.
22.
The mission discussed the authorities’ agenda for public expenditure reform.
The main priority is to strengthen treasury controls, by bringing sub-treasuries in the
provinces under the direct control of the central treasury. Over the longer term, this will
require a comprehensive revision to the basic Treasury Law. The authorities agreed that it
would be useful to launch this process by preparing a concept paper, with the assistance of
FAD and the World Bank, to forge a consensus on the key reforms. In the interim, the
authorities indicated that they would develop an integrated cash management plan to improve
cooperation and information between the center and the six largest provinces. These reforms
would be complemented by efforts to improve information, through the implementation of a
revised chart of accounts and budget nomenclature based on international standards. Greater
efforts are also needed to prevent and clear domestic budget arrears. The authorities noted
that the September 2003 survey on arrears had been helpful in developing a strategy to
reduce legitimate arrears and they intended to conduct another survey of arrears as of endSeptember 2004 to further this process.
23.
The authorities recognize that reforms to the broader decentralization
framework are essential to strengthening fiscal management. (The provinces are unlikely
to cede control over revenues until such a framework is in place). The government is
currently reviewing the regulatory framework for fiscal relations between the central
government and the provinces, with a view to clarifying the assignment of revenue and
expenditure responsibilities between the center and provinces and develop a robust
mechanism for inter-governmental transfers. Staff recognize that the reform process is highly
sensitive, and have offered technical assistance to explore different options in intergovernmental fiscal relations to help facilitate the ongoing dialogue in this area.
B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
24.
The authorities confirmed that monetary policy would remain firmly geared
towards reducing inflation. They did not envisage a major shift in monetary operations
in 2004/05. They would aim to keep the central bank’s net domestic assets broadly
unchanged over the year, a target that would be underpinned by a government commitment
to avoid bank financing of the budget. After a period of retrenchment in bank loan portfolios,
the authorities expected credit growth to rise to around 14½ percent in 2004/05, in line with

- 14 -

nominal GDP. They also saw merit in raising the level of gross international reserves further
to around 4¼ months of imports, which would be broadly consistent with reserve money
growing at around 12 percent over the year.
25.
Staff urged the authorities to maintain tight control over credit expansion at the
SCBs. This would be essential until the banks were placed on a sound commercial footing.
Staff expressed concern about the rapid credit expansion in the SCBs in the last quarter
of 2003/04, which caused the end-September indicative targets on the banks’ net domestic
assets to be breached by a significant margin. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to
prudent credit management at the SCBs, but noted that the recent credit expansion had
reflected a one-off investment in the domestic cement industry, a high priority area for the
government. Staff noted, however, that such a large exposure posed risks to both
macroeconomic stability and the bank restructuring process,11 and have encouraged the
authorities to recalibrate the financing of this project to reduce the SCBs’ exposure. The
authorities are currently reviewing alternative financing options for the project in
collaboration with the World Bank.
26.
The authorities regard exchange rate stability as key to maintaining
macroeconomic stability. Although the central bank’s external reserves more than cover
base money, the authorities recognize that they have neither the instruments nor sufficient
control over the budget to credibly peg the exchange rate. Their interventions in the foreign
exchange market would therefore be limited only to smoothing transitory fluctuations in the
exchange rate. Sustained pressure on the exchange rate would have to be addressed by
correcting the underlying policy slippages. They agreed with staff that exchange rate stability
was best preserved through prudent fiscal management and effective control over the
SCBs—a major source of credit expansion in the past—both of which were central to
effective monetary control. The staff agreed with the authorities that recent trends in exports
suggested that the exchange rate was not seriously misaligned.
C. External Debt Management
27.
Staff are clarifying the status of negotiations on the rescheduling of Lao P.D.R.’s
external debt with Russia. A preliminary agreement was signed in December 2003, which
entailed an approximate NPV reduction of 20 percent on the face value of the outstanding
debt ($387 million). Given the relatively limited degree of concessionality under this
agreement, the authorities have approached the Russian government to secure more favorable
terms (an initial payment was made in August, as a gesture of good faith). The Lao
authorities are currently awaiting a response from Russia to their request.
28.
Staff urged the authorities to strengthen internal control over public debt
management. While the Ministry of Finance has made efforts to improve its monitoring and
reporting of public external debt, significant weaknesses remain with regard to control over
11

The exposure to this project violates prudential norms by a wide margin.

- 15 -

the contracting of external debt. While no new instances of contracting of nonconcessional
public debt have been reported, there have been a number of instances of public debt being
contracted without the Ministry of Finance’s prior approval. These weaknesses in public debt
management pose a significant risk to maintaining a sustainable debt burden.
D. Structural Reform
29.
Discussions on the structural reform agenda focused largely on efforts to
improve public sector financial management. SCB restructuring and SOE reform have
been the two key elements of the reform program supported by the PRGF arrangement, as the
finances of these state institutions need to be improved to protect the medium-term fiscal
outlook.
Banking issues
30.
The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to creating a sound and
competitive banking sector. Progress is being made under the restructuring plans
established for the two SCBs,12 and the international banking advisers placed in both banks
have helped strengthen the banks’ operations and credit management practices. Steady
progress is also being made in strengthening bank supervision, with the support from MFD.
31.
Staff noted that significant risks remained at the SCBs. Both are still deeply
insolvent and their underlying profitability is weak. Moreover, the risk of new nonperforming
loans is high, as they are still vulnerable to pressures to extend credits on a non commercial
basis. It was agreed that to mitigate these risks, the authorities should maintain close
oversight over the banks’ operations. The immediate priority was to finalize the external
audit of the banks’ 2003 accounts to help establish appropriate performance targets for the
two SCBs in 2004/05. Regular on-site inspections of these SCBs would continue to be
important, as would overall credit limits for the SCBs while they are in the process of
restructuring. Staff also urged the authorities to introduce new regulations on credit limits
and foreign exposure and establish a time table for bringing the SCBs into compliance with
prudential regulations.
32.
Staff also discussed measures to improve the overall banking environment. The
immediate priority was to secure the passage of amendments to the banking laws to equalize
the capital requirements for domestic and foreign banks and allow foreign banks to operate
branches on a nationwide basis. Staff reviewed preparations for attracting private sector
investors into the SCBs. The authorities noted that progress on this front would be difficult
until the process of recapitalizing the SCBs was more advanced, and further progress had

12

Banque pour le Commerce Exteriéur du Laos (BCEL) and Lao Development Bank (LDB).

- 16 -

been made in the ongoing reforms in the legal environment and private sector development,
supported by the AsDB and the World Bank.13
Enterprise issues
33.
SOE reform has been an essential complement to the banking reform agenda.
Although the SOE sector is now relatively small, it accounts for a large share of credit and
NPLs at the state banks. The reform program, supported by the World Bank, has focused on
addressing the financial weaknesses of the largest and most indebted SOEs. The focus has
been on tariff reform to commercialize the large utilities and on operational restructuring,
including the sale of noncore assets.
34.
The authorities have made progress in SOE reform over the last year. 14
Substantial adjustments have been made in the tariffs for the major utilities and the
restructuring for the electric utility (EDL) is almost complete. Time-bound restructuring
programs for three of the four other major enterprises have also been launched and are
expected to be completed by end-2005. The authorities have also taken steps to address the
losses of Lao Airlines, whose financial position had deteriorated sharply over the last year,
partly as a result of leasing a new Airbus. The authorities have decided to ground the Airbus,
to stem the losses from its operations, and are exploring options to contract the airplane to
another airline. The authorities are also proceeding with the strategy agreed with the World
Bank to secure a joint venture partner for the airline.
35.
The authorities have taken steps to improve the overall climate for private sector
activity and stimulate investment. A decree on competition was issued in February 2004,
lifting barriers to trade and laying out a framework for dealing with uncompetitive practices,
and a further decree was issued in June 2004, abolishing barriers to movements of goods
within the country. In recent months, the authorities have also taken a series of initiatives
designed to facilitate investment, including the finalization of a decree for setting up a onestop window for the approval of new investment projects.
36.
The persistent deficiency of the Lao legal system is one of the major
impediments to private sector development and increased foreign direct investment. In
order to address the shortcomings in the legal framework and strengthen the operation of the
legal system, the authorities have launched several reform projects with assistance from the
13

The SCBs have a capital deficiency of around 3-4 percent of GDP. Staff have conservatively
estimated that the bulk of the capital deficiency (2½-3 percent of GDP) will be covered by bank
recapitalization bonds, with the remainder to be met by retained earnings as the banks return to
profitability.
14

The program focused on five large, indebted SOEs: the electricity utility (EDL), the Ministry
of Defense conglomerate Phoudoi, the water utility (Nam Papa), the national airline (Lao
Airlines), and a pharmaceutical factory.

- 17 -

AsDB and UNDP. These projects aim, inter alia, at simplifying the laws and regulations and
increasing their dissemination, ensuring the consistency of the existing legal framework,
expanding the body of commercial laws, and strengthening the operation of tribunals.
Trade and exchange system reforms
37.
The authorities recognize that reforms to the trade and exchange system are also
key for developing the private sector. To this end, quota restrictions on imports have been
abolished, and import licensing is required for only four products: fuel, cement, steel, and
vehicles.15 The authorities are committed to continuing the process of tariff reform in line
with their commitments under AFTA, are moving ahead with their application to the WTO,
and have sought to advance the process of obtaining normal trade relations (NTR) with
the USA. They are also working with international partners under the Integrated Framework
(IF) scheme to integrate trade reform into their national growth and poverty reduction
strategy.
38.
The authorities are committed to a liberal foreign exchange regime. A joint
LEG/MFD mission visited Vientiane in August 2004 to review the exchange system and
facilitate acceptance by Lao P.D.R. of the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2,3 and 4. The
mission recommended that Lao P.D.R. address a number of issues before accepting the
obligations, including measures inconsistent with Article VIII, specifically: (i) the
requirement to produce a tax payment certificate before certain payments and transfers for
international transactions can be authorized;16 and (ii) maintaining lists of persons to whom
payments and transfers cannot be made.17 Staff does not recommend approval of these
exchange restrictions. The mission also suggested that the authorities amend the regulations
in certain areas to clarify that the kip is convertible for all current international transactions.
The authorities are reviewing the recommendations of the mission, with a view to expediting
the process of accepting the obligations under Article VIII.

15

The authorities informed staff that an import-export balance requirement is still issued to
provinces on an annual basis, but it serves only as an “indicative plan” and is nonbinding.
16

In some instances, the tax certificate is required for taxes unrelated to the underlying
transaction, which creates an exchange restriction.
17

The latter exchange restriction is common to many countries. The mission noted that if the
authorities wished to avail themselves of the Decision No. 144-(52/51) approval process, the
authorities should notify the Fund of restrictions maintained solely for the preservation of
security. It is possible some additional issues may arise from an ongoing review of Lao P.D.R.’s
bilateral payments and trade agreements.

- 18 -

Other Issues
39.
The quality of macroeconomic statistics needs to be significantly improved.
Efforts have been made this year, with IMF technical assistance, to improve government
finance and monetary and financial statistics. Moreover, the authorities have also identified
steps needed to participate in the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), and
are continuing work on finalizing the metadata. This will also improve data coordination
between the agencies in the government. Meanwhile, greater efforts are needed to improve
the system of reporting and monitoring of all public debt, including SOE debt. Given
significant weaknesses in the balance of payments statistics, it would be useful for the
authorities to seek technical assistance in this area.
40.
A new issue has arisen regarding the Fund’s safeguards policy. The authorities
have indicated that they are not in a position to implement an earlier agreement to undertake
a joint audit of the BoL’s 2003 accounts by the state auditor and an international audit firm.
Staff have proposed a temporary compromise that involves commissioning a targeted
external review of the BoL’s external reserves and reserve money positions by an
international audit firm, as a step towards a full-fledged joint external audit at a later stage.
The authorities are currently reviewing their position with regard to this proposal.
III. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
41.
The staff’s medium term scenario envisages the economy growing at
6-6½ percent per annum (Table 9).18 Large foreign invested projects in the mining and
hydroelectric power sectors are expected to be the main source of growth, complemented by
smaller scale investments in agriculture, manufacturing and service sectors, as the benefits of
increased regional integration take hold. Inflation is expected to ease to around 5 percent,
provided monetary and fiscal policies remain under tight control. Strong export growth,
mainly from a sharp increase in exports from the Oxiana mines, is expected to compensate
for high oil prices.19 The external current account deficit would widen to 10–11 percent
of GDP, but this reflects primarily large capital imports associated with the NT2 project, that
will be matched by increases in foreign direct investment. The underlying external position
would remain manageable, with current account deficits declining to 3–4 percent of GDP,

18

The expansion of the Oxiana gold mine and the opening of a sister copper mine will contribute
1.4 percent to growth in 2005. The construction of the NT2 hydroelectric dam should raise
growth by a further ½ percentage point in 2005-2006.
19

The abolition of textile quotas under the Multi-Fiber Agreement in 2005 will lead to increased
competition for Lao P.D.R. in the European market. However, this may be offset if Lao P.D.R.
obtains increased tariff-free access to the EU under the new Generalized System of Preferences,
and progress is made in normalizing trade relations with the USA.

- 19 -

and continuing to be financed mainly by concessional medium and long-term borrowings
(Table 10).
42.
Even under a relatively optimistic base-line scenario, Lao P.D.R. faces risks
from a high debt burden (Tables 11a and 11b).20 The NPV of public external debt is well in
excess of the threshold for eligibility from debt relief under the enhanced initiative for
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative),21 although the authorities have
emphasized that they do not intend to seek HIPC assistance. In addition to the high debt
stock ratios, the analysis suggests that due to weak revenue generation, servicing the debt
may put pressure on the government budget over the next few years. Staff agree with the
authorities that more concessional terms on the rescheduling of the Russian debt could ease
this burden, but over the medium-and long-term, moving toward a more sustainable debt
burden requires: (a) strong and sustained growth of real GDP and exports; (b) steady
increases in government revenue relative to GDP; and (c) continued prudent debt
management, with reduced levels of public sector borrowing and a high degree of
concessionality on any new borrowing.
43.
The baseline scenario is clearly subject to a number of risks, in the absence of
structural reform. Foremost among these is the risk that slow progress in structural reforms
to strengthen public finances undermines the government’s ability to sustain a sound
macroeconomic framework. As illustrated by the debt sustainability analysis, the pace of
reform with regard to revenue mobilization will be especially critical to ensuring a
sustainable fiscal position. Banking and SOE reform will also be important in this regard.
Stringent external debt management is also essential, as the debt dynamics could quickly
become unsustainable, if the discipline provided under the PRGF arrangement is eroded.
Finally, achievement of the positive growth outlook hinges critically on structural reforms to
encourage private sector development.

20

The staff has undertaken a comprehensive debt sustainability analysis in collaboration with the
World Bank and the AsDB (see accompanying Selected Issues).
21

Includes Lao P.D.R.’s debt to Russia, based on the terms of the agreement reached between the
two governments in December 2003.

- 20 -

IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
44.
Lao P.D.R.’s macroeconomic performance under the PRGF arrangement has
been relatively encouraging. The authorities have made considerable progress at ensuring
macroeconomic stability, while sustaining relatively robust rates of economic growth. Recent
data also suggest that poverty has continued to decline. Improved macroeconomic
management has been central to this performance. However, underlying macroeconomic
situation is fragile as progress in addressing the underlying structural weaknesses, especially
in the revenue area, has been much slower than originally envisaged.
45.
The authorities’ PRSP sets out a strategy to achieve rapid growth in the medium
term to improve the living conditions of the poor. As noted in the joint staff advisory note
(JSAN), Lao P.D.R. has the potential to achieve a rapid pace of development provided that
structural reforms are pursued in earnest. Slow progress in strengthening the public finances
is a key risk which could undermine the government’s ability to sustain macroeconomic
stability. To mitigate this risk, the pace of reform with regard to revenue mobilization, and
banking and state-owned enterprise reforms will need to be accelerated. This is especially
critical in view of Lao P.D.R.’s high public debt burden.
46.
While the near-term macroeconomic outlook appears favorable, a number of
risks have emerged. Staff project high growth, modest inflation, and a manageable external
position, but this is contingent on the government maintaining sound macroeconomic
policies. Steps will need to be taken to address potential slippages in the 2004/05 budget. The
possibility of an expansionary 2004/05 budget, combined with potential slippages in credit
discipline at the state banks are important short term risks.
47.
A sound revenue strategy is key over the medium term. The ongoing efforts to
strengthen the central government’s control and authority over provincial customs and tax
administration will need to be accelerated, which would help reverse the revenue declines of
the recent past and generate sufficient resources needed for poverty reduction. As part of the
strategy, the decentralization policy pertaining to center-provincial revenue assignments
would need to be clarified and streamlined. External technical assistance could be useful in
moving this process forward.
48.
More specifically, staff welcome the restoration of the two-rate turnover tax and
the government’s commitment to introducing a single rate VAT in 2006/07. To advance
the process of the VAT, the authorities should soon finalize the plans for the main parameters
of the VAT and its implementation. Care will also need to be taken to ensure that
implementation of the new investment laws does not result in an erosion of the revenue base.
49.
Public expenditure management reform should be a high priority for the
authorities. Progress is needed in improving budget reporting, budget classification, and
cash management, and greater efforts should be made in the prevention and clearance of
budget arrears. A comprehensive treasury reform strategy should also be developed soon.

- 21 -

50.
Monetary policy should continue to be set in order to contain inflation. A key
element is a tight control over central bank’s domestic assets. Improved credit appraisals by
banks and prudent fiscal management are key to exchange rate stability, which in turn helps
contain inflation. The current flexible exchange rate regime is appropriate.
51.
Although some progress has been made on state bank restructuring program,
significant risks remain. The financial position of the state banks remains precarious.
Greater efforts are needed to improve the regulatory and supervisory environment, credit
appraisals, recapitalize state banks, and strengthen bank competition. The state banks remain
vulnerable to pressures to extend credits on a non commercial basis.
52.
Staff welcome the progress made in reforming the state owned enterprises. While
price adjustments have been continuing for some time, the sale of noncore assets should
proceed in line with the restructuring plans of these enterprises. The government should also
move rapidly with a comprehensive strategy to deal with the ongoing losses of Lao Airlines,
especially from the leased Airbus. At the same time, the climate to promote private sector
activity and investment should be further improved.
53.
Prudent public debt management is essential to mitigate the risks arising from
Lao P.D.R.’s high debt burden. Despite recent efforts to improve monitoring and reporting
of public external debt, significant weaknesses remain regarding control over the contracting
of external debt.
54.
Progress on safeguards is important to provide reassurance about the soundness
of the central bank’s accounts. The staff encourages the authorities to commission a
targeted external review of the BoL’s external reserves and reserve money positions by an
international audit firm as soon as possible, and as a step towards a full-fledged joint external
audit of the BoL’s accounts at a later stage.
55.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Lao P.D.R. will be held in
accordance with the provisions of the decision on consultation cycles approved by the
Executive Board on July 15, 2002.

- 22 -

Chart. Lao P.D.R.: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-2004
6.5

6.5

6.0

6.0

30

1200

Real GDP Growth
(In percent change)
1000

Current Account,
Exports, & Imports

25

Exports (millions of US$) (left hand scale)
Imports (millions of US$) (left hand scale)

800
5.5

5.0

20

Current Account Deficit (percent of GDP)
(right hand scale)

5.5

600

15

400

10

200

5

5.0

4.5

4.5

4.0

4.0
2000

2001

2002

2003

0

0
2000

2004

2001

2002

2003

2004

Proj
9,000

9,300

Proj.
220

Exchange Rates
(Kip/US$ & Kip/Baht)

230

Kip/US$
(left hand scale)
Kip/Baht
(right hand scale)

9,600

240

120

120

Effective Exchange Rates
(2000=100)

110

110

100

100

90

90

9,900
250
10,200
80

80

260

10,500

REER
NEER

70

10,800

Jun-02

Sep-02

Jan-03

May-03

Sep-03

Jan-04

May-04

Sep-04

200

2,000

1,900

70

270

Credit Developments
(In billions of kip; at constant exchange rates)

60

Dec 00

Jun 01

Dec 01

Jun 02

Dec 02

Jun 03

Dec 03

Jun 04

250

International Reserves
(in millions of U.S. Dollars)

100
0

60

Jun 00

140

200

120

1,800
-100
1,700

-200

100

150
80

-300

1,600

-400

1,500

100

60

-500

40

1,400
-600

Net domestic assets of the SCBs (left scale)

1,300

-800
Jul-01

Jan-02

Jul-02

Jan-03

Jul-03

Jan-04

Jul-04

20

Gross official reserves (left scale)

-700

Net domestic assets of the BOL (right scale)
1,200
Jan-01

50

Net international reserves (right scale) 1/
0
Jan-01

0

Jul-01

Jan-02

Jul-02

Jan-03

Jul-03

Jan-04

Jul-04

1/ Does not include the foreign currency component of reserve money.

- 23 -

Table 1: Lao P.D.R.: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-2005
Nominal GDP (2002): $1,818 million
Population (2002): 5.53 million

GDP per capita (2002): $329
Fund quota: SDR 52.9 million
2001

2002
Est.

2003
Est.

2004
Latest 1/

2004
Proj

2005
Proj

Real GDP growth (percentage change) 2/

5.8

5.8

5.3

...

6.0

7.0

Inflation (annual percent change)
Period average
End of period

7.8
7.5

10.6
15.2

15.5
12.6

11.9
7.4

11.2
9.5

7.8
5.7

13.2
3.1
20.7
-4.4
63.0
0.0

13.1
1.3
18.4
-4.0
66.3
0.0

11.1
2.1
19.0
-5.8
83.9
0.0

...
...
...
...
...

11.3
1.9
17.2
-3.9
81.3
0.0

11.6
1.9
17.7
-4.1
78.3
0.7

Money and Credit (annual percent change) 3/ 5/
Reserve money
Broad money
Bank credit to the economy

-19.3
7.8
27.6

19.4
12.9
-5.2

23.7
24.1
5.4

...
...
...

28.7
19.5
6.6

11.7
18.0
14.4

Interest rates (end of period)
On three-month deposits
On short term loans

16.0
12-18

17.0
12-20

10-15
22-25

7-9
16-18

...
...

...
...

334
542
-66
-3.7
134
2.6
152

340
570
-98
-5.4
196
3.5
152

401
618
-116
-5.5
216
3.2
172

...
...
...
221
3.1
183

437
752
-204
-8.5
239
3.9
203

563
764
-209
-7.9
260
4.2
215

External public debt 6/
(in millions of U.S. dollar)
Net present value (in percent of exports)

1,213
...

1,330
233

1,915
218

...
...

2,035
213

2,169
187

External public debt service
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of exports)
(in percent of revenue, excluding grants)

36
7.2
19.0

36
7.1
18.1

40
7.2
13.8

...
...

73
11.9
19.7

78
10.3
24.2

9,490
9,560
95.7
102.1

10,680
10,760
83.3
97.3

10,467
10,470
73.1
97.6

10,771
10,784
70.1
101.6

...
...

...
...

...

...

Government budget (in percent of GDP) 3/ 4/
Revenue
Grants
Expenditure
Overall balance (including grants)
Government debt
of which: bank restructuring bonds (excluding debt clearance bonds)

Balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollar)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance (including official transfers)
(in percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of prospective goods and services imports)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Exchange rate
Kip per dollar (end of period)
Commercial bank rate
Parallel market rate
Nominal effective exchange rate 8/
Real effective exchange rate 8/

7/
7/
9/
9/

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (in billions of Kip) 2/

15,705

18,390

22,069

...

25,739

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities, and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Latest data are for September 2004 unless otherwise indicated.
2/ The government estimates real GDP and deflator growth in 2003 to be 5.8 percent and 15.8 percent respectively.
3/ Fiscal year basis (October to September).
4/ Numbers for 2004 are estimates and for 2005 are staff proposal.
5/ Money and credit data are evaluated at constant exchange rates.
6/ Russian debt for 2003-2005 is based on the agreement reached in December 2003 between the Lao P.D.R. and Russian governments.
Prior to 2003 the Russian debt is excluded.
7/ Data as of November 10, 2004.
8/ Base Year 2000=100.
9/ Data as of July 2004.

29,460

- 24 -

Table 2. Lao P.D.R.: Balance of Payments, 2001–2008
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005 3/
2006
Projections

2007

2008

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Current account
Excluding official transfers

-66
-129

-98
-146

-116
-178

-204
-276

-209
-284

-304
-385

-335
-420

-367
-457

-209
334
542

-230
340
570

-217
401
618

-315
437
752

-201
563
764

-201
663
864

-238
683
921

-278
705
983

Services (net)

125

131

95

122

97

68

80

93

Income (net)
of which : interest payments 1/
of which : public debt

-67
-35
-11

-70
-29
-10

-81
-35
-12

-108
-47
-26

-208
-45
-27

-282
-44
-27

-295
-42
-28

-307
-115
-30

Transfers (net)
Private
Official

85
22
63

71
23
48

87
24
63

97
25
72

103
27
75

111
30
81

118
32
85

125
35
90

Capital account

65

153

135

212

215

332

373

402

66
105
-39

127
165
-38

89
136
-47

72
139
-67

185
256
-71

324
406
-82

338
418
-80

342
427
-85

Foreign Direct Investment
of which : hydropower investment

24
0

60
0

69
0

186
0

105
27

86
61

88
61

90
61

Net foreign assets of commercial banks (increase -)
Assets
Liabilities

28
21
7

-7
-39
32

-21
-15
-6

-38
-36
-2

-35
-35
0

-35
-35
0

-35
-35
0

-25
-25
0

-53

-27

-2

-9

-41

-43

-18

-5

-1

55

20

8

5

28

38

36

1

-55

-20

-8

-5

-28

-38

-36

Central bank net foreign assets
Assets (increase -)
Liabilities (reduction -)

1
6
-5

-55
-62
7

-20
-20
0

-30
-23
-7

-21
-21
0

-28
-28
0

-38
-38
0

-36
-36
0

Financing gap 2/
Coverage of financing gap

0
0

0
0

0
0

22
22

16
16

0
0

0
0

0
0

-7.3
-3.7

-8.0
-5.4

-8.5
-5.5
-6.0
216
3.2
2,088

-11.5
-8.5
-3.1
239
3.9
2,412

-10.7
-7.9
-3.0
260
4.2
2,665

-13.3
-10.5
-3.3
287
4.3
2,895

-13.5
-10.7
-4.1
325
4.5
3,125

-13.5
-10.9
-4.2
361
4.5
3,375

Merchandise trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, c.i.f.

Medium- and Long-Term Loans
Disbursements
Amortization

Other Private Flows and Errors and Omissions
Overall balance
Financing

Memorandum items:
Current account (percent of GDP; excluding official transfers)
Current account (percent of GDP; including official transfers)
Current account (percent of GDP; excluding NT2 and Oxiana)
Official gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of prospective goods and service imports, excl. NT2)
Nominal GDP at market prices (US$ million)

...

...
134
2.6
1,762

196
3.5
1,818

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes debt service to official creditors and estimates for debt service to commercial creditors.
2/ The financing gap in 2004 and 2005 are covered by disbursements under the PRGF program, and program loans from the World Bank and AsDB.
3/ Imports for NT2 start in late 2005, supported mainly by external financing.

- 25 -

Table 3: Lao P.D.R.: External Debt and Debt Service 2001–2008
2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Total debt stock (public and private)

1,458

1,614

2,171

2,265

2,456

2,762

2,932

3,202

Public debt
Bilateral official
of which: Russian Federation 1/
Multilateral
of which:
AsDB
IDA
IMF
Commercial
Private debt

1,213
68
...
1,089

1,330
64
...
1,191

1,915
497
387
1,340

2,035
512
385
1,422

2,169
519
383
1,518

2,314
521
380
1,618

2,320
523
378
1,731

2,429
522
375
1,848

575
407
37
56
245

603
435
43
75
284

715
485
46
78
257

764
511
37
102
229

811
553
37
132
287

859
603
31
175
448

915
657
31
66
611

971
717
27
59
773

Total debt service

84

76

91

122

123

126

122

198

Amortization

49

47

56

75

77

82

80

85

Public debt
Bilateral official
of which: Russian Federation
Multilateral
of which : IMF
Commercial
Private debt

25
4
0
20
9
1
24

27
4
0
23
9
0
20

28
2
0
26
9
0
27

48
6
2
29
9
12
27

51
8
2
29
7
14
26

54
10
3
29
7
15
28

54
11
3
33
6
10
26

57
11
3
37
5
10
27

Interest payments

35

29

35

47

45

44

41

113

Public debt
Bilateral (official debt)
of which: Russian Federation 1/
Multilateral
of which : IMF
Commercial
Private debt

11
1
0
9
1
1
24

10
1
0
9
0
0
20

12
1
0
11
0
0
23

26
10
9
12
0
3
21

27
11
9
13
0
3
19

27
11
9
14
0
2
16

27
11
9
15
0
2
14

28
11
9
16
0
2
85

4.6
2.9
92.2
81.4

4.3
2.8
95.4
79.9

3.9
2.6
93.8
74.2

5.9
2.5
94.9
72.0

(In percent of GDP)
Total debt service
of which: public debt
Total debt stock
of which: public debt

4.7
2.0
82.7
68.9

4.2
2.0
88.8
73.2

4.3
1.9
104.0
91.7

5.0
3.0
93.9
84.4

(In percent of exports of goods and services)
NPV of public external debt
Total debt service
of which: public debt

...
16.7
7.2

...
14.8
7.1

219
16.2
7.2

213
19.7
11.9

187
16.3
10.3

175
14.5
9.4

180
13.5
9.2

185
21.0
9.4

...
1,762
500
502

...
1,818
517
512

1,223
2,088
560
525

1,313
2,412
617
565

1,408
2,665
754
610

1,511
2,895
865
745

1,624
3,125
900
840

1,741
3,375
939
901

Memorandum items:
NPV of public external debt
GDP
Exports of goods and services
Three year average

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based on the December 2003 agreement between Russian and Lao authorities.

- 26 -

Table 4. Lao P.D.R.: Monetary Survey, 2003–2005 1/
(In billions of kip, unless otherwise indicated)
2003
Sept
Prog.

2005
Sept
Proj

2004
June
Est 2/

Staff 3/

Sept
Est

Staff 3/

Est

Bank of Lao (BoL)
Net Foreign Assets
(In millions of US dollars)
Net Domestic Assets
Government (net)
Economy
Banks
BOL securities
Other items (net)
Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Bank reserves (Kip)
Bank reserves (Forex)

1,636
151

1,635
154

1,714
162

2,017
190

1,908
180

1,952
184

2,226
210

-471
-391
756
185
-66
-955

-441
-368
732
139
-96
-849

-406
-374
732
140
-96
-810

-581
-550
717
134
0
-882

-417
-362
710
132
-47
-850

-416
-352
709
138
0
-910

-509
-468
690
132
-13
-850

1,165
131
189
845

1,194
122
353
719

1,308
165
330
813

1,436
316
283
837

1,491
328
307
856

1,537
350
359
828

1,717
420
379
919

2,437
226

2,601
245

2,826
267

3,287
310

3,191
301

3,060
289

3,763
355

1,378
-205
-344
139
2,814
-1,230

1,366
-194
-331
139
2,569
-1,009

1,525
-131
-341
210
2,674
-1,019

1,323
-371
-578
210
2,559
-866

1,589
-81
-327
246
2,629
-960

1,683
-152
-396
246
2,625
-790

1,834
135
-433
568
2,634
-935

3,815
131
957
2,727

3,968
122
1,209
2,637

4,351
165
1,296
2,890

4,610
316
1,363
2,931

4,779
328
1,417
3,034

4,743
350
1,428
2,964

5,597
420
1,710
3,467

Monetary Survey
Net foreign assets
(In millions of US dollars)
Net domestic assets
Government (net)
Budget
Other
Credit to the economy
Other items (net)
Broad Money
Currency outside banks
Kip deposits
Foreign currency deposits

(Annual percentage change)
Reserve money
Kip reserve money
Broad money
Credit to the economy 4/

20.7
22.6
19.5
15.6

23.4
81.9
24.1
5.4

5.7
13.8
14.0
14.8

16.0
37.7
20.8
9.4

24.9
33.8
20.5
6.8

28.7
49.3
19.5
6.6

11.7
12.5
18.0
14.4

193
73
12
139
10,800

198
86
12
139
10,600

203
85
22
210
10,600

228
111
22
210
10,600

219
99
22
246
10,600

220
106
22
246
10,600

256
123
52
568
10,600

Memorandum Items:
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. Dollars)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. Dollars) 5/
Disbursement of Program Loans 6/
Issue of Debt Clearance/Bank Recapitalization Bonds 7/
Program Exchange Rate

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ All figures evaluated at program exchange rate.
2/ The first column is evaluated at a program exchange rate of 10,800, while the second is evaluated at 10,600.
3/ Revised targets agreed with the authorities in December 2003 (for June 2004) and in July 2004 (for September 2004).
4/ Adjusted for the impact of Debt Clearance/Bank Recapitalization Bonds.
5/ Net Foreign Assets of BoL minus foreign currency component of reserve money.
6/ In millions of U.S. dollars, cumulative since March 2003.
7/ Cumulative since end-June 2003.

1,643

3. Net domestic assets of the state commercial banks 6/

0
0
0
0
0

7. Publicly contracted or guaranteed nonconcessional external debt 10/ 11/
- up to one-year maturity
- maturity of more than 1 year
of which: 1–5 years' maturity

8. External payments arrears 10/

12
139
137
68
10,800

0

0
0
0
0

86

2,336

475

1,426

-201

-459

12
210
208
75
10,800

0

0
0
0
0

84

1,218

445

1,553

18

-428

Program

1,194

606

1,383

-173

-365

(In billions of kip)

Est.

12
210
208
74
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

75

22
210
208
79
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

85

1,916

495

1,503

-131

1/ Performance criteria.
2/ Revised program agreed with the authorities in December 2003 (for March 2004).
3/ Revised targets agreed with the authorities in December 2003 (for June 2004) and in July 2004 (for September 2004).
4/ The ceilings for net domestic assets of the BOL and net bank credit to the government will be adjusted upward (downward), and the floor of net official international reserves
will be adjusted downward (upward) by any shortfall (excess) in nonproject budget loans.
5/ The ceilings for net credit to the government will be adjusted upward to the extent that issues of Debt Clearance/Bank Recapitalization Bonds exceed program assumptions.
6/ The state commercial banks include BCEL and LDB. Net domestic assets exclude net claims on government and BOL. The ceiling on net domestic assets
of state commercial banks will be adjusted downward to the extent that issues of Debt Clearance/Bank Recapitalization Bonds exceed program assumptions.
7/ Indicative target.
8/ Cumulative from start of fiscal year (October to September).
9/ Excludes foreign currency component of reserve money.
10/ Continuous performance criterion.
11/ From March 2003 onwards. Excludes the three-year lease contracted by Lao Airlines on May 27, 2003 as well as debt contracted from the Asian Development Bank and the
European Investment Bank to finance the government's equity portion of Nam Theun 2 hydroelectric project.
12/ Cumulative from end-September 2002.
13/ Cumulative issues from end-June 2003.

12
210
208
79
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

92

Jun.

-406

Staff 3/

2004

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1,127

473

1,465

-49

-324

Mar.
Revised
Program 2/

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities. Definitions of terms are contained in the Technical Memorandum on Program Monitoring.

12
139
137
78
10,800

73

6. Net official international reserves 4/ 9/

Memorandum items:
Nonproject budget loans (in millions of U.S. dollars) 12/
Debt Clearance/Bank Recapitalization Bonds (in billions of kip) 13/
of which: state commercial banks
Foreign exchange component of reserve money (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Program exchange rate (kip per dollar)

2,430

5. Budget revenue (excluding grants) 7/ 8/

320

-205

2. Net credit to the government from the banking system 4/ 5/

4. Reserve money (kip) 7/

-471

1. Net domestic assets of the Bank of the Lao P.D.R. (BOL) 4/

2003
Sept.
Program 1/
Est.

Table 5. Lao P.D.R.: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, 2003-2004

22
210
208
79
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

111

1,970

599

1,414

-371

-581

Est.

Sept.

22
246
244
81
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

99

2,817

635

1,419

-81

-417

Staff 3/

22
246
244
78
10,600

0

0
0
0
0

106

2,817

709

1,484

-152

-416

Est.

- 27 -

- 28 -

Table 6. Lao P.D.R.: General Government Operations 2001/02-2004/05
2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Est.

Budget

Staff

Budget

(in billion of kip)
Revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax
of which: excluding timber royalties
Nontax
Grants

2,561
2,324
1,875
1,513
449
238

2,794
2,341
1,924
1,706
417
453

3,281
2,816
2,404
2,254
413
465

3,282
2,817
2,379
2,198
437
465

3,871
3,316
2,792
2,586
524
555

3,825
3,431
2,872
2,722
559
394

Expenditure
Current
Wage bill 1/
Wages and salaries 1/
Allowances and pensions /1
Other subsidies and transfers
Interest payments
of which: External
Other recurrent
Capital and onlending
Domestically financed
Externally financed
Onlending

3,268
1,483
703
547
156
109
138
108
533
1,785
995
931
-142

4,017
1,647
840
668
172
169
123
115
514
2,370
1,026
1,499
-156

5,073
2,245
1,028
839
188
138
289
224
790
2,828
784
2,159
-115

4,261
2,082
1,060
872
188
138
249
184
634
2,179
837
1,456
-114

5,036
2,568
1,354
1,164
190
200
333
255
681
2,468
941
1,645
-118

5,294
2,683
1,605
1,118
487
202
306
256
570
2,611
543
2,227
-159

Overall balance
Excluding grants
Bank restructuring bonds 2/

-706
-944
0

-1,222
-1,676
-139

-1,791
-2,256
0

-980
-1,445
-108

-1,165
-1,721
-282

-1,469
-1,863
-254

Financing
Domestic financing (net)
Bank financing
of which: Bank restructuring bonds
Nonbank financing 3/
Discrepancy/Financing gap
Foreign financing (net)
Disbursements
Amortization

706
130
-234
0
317
47
577
859
-282

1,361
253
230
-139
5
18
1,108
1,309
-201

1,791
7
2
0
5
0
1,784
2,020
-236

1,087
14
42
-108
6
-34
1,073
1,309
-236

1,447
287
282
-282
5
0
1,160
1,486
-326

1,723
119
109
-254
10
0
1,604
1,913
-309

Revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax
of which: excluding timber royalties
Nontax
Grants

14.5
13.1
10.6
8.5
2.5
1.3

13.2
11.1
9.1
8.1
2.0
2.1

(in percent of GDP)
13.4
13.2
11.5
11.3
9.8
9.6
9.2
8.9
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.9

13.6
11.6
9.8
9.1
1.8
1.9

13.4
12.0
10.1
9.5
2.0
1.4

Expenditure
Current
Wage bill 1/
Wages and salaries 1/
Allowances and pensions /1
Other subsidies and transfers
Interest payments
of which: External
Other recurrent
Capital and onlending
Domestically financed
Externally financed
Onlending

18.4
8.4
4.0
3.1
0.9
0.6
0.8
0.6
3.0
10.1
5.6
5.3
-0.8

19.0
7.8
4.0
3.2
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.5
2.4
11.2
4.9
7.1
-0.7

20.7
9.2
4.2
3.4
0.8
0.6
1.2
0.9
3.2
11.6
3.2
8.8
-0.5

17.2
8.4
4.3
3.5
0.8
0.6
1.0
0.7
2.6
8.8
3.4
5.9
-0.5

17.7
9.0
4.7
4.1
0.7
0.7
1.2
0.9
2.4
8.7
3.3
5.8
-0.4

18.6
9.4
5.6
3.9
1.7
0.7
1.1
0.9
2.0
9.2
1.9
7.8
-0.6

Overall balance
Excluding grants
Bank restructuring bonds 2/

-4.0
-5.3
0.0

-5.8
-7.9
-0.7

-7.3
-9.2
0.0

-3.9
-5.8
-0.4

-4.1
-6.0
-1.0

-5.2
-6.5
-0.9

Financing
Domestic financing (net) 3/
Foreign financing (net)

4.0
0.7
3.3

6.4
1.2
5.2

7.3
0.0
7.3

4.4
0.1
4.3

5.1
1.0
4.1

6.0
0.4
5.6

17,719
-3.2
9,810

21,150
-5.2
10,636

24,460
-6.1
10,600

24,821
-2.9
10,577

28,530
-2.9
...

28,530
-4.1
...

Memorandum items:
GDP (in billions of kip)
Primary balance/GDP
Exchange rate

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Reflects staff provisional understanding of treatment of wages, salaries, and allowances and pensions in 2004/05 budget.
2/ In 2002/03 and 2003/04 the bonds were Debt Clearance Bonds issued to state banks to settle budget obligations to contractors with NPLs.
In 2004/05 includes bank recapitalization bonds.
3/ In 2001/02 includes a transfer of $33 million from EDL to the government from the Theun-Hinboun Power Company refinancing.

- 29 -

Table 7. Lao P.D.R. : Structural Benchmarks under Third Annual Program
Status
Continuous
•

No tax incentives under Presidential Decree 01 or any
other legislation

9

October-November 2003
•
•
•
•

Implement new expenditure classification in 2003/04
Budget. (October)
Complete on site inspections of two SCBs for endSeptember ’03 accounts.1/ (November)
Transfer 20 large enterprises from provinces to central
large tax payer unit. (November)

9

Issue implementing regulations for Presidential
Decree 01 on tax incentives. (November)

9

9
9

December 2003
•

Issue instructions to centralize national customs
service and the national treasury.

°

January 2004
•

1/

Submit amendments to the Decree Law on
Commercial Banks to National Assembly Standing
Committee.

Performance criterion.

In process

- 30 Table 8. Lao P.D.R.: Strategy for Structural Fiscal Reforms.
Priority Fiscal Reforms*
Establish
national customs service

Establish
national tax administration

Establish
integrated national treasury

● establish pilot scheme in seven
main international check points
(2005)

● establish central control over
main provincial LTUs (2005)

● prepare concept paper for a
revised legal framework for the
treasury to establish central
authority over provincial
treasuries (2005)

● launch fully centralized
customs service (2006)

● launch fully centralized tax
administration (2006)

● implement the revised legal
framework (2006)

Introduce single rate VAT
● prepare implementation plan (2005)
● launch consultative process (2005)

● develop integrated cash
management system covering
largest provincial treasuries
(2005)
● implement integrated cash
management covering all
provincial treasuries (2006)

● draft VAT law (2006)
● launch VAT (January 2007)
* A comprehensive reform of inter-governmental relationships (including revenue and expenditure
assignments, and revenue sharing agreements) is crucial for the success of priority reforms.

Other Reforms
Tax policy
● tax incentives: strengthen control over granting tax incentives under the new investment law (2005)
Customs administration
● customs law: implement a new law clarifying the central authority over customs and consistent with WTO (2005)
● automation: stabilize the existing reporting system (2005)
● organization: implement a new HQ structure and regional offices in line with the centralization strategy (2005)
Tax administration
● organization: modernize the tax department HQ organization based on a functional model
● operations of LTUs: control compliance of non-filing and unlicensed taxpayers; establish and implement a riskbased compliance file selection system; improve information management system (2005)
Public Expenditure Management
● budget reporting: evaluate reporting standards for provinces (2005); improve reporting in priority sectors (2006)
● automation: introduce pilot accounting software to all ministries (2005) and provinces (2006)
● banking arrangements: prepare register of bank accounts (2005); close unauthorized/unnecessary accounts (2006)
● expenditure arrears: prepare census of arrears (2005); develop mechanisms to prevent new arrears (2006); clear
the arrears (2007)
● budget nomenclature and accounting: introduce an economic budget classification for each administrative unit;
harmonize accounting codes with the revised budget nomenclature (2007)
● budget preparation: bring the budget preparation cycle forward (2007)
● improve external audit: prepare and publish a full external audit of the budget by the State Audit Authority (2007)

- 31 -

Table 9: Lao P.D.R.: Summary Macroeconomic Framework, 2001-2008

Nominal GDP (in billions of kip)
Real GDP (in billions of kip)
Real GDP growth (percent change)
Increase in GDP deflator (percent change)
Merchandise exports (percent change)
Merchandise imports (percent change)
Gross official reserves (in months of prospective
goods and services imports, excl. NT2)

2001

2002
Est.

2003
Est.

2004

2005 1/

15,705
1,192
5.8

18,390
1,262
5.8

22,069
1,329
5.3

25,739
1,409
6.0

8.6
-3.2
-3.6

10.6
2.1
5.1

14.0
17.8
8.4

2.6

3.5

3.2

Budget (fiscal year basis) 2/

2006
Proj.

2007

2008

29,460
1,507
7.0

32,955
1,605
6.5

36,596
1,698
5.8

40,639
1,795
5.8

10.0
9.0
21.7

7.0
28.8
1.6

5.0
17.8
13.1

5.0
3.0
6.6

5.0
3.2
6.7

3.9

4.2

4.3

4.5

4.5

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise noted)

Revenue
Grants
Expenditure
Current
of which: interest on debt clearance bonds
Capital and onlending

13.2
3.1
20.7
8.1
0.0
12.6

13.1
1.3
18.4
8.4
0.0
10.1

11.1
2.1
19.0
7.8
0.0
11.2

11.3
1.9
17.2
8.4
0.2
8.8

11.6
1.9
17.7
9.0
0.2
8.7

11.9
1.9
17.7
9.2
0.2
8.5

12.3
1.9
18.0
9.3
0.3
8.7

12.8
1.9
18.4
9.4
0.3
9.0

Current fiscal balance before grants
Overall fiscal balance after grants 3/
Domestic financing
of which: debt clearance bonds
Foreign financing

5.1
-4.4
1.2
0.0
3.1

4.7
-4.0
0.7
0.0
3.3

3.3
-5.8
1.2
0.7
5.2

3.0
-3.9
0.1
0.4
4.3

2.6
-4.1
1.0
1.0
4.1

2.7
-3.9
1.0
0.9
3.8

3.0
-3.8
0.9
0.8
3.7

3.4
-3.7
0.1
0.0
3.6

Real GDP growth (percent change) 2/
Increase in GDP deflator (percent change) 2/

5.8
11.9

5.8
10.2

5.4
13.2

5.8
10.9

6.7
7.7

6.6
5.4

5.9
5.0

5.8
5.0

Savings and Investment balance 4/

(In percent of GDP)

National savings
Private
Government

17.1
8.9
8.2

14.1
8.0
6.1

16.5
11.0
5.4

10.4
5.6
4.8

11.9
7.3
4.6

10.2
5.5
4.7

10.0
5.1
4.9

10.0
4.7
5.3

Investment
Private
Hydropower
Other
Government 5/

20.9
7.4
0.0
7.4
13.5

19.5
8.6
0.0
8.6
10.9

22.0
10.1
0.0
10.1
11.9

18.9
10.1
0.0
10.1
8.8

19.8
11.1
1.0
10.1
8.7

20.7
12.2
2.1
10.1
8.5

20.7
12.0
1.9
10.1
8.7

20.9
11.9
1.8
10.1
9.0

7.3
3.7

8.0
5.4

8.5
5.5

11.5
8.5

10.7
7.9

13.3
10.5

13.5
10.7

13.5
10.9

Foreign savings (excluding official transfers)
Foreign savings (including official transfers)

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ It is expected that the construction of the large NT2 hydroelectric project will begin in late 2005.
2/ Fiscal year ending September; Fiscal numbers are based on staff estimates for 2004 and staff proposal for 2005-2008.
3/ The overall budget deficit for 2001/02 includes estimated expenditure arrears of KN 130 billion.
4/ Estimates for private savings and investment are highly tentative as no expenditure based national accounts have yet been established.
In particular, private savings reflect unrecorded imports.
5/ Comprises government investment and selected enterprise investment.

- 32 -

Table 10. Lao P.D.R.: External Financing Needs and Sources, 2003–2008
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2003

2004

2005

Est.

Gross financing needs

2006

2007

2008

Proj.

254

374

268

242

285

306

178

276

170

129

164

182

47
47
19
27
…

67
67
39
27
…

71
71
44
26
…

82
82
54
28
…

80
80
54
26
…

85
85
57
27
…

-20
9

-23
8

-21
6

-28
3

-38
3

-36
4

254

352

253

242

285

306

69

186

105

86

88

90

Financing from official creditors
Grants
Loans

199
63
136

211
72
139

247
75
172

298
81
217

314
85
229

328
90
238

Other flows 3/

-14

-45

-100

-143

-118

-112

0

22

16

0

0

0

External current account deficit (excl. official transfers)
Debt amortization 1/
Medium- and long-term debt
Public
Private
Short-term debt 2/
Gross reserve accumulation (- = increase)
IMF repurchase and repayments
Financial sources
Foreign direct investments

Financing gap 4/

Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding the IMF.
2/ Original maturity of less than one year. Includes all short-term outflows.
3/ Includes all other net financial flows, and errors and omissions.
4/ Includes prospective IMF disbursements.

58.6
58.6

Without NT2

Alternative Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

...
...

Without NT2

Alternative Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

7.2

Alternative Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

1,313
73.4
617
617
7.3
41.4

11.9

11.9

11.9

212.7

212.7

212.7

54.4

54.4

54.4

2004

1,408
77.7
754
754
6.9
43.5

10.3

10.3

10.3

186.7

185.8

186.7

52.8

52.6

52.8

2008

52.0

51.1

52.0

51.8

50.4

51.6

(In percent of GDP)

2007

51.5

49.3

50.8

2009

187.1

176.3

180.4

196.2

180.0

185.5

203.0

181.4

188.2

9.6

9.4

9.5

9.6

9.2

9.3

10.0

9.3

9.5

10.8

9.8

10.0

(In percent of exports of goods and services)

177.7

172.1

174.6

(In percent of exports of goods and services)

52.2

51.8

52.2

2006

1,511
82.0
865
865
6.9
44.8

1,624
83.6
900
900
6.8
45.0

1,741
89.0
939
939
6.5
45.5

1,857
98.7
986
986
6.1
45.2

(In millions of dollars; unless indicated otherwise)

2005

1/ Export growth is lower by 2 percent per annum from 2006. Real GDP growth falls to 5 percent by 2009 and stays at that level.

NPV of public debt (Baseline)
Public debt service
Exports of goods and services
excluding NT2
Public sector borrowing (in percent of GDP)
Grant element of new public borrowing (in percent)

1,223
...
560
560
6.5
40.0

7.2

Without NT2

Memorandum items:

7.2

Baseline

1. Debt service to exports

b) Public Debt Service

...

Baseline

2. NPV of debt to exports

58.6

Baseline

1. NPV of debt to GDP

a) Public debt stock

Discount rate end 2001

2003

1,958
106.1
1,253
1,043
5.5
49.5

9.3

9.8

8.5

171.3

181.3

156.3

47.9

48.1

47.3

2010

Table 11a. Lao P.D.R.: External Sustainability Analysis of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2003-2019

2,570
155.4
1,621
1,399
5.5
49.5

11.6

10.6

9.6

191.2

179.9

158.5

44.2

43.0

42.2

2015

3,142
200.0
2,154
1,920
4.9
49.5

12.1

10.1

9.3

189.7

161.8

145.9

40.9

38.5

37.8

2019

- 33 -

62.0
58.9

Including SOE debt

Alternative macroeconomic scenario 2/

533.6

Alternative macroeconomic scenario 2/

-5.3

11.0
2.1
18.5
367.2

11.0
2.1
18.5
367.2

Primary balance

Baseline fiscal projection:
Fiscal revenues excluding grants
Grants
Non-interest Expenditures
Non-interest Expenditures in millions USD

Alternative macroeconomic scenario fiscal projection:
Fiscal revenues excluding grants
Grants
Non-interest Expenditures
Non-interest Expenditures in millions USD

11.3
1.9
16.3
383.6

11.3
1.9
16.3
383.6

-3.1

16.9

19.7

24.1

19.7

482.3

508.9

482.3

54.7

57.7

54.7

2004

11.3
1.9
16.2
421.3

11.6
1.9
16.5
428.6

-2.9

20.7

24.8

29.6

24.2

462.6

484.3

457.7

52.5

56.3

53.2

2005

1/ Government debt, including domestic debt. Based on the Lao P.D.R. fiscal year (October-September).
2/ No reforms or administrative gains; revenues as a percentage of GDP stay at 2004 level.

11.6

13.9

...

Debt service to revenue including grants

Memorandum items:

Alternative macroeconomic scenario 2/

Including SOE debt

Baseline

13.9

561.2

Including SOE debt

Debt service to revenue excluding grants

533.6

Baseline

NPV debt to revenue excluding grants

58.9

Baseline

1. NPV of debt to GDP

Discount rate end 2001

2003

2008

50.1

55.9

52.0

25.4

27.0

23.4

445.5

458.3

429.3

25.2

25.2

22.4

441.2

438.0

407.3

(In percent of fiscal revenue)

50.5

56.3

52.7

(In percent of GDP)

2007

24.6

24.4

21.6

430.3

424.2

392.2

48.8

54.7

50.6

2009

11.3
1.9
16.0
453.4

11.9
1.9
16.5
469.3

-2.7

20.7

11.3
1.9
15.9
487.3

12.3
1.9
16.8
515.9

-2.6

20.3

11.3
1.9
15.8
522.8

12.8
1.9
17.2
569.8

-2.5

19.5

11.3
1.9
15.6
557.7

12.9
1.9
17.1
613.2

-2.3

18.8

(In percent of GDP; unless indicated otherwise)

25.2

29.1

24.0

454.2

473.1

445.6

51.5

56.3

53.1

2006

Table 11b. Lao P.D.R.: Fiscal Sustainability Analysis of Public Debt, 2003-2019 1/

11.3
1.9
15.4
617.8

12.9
1.9
16.9
680.9

-2.1

17.6

23.0

22.8

20.2

404.0

400.0

366.6

45.8

51.7

47.4

2010

11.3
1.9
15.4
878.5

13.9
1.8
17.8
1065.4

-2.2

15.6

22.4

20.6

17.6

355.9

324.4

284.7

40.4

45.0

39.5

2015

11.3
1.8
15.1
1138.7

14.5
1.7
18.1
1473.4

-1.9

13.4

20.4

18.3

14.9

320.2

277.6

236.9

36.3

40.2

34.3

2019

- 34 -

- 35 -

Table 12: Lao P.D.R.: Millennium Development Goals Indicators, 1990-2015

1990

1995

2001

2002

Latest Data

2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates
..
..
..
26.3 (1997)
..
..
..
6.3 (1997)
7.6
..
..
7.5 (1997)
40
40
..
40 (2001)
28.0
22.0
..
22.0 (2001)

1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 a day (%)
Poverty gap at $1 a day (%)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%
Prevalence of child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)

..
..
..
..
29.0

2 Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (%)
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)

61.4
53.3
70.1

70
55.4
74

2015 target = net enrollment to 100
82.8
..
82.8 (2001)
62.3
..
62.3 (2001)
78.6
79.3
80.0 (2003)

3 Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

74.9
76.2
42.1
6

77.8
80.1
..
9

2005 target = education ratio to 100
83.0
..
83.0 (2001)
84.1
84.7
84.7 (2002)
..
..
42.1 (1990)
21
21
23 (2004)

4 Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12 months)

163
120
32

2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
134
105
100
100 (2002)
105
90
87
87 (2002)
68
50
55
55 (2002)

5 Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

650
..

2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
650
650
..
650 (2001)
..
19.4
..
19.4 (2001)

6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence rate of HIV, females (% ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

..
..
..
..
..

2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.
..
0.1
..
0.1 (2003)
25.1
..
..
32.2 (2000)
..
280
..
280 (2000)
..
360
359
359 (2002)
24.0
38.0
43.3
43.3 (2002)

7 Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation (% of population)
Access to secure tenure (% of population)

56.7
..
..
0.1
..
..
..

..
0.0
..
0.1
..
..
..

54.4
0.0
..
0.1
37.0
30.0
..

..
13.1
..
..
..
..
..

54.4
13.1
..
0.1
37.0
30.0
..

..
1.6
..

..
3.9
1.1

..
15.2
3.0

..
21.2
3.3

..
21.2 (2002)
3.3 (2002)

4.1
0.8
200
56.5
6
49.7
17.3
204.3
13.5
35.8

4.7
1.7
370
60.6
5.5
51.8
17.6
123.2
26.0
60.6

5.4
1.6
300
65.6
5
53.7
14.7
150
22.1
..

5.5
1.7
310
66.4
4.8
54.5
17.3
165.2
..
..

8 Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (% of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Population (millions)
Gross national income ($ billions)
GNI per capita ($)
Adult literacy rate (% of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Aid (% of GNI)
External debt (% of GNI)
Investment (% of GDP)
Trade (% of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators database, April 2004.

5.5
1.7
310
66.4
4.8
54.5
17.3
165.2
22.1
60.6

2015
Target

[3.9]

[14.5]

[100]
[100]
[100]

[100]
[100]

[54.3]

[162.5]

[0.0]

[0.0]

(2001)
(2002)
(2001)
(2001)
(2001)

(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2002)
(2001)
(1995)

[74]
[60]

[Increase]
[Increase]

2.0
7.5

6.7
1.7

Total Fund credit outstanding, end of period
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services

Total debt service due to the Fund
Total obligations, including interest
and charges (in millions of SDRs)
In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services

Sources: IMF Finance Department; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1.40
52.9
2,088
560

56.5

Total Fund credit outstanding, end of period
ESAF/PRGF

Memorandum items:
Exchange rate (U.S. dollars per SDR)
Quota (in millions of SDRs)
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Exports of goods and services (in millions of U.S. dollars)

29.9
29.9
0.0

6.5
6.5
0.0

Repayments
ESAF/PRGF
SAF

Total Fund credit outstanding, end of period
Total
ESAF/PRGF
SAF

4.5

Disbursements PRGF

Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) and
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)

2003

1.47
52.9
2,412
617

5.4
1.3

1.5
5.9

46.5

24.6
24.6
0.0

5.3
5.3
0.0

0.0

2004

1.47
52.9
2,665
754

4.3
0.8

1.4
4.9

47.3

25.0
25.0
0.0

4.1
4.1
0.0

4.5

2005

2007

2008

20.9
20.9
0.0

1.9
1.9
0.0

0.0

18.1
18.1
0.0

2.7
2.7
0.0

0.0

1.47
52.9
2,895
865

2.4
0.4

1.2
3.9

43.1

1.47
52.9
3,125
900

2.1
0.3

1.0
3.4

39.4

1.47
52.9
3,375
939

2.9
0.4

0.8
2.8

34.3

(In percent of quota)

22.8
22.8
0.0

2.2
2.2
0.0

0.0

(In millions of SDRs)

2006

Table 13. Lao P.D.R.: Fund Position and Indicators of Fund Credit, 2003–2012

1.47
52.9
3,654
986

3.7
0.6

0.6
2.2

27.4

14.5
14.5
0.0

3.6
3.6
0.0

0.0

2009

1.47
52.9
4,144
1,253

4.1
0.5

0.4
1.2

19.9

10.5
10.5
0.0

4.0
4.0
0.0

0.0

2010

1.47
52.9
4,475
1,309

4.1
0.5

0.2
0.7

12.2

6.4
6.4
0.0

4.1
4.1
0.0

0.0

2011

1.47
52.9
4,833
1,373

3.2
0.3

0.1
0.4

6.2

3.3
3.3
0.0

3.2
3.2
0.0

0.0

2012

- 36 -

- 37 -

Table 14. Lao P.D.R.: Phasing of Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement

Date

Disbursement 1/
Millions of Percent of
SDR
Quota

Conditions

April 25, 2001

4.53

8.6

Board approved new three-year arrangement and
endorsed first-year program.

February 25, 2002

4.53

8.6

Board completed first review, based on quantitative
performance criteria for June 2001.

August 26, 2002

4.53

8.6

Board completed second review, based on quantitative
performance criteria for March 2002, and endorsed
second-year program.

September 12, 2003

4.53

8.6

Board completed third review, based on quantitative
performance criteria for September 2002. Board
grants extension of program by one year.

April, 2005

4.53

8.6

Board completes fourth review, based on quantitative
performance criteria for September 2003.

22.65

42.85

Total

Sources: IMF, Finance Department; and staff projections.
1/ Since the fifth and sixth reviews are not expected to be completed, the last two disbursements of SDR 4.53 million
and SDR 4.52 million respectively will not be made.

- 38 -

ANNEX I

Lao P.D.R.—Fund Relations
(As of September 30, 2004)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 7/05/61; Article XIV

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency

SDR million
52.90
52.90

Percent Quota
100.0
100.0

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR million
9.41
9.90

Percent Allocation
100.0
105.18

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

SDR million

Percent Quota

25.74

48.67

ESAF/PRGF arrangements
V.

VI.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount
Approved
(SDR million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR million)

PRGF
PRGF
SAF

4/25/01
6/04/93
9/18/89

4/24/05
5/07/97
9/17/92

31.70
35.19
20.51

18.12
35.19
20.51

Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Principal

1.17

4.11

2.21

1.95

2.72

Charges/interest

0.06

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

Total

1.24

4.22

2.31

2.03

2.79

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative

The Lao P.D.R. could be eligible for assistance under the HIPC Initiative. A loan-by-loan
DSA has been undertaken with the newly available data on the recent mission. This, together
with the outcome of the negotiations on the debt to the Russian Federation, will be needed to
evaluate whether to seek HIPC relief.

- 39 -

VIII.

ANNEX I

Safeguards Assessments

Under the Fund's safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of the Lao P.D.R. (BoL) is subject
to a full safeguards assessment with respect to the PRGF arrangement, which was approved
on April 25, 2001. An off-site safeguards assessment of the BoL was completed on
December 17, 2001. The assessment concluded that high risks may exist in the external audit
mechanism, and financial reporting framework, internal audit mechanism, and system of
internal controls and recommended an on-site assessment. The FIN on-site safeguards
assessment mission took place in early December 2002. It noted that the BoL has taken initial
steps to strengthen its safeguards framework with the creation of an internal audit department
and the initiation of external audits. However, staff noted that significant vulnerabilities
remain and the BoL must continue to strengthen its external audit, adopt a recognized
financial reporting framework, and develop its internal audit function further.
To address the significant vulnerabilities, staff and the authorities had agreed that the BoL:
(i) contract an audit firm with international experience and exposure to conduct joint audits
with the state auditor for financial years ending December 2003 and 2004; (ii) adopt
International Accounting Standards (IAS) as its financial reporting framework beginning
with the financial year ending December 31, 2004; (iii) establish a formal monthly process of
reconciling accounting data to program data reported to the Fund; and (iv) train internal audit
staff to become proficient in conducting internal audits professionally.
The authorities have started the process of reconciling accounting data to program data and
have recently completed the audit of BoL’s 2002 accounts with assistance of an international
audit firm. However, progress in the remaining areas listed above has been slow. The
authorities have indicated that they are not in a position to implement an earlier agreement to
undertake a joint audit of the BoL’s 2003 accounts by the state auditor and an international
audit firm. Staff have proposed a temporary compromise that involves commissioning a
targeted external review of the BoL’s external reserves and reserve money positions as of
end-September 2003 by an international audit firm, as a step towards a full-fledged joint
external audit at a later stage. The authorities are currently reviewing their position with
regard to this proposal.
IX.

Exchange Rate

In September 1995, the Lao P.D.R. adopted a managed floating exchange rate system. From
October 1997, commercial banks have been encouraged to follow the parallel market closely.
From October 27, 2003, the commercial bank exchange rate is calculated by the BoL as the
weighted average of the previous day’s commercial banks’ and interbank market rates. The
BoL provides this reference rate to the commercial banks, who then set their own rates,
keeping them close to the parallel market rates. On November 10, 2004 the commercial bank
exchange rate was kip 10,752 (buying) and kip 10,816 (selling) per U.S. dollar.

- 40 -

X.

ANNEX I

Last Article IV Consultation Discussions

The last Article IV consultation discussions were held in Vientiane during April 24 –
May 8, 2002. The staff report (IMF Country Report No. 02/221) was discussed by the
Executive Board on August 26, 2002. Lao P.D.R. continues to avail itself of transitional
arrangements under Article XIV. Staff have conducted a review of the exchange system to
establish the remaining measures that would facilitate Lao P.D.R.’s acceptance of the
obligations under Article VIII.
XI.

Technical Assistance (since 1998)
Purpose

Department

Date

STA

-

Government finance statistics
Money and banking statistics
Multisector statistics/GDDS mission.
Assist in compilation of balance of payments data.
Review and assist in compilation of money and
banking statistics.

4-5/04
4-5/04
10/02
8/99
2/99

FAD

-

Missions on tax policy and administration.

1/99, 2/00, 10-11/01, 3/02, 10/04

-

Expert on tax administration.

9/98-12/99, 1-3/00, 5-7/00, 911/00, 1-2/01, 4-6/01,
3-4/03, 11/03, 4/04

-

Expert on customs administration.

10/98-1/99, 5-6/00, 9-11/00,
1-3/01, 5-6/01, 3-4/03,
7-8/03, 11/03, 2/04, 4/04

-

Mission on public expenditure management.

4-5/01, 10/02, 6-7/04, 10/04

-

Expert on banking supervision.

4-5/02, 7/02, 10-11/02, 1/03,
6-4/03, 7/03, 10-12/03, 1-2/04,
5-7/04, 9-11/04

MFD

XII.

Resident Representative

Mr. Philippe Beaugrand assumed the post of resident representative in Vientiane on
January 28, 2004.

- 41 -

ANNEX II

Lao P.D.R.—Statistical Issues
The overall coverage, quality, and timeliness of macroeconomic statistics need to be
significantly improved for effective monitoring of economic developments, policy
formulation, and program compliance. In this regard, a multisector STA mission visited
Vientiane during October 2002 in order to facilitate in the preparation of the General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS) metadata. It provided key recommendations, including in
areas where technical assistance and training would be needed. The mission recommended
greater coordination between the various agencies responsible for compiling macroeconomic
statistics, including through the formation of an inter-agency working group. In line with the
recommendations of the multisector mission, a GDDS coordinator has recently been
appointed. The authorities also need to finalize the GDDS metadata to formally endorse the
strategy for statistical improvement. The multisector mission was followed up recently by
two parallel STA missions in April/May 2004—in the areas of government finance statistics
and monetary and financial statistics.
Economic and financial data are published in periodic reports by the National Statistical
Center (NSC) and the Bank of the Lao P.D.R. (BoL). Since 1996, the Lao P.D.R. has been
included in the International Financial Statistics (IFS) publication.
National accounts
National accounts consist of annual estimates of GDP by activity at current and
constant 1990 prices which broadly follow the System of National Accounts 1968
(1968 SNA). The lack of regular surveys to collect comprehensive data on current economic
activities and the use of inadequate compilation methods raise questions about the coverage
and reliability of the GDP estimates. The estimates rely heavily on data on quantity of
production or quantity indicators collected by line ministries. The October 2002 multisector
STA mission recommended to the authorities to establish a system for collecting data on
current economic activities based on regular surveys and to implement compilation methods
in accordance with the System of National Accounts 1993 (1993 SNA). The Swedish
International Development Agency (SIDA) is providing technical assistance to the NSC to
compile new series of GDP by activity and by expenditure at current and constant 2002
prices, which are expected to be completed in the near future. With SIDA support, the Lao
Expenditure and Consumption Survey 2002-2003 (LECS 3) has just been finalized and
released.
Prices
The NSC compiles a monthly CPI that is available on a timely basis. The latest CPI was
introduced in January 2000 (with December 1999 as the reference period) using the results of
the 1997/98 Lao Expenditure and Consumption Survey (LECS) for deriving a consumption
basket. It comprises nine product categories covering major urban centers, including
Vientiane. The NSC plans to revise the weights and review the sample of outlets and

- 42 -

ANNEX II

products on the basis of the LECS 3. The NSC is also working on the development of a
producer price index (PPI) on a quarterly basis with SIDA’s assistance.
Government finance
Government finance statistics are weak and there is scope to significantly improve their
accuracy, coverage and transparency. The Budget Department produces monthly, quarterly,
and annual revenue and expenditure statistics. Most data are currently recorded on a cash
basis. Expenditure data by economic type are compiled by central government and the
provinces. Data on bank and nonbank financing of the budget, including treasury bill
operations, need to be made consistent with the monetary accounts. The recently introduced
social security fund and off-budget activities are not included in fiscal data. Annual budget
and outturn data are not disseminated according to an international standard, which
complicates fiscal analysis. In July 2004, the authorities published in the Official Gazette
the 2003/04 budget data by central government ministry and province and the 2002/03
outturn, which allows the identification of key spending categories. However, no government
finance data are presented in IFS country page or the Government Finance Statistics (GFS)
Yearbook.
Budget planning, execution, reporting, and cash management require significant upgrading,
as noted by the October 2002 FAD mission on public expenditure management. Moreover,
greater decentralization in 2000/01 further complicated the timely reporting of fiscal data
from lower government levels, as monitoring systems are weak and skilled staff limited. This
continues to hamper the accurate reporting of various items to the central budget, such as
timber-related royalty payments.
Central government debt data are compiled by two departments of the MOF; external debt by
the External Financial Relations Department and domestic debt by the Budget Department.
Debt data are comprehensive and are available by type of debt holder and instrument. Efforts
are being made to further improve coverage, particularly relating to SOE debt.
The government finance statistics mission in 2004 provided recommendations to improve the
quality of fiscal statistics and developed a roadmap for the eventual migration to GFSM2001.
Monetary statistics
The BoL regularly reports its balance sheet (with a two-week lag) and commercial bank
balance sheet (with a four-week lag) to APD for program monitoring purposes, and to STA
for publication in IFS with a lag of two to three months. In recent years, a number of STA
missions have provided technical assistance in monetary statistics to BoL. The authorities
have been implementing the recommendations made by these STA missions and making
progress in compiling monetary statistics.
However, the latest monetary and financial statistics mission in April/May 2004 identified a
number of problems in the compilation of monetary statistics and made recommendations

- 43 -

ANNEX II

for: (i) improvement in the sectorization of various institutional units (e.g., nonfinancial
public enterprises) and uniform treatment of sectors on both asset and liability sides of the
commercial bank balance sheet; (ii) valuation of financial assets and liabilities (e.g., valuing
monetary gold in market prices); (iii) classification of financial instruments (e.g., classifying
loan loss provisions as other liabilities and valuation adjustments as part of shares and other
equity); (iv) improvement in the charts of accounts for BoL and commercial banks, including
preparation of a “Manual of the Chart of Accounts”; (v) improvements in the coverage and
identification of IMF accounts; (vi) reconciliation of differences between the accounting data
(from the Accounting Department of the BoL) with monetary data sent to APD and STA
(compiled by the Economic Research Department using source data from the Operations
Department of the BoL); and (vii) on investigation of any discrepancies in bank financing
between monetary and government finance statistics.
Balance of payments
Data on foreign reserves are reported on a weekly basis, and also derived from the monetary
survey at the prevailing kip per U.S. dollar end-month exchange rate.
Balance of payments statistics need significant improvements in the frequency and coverage
in the following areas: (i) customs trade data, (ii) the commodity composition of external
trade, (iii) services and income, (iv) actual foreign direct investment flows, (v) separation of
current and capital transfers as well as coverage of some type of grants, especially from
international nongovernment organizations, (vi) the reconciliation of fiscal and balance of
payments data on external loans and grants, and (vii) data quality and monitoring of external
debt, especially of state owned enterprises. Since 2001, the MOF has adopted the
Commonwealth Secretariat-Debt Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS) for
processing and maintaining external debt data.
The introduction of new customs procedures, the Customs 2000 system and equipment, has
been implemented (with FAD technical assistance) which started to produce more accurate
trade data in October 2000. However, for a range of technical reasons, the customs
department has not yet produced these data on a regular basis. Fund missions have
emphasized that this problem needs to be urgently addressed.
In order to produce accurate balance of payments updates on a regular basis, there is an acute
need to improve the coordination between the agencies involved in BOP compilation, viz.,
the BoL, the NSC, the Customs and the External Financial Relations Departments of
the MOF, the Department of International Cooperation of the Committee of Planning and
Investment, and the commercial banks.

O

E

C

O

Mode of
reporting 4/

Confidentiality5/

Frequency of
Publication 5/

E

A

O

C

E

A

M

M

10/28/04

09/04

O

C

E

A

M

M

10/28/04

09/04

O

C

E

A

M

M

10/28/04

09/04

O

C

E

A

M

M

10/18/04

08/04

Interest
Rates

O

C

E

A

M

M

10/14/04

09/04

Consumer
Price Index

O

C

C

A

Q

Q

07/21/04

Q2/04

Exports/
Imports

O

C

C

A

Q

Q

07/21/04

Q2/04

Current
Account
Balance

O

C

C

B

M 2/

M 2/

07/22/04

06/04

O

C

C

C

A

A

04/21/04

2003

Overall
Government
Balance
GDP/GNP

2/

International reserves are available on a bi-weekly basis.
Monthly budget revenue and expenditure reported with 3-week lag, but budget financing reported on an irregular basis.
3/
Source A: Central Bank, B: Ministry of Finance, C: National Statistical Center.
4/
Data are directly reported by the authorities via the resident representative's office (E - electronic , C - facsimile).
5/
All data are eventually published in periodic reports by the BOL and the National Statistical Center. No explicit embargoes apply. These data (except fiscal data) have
also been published in International Financial Statistics (IFS) since the April 1996 issue (C - unrestricted use, O - other irregular basis).

1/

C

A

Source of
Data 3/

M1/

D

Frequency of
reporting

M1/

10/28/04

D

10/28/04

Date received

09/04

Frequency
of data

10/28/04

Date of latest
observation

Exchange International Reserve/Base Central Bank Broad
Rates
Reserves
Money
Balance Sheet Money

Lao P.D.R.: Core Statistical Indicators
(As at November 7, 2004)

O

C

C

A/B

Q

Q

07/21/04

06/04

External
Debt

- 44 ANNEX II

- 45 -

ANNEX III

Lao P.D.R.: Fund-Bank Relations Annex22
Partnership for Development
The Government (GOL) of the Lao Peoples’ Democratic Republic (P.D.R.) aims to achieve
rapid economic growth in order to improve the living conditions of its poor and graduate
from its status as a least-developed country. The development strategy to achieve these goals
has been articulated in the National Socioeconomic Development Plan (2001–05), the
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) and the recently-prepared National
Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES), approved by the National Assembly in
October 2003. This strategy seeks to: (i) maintain macroeconomic stability by strengthening
revenue and ensuring appropriate fiscal and monetary policies; (ii) deepen structural reforms
in the following areas: public expenditure management, financial sector, state-owned
enterprises (SOEs), private sector, trade, and development of the legal system; (iii) invest in
the social sectors to expand access and improve social sector outcomes; (iv) invest in
infrastructure such as roads, power, and water supply, and expand access to these services;
(v) invest in rural development and natural resource management—including support for
agricultural, mining, forestry and hydropower development; and (vi) strengthen capacity.
The World Bank Group—International Finance Corporation (IFC), Mekong Private Sector
Development Facility (MPDF), World Bank Institute (WBI) and International Development
Association (IDA)—provides technical and financial support to Lao P.D.R. in the
implementation of this strategy. The Bank itself supports analytical work in the structural
reform areas cited above, in poverty diagnostics, in key sectors and in capacity building for
the public sector, in addition to concessional financial assistance of around US$30 million a
year. As agreed during the recent Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) consultations and as
requested by the GOL, the Bank intends to place increased emphasis on human resource
development in its new credits, in addition to its existing role in basic infrastructure and
agriculture. The WBI provides training in support of capacity building initiatives. The IFC,
together with its MPDF, the private sector arm of the Group, promotes private sector
development through technical assistance, strengthened dialogue between public and private
sectors and direct financing of private-sector projects.
IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
The IMF takes the lead in advising the GOL on macroeconomic policy. This support covers
tax, fiscal, monetary, interest rate and exchange rate policies, balance of payments and
related statistical issues. In addition, some aspects of three structural policy areas that have an
important bearing on macroeconomic performance (financial sector, revenue administration,
public expenditure management, and trade policy) are also integral to the Fund’s work
22

Prepared by the staff of the World Bank. Contact person: Mr. Alessandro Magnoli,
Country Economist, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Department, East Asia
and Pacific Region, phone (202) 473–1653.

- 46 -

ANNEX III

program. The Bank has taken the lead in supporting the GOL in growth strategies, poverty
analysis and advice, poverty and social impact assessments, consultations for the poverty
reduction strategy, SOE reform and restructuring, and legal/judicial development, in addition
to natural resource management and sectoral reforms. The Bank in coordination with the
Fund advises the GOL on structural areas of the financial sector, public expenditure
management and trade policy as well as in supporting the GOL in the implementation of its
poverty reduction strategy (NGPES). Both institutions also collaborate closely with the
AsDB on financial sector reform and public expenditure management, and with the UN
agencies in the trade policy and the NGPES.
The Bank also plans to initiate new work on capacity enhancement in the public sector as
well as in transport, private sector development, education, and legal and judicial
development. The GOL has indicated that while various types of capacity-building is
ongoing on in different parts of the public sector, and the Bank projects have components
that address this issue in the sectors, there is a need for greater focus, systematic effort and
scaling up of capacity enhancement efforts. To address the situation, the Bank is preparing its
CAS for the next four years with capacity enhancement as the defining theme, and WBI is
closely working with the GOL and the National Organization for the Study of Policy and
Administration (NOSPA) to concretely define both a capacity enhancing strategy and an
agreed working plan. The GOL’s recent governance report has emphasized its commitment
to the rule of law and the need for implementing that in the country; the Bank plans to
support this area.
Bank and Fund Policy Dialogue
Poverty Reduction Strategy. The Bank and the Fund, together with UNDP, have provided
assistance to the GOL’s process of formulating its medium-term poverty reduction strategy.
In April, 2001, the GOL submitted an I-PRSP to the Boards of the World Bank and the IMF,
and Progress Reports on the preparation of the full PRSP were submitted in August 2002
and September 2003. In May 2003, the GOL circulated the first draft of the full PRSP, which
was initially called the National Poverty Eradication Program (NPEP). This was presented
at the May 2003 mini Roundtable Meeting (RTM) of donors and NGOs for comments. In
August 2003, GOL issued the final draft of the document, which was officially presented to
the international community at the 8th Round Table Meeting (RTM) in September 2003 and
approved by the National Assembly in October 2003. The NPEP was reviewed and upgraded
to a national strategy in early 2004. The final text takes the name of National Growth and
Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES), and is based on the five-year National SocioEconomic Development Plan for 2001–05 (NSEDP). In June 2004, the authorities submitted
the full PRSP for consideration of the IDA and IMF staff and endorsement by the IDA and
IMF Boards. The Bank and the Fund’s Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) of the strategy has
been prepared in October 2004, and will be considered by the IDA and IMF Boards in
November/December 2004.
Public Expenditure Management. In 2002, the Bank completed a Public Expenditure,
Financial Management and Procurement Review (PER), jointly with the IMF, the AsDB and

- 47 -

ANNEX III

the GOL. Subsequently in late 2002, an FAD mission from the IMF completed a review of
the treasury, budget reporting and accounting systems. These assessments provided a further
basis for the GOL’s reform program that has been supported by the IMF’s PRGF and by the
Bank’s financial support in the form of the Financial Management Adjustment Credit
(FMAC)23, and the technical assistance provided by the Financial Management Capacity
Building Credit (FMCBC), the IDF grants to improve public financial management, the
efficiency of the procurement regime, and tariff-studies. In particular, the FMAC sought to
enhance transparency, accountability and efficiency through the publication of the budget,
improvements in procurement, greater balance between recurrent and capital expenditures
and the development of a better chart of accounts for classifying expenditures. These actions
complement several of the PRGF structural benchmarks in respect of treasury reforms,
budget reporting and public accounting.
Given the current situation of public financial management, reforms are expected to continue
for some time to make such management adequately transparent, accountable and efficient.
The final NGPES incorporates not only the public investment and current expenditure plan
that would be needed to achieve the goals set out in that strategy, but also reforms in public
financial management that would be needed to effectively manage the rising revenues from
natural resources and general taxes. Self-standing technical assistance projects may be
provided by the Bank and the Fund in this area, if needed. Firm entrenchment of this reform
process, along with clear, monitorable performance benchmarks, and an established track
record will be necessary for the World Bank and other donors to continue expanding support
to Lao P.D.R., including possible support for future projects to export power to neighbors,
such as the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) power project.
The Bank has completed, jointly with the GOL, an examination of the likely sources of
growth for Lao P.D.R., the institutional development that is necessary for better public
financial management and the likely impact of both on poverty and human development.
Work on intergovernmental fiscal relations is also planned. The Bank expects to support
public financial management reforms over the medium term through a number of Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs). The PRSCs, adjustment credits supporting the
implementation of the NGPES, will assist the GOL’s reform efforts, inter alia, in the areas of
public sector governance, social sectors, trade, and private sector development (PSD). The
objective of the project is to develop and implement policies and structural reforms that are
consistent with and supportive of the country's overall economic development strategy in a
sequenced and phased manner. Timing will be synchronized with the budget cycle to the
extent possible. Project concept review was scheduled for October 2004.

23

This was a two-tranche adjustment operation of US$17 million, with the first tranche of
US$7 million disbursed in January 2003. The second-tranche release was disbursed in
May 2004.

- 48 -

ANNEX III

Financial Sector Reforms. The World Bank and the IMF have worked closely with the
AsDB to support the Bank of the Lao P.D.R.(BoL) in developing and implementing a multiyear banking reform program, with technical assistance provided by the AsDB. The Bank’s
FMAC supported restructuring of state-owned commercial banks (SCBs) and their move to a
more commercial basis of operation, as well as the development of rural micro-finance
institutions. Reflecting the Bank’s view that SCBs must be put on a commercial footing, the
conditionality under FMAC included detailed provisions on the restructuring of SCBs,
including non performing loans (NPL) resolution process, proper and regular reporting by
SCBs, as well as international audits so as to improve transparency and accountability. In
addition, it supports the development of an appropriate policy framework for rural and micro
finance institutions through a consultative process. The IMF is taking the lead in
strengthening banking regulation and supervision, and complementing the Bank and AsDB
work on SCB restructuring, by focusing on the financial aspects of restructuring and its fiscal
implications.
The Bank recognizes, together with the IMF, that the restructuring of SCBs and the reform of
regulation and supervision is not only important for the proper functioning of the financial
sector, but also for fiscal and macro-stability in the Lao P.D.R., as NPLs and the losses from
NPLs have impacted the budget adversely and could do so in the future. The FMAC,
supported by the FMCBC, and the PRGF have sought to break this destabilizing cycle as a
key step in the process of better management of public resources and fiscal stability. It is
expected that this support will be needed over the medium-term which could be provided by
PRSCs and the programs of the IMF and the AsDB.
Trade Policy. Trade policy was an integral part of both the Bank and IMF’s earlier
analytical work and programs. More recently, the WBI conducted several seminars on trade
policy issues, and in April 2004, organized a face-to-face workshop on WTO accession and
its potential for exports and poverty reduction, in a peer-learning mode, which was attended
by more than a dozen senior Lao officials. The Bank completed the updating of earlier work
on Lao P.D.R.’s trade regime and exports, and is leading a larger piece of diagnostic work on
trade policy and export potential during June-October 2004; this is being done jointly with
the GOL (led by the Ministry of Commerce) under the Integrated Framework program.
Reforms in this area are also expected to be supported by the proposed PRSC.
The Bank’s Key Roles in Policy Dialogue
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis. This work, supported by the Bank, is being
mainstreamed into the various pieces of the Bank’s analytical and advisory assistance (AAA)
and so there will be no single piece of work designated as the PSIA. Instead, key prospective
analytical work, agreed in consultation with the GOL, will not only diagnose the problems at
hand and identify the technical solutions to the problems/constraints being analyzed, but go
on to assess the ex ante poverty and social impact of those potential solutions and policies,
before developing recommendations. Most of the AAA work is also being conducted in a
consultative mode using some of the processes developed for the NGPES. The recently
completed Country Economic Memorandum/Sources of Growth report, planned Poverty

- 49 -

ANNEX III

Assessment and Public Expenditure Tracking work, and the planned Trade Policy
Diagnostics will all be done in this mode; the IMF will provide relevant inputs for this work
in the specific areas of its expertise (e.g., tax policy, exchange rate policy).
State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs). The SOEs have been large users of resources and certainly
have been the main debtors to SCBs; they have also been major contributor to the problem
of NPLs at SCBs. Accordingly, the FMAC supported the GOL’s ongoing SOE reform
program aimed at improving and institutionalizing the reporting and recording of annual
performance of all SOEs, the restructuring of the nine large SOEs including, BPKP,
Pharmaceutical Factory No. 3, Nam Papa Lao, Lao Airlines, DAFI, Electricité du Lao, and
DAI SOEs, and appropriate pricing policy for public utility SOEs. The latter requires the
development of tariff policies for water, telecommunications and aviation to ensure costrecovery tariffs and transparent subsidies where applicable, so that the impact of pricing on
the commercial viability of those SOEs are predictable and favorable.
For this purpose, the Bank has supported through technical assistance, the preparation of
multi-year restructuring plans for five of the above-mentioned SOEs; the development of
Memorandums of Understanding outlining the parameters of the restructuring for the next
five SOEs; the implementation of the performance monitoring system for all 148 SOEs in
Lao P.D.R. and detailed tariff studies in telecommunications and aviation. The SOE reform
effort not only seeks to move SOEs towards greater efficiency and more commercially viable
operations, but also expects to limit future contingent liabilities of SOEs that may undermine
medium-term fiscal stability.
The Bank will support the implementation of the SOE’s multi-year restructuring plans, the
monitoring system as well as the utilities’ tariff-policies beyond the second-tranche release of
FMAC; this will be done through the PRSCs, the technical assistance grants and credits, and
analytical work.
Private Sector Development. The Bank supports the development of the private sector, both
economy-wide and in sectors. Over the next 12 months the World Bank Group (IDA, IFC,
MPDF) will carry out extensive analysis in the PSD area to define a prioritized and feasible
multi-year Action Plan with the objective of removing the constraints to private sector
growth. Specific activities under this initiative include a joint ADB-WBG Investment
Climate Survey of manufacturing and tourism firms in Lao P.D.R., provincial level reviews
of the regulatory procedures and PSD promotion initiatives of local governments; a review of
the key business laws, and coordination of the donor working group on macroeconomic and
PSD issues. The IFC and MPDF are supporting the establishment of a regular business forum
to institutionalize the private-public dialogue and the GOL’s efforts to unify the domestic and
foreign investment laws, in addition to continuing their efforts to develop private-sector
projects for funding, and train SME managers and bankers. IDA has provided inputs to the
private sector component of the NGPES. IDA’s sector programs in education, health and
transport are supporting the development of a policy framework supportive of private
participation.

- 50 -

ANNEX III

Forestry Development. The GOL is involved in a continuing process of reforming its
forestry sector and improving the implementation of forestry programs and projects. The
Bank is trying to ensure that the GOL’s objectives and strategy for forestry are nested within
and consistent with the overall NGPES/PRSP, Rural Development Program, and Agriculture
Development Strategy. Through these, the GOL is, inter alia, seeking to (i) stabilize or
increase forest cover and condition; (ii) ensure protection of water resources and critical
infrastructure through forest conservation; and (iii) put forest resources to work directly for
the reduction of rural poverty through partnerships with local communities.
The Nam Theun 2 Hydro-power Project. This project, involving the construction of a dam
to generate power mainly for export to Thailand, constitutes an opportunity for Lao P.D.R.
to: (i) combat widespread poverty in the country through additional revenues gained from
electricity exports; (ii) help meet Thailand's energy needs and strengthen regional Mekong
initiatives; (iii) promote sustainable development and the broader development agenda in
Lao P.D.R.; and (iv) benefit from increased future opportunities to implement similar
projects in the mining and electricity sectors, as Lao P.D.R. becomes better integrated into
global developments and builds relationships with the international private sector. The GOL
has requested World Bank Group’s support for this project through an IBRD partial risk
guarantee, an IDA environmental and social project and a MIGA guarantee.
A World Bank decision to support the proposed project is linked to: (i) Lao P.D.R.
establishing and implementing a viable development policy framework, characterized by
concrete performance, and national programs for poverty reduction and social and
environmental protection; (ii) the technical, financial, economic and implementation aspects
of the proposed project, as well as the design and implementation of safeguards policies,
being sound; and (iii) wider understanding and broader support from the international donor
community and global and local civil society for Lao P.D.R.’s development framework and
the proposed project.
World Bank Strategy and Lending Operations
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). The last CAS was presented to the Bank’s Board in
April 1999 and the next one is proposed to be presented at the beginning of 2005; this timing
is aimed at using the NGPES as the basis for the next CAS.
The overarching objective of the last CAS was poverty reduction, focusing on sustained
growth to improve Lao P.D.R.’s' social indicators, and graduation from the rank of Least
Developed Countries by the year 2020. The last CAS focused on supporting the stabilization
of the economy, to be accomplished in close collaboration with the IMF. This consisted of a
lending and non-lending program, with the former amounting to US$111 million of new
commitments during July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2003. Since 2001, there has been a jump in the
non-lending program for Lao P.D.R., given the special emphasis given to low income
countries facing difficult conditions.

- 51 -

ANNEX III

Non-Lending Program. The current sources of growth in the Lao P.D.R. economy haves
been examined in a Country Economic Memorandum/Sources of Growth report, which was
completed in May 2004 and will shortly be shared with the GOL.
The World Bank’s Main Non-Lending Work
(recently completed and ongoing)
Area

Instrument

Poverty Reduction

Poverty Assessment Report (completed, 2002; new one ongoing,
June 2004); Poverty-Environment Nexus Study Phase 1
(completed, 2002);

Growth Analysis

Sources of Growth - CEM (completed, May 2004)

Public Expenditure Management

PER, CFA, CPAR (completed, 2002); Public Expenditure Tracking
in Health & Education (ongoing, November 2004);
Intergovernmental Fiscal System Note (planned September 2004)

Private Sector Development & Trade
Policy

Concept Note for AAA package on private sector development,
including investment climate survey and provincial regulatory
reviews.
Integrated Framework work on trade diagnostics (planned to be
completed by November 2004)

Capacity Enhancement & Public
Sector Reform

Note on Capacity Enhancement for CAS (planned June 2004)

Lending Operations
As of September 7, 2004, IDA credits totaling US$723 million equivalent had been approved
for Lao P.D.R. including support for adjustment operations, rural development, forestry,
transport, energy, telecommunications, education, health, industry, and capacity building.
In the last three years, lending operations have focused on the above mentioned CAS
objectives, with an average commitment of about US$37 million, while disbursements
averaged US$34 million. The level and composition of the lending program for the next four
years will be determined in the context of the forthcoming CAS, currently scheduled
for early 2005.

- 52 -

ANNEX III

IDA: Commitments and Disbursements to the Lao P.D.R., 1977–2004
(In millions of U.S. dollars; as of July 31, 2004)
Fiscal Year (to June 30)
1977-93
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Total
Source: World Bank, 2004.

Committed
335.2
48.4
19.2
60.7
48.0
34.7
29.8
0.0
41.7
44.8
24.7
35.7
0.0
722.9

Disbursed
180.7
45.1
31.4
28.6
65.2
26.5
27.8
18.1
29.9
30.5
41.2
46.7
2.2
573.9

Repayments
1.5
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
1.3
1.5
3.0
3.6
4.9
6.1
7.3
0.7
32.3

- 53 -

ANNEX IV

Lao P.D.R.—Relations with the Asian Development Bank24
The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) has extended development assistance to Lao P.D.R.
since 1970. In the 1970s and 1980s, AsDB assistance was focused mainly on economic growth
projects involving infrastructure development in the transport and energy sectors, as well as
agriculture. AsDB has been active in financial sector development since the latter part of the
1980s. Since the early 1990s, the emphasis of AsDB assistance to Lao P.D.R. has been
broadened to include rural development, social development and environment. Since the
late 1990s, the AsDB has focused its activities on poverty reduction.
AsDB worked with the Government and other stakeholders to formulate its current Country
Strategy and Program in 2001 to guide its operations in Lao P.D.R. for the next five-year period.
The theme of AsDB’s interventions in Lao P.D.R. will be poverty reduction by broadening
community participation and opportunities. The core strategies for poverty reduction are:
sustainable economic growth, inclusive social development, and good governance. The main
strategic focus will be on four operational priorities including rural development and market
linkages, human resource development, sustainable environmental management, financial and
private sector development, and regional integration.
Lao P.D.R. is a key actor in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (GMS) program as a land-link
among the other member countries. The AsDB will aim to explore various options to maximize
the benefits to Lao P.D.R. from sub-regional cooperation. To enhance the development impact of
projects and ensure their close monitoring, AsDB’s interventions will focus primarily on the poor
northern region provinces and along the East-West economic corridor, which links Thailand to
Savannakhet and Vietnam.
Since 1970, the AsDB has approved 60 loans (including four loans for the financial/banking
sector reforms) for a total of $1,085.4 million by end-December 2003, when 23 of these loans
were still active. As of end-2003, technical assistance amounting to $95.76 million comprising
198 projects has been approved.
In 2004, two new loans had been approved by July, and one additional loan is envisaged to be
approved, with the planned annual commitments of $37.7 million. Technical assistance of
$1.45 million was approved during the first eight months of 2004.
Table 1. Lao P.D.R.: AsDB Commitments and Disbursements, 1999-2004
(In million of US dollars)
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 1/

Commitments

57.6

60.5

65.0

86.9

46.0

37.7

Disbursements

46.8

51.0

44.7

45.6

54.7

61.8

1/ Planned figures.
Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank.
24

Prepared by the Asian Development Bank.

- 54 -

Lao P.D.R.: Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1970-75

1980-85

1995-2002

East
Asia &
Pacific

3.0
2.2
11.1
6.5

3.6
2.4
13.8
6.5

5.5
2.4
20.2
4.8

1,838.5
1.0
38.2
2.1

2,494.6
1.9
30.6
3.5

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

..
..
..

38.6
26.9
41.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

..
..
..

..
..
..

310
938
..

960
135 1/
..

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

..
..
..

37.0
7.6
45.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
0.4
..

1.7
3.2
..

1.9
3.2
..

1.1
3.1
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

83
86
79

92
92
92

80
85
74

..
..
..

..
..
..

37
61
29

76
93
67

76
90
70

..
..
..

6
4
..

55
45
40

70
78
15

65
65
42

42
41
44

47
46
49

55
53
56

69
68
71

59
58
60

145
218

135
200

87
100

32
42

79
121

610
510
..
..

531
439
..
..

355
299
650
19

184
129
..
80

310
259
..
..

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Source: 2004 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank.
1/ Includes latest data in the range for 1994-2000.

Lowincome

430
140
..

Statement by Made Sukada, Alternate Executive Director for the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
and Pichit Patrawimolpon, Senior Advisor to Executive Director
November 29, 2004
Introduction
On behalf of the Lao’s authorities, we would like to express their appreciation to the
staff, management and the Executive Board as well as to the donor community for their
advice and continued support. The extensive consultation and discussions during the Fund
mission have provided a comprehensive assessment and valuable suggestions to the
authorities on Lao’s economic development, including the implementation of the reform
program. In this respect, the authorities would like to thank the mission team for the
constructive dialogue as well as the well written and balanced Staff Report for the 2004
Article IV Consultation.
Continued implementation of the structural reform program coupled with sound
macroeconomic policies, supported by financial and technical assistance from the Fund and
other development partners, have contributed to macroeconomic stability and encouraging
economic growth in the recent years. Inflationary pressures have subsided and poverty has
continued to decline. Despite these positive developments, the authorities are aware that
Lao’s economy still faces major challenges. While significant progress has been made,
structural weaknesses in a number of areas remain. In view of these challenges, the Lao
authorities would like to reiterate their continued commitment to sound macroeconomic
management and the reform agenda, consistent with the National Growth and Poverty
Eradication Strategy (NGPES), the first full poverty reduction strategy prepared by the
government. The NGPES has provided a broad strategic framework under which the
Government’s future growth and poverty eradication program will be developed and
implemented in order to raise Lao P.D.R. from the rank of least-developed countries by 2020.
Recent Economic Developments

A combination of prudent macroeconomic policies and more favorable external
developments contributed to Lao’s favorable macroeconomic performance in the past few
years. In 2004, the economy rebounded and growth is expected to reach 6 ½ percent of GDP,
attributed mainly to agriculture and hydroelectricity output that have recovered from a
drought in 2003. The tourism sector has also recovered from last year’s SARs outbreak. In
addition, manufacturing activity has also picked up in response to growth in consumer
demand.
Inflation, which had surged into double digits in 2002, has been on a downward trend
since mid-2003, reflecting continued prudent monetary policy. A temporary supply shock—
mainly resulting in a sharp increase in basic food, fuel and utility prices—has caused
headline inflation to be relatively high for most of 2004. However, as food inflation fell
rapidly, headline inflation has declined to 7 percent in October 2004, and is expected to stay
in single digits for the remainder of the year. With the kip remaining stable, core inflation has

-2fallen significantly over the past year.
Lao’s external position has continued to improve. Rapid export growth and continued
buoyant donor and FDI inflows have allowed gross official reserves to increase steadily and
are expected to reach US$ 240 million by end 2004, which is equivalent to around 4 months
of imports. Nevertheless, with new contracts on concessional borrowings from multilateral
donors, public external debt has continued to rise over the last couple of years.
On the structural reform front, the authorities have implemented most of the original
structural benchmarks for the fourth review of the PRGF. The benchmarks related to onsite
bank inspection, improving the budget classification, and transferring tax payers to the
central large tax payer unit were implemented on schedule. However, some delays occurred
in the finalization of implementing regulation for the presidential decree on tax incentives.
Fiscal Policy
Recognizing the importance of fiscal sustainability to macroeconomic stability, the
authorities remain committed to pursue prudent fiscal policy and to continue the necessary
fiscal reforms. However, the adjustment pace should also consider the favorable working
environment between central and local government, given the prevailing capacity constraints
and the need to ensure sustainability and irreversibility of the reforms.
As highlighted in the staff report, the preliminary fiscal outturn for 2003/04 indicates
that the budget deficit declined to 3.9 percent of GDP, almost 2 percentage points lower than
that in 2002/03. At the same time, revenue collections have also performed well, rising from
11.1 to 11.3 percent of GDP. As last year’s increase in petroleum taxes take full effect
combined with stronger administrative efforts, tax revenues (excluding timber royalties)
increased from 8.1 to 8.9 percent of GDP. In order to further enhance the source of revenues,
the authorities have submitted a proposal to the National Assembly to introduce a single rate
value added tax (VAT).
The authorities broadly agree with staff that progress in revenue mobilization and
strengthening of tax and custom administration will also depend on strengthening of central
government control over revenue administration and treasury operations in the provinces. In
this respect, the authorities are committed to undertake reform on inter-governmental
relations. However, redefinition of central-local relations can only be undertaken on a stepby-step basis according to the capacity of local level officials to assume new responsibilities,
and the ability of the Central Government to monitor compliance with national priorities. In
this context, the government is committed to improve communication with people especially
in the remote areas, clarify the responsibilities for each level of government, redeploy human
resources from central to local level, improve capacity building at the local level, and
improve the monitoring capacity of the central government.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
The authorities will continue to gear monetary policy toward reducing inflation and

-3creating a stable financial environment that are deemed essential to facilitate growth, private
investment, and promote international trade. Monetary policy has generally been restrained
over the past year. As illustrated in Table 4 in the staff report, growth of credit to the
economy was slower than the target, largely contributed to by relatively tight credit controls
under the state bank restructuring program during 2003/04. However, due to a one-off
investment in a domestic strategic industry (cement), net domestic assets of the SCBs
showed a temporary jump in 2004. The authorities are exploring ways to increase equity in
this project and to diversify its sources of financing. Credit growth is expected to return to a
moderate rate, in line with nominal GDP, over the medium-term.
On exchange rate policy, a managed floating exchange rate system has served Lao’s
authorities well. In this respect, the authorities’ intervention in the foreign exchange market
is aimed at smoothing transitory fluctuations in the exchange rate.
Structural Reforms
The authorities recognize that strengthening structural reform efforts in all sectors,
particularly in the state commercial banks (SCBs), state owned enterprises (SOEs), and the
trade sector, will be a key to promoting economic efficiency and competitiveness. This is
crucial to sustaining economic growth which is required for poverty reduction.
On SCBs, the authorities are committed to continuing the banking sector reform
program supported by the World Bank, the IMF, and the AsDB. The Lao authorities
recognize that the reform is not only crucial to the proper functioning of the financial sector,
but also to fiscal and macro stability. In this respect, the process of finalizing the external
audit of the banks' 2003 accounts, which will be used to establish appropriate performance
targets for BCEL (Banque pour le Commerce Exterieur du Laos) and LDB (Lao
Development Bank) in 2004/05, is underway. The authorities agree with staff that on-site
inspections and overall credit limits for the SCBs will remain and continue to provide critical
operational benchmarks for these institutions. However, the time table for bringing the SCBs
into compliance with these prudential regulations need to be set appropriately with due
consideration to institutional capabilities. In this context, the authorities intend to proceed
with the recapitalization of the SCBs during 2005. In addition the Bank of the Lao PDR will
also issue regulation on loan concentration and foreign currency exposure.
For the non-financial state-owned enterprises, the authorities have made progress in
restructuring the five large-indebted SOEs, namely the electricity utility (EDL), the Ministry
of Defense conglomerate Phoudoi, the water utility (Nam Pa Pa), the national airline (Lao
Airlines), and a pharmaceutical factory. Steps have also been taken to resolve and streamline
operations of a number of key corporations, including to address the ongoing losses of Lao
Airlines. With assistance from the World Bank, restructuring for the EDL is almost complete,
and the programs for three other enterprises have also been initiated and are expected to be
completed by end-2005. To promote private sector activity and improve the investment
climate, the authorities intend to ensure that the new investment laws, as approved by the
National Assembly in October 2004, are consistent with the earlier structure and levels of
incentive provided under the presidential decree.

-4-

The authorities have also initiated several legal reform projects with assistance from
the donor community. To foster the development of a more favorable environment conducive
to private activities and investments, a number of reforms have been implemented to enhance
competition and provide a more level playing field. In particular, quota restrictions on
imports have been abolished and import licensing menu has been narrowed down to only
four products, namely fuel, cement, steel, and vehicle. Furthermore, a decree on competition
was also issued in February 2004, lifting barriers to trade and laying out a framework for
dealing with uncompetitive practices, followed by another decree issued in June 2004,
abolishing barriers to movements of goods within the country. The authorities are also
committed to continuing the process of tariff reform in line with AFTA schedule, moving
ahead with WTO application, and seeking to normalize trade relations (NTR) with the USA.
The authorities have made progress in improving the quality of macroeconomic
statistics, with Fund technical assistance. Preparations are being undertaken to improve data
coordination between the government agencies. On the safeguards issue, the authorities are
reviewing staff’s proposal for the commissioning of a targeted external review of the Bank of
Lao’s external reserves and reserve money positions by an international audit firm. Further
discussion on this issue with the staff is expected to take place during the fourth PRGF
review period, after this Article IV Consultation.
External Debt Management
The authorities recognize that the external debt level is high, but is nevertheless
manageable. Accordingly, they are committed not to seek debt relief under enhanced HIPC
Initiative. In this context, they will pursue policies aimed at raising economic growth in a
sustainable manner and increasing gradually the government revenue ratio to GDP. In
addition, the authorities plan to reduce the fiscal deficit over time and will make sure that
new debts contracted carry a sufficiently high degree of concessionality, and will focus on
strict enforcement of the Instruction on Centralization of the Management and Monitoring of
External Debt at the Ministry of Finance.
Outlook
In the medium-term, the economy is expected to remain reasonably favorable,
fostered by macroeconomic stability and continued progress in the structural reform program.
The authorities agree with staff that FDI inflows, particularly in mining, and in the
hydroelectric power sector are expected to be the main engine of growth. The current account
deficit is expected to be fully financed by FDI and concessional borrowings. The authorities
acknowledge that prudent fiscal and monetary policy is essential to sustaining the economic
growth momentum. In addition, further acceleration of the structural reform program being
undertaken by the authorities will gradually lessen the government’s debt burden to a more
sustainable level. The authorities are also aware that such an ambitious target to reduce the
debt burden can only be achieved through a combination of revenue enhancing, expenditure
streamlining, as well as private sector development measures. Strong and sustained economic
growth will, in turn, provide a firm basis for continued poverty reduction over the period.

-5-

Conclusions
Considering the relatively dire conditions that the Lao’s authorities had to start with,
we believe that from the beginning of the PRGF program in 2001, Lao’s economic and social
development has come a long way. The authorities highly value the continued support from
the international community, including the Fund. Despite considerable progress being
achieved thus far, there are challenges ahead. The Lao’s authorities look forward to the
continuation of the close and effective cooperation, as in the past, with the Fund through
further discussion on the fourth PRGF review. The authorities would like to thank staff, once
again for their hard work and dedication, in seeking alternative ways to fulfill the
requirements of the program, giving due consideration to the formidable constraints facing
Lao PDR. On their part, the authorities will employ their utmost efforts in pursuit of
development in order to fulfill both national targets, as well as international community’
expectations.
With regards to AML-CFT, Lao PDR maintains restrictions on financial transactions
and accounts are frozen if they involve individuals or organizations included in the list of
terrorists maintained pursuant to (a) UN Secretary Council Resolution 1373 (September 28,
2001); and (b) the list of current terrorist organizations designated by the US Secretary of
State.
The Authorities intend to authorize publication of the Staff Report for the 2004
Article IV consultation, Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper-Joint-Staff Advisory Note
(EBS/03/127), Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix on the Fund’s web site.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/2
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 12, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with
the Lao People's Democratic Republic
On November 29, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with the Lao People's Democratic Republic.1
Background
Since the last Article IV, Lao P.D.R.’s macroeconomic performance has been relatively
encouraging. After a brief hiatus in 2002, macroeconomic stability has been restored and
growth has been relatively robust. The latest data also show that poverty has continued to
decline. However, while progress has been made in strengthening macroeconomic policies,
advancing the agenda of structural reform has proved more challenging, especially with regard
to mobilizing revenues and strengthening expenditure management, two key reform priorities
under the PRGF arrangement.
The economy has performed relatively well in 2004, rebounding well from a number of shocks,
including a drought and the regional impact of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
the previous year. Although economic growth dipped in 2003 to 5¼ percent, half a percentage
point lower than in 2002, activity has rebounded in 2004, and growth is projected to rise to
6 percent, supported by a recovery in agriculture and hydroelectricity output, and a rebound in
tourism. Inflation, which had surged into double digits in 2002, has been on a downward trend
since mid-2003. With the kip remaining stable over the last 18 months, inflation has fallen to
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-27½ percent in September. The external position has also improved, with brisk export growth and
continued donor assistance, leading to a further rise in external reserves. However, public
external debt remains high.
The improvement in macroeconomic performance has been underpinned by steady
implementation of macroeconomic policies for much of the past year. Monetary policy has been
restrained over the past year, with the Bank of the Lao P.D.R. keeping its net domestic assets
broadly stable. Preliminary data suggest that the budget performance also improved in 2003/04.
Revenues rose from 11.1 to 11.3 percent of GDP, partly reversing the significant decline in
revenues in 2002/03, and expenditures fell due to lower donor-financed capital expenditures.
With the government keeping tight control over domestic spending, the overall deficit declined to
3.9 percent of GDP.
The priority over the past year has been to advance key structural reforms, especially with
regard to strengthening the revenue base. To this end, the authorities have announced their
intention to introduce a VAT in January 2007 and have started to reform the turnover tax—
reducing the number of its rates from three to two—a key preparatory step. However progress
in addressing the key administrative reforms, related to centralizing control over the tax and
customs administration, has proved difficult as they touch directly on the issue of centerprovincial relations. The authorities have also continued to make headway in reforming the state
banks and state-owned enterprises, although much remains to be done in both areas to limit
contingent liabilities to the budget.
Provided that sound macroeconomic policy implementation is sustained, macroeconomic
performance is expected to remain favorable in 2005. Growth is projected to rise to 7 percent,
driven by an expansion in mining exports, inflation should remain in single digits, and strong
export growth would help Lao P.D.R. improve its external reserve position. However, two
potential risks have emerged to this positive outlook: (i) the 2004/05 budget plan, approved by
the National Assembly in October, proposes a large increase in the wage bill which may prove
unsustainable, unless phased over a longer-time period; and (ii) state bank credit has expanded
rapidly over the last quarter, potentially undermining a key element of recent monetary
discipline.
The government’s National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy sets out a medium-term
strategy to achieve rapid growth in order to improve the living conditions of the poor. If strong
progress is made in structural reform, Lao P.D.R. has the potential to achieve the government’s
medium-term objectives of raising growth to 6-6½ percent—and sharply reducing poverty—as a
number of major projects, such as the Nam Theun 2 hydroelectric dam, are in the pipeline.
Achievement of this outlook is predicated on further reform with regard to revenue mobilization,
and banking and state-owned enterprise reforms, needed to address potential risks to fiscal
sustainability, stemming from Lao P.D.R.’s high debt burden. Strengthening expenditure
management will also be critical to maintaining progress in ensuring sustained improvements in
social indicators consistent with the Millennium Development Goals.
The present PRGF arrangement for SDR 31.7 million, was approved in April 2001, and was
extended by an additional year, through April 24, 2005, in September 2003. The third review
was completed on September 12, 2003. Discussions of the fourth review, which have been
ongoing since December 2003 will resume after the conclusion of the 2004 Article IV
consultation.

-3-

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended Lao P.D.R.’s progress toward macroeconomic stability, with
inflation declining and the external position strengthening, and welcomed the robust economic
growth and reduction in poverty. While improved economic management has been central to
this performance, Directors stressed that significant challenges remain. In particular, faster
progress is needed in strengthening domestic revenue mobilization and public expenditure
management, completing the restructuring of state-owned banks and enterprises, and
promoting private sector activity and investment. In this context, Directors welcomed the
completion of the National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES), and called on
the authorities to translate its objectives into concrete actions embedded in a robust policy
framework. Given the country’s limited capacity, these efforts will require continued support
from the international community.
While Lao P.D.R’s near-term outlook remains favorable, Directors expressed concern about the
2004/05 budget plan, approved by the National Assembly in October. They noted, in particular,
that the revenue targets may not be achievable in the absence of additional revenue measures,
and that the large increase in the wage bill will likely need to be phased in over a longer period
of time. Directors also encouraged the authorities to ensure that increases in world oil prices are
passed on to consumers, as the budget cannot afford a loss of revenue from reductions in
petroleum taxes at this juncture.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to continue to gear monetary policy toward
reducing inflation. Tight control over the Bank of the Lao P.D.R.’s net domestic assets,
underpinned by a government commitment to avoid bank financing of the budget, should
continue to be the principal anchor of monetary policy. This will need to be complemented by
firm restraint of credit by the state banks, and, in this regard, Directors expressed concern about
the recent expansion of credit to finance a government-sponsored project. Directors considered
Lao P.D.R’s flexible exchange rate system, with interventions limited to smoothing operations,
to be appropriate. They welcomed the ongoing review of the exchange system, and encouraged
the authorities to expedite the process of accepting the obligations under Article VIII.
Directors underscored that improving revenue mobilization will be critical to ensuring fiscal
sustainability, given Lao P.D.R.’s substantial expenditure needs and high public debt. Key
priorities in the period ahead are the strengthening of revenue administration, which will
importantly depend on reforms to re-centralize authority over tax and customs administration,
and the introduction of a value added tax in early 2007. Directors also encouraged the
authorities to ensure that tax incentives provided under the new investment laws do not
undermine efforts to broaden the tax base, and to reduce tax incentives over time.
Directors stressed the need to accelerate reforms of public expenditure management in order to
strengthen the accountability and monitoring of public spending. They urged the authorities to
develop a comprehensive treasury reform strategy that will bring treasury operations in the
provinces under central government control. These reforms will require pressing ahead with the
ongoing review of the decentralization framework, to clarify the assignment of revenue and
expenditure responsibilities between the center and provinces, and develop a robust
mechanism for intergovernmental transfers.
Directors urged the authorities to pursue vigorously the restructuring of state banks, whose
financial position remain precarious, and to maintain close oversight over the banks’ operations
until the restructuring process is complete. Some Directors considered that private investor

-4participation would facilitate the reform of state banks and improve their management and
financial operations. Directors also encouraged the authorities to move ahead with measures to
improve the overall banking environment, notably through legislation to strengthen competition
in the banking sector.
Directors welcomed the recent progress on state-owned enterprise reforms and the ongoing
utility price adjustments. They urged the authorities to proceed with the sale of noncore assets
of the large and most indebted enterprises, and to finalize a comprehensive strategy to address
the losses of Lao Airlines. To complement the reforms to the state sector, the overall climate for
private sector activity and investment should also be improved, including by reforming the legal
system.
Directors stressed that lowering Lao P.D.R.’s high external debt to a more sustainable level will
require strong action on several fronts. In addition to efforts to mobilize domestic revenue and
reduce borrowing relative to GDP, the authorities will need to maximize grant financing and
maintain a high level of concessionality on new borrowing. Some Directors also called for limits
on concessional borrowing. Directors also urged the authorities to improve the monitoring and
reporting of public external debt, and to centralize control over the contracting of new debt.
Directors noted that, despite Lao P.D.R.’s eligibility, the authorities have indicated that they do
not intend to avail themselves of debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
Directors regretted that the joint audit of the central bank’s 2003 accounts by the state auditor
and an international audit firm has not yet been undertaken. They urged the authorities to fully
implement this key recommendation of the safeguards assessment as soon as possible. Most
Directors supported the view that, in the interim, the authorities should ensure that, at minimum,
adequate safeguards are put in place with respect to the reporting of the central bank’s net
international reserves and net domestic assets.
While efforts have been made to improve Lao P.D.R’s statistics, Directors urged the authorities
to continue to work, with IMF technical assistance, to address remaining weaknesses and to
improve data dissemination.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of
the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the
country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article
IV consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional
level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with
longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of
general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.
The Staff Report for the year 2004 Article IV Consultation with Lao P.D.R. is also available.

-5-

Lao P.D.R.: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000-2003
Nominal GDP (2002): $1,818 million
Population (2002): 5.53 million

GDP per capita (2002): $329
Fund quota: SDR 52.9 million
2000

2001

2002

2003

Output and Prices
Real GDP growth (percentage change) 1/
Inflation (annual percent change)
Period average
End of period

5.8

5.8

5.8

5.3

23.2
10.6

7.8
7.5

10.6
15.2

15.5
12.6

Government budget (in percent of GDP) 2/
Revenue
Grants
Expenditure
Overall balance (including grants)
Government debt

13.2
3.7
21.5
-4.6
65.3

13.2
3.1
20.7
-4.4
63.0

13.1
1.3
18.4
-4.0
66.3

11.1
2.1
19.0
-5.8
83.9

45.7
41.1
15.0
16-24

7.8
27.6
16.0
12-18

12.9
-5.2
17.0
12-20

24.1
5.4
10-15
22-25

Money and Credit (annual percent change) 2/ 3/
Broad money
Bank credit to the economy
Interest rates (on three-month deposits; end of period)
Interest rates (on short term loans; end of period)
External Sector
Exports (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Imports (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
(including official transfers; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of prospective goods and services imports)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
External public debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4/
External public debt service (in percent of exports)

345
562
-25

334
542
-66

340
570
-98

401
618
-116

127
2.6
96
1,179
5.8

134
2.6
152
1,213
7.2

196
3.5
152
1,330
7.1

216
3.2
172
1,915
7.2

Exchange rate
Kip per dollar (end of period)
Commercial bank rate
Parallel market rate
Real effective exchange rate 5/

8,140
8,170
100.0

9,490
9,560
102.1

10,680
10,760
97.3

10,467
10,470
97.6

13,672

15,705

18,390

22,069

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (in billions of Kip) 1/
Sources: Data provided by the Lao P.D.R. authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ The government estimates real GDP and deflator growth in 2003 to be 5/8 percent and 15.8 percent respectively.
2/ Fiscal year basis (October to September).
3/ Money and credit data are evaluated at constant exchange rates.
4/ Russian debt for 2003 is based on a preliminary agreement between the Lao P.D.R. and Russian governments. Prior to 2003 the Russian
debt is excluded.
5/ Base Year 2000=100.

