October 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/321

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001

January 29, 2001

Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report;
Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the
Executive Director for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, the following documents have been released and are included
in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the
IMF, following discussions that ended on April 21, 2004, with the officials of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
June 25, 2004. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 16, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for
the 2004 Consultation with Timor-Leste
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Juha Kähkönen
June 25, 2004

•

A staff team visited Dili during April 8–21 to hold the 2004 Article IV consultation
discussions. The discussions were held with Prime Minister Alkatiri, Finance
Minister Boavida, other senior officials, representatives of key donors and the
business community, and the resident missions of the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank.

•

The mission comprised Messrs. Kim (head), Chensavasdijai and Nozaki (EP), and
Ms. Poirson (all APD), and was assisted by Mr. Al-Eyd (Senior Resident
Representative). Mr. Santos (OED) attended some of the meetings.

•

Timor-Leste’s statistical base remains weak due to slow progress in institution and
capacity building. The weakness is especially pronounced in the areas of national
accounts and the balance of payments, constraining surveillance seriously.

•

Timor-Leste has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and it
maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers
for current international transactions.

•

The authorities expressed their consent to the publication of the 2004 Article IV
consultation staff report, together with the supporting document.

•

It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month
cycle.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary...................................................................................................................3
I.

Introduction and Background ........................................................................................4

II.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................7

III.

Policy Discussions .........................................................................................................9
A. Economic Outlook ..................................................................................................10
B. Near- and Medium-Term Budget Management ......................................................10
C. Long-Term Fiscal Strategy and Management of Oil/Gas Revenues.......................13
D. Financial Sector Issues............................................................................................14
E. Private Sector Development ....................................................................................15
F. Institution and Capacity Building............................................................................16
G. Other Issues.............................................................................................................16

IV.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................17

Boxes
1.
Oil/Gas Resources..........................................................................................................5
2.
Road Map and Sector Investment Programs..................................................................7
3.
Budget Estimates for FY2004/05–FY2007/08 ............................................................11
Figure
1.
Selected Economic Indicators......................................................................................20
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Selected Social Indicators ............................................................................................21
Selected Economic Indicators, 1999–2004..................................................................22
Central Government Budget Operations, FY2000/01–FY2003/04 .............................23
Central Government Budget Estimates, FY2004/05–FY2007/08 ...............................24
Combined Sources Fiscal Operations, FY2000/01–FY2004/05..................................25
Monetary Developments, 2000–2004..........................................................................26
Balance of Payments, 1999–2004................................................................................27
Medium-Term Outlook, 2003–2008............................................................................28

Annexes
I.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................29
II.
Relations with the World Bank Group.........................................................................32
III.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................34
IV.
Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................35
V.
Long-Term Fiscal Strategy ..........................................................................................39
VI.
Key Features of a Norwegian Model of a Petroleum Fund............................................46
VII. Summary of the Exchange and Payments System .......................................................47
VIII. Press Information Notice .............................................................................................51

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic and policy developments
After a strong recovery from the 1999 destruction, economic activity slowed down
substantially. Real GDP declined by 3 percent in 2003 and is expected to recover only
modestly in 2004, reflecting the lingering impact of a reduced international presence.
Inflation, however, moderated in recent months. The Bayu-Undan project has come on
stream, paving the way for increased oil/gas revenues over the medium term.
Fiscal policy remains prudent. The budget for FY2003/04 (fiscal year: July–June) was
tightened during the mid-year budget review in response to a perceived weakening of oil/gas
revenues. A significant expenditure compression was also incorporated into the budget
estimates for FY2004/05 and over the medium term to address large financing gaps and
downside risks to oil/gas revenues.
Expansion in the banking sector continues. A third commercial bank started operations
last August, and bank loans have recently been picking up. Nonetheless, financial
intermediation remains modest, with a substantial portion of bank deposits invested abroad
and banking services largely limited to Dili.
Steps have been taken to address Timor-Leste’ deep-rooted structural problems,
especially the underdeveloped private sector and nascent institutions and capacity.
Several laws have been enacted toward establishing a legal framework for business activity,
and efforts are being made to strengthen the government’s capacity for governance and
service delivery.
Policy issues
The near- and medium-term challenge for fiscal management is to make the FY2004/05
budget estimates credible and ensure adequate government services. To this end, efforts
need to be stepped-up to prioritize expenditures, improve budget execution (particularly for
capital projects), and restrain the increase in wages and salaries. For the long term, the
authorities need to develop a fiscal strategy to ensure the productive use of oil/gas revenues.
A petroleum fund should be established swiftly toward sound management of oil/gas savings.
The current U.S. dollar-based monetary and exchange rate regime should be
maintained until adequate institutional and financial conditions develop. With bank loans
increasing, the authorities should remain vigilant over bank portfolios to keep them sound.
The authorities need to step up their efforts to address Timor-Leste’s serious structural
problems. In particular, further actions are needed to improve infrastructure and develop a
legal framework for private sector activity. Steps should be taken urgently to strengthen
institutions and capacity, especially at the Ministry of Planning and Finance and the
monetary authority, to counter a further winding-down of the UN-supported capacity
building program.

-4-

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1.
Timor-Leste has begun nation-building following its independence in May 2002.1
Progress has been made in consolidating the new government’s administrative power and
fostering a stable political environment despite some early challenges.2 Further steps have
been taken under the government’s initiatives to reconstruct the economy from the severe
destruction of 1999 that followed the national referendum overwhelmingly supporting
independence from Indonesia.
2.
Despite progress in economic reconstruction, significant economic challenges
remain ahead. These challenges center around the strengthening of medium-term growth
prospects to alleviate widespread poverty (Table 1).3 Meeting the challenges requires the
authorities to address deep-rooted structural problems, including poor infrastructure, low
productivity (notably in agriculture), an underdeveloped legal system for business activity,
and serious institutional and capacity constraints. Added to this task is the need for the
productive use of growing oil/gas revenues expected over the medium term from the
exploitation of oil/gas resources in the Timor Sea (Box 1).
3.
The economy operates under a U.S. dollar-based currency regime.4 Combined
with the monetary authority’s lack of legal power to lend, the currency regime constrains the
1

Independence came after a 2½ year-rule of the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET). Following independence, the UN’s assistance to Timor-Leste has
been provided through a scaled-back presence—the UN Mission in Support of East Timor
(UNMISET). UNMISET was initially scheduled to be replaced by a further scaled-back
successor mission in May 2004, but its presence was extended for another year (subject to a
review in late 2004) to ensure the maintenance of security.
2

The government has faced a number of political challenges since independence (including
the civil unrest in Dili in December 2002 and recent bribery allegations made by a U.S. oil
company in a lawsuit to claim its right to develop oil/gas fields in the Timor Sea). However,
these challenges were ridden out without much political damage, aided by a dominant
parliamentary majority held by the ruling party led by Prime Minister Alkatiri.
3

Per capita GDP is estimated at about $415 in 2003, and more than 40 percent of the
population falls below the national poverty line. Although no official data are available,
unemployment and underemployment are estimated to be widespread, particularly among the
young.
4

Timorese coins were introduced in November 2003 to complement the U.S. dollar coins.
The new coins (comprising five denominations equivalent to 50 cents, quarter, dime, nickel,
and penny) are issued only in exchange for U.S. dollars and their introduction does not
change the basic nature of the existing monetary and exchange rate regime.

-5-

scope for monetary and exchange rate policies.5 However, it has been instrumental in
restoring financial confidence in the aftermath of the 1999 destruction, while reducing the
risk of fiscal instability through government borrowing from the monetary authority.
Box 1. Oil/Gas Resources
•

Major oil/gas fields: Timor-Leste’s oil/gas revenues are generated from the commercial
exploitation of oil/gas resources in the Timor Gap (an area of disputed sovereignty).¹ Major
oil/gas fields discovered to date include the Elang-Kakatua-Kakatua-North (EKKN), BayuUndan, and Great Sunrise fields. The EKKN field is estimated to contain small oil reserves (less
than 30 million barrels); the Bayu-Undan field, 370 million barrels of liquids (condensate and
LPG) and 2.7 trillion cubic feet of gas; and the Greater Sunrise field, 7.6 trillion cubic feet of gas.
With oil reserves in the EKKN field likely to be depleted in 2005 and the development of the
Greater Sunrise still uncertain, the Bayu-Undan field is currently expected to constitute the major
source of oil/gas revenues for Timor-Leste.

•

Bayu-Undan project: A development plan and production sharing contracts to exploit oil/gas
reserves in the Bayu-Undan field were agreed on May 16, 2003 between oil companies (led by
ConocoPhillips) and the Joint Commission representing Timor-Leste and Australia. The
development plan aims at producing both liquids and gas, with the latter to be transported to
Australia for downstream activities, including power generation and LNG production for Asian
markets. Following the development of the field since early 2000, the production of liquids started
in April 2004. The exploitation of oil/gas reserves in the field is estimated to provide Timor-Leste
with oil/gas revenues totaling $3.2 billion over a 20-year horizon (on the basis of an average
export price equivalent to a crude price of about $20 per barrel at 2002/03 prices).

•

Revenue sharing arrangement: The commercial exploitation of oil/gas resources in the Timor
Gap is governed by the Timor Sea Treaty signed between Timor-Leste and Australia on
May 20, 2002. Under the Treaty, the Timor Gap is partitioned into three areas: A (the Joint
Petroleum Development Area—JPDA); B (area under Australian jurisdiction), and C (area under
Timor-Leste jurisdiction). Oil/gas revenues in the JPDA are shared between Timor-Leste and
Australia with a 90/10 split. The Bayu-Undan field is located entirely in the JPDA, while the
Greater Sunrise field straddles the JPDA (about 20 percent of the field lies within the JPDA,
subject to the resolution of seabed boundaries between Timor-Leste and Australia).²

______________________________
1

The emergence of the Timor Gap goes back to 1972, when a treaty was signed between Australia and
Indonesia setting the permanent seabed boundary between the two countries. However, the treaty failed to
cover an area adjacent to then East Timor (the Timor Gap), as agreement could not reach with Portugal
(then administrative power governing East Timor) on the seabed boundary in that region.
2

The first round of discussions on seabed boundaries took place in April 2004, with the next round
scheduled for September 2004.
5

The monetary authority (Banking and Payments Authority—BPA) is an autonomous body
and performs all functions of a central bank except for monetary, interest, and exchange rate
policies.

-6-

4.
Fiscal operations are key to macroeconomic management. They consist of (i) the
central government budget (the Consolidated Fund for East Timor—CFET; Table 3) and
(ii) various reconstruction and development programs funded and undertaken by bilateral
donors and multilateral institutions outside the central government budget (non-CEFT fiscal
and quasi-fiscal operations). Total outlays under these CFET and non-CFET fiscal operations
(defined as “combined sources fiscal operations”) increased sharply in the aftermath of
the 1999 destruction, but have been falling substantially since then, as non-CFET
reconstruction-related programs have been winding down (Table 5).6
5.
The central government budget carries several features. These include (i) an
absence of borrowing (the lack of access to domestic borrowing combined with the
authorities’ policy to avoid external loans); (ii) heavy reliance on external cash grants for
budget financing; and (iii) an ad-hoc oil/gas saving policy (under which royalties are
automatically saved, with only tax revenues available for expenditure financing). Reflecting
limited revenues, external assistance has financed about one-half of government expenditures
to meet pressing reconstruction and development needs. The lack of budget financing
through borrowing, together with limited oil/gas revenues thus far, has contributed to
restraining an excessive expansion in expenditures. Fiscal policy, however, is expected to
face more serious challenges over the long term, as the resource constraint eases with a sharp
increase in oil/gas revenues. Such challenges include (i) the development of an expenditure
strategy consistent with macroeconomic and fiscal stability and (ii) the sound management of
oil/gas savings.
6.
Initial actions are being taken to address structural problems through the
implementation of the Road Map (Box 2). The Road Map focuses on strengthening
governance, promoting the development of a dynamic private sector, and building TimorLeste’s institutions and capacity. For the latter, key institutions (particularly the monetary
and fiscal agencies) have been restored since the devastation of 1999 and the government’s
capacity has been developed through (i) significant Fund technical assistance (Annex I),
(ii) the World Bank-supported Transition Support Programs (TSPs; Annex II), and
(iii) bilateral donor assistance. Nonetheless, Timor-Leste continues to depend heavily on
international experts for its daily administrative operations, and acceleration in institution and
capacity building remains a major challenge, especially in view of a further winding-down of
the UN-supported capacity building program.7
6

Data on non-CFET fiscal and quasi-fiscal operations, however, are incomplete and highly
preliminary.
7

Over the two years after independence, a UN-supported capacity-building program has
played a key role in funding key public administration posts (comprising 100 “core” posts
directed funded by UNMISET and 200 “development” posts jointly funded by UN and
bilateral and other donors). The number of posts supported by the program is to be reduced
by almost half (comprising 58 “most critical” posts and 99 “critical” posts) in FY2005/06.

-7-

Box 2. Road Map and Sector Investment Programs
•

The Road Map was developed in 2003 to set out an annual action plan for each ministry
through FY2006/07 to achieve main objectives of the National Development Plan (especially
higher growth and poverty alleviation) and the “stability” program; the latter was announced
in early 2003 to strengthen governance, create job opportunities, and improve government
service delivery. The implementation and funding of the Road Map have heavily depended
on international assistance (mainly through non-CFET operations).

•

The Road Map is expected to be replaced in FY2005/06 by the Sector Investment Programs
(SIPs), which cover 14 sectors, including primary sectors (especially, agriculture) and key
sectors relating to infrastructure (power, communications, and transport) and social services
(education and health). The SIPs, which are currently under preparation, are aimed at
(i) clarifying sectoral goals (including National Millennium Development Goals),
(ii) establishing comprehensive policies and strategies, and (iii) laying out essential
investment programs. As a way to secure funding from donors, SIPs are to be formally
integrated into the combined sources fiscal operations.

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
7.
Recent economic developments have been marked by a slowdown in growth, a
moderation in inflation, and a large, albeit declining, external current account deficit.
•

Real GDP is estimated to have declined by 3 percent in 2003, following a sharp
recovery in the aftermath of the 1999 destruction (Figure 1 and Table 2). The
slowdown reflects the adverse impact of the winding-down of the international
presence, compounded by a fall in agricultural production due to droughts.

•

Inflationary pressures have been waning in recent months. CPI inflation declined to
4 percent (year-on-year) in April 2004, after hovering around 8–10 percent during
late 2002 to mid-2003, owing to a drought-induced scarcity of agricultural goods.

•

The external current account excluding official transfers remains in large deficit,
but the deficit is narrowing (to about $230 million or 65 percent of GDP in 2003),
reflecting a further reduction in imports (Table 7). Exports remain little changed, with
coffee exports (the principal export item) estimated at about two-thirds of their peak
level prior to the 1999 destruction due to still weak international prices.

•

The development of the Bayu-Undan oil/gas field was adversely affected by
technical problems during the second half of 2003, generating expectations that
oil/gas production may be delayed substantially. However, the situation has improved
since then, with production starting in April 2004. Nonetheless, oil/gas production in
the first few years is still estimated to be substantially lower than projected a year
ago.

-8-

8.
The central government budget for FY2003/04 (fiscal year: July–June) was
tightened during the mid-year budget review (November 2003). This reflected
(i) emerging concerns about potential shortfalls in oil/gas revenues,8 and (ii) a rapid increase
in expenditures (mainly for vehicle purchases and maintenance, domestic and overseas
travel, and the hiring of temporary staff) due to less stringent expenditure control during the
first four months of the year. In response, total expenditure was cut by 1.5 percent of GDP
and expenditure control was tightened (Table 3).9
9.
The fiscal outturn thus far, however, points to a considerably smaller overall
deficit for FY2003/04. During the first three quarters of the year, total revenue exceeded the
revised budget projection by about one-third, owing mainly to a shift in import composition
toward goods subject to duties (particularly higher excises), a strengthening of tax
administration,10 and buoyant oil/gas revenues; the latter reflected higher-than expected
international oil prices and more stringent revenue collections from oil/gas companies. Total
expenditure was about 15 percent below the revised budget target (on a commitment basis),
as a result of the continued slow recruitment of civil servants and delays in the
implementation of capital projects, combined with tightening of expenditure control. On the
basis of these developments, the overall deficit for FY2003/04 as a whole is estimated at
4½ percent of GDP, about half of that envisaged during the mid-year budget review.
10.
Reform measures have been taken to strengthen the power authority, but its
financial position remains weak. After initial delays, the installment of prepayment meters
has been accelerated in recent months, reaching 75 percent of the target by end-April.11 Also
the power authority has been placed under an externally-contracted new management team
since March 2004. However, total bill collections were 30 percent below target through
March 2004 and are estimated to fall short of the annual target by more than 20 percent. The
shortfall is estimated to be largely covered by unbudgeted external assistance and no
additional budgetary appropriations would be required.
8

The shortfalls, estimated at about 5 percent of GDP, reflect a number of ad-hoc factors
unexpected during the FY2003/04 budget preparation, including tax refunding due to the
retroactive application of changes in the tax arrangement following the finalization of the
Bayu-Undan project.
9

The expenditure cuts fell mainly on wages and salaries (due to slow recruitment of civil
servants) and appropriations for less essential expenditures.
10

This reflects improved compilation of tax information as a result of the adoption of the
SIGTAS and ASYCUDA systems, increased efforts to strengthen compliance by large
taxpayers, and tighter border control.
11

The installment of prepayment meters covers about one-fourth of the customer base, with
the remaining customers continuing to be billed under the conventional meters.

-9-

11.
The expansion of the banking system continues, although its activity remains
largely confined to the Dili area. Bank deposits increased to 23 percent of GDP by endMarch 2004, as a third commercial bank commenced operations in mid-2003 and microfinancing operations gained momentum (Table 6). Although a substantial portion of deposits
continue to be invested abroad, bank lending (mainly to the construction and trading sectors)
has started to pick up since mid-2003, reflecting the adoption of a more active lending policy
by one of the commercial banks. Despite the increase, the amount of nonperforming loans
has remained modest (about 1 percent of total lending). Steps have been taken under MFD
technical assistance to prepare a payments law to address risks associated with the payments
system and develop an insurance law to foster insurance activities, as well as build a
framework for insurance supervision.
12.
Progress has been made in implementing structural measures relating to private
sector development and institution and capacity building. A commercial code and a
company law were enacted as initial steps to establish a legal and regulatory framework for
business activity. A policy paper on private investment was placed for public consultation in
last November and draft domestic and foreign investment laws have been submitted to the
Council of Ministers. Following the enactment of a basic law for land ownership in
early 2003, draft laws for (i) leasing of private and public land and (ii) land and property
dispute mediation are currently being reviewed by the Council of Ministers for enactment by
mid-2004. To strengthen institutions and capacity (particularly those relating to governance
and service delivery), actions are being taken in the context of the World Bank-supported
Second Transition Support Program (TSP II). However, progress has been slow in the area of
governance, especially the judiciary.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
13.
In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation, Directors underscored the
importance of strengthening growth prospects and alleviating widespread poverty. To
this end, they stressed the need for actions to foster private sector development and further
build Timor-Leste’s institutions and capacity. Supporting the current U.S. dollar-based
monetary and exchange rate regime, they indicated that fiscal policy should bear the major
burden in sustaining macroeconomic stability. In particular, they encouraged the authorities
to develop a long-term fiscal strategy to make the best use of the increasing oil/gas revenues
to promote growth, while safeguarding a sound fiscal position. The authorities were in broad
agreement with the Executive Board’s recommendations, and have been taking steps in line
with them. However, progress has been relatively slow, especially in the implementation of
structural measures to strengthen growth and build institutions, due mainly to severe capacity
constraints. The mission’s discussions continued to center on the macroeconomic and
structural policy issues raised by the Executive Board, stressing the importance of early
implementation of necessary policy measures.

- 10 -

A. Economic Outlook
14.
The short-term outlook is for a gradual recovery in economic activity. Real GDP
is projected to show a modest upturn (1 percent) in 2004, as agricultural production is
expected to recover with the return of normal weather conditions, offsetting the impact of a
further winding-down of the international presence (Table 8). Inflation is projected to
moderate to 3 percent by end-2004 barring major external shocks. Over the medium term, it
is possible that real GDP growth could accelerate to 5 percent, with inflation contained
within low single digits, as envisaged by the National Development Plan (NDP).
15.
The mission stressed that strong policy actions will be required for this outlook
to materialize. Key to the projected acceleration in growth will be the early completion and
effective implementation of the Sector Investment Programs (SIPs; Box 2) underpinned by
appropriate funding arrangements. In particular, the mission reiterated the importance of
developing the agricultural sector (through improved productivity of food production and the
expansion in cash crop production) in view of its potentially significant contributions to
alleviating poverty. The increase in public investment should be accompanied by steps to
foster business activity (¶26–27) and further strengthen institutions and capacity (¶28–30). At
the same time, the mission stressed that the maintenance of a prudent fiscal policy will be
critical to limit pressures on nontraded goods prices and avoid further erosion in external
competitiveness (¶16–19).12 Sharing the mission’s view, the authorities indicated their
intention to complete the SIPs by end-August 2004 for implementation starting FY2005/06.
B. Near- and Medium-Term Budget Management
Central government budget estimates for FY2004/05–FY2007/08
16.
Central government budget estimates for FY2004/05 and three-year forward
projections through FY2007/08 are marked by a major tightening of expenditure
policy. Total expenditure is budgeted to be compressed by 12 percent, on average, in
comparison with the November 2003 mid-year budget review estimates (Box 3 and Table 4).
The authorities indicated that the expenditure compression is aimed at narrowing the
significant financing gaps that were projected during the mid-year budget review due to a
substantial weakening in the outlook of oil/gas revenues. They emphasized that the budgeted
expenditure cuts are also appropriate in view of (i) the need to safeguard against large
downside risks to oil/gas revenues despite their improved outlook (the third bullet point in
12

No comprehensive official data relating to external competitiveness, including wages, are
available. However, anecdotal information suggests that the average wage rate in the formal
sector in Dili is relatively high in comparison with neighboring countries at a similar stage of
development, although the increase in wages has leveled off since the winding-down of UN
operations. The computation of the real exchange rate is constrained by the absence of
reliable trade data.

- 11 -

Box 3. Budget Estimates for FY2004/05-FY2007/08
•

Total expenditure is budgeted to be compressed by 12 percent, on average, compared with
expenditure projections for FY2004/05–FY2006/07 that were made during the 2003 midyear budget review (Table 4). Expenditure compression is aimed at (i) narrowing the significant
financing gaps ($125 million or 11 percent of GDP per year, on average) that was projected
during the mid-year budget review due mainly to an expected delay in oil/gas production (¶6), and
(ii) safeguarding against large downside risks to oil/gas revenues (see below).

•

The expenditure cuts are expected to fall primarily on appropriations for less essential
goods and services, including fuels, vehicle maintenance, and office equipment. Capital
expenditures are also budgeted to be reduced, although efforts were made to broadly maintain
their share in total expenditure. Wages and salaries are subject to the least cuts, but are allowed to
increase only modestly.

•

Total revenue is budgeted to be more than 45 percent higher, on average, than projected
during the 2003 mid-year budget review. This is primarily attributable to an improved outlook
for oil/gas revenues, reflecting an upward revision of the production profile, higher international
oil prices, and a smaller deduction for depreciation.¹ However, the revenue estimates are subject
to significant downside risks, as the tax arrangement is characterized by large fluctuations in
income tax in response to a change in oil/gas production and prices.² Domestic revenues are also
expected to be better than earlier anticipated (by 16 percent, on average) due partly to improved
tax administration.

•

On the basis of these revenue and expenditure projections, the overall fiscal position is
projected to improve substantially, although some financing gaps still remain. Given large
donor grants already committed for FY2004/05, together with CFET cash balances available, no
financing gap is expected for the coming fiscal year. However, financing gaps totaling about
$30 million (3 percent of GDP per year, on average) are expected for the following three years, if
the current oil/gas saving policy, as well as CFET cash balances sufficient to cushion against
temporary fluctuations in revenues, are to be maintained.

•

The financing gaps, however, are expected to be largely covered by further donor budgetary
support. At the meeting held in Dili during May 17–18, 2004, donors indicated that they would
extend their budgetary support for another two years through FY2006/07. The assistance will
continue to be provided under the World Bank-supported TSPs, which have also been extended
through FY2006/07.³
______________________________
1

Official estimates of oil/gas revenues incorporate (i) relatively conservatives oil prices (about $24 barrel) and
(ii) a 15 percent discount of baseline projections to provide the budget with an adequate cushion against
unforeseen declines in oil/gas production and prices.
2

The authorities’ estimates show that a decline in oil prices by $2 per barrel from the baseline projections,
combined with a fall in oil/gas production by about 15 percent, would reduce total oil/gas revenues over the
next four years by 40 percent, with the reduction accounted for largely by tax revenues.
3

Donors are expected to make formal pledges for additional budgetary support (as well as non-budgetary
assistance) at a meeting scheduled for mid-2005. At present, budgetary support is committed only through
FY2004/05, which was previously viewed as the last “lean year” before the Bayu-Undan project comes on
stream.

- 12 -

Box 3) and (ii) ministries’ limited capacity for effective expenditure execution. At the same
time, however, the authorities recognized the adverse impact of the expenditure cuts on the
economy, especially in view of weak business activity and pressing needs for government
services for economic reconstruction and development. They stressed that expenditure
estimates over the medium term will be reviewed, as necessary, to ensure an adequate level
of government services in accordance with the availability of budgetary resources and
improvement in expenditure execution.
17.
While supporting the budget estimates, the mission stressed a number of
prerequisites for these estimates to be credible. In particular, there should be rigorous
efforts to prioritize expenditures over the medium term in order to safeguard essential
government services, especially for education and health. Prioritization should be
accompanied by efforts to strengthen budget execution and ensure the timely delivery of
government services, particularly in rural areas.13 Also, containment of wages and salaries
within the budget estimates will require the authorities to adhere strictly to the current ceiling
on the total number of civil servants and avoid a major increase in the wage rate. The
authorities concurred with the mission’s view and indicated that necessary steps will be taken
to meet the budget targets.
18.
The mission expressed concern about the low level of budget estimates for
capital expenditures, which may not be compatible with the growth objectives set by the
NDP. The authorities shared the mission’s concern, but noted that the increase in capital
expenditures is severely constrained by the government’s capacity for project preparation and
implementation. While urging the authorities to step up their efforts to improve ministries’
absorption capacity, the mission underscored the importance of actions, in the interim, to
secure adequate public investment through capital projects undertaken by bilateral donors
and multilateral institutions. Accordingly, the mission encouraged the authorities to move
forward swiftly to finalize the SIPs as planned, so as to mobilize donor support for capital
projects.
19.
The authorities stressed significant downside risks to oil/gas revenues and a
possibility that the financing gaps could be larger than budgeted. While sharing the
authorities’ concern, the mission noted the cautious nature of official oil/gas revenue
projections (footnote 1 in Box 3) and the substantial amount of government cash balances
available for budget financing. Should downside risks materialize and donor assistance fall
short of closing the financing gaps, the mission advised the authorities to consider additional
financing measures in view of the limited scope for further cuts in expenditures or increases
in domestic tax revenues. These measures would include a change in the present oil/gas
13

Under the World Bank-supported TSPs, efforts have been made to improve expenditure
execution. These efforts focus on improvements in procurement services, procedures for
expenditure authorization, budget planning for capital projects, and line ministries’ capacity
for service delivery.

- 13 -

saving policy to permit the increased use of oil/gas revenues (a flexible oil/gas saving
policy)14 and a cautious relaxation of the current non-external borrowing policy to allow
concessional loans. The latter option would not be inappropriate, as long as concessional
loans are a cheaper source of funding (in comparison with the use of oil/gas revenues) and
limited to fund mainly capital projects consistent with the government’s absorption capacity.
The authorities indicated that their preference would be for the increased use of oil/gas
revenues, and they would remain cautious about external borrowing.
Power sector issues
20.
The mission stressed that further efforts will be necessary to improve the power
authority’s financial position. Notwithstanding the installment of prepayment meters and
expected improvement in the authority’s management under the new external management
team, there are risks that revenue collections may remain below budgeted over the medium
term. This reflects a possibility that progress can be made only gradually in improving the
existing billing system and enforcing measures against nonpayment by customers who are
still billed under the conventional meters. The mission stressed, and the authorities agreed,
that rigorous implementation of the reform measures (including the planned installment of
additional prepayment meters), combined with stringent oversight of the external
management contract, will be critical to prevent further overruns in budgetary allocations to
the power authority.
C. Long-Term Fiscal Strategy and Management of Oil/Gas Revenues
21.
The mission underscored the urgent need for establishing a long-term fiscal
strategy to ensure the productive use of oil/gas wealth while safeguarding fiscal
stability. The key policy issue for such a strategy is what would be an appropriate level of
fiscal expenditure over the long term to achieve these objectives. To address the issue, which
is closely associated with the saving policy for oil/gas wealth, the mission updated the longterm fiscal scenario that was presented to the authorities for discussion during the 2003
Article IV consultation and reiterated major caveats associated with the scenario. Among
them is that part of oil/gas wealth should be used to meet pressing investment needs for
infrastructure and human capital development in order to achieve the growth objectives set
under the NDP. However, an unduly expansionary fiscal program aimed at more ambitious
growth objectives should be avoided in view of risks associated with public investment until
the government’s absorptive capacity improves substantially.
14

The FY2004/05 budget projects that oil/gas saving would reach almost $130 million (about
180 percent of recurrent expenditure) by end-FY2007/08 under the current oil/gas saving
policy (Table 4). Together with the conservative oil price assumption used for the budget
estimates, this would provide the authorities with a financial cushion large enough to ride out
an oil price shock, as long as oil prices do not fall below $20 per barrel for a prolonged
period.

- 14 -

22.
Based on these caveats, the mission’s scenario suggests that government
expenditure should be restrained to around 20 percent of GDP over the long term
(Annex V). The containment of expenditure at this level would permit Timor-Leste to
preserve about 85 percent of oil/gas wealth in financial assets for future generations.15 This
scenario depends on oil/gas prices and the return on financial savings, as well as a number of
policy assumptions. The latter includes: (i) actions to increase non-oil/gas tax revenues to
supplement oil/gas revenues; and (ii) strong efforts to restrain recurrent expenditures to
provide appropriate funding for capital expenditures. The authorities were in broad
agreement with the thrust of the scenario, and indicated that efforts will be stepped up to
build a national consensus to address the issues, especially with regard to the size of oil/gas
wealth to be saved for future generations; this will be done in tandem with the establishment
of a petroleum fund.
23.
The authorities indicated that a petroleum fund will be established by June 2005
to manage oil/gas savings in a sound manner. They acknowledged a delay in the timetable
for the fund partly due to their limited capacity. The mission strongly supported the
authorities’ intention to base the petroleum fund on a Norwegian model (as recommended by
the October 2002 FAD technical assistance mission)16 and noted the Fund’s commitment to
assist Timor-Leste in establishing the fund through providing a long-term resident advisor.
The authorities were reminded that the key principle of a Norwegian model is to ensure
transparency and accountability in the management of the fund17 and that prudent
expenditure policy is the principal prerequisite for the effective functioning of the fund
(Annex VI).
D. Financial Sector Issues
24.
The authorities expressed their intention to maintain the current monetary and
exchange rate regime for the foreseeable future. While recognizing that the current regime
complicates relative price adjustments, they consider that it is appropriate under the present
15

This size of oil/gas wealth drawn down is smaller than the one discussed during the 2003
Article IV consultation (about one-third of oil/gas wealth). The reduction reflects greater
uncertainty about progress in developing Timor-Leste’s absorption capacity.
16

Key recommendations included (i) the use of a petroleum fund solely to finance fiscal
deficits through the rigorous budgetary process, (ii) the avoidance of rigid, pre-determined
saving rules for oil/gas revenues, (iii) the appointment of a high level council to supervise
operations of the fund, and (iv) the establishment of an investment advisory committee.
17

With oil/gas production in the Bayu-Undan field expected to start in 2004, the authorities
participated in the London conference on the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) in June 2003. While indicating their support for the new initiative, the authorities have
yet to make a formal decision as to their participation in the EITI.

- 15 -

circumstances, particularly given the limited institutional capacity, the lack of sufficient
official reserves, and the absence of well-developed financial markets (including the foreign
exchange market). Accordingly, they would consider the introduction of a national currency
only after these institutional and financial constraints have been substantially eased. The
authorities agreed to the staff’s view that, given the constraints on relative price adjustments,
issues relating to external competitiveness should be addressed primarily through fiscal and
labor market policies.
25.
The authorities recognize that further improvement in financial intermediation
remains important despite recent increases in domestic bank lending. They attribute
limited financial intermediation to the absence of viable lending opportunities and the
underdeveloped legal system to safeguard the recovery of bank loans. Accordingly, the
authorities’ efforts will continue to focus on strengthening the legal and regulatory
framework to foster business activity (¶26–27) and facilitate loan recovery, while avoiding
recourse to administrative measures to artificially promote bank lending. The mission
underscored the importance of continued stringent supervision by the monetary authority of
bank lending to ensure that bank portfolios remain sound. The authorities indicated their
intention to (i) move forward swiftly to enact the payments and insurance laws, and
(ii) prepare necessary legislation through Fund technical assistance to combat money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
E. Private Sector Development
26.
The authorities recognize the critical role played by the private sector in
improving growth prospects and alleviating poverty. They indicated that a key step to
foster increased private sector activity will be to improve infrastructure, particularly the road
network, which will go a long way toward broadening the domestic market, especially for
agricultural products. At the same time, efforts will be stepped up to enact economic
legislation (particularly, domestic and foreign investment laws, and land and land-related
regulations) to set out a basic regulatory framework for business activity. The mission
encouraged the authorities to work toward early parliamentary approval of these laws and
regulations.
27.
The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to maintain a liberal trade and
investment regime.18 For the latter, they stressed that the draft domestic and foreign
investment laws are designed to incorporate key provisions to ensure a liberal environment to
18

Timor-Leste maintains an open trade regime. Under the present regime, the import duty is
limited to a uniform 6 percent, which is applicable to all imports except for a number of
selected items (e.g., cigarettes and alcohol), as well as those undertaken by UNMISET and
associated with bilateral assistance programs. No imports are subject to quotas, licenses,
bans, and other forms of quantitative restrictions, although the importation of certain
categories of goods is banned for health and security reasons.

- 16 -

potential investors. These include nondiscrimination between domestic and foreign investors,
the adoption of a one stop-shop approval procedure, free repatriation of profits, and the
avoidance of establishing special areas reserved only for domestic producers. The draft
investment laws, however, incorporate tax incentives linked to the size of employment as a
way to promote labor-intensive business activity. The mission noted the general
ineffectiveness of such tax incentives and potentially large revenue losses, and encouraged
the authorities to remove the tax measures from the laws. The authorities expressed their
commitment to avoid the introduction of populist measures (including a minimum wage
scheme for workers and administrative determination of prices of essential goods) despite
continued political pressures.
F. Institution and Capacity Building
28.
The mission underscored the critical importance of strengthening key economic
institutions and capacity for Timor-Leste’s development. This is becoming all the more
urgent in view of a further scale-back in the UN-supported capacity building program (see
footnote 7 in ¶6). The cut-back is expected to hit particularly hard the Ministry of Planning
and Finance (MOPF) and, to a lesser extent, the Banking and Payments Authority (BPA),
which have relied heavily on UN-supported international experts for their daily operations.
29.
Against this background, the mission urged the MOPF and BPA to intensify
their efforts for institution and capacity building. With regard to the MOPF, the mission
underscored the importance of expeditiously implementing the medium-term capacity
development program worked out jointly by the World Bank and the Fund. Key components
of the program include appointment of a non-political “Director General” who will assume
responsibility for day-to-day institution development matters, strengthening of the recently
established human resources management unit, and appointment and training of local
counterparts to all internationals in line positions. In the interim, the mission encouraged the
authorities to retain an adequate number of international experts to avoid disruption in the
MOPF’s operations. As for the BPA, the mission encouraged the authorities to “Timorize”
senior positions of the monetary authorities, with international experts playing an advisory
role, as recommended by a recent MFD technical assistance mission. The authorities
indicated that an East-Timorese staff will be appointed General Manager starting FY2004/05,
to be followed by Timorization of other senior positions in due course.
30.
The authorities expressed their commitment to move forward with further
actions for institution and capacity building under the TSP III. These actions will
continue to focus on (i) governance and (ii) service delivery (particularly for education and
health). The former will center on strengthening legal and institutional frameworks for the
judiciary, public sector personnel management, and public expenditure management.
G. Other Issues
31.
The mission urged the authorities to step up their efforts to improve
macroeconomic data. Data problems are especially serious in the areas of national accounts

- 17 -

and the balance of payments where no official statistics are currently available (Annex IV).
The mission stressed the need for increased staffing for the Statistics Division of MOPF and
the early initiation of data compilation relating to sectoral production and external
transactions, to build on the enactment last August of the statistics law. While agreeing with
the mission’s view, the authorities noted that the lack of qualified staff poses a severe
constraint and that continued Fund technical assistance remains important.
32.
The mission reviewed developments in the exchange and trade system since the
last Article IV consultation. Timor-Leste has accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4, effective the date of its membership in the Fund. Timor-Leste maintains
an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions.19
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
33.
Following the impressive recovery from the severe post-referendum destruction,
Timor-Leste’s economic activity has weakened significantly. Real GDP fell in 2003 and is
expected to recover only modestly in 2004, reflecting a continued winding-down of the
international presence. Inflation, however, has moderated partly in response to a continued
cautious fiscal management. Also, encouraging initial progress has been made in addressing
the country’s deep-rooted structural problems.
34.
With the economic slowdown reinforcing widespread poverty and serious
underemployment, there is an urgent need to strengthen the country’s growth
prospects. This would foremost require a significant stepping-up in the authorities’ efforts to
develop a dynamic private sector and strengthen Timor-Leste’s institutions and capacity.
These efforts should be accompanied by the productive use of growing oil/gas revenues over
the long term to fund essential government services, especially for infrastructure and human
capital, while sustaining macroeconomic stability.
35.
Notwithstanding the difficult economic situation, fiscal policy has remained
prudent. The FY2003/04 budget was tightened at the mid-year budget review in response to
perceived weaknesses in oil/gas revenues. A significant expenditure compression was also
incorporated into the FY2004/05 budget and the three-year forward fiscal projections to
narrow sizeable financing gaps projected over the medium term, as well as to safeguard
against potential downside risks to oil/gas revenues.
36.
While the authorities are commended for the recent fiscal adjustments, followup actions are essential to make the adjustment credible and minimize its adverse
impact. In particular, it is important to ensure that the expenditure cuts will not jeopardize
Timor-Leste’s development process and that essential government services, especially for
infrastructure and social services, will be safeguarded. To this end, expenditure composition
19

Timor-Leste’s exchange system is summarized in Annex VII.

- 18 -

should be kept under constant review to ensure appropriate prioritization; increases in wages
and salaries need to be restrained; and budget execution should be improved substantially to
ensure the timely delivery of government services. For the latter, it is essential for ministries
to improve their capacity to execute capital projects in support of the achievement of TimorLeste’s growth objectives.
37.
Despite the significant expenditure adjustment, some financing gaps still remain
over the medium term. Although these gaps are likely to be narrowed substantially by
continued donor assistance, consideration should be given to additional steps particularly in
the event financing gaps prove to be larger than projected. In view of the limited scope for
further fiscal adjustment, such steps would comprise largely financing measures, including
the modification of the existing oil/gas saving policy consistent or relaxation of the current
non-external borrowing policy to tap concessional loans. Although the authorities are
commended for their cautious approach to external borrowing, the suggested policy change
merits consideration as long as concessional loans constitute a cheaper source of funding
(than the use of oil/gas revenues) and are limited to fund mainly capital projects consistent
with the government’s absorption capacity.
38.
Ensuring the productive use of growing oil/gas revenues while maintaining a
sound macroeconomic environment remains a major policy challenge for the
authorities over the long term. To this end, the authorities are urged to develop a long-term
fiscal strategy that sets out an appropriate level of government expenditure. Such a strategy
should address the need to improve infrastructure and human capital to accelerate growth and
alleviate poverty, consistent with Timor-Leste’s absorption capacity, while at the same time
securing a sound fiscal position in the long run. Given uncertainty over the improvement in
absorption capacity at present, however, the authorities are cautioned against embarking on
an unduly large public investment program, and encouraged to save a major portion of
oil/gas wealth in financial assets for future generations.
39.
With the Bayu-Undan oil/gas project coming on stream, it is important that a
petroleum fund be established swiftly in time for increased inflows of oil/gas revenues.
The authorities are therefore urged to step up their efforts to make the fund operational by
mid-2005, as currently planned. The authorities’ intention to base the fund on a Norwegian
model, which is designed to ensure transparency and accountability in the management of
oil/gas savings, deserves strong support. The staff stresses that the maintenance of a prudent
fiscal policy is a critical prerequisite for the effective functioning of the fund.
40.
Progress has been made in implementing key reform measures toward
improving the financial position of the power authority. However, risks remain that
revenue collections continue to be constrained by deep-rooted problems associated with
nonpayment and the existing billing system. Therefore, rigorous implementation of the
reform measures, combined with stringent oversight of the external management contract, is
critical.

- 19 -

41.
The current monetary and exchange rate regime provides an appropriate
cornerstone for macroeconomic management in view of the existing institutional and
financial constraints. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to defer the introduction
of a national currency until these constraints have substantially been eased. Given the limited
scope for relative price adjustments under the current regime, prudent fiscal and wage
policies are critical to forestall an erosion in external competitiveness. The recent increase in
bank lending is a welcome development toward improved financial intermediation. At the
same time, it calls for the monetary authority to remain vigilant over bank portfolios to keep
them sound.
42.
Timor-Leste’s progress in improving growth prospects and alleviating poverty
hinges critically on the development of a dynamic private sector. Key to this objective is
improvement in infrastructure through the effective implementation of a public investment
program, combined with the early establishment of a clear regulatory framework for business
activity. For the latter, efforts need to be stepped up to secure early enactment of key
legislation, including domestic and foreign investment laws. The authorities are commended
for their continued commitment to maintain a liberal trade and investment regime. The staff
welcomes the generally liberal nature of the draft domestic and foreign investment laws, but
the authorities are cautioned against the introduction of tax incentives to promote investment.
43.
There is an urgent need to intensify the authorities’ efforts to strengthen nascent
institutions and develop local capacity. The urgency has been heightened by a further
scale-back in the UN-supported capacity building program. Given this outlook, early actions
should be taken to implement a medium-term capacity building program for the MOPF. The
monetary authority is encouraged to move forward with “Timorization” of the remaining
senior positions. The staff welcomes the authorities’ commitment to further build TimorLeste’s institutions and capacity under the Bank-supported TSP III.
44.
Improvement in macroeconomic data remains critical. The effective monitoring
of the economic situation and timely policy decisions remain seriously hampered by the lack
of data, especially on national accounts and balance of payments. To build on the enactment
of the statistics law, the authorities are therefore urged to take initial steps to compile data on
sectoral production and external transactions. Actions also need to be taken to strengthen
training of staff and increase its number for the Statistics Division of MOPF.
45.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Timor-Leste be held on
the standard 12-month cycle.

- 20 -

Figure 1. Timor Leste: Selected Economic Indicators

Output remains weak, after a rapid
expansion in the previous years...
500

...while inflation shows signs of
moderation, after accelerating sharply.
500

Real GDP
(in millions of US dollars)

14

Proj.

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

16

2004

Bank deposits are growing further as a third
commercial bank commenced operations...

16
Consumer Prices, April 2001-April 2004
(12-month percentage change)

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4
Apr-01

-4
Apr-02

Apr-03

Apr-04

...and the external current account deficit is narrowing,
although it remains large.
85

400

75

350

65

65

300

300

55

55

250

250

45

45

200

200

35

35

150

150

25

25

100

100

15

50

85

Bank Deposits, December 2000-March 2004
(in millions of US dollars)
Bank Deposits and Bank

75

15
Dec-00

Dec-01

Dec-02

35

Revenues, July 2003-March 2004
(in millions of US dollars)

30

80

400
350

50
1999

Dec-03

Revenue collections are significantly
higher than budget estimates...
35

External Current Account Deficit
(excluding official transfers, in millions of US dollars)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

...while expenditures are running
below budget estimates.
Government Expenditure, July 2003-March 2004
(in millions of US dollars)

80

30
Actual
Pro-rata budget estimates

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
Domestic
revenues

Direct taxes

Indirect
taxes

Non-tax

Oil/gas
revenues

60

60

Actual
Pro-rata budget estimates

40

40

20

20

0

0
Total
expenditure

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities and Fund Staff estimates.

Wages and
salaries

Goods and
services

Capital

- 21 -

Table 1. Timor-Leste: Selected Social Indicators 1/
East Asia
and Pacific
island
countries

TimorLeste

Per capita income (U.S. dollars, 2003)
Area (in thousands of square kilometers)

Low
income
countries

415

1,267

432

15

…

…

Demography
Total population (in thousands)
Population growth (in percent)

825
1.9 2/

Life expectancy and mortality
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Male
Female
Infant mortality (per thousand live births)
Male
Female
Under 5 mortality rate (per thousand live births)
Male
Female

1,838,371
1

2,495,033
2

57
56
59
80
88
72
144
156
132

69
68
71
33
…
…
41
…
…

59
58
60
81
...
...
115
...
...

Education
Illiteracy rate (in percent) 3/
Male
Female
Net primary school enrollment rate (in percent)

57
57
57
76

13
7
18
93

37
28
47
74

Health
Number of hospitals (per thousand)
Number of doctors (per thousand)
Number of nurses (per thousand)

0.5
0.2
1.4

…
…
…

...
...
...

Other indicators
The population below the poverty line 4/
Households with access to electricity 4/
Households with access to drinking water 4/

41
36
65

29
…
75

...
...
76

Sources: UNDP Human Development Report 2003, World Bank, and Fund staff estimates.
1/
2/
3/
4/

Relate to 2002, unless otherwise indicated.
Average rate for the 1990s.
Relates to the population of ages 15 and above.
In percentage share of the total.

- 22 -

Table 2. Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004
1999

Output and prices
GNP at current prices (in millions of U.S. dollars)
GDP
Oil/gas income
Real GDP growth (percentage change)
Inflation (percentage change at end-period) 1/2/

2000

270
270
0
-35
140

2001
Est.

329
321
8
15
3

2002

400
387
13
15
0

2003

397
381
17
3
10

2004
Proj.

372
341
31
-3
4

370
328
42
1
4

(In percent of GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 3/
Gross national savings
External savings

21
-13
34

33
-53
85

31
-47
78

29
-43
73

27
-32
60

24
-21
45

Government budget (CFET) 4/
Revenues
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

7.7
4.0
3.7
14.5
8.4
6.1
-6.8

8.1
5.3
2.8
13.7
10.7
3.0
-5.5

13.5
5.3
8.2
19.6
15.6
4.0
-6.1

17.7
8.2
9.5
22.1
19.0
3.1
-4.4

20.4
7.0
13.4
22.8
19.7
3.1
-2.4

Combined sources fiscal operations 4/5/
Revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

...
...
...
...
...

8
122
96
26
-114

9
121
97
23
-111

15
105
82
22
-90

19
91
72
19
-72

22
79
62
17
-56

Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 6/
Net domestic assets (end-period)

48
47

6
-4

13
-4

14
-9

21
-11

23
-18

-230
43
-195
7
-203
18

-170
40
-158
8
-167
17

-67
13
-57
2
-59
5

-52
12
-48
3
-51
5

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/8/
Merchandise imports 7/
Overall balance

-92
6
-67
52
-119
0

-279
48
-235
5
-240
16

-309
54
-264
4
-268
8

-292
44
-245
6
-251
20

(In percent of GDP)
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/8/
Merchandise imports 7/
Overall balance

-34
2
-25
19
-44
0

-87
15
-73
2
-75
5

-80
14
-68
1
-69
2

-77
12
-64
2
-66
5

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Rupiah-based CPI for Dili through 2000 and, thereafter, dollar-based CPI for Dili.
2/ The figure for 2004 relates to April.
3/ Excludes investment relating to the oil/gas sector.
4/ On the basis of fiscal year (July-June); for example, 2000 relates to FY2000/01.
5/ Include fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international financial institutions outside
the central government budget.
6/ Figures after 1999 exclude currency holdings by the public, on which no data are available. The figure for 2004 relates to March.
7/ Figures before 2000 include unrecorded border trade.
8/ Excludes oil/gas revenues, which are recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues).

- 23 -

Table 3. Timor-Leste: Central Government Budget Operations (CFET), FY2000/01-FY2003/04 1/

FY2000/01

FY2001/02

FY2002/03

Budget

FY2003/04
Revised 2/

Est. 3/

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Revenue

27.1

31.3

48.8

59.8

45.1

59.3

Domestic revenues
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Nontax revenues and other

14.1
0.6
11.6
1.9

20.5
5.4
12.7
2.4

19.3
5.3
11.7
2.3

17.6
4.7
10.2
2.7

20.3
5.4
11.8
3.1

27.5
6.1
16.9
4.5

Oil/gas revenues
Tax revenues
Royalties and interest
Royalties
Interest

13.1
9.9
3.1
3.0
0.1

10.8
6.5
4.3
4.2
0.1

29.5
26.4
3.1
3.0
0.1

42.2
29.3
12.9
12.3
0.6

24.8
17.1
7.7
7.6
0.1

31.8
27.2
4.6
4.5
0.1

51.3
29.6
13.9
15.7
21.7

52.6
41.1
18.8
22.2
11.5

70.8
56.2
21.9
34.3
14.5

79.1
66.8
27.0
39.8
12.3

74.6
64.2
26.1
38.1
10.4

74.1
63.7
25.6
38.1
10.4

-24.2

-21.3

-22.0

-19.3

-29.5

-14.8

24.2
31.6
-4.2
-3.1
-0.1
0.0

21.3
22.7
2.7
-4.3
0.2
0.0

22.0
32.5
-8.6
-3.1
1.1
0.0

19.3
28.0
4.2
-12.9
0.0
0.0

29.6
33.8
3.5
-7.7
0.0
0.0

14.8
35.6
-16.2
-4.6
0.0
0.0

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Capital expenditure
Overall balance
Financing
Grants 4/
Changes in CFET cash balances (increase -)
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -) 5/
Other
Financing gap

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
O/w: Tax revenues

7.7
4.0
3.7
2.8

8.1
5.3
2.8
1.7

13.5
5.3
8.2
7.3

18.0
5.3
12.7
8.8

13.5
6.1
7.4
5.1

17.7
8.2
9.5
8.1

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure

14.5
8.4
6.1

13.7
10.7
3.0

19.6
15.6
4.0

23.9
20.1
3.7

22.3
19.2
3.1

22.2
19.0
3.1

Overall balance
Financing
Financing gap

-6.8
6.8
0.0

-5.5
5.5
0.0

-6.1
6.1
0.0

-5.8
5.8
0.0

-8.8
8.8
0.0

-4.4
4.4
0.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
Cumulative oil/gas savings (end-period)
(In percent of recurrent expenditure)
CFET cash balances (end-period) 6/
Appropriations to the power authority
Non-oil overall fiscal balance
(In percent of GDP)

3.1
10.6
8.9
8.4
-37.3
-10.5

7.4
18.1
6.3
6.7
-32.0
-8.3

10.5
18.7
14.8
8.4
-51.4
-14.3

22.4
33.6
6.0
6.8
-61.5
-18.6

18.3
28.4
11.3
6.8
-54.3
-16.2

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year: July-June.
2/ Revised estimates made during the mid-year budget review (November 2003).
3/ Staff estimates based on the actual outcome through March 2004.
4/ In the official presentation, grants are shown "below the line" to highlight the amount of donor assistance required to close
financing gaps.
5/ Under the current oil/gas saving policy, royalties and interest income are automatically saved and only tax revenues are available
for budget financing.
6/ The budge estimate for FY2003/04 was derived on the basis of CFET cash balances ($10.2 million) projected during the 2002
mid-year budget review.

15.1
23.8
31.0
6.8
-46.6
-13.9

- 24 -

Table 4. Timor-Leste: Central Government Budget Estimates (CFET), FY2004/05-FY2007/08 1/

FY2003/04
Est.

FY2004/05

FY2005/06 FY2006/07
Budget estimates 2/

FY2007/08

Memorandum items:
FY2004/05 FY2005/06 FY2006/07
2003 MYBR estimates 3/

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Revenue

59.3

67.2

86.4

110.7

103.9

48.6

54.6

78.1

Domestic revenues
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Nontax revenues and other

27.5
6.1
16.9
4.5

23.0
5.4
13.6
4.0

23.8
5.5
13.9
4.4

25.0
5.6
14.7
4.7

26.6
6.0
15.4
5.2

20.0
5.2
11.3
3.5

20.5
5.2
11.6
3.8

21.2
5.2
11.7
4.3

Oil/gas revenues
Tax revenues
Royalties and interest
Royalties
Interest

31.8
27.2
4.6
4.5
0.1

44.2
18.3
25.8
25.5
0.3

62.6
35.2
27.4
26.1
1.3

85.7
56.4
29.3
26.9
2.4

77.3
47.7
29.7
25.9
3.7

28.6
9.7
18.9
18.5
0.4

34.1
7.7
26.4
25.5
0.9

56.9
28.8
28.1
26.3
1.8

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Capital expenditure

74.1
63.7
25.6
38.1
10.4

75.1
64.9
28.2
36.7
10.2

78.9
66.8
28.9
37.9
12.1

81.9
68.9
29.5
39.4
12.9

84.2
70.3
30.0
40.3
13.9

83.2
69.7
28.4
41.2
13.5

88.0
72.9
29.8
43.1
15.2

96.0
77.1
30.6
46.5
18.9

Overall balance

-14.8

-7.9

7.5

28.8

19.7

-34.6

-33.4

-17.9

Financing
Grants 4/
Changes in CFET cash balances (increase -)
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -) 2/
Financing gap

14.8
35.6
-16.2
-4.6
0.0

7.9
30.8
3.0
-25.8
0.0

-27.4
0.0
0.0
-27.4
19.9

-29.3
0.0
0.0
-29.3
0.5

-29.7
0.0
0.0
-29.7
9.9

14.1
29.2
3.8
-18.9
20.5

-26.4
0.0
0.0
-26.4
59.8

-28.1
0.0
0.0
-28.1
46.0

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
O/w: Tax revenues

17.7
8.2
9.5
8.1

20.4
7.0
13.4
5.6

25.3
7.0
18.4
10.3

30.3
6.8
23.5
15.4

26.0
6.7
19.3
11.9

14.7
6.1
8.7
2.9

16.0
6.0
10.0
2.3

21.4
5.8
15.6
7.9

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Capital expenditure

22.2
19.0
7.6
11.4
3.1

22.8
19.7
8.5
11.1
3.1

23.1
19.6
8.5
11.1
3.5

22.4
18.9
8.1
10.8
3.5

21.0
17.6
7.5
10.1
3.5

25.2
21.1
8.6
12.5
4.1

25.8
21.4
8.7
12.6
4.4

26.3
21.1
8.4
12.7
5.2

Overall balance
Financing
Financing gap

-4.4
4.4
0.0

-2.4
2.4
0.0

2.2
-8.0
5.8

7.9
-8.0
0.1

4.9
-7.4
2.5

-10.5
4.3
6.2

-9.8
-7.7
17.5

-4.9
-7.7
12.6

37.1
53.3
7.6
5.2
-63.2
-19.2

63.6
87.3
7.6
3.6
-67.5
-19.8

91.6
118.8
7.6
3.0
-74.8
-20.5

(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
Cumulative oil/gas savings (end-period)
(In percent of recurrent expenditure)
CFET cash balances
Appropriations to the power authority
Non-oil overall fiscal balance
(In percent of GDP)

15.1
23.8
31.0
6.8
-46.6
-13.9

41.0
63.1
28.0
5.7
-52.1
-15.8

68.4
102.3
28.0
4.1
-55.1
-16.2

97.6
141.7
28.0
3.4
-56.9
-15.6

127.3
181.0
28.0
3.1
-57.6
-14.4

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year: July-June.
2/ Assumes the maintenance of the current oil/gas saving policy under which royalties and interest income are automatically saved and only tax revenues are
available for budget financing.
3/ Estimates made during the November 2003 mid-year budget review.
4/ In the official presentation, grants are shown "below the line" to highlight the amount of donor assistance required to close financing gaps.

- 25 -

Table 5. Timor-Leste: Combined Sources Fiscal Operations, FY2000/01-FY2004/05 1/
FY2000/01

FY2001/02 FY2002/03
Est.

2003/04

FY2004/05
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Revenue
CFET
Autonomous agencies

29
27
1

36
31
4

54
49
5

65
59
6

74
67
7

Total expenditure
CFET 2/
Non-CFET
Autonomous agencies
TFET
Bilateral
UNTAET/UNMISET 3/

432
43
389
9
47
139
194

463
46
417
9
46
161
201

378
62
317
11
25
153
128

305
67
238
15
20
126
77

260
75
185
16
20
100
49

Recurrent expenditure 4/
CFET 2/
Non-CFET
Autonomous agencies
TFET
Bilateral
UNTAET/UNMISET 3/

340
22
318
8
24
92
194

374
35
339
8
23
106
201

297
47
250
9
12
101
128

241
56
184
13
10
84
77

203
63
140
15
10
66
49

Capital expenditure
CFET 2/
Non-CFET
Autonomous agencies
TFET
Bilateral
UNTAET/UNMISET 3/

92
21
71
1
23
47
0

89
11
78
1
23
55
0

81
15
66
2
12
52
0

65
11
54
1
10
43
0

57
12
45
1
10
34
0

-403

-428

-324

-241

-186

403
23
380
47
139
194

428
19
408
46
161
201

324
19
305
25
153
128

241
17
224
20
126
77

186
17
169
20
100
49

8

9

15

19

22

122
12
110

121
12
109

105
17
88

91
20
71

79
23
56

Recurrent expenditure 4/
CFET 2/
Non-CFET

96
6
90

97
9
88

82
13
69

72
17
55

62
19
43

Capital expenditure
CFET
Non-CFET

26
6
20

23
3
20

22
4
18

19
3
16

17
4
14

-114

-111

-90

-72

-56

114
7
107

111
5
106

90
5
85

72
5
67

56
5
51

Overall balance
Financing
CFET 2/
Non-CFET
TFET
Bilateral
UNTAET/UNMISET 3/

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Total expenditure
CFET 2/
Non-CFET

Overall balance
Financing
CFET
Non-CFET

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Include expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors, UNTAET/UNMISET, and international financial
institutions outside the central government budget. The coverage of UNTAET/UNMISET operations differs from the
official budget presentation.
2/ Net of CFET budget transfers to autonomous agencies.
3/ Excludes military expenditures and those not directly related to government operations.
4/ Includes technical assistance.

- 26 -

Table 6. Timor-Leste: Monetary Developments, 2000-2004
(In millions of U.S. dollars; at end-period)
2000
Dec.
Banking System
Net foreign assets
Assets
Cash holdings
Claims on foreign banks
Liabilities

2001
Dec.

2003

2002
Dec.

Mar.

June

Sept.

2004
March

Dec.

33.8
33.8
6.3
27.5
0.0

65.4
72.9
11.7
61.2
7.5

89.9
93.3
18.1
75.3
3.5

92.8
97.0
15.1
81.9
4.2

99.7
104.7
10.5
94.1
5.0

103.1
106.0
15.3
90.7
2.9

108.3
141.6
19.0
122.6
33.3

133.7
154.1
28.6
125.6
20.4

-13.8
-19.0
0.3
4.9

-14.3
-21.1
3.0
3.8

-35.3
-33.7
5.1
-6.7

-38.4
-36.3
6.1
-8.1

-41.9
-41.5
7.8
-8.2

-37.6
-28.3
12.6
-21.9

-36.0
-49.7
22.1
-8.4

-58.7
-74.3
32.4
-16.8

20.0
19.3
0.0
0.7

51.1
36.9
8.2
6.0

54.6
39.1
10.2
5.3

54.4
37.5
11.7
5.2

57.7
39.2
13.7
4.9

65.5
43.1
16.6
5.8

72.3
40.1
22.6
9.6

75.0
44.0
25.1
6.0

16.0
16.0
1.3
14.7
0.0

23.7
23.7
4.9
18.8
0.0

43.5
43.5
13.0
30.5
0.0

46.3
46.3
12.2
34.1
0.0

51.4
51.4
7.7
43.6
0.0

42.3
42.3
10.1
32.1
0.0

61.3
61.3
6.9
54.4
0.0

86.8
86.8
20.4
66.4
0.0

-16.0
-19.0
3.0
0.0

-22.7
-21.1
3.5
-5.0

-39.1
-33.7
2.4
-7.8

-42.3
-36.3
1.7
-7.7

-46.6
-41.5
2.1
-7.2

-34.8
-28.3
1.6
-8.1

-55.0
-49.7
3.4
-8.8

-80.9
-74.3
2.5
-9.2

0.0
0.0
0.0

1.0
1.0
0.0

4.5
4.5
0.0

4.0
4.0
0.0

4.8
4.8
0.0

7.5
7.5
0.0

6.3
6.3
0.0

5.9
5.9
0.0

17.8
17.8
5.0
12.8
0.0

41.7
49.2
6.8
42.4
7.5

46.4
49.8
5.0
44.8
3.5

46.5
50.7
2.9
47.8
4.2

48.3
53.3
2.8
50.5
5.0

60.8
63.7
5.2
58.5
2.9

47.0
80.3
12.1
68.2
33.3

47.0
67.4
8.2
59.2
20.4

5.2
0.0
0.0
0.3
4.9

12.9
1.0
0.0
3.0
8.9

10.7
4.5
0.0
5.1
1.1

9.7
4.0
0.0
6.1
-0.4

11.5
4.8
0.0
7.8
-1.1

6.2
7.5
0.0
12.6
-13.9

28.8
6.3
0.0
22.1
0.4

30.6
5.9
0.0
32.4
-7.7

Deposit liabilities
Current deposits
Saving deposits
Time deposits

20.0
19.3
0.0
0.7

51.1
36.9
8.2
6.0

54.6
39.1
10.2
5.3

54.4
37.5
11.7
5.2

57.7
39.2
13.7
4.9

65.5
43.1
16.6
5.8

72.3
40.1
22.6
9.6

75.0
44.0
25.1
6.0

Liabilities to BPA

3.0

3.5

2.4

1.7

2.1

1.6

3.4

2.5

Net domestic assets
Claims on government (net)
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)
Broad money 1/
Demand deposits
Saving deposits
Time deposits
BPA
Net foreign assets
Assets
Cash in vault
Claims on central banks
Liabilities
Net domestic assets
Government (net position)
Claims on domestic banks
Other items (net)
Liabilities
Financial institutions
Private enterprises
Commercial banks 2/
Net foreign assets
Assets
Cash holdings
Claims on foreign banks
Liabilities
Net domestic assets
Deposits with BPA
Claims on government (net)
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)

Sources: Data provided by the Banking and Payments Authority; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Exclude currency in circulation , on which no data are available due to dollarization of the financial system.
2/ Includes the micro-finance institution.

- 27 -

Table 7. Timor-Leste: Balance of Payments, 1999-2004
1999

2000

2001
Est.

2002

2003

2004
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers

-92
6

-279
48

-309
54

-292
44

-230
43

-170
40

Trade balance
Exports of goods 1/2/
O/w: Coffee
Imports of goods 1/
O/w: International assistance-related

-67
52
...
-119
-58

-235
5
4
-240
-125

-264
4
3
-268
-129

-245
6
5
-251
-126

-195
7
6
-203
-104

-158
8
6
-167
-84

-25

-48

-49

-48

-40

-32

0
0

3
3

5
4

1
0

6
4

20
19

Current transfers (net)
O/w: Oil/gas tax revenues
International assistance

98
0
43

327
5
315

363
8
347

336
16
314

273
27
240

210
24
181

Capital and financial accounts
Official capital transfers
Financial accounts

-3
0
-3

-54
71
-125

-61
74
-134

-36
71
-107

-16
58
-74

-23
48
-71

Errors and omissions (net)

-3

23

14

12

-10

0

0
0
0
0

16
-16
-3
-13

8
-8
-4
-3

20
-20
0
-20

18
-18
-3
-15

17
-17
-19
2

-67
13
-57

-52
12
-48

31
61
11

42
78
29

Services (net)
Income (net)
O/w: Oil/gas royalty and interest

Overall balance
Changes in foreign assets (increase -)
Oil/gas revenue savings (increase -)
Other

(In percent of GDP)
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance

-34
2
-25

-87
15
-73

-80
14
-68

-77
12
-64

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
Oil/gas revenues
Gross foreign assets (end-period)
O/w: Oil/gas revenue savings

0
0
0

8
16
3

13
24
7

17
44
7

Source: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Figures before 2000 include unrecorded border trade.
2/ Exclude oil/gas revenues, which are recorded under the income (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues) because of the
lack of detailed data on the oil/gas sector (including production, exports, service payments, and profit remittances).

- 28 -

Table 8. Timor-Leste: Medium-Term Outlook, 2003-2008
2003
Est.
Output and prices
GNP at current prices (in millions of US dollars)
GDP
Oil/gas income
Real GDP growth (percentage change)
Inflation (percentage change at end-period) 1/2/

372
341
31
-3
4

2004

2005

370
328
42
1
4

2006
Proj.

391
332
59
1
3

2007

2008

438
350
88
2
3

478
380
97
4
3

523
420
103
5
3

(In percent of GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 3/
O/w: Public investment
Gross national savings
External savings

27
21
-32
60

24
18
-21
45

23
16
-9
32

21
13
3
18

20
12
7
13

20
11
10
10

17.7
8.2
9.5
22.1
19.0
3.1
-4.4

20.4
7.0
13.4
22.8
19.7
3.1
-2.4

25.3
7.0
18.4
23.1
19.6
3.5
2.2

30.3
6.8
23.4
22.4
18.9
3.5
7.9

26.0
6.7
19.3
21.1
17.6
3.5
4.9

32.3
6.8
25.5
20.3
16.7
3.6
12.0

Combined sources fiscal operations 4/5/
Revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

19
91
72
19
-72

22
79
62
17
-56

28
69
54
16
-42

33
62
49
13
-29

28
59
45
14
-30

35
49
39
11
-15

Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 6/7/
Net domestic assets (end-period) 7/

21
-11

23
-18

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

-109
44
-125
14
-138
29

-106
45
-126
14
-140
41

-29
12
-33
4
-36
8

-25
11
-30
3
-33
10

Government budget (CFET) 4/
Revenues
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 8/
Merchandise imports
Overall balance

-230
43
-195
7
-203
18

-170
40
-158
8
-167
17

-132
29
-137
10
-148
17

-116
37
-128
13
-140
28

(In percent of GDP)
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 8/
Merchandise imports
Overall balance

-67
13
-57
2
-59
5

-52
12
-48
3
-51
5

-40
9
-41
3
-45
5

-33
11
-36
4
-40
8

Sources: Data provided by the Timor Leste authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ U.S. dollar-based CPI for Dili.
2/ The figure for 2004 relates to April.
3/ Excludes investment relating to the oil/gas sector.
4/ On the basis of fiscal year (July-June); for example, 2003 relates to FY2003/04.
5/ Include fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international financial institutions
outside the central government budget.
6/ Excludes currency holdings by the public, on which no data are available.
7/ The figure for 2004 relates to March.
8/ Excludes oil/gas revenues, which are recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues).

- 29 -

ANNEX I

TIMOR-LESTE: FUND RELATIONS
(As of April 30, 2004)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 7/23/2002; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

SDR Million
8.20
8.20
0.00

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

None
None

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangements

% Quota
100.00
100.00
0.00

On January 24, 2000, the U.S. dollar was adopted as the official currency of then
East Timor by the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). This arrangement has been maintained after Timor-Leste’s
independence on May 20, 2002. At present, the monetary authority does not
undertake foreign exchange transactions; they are handled by commercial banks
on the basis of rates quoted in the international markets.
VIII. Article IV Consultations
The first, 2003 Article IV consultation discussions with the authorities were held
during April 2-15, 2003. The Executive Board discussed the staff report (see IMF
Country Report 03/227, 7/28/03) and concluded the consultation on July 14, 2003.
IX.

Technical Assistance
Since late 1999, a significant amount of technical assistance has been
provided by the Fund as part of the international community’s efforts to
reconstruct the Timor-Leste economy in the aftermath of the widespread
violence and destruction that followed the August 1999 referendum. The
Fund’s technical assistance has focused on establishing key economic
institutions (especially fiscal and monetary authorities) essential for
macroeconomic management, as well as on developing local capacity to

- 30 -

manage them. It also played a key role in the adoption of a new currency
arrangement based on the U.S. dollar. Between late 1999 and early 2004,
numerous technical assistance missions (including staff visits) took place,
making Timor-Leste one of the largest recipients of Fund technical
assistance.
FAD: A series of multi-topic FAD missions were taken place to establish and
develop the Central Fiscal Authority (CFA, February 2000), which now functions
as the Ministry of Planning and Finance. In this connection, assistance were
provided to develop budget preparation, establish tax policy and administration,
strengthen treasury and expenditure management, and advise on oil sector fiscal
regimes and the establishment of an oil fund. In addition, long-term resident
advisors were assigned to the Ministry of Planning and Finance and the Revenue
Service of Timor-Leste to advise the authorities on a number of fiscal areas
(including budget policy and tax administration) partly under a cost sharing
arrangement with the UN.
LEG: A number of LEG missions have taken place to advise the authorities on
key fiscal and financial legislation. These included the customs law and
directives, income tax legislation, the budget and financial management law, and
banking regulations (relating to the monetary authority, the banking system, and
the payments system). Technical assistance has recently been provided to assist
the authorities in drafting an AML/CFT Law.
MFD: A large number of MFD missions were taken place to establish and
develop the Central Payments Office (CPO, January 2000), which was
transformed into the Banking and Payments Authority subsequently
(November 2001). To this end, assistance were provided to establish a payment
system, prepare banking legislation, and develop key functions of the monetary
authority, including banking supervision, asset management, accounting, and
organization and management. Assistance was also provided on the introduction
of a dollar-based currency system. More recently, assistance has been provided to
(i) develop a legal framework for insurance companies, (ii) issue domestic coins
to supplement the use of U.S. dollar coins, and (iii) address a broad range of
issues relating to money laundering and financing of terrorism. In addition, longterm resident advisors, including on bank supervision, payments, and accounting,
have been assigned to the Central Payments Office and the Banking and Payments
Authority under a cost sharing arrangement with the UN.
STA: A multi-sector statistical mission took place in November 2000 to assess
the availability of official macroeconomic data and their quality, and help
establish the Statistic Division of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Development. A long-term statistical advisor was assigned between
November 2001 and February 2004 to assist the authorities in improving data
compilation and developing local capacity.

- 31 -

X.

Resident Representative
A Resident Representative office was established in Dili in August 2000. Since
March 2002, Mr. Kadhim Al-Eyd has taken up the post as Senior Resident
Representative.

- 32 -

ANNEX II

TIMOR-LESTE: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of April 30, 2004)
1.
Timor-Leste joined the World Bank Group on July 23, 2002. It became eligible for
IDA assistance on October 9, 2002. Thus far, there has been no lending to Timor-Leste,
reflecting the authorities’ policy to avoid external borrowing, including concessional loans.
However, the World Bank has been actively involved in the reconstruction and development
of the economy since late 1999, by playing a key catalytic role in mobilizing and
coordinating international assistance to Timor-Leste.
2.
During the transition to independence, the World Bank’s involvement centered
around its role as a trustee and co-manager of the Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET), which
was established in December 1999 as a vehicle to provide grant assistance for reconstruction
activities and economic development in Timor-Leste.1 Under the TFET, which is comanaged with the Asian Development Bank (AsDB), the World Bank has administered
projects relating to social services (especially, health and education), agriculture, private
sector development, and economic capacity building. Total funding for the World Bankadministered projects reached $115 million, of which $78 million was disbursed by endJanuary 2004. The World Bank has also provided analytical and advisory services, including
through a Country Economic Memorandum, a Poverty Assessment Paper, a Public
Expenditure Management and Accountability Note, and an Education Sector Review.
3.
In addition to its involvement through the TFET, the World Bank has also been
playing a key role in mobilizing budgetary assistance for the post-independence period,
before the inflow of substantial oil/gas revenues starts. As an initial step for such assistance,
the World Bank Board approved the first Transition Support Program I (TSP I, $5 million
grant in support of the FY2002/03 budget) in July 2002, focusing on fostering the
development of institutions, a legislative framework, and management systems required for
core government functions. Following TSP I, the second Transition Support Program
(TSP II, $4 million grant in support of the FY2002/03 budget) was approved in July 2003 to
assist the authorities in strengthening public expenditure management, improving the
delivery of key social services (especially, education and health), fostering private sector
development, and developing a legal framework for governance and the judiciary. The TSPs

1

Pledges to the TFET were made by 12 donor countries, the European Commission, and the
World Bank, with the total amount of funds reaching $177 million. This comprises donors’
contributions of $169 million (including $10 million by the World Bank) and investment
income of $8 million. Of this total, $131 million was disbursed by end-March 2004. TFET
projects are expected to wind down by mid-2006.

- 33 -

have been used as a unifying framework for donors’ budget support, mobilizing $33 million
in FY2002/03 and $35 million (estimate) in FY2003/04 from 10 bilateral donors.2
4.
Prior to Timor-Leste’s independence, the World Bank co-chaired six bi-annual
donors’ meetings with the UN. After independence, the World Bank has co-chaired the
donors’ meeting with the Timor-Leste government (“Timor-Leste and Development Partners
Meeting”) in December 2002, June 2003, and December 2003.

2

These bilateral donors consist of Australia, Canada, Finland, Ireland, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In addition, People’s
Republic of China, Japan, Malaysia, the Asian Development Bank, UNMISET, UNDP, and
UNICEF have been providing technical assistance in support of the TSPs.

- 34 -

ANNEX III

TIMOR-LESTE: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of April 30, 2004)
1.
Timor-Leste joined the AsDB on July 24, 2002. To date, there has been no lending to
the country, reflecting the authorities’ policy to avoid external borrowing. However, like
other international financial institutions and bilateral donors, the AsDB has been actively
involved in the reconstruction and development of the economy since late 1999.
2.
The AsDB’s involvement has centered around co-managing with the World Bank the
Trust Fund for East Timor (TFET), which was established in December 1999 as a vehicle to
provide grant assistance for reconstruction activities and economic development in TimorLeste.1 Under the TFET, the AsDB has managed six projects with total funding of
$53 million,2 which aimed at the rehabilitation of physical infrastructure (rural power, rural
roads, ports, and water and sanitation) and the development of microfinance. In the wake of
the post-referendum destruction, the focus of the projects was on providing emergency
assistance, but subsequently shifted to meeting the country’s long-term development needs.
At end-December 2003, disbursements for AsDB-managed projects totaled $45 million.
Most projects are expected to be completed by end-2004.
3.
The AsDB has also been actively involved in technical assistance. Thus far, the
AsDB has approved 21 technical assistance programs totaling $9.2 million. Most technical
assistance programs have been undertaken in parallel with the implementation of the TFETfunded projects, focusing on project preparation and sector-specific capacity/institution
building essential for project implementation. The latter includes the development of
regulatory and legislative frameworks, the analysis of sectoral policy issues, poverty
assessment and statistics, and strategies for economic and social development and planning.
As of end-December 2003, 13 technical assistance programs were completed and 8 programs
were still going on.

1
2

See footnote 1 in Relations with the World Bank Group.

These projects comprise the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project
($29.8 million); the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project 2 ($9 million); the
Water Supply and Sanitation Rehabilitation Project ($4.5 million); the Water Supply and
Sanitation Rehabilitation Project 2 ($4.5 million); the Hera Fisheries Port Facilities
Rehabilitation Project ($1 million); and the Microfinance Development Project ($4 million).

- 35 -

ANNEX IV

TIMOR-LESTE: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Prior to 1999, macroeconomic data in Timor-Leste (including national accounts, prices,
labor, provincial budget, and money and credits) were compiled by the Indonesian Central
Bureau of Statistics (Badan Pusat Statistik, BPS) and the Central Board of Statistics of the
East Timor Province. While these data provided useful economic information, their
improvement was viewed as necessary especially in terms of coverage and methodology. The
most serious data problem lay in balance of payments statistics, which were almost
nonexistent as Timor-Leste was treated as one of the Indonesian provinces.
Compilation of macroeconomic data was seriously disrupted in 1999, as the post-referendum
turmoil led to the destruction of databases and the collapse of institutional capacity as a result
of the departure of most Indonesian statistical officers. Under the economic reconstruction
process beginning late 1999, efforts have been made to begin the compilation of key
macroeconomic data through technical assistance provided by international financial
institutions and bilateral donors.
To this end, a multi-sector Fund statistics mission visited Dili in November 2000 and assisted
the authorities in establishing short- and long-term objectives for the restoration of economic
statistics and in setting up a Statistical Office with the Ministry of Economic Affairs and
Development in 2001, which was transformed to the Statistical Division of the Ministry of
Planning and Finance in 2002. Also, a long-term resident statistical advisor was attached to
the Statistical Division during November 2001–Februray 2004 to lay a basis for compilation
of macroeconomic data while developing local capacity. Nonetheless, progress in data
compilation has been slow, constrained by the nascent institutional capacity, and
macroeconomic data remain very weak in terms of availability, coverage, and quality.
National accounts
No official national accounts statistics are available at present, mainly because of the lack of
sectoral data. Under a World Bank-financed project, national accounts data for 2000 (both
sectoral and expenditure basis) were estimated by the Boston Institute for Developing
Economies. Also, Fund staff have produced estimates for 1999–2003 on the basis of
information obtained during various staff visits, as well as the 2003 Article IV consultation
mission. These estimates, however, are highly preliminary, and there is an urgent need to
collect sectoral data as an initial step toward the compilation of official national accounts
data. To improve national accounts data, a follow-up World Bank-financed project is to be
initiated to produce estimates for 2001 and 2002.
Prices, employment, and wages
Following the disturbances of 1999, a consumer price index was compiled on a monthly
basis for Dili and on a quarterly basis for the whole of Timor-Leste, with April 2000 as a
base period. However, the price index suffered from a number of problems, including its
weighting scheme, which was based on a household expenditure survey conducted by the

- 36 -

BPS for Jakarta. To address the problems, the commodity basket and the weighting scheme
were revised in mid-2003 under a donor-supported project to better reflect the expenditure
composition of households, and a new monthly consumer price index for Dili has been
compiled, with December 2001 as a base period. Data on public sector employment and
wages are available on an annual basis through fiscal data. However, no data are compiled on
private sector employment and wages, although some partial data are available through
household surveys conducted jointly by the UNDP, AsDB, and World Bank.
Government financial statistics
Official data on the central government’s revenues and expenditures are published on an
annual and semi-annual basis as part of the budget preparation and review process. In
addition, monthly data are available on request (mainly in connection with missions’ visits)
through the Budget Department of the Ministry of Finance, the Treasury, and the Revenue
Services of Timor-Leste. The compilation of revenues and expenditures follows A Manual on
Government Finance Statistics (GFSM 1986) classification (including expenditure data on
the basis of both functional and economic classification), and steps need to be taken in order
to compile the data on the basis of the Government Finance Statistical Manual 2001
(GFSM 2001). However, data on financing are incomplete and are estimated by Fund staff on
the basis of various sources. Only limited data are available on fiscal and quasi-fiscal
activities undertaken by bilateral donors and special funds established for economic
reconstruction outside the central government budget (e.g., the Trust Fund for East Timor).
At present, there are three nonfinancial public enterprises, and only partial data are available
on their operations. No data are currently reported for the GFS Yearbook and the
International Financial Statistics.
Monetary accounts
Monetary statistics on the banking system are compiled by the Banking and Payments
Authority (BPA), generally following the classification recommended by the Fund. However,
monetary survey data are incomplete because of the absence of official data on currency
holdings by the public, which are difficult to compile under the current currency regime.
Statistics on key monetary aggregates are now published on a quarterly basis through the
BPA’s quarterly bulletin and on a yearly basis through the BPA’s annual report. Monetary
data with a detailed breakdown are also available on a monthly basis, but only on request.
Compilation of data on interest rates (both deposit and lending rates) and bank lending and
investment in a comprehensive manner has begun only recently. However, the availability of
these data is extremely limited because the BPA is concerned that their public release will
reveal confidential information concerning commercial bank operations (especially with
regard to lending) given a very small number (only three) of banks comprising the banking
system. No monetary data are currently reported to STA for publication in the International
Financial Statistics.

- 37 -

Balance of payments
No official data on the balance of payments are available, except for data on merchandise
exports and imports. Merchandise trade data are compiled on the basis of customs data with a
breakdown according to major commodity categories, and are available on a monthly basis
starting March 2000. However, these data are incomplete, because they do not include
unrecorded border trade, which is believed to be substantial, and because their classification
by commodities and trading partners needs further improvement. Data on oil/gas revenues
are currently recorded under the income account (for royalties) and under transfers (for tax
revenues) on the basis of fiscal data, as no comprehensive information on production and
investment in the oil/gas sector is available. All other major balance of payments data,
including the services account, transfers, and capital and financial account transactions, are
estimated by Fund staff on the basis of information obtained during staff visits from various
sources, including bilateral donors.

No
Q

Confidentiality

Frequency of publication8
Q

No

E

G

M

M

05/04

03/04

Q

No

E

G

M

M

05/04

03/04

Bank
deposits3

Data not
available

Interest
rates

2

R

No

E

G

M

M

05/04

04/04

Consumer
price index

Most data not officially published. Timor-Leste has not started official reporting to the Fund.
The domestic currency is the U.S. dollar.
3
Because of dollarization, the stock of currency in the hands of the public is not known.
4
Data on services, investment income, and transfers are not available.
5
M-monthly, Q-quarterly, V-irregularly, generally in conjunction with staff visits.
6
G-Authorities.
7
E-electronic data transfer.
8
Q-quarterly, R-Not published; available upon request only.

1

E

G

Mode of reporting 7

Source of update 6

M

Frequency of reporting

Not
applicable

M

05/04

Date received

Frequency of data 5

03/04

Date of latest observation

Exchange International BPA balance
rates 2
reserves
sheet

R

No

E

G

V

M

04/04

12/04

Exports /
imports

Timor-Leste: Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators1
(As of May 31, 2004)

Data not
available 4

Current
account
balance

R

No

E

G

Q

Q

05/04

03/04

Data not
available

Overall
government GDP/GNP
balance

No
external
debt
contracted

External
debt

- 38 -

- 39 -

ANNEX V

TIMOR-LESTE: LONG-TERM FISCAL STRATEGY
1.
Given a substantial amount of oil/gas revenues expected to flow into Timor-Leste
over the next 20 years, a central fiscal issue facing the authorities is what would be an
appropriate level of government expenditure over the long term. One way to address this
issue would be to view the adequacy of financing as a key determinant.1 Given this approach,
the appropriateness of government expenditure depends critically on three factors in the case
of Timor-Leste. These are (i) saving policy regarding oil/gas wealth, (ii) prospective
developments in non-oil/gas revenues, and (iii) borrowing policy.
2.
This annex develops an illustrative scenario concerning these factors to derive an
appropriate level of government expenditure over the long term. This will be followed
by discussion of a scenario concerning the composition of government expenditure, which
will address an adequate level of government capital expenditures to meet growth objectives.
These scenarios relate primarily to the “oil/gas period” over which oil/gas production
continues.
Saving policy for oil/gas wealth
3.
Given growing oil/gas revenues, the level of central government expenditure
depends critically on Timor-Leste’s decision as to how much of oil/gas wealth should be
saved in financial assets for future generations. This decision can be alternatively phrased
as how much of oil/gas wealth should be invested in “physical” assets (namely, investment in
projects to improve physical infrastructure and human capital).2
1

Alternatively, the appropriateness of government expenditure may be assessed in terms of
maintaining macroeconomic stability, especially to avoid the Dutch disease. This approach is
not adopted in the scenario presented below because it requires a comprehensive
macroeconomic analysis (particularly with regard to impacts of government expenditure not
only on the overall price level, but also on relative prices between traded and nontraded
goods) and is therefore less practical for policy discussions. However, the importance of
macroeconomic stability is addressed indirectly as the scenario calls for a relatively small
amount of oil/gas wealth to be drawn down for fiscal programs over the long term.
2

Return on financial assets takes the form of interest income, while return on “physical”
assets will be given by the form of increased output, including through improvement in
productivity of factors of production. Generally speaking, how oil/gas wealth should be held
depends on the expected relative rate of return between financial and “physical” assets. In
general, the greater the potential contribution of investment in physical assets to
improvement in productivity (and economic growth), the smaller should be the share of
oil/wealth held in financial assets. In practice, however, it is difficult to measure the rate of
return on “physical” assets, and a decision regarding oil/gas wealth savings should rely
heavily on judgmental factors.

- 40 -

4.
Various saving policies are available for the authorities’ considerations. Among
them are:
•

Saving of entire oil/gas wealth in financial assets: This saving policy aims at
preserving all of oil/gas wealth (in real terms) in financial assets. Under this policy,
financial resources available for the government to finance budget deficits would be
limited to the real interest income generated from oil/gas wealth, so as to avoid any
drawdown of oil/gas wealth in real terms.

•

Saving of oil/gas wealth in financial assets on a per capita basis: Oil/gas wealth
might be entirely saved in financial assets and maintained constant (in real terms) on
a per capita basis. Under this policy, part of the real interest income would need to be
saved to ensure that real oil/gas wealth increases over time in line with population
growth.

•

Partial drawdown of oil/gas wealth: This saving policy permits part of oil/gas
wealth (in real terms) to be invested in “physical” assets. Under this policy, the
amount of oil/gas revenues available for budget financing depends crucially on how
much of oil/gas wealth would be permitted to be drawn down.3

5.
In Timor-Leste’s context, there are three considerations that should be taken
into account in deciding what type of saving policy to be adopted. These are:
•

Need to strengthen the country’s growth prospects to alleviate poverty: The
attainment of this objective would require the adequate provision of government
services, especially to improve infrastructure and human capital, toward the growth
objective set by the National Development Plan (5 percent per year over the long
term).

•

Need to secure appropriate funding for budgetary expenditures during the postoil/gas period: After oil/gas resources are depleted, budgetary expenditures would
have to be funded through domestic revenues and interest income from oil/gas
savings, provided that the borrowing option is excluded (¶8). An excessively low

3

Each oil/gas saving policy implies a different decision regarding inter-generational
distribution of oil/gas wealth. Among the three different oil/gas saving policies mentioned
above, the third saving policy favors the current generation most, while the second saving
policy ensures benefits of oil/gas wealth are fully passed on to future generations. The first
saving policy could be viewed as relatively neutral in terms of inter-generational distribution
of oil/gas wealth.

- 41 -

level of oil/gas savings would result in a low level of interest income and necessitate
substantial fiscal adjustments during the post-oil/gas period.4
•

Prospects of absorption capacity: A critical factor affecting the rate of return on
“physical” assets is the government’s capacity to carry out investment programs for
infrastructure and human capital productively. Caution is necessary in embarking on
large-scale public investment programs if the governments’ absorption capacity is
limited.

6.
Against this background, the scenario assumes that Timor-Leste opts for
drawing down a portion of oil/gas wealth in real terms during the oil/gas period to fund
public investment programs. However, the amount of oil/gas wealth invested in “physical”
assets is limited to a relatively modest portion—about 15 percent of the total—with the
remainder held in financial assets for future generations (Figure 1-b).5 This reflects
uncertainty about the government’s capacity to execute investment programs productively, as
well as the need to avoid major fiscal adjustment during the post-oil/gas period. Under this
saving policy, the stock of oil/gas savings held in financial assets at the end of the oil/gas
period would reach $1.3 billion in terms of real present value.
Non-oil/gas revenues
7.
Non-oil/gas revenues are assumed to increase from 7 percent of GDP in
FY2004/05 to 10 percent of GDP by FY2024/25 (the end-year of the oil/gas period). The
profile of the non-oil/gas revenues/GDP is rather conservative compared with the
revenue/GDP ratios that are observed in other developing countries. However, the assumed
increase in the non-oil/gas revenue/GDP ratio would require (i) substantial improvements in
Timor-Leste’s capacity for tax administration following the full winding-down of
international technical assistance for the Revenue Service of Timor-Leste and (ii) increased
4

It should be stressed that whichever saving policy might be adopted, interest income from
oil/gas savings would fall steadily in relation to GDP during the post-oil/gas period, unless
the real rate of interest exceeds the real rate of economic growth significantly. This means
that expenditure in relation to GDP should be adjusted downward steadily to the non-oil/gas
revenues/GDP ratio, or steps should be taken to mobilize additional non-oil/gas revenues if
expenditure is to be maintained in relation to GDP. Without these adjustments, further drawdowns of oil/gas wealth would be necessary, leading to an eventual depletion of oil/gas
wealth. The extent of fiscal adjustment required would be smaller, the larger the size of
oil/gas savings at the end of the oil/gas period.
5

Under the scenario which was discussed with the authorities during the 2003 Article IV
consultation, about one-third of oil/gas wealth was proposed to be drawn down to fund
government expenditures. The reduction in the size of oil/gas wealth to be drawn down
reflects greater uncertainty over progress in Timor-Leste’s absorption capacity.

- 42 -

efforts to mobilize additional non-oil/gas revenues during the course of the next 20 years.
Such revenue mobilization efforts would include tax reforms aimed at broadening the tax
base (e.g., the introduction of VAT), as well as a steady improvement in compliance. These
reform measures are assumed to be taken gradually during the second half of the next 20year time span.
Borrowing
8.
The authorities continue to avoid borrowing for budget financing. This implies
that (i) they remain cautious about external borrowing and (ii) the current monetary and
exchange rate regime is maintained, with the banking system providing no financing for
budgetary operations.
Appropriate level of government expenditure
9.
Simulation exercises based on these scenarios concerning oil/gas saving policy,
prospective developments in non-oil/gas revenues, and borrowing policy suggest that
CFET expenditure during the oil/gas period might be maintained at around 21 percent
of GDP, on average (Figure 1-a). This estimate is conditional on prospective developments
in oil prices and the rate of return on financial assets, which would affect the size of oil/gas
wealth and streams of interest income. In the scenario, it is assumed that (i) the rate of return
on financial assets would be sustained at 3.5 percent in real terms,6 and (ii) international oil
prices would average $20 per barrel at 2002/03 prices.
10.
The level of CFET expenditure is sensitive to the assumptions on non-oil/gas
revenues, the rate of interest, and the size of oil/gas wealth. A sensitivity analysis
indicates that CFET expenditure should be lowered by about 1-2 percent of GDP, on average,
in order to limit the drawdown of oil/gas wealth to 15 percent, if one of the following
alternative assumptions is made to these parameters: (i) non-oil gas revenues in relation to
GDP remain unchanged at the FY2007/08 level during the oil/gas period; (ii) the average rate
of interest is lower by one percentage point compared with the central scenario; and
(iii) oil/gas revenues beyond FY2007/08 are 10 percent lower than projected.
Expenditure composition
11.
Given the appropriate level of central government expenditure, another key
fiscal issue that has to be addressed by the authorities is expenditure composition. This
issue relates to the need to ensure an adequate amount of capital expenditures toward the
achievement of the growth target, while funding necessary recurrent expenditures. The
composition of central government expenditure will be affected by the following factors.
6

This rate is close to the average real rate of return on U.S. long-term government bonds
over the past 10 years.

- 43 -

•

Total investment: The National Development Plan envisages that economic growth
would accelerate to 5 percent over the long term. The extent to which this growth
target would be achieved depends importantly on the size of investment. On the basis
of a scenario concerning the incremental capital output ratio (ICOR), total investment
needs to be sustained at about 22 percent of GDP over the long term in order to meet
the targeted growth rate (Figure 2-b).7

•

Private investment: Private investment is assumed to increase from 7 percent of
GDP in 2004 to 14 percent of GDP by 2024. The achievement of this increase would
require strong measures to promote private investment. Such measures include
actions to improve physical and human capital, establish a legal and regulatory
framework, and maintain a liberal trade and investment regime. The latter will be
essential to attract foreign investment in those sectors that have high potential for
growth, including tourism.

•

Public investment and donor-funded capital projects: Given the expansion in
private investment and overall investment requirements, public investment is
projected to decline from 18 percent in 2004 to 8 percent by 2024. The decline is
consistent with an expected winding-down of capital projects undertaken by bilateral
donors and multilateral institutions (non-CFET capital expenditures) over the coming
years. Such capital projects are assumed to decline from 14 percent of GDP in 2004
to nil by 2024.

12.
On the basis of the scenarios regarding public investment and donor-funded
capital projects, central government capital expenditures would have to increase from
3 percent of GDP in FY2004/05 to 8 percent of GDP in FY2024/25. The increase is rather
modest, reflecting an assumption that the government’s absorption capacity would improve
only gradually. To accommodate the increase in capital expenditures with overall
expenditure, recurrent expenditure would need to be adjusted downward, from 20 percent of
GDP in FY2004/05 to about 14 percent of GDP by FY2024/25 (Figure 2-a). Such an
adjustment would require restraints on the increase in the average wage rate and the number
of civil servants and cuts in appropriations for less essential goods and services, while
protecting key social services.

7

In the scenario, economic growth is assumed to moderate to 3.5 percent in the long run,
partly reflecting a decline in marginal productivity of capital and a slowdown in population
growth.

- 44 -

Figure 1. Timor-Leste: Revenue, Expenditure and Oil Wealth; FY2000/01 - FY2024/25
(a) Revenues and Expenditures (in percent of GDP)
120

120
Total revenue
Domestic revenue
CFET expenditure
Combined fiscal expenditure

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

FY00/01

FY05/06

FY10/11

FY15/16

FY20/21

FY24/25

(b) Oil Wealth (in millions of U.S. dollars; FY2000/01 prices)

2000

Oil/gas wealth (real) 1/

2000

Cumulative oil/gas savings (real) 2/
1500

1500

1000

1000

500

500

0

FY00/01

0

FY05/06

FY10/11

FY15/16

Sources: Information provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff projections.
1/ In terms of the real present value of projected oil/gas revenues.
2/ Stock of oil/gas financial assets in real terms.

FY20/21

FY24/25

- 45 -

Figure 2. Timor-Leste: Developments in Government Expenditures and Investment
(a) CFET Expenditure Components (in percent of GDP; FY2000/01-FY2024/25)

35

35
Capital
Goods and Services
Wages and Salaries

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
FY00/01

0
FY05/06

FY10/11

FY15/16

FY20/21

FY24/25

(b) Investment (in percent of GDP; CY2000-2024)
40

40

Private investment
Public investment
Total investment

30

30

20

20

10

10

0
2000

0
2005

2010

2015

Sources: Information provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and Fund staff projections.

2020

2024

- 46 -

ANNEX VI

TIMOR-LESTE: KEY FEATURES OF A NORWEGIAN MODEL OF A PETROLEUM FUND

•

Norway’s State Petroleum Fund (SPF) is characterized as a financing fund,
designed solely to finance the fiscal deficit. The SPF does not attempt to deal
directly with stabilization and savings issues associated with oil revenues, which are
addressed in the context of the budgetary process. The budget is required to transfer
all oil revenues to the SPF; in turn, the SPF finances the non-oil resource deficit of
the budget through reverse transfer.

•

The critical prerequisite for the effective functioning of a financing fund is
prudent fiscal policy. The fund is not subject to pre-determined specific rules for
accumulation or drawdowns of oil revenues. Under a financing fund, the flows in and
out of the fund therefore depend crucially on fiscal policy pursued by the government.

•

The SPF is effectively little more than a government account. Its features ensure
integration into a unitary fiscal system. SPF assets are under the control of the
Ministry of Finance, which sets the guidelines for the SPF’s investment strategy. On
the basis of the strategy, the Central Bank manages the portfolios of the SPF.

•

Transparency and accountability are the founding principles of the SPF.
Transfers to and from the SPF require parliamentary approval, and its operations are
incorporated into the fiscal accounts. The Central Bank has legal obligations to
provide information on the SPF’s operations to the public on a regular basis,
including on the valuation, composition, and returns of portfolios, as well as on
transfers to and from the budget. The SPF’s accounts are regularly audited, and the
audit reports are made public.

Source: “Stabilization and Savings Funds for Nonrenewable Resources,” IMF Occasional
Paper 205, 2001.

- 47 -

ANNEX VII

TIMOR-LESTE: SUMMARY OF THE EXCHANGE AND PAYMENTS SYSTEM
(Position as of April 30, 2004)

I. Status Under IMF Articles of Agreement
1. Date of membership
Article VIII

Yes

July 23, 2002.

Yes

Date of acceptance: July 23, 2002

II. Exchange Arrangement
The currency of the Democratic Republic of Timor Leste is the
U.S. dollar.

1. Currency
a. Other legal tender

Yes

On November 10, 2003, Timorese coins were introduced to serve as
fractional currency to the U.S. dollar.

2. Exchange rate structure
a. Unitary

Yes

3. Classification
a. Exchange arrangement
with no separate legal tender

Yes

4. Exchange tax

No

5. Exchange subsidy

No

The dollar is legal tender and circulates freely. Foreign exchange
transactions are effected through three (foreign-owned) commercial
banks and one licenced currency exchange bureau.

6. Forward exchange
market
a. Official cover of forward
operations

No

III. Arrangements for Payments and Receipts
1. Prescription of currency
requirements
a. Controls on the use of
domestic currency

All domestic transactions and settlements must be in the domestic
currency (U.S. dollar).

b. Use of foreign exchange
among residents

Withdrawals from bank accounts denominated in foreign currencies
must be made in U.S. dollars, though bank transfers from foreign
currency accounts abroad may be made in foreign currencies.

2. Payments arrangements

None
Overall responsibility for the administration of exchange controls rests
with the BPA, which has the power to regulate payment and settlement
systems in domestic and foreign currency.

3. Administration of control

4. International security
restrictions

No

5. Payments arrears

No

6. Controls on trade in gold

No

- 48 (coins and/or bullion)
7. Controls on exports and
imports of banknotes
a. On exports

No

b. On imports
1. Domestic currency

No

2. Foreign currency

No

IV. Resident Accounts
1. Foreign exchange
accounts permitted
a. Held domestically

Approval required
b. Held abroad
Approval required

No
restriction

There are no restrictions on the holding of foreign exchange accounts,
but withdrawals from the accounts should be made in domestic
currency (U.S. dollar).

No
No
restrictions
No

2. Accounts in domestic
currency held abroad

No
restricitons

3. Accounts in domestic
currency convertible into
foreign currency

Restricted

Withdrawals from bank accounts in foreign currency are prohibited.

V. Nonresident Accounts
1. Foreign exchange
accounts permitted

No
restrictions

a. Approval required

No

2. Domestic currency
accounts

No
restrictions
Withdrawals from bank accounts in foreign currency are prohibited.

a. Convertible into foreign
currency
b. Approval required

No

3. Blocked accounts

No

VI. Imports and Import Payments
1. Foreign exchange budget

No

2. Financing requirements
for imports

No

3. Documentation
requirements for release of
foreign exchange for

No

- 49 imports
4. Import licenses and other
nontariff measures

No

5. Import taxes and/or
tariffs

There are no quantitative restrictions on imports. With the exception of
selected items (e.g., cigarettes and alcohol with certain limits,
household effects of returning former residents), a uniform ad-valorem
tariff (6 percent) is levied on all imports. Also, excise taxes are levied
on imports of selected goods at specific or ad-valorem rates (10170 percent) depending on types of goods. In addition, the sale tax
(6 percent) is levied on the sum of customs value, import duty, and
excise payable.

a. Taxes collected through the
exchange system

6. State import monopoly

No

VII. Exports and Export Proceeds
1. Repatriation
requirements

No

2. Financing requirements

No

3. Documentation
requirements

No

4. Export licenses

No

5. Export taxes

No

VIII. Payments for Invisible Transactions and Current Transfers
Controls on transfers

No

IX. Proceeds from Invisible Transactions and Current Transfers
1. Repatriation
requirements

No

2. Restrictions on use of
funds

No

X. Capital Transactions
A. Controls on capital
transactions
1. Controls on capital and
money market instruments

No

2. Controls on derivatives
and other instruments

No

3. Controls on credit
operations

No

4. Controls on direct

No

No domestic capital and money markets have developed yet.

- 50 investment
5. Controls on liquidation of
direct investment

No

6. Controls on real estate
transactions
a. Purchase abroad by
residents

No

b. Purchase locally by
nonresidents

Yes

The constitution prohibits ownership of land by foreigners.

c. Sale locally by
nonresidents

Yes

The constitution prohibits ownership of land by foreigners.

7. Controls on personal
capital transactions

No

8. Provisions specific to
commercial banks and
other credit institutions
a. Borrowing abroad

No

b. Maintenance of accounts
abroad

No

c. Lending to nonresidents
(financial or commercial
credits)

No

d. Lending locally in foreign
exchange

Yes

All domestic transactions must be made in the domestic currency.

e. Purchase of locally issued
securities denominated in
foreign exchange

Yes

All domestic transactions must be denominated in the domestic
currency.

f. Differential treatment of
deposit accounts in foreign
exchange

No

g. Differential treatment of
deposit accounts held by
nonresidents

No

h. Investment regulations

No

i. Open foreign exchange
position limits

No

9. Provisions specific to
institutional investors

No

10. Other controls imposed
by securities laws

No

Changes During 2003
Exchange arrangement

Nov. 10

Timorese coins were introduced to serve as fractional currency to the
U.S. dollar.

Arrangements for payments
and receipts

Nov. 13

A new currency law revoked the restrictions on importing foreign currencies.
(Previously, imports of foreign currencies exceeding the equivalent of $2,000
are prohibited without a permit from the BPA. Also imports of currencies
issued by countries which maintain export restrictions were limited to the
equivalent of $500 without BPA approval.)

Statement by Pier Carlo Padoan, Executive Director for
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste and
Luis Saramago, Advisor to Executive Director
July 16, 2004
Ever since its first steps on its own, after the 1999 referendum that paved the way for
independence in 2002, Timor Leste has had to face challenges of an exceptional magnitude.
On top of recovering from the destruction caused by post-referendum mayhem, confronting
widespread poverty and struggling to build up, almost from scratch, all sorts of institutions
required for independent nations to thrive, the country had to cope with lingering security
problems, still pressing enough to justify the presence of a downsized UN peacekeeping
mission for another year.
Compelled to deal with such daunting tasks, the authorities have followed, among others, a
few simple but demanding guidelines: dollarization, to pre-empt monetary instability; tight
fiscal policy with a social perspective, to avoid the consequences of excessive budgetary
stimulus and mounting indebtedness, while trying to bias public expenditures towards the
poorer; prudent arrangements for future oil revenues, aiming to ensure both an adequate
generation-sharing of such revenues and their absorption by the economy in a nonunbalancing way; finally, the progressive setting up of a legal and administrative framework
able to sustain the normal operation of a democratic society and a market economy.
External assistance has been paramount in this context, as the authorities recognize,
acknowledging in particular the significant contribution put forward by the Fund, including
through Article IV missions.
Recent developments and policy stance
Adverse developments that took place in 2003 added further strain to the permanent burden
that results from the above constraints, therefore testing the authorities' resolve to uphold
their prudent approach to policy. On one hand, royalties from oil and gas turned out to be
significantly lower than budgeted, partly due to technical problems that affected the
development of the Bayu-Undan field (later to some extent recovered). On the other hand,
economic activity declined by a larger than expected measure, reflecting a faster pace of
international community unwinding and the impact of droughts on agriculture.
Both these events put significant pressure on the crucial domain of fiscal policy, the latter by
tempting authorities to attempt demand-sustenance through increased public expenditure.
Even though other sources of revenue were turning out to yield much more than budgeted,
namely in the form of indirect and oil/gas taxes, it was the authorities' understanding that
measures on the expenditure side were still called for, in order to keep an appropriately
cautious fiscal stance – trying in particular to compensate for a perceived increase in the
volatility of oil/gas revenues. They thus proceeded to implement significant expenditure
restraint, on both the current and the capital fronts, finally resulting in commendable fiscal
consolidation, additionally compounded by larger than expected donor grants.

-2The notion of a budgetary stimulus to sustain demand never amounted, therefore, to more
than a temptation, rejected in view of the authorities’ option for a borrowing policy that
avoids overburdening future generations, but also in recognition of supply-side constraints,
which might lead to a pick-up in inflation. Such an event, undesirable in itself for the usual
reasons (social unfairness and distortion of investment decisions), would moreover imply a
real appreciation of the effective exchange rate, most likely resulting in a loss of
competitiveness for the non-oil economy, which is to say something like symptoms of
Dutch disease even before the “virus” (oil sector’s distorting potential) really starts to grow.
Recent monetary and financial developments have actually been quite favorable, with
inflation increasingly subdued since mid-2003, after a surging period mostly caused by food
price behavior, and a significant increase in banking activity. This latter fact is particularly
welcome, for the lack of an effective banking system – capable of adequately fulfilling its
function of financial intermediation – has been frequently identified as a major shortcoming
of the Timorese economy.
Pushed by the entry of a third commercial bank into the market, a more dynamic approach by
another and increasing microfinance activity, recent progress in this area is indeed
remarkable: total credit to the private sector went from representing 13.5 percent of broad
money by end-June 2003 to 43.1 percent by end-March 2004. In spite of limited investment
opportunities, such an increase was achieved without compromising the financial position of
commercial banks – which remains solid, with bad loans amounting to no more than
1 percent of bank portfolios – and so the authorities intend to preserve it, remaining alert to
their banking supervision duties and committed to further improving the legal and
institutional framework.
Medium-term prospects
The same prudence the authorities gave proof of during 2003 also stands out as a major
feature of the medium-term macroeconomic prospects for Timor Leste, recently revised. As
the staff duly emphasizes, such prospects (which run until 2008) have improved significantly,
underscored by much sounder public finances. That is the result, on one hand, of a large
increase in expected revenues, both from oil/gas resources (reflecting somewhat more
favorable, but still relatively conservative, reviews of projected production levels,
international prices and the deduction for depreciation) and from other domestic sources
(in this case mostly reflecting the impact of measures taken to improve tax administration,
the first outcomes of which were already noticeable in 2003).
However, the improved prospects also result from the authorities’ determination to stick by
their cautious fiscal stance, therefore aiming to close the remaining financial gaps by means
of a significant expenditure cut (12 percent over previous projections) – with such cuts aimed
to a large extent at less essential outlays, and not so much at social or capital expenditures.
Caution is further present in the upholding of stringent provisions for budget financing
(no access to borrowing from domestic sources and voluntary refusal to tap external ones) as
it was in the steps taken to consolidate the solvability of public institutions (in particular the
power authority), therefore aiming to avoid unexpected calls for additional budget support. It
is worth emphasizing that as far as remaining residual financing gaps, even after a possible

-3boost in donor support, the authorities might then consider increasing the use of oil/gas
revenues, thus further avoiding the resort to external borrowing.
Effective and projected capital expenditure cuts, as those mentioned above, raise once more
one of the major policy dilemmas facing Timor Leste: how to reconcile huge public
investment needs (for basic reconstruction, poverty alleviation, private sector promotion and
so forth) with severely constrained institutional and administrative resources as well as the
economy’s limited absorption capacity in a non-inflationary way. These are long-term issues
that essentially require a permanent effort of structural reform from the authorities – who
have been trying to comply, as can be seen, for instance, in the training and capacity-building
initiatives going on (including the almost-finished Sector Investment Programs) and in the
new legislation already launched or being prepared to promote the private sector. Such issues
also require, nevertheless, continued support from the international community.
Use of oil and gas resources
Well aware that oil/gas resources can supplement that support in a significant way, but are
transitional in nature, the authorities consider of utmost importance both the design of a
sound strategy to deal with revenues resulting there from and the parallel need to promote
alternative activities – the latter in order to build up a diversified production structure,
capable of ensuring a post-oil/gas future with minimal disruptions to the economy in general
and public finances in particular.
Regarding oil/gas revenues, the main concerns are to ensure, first, that they are saved to an
adequate extent – now put at 85 percent of total oil/gas wealth, which is more than previously
intended (in recognition of the economy’s limited absorption capacity) but still allows
significant resources to be channeled for much needed poverty-alleviation and capacitybuilding expenditures. Apart from an adequate accumulation of oil/gas savings, the second
major concern is their management in a sound manner, for which purpose the authorities
reaffirm their commitment to set up by mid-2005 a petroleum fund inspired in the Norwegian
model – which they consider to be the most efficient and transparent way of ensuring a
smooth fiscal transition to a post-oil/gas future.
Monetary issues
The monetary and currency arrangement adopted by Timor Leste – with dollarization and the
interdiction of domestic financing to the government as the main features – appears to have
been serving the country well, as generally low inflation, a sound banking system and
induced fiscal rigor seem to attest. The option for the current arrangement was taken with due
knowledge of its drawbacks, namely to give up discretion in the conduct of monetary policy
and thus to forfeit an adjustment channel that could be of paramount importance for an
already highly vulnerable economy. However, it was the authorities' understanding that
precisely because of some of the economy’s vulnerabilities – most of all limited institutional
capacity and an underdeveloped financial system – it was in the best interest of the country to
adopt such an arrangement, giving up for the time being the introduction of a national
currency. In view of the mentioned results and of the fact that those vulnerabilities persist,
the authorities’ option seems so far to be vindicated and they therefore intend to maintain it.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/118
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 12, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the Democratic Republic
of Timor-Leste
On July 16, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.1
Background
Timor-Leste has begun nation-building following its restoration of independence in May 2002.
Progress has been made in consolidating the new government’s administrative power and
fostering a stable political environment, despite some early challenges. Further steps have been
taken under the government’s initiatives to reconstruct the economy from the severe destruction
of 1999 that followed the national referendum overwhelmingly supporting independence from
Indonesia.
Despite progress in economic reconstruction, significant economic challenges remain.
These challenges center around the strengthening of medium-term growth prospects to
alleviate widespread poverty. Meeting the challenges requires the authorities to address
deep-rooted structural problems, including poor infrastructure, low productivity (notably in
agriculture), an underdeveloped legal system for business activity, and serious institutional and
capacity constraints. Added to this task is the need for the productive use of growing oil/gas
revenues expected over the medium term from the exploitation of oil/gas resources in the
Timor Sea.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2-

After a strong recovery from the 1999 destruction, economic activity slowed down
substantially since mid-2002. Real GDP is estimated to have declined by 3 percent in 2003,
reflecting the lingering impact of a reduced international presence. Inflationary pressures,
however, have been waning in recent months, with CPI inflation declining to 4 percent
(year-on-year) in April 2004. The external current account excluding official transfers remains in
large deficit, but the deficit is narrowing, due to a further reduction in donor-assisted
reconstruction activities. The Bayu-Undan oil/gas project has come on stream, paving the way
for increased oil/gas revenues over the coming years. However, in the near and medium term
these revenues are projected to be substantially smaller than earlier projected due to low
production in initial few years.
Fiscal policy remains prudent. The budget for FY2003/04 (July–June) was tightened during the
mid-year budget review (November 2003) in response to a potential decline in oil/gas revenues.
A major tightening of expenditure policy was also incorporated in budget estimates for
FY2004/05 and three-year forward projections through FY2007/08, with total expenditure
budgeted to be compressed by 12 percent, on average, in comparison with the estimates
envisaged during the November 2003 mid-year budget review. The expenditure compression is
aimed primarily at narrowing the significant financing gaps that were projected during the
mid-year budget review due to a substantial weakening in the outlook of oil/gas revenues.
The prudent policy stance reflects the authorities’ continued avoidance of external borrowing, as
well as the lack of access to domestic borrowing under the current U.S. dollar-based monetary
and exchange rate arrangement.
The expansion of the banking system continues, although its activity remains largely confined to
the Dili area. Bank deposits increased by more than 35 percent (year-on-year) during the
12 months ending March 2004, as a third commercial bank commenced operations in mid-2003
and micro-financing operations gained momentum. Although a substantial portion of deposits
continue to be invested abroad, bank lending (mainly to the construction and trading sectors)
has started to pick up since mid-2003. Despite the increase, the amount of nonperforming loans
has remained modest. Steps have been taken to prepare a payments law to address risks
associated with the payments system and develop an insurance law to foster insurance
activities, as well as build a framework for insurance supervision.
Progress has been made in implementing structural measures relating to private sector
development and institution and capacity building. A commercial code and a company law were
enacted as initial steps to establish a legal and regulatory framework for business activity.
A policy paper on private investment was placed for public consultation in last November and
draft domestic and foreign investment laws have been submitted to the Council of Ministers.
Following the enactment of a basic law for land ownership in early 2003, draft laws for
(i) leasing of private and public land and (ii) land and property dispute mediation are currently
being reviewed by the Council of Ministers. To strengthen institutions and capacity (particularly
those relating to governance and service delivery), actions are being taken in the context of the
donor-supported Second Transition Support Program. Nonetheless, Timor-Leste continues to
depend heavily on international experts for its daily administrative operations, and acceleration
in institution and capacity building remains a major challenge, especially in view of a further
winding-down of the UN-supported capacity building program.

-3-

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the
authorities for their prudent macroeconomic policies in a challenging environment, and for the
initial steps taken to address Timor-Leste’s deep-rooted structural problems. Directors noted,
however, that the significant weakening in economic activity underscores the urgency of strong
actions to alleviate the country’s widespread poverty and serious underemployment.
They agreed that the authorities will need to step up their efforts to develop a dynamic private
sector, strengthen Timor Leste’s institutions and capacity, and make effective use of oil/gas
wealth in order to improve growth prospects and reduce poverty. They stressed that continued
international assistance will be essential to support the authorities’ efforts toward these
objectives.
Directors commended the authorities for maintaining a prudent fiscal policy to narrow the
projected large financing gaps and safeguard the budget against volatile oil/gas revenues.
They stressed the importance of follow-up actions to make the budget estimates for FY 2004/05
and over the medium term credible, while minimizing the adverse economic impact of the
budgeted spending cuts. In this context, Directors highlighted the need for improvements in
expenditure execution, careful prioritization of spending, and maintaining the policy of restraint
with respect to wages and salaries, while ensuring that critical human resource needs in the
public sector are effectively met. They also encouraged the authorities to step up efforts to
improve the financial position of the power authority.
Directors observed that, despite the significant expenditure compressions, some financing gaps
will still remain over the medium term. In the event that these gaps are not fully closed through
further donor assistance, Directors advised the authorities to consider other financing options,
given the limited scope for additional fiscal adjustment. These options should include the
increased use of oil/gas revenues and the prudent tapping of concessional loans to fund
essential capital investments, consistent with the country’s absorptive and debt management
capacity.
Directors underscored the critical importance of developing a long-term fiscal strategy aimed at
ensuring the productive use of the country’s oil/gas wealth, while sustaining a sound fiscal
position over the long run. They agreed that part of the oil/gas wealth should be used to meet
pressing investment needs for infrastructure and human capital development. However, they
stressed that an unduly ambitious public investment program should be avoided in view of the
country’s still limited absorptive capacity, and indicated that a significant portion of oil/gas
wealth should be saved in financial assets for future generations. Directors shared the
government’s view that, over the long-term, the non-oil tax base should be broadened in order
to avoid excessive reliance on oil/gas revenue.
Directors encouraged the authorities to press ahead with their plan to establish a petroleum
fund by mid-2005, in response to the commencement of oil/gas production in the Bayu-Undan
field. They supported the authorities’ intention to base the fund on a Norwegian model designed
to ensure transparency and accountability in the management of oil/gas savings, and

-4underscored that the continuation of a prudent fiscal policy will be essential for the effective
operation of this fund. They welcomed the provision of Fund technical assistance in this area.
Directors reiterated their support for the current U.S. dollar-based monetary and exchange rate
regime, in view of the existing institutional and financial constraints. Given the constraints of the
current regime, prudent fiscal and wage policies will be essential to help avoid an erosion in
Timor-Leste’s external competitiveness. Directors welcomed the recent increases in bank
lending and financial intermediation, while stressing the importance of close monitoring by the
monetary authority to keep bank portfolios sound. They looked forward to the enactment of
legislation on money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism.
Directors underscored the critical importance of private sector development in improving
Timor-Leste’s growth prospects and fostering economic diversification. They looked forward to
the timely enactment of legislation to establish a clear framework for business activity, steps to
develop an independent judiciary, and the swift completion and implementation of the Sector
Investment Programs to improve infrastructure. Directors commended the authorities for their
commitment to maintain a liberal trade and investment regime, but cautioned against the
introduction of tax incentives to promote investment in view of their general ineffectiveness and
potentially large revenue losses.
Directors urged the authorities to intensify their efforts to strengthen Timor-Leste’s institutions
and capacity, and welcomed their commitment to progress in this area. Given the further
scaling-back in the UN-supported capacity building program, they stressed the importance of
the expeditious implementation of medium-term capacity building plans, especially for the
Ministry of Planning and Finance (MOPF). They welcomed initial steps to ‘Timorize” senior
positions at the monetary authority, and encouraged further progress in improving the capacity
of local officials.
Directors noted serious weaknesses in Timor-Leste’s macroeconomic data. To build on the
enactment of the statistical law last year, they urged the authorities to take early steps to
improve the data, especially those relating to national accounts and the balance of payments,
as well as to strengthen staff resources.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV
Consultation with the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste is also available.

-5-

Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999–2004

Output and prices
GNP at current prices (in millions of U.S. dollars)
GDP
Oil/gas income
Real GDP growth (percentage change)
Inflation (percentage change at end-period) 1/2/

1999

2000

2001
Est.

2002

2003

2004
Proj.

270
270
0
-35
140

329
321
8
15
3

400
387
13
15
0

397
381
17
3
10

372
341
31
-3
4

370
328
42
1
4

(In percent of GDP)
Investment-saving balance
Gross investment 3/
Gross national savings
External savings

21
-13
34

33
-53
85

31
-47
78

29
-43
73

27
-32
60

24
-21
45

Government budget (CFET) 4/
Revenues
Domestic revenues
Oil/gas revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

7.7
4.0
3.7
14.5
8.4
6.1
-6.8

8.1
5.3
2.8
13.7
10.7
3.0
-5.5

13.5
5.3
8.2
19.6
15.6
4.0
-6.1

17.7
8.2
9.5
22.1
19.0
3.1
-4.4

20.4
7.0
13.4
22.8
19.7
3.1
-2.4

Combined sources fiscal operations 4/5/
Revenues
Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance

...
...
...
...
...

8
122
96
26
-114

9
121
97
23
-111

15
105
82
22
-90

19
91
72
19
-72

22
79
62
17
-56

Money and credit
Broad money (end-period) 6/
Net domestic assets (end-period)

48
47

6
-4

13
-4

14
-9

21
-11

23
-18

-230
43
-195
7
-203

-170
40
-158
8
-167

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/8/
Merchandise imports 7/

-92
6
-67
52
-119

-279
48
-235
5
-240

-309
54
-264
4
-268

-292
44
-245
6
-251

-6Timor-Leste: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999–2004

Overall balance

1999

2000

0

16

2001
Est.
8

2002

2003

20

18

2004
Proj.
17

-67
13
-57
2
-59
5

-52
12
-48
3
-51
5

(In percent of GDP)
Current account excl. official transfers
Current account incl. official transfers
Trade balance
Merchandise exports 7/8/
Merchandise imports 7/
Overall balance

-34
2
-25
19
-44
0

-87
15
-73
2
-75
5

-80
14
-68
1
-69
2

-77
12
-64
2
-66
5

Sources: Data provided by the Timor-Leste authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Rupiah-based CPI for Dili through 2000 and, thereafter, dollar-based CPI for Dili.
2/ The figure for 2004 relates to April.
3/ Excludes investment relating to the oil/gas sector.
4/ On the basis of fiscal year (July-June); for example, 2000 relates to FY2000/01.
5/ Include fiscal and quasi-fiscal expenditure programs undertaken by bilateral donors and international financial institutions
outside the central government budget.
6/ Figures after 1999 exclude currency holdings by the public, on which no data are available. The figure for 2004 relates to
March.
7/ Figures before 2000 include unrecorded border trade.
8/ Excludes oil/gas revenues, which are recorded under the income account (royalties) and transfers (tax revenues).

