February 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/44

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Nepal: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Nepal
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Nepal, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on November 2, 2005, with the officials of Nepal on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on December 30, 2005. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its January 18, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Nepal.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
NEPAL
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Nepal
Approved by Wanda Tseng and Matthew Fisher
December 30, 2005
•

A staff team visited Kathmandu during October 20–November 2, 2005 to conduct
the 2005 Article IV consultation discussions. The team comprised Sanjay Kalra (head),
Ari Aisen, Nombulelo Wandwasi (all APD), Christian Beddies (PDR), and
Sukhwinder Singh (Resident Representative). The mission met former Finance Minister
Rana, State Finance Minister Jyoti, National Planning Commission Vice Chairman Sharma,
Nepal Rastra Bank Governor Bhattarai, Chief Cabinet Secretary Karki, Finance Secretary
Acharya, and other senior officials. The mission also met representatives of the donor
community, private sector, labor unions, political parties and civil society, and journalists.
The mission coordinated closely with resident missions of the World Bank and Asian
Development Bank, and bilateral donors. Ms. Phang (Executive Director) and Mr. Sukada
(Alternate Executive Director) participated in the consultation discussions.

•

Nepal accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in May 1994, and the
exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions.

•

The 2003 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on August 22, 2003.
Executive Directors emphasized the need to alleviate poverty by raising economic growth
over the medium term through the implementation of structural reforms, especially in the
financial and public sectors. Directors commended the authorities for maintaining broad
fiscal stability to create conditions to support economic growth. Directors also agreed that
monetary and exchange rate policies should remain geared to supporting the exchange rate
peg. They also underlined that growth prospects remain contingent on political stability,
improved security, and progress towards peace.

•

The principal authors of this staff report are Sanjay Kalra and Sukhwinder Singh.

–2–

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I.

Introduction....................................................................................................................5

II.

Stocktaking and Recent Developments .........................................................................5
A.
Growth and Poverty ...........................................................................................5
B.
Fiscal Developments..........................................................................................7
C.
Monetary and External Sector Developments ...................................................9

III.

Outlook and Risks........................................................................................................10

IV.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................10
A.
Maintaining Macroeconomic Stability ............................................................11
B.
Structural Reforms ...........................................................................................15
C.
PRGF Arrangement .........................................................................................19
D.
Enhanced HIPC and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiatives ................................19
E.
Other Issues......................................................................................................19

V.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................20

Boxes
1.
The Decline in Poverty ..................................................................................................8
2.
Land Reforms and Agricultural Productivity ..............................................................18
Figure
1.
Economic Developments .............................................................................................23
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2000/01–2005/06 .......................................................24
Summary of Government Operations, 2003/04–2007/08............................................25
Monetary Accounts, 2002/03–2005/06........................................................................26
Balance of Payments, 2000/01–2009/10......................................................................27
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2001/02–2009/10 .................................28
Status of Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets ...........................29
Status of Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for Second Review
Under the PRGF Arrangement....................................................................................30
Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for the Third Review
Under the PRGF Arrangement....................................................................................31
Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015..............................................................32

–3–

Annexes
1.
Past Main Policy Recommendations and the Authorities’ Responses ........................33
2.
Debt Sustainability Analysis........................................................................................34
3.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................43
4.
Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................45
5.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................52
6.
Statistical Issues...........................................................................................................53

–4–

Executive Summary
Continued political tensions and the decade long insurgency continue to dampen
growth and impede poverty reduction. Real GDP growth averaged 2 percent during
2000/01−2004/05, compared to 5 percent in the 1990s. Notwithstanding a decline during the
last decade, poverty remains high. Nepal also lags in human development indicators. The
proximate causes are insufficient growth, inefficient resource allocation in key sectors, and
poor governance and social service delivery. While macroeconomic stability has been
maintained, institution building and structural reform implementation has lagged.
Growth is projected to remain modest and risks remain. GDP growth is expected to be
2½–3½ percent in 2005/06 and is projected to rise to 5–5½ percent over the medium term, if
the security situation improves, political tensions can be resolved, and structural reforms are
implemented. While manufacturing and tourism are expected to be the main sources of
growth, a significant contribution from agriculture is also envisaged. Inflation is expected to
remain below 5 percent. The current account deficit is projected to increase, but higher aid,
remittances, and other inflows should allow international reserves to be maintained at
adequate levels. The security situation, political tensions, and shortfall in external aid if
structural reform implementation does not proceed remain key risks.
Key fiscal policy challenges over the medium term are to improve revenue mobilization,
prioritize spending, and contain domestic borrowing. While the revenue-to-GDP ratio has
risen, in part due to an increase in the VAT rate, measures to strengthen administration are
required by improving the operations of the Large Taxpayer Office and customs
administration, and plugging excise leakages. Despite security-related spending pressures,
which remain high, spending needs to be directed toward priority social and infrastructure
sectors to help reduce poverty. Limited domestic borrowing and efforts to mobilize external
aid will help maintain fiscal sustainability.
Monetary policy should remain geared to supporting the peg to the Indian rupee. The
peg has served Nepal well given close ties with India and has helped to keep inflation at low
levels. The level of the peg appears broadly appropriate for now, but should remain under
review, given impending commitments under global and regional trading arrangements and
external shocks. Competitiveness needs to be raised through labor market reforms,
improvement in the business climate, and better infrastructure to lower transactions and
transportation costs.
Structural reform implementation is critical to restoring growth and reducing poverty.
The key reform areas are financial sector, public enterprises, and governance. In the financial
sector, the critical issue is to increase significantly loan recoveries from large, willful
defaulters. Other priorities include improving financial sector legislation, strengthening the
central bank, and restructuring insolvent commercial and development banks to improve
intermediation. Liquidation of unviable pubic enterprises should proceed quickly.
Governance reforms are required to increase accountability and reduce corruption.

–5–

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This Article IV consultation takes place against a background of continued
political tensions in Nepal. Tensions have intensified since King Gyanendra took over
executive powers on February 1, 2005. While King Gyanendra has promised to restore
democracy and security within three years, key political parties and civil society are engaged
in street protests for immediate and full restoration of multiparty democracy. These protests
have the potential—as they did in the early 1990s—to take a violent turn. Although
municipal elections have been announced for February 2006 and parliamentary elections by
April 2007, there is widespread skepticism as to whether the elections can be conducted in a
free and fair manner, given the ongoing insurgency and security situation.
2.
The royal takeover and subsequent government actions have also met with
international criticism. Key countries have placed their military and bilateral assistance
under review. Restrictions on the media and on activities of NGOs have also drawn
international criticism. Donors have called—with no perceptible impact—for all sides to
negotiate a peaceful settlement to address the root causes of the insurgency.
3.
The insurgency—now a decade old—reflects widespread poverty, exclusion, and
poor governance and continues to take a heavy human toll. Casualties from the
insurgency now exceed 12,000 and most observers rule out a military solution. Meanwhile,
the unilateral ceasefire by the insurgents which has been in place since September and a joint
statement by the key political parties and insurgents in November are raising pressures on
King Gyanendra to negotiate a settlement.
II. STOCKTAKING AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
A. Growth and Poverty
4.
The key economic policy challenge facing Nepal is to raise growth and reduce
poverty. A series of governments helped finalize a poverty reduction strategy in May 2003,
after extensive consultations with stakeholders and donors. The Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) is based on four pillars: broad-based economic growth; social sector
development; targeted programs for the poor and deprived groups; and good governance.1
PRSP objectives include macroeconomic stability, institution building, and structural reforms
to raise growth. Even as the current government has placed greater emphasis on security than
previous governments, the PRSP continues to broadly guide its economic policies.

1

A Joint Staff Assessment of the PRSP was circulated to Executive Boards of the IMF and
the World Bank in October 2003. A Joint Staff Advisory Note on progress in implementing
PRSP policies during 2003/04 was circulated to the Boards in December 2005.

–6–

5.
Notwithstanding a broad consensus on PRSP strategy, political uncertainties
have impeded implementation since mid-2004. Prior to mid-2004, structural reforms
progressed, including in the context of the PRGF arrangement, World Bank, AsDB, and
other donor supported programs.2 A number of policy recommendations made during the
2003 Article IV consultation have been implemented (Annex I). The takeover by King
Gyanendra appears to have pushed reforms to the backburner as the government has tried to
address the security situation and political opposition to the takeover.
6.
Growth has fallen significantly below the trend rate of the 1990s since the
intensification of the insurgency in 2000. Real GDP growth averaged 2 percent
during 2000/01−2004/05, compared to
12
12
the 1990s when significant trade
Nepal
Real GDP Growth
South Asia 1/
India
10
10
liberalization contributed to average
China: Mainland
34
real GDP growth of 5 percent. Since
8
8
the intensification of the insurgency,
6
6
manufacturing and transportation have
4
4
suffered from destruction of
2
2
production capacity, work stoppages,
and extortion by insurgents. Tourist
0
0
1991/92–1999/00
2000/01–2004/05
arrivals remain below peak levels of
the late 1990s. Progress in
implementing large infrastructure and
hydroelectric projects has also been impeded by security concerns.
Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF, World Economic Outlook.
1/ Average of Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka.

7.
Growth fell to 2½ percent in 2004/05, and inflation has risen in recent months.
Growth was lower both in the agricultural and nonagricultural sectors compared to 2003/04.
Inflation has remained in the low single digits, although it rose to 7¾ percent in
mid-October 2005 (12-month basis), including on account of the VAT rate increase in
January 2005 and partial pass-through of higher international oil prices by Nepal Oil
Corporation (NOC).
8.
Notwithstanding a decline in the last decade, poverty remains high and human
development indicators are low. The poverty ratio fell from 42 percent in 1995/96 to
2

A Poverty Reduction Support Credit was approved by the World Bank in 2003. AsDB has
provided support through Governance Reform Program and Public Sector Management
Loan.
3
4

Fiscal year begins mid-July.

Staff’s analysis suggests that, compared to other South Asian countries, more frequent
shifts in government in Nepal reduced growth by an estimated ¾ percent per year. Chapter I,
selected issues paper, “Political Instability and Growth in Nepal.”

–7–

31 percent in 2003/04, including on account of rising remittances which were a mainstay of
the economy in a difficult period (Box 1).5 The decline in poverty was broad based.
Nevertheless, poverty in certain regions and the population living on less than $1/day is high
and human development indicators are low relative to Nepal’s MDG targets.
Selected Social Indicators in Asia, 2003

Human development index rank
Life expectency at birth
Adult literacy rate
Reduction in infant mortality
(from 1970; per 1,000 live births
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Population on less than $1/day (in percent) 1/

Nepal

China

Sri Lanka

India

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Pakistan

136
62
49

85
72
91

93
74
90

127
63
61

139
63
41

134
63
47

135
63
49

104
61
24.1

55
30
16.6

52
13
7.6

64
63
35.3

99
46
36.0

86
70
...

39
61
...

Source: Human Development Report 2005 , UNDP; and World Development Indicators , World Bank.
1/ Data is as of 2004 in Nepal, 2002 in Sri Lanka, 2001 in China, and 2000 in India and Bangladesh.

B. Fiscal Developments
9.
In recent years, an increase in revenue mobilization has offset the decline in
external aid to help maintain expenditure and limit domestically financed deficits.
Compared to the 1990s, domestic revenue collection rose by over 2 percent of GDP during
2000/01–2004/05.6 This increase
Nepal: Government Operations
helped sustain an increase in security1990/91–1999/00 2000/01–2004/05
related and social services spending
(Annual
average, percent of GDP)
(education, health, drinking water, and
Revenue and grants
11.4
14.0
local development), while also limiting
Of which : revenue
9.7
12.1
Expenditure and net lending
16.2
16.4
overall and domestically financed
Of which : current
...
11.4
deficits even as external aid flows
Deficit (after grants)
4.8
2.5
Foreign financed
3.1
1.0
declined.
Domestically financed
1.7
1.5
Memorandum item:
Social services 1/
4.5
5.3
10.
The overall and domestically
Of which : health and education
3.0
3.8
Security related
1.8
2.9
financed deficits remained limited
External aid
4.8
2.9
in 2004/05. The VAT rate was raised
Sources: IMF, GFS; IMF, IFS; FCGO, Economic Survey ; and staff estimates.
in the revised budget from 10 percent
1/ Social services include education, health, drinking water, and local development.
to 13 percent in early-2005, and helped
raise revenue by ¾ percentage point of GDP to 13 percent of GDP (Table 2). Even so,
revenue fell short of the revised budget target due to weaker than projected growth and

5
6

Chapter II, selected issues paper, “Remittances and the Nepalese Economy.”

The VAT was introduced in 1997, and the 2002 income tax reforms closed a number of
loopholes and broadened the tax base.

–8–

Box 1. Nepal: The Decline in Poverty
Poverty in Nepal fell dramatically between 1995/96 and 2003/04.1 During this period, the
poverty headcount is estimated to have fallen from 42 percent to 31 percent. Poverty declined in
both rural and urban areas,
Nepal: Growth and Redistribution Components of Decline in Poverty
and across regions.
Inequality also increased.
Contribution
This increase was largely due
Change
1995/96
2003/04
Growth Inequality
to faster growth of
consumption in the highest
(In percent)
(In percentage points)
income group.
Nepal
Urban
Rural

42
22
43

31
10
35

-11
-12
-9

-24
-12
-17

13
0
9

This decline in poverty is
attributable to solid growth
Source: The World Bank, Nepal: Draft Poverty Assessment, December 2005.
in remittances and wages,
improved connectivity,
urbanization, and a decline in the dependency ratio. With an estimated 1 million workers
abroad in 2004, remittances to 12 percent of GDP, contributing to an increase in real per capita
expenditure by 42 percent. Agricultural wages increased by about 25 percent in real terms over
the period due to tighter labor market conditions and better connectivity through rural roads. The
ratio of the population in urban areas—where poverty was lower to start with—rose from
7 percent to 15 percent. The larger decline in urban poverty reflects higher education levels,
higher economic returns to skills, and wider opportunities for gainful employment in these areas.
Increased urbanization shifted the labor force to higher productivity jobs in the urban centers.
A cross-section analysis of the 2003/04 data points to the correlates of poverty. The following
factors are associated with a lower probability of a household being poor: higher levels of
schooling of the head of the household; the household head’s main occupation is in trade and
services; the household is female headed; households with more land; and households with a
smaller number of children less than 6 years old.
This analysis of poverty points to a number of policy conclusions. It highlights that poverty
alleviation requires sustained growth, improved developmental impact of remittances, better
physical and social infrastructure, human capital, and asset ownership. At the same time, it
suggest that the positive effects of growth on poverty reduction—most importantly through a
restoration of peace and stability—can be complemented by continued decentralization and
measures to combat social exclusion.
______________
1

Nepal Living Standards Survey, The World Bank, 2005.

–9–

imports, continued excise leakages, and delayed excise duty refunds from India. Current
spending was lower than the revised budget: the higher civil service wages and allowances
and security-related expenditures were more than offset by lower spending on development
and social sector projects, especially in the conflict-affected areas. The overall deficit was
lower than budgeted (1 percent of GDP compared to 2½ percent of GDP). As a result,
although external loans fell short of the budget, as assistance from the World Bank, AsDB,
and donors dwindled, the domestically financed deficit was also lower than budgeted (at
½ percent of GDP).
C. Monetary and External Sector Developments
11.
Monetary and exchange rate policies remained geared to supporting the
exchange rate peg to the Indian rupee. Broad money growth slowed from 12¾ percent in
2003/04 to 8 percent in 2004/05, reflecting substantially lower NFA accumulation by the
NRB (Table 3). While budget financing from the banking system was limited, private sector
credit grew by 13¼ percent, mainly in consumer lending. Balance sheet consolidation by the
two largest banks undergoing
restructuring limited the growth of loans
2500
2500
Exports to India
Nepal : Composition of Trade
Exports to other countries
for manufacturing and services sectors.
(In millions of U.S. dollar)
Non-oil imports
2000
2000
Oil imports
With high remittances, liquidity was
ample, T-bill rates remained low, and
1500
1500
interest rates edged lower.
12.
The current account and
overall balance of payments remained
in surplus. Despite disruptions related to
the insurgency and the elimination of
textile quotas, total exports rose by
10 percent in 2004/05. This was mainly
due to booming exports to India which
rose by 30 percent, while exports to other
countries declined by over 15 percent
(Table 4). Export performance in
traditional sectors—garments, carpets,
and pashmina—remained weak.7 Total
import growth was stagnant due to weak
economic activity—a 35 percent increase
in oil imports reflecting higher

1000

1000

500

500
nplsr1i

0

1998/99

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

0

2003/04

Nepal: Remittances
1000

800

25

In millions of U.S. dollars (left scale)

600

20

15
In percentage of GDP (right scale)

400

10

200

5

0

0
1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and Nepalese authorities.

7

In particular, garment exports fell by 37 percent (after a 20 percent decline in 2003/04).
While the removal of MFA quotas contributed to this decline, domestic inefficiencies and
disruptions were also significant contributory factors.

– 10 –

international prices was offset by a 6 percent decline in non-oil imports. Reflecting continued
strong remittances, the current account surplus (excluding official transfers) increased from
1 percent of GDP in 2003/04 to 3 percent of GDP in 2004/05. A small overall surplus in the
balance payments led to an increase in international reserves to around US$1½ billion at
end-2004/05 (7½ months of imports of goods and services).
III. OUTLOOK AND RISKS
13.
Nepal’s growth prospects are contingent on political stability and improved
security. Staff project real GDP growth of 2½−3½ percent in 2005/06. With the peg,
inflation is expected to broadly follow price developments in India, although a full
pass-through of international oil prices could temporarily add 2−3 percentage points to
inflation in 2005/06. In this scenario, if political stability and better security conditions can
be established and structural reforms are implemented, Nepal could see a gradual return to
growth rates of 5−5½ percent through 2009/10. This would require a rebound in
manufacturing and service sectors, higher tourism earnings, and a larger contribution from
agriculture and government activity. The external position would be supported by export
diversification, tourism, remittances, and aid flows. However, if the conflict persists and the
political impasse stalls reform implementation, low growth rates are likely to become
entrenched, security-related spending pressures will remain high, and development spending
low. In these conditions, the fiscal and external position could deteriorate, and international
reserves could be lower.
IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
14.
The consultation discussions focused on two main issues. First, how to preserve
macroeconomic stability by implementing a fiscal framework focused on mobilizing
revenue, containing expenditure, and limiting domestic financing to levels consistent with
medium-term fiscal sustainability and gearing monetary and exchange rate policies to
support the exchange rate peg to the Indian rupee. Second, how to further reform
implementation under the current political conditions to improve growth prospects and
reduce poverty. It was agreed that the PRSP strategy remains broadly appropriate. It was also
agreed that further reforms in the financial sector, public enterprises and governance, and
regulation and labor market would help to address fundamental constraints on growth—
inadequate financial intermediation, inefficient resource allocation in the public and private
sectors, a deficient climate for business activity, and rigidities in the labor market. Reforms
are also required in agriculture, the largest sector in the economy, to achieve productivity
increases which can raise farm incomes and ensure that land reforms are more successful in
their objective of reducing poverty. On implementation, the authorities acknowledged that
reforms had been slowed by political considerations but pointed to measures taken since
mid-2005, especially the promulgation of five key ordinances to improve governance and the
regulatory framework, as demonstration of their resolve to implement PRSP reforms.

– 11 –

A. Maintaining Macroeconomic Stability
Fiscal Policies
15.
The 2005/06 budget was formulated in line with medium-term fiscal objectives
of improving revenue mobilization, containing expenditure pressures, and limiting
domestically financed deficits. Revenue was projected to increase through the full year
effect of the higher VAT rate, steps to plug excise leakages, and a step-up in privatization.
The budget also made allocations for a significant step-up in development spending,
including in the conflict-affected areas, and assumed that support from the World Bank
would be available through a follow-up PRSC. The budget targeted an overall deficit of
2 percent of GDP and domestic financing of ¾ percent of GDP.
16.
While revenue and external aid are projected to be lower than the budget, lower
expenditure would help limit domestic financing in 2005/06. The authorities agreed with
staff that lower growth and the unsettled security conditions would likely lead to revenue
shortfalls. However, they were optimistic, more so than staff, that improvements in tax
administration—the October Finance Ordinance and introduction of the security sticker
regime for excisable goods—could offset some of revenue decline from lower growth.8
There was also agreement that social sector grants and foreign-financed capital expenditures
would remain low due to difficulties in carrying out development activities in conflictaffected areas. Staff encouraged the authorities to further pursue higher social sector and
infrastructure spending (especially for rural roads) through greater community and user
group participation. The overall deficit is projected to be lower than budgeted (at 1¼ percent
of GDP). While external loans would likely be lower than budgeted, the authorities believed
that domestic financing could be contained to ¾ percent of GDP; staff estimated that it could
be around 1 percent of GDP.
17.
To alleviate donor concerns about the quality of spending, staff urged the
authorities to improve fiscal transparency and public expenditure management. Within
limits placed by national security considerations, the authorities agreed that reporting of
security-related spending could be more comprehensive. They also intended to implement
ROSC recommendations, including broader coverage of off-budget activities and integration
of annual budgets into the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). A strengthened
MTEF could incorporate higher pro-poor allocations, improve unit costing, and enhance
reporting of outcomes. Staff cautioned against nonconcessional external loans, government

8

The main tax administration provisions of the Finance Ordinance relate to a voluntary
disclosure of stocks and partial deferral of the tax liability (without penalty), greater public
awareness to broaden VAT registration, and reintroduction of the VAT threshold for selected
goods (such as electronics) where tax evasion is considered to be extensive. The sticker
regime consists of affixing excise stamps to individual items to reduce tax evasion.

– 12 –

guarantees, and suppliers credits. These options were contemplated recently for some
defense-related purchases.
18.
For the medium term, the authorities aimed to further mobilize revenue and
limit domestic financing while meeting higher expenditure needs. Improvements in
administration, including lower excise leakages and elimination of VAT exemptions, would
help boost revenue. The authorities were considering introduction of performance-based
incentive schemes in the Large Taxpayer Office (LTO) and customs administration to
improve collections, but noted implementation difficulties related to design of the schemes
and resistance from other parts of the civil service. A further increase in the VAT rate could
also be considered, if needed, to meet recurrent spending needs, along the lines
recommended in past IMF technical assistance. On expenditure, the authorities noted that
security-related spending can be expected to remain high, and characterized such spending as
“an investment in peace.” They also noted that spending needs to improve physical and
human capital are high. In addition, the budget would have to shoulder the carrying cost of
contingent liabilities from financial sector and public enterprise reforms.9 These carrying
costs (interest on bonds and liquidation costs of public enterprises) would be around
¼−¾ percent of GDP. Staff estimates suggest overall deficits would rise as development
spending rises. However, with adequate external aid domestic financing could be limited to
¾ percent of GDP through 2010/11. Should aid fall short, spending on foreign-financed
capital projects is likely to be commensurately lower.
19.
While Nepal’s public debt is projected to decline over the medium term, external
debt vulnerabilities remain. Excluding contingent liabilities, public and publicly
guaranteed (PPG) debt is projected to
70
70
fall toward 50 percent of GDP
Nepal: Public Debt
(In percent of GDP)
by 2010/11. In an alternative scenario
65
65
with lower growth, the debt-to-GDP
ratio would still fall, but by a smaller
60
60
amount. As regards external debt, most
55
55
debt indicators remain below the
policy-dependent indicative thresholds
50
50
(based on World Bank classification of
Baseline scenario
Lower growth (2½–3½ percent growth rate from 2005/06 to 2010/11)
Nepal as a medium policy performer).
45
45
Contingent liabilities (10 percent of GDP in 2006/07)
However, at 172 percent, the NPV of
Projection
40
40
debt-to-exports of goods and services
2004/05
2005/06
2006/07
2007/08
2008/09
2009/10
2010/11
ratio at end-2004/05 exceeded the

9

These liabilities are currently estimated at 7−8 percent of GDP, the bulk of it for
recapitalization of NBL and RBB (6−7 percent of GDP).

– 13 –

indicative threshold of 150 percent.10 This reflected a low ratio of exports of goods and
services to GDP (16 percent) even as the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio was 27¾ percent.
Moreover, Nepal remains vulnerable to shocks, especially export growth slowdowns, and the
sensitivity analysis indicates that external debt dynamics are subject to a high risk of distress
(Annex II).
Nepal Oil Corporation
20.
Notwithstanding past price hikes, the NOC has operating and accumulated
losses due to inadequate pass-through of higher international oil prices. The NOC has
raised prices of petroleum products by 25–65 percent since December 2003. However, prices
for diesel and kerosene may have to be raised by an additional 25−30 percent to stem NOC
losses.11 In September 2005, the budget provided a loan of Nrs 1 billion (¼ percent of GDP)
to service payables to Indian Oil Corporation (IOC). Meanwhile, commercial banks are
increasingly unwilling to lend to NOC without government guarantees.
21.
The authorities recognized that an automatic pricing mechanism and full
pass-through of international prices to improve NOC finances was overdue. Given that
higher international oil prices are likely to persist, the authorities considered a phased, full
pass-through to domestic prices unavoidable and were considering raising prices by
end-2005. Staff noted that World Bank estimates suggest that the impact of the price changes
on the poor would be small, given consumption patterns reported in the 2003/04 Nepal
Living Standards Survey.12 The authorities also plan to allow private participation in the

10

These projections, conducted jointly with World Bank staff, are based on the Low-Income
Country Debt Sustainability Analysis (LIC-DSA) framework. The NPV of external debt-toexports ratio was reported at 136 percent at the time of the first review under the PRGF
arrangement (IMF Country Report No. 04/329). The higher value of 172 percent is
attributable to higher reported debt service obligations compared to previous submissions.
The current submission has been scrutinized for consistency with creditor records.

11

These losses are currently estimated at Nrs 450−550 million per month (1 percent of GDP
on an annualized basis). In addition, the debt obligations of NOC are estimated at
Nrs 6 billion (1 percent of GDP), including suppliers credits from IOC. The NOC breaks
even on its petrol and aviation fuel operations. Implementation of an automatic pricing
mechanism at prices reflecting NOC cost structure—scheduled for end-December 2004—
was a third review structural PC under the PRGF arrangement.
12

Results from the World Bank’s Poverty and Social Impact Analysis suggest that given the
low share of expenditure on petroleum products (primarily kerosene) by the lowest quintiles
of households in the urban areas, the impact of a price increase would be small. In the rural
areas, the use of kerosene is more limited as the primary fuel for cooking is firewood.

– 14 –

petroleum sector, leaving NOC only as a wholesaler. A review of NOC is also currently in
progress to accurately assess its financial position and operating efficiency.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
22.
The staff supported Nepal Rastra Bank’s view that the exchange rate peg to the
Indian rupee continues to be appropriate. Private sector representatives have asked, on
occasion, whether a more flexible exchange rate arrangement could help Nepal adjust better
to external shocks. The staff shared the NRB’s view that the peg has enabled the economy to
benefit from its close economic ties with India. These ties include extensive trade links, free
labor mobility through porous borders, and formal business links and informal family
relations. In particular, the peg eliminates exchange rate risk in the large volume of current
and capital account transactions with India. The peg provides credibility to policy by
importing stable monetary conditions from India and has contributed to low inflation rates.
The peg has also contributed to maintaining fiscal discipline, especially in the current
environment where spending pressure
are high.
125

125

Nepal: Real Effective Exchange Rates
(January 2000 = 100)

23.
The NRB broadly agreed
with the staff’s assessment that the
level of the peg appears to allow
Average + 2 SD
sufficient competitiveness. In
100
100
particular, overall exports have grown
Average
in recent years even as the real
Average - 2 SD
effective exchange rate (REER,
CPI-based) appears to have remained
broadly stable. It was agreed that
75
75
2001M1 2001M6 2001M11 2002M4 2002M9 2003M2 2003M7 2003M12 2004M5 2004M10 2005M3
external sector developments such as
elimination of MFA quotas in
early 2005, faster productivity growth in India, and WTO membership have implications for
competitiveness and would require that the level of the peg be kept under review.13 However,
improvements in the business climate and investment in infrastructure are key to raising
competitiveness by raising productivity and labor market flexibility, reducing transportation
and transactions costs, and easing supply bottlenecks.14
Source: INS.

13

Nepal became the 147th member of the WTO in April 2004 and has joined a number of
regional trading arrangements, including SAFTA and BIMSTEC. See Chapter III, selected
issues paper, “Nepal—Meeting the Challenges of Globalization.”
14

For example, on most indices of labor market rigidity in the World Bank survey on Doing
Business in 2006, Nepal is above the South Asian average.

– 15 –

B. Structural Reforms
Financial Sector
24.
The authorities have made progress in implementing their financial sector
reform strategy since 2002, although much remains to be done. These reforms have been
financed by the World Bank and AsDB, and cover three main areas: improvements in the
legal framework for financial sector activity; NRB “reengineering” to transform it into an
effective central bank; and restructuring of insolvent commercial and development banks to
improve financial intermediation.
25.
There was broad consensus on steps needed to further improve the legal
framework and NRB reengineering. On the legal framework, the authorities are
considering amendments in the Banking and Financial Institutions Ordinance (BFIO),
possibly higher capital requirements, and other provisions for mergers which could help the
financial system consolidate ahead of 2010 when competition would increase under WTO
commitments. As regards the NRB “reengineering,” a major achievement has been staff
reduction through voluntary and compulsory retirement schemes. The NRB now intends to
raise professionalism through better performance evaluation and incentives. Efforts are
underway to strengthen financial sector supervision, and to raise internal audit and
accounting standards.
26.
The legal framework for loan recovery has improved. New debt recovery
mechanisms (blacklisting directives, the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT), and an Appellate
Tribunal) have provided financial institutions with additional instruments to enforce
contractual obligations, raised awareness about sound banking practices, and led to some
recoveries from small- and medium-sized defaulters. However, the banks have been reluctant
to pursue many cases in the DRT due to concerns about its limited staff and capacity to
enforce rulings.
27.
Progress has been made with restructuring of commercial and development
banks. External management
teams at Nepal Bank Limited
Nepal: Financial Sector Indicators
(NBL) and Rastriya Banijya Bank
2002/03
2003/04
2004/05
(RBB)—the two largest banks
Financial institutions (number)
Commercial banks
17
17
17
which account for 50 percent of
Nonbank financial institutions 1/
102
106
117
banking system deposits—have
Banking system performance indicators
(In percent)
Capital
adequacy
(total
capital/total
risk
weighted
assets)
-12.0
-9.1
-2.6
eliminated the losses of the
NBL
-28.3
-25.0
-22.2
RBB
-44.3
-42.1
-35.0
banks; both banks made profits in
Other commercial banks
12.5
11.3
13.5
2003/04 and 2004/05. The
Asset quality (NPLs/total loans)
28.7
22.8
18.7
NBL
60.7
53.7
49.0
managers achieved this through
RBB
60.2
57.6
50.7
Liquidity (liquid assets/total deposits)
39.9
40.5
39.4
voluntary retirement schemes to
Profitability (return on assets: net profit or loss /total assets)
-1.1
1.2
1.5
reduce excess staff and reductions
Sources: Nepal Rastra Bank; World Bank, Financial Soundness Indicators ; and Fund staff estimates.
in their deposit rates to lower the
1/ Includes development banks (including rural and microcredit development banks), finance companies,
and cooperatives.
cost of funds. They also made

– 16 –

some headway in reducing the negative net worth of the banks. In addition, AsDB supported
restructuring plans for Agricultural Development Bank of Nepal (ADBN) have proceeded
well, including through a voluntary retirement scheme to reduce excess staff, changes in the
management team, and reconstitution of its board of directors. However, no progress has
been made with the restructuring of Nepal Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC) even
though its financial condition is dismal.15 The development bank has NPAs over 85 percent
and is a perennial loss-maker. Staff agreed that the NIDC can be privatized given the
substantial undervaluation of its fixed assets, and need not necessarily be liquidated. The
authorities agreed that NIDC privatization should be done early, transparently, and without
any capital injection.
28.
However, loan recovery from large willful defaulters remains contentious.
Recoveries from these defaulters are required to improve NBL and RBB balance sheets, pave
the way for their privatization, and reduce contingent liabilities for the budget. The banks’
efforts to seize collateral from defaulters have been stalled by stay orders issued by the
judiciary. At the same time, external shocks (e.g., elimination of MFA quotas and slack
tourism) and domestic disturbances have made it more difficult for some borrowers to
service loans. While accepting that economic conditions are difficult, staff noted that loan
nonrepayment is a longstanding problem and needs to be addressed firmly. Staff supported
the NRB’s view that the government should remain focused on supporting loan recovery. In
this context, staff also agreed with the NRB that inconsistencies, if any, in the legal
framework—such as those alleged between blacklisting directives and limited liability
provisions of the new Company Ordinance—can be handled by the courts. To further the
loan recovery process, staff supported full implementation of measures (such as revocation of
defaulters’ passports) enumerated in a recent high-level committee report.
Public Enterprises and Governance
29.
The authorities acknowledged that public enterprise reforms had lagged. Of the
thirty nonfinancial enterprises—operating in industrial, trading, services, and utilities
sectors—under full government ownership at end-2002/03, most of which were loss-making,
three enterprises have been privatized/liquidated.16 An additional five enterprises were to be
privatized by early 2005. Progress has been slow due to a combination of factors, including
slow decision-making, uncertain market conditions which make potential investors reluctant
to bid for enterprises, and court rulings obtained by unions against privatization/liquidation.
The authorities intended to press on with privatization/liquidation of loss-making enterprises.
They also noted that they were taking other actions to create space for the private sector in
15

The estimated assets of ADBN and NIDC—the two main development banks—at
end-2004/05 were 7½ percent of GDP and 1 percent of GDP, respectively.

16

Excluding NTC, the annual operating losses of these enterprises are estimated at
Nrs 1−1½ billion (¼ percent of GDP).

– 17 –

economic activity. These included recent market entry of a second mobile services provider
and plans for share offerings in Nepal Telecommunications Corporation.
30.
Some progress was made in governance reforms. After the Civil Service
Ordinance which was promulgated in July 2005, the authorities are in the final stages of
promulgating the Governance Ordinance, a reform supported by AsDB and World Bank
programs. This ordinance would clarify responsibilities between the executive and the civil
service. Decentralization is also progressing, especially in the health and education sectors
through transfer of schools and sub-health posts to local level management, with support
from the World Bank and donors. Progress in judicial reforms is slower. Staff encouraged the
authorities to make further progress in reducing corruption, noting that domestic stakeholders
and the international community believed that governance remains weak.
Regulation and Labor Market
31.
Efforts to improve the regulatory framework and reform the labor market are
underway. Staff welcomed the promulgation of four ordinances in September/October—
Secured Transactions, Company, Securities, and Insolvency—to improve the regulatory
environment. A draft Competition Ordinance is also being prepared. As regards labor
markets, the government has prepared a draft ordinance with provisions for more flexible
contractual hiring, and streamlined procedures for enterprise closure and layoffs. Staff
welcomed the flexibility provisions of the draft ordinance, but noted the need to
accommodate labor concerns about unemployment insurance and due process provisions to
ensure that new provisions balance flexibility with fairness in industrial employment.
Agricultural Sector
32.
Notwithstanding improved performance during the second half of the 1990s,
agricultural productivity in Nepal remains low. Crop yields are low relative to
neighboring states in India and Bangladesh. Limited availability and use of irrigation and
complementary inputs (improved seeds, fertilizers and technical advances), and limited
access to markets (especially for the mountainous regions) contribute to these low yields.
The size of landholdings had also become smaller progressively during decades of
population growth, making it difficult to exploit scale economies in the plains; the hilly areas
present problems related to a difficult terrain. The authorities acknowledged that while land
reforms have had some success in reducing inequity in landholding in the rural areas,
landholders require complementary inputs to raise agricultural productivity (Box 2). They
noted that the twenty-year Agricultural Perspective Plan (APP) initiated in 1995 aims to
improve the delivery of these inputs and infrastructure to promote commercialization and
market access. A number of the policies from the APP are included in the PRSP.

– 18 –

Box 2. Nepal: Land Reforms and Agricultural Productivity
Land reforms have often been credited with spurring growth, reducing inequality, and
inducing structural transformation. This is especially the case for East Asian countries.1 In these
countries, land reforms have improved agricultural growth and productivity, raising living
standards, and paving the way for a shift to industrial societies. Greater equality in landholding and
lower landlessness in agricultural economies is also associated with lower social and economic
conflict. By the same token, landlessness in Nepal is closely associated with the insurgency and
intensity of conflict.

Cumulative Landholding

In Nepal, land reforms have been undertaken across five decades, with mixed results.2
Landmarks in this process include
the Land Cultivation Act of 1956,
Nepal: Landholding Lorenz Curves, 1961–2001
100
the Land Act of 1957, the
Agricultural Reorganization Act
of 1963, the Land Reform Act
75
of 1964, the Land Reform
Commission of 1994, and the land
50
reforms of 2001. Land reforms in
Nepal, as in other South Asian
25
countries, have mostly involved
land redistribution from those that
have large holdings to the landless
0
0
25
50
75
100
or those with small holdings.
Cumulative Percent of Households
These efforts have taken the form
1961
1991
2001
Line of Equality
of a progressive reduction in
ceilings on land holdings. Efforts
have also been made to promote and protect tenancy rights. To some extent, these reforms have
reduced land inequality and some reduction in the ratio of landless households. However, with the
population increase over the decades, the absolute number of landless households has increased
and landholdings have further fragmented. Moreover, other reasons for limited success include the
inability of land recipients to assert their rights (due to lack of knowledge and/or illiteracy), the
generally low quality of the land that was redistributed, and the lack of complementary inputs.
Experience suggests that complementary inputs need to be in place to raise agricultural
productivity. Without these inputs, the impact of land reforms in Nepal on agricultural
productivity would likely remain limited. These inputs include rural finance for irrigation, farm
machinery, and fertilizers, and improvements in rural infrastructure to promote commercialization
and market access for agricultural produce. A number of these policies are envisaged in the 20-year
Agricultural Perspective Plan initiated in 1995 and are included in the PRSP. At the same time,
employment generation in urban areas would reduce pressures on land and provide gainful
opportunities in nonagriculture.
_________________
1

R. L. Prosterman and T. Hanstad, 2003, “Land Reform in the 21st Century,” RDI Reports on
Foreign Aid and Development, No. 117.
2
P.S. Thapa, 2001, “The Cost-Benefit of Land Reform,” Himal Magazine.

– 19 –

C. PRGF Arrangement
33.
Performance under the PRGF arrangement which was approved by the
Executive Board in November 2003 to support Nepal’s Poverty Reduction Strategy has
been mixed. Macroeconomic stability has been maintained. However, structural reforms
have progressed at a slower-than-envisaged pace. Progress was made in tax administration,
financial sector reforms (framework for banking sector activity, NRB reengineering and
restructuring of commercial and development banks), public expenditure management, and
decentralization of social sector service delivery. Based on this progress, the first review
under the arrangement was completed, with a delay, in October 2004. Since then, the second
and third reviews—envisaged to be completed in January and April 2005, respectively—
have not been completed. Most quantitative performance criteria for the reviews were met
(Table 6). A number of structural measures for the second review have also been
implemented (Table 7). However, only one measure for the third review has been
implemented (Table 8). While implementation in the current political and security conditions
remains difficult, donors have expressed a willingness to provide financial assistance if
reforms can be undertaken.
D. Enhanced HIPC and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiatives
34.
The authorities are considering participation in the enhanced HIPC initiative, if
found eligible. Based on the ongoing ring-fencing exercise, Nepal was considered
potentially eligible—on a preliminary basis—for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative. As part of the initial work in this exercise, the NPV of external debt for end-2004
was estimated at 200 percent of exports of goods and services.17 Since then, a reconciliation
of Nepal’s external debt database with creditor records has been completed and a final
determination on eligibility is expected to be made in early 2006. Preliminary estimates
indicate that the combined relief under the enhanced HIPC and Multilateral Debt Relief
(MDR) Initiatives could be up to US$1¼ billion in NPV terms (85 percent of exports of
goods and services). The authorities recognized that these initiatives provide an opportunity
to reduce significantly external debt obligations if Nepal can implement its reform agenda.
E. Other Issues
35.
The NRB is taking steps to follow through on safeguards issues. The international
auditor has finalized 2003/04 NRB accounts, a performance criterion for the third review,
and the Auditor General has appointed an international auditor for 2004/05. The Financial
Management Department is making efforts to adopt international accounting standards
(IFRS), and the Internal Audit Department is also being strengthened. However, weaknesses
17

This NPV computation generates a higher NPV-to-exports ratio than the LIC-DSA due to
the use of currency specific discount rates, which are currently lower than the LIC-DSA
discount rate.

– 20 –

identified by the external auditors in internal control and reporting systems remain to be
addressed.
36.
The authorities expressed satisfaction with past IMF technical assistance and
discussed future needs. They noted that technical assistance to the NRB—monetary
operations and public debt management—had helped implement the new framework for
monetary operations. Further assistance is required in improving tax administration,
preferably through a long term advisor. The authorities sought further assistance to address
statistical weaknesses (Annex VI), especially to improve national income accounts and to
construct trade price indices.
37.
The authorities are taking steps to improve external debt data management to
ensure accurate monitoring of external obligations. This would help ensure that such
incidents as the recent misreporting of external arrears related to the second disbursement
under the PRGF arrangement do not recur and payments are made on a timely basis. The
second disbursement under the arrangement was made in November 2004 on the basis of a
finding that all conditions applicable to the disbursement, including on the nonaccumulation
of external payment arrears, had been met. This finding later proved incorrect, as discussions
with the authorities revealed that Nepal had accumulated external payment arrears to Austria,
including between November 2003 and October 2004. As a result, the disbursement made in
November 2004 was noncomplying. The arrears which led to the noncomplying
disbursement have been cleared. The arrears are attributable to weak debt management and
coordination problems. The authorities are making a good-faith effort to service their debt in
a timely manner, strengthen debt management, and improve coordination. In light of these
corrective actions, it has been recommended that the Executive Board grant a waiver for
Nepal’s nonobservance of the continuous performance criterion on the nonaccumulation of
external payment arrears.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
Nepal’s growth performance has deteriorated and poverty remains high.
Unsettled political conditions and the insurgency have increasingly contributed to lower
growth. Notwithstanding a decline during the last decade, poverty remains high and Nepal
lags in human development indicators. The main causes include inefficient resource
allocation in key sectors, and poor governance and social service delivery.
39.
The PRSP strategy, reflecting the consensus of stakeholders across the political
spectrum, remains appropriate. To effectively implement this strategy and improve growth
prospects, resolution of the political uncertainties, improved security, and progress towards
peace are essential. Over the medium term, continued macroeconomic stability, institution
building, and structural reform are required to generate high, sustained growth and further
reduce poverty.

– 21 –

40.
Prudent fiscal policies in the past have helped maintain macroeconomic stability.
Efforts to raise the revenue-to-GDP ratio, increase social sector spending, and limit domestic
financing are commendable. Prioritization of expenditures as part of the MTEF is welcome.
41.
Looking forward, continued efforts to mobilize revenue, contain expenditure,
and limit domestic financing are required to ensure medium-term fiscal sustainability.
On revenues, there is considerable scope for improvements in tax administration, especially
customs, excises, and LTO operations to raise collections. As regards expenditure, low levels
of development spending, especially on foreign-financed infrastructure projects, continue to
dampen growth and restrict the achievement of PRSP objectives. External assistance and
development spending need to be raised, and domestically financed deficits limited to levels
consistent with fiscal sustainability. This requires implementing PRSP reforms, which will
help bring donor programs back on track. Contingent liabilities from banking and public
enterprise reforms should also be addressed, with donor assistance. To ensure that the NOC
does not pose an additional burden on the budget, a full pass-through of higher international
oil prices and implementation of an automatic pricing mechanism are essential.
42.
Fiscal transparency and improved public expenditure management can help
alleviate donor concerns about the quality of spending and improve resource allocation.
For this, implementation of fiscal ROSC recommendations would be key. The MTEF can be
further strengthened and pro-poor expenditure increased, primarily through better costing
and enhanced reporting of outcomes.
43.
Monetary and exchange rate policies to support the exchange rate peg to the
Indian rupee remain appropriate; the level of the peg should be kept under review. The
peg enables the economy to benefit from close economic ties with India, provides policy
credibility by importing stable monetary conditions, and keeps inflation at low levels.
Nevertheless, Nepal’s continuing integration with the global and regional economy and
external shocks require that the level of the peg be kept under review. External
competitiveness is best addressed by structural reforms and infrastructure investments to
reduce input costs and supply bottlenecks.
44.
While financial sector reforms have progressed, much remains to be done.
Commendable progress has been made in improving the legal and debt recovery frameworks,
NRB reengineering, and restructuring of RBB, NBL, and ADBN. Nevertheless, the legal
framework for financial sector activity can be further improved by amending the BFIO.
Further progress can be made at the NRB to improve staff performance and professionalism,
enhance financial sector supervision, and raise internal audit and accounting standards.
While the operations of the DRT need to be enhanced by increasing its staffing and
budgetary resources, significant loan recoveries from large, willful defaulters are required to
improve the balance sheets of RBB and NBL. This requires full implementation of
recommendations contained in the recent high-level committee report. The delay in NIDC
restructuring needs to be addressed by privatizing it promptly and transparently.

– 22 –

45.
Significant progress is required in public enterprise and governance reforms to
increase the efficiency, credibility and accountability of government operations.
Liquidation of unviable loss-making enterprises should proceed decisively. Other
mechanisms—such as share sales and management contracts—should be actively pursued for
large public enterprises to improve their efficiency. Staff welcomes the adoption of the Civil
Service Ordinance to improve governance, and urges early promulgation of the Governance
Ordinance. Anti-corruption efforts need to focus on large and prominent offenders to yield
measurable results. Improving voice, accountability and service delivery requires further
decentralization. Judicial reforms would help enforce the rule of law.
46.
To foster private sector led growth, the regulatory framework needs to be
upgraded and labor markets made more flexible. The promulgation of Secured
Transactions, Company, Securities, and Insolvency Ordinances is a step in the right
direction. By meeting its obligations under multilateral and regional trading arrangements,
Nepal could further upgrade its regulatory framework to international standards. Staff urges
early promulgation of the draft Labor Ordinance, after due consultation with all stakeholders
to ensure that its provisions are durable and implementable.
47.
Effective implementation of the Agricultural Perspective Plan can raise
productivity. In particular, policies to increase rural finance for complementary inputs, and
better rural infrastructure to promote commercialization and market access are essential.
Land reforms will likely have limited success without these supportive policies.
48.
Data deficiencies need to be addressed to improve policy formulation and
monitoring. Data provision to the Fund is generally adequate for policy surveillance. Efforts
to improve statistics notwithstanding, significant gaps remain. Staff encourages the
authorities to make use of STA technical assistance and fully implement its
recommendations.
49.
Staff welcome efforts to strengthen external debt data management and recommends
that the Executive Board grant a waiver for Nepal’s nonobservance of the continuous
performance criterion on the nonaccumulation of external payment arrears related to the
second disbursement under the PRGF arrangement.
50.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Nepal be held within
24 months, subject to the applicable Executive Board decision on consultation cycles.

– 23 –

Figure 1. Nepal: Economic Developments
The conflict has contributed to real GDP growth
slowdown....
10

... and supply side disruptions have recently led to higher
inflation.
10

Real GDP Growth
(Annual percentage change)

12

12

Consumer Price Inflation
(12-month percent change)

8

10

6

6

8

4

4

6

6

2

2

4

4

0

0

2

-2

0 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

8

-2

nplsr01a

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Est..

Meanwhile, low development spending and revenue
mobilization...
24

Government Finances
(In percent of GDP)

20

Revenue
Grants
Current expenditure 1/
Capital expenditure

20

5 (In percent of GDP)

12

8

8

4

4
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Est.

0

High remittance inflows have offset weak export
performance, and together with low imports...
2500

2

nplsr01b

6

12

1999/00

CPI: Nepal

24

16

0

8

WPI: India

... have helped keep deficits low.

16

nplsr01g

10

6

Fiscal Deficit

Foreign financed
Domestically financed

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0
-1

0
nplsr01e

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Est.

-1

... allowed a buildup of international reserves.
2500

2.0

2000

1.6

1.6

1500

1500

1.2

1.2

1000

1000

0.8

0.8

500

500

0.4

0.4

0

0.0

Trade and Remittances

Exports
Remittances
Imports

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2000

0

(In billions of U.S. dollars)

nplsr01d

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2.0

Official Reserves

2004/05
Est.

nplsr01f

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Sources: Data provided by the Nepalese authorities; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and staff estimates.
1/ Includes net lending.

0.0

- 24 Table 1. Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000/01–2005/06 1/
Nominal GDP (2004/05): US$7,359 million
Population (2004/05): 25.2 million
GDP per capita (2004/05): US$292
Poverty rate: 31 percent (2003/04)
Main exports: Textiles and clothing
Quota: SDR 71.3 million
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

5.6
3.4
2.4
2.6

-0.6
3.5
2.9
3.4

3.4
6.1
4.7
4.5

2003/04
Prog.
Est.

2004/05
Prog.
Est.

2005/06
Proj.

(Percent change)
Real GDP at market prices
CPI (12-month change)
CPI (period average)
GDP deflator
Fiscal indicators 1/
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall deficit before grants
Overall deficit after grants
Domestic financing (net)
Public debt

11.4
17.5
11.1
6.4
6.1
4.5
2.7
63.6

11.5
17.2
11.5
5.6
5.7
4.3
2.9
67.9

12.3
16.0
11.4
4.6
3.7
1.6
0.9
67.2

15.2
18.8
1.9

4.4
9.2
1.9

2.5
6.6
4.5
4.1

2½–3½
7-9
7-9
5.0

12.4
18.7
13.1
5.6
6.3
3.1
1.7
65.8

12.2
15.5
11.2
4.3
3.3
1.0
0.6
65.2

13.3
18.7
13.0
5.7
5.3
2.5
0.7
60.0

13.0
16.0
11.7
4.3
3.0
0.9
0.4
60.8

13.6
17.3
12.8
4.5
3.7
1.2
0.8
57.8

9.8
12.0
1.9

11.1
13.7
1.8

12.7
9.3
1.8

13.3
11.5
1.7

8.0
13.3
1.7

9.0
11.0
1.7

…
…
…

3.7
1½–5½
6½–13

…
…
…

(In percent)
5.0
6½–7½
9½–15

3.6
2–5½
7–14½

4.0
2–5½
7–14½

…
…
…

1.5
2–5½
6½–13

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Balance of payments
Current account balance (excluding grants)
In percent of GDP
Trade balance
In percent of GDP

4.0
5.5
4.4
5.5

(Percent change, end-of-period)

Interest rates
91-day treasury bill (end-of-period)
Central bank refinancing
Loans to industry

3.4
2.0
4.0
5.0

(In percent of GDP)

Money and credit
Broad money
Domestic credit
Velocity

3.5
4.5
5.3
4.9

162
2.9
-765
-13.7

106
1.9
-694
-12.5

16
0.3
-904
-15.4

-109
-1.7
-1,098
-17.1

59
0.9
-1,053
-15.6

-163
-2.2
-1,287
-18.4

226
3.1
-980
-13.3

174
2.2
-1,101
-13.8

-0.4
0.0

-3.7
-0.1

12.4
0.2

...
...

1.9
0

...
...

2.0
0

15.0
0.2

1,020
7.2

1,048
7.0

1,178
6.6

1,233
6.4

1,471
8.2

1,568
6.8

1,507
7.6

1,551
6.7

5.5
1.9

-18.4
-15.3

5.6
7.5

7.4
9.0

14.7
15.8

6.9
15.5

10.4
0.3

10.1
11.3

External debt/GDP (in percent) 3/
Debt service 4/

49.8
4.2

52.7
4.9

52.6
5.0

47.2
6.0

51.0
4.5

43.7
5.0

47.1
4.6

44.5
4.6

Exchange rate (Nrs per U.S. dollar, end-of-period)
REER (end-of-period; percent change; negative = depreciation)
NEER (end-of-period; percent change)

74.7
3.8
2.9

78.0
-9.2
-11.2

74.8
-7.2
-2.0

...
...
...

74.1
-3.4
-2.3

…
…
…

70.0
...
4.6

...
...
...

7.8

4.5

1.7

...

7.1

…

14.3

...

411.3

422.8

456.7

484.3

495.6

539.9

529.0

572.0

Foreign direct investment
In percent of GDP
Gross official reserves (end-of-period)
In months of imports of goods and services
Export value growth 2/
Import value growth

Fund operations (outstanding loans at end-of-period; SDR millions)
SAF/ESAF/PRGF
Nominal GDP at market prices (Nrs billions)

Sources: Data provided by the Nepalese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year begins mid-July. For 2004/05, figures relate to the revised January 2005 budget.
2/ Excluding re-exports.
3/ Includes estimated short-term trade credits.
4/ In percent of exports of goods, services, excluding reexports and private transfers; including debt service to the Fund.

- 25 -

Table 2. Nepal: Summary of Government Operations, 2003/04–2007/08 1/
2003/04
Budget Outcome

2004/05
Budget/ Revised Outcome
Program Budget Estimate

2005/06
Budget Proj

2006/07 2007/08
Proj
Proj

(In billions of Nepalese rupees)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue 2/
Grants

75.7
60.2
48.2
12.0
15.5

71.8
60.5
48.2
12.3
11.3

83.7
68.3
53.8
14.6
15.4

87.3
71.9
56.0
16.0
15.4

79.9
68.9
54.1
14.8
11.1

98.9
80.3
63.9
16.4
18.7

92.1
77.8
62.3
15.4
14.3

98.3
84.8
67.7
17.1
13.5

107.7
92.7
74.5
18.3
15.0

Total expenditure
Current
Of which: interest payments
Capital and net lending

90.7
63.5
7.9
27.2

76.8
55.6
6.5
21.2

97.2
67.6
7.6
29.6

100.8
70.1
7.6
30.7

84.5
61.6
6.2
22.9

111.5
75.8
7.4
35.7

99.0
73.4
7.4
25.7

111.5
81.7
8.2
29.7

125.3
90.6
9.3
34.6

-30.5
-15.0

-16.3
-5.0

-28.9
-13.5

-28.9
-13.5

-15.6
-4.6

-31.3
-12.6

-21.3
-7.0

-26.7
-13.2

-32.5
-17.5

Financing
Net foreign loans
Gross disbursements
Amortization
Net domestic financing
Net NRB financing
Net commercial bank
Net nonbank

15.0
6.7
12.8
6.1
8.4
1.0
7.0
0.4

5.0
1.9
7.6
5.8
3.2
-5.4
4.3
4.3

13.5
10.0
17.0
7.0
3.5
0.5
2.5
0.5

13.5
10.0
17.0
7.0
3.5

4.6
2.5
8.4
6.0
2.1
-0.9
4.8
-1.8

12.6
8.0
14.5
6.5
4.6

13.2
7.9
15.0
7.1
5.2

17.5
12.0
20.0
8.0
5.5

...
...
...

7.0
2.6
9.2
6.7
4.4
1.0
3.0
0.4

...
...
...

...
...
...

Total revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue 2/
Grants

12.4
9.9
2.5
3.2

12.2
9.7
2.5
2.3

12.7
10.0
2.7
2.8

13.3
10.4
3.0
2.8

13.0
10.2
2.8
2.1

13.6
10.8
2.8
3.2

13.6
10.9
2.7
2.5

13.6
10.9
2.7
2.2

13.7
11.0
2.7
2.2

Total expenditure
Current
Of which: interest payment
Capital and net lending

18.7
13.1
1.6
5.6

15.5
11.2
1.3
4.3

18.0
12.5
1.4
5.5

18.7
13.0
1.4
5.7

16.0
11.7
1.2
4.3

18.9
12.8
1.3
6.0

17.3
12.8
1.3
4.5

17.9
13.1
1.3
4.8

18.5
13.4
1.4
5.1

Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants

-6.3
-3.1

-3.3
-1.0

-5.3
-2.5

-5.3
-2.5

-3.0
-0.9

-5.3
-2.1

-3.7
-1.2

-4.3
-2.1

-4.8
-2.6

Financing
Net foreign loans
Gross disbursements
Amortization
Net domestic financing
Central bank financing
Commercial bank financing
Nonbank financing

3.1
1.4
2.6
1.3
1.7
0.2
1.4
0.1

1.0
0.4
1.5
1.2
0.6
-1.1
0.9
0.9

2.5
1.8
3.1
1.3
0.7
0.1
0.5
0.1

2.5
1.8
3.1
1.3
0.7

2.1
1.4
2.5
1.1
0.8

1.2
0.5
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.2
0.5
0.1

2.1
1.3
2.4
1.1
0.8

2.6
1.8
2.9
1.2
0.8

...
...
...

0.9
0.5
1.6
1.1
0.4
-0.2
0.9
-0.3

...
...
...

...
...
...

Memorandum items:
Public savings
Primary balance
Debt service
Domestic
Foreign
Public debt
Domestic
External
Education expenditure
Health expenditure
Nominal GDP (Nrs billions)

-0.7
-1.5
3.6
1.8
1.8
65.8
18.6
47.2
3.0
1.0
484.3

1.0
0.3
3.5
1.9
1.6
65.2
17.1
48.1
2.9
0.8
495.6

0.1
-1.1
3.7
1.9
1.8
60.0
15.6
44.3
3.3
1.2
539.9

0.3
-1.1
3.7
1.9
1.8
60.0
15.6
44.3
3.3
1.2
539.9

1.4
0.3
3.7
2.2
1.5
60.8
16.4
44.4
3.1
0.9
529.0

0.7
-0.9
3.6
2.1
1.5
59.9
15.8
44.1
3.6
1.3
590.8

0.8
0.1
3.7
2.1
1.6
57.8
16.0
41.8

0.5
-0.8
3.7
2.1
1.7
56.4
15.5
40.8

0.3
-1.2
3.9
2.1
1.8
55.3
15.0
40.2

...
...

...
...

...
...

572.0

621.7

678.8

Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants

...
...
...

(In percent of GDP)

...
...
...

Sources: Data provided by the Nepalese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal years start mid-July. Table confined to central government operations as contained in the budget.
2/ Includes privatization receipts.

- 26 -

Table 3. Nepal: Monetary Accounts, 2002/03–2005/06
2002/03
Jul.

2003/04
Jul.

Monetary authorities
Reserve money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets

Oct.

2004/2005
Jan.

Jul.

2005/06
Jul.
Proj.

93.1
107.3
-14.2

93.9
103.9
-9.9

101.4
107.5
-6.1

5.6

-0.5

8.0

Apr.

(In billions of Nepalese rupees)
81.0
87.7
-6.7

94.4
108.2
-13.8

88.3
107.2
-19.0

86.0
107.1
-21.1

(Annual percentage change)
Reserve money

2.5

16.6

13.2

9.6

(12-month change in percent of reserve money at start of period)
Reserve money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets

2.5
8.3
-5.8

16.6
25.4
-8.8

Monetary survey

-6.5
-1.0
-5.5

-8.9
-1.1
-7.8

-1.4
-1.0
-0.4

-0.5
-4.6
4.1

8.0
3.9
4.1

(In billions of Nepalese rupees)

Broad money
Narrow money
Quasi money 1/

245.9
83.8
162.2

277.2
94.0
183.2

282.0
93.9
188.1

289.3
95.7
193.6

294.4
100.5
193.9

299.3
98.9
199.9

326.2
109.1
217.1

Net foreign assets

91.4

108.5

106.4

108.9

112.8

109.1

113.6

154.5
224.3
61.5
58.7
2.8
162.8
-69.8

168.7
245.2
59.8
57.6
2.2
185.4
-76.5

175.7
255.3
60.7
56.8
3.9
194.6
-79.6

180.3
258.4
58.3
54.8
3.6
200.1
-78.1

181.6
263.8
56.1
53.0
3.0
207.7
-82.2

190.1
277.8
68.0
61.5
6.5
209.8
-87.7

212.6
308.3
72.0
65.5
6.5
236.4
-95.8

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit 1/
Public sector
Government
Public enterprises
Private sector
Other items, net 2/

(Annual percentage change)
Broad money
Narrow money
Quasi money

9.8
8.6
10.4

12.7
12.2
13.0

14.0
16.5
12.8

12.6
15.3
11.3

9.4
13.4
7.5

8.0
6.7
8.6

9.0
10.3
8.6

Domestic credit
Public sector
Government
Private sector credit

12.0
4.9
5.6
14.9

9.3
-2.7
-1.8
13.9

11.5
-0.4
-3.0
15.9

14.6
11.1
10.0
15.7

15.2
3.4
3.5
18.9

13.3
13.6
6.7
13.2

11.0
5.9
6.5
12.6

(12-month change in percent of broad money at start of period)
Broad money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Private sector

9.8
1.3
8.5
10.7
9.4

12.7
6.9
5.8
8.5
9.2

1.7
-0.8
2.5
3.6
3.3

4.3
0.2
4.2
4.8
5.3

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Commercial bank data are subject to revisions due to reporting lags.
2/ Includes overdraft at NRB (Nrs 2.6 billion in July 2004/05; zero elsewhere).

6.2
1.6
4.6
6.7
8.1

8.0
0.2
7.7
11.8
8.8

9.0
1.5
7.5
10.2
8.9

- 27 Table 4. Nepal: Balance of Payments, 2000/01–2009/10
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Prel.

2005/06

270
162

249
106

150
16

200
59

405
226

370
174

-765

-694

-904

-1,053

-980

945
758
187

754
618
136

653
653
0

748
748
0

826
826
0

1,710
338
1,372

1,448
288
1,160

1,556
242
1,314

1,801
273
1,528

123
404
159
281

64
319
113
255

93
341
151
248

23
74
51

-8
56
64

889
908
108
640
130
510
19

2006/07

2007/08
Proj.

2008/09

2009/10

362
179

356
157

326
125

279
75

-1,101

-1,181

-1,282

-1,416

-1,522

910
910
0

1,184
979
204

1,287
1,064
223

1,392
1,159
233

1,511
1,267
243

1,806
370
1,436

2,011
475
1,536

2,365
691
1,674

2,569
711
1,858

2,808
728
2,080

3,032
749
2,283

125
465
246
340

6
359
144
353

5
380
160
375

3
403
179
401

10
430
201
420

22
462
226
439

36
495
254
459

-10
58
68

-23
52
75

25
109
84

27
112
86

28
116
88

30
119
89

32
123
91

34
126
93

887
913
143
618
165
453
26

971
1,000
135
697
234
463
29

1,151
1,209
141
795
381
414
58

1,354
1,403
180
908
606
302
48

1,440
1,493
196
994
673
321
53

1,513
1,571
183
1,064
732
333
59

1,598
1,662
198
1,144
799
346
64

1,688
1,759
202
1,236
876
360
71

1,731
1,809
204
1,278
920
358
78

84
84
58

74
74
48

69
69
42

20
20
20

22
22
22

24
24
24

26
26
26

27
27
27

29
29
29

31
31
31

-416
0
0
-415
103
164
61

-426
-4
0
-422
39
105
66

-172
12
0
-184
40
111
71

-298
2
0
-300
38
116
79

-426
2
0
-428
45
128
83

-418
15
0
-433
75
165
90

-315
17
0
-332
104
203
100

-362
20
0
-382
166
271
105

-357
23
0
-380
184
293
109

-308
26
0
-334
199
316
117

100

64

45

314

23

0

0

0

0

0

38

-39

93

235

24

-24

73

21

-1

3

-38
-75
-5
42

39
51
-4
-8

-93
-91
-4
1

-235
-308
8
65

-24
-35
11
0

-46
-44
0
0

-138
-138
0
0

-81
-81
0
0

-54
-52
-2
0

-53
-48
-4
0

0.3
0.3
0

0.3
0.3
0

0.3
0.3
0

0.3
0.3
0

0.5
0.3
0.2

-1.7
-1.5
-0.2

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

70

65

60

55

50

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise stated)
Current account
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Merchandise exports
Re-exports of oil 1/
Imports, f.o.b.
Oil products
Other imports
Services (net)
Receipts
Of which : tourism
Payments
Income
Credit
Debit
Current transfers
Credit, of which:
General government 2/
Workers remittances
Recorded
Estimated
Debit
Capital account
Capital transfers
Of which : official grants
Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Other investment (net) 3/
Of which : loans
Disbursements
Amortization
Errors and omissions 3/
Overall balance
Financing
Change in reserve assets (-=increase)
IMF purchases (net)
Other liabilities
Exceptional finacing
Arrears to Austria (+ increase)
Arrears to Belgium (+ increase)
Financing gap

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated)
Memorandum items:
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Current account (including official transfers)
Total external debt 4/
Total PPG external debt
PPG debt service 5/
Debt service 6/
Stock of arrears

2.9
4.8
49.8
47.0
7.2
4.2
0.3

1.9
4.5
52.7
50.5
9.4
4.9
0.6

0.3
2.6
52.6
49.3
9.6
5.0
0.9

0.9
3.0
51.0
48.1
9.7
4.5
1.2

3.1
5.5
47.1
44.4
9.5
4.6
1.7

2.2
4.6
44.5
41.8
9.5
4.6
0.0

2.1
4.3
43.6
40.8
9.7
4.8
0.0

1.8
4.0
43.1
40.2
9.4
4.7
0.0

1.3
3.4
42.0
39.1
9.3
4.6
0.0

0.7
2.7
41.4
38.4
9.4
4.7
0.0

Gross foreign assets (end of period)
Of which : central bank
(In months of imports of goods and services)

1,423
1,020
7.2

1,371
1,048
7.0

1,462
1,178
6.6

1,772
1,471
8.2

1,870
1,507
7.6

1,970
1,551
6.7

2,158
1,689
6.8

2,258
1,770
6.5

2,320
1,821
6.3

2,378
1,869
6.0

Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

5,596

5,568

5,873

6,757

7,359

7,990

8,429

8,971

9,697

10,382

Sources: Data provided bt the Nepalese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Nepal buys oil in the international market and re-exports it to India for refinery. This activity recently ceased due to deterioration in NOC finances, but are expected to
resume as planned domestic oil price adjustments should improve NOC finances.
2/ Includes estimated international NGO transfers.
3/ Large other investments and errors and omissions reflect data weaknesses in capital account, unreported remittances and informal trade.
4/ Includes estimated private sector debt and short-term trade credits.
5/ As a ratio of exports of goods and services (excluding reexports of oil).
6/ As a ratio of exports of goods and services (excluding re-exports of oil) and private transfer and income receipts.

- 28 -

Table 5. Nepal: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2001/02–2009/10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Est.

2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Projections

Real sector
Real GDP growth (percent change)
Agriculture
Nonagriculture
GDP deflator (percent change)

-0.6
2.2
-1.9
3.4

3.4
2.5
3.5
4.5

3.4
3.9
2.9
5.0

2.5
2.8
1.6
4.1

3.0
2.8
2.9
5.0

3.0
2.8
2.9
5.5

4.0
3.6
4.0
5.0

4.5
4.4
4.5
5.0

5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0

Saving-investment balance
Gross domestic savings
Public 1/
Private
Gross fixed investment
Public 1/
Private

26.1
0.2
25.9
19.3
7.6
11.7

26.3
0.8
25.6
19.1
6.8
12.2

28.1
1.1
27.0
19.2
6.6
12.6

29.1
2.4
26.7
19.3
6.2
13.1

28.1
0.9
27.3
19.0
5.7
13.3

29.4
0.6
28.7
21.5
5.6
15.9

29.8
0.5
29.3
22.5
0.3
22.2

29.5
0.5
28.9
23.0
0.5
22.5

29.0
0.7
28.3
23.4
0.4
23.0

Fiscal sector
Total revenue
Grants
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall balance before grants
Overall balance after grants

11.5
1.4
11.5
5.6
-5.7
-4.3

12.3
2.1
11.4
4.6
-3.7
-1.6

12.2
2.3
11.2
4.3
-3.3
-1.0

13.0
2.1
11.7
4.3
-3.0
-0.9

13.6
2.5
12.8
4.5
-3.7
-1.2

13.6
2.2
13.1
4.8
-4.3
-2.1

13.7
2.2
13.4
5.1
-4.8
-2.6

13.7
2.2
13.2
5.3
-4.8
-2.6

13.7
2.2
13.0
5.5
-4.8
-2.6

-18.4
-15.3

5.6
7.5

14.7
15.8

10.4
0.3

10.1
11.3

7.6
17.6

8.6
8.6

8.9
9.3

9.4
8.0

Current account balance (excluding official transfers)/GDP
Overall balance/GDP
Financing gap (in million U.S. dollars)
Change in reserves (in million U.S. dollars)

1.9
-0.7
0
51

0.3
1.6
0
-91

0.9
3.5
0
-308

3.1
0.3
0
-35

2.2
-0.3
70
-44

2.1
0.9
65
-138

1.8
0.2
60
-81

1.3
0.0
55
-52

0.7
0.0
50
-48

External debt/GDP (in percent)
Debt service ratio 3/

52.7
4.9

52.6
5.0

51.0
4.5

47.1
4.6

44.5
4.6

43.6
4.8

43.1
4.7

42.0
4.6

41.4
4.7

4.4
3.9

9.8
14.9

12.7
13.9

8.0
13.2

9.0
12.6

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

422.8

456.7

495.6

529.0

572.0

621.7

678.8

744.7

820.9

External sector
Export value (percent change) 2/
Import value (percent change)

Monetary sector
Broad money (percent change)
Private sector credit (percent change)
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (Nrs billions)

Sources: Data provided by Nepalese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Public savings and investment estimate derived from fiscal accounts.
2/ Excluding re-exports.
3/ As a ratio of exports of goods and services (excluding reexports) and private transfers and income receipts.

0.0

0.0

0.0

IV. Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional
medium- and long-term external debt by the central government and NRB
Cumulative from July 15, 2004 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6/

V. Ceiling on short-term external debt contracted
or guaranteed by the central government and NRB (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6/

VI. Accumulation of external payments arrears (Stock) 7/
Continuous performance criterion during the program period
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

10.8

II. Floor on central government revenue 5/
Cumulative from July 15, 2004

12.8

88.3

1.0

0.0

0.0

-1.1

-20.3

1,447.3

Oct. 16, 2004
Act.

25.0

89.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.4

-22.6

1,489.6

Jan. 13, 2005
(PC)

29.8

86.1

1.3

0.0

0.0

-2.8

-26.2

1,496.9

Jan. 13, 2005
Act.

43.1

97.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.2

-16.1

1,514.6

45.9

93.1

1.3

0.0

0.0

-2.5

-18.9

1,493.5

Apr. 13, 2005 Apr. 13, 2005
(IT)
Prel.

1/ Mid-October 2004 and mid-January 2005 are performance criteria test dates. Figures for mid-April 2005 and mid-July 2005 are indicative targets.
2/ Valued at the program exchange rates. Monetary gold valued at program prices (US$360 per oz.).
3/ To be adjusted upward/downward by excess/shortfall of foreign program financing. Details specified in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.
4/ To be adjusted upward/downward by shortfall/excess of rupee equivalent of foreign financing. Details specified in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.
5/ To be adjusted upward/downward by excess/shortfall of privatization receipts. Details specified in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.
6/ External debt as defined in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.
7/ At program exchange rates.

89.4

I. Ceiling on reserve money

Indicative targets (IT)

0.5

-20.1

1,459.6

III. Ceiling on change in net domestic financing of central government budget 4/ 5/
Cumulative from July 15, 2004

II. Ceiling on net domestic assets of the NRB 2/ 4/

I. Floor on net foreign assets of the NRB (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ 3/

Performance criteria (PC) and indicative targets (IT ) 1/

Oct. 16, 2004
(PC)

(In billions of Nepalese rupees, unless otherwise stated)

Table 6. Nepal: Status of Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets

68.3

101.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.5

-14.2

1,544.6

Jul. 15, 2005
(IT)

68.3

101.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

8.8

-6.8

1,515.6

Jul. 15, 2005
Adjusted IT

70.1

96.4

1.3

0.0

0.0

4.7

-14.5

1,478.4

Jul. 15, 2005
Act.

- 29 -

November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004

November 15, 2004

November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004
November 15, 2004
Quarterly test dates

B. Financial Sector Reforms
1 Strengthen the Nepal Rastra Bank (Provide for compulsory retirement scheme in NRB employee
rules and regulations)

Structural Benchmarks
1. Strengthen the Nepal Rastra Bank (Revise Human Resource Policies)
2. Prepare a time bound action plan to strengthen Financial Management and Internal Audit Depts of NRB
3. Implement restructuring plans for ADBN
4. Complete liquidation/privatization of two SOEs
5. Cabinet approval of amended Civil Service Ordinance
6. NRB to reconcile accounting data with program monitoring data

Test Date

Structural Performance Criteria
A. Fiscal and Monetary Reforms
1. Implement time-bound action plan to improve customs administration
2. Fully operationalize the large taxpayer office (LTO) in the Inland Revenue Department
3. Implement new framework for monetary operations, including a liquidity-monitoring framework

Measures

Delayed
November 15, 2004
October 11, 2004
January 2005
July 6, 2005
Completed

July 14, 2005

Delayed
November 22, 2004
November 15, 2004

Completion Date

Table 7. Nepal: Status of Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for Second Review Under the PRGF Arrangement

- 30 -

January 15, 2005
February 15, 2005
January 15, 2005
January 15, 2005
February 15, 2005
January 15, 2005
Quarterly test date

Structural Benchmarks
1. Cabinet approval of Fiscal Transparency Ordinance
2. Amend BFI ordinance including for consistency with other legislation
3. Cabinet approval of Asset Management Companies Ordinance
4. Implement restructuring plans for NIDC
5. Adopt Petroleum Products Sale and Distribution Ordinance
6. Complete liquidation/privatization of three SOEs
7. NRB to reconcile accounting data with program monitoring data

1/ All actions except 2/ are pending.
2/ Completed.

January 15, 2005
December 31, 2004

Public Sector Reform
Finalize audit of NOC 2003/04 accounts by international auditor
Implement automatic pricing mechanism for oil products

C.
1.
2.

July 14, 2005

Financial Sector Reforms
Finalize audit of NRB’s 2003/04 accounts by an international auditor 2/

January 15, 2005
January 15, 2005

Timing

B.
1.

Structural Performance Criteria
A. Fiscal and Monetary Reforms
1. Implement time-bound action plan to improve customs administration
2. Fully operationalize the large taxpayer office (LTO) in the Inland Revenue Department

Measures

Table 8. Nepal: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks for the Third Review Under the PRGF Arrangement 1/

- 31 -

– 32 –
Table 9. Nepal: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015
1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

2015

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 per day (in percent)
Poverty gap at $1 per day (in percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (in percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)

(2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates)
...
37.7
...
...
...
18.9
...
9.7
...
...
...
...
...
7.6
...
...
...
...
...
48.5
48.3
...
...
24.3
18.0
24.0
17.0
...
17.0
...

Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (in percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (in percent)
Youth literacy rate (in percent of ages 15-24)

...
52.0
46.6

(2015 target = net enrollment to 100)
...
70.5
...
...
62.1
...
54.6
61.6
62.7

...
...
...

100
...
...

Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent of ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)

56.6
40.7
11.7
6.0

(2005 target = education rate to 100)
69.7
83.4
...
85.4
48.2
57.3
58.9
...
...
...
...
...
3.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

100
...
...
...

Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (in percent of children under 12 months)
Improved maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (in percent of total)
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV, female (in percent of ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (in percent of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)
Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (in percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (in percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$ per kg. oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (in percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (in percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (in percent of population)
Develop a global partnership for development
Youth unemployment rate (in percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Population (in millions)
Gross national income (in billions of U.S. dollars)
GNI per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Adult literacy rate (in percent of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (in years)
Aid (in percent of GNI)
External debt (in percent of GNI)
Investment (in percent of GDP)
Trade (in percent of GDP)

(2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 motality by two thirds)
143.0
114.0
91.0
83.0
82.0
99.0
81.0
67.0
62.0
61.0
57.0
56.0
71.0
71.0
75.0

47.7
...
...

(2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three fourths)
...
830.0
740.0
...
...
207.5
7.4
9.0
10.9
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

(2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.)
...
0.3
...
0.5
28.5
39.3
...
...
...
13,000.0
...
...
...
201.0
189.8
211.2
6.0
60.0
63.6
60.3

0.2
...
...
150
...

32.7
...
2.6
0.0
67.0
20.0
...

...
7.8
3.3
0.1
...
...
...

(2015 target = various 1/)
27.3
...
7.8
8.9
3.9
...
0.1
...
88.0
...
28.0
...
...
...

...
8.9
3.8
...
84.0
27.0
...

30
10
...
...
83.5
...
...

...
3.2
...

...
4.1
1.2

(2015 target = various 2/)
...
...
13.9
15.1
3.5
3.7

...
17.8
3.7

...
...
...

18.1
3.9
220.0
30.4
5.3
53.6
11.6
45.1
18.1
32.2

20.4
4.4
220.0
36.0
4.6
56.3
9.8
54.9
25.2
59.5

24.7
5.9
240.0
...
4.1
60.2
...
...
25.8
45.4

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

23.6
5.6
240.0
42.9
4.3
58.9
7.0
48.2
24.0
53.8

24.1
5.5
230.0
44.0
4.2
59.9
6.6
53.3
24.6
44.9

Source: World Development Indicators database.
1/ Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environment resources. Halve, by 2015, the
proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking.
2/ Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, nondiscriminatory trading and financial system. Address the special needs of the least developed countries.
Address the special needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states.

– 33 –

ANNEX I

Nepal—Past Main Policy Recommendations and Authorities’ Responses
Recommendations

Actions

Fiscal Policy
Mobilize revenue

Revenue-to-GDP ratio increased from 12¼ percent of GDP in
2002/03 to 13 percent in 2004/05, reflecting increase in the VAT
rate in January 2005 and tax administration measures (establishment
of a Large Taxpayers Office and implementation of a three-year
customs modernization plan).

Improve public expenditure
management

The MTEF has rationalized and prioritized the development budget.
Expenditure on Priority 1 projects increased; higher pro-poor
spending. However, capital spending remains low due to the difficult
security situation.

Limit domestic borrowing

Net domestic financing limited to an average of ⅔ percent of GDP
during 2002/03–2004/05.

Financial Sector Policies
Strengthen central bank

NRB reforms have progressed (streamlined organizational structure,
three VRS schemes to reduce excess staffing, outsourcing of some
non-core functions, and improved accounts).

Loan recovery

The debt recovery framework has been strengthened (blacklisting;
DRT). Little progress in loan recovery from large willful defaulters.

Restructure insolvent commercial and
development banks

NBL and RBB are making profits through staff reductions and lower
cost of funds; however, both banks have negative net worth. ADBN
has been restructured; no progress with NIDC.

Public Enterprises and Governance
Liquidate/privatize unviable entities

Limited progress. Only three entities divested.

Deepen governance reforms and
decentralization; reduce corruption

New Civil Service Act introduced in July 2005. New financial
administration regulations were introduced in 2003. Draft
Governance Ordinance prepared. Schools (2,200) and sub-health
posts (1,100) transferred to community management.
Five year anti corruption plan prepared. Increase in number of
successful prosecutions by the CIAA.

Other Structural Policies
Regulatory Reform

Bankruptcy, Company, Secured Transactions, Insolvency, and
Securities Ordinances promulgated

Increase labor market flexibility

Draft Labor Ordinance under discussion with provisions for more
flexible hiring and retrenchment.

Statistics
Strengthen data collection and
dissemination

From 2004/05, expenditures have been reclassified into current and
capital. Balance of payments data now based on 5th BOP Manual.

- 34 -

ANNEX II

Nepal—Debt Sustainability Analysis
Public debt dynamics are assessed using the Low Income Country Debt Sustainability Analysis
(LIC-DSA) framework. The DSA was conducted jointly with the World Bank. Based on the
external LIC-DSA, Nepal’s external debt dynamics are subject to a high risk of debt distress.
I. LOW INCOME COUNTRY-DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS (LIC-DSA)1
A. Size and Composition of Public and Publicly Guaranteed (PPG) Debt
1.
Nepal’s total public debt is estimated at 61 percent of GDP at end-2004, of which
roughly 75 percent is external debt. External debt doubled between 1990 and 2004, reflecting
budget support and project finance from multilateral institutions, mostly IDA and the AsDB.
At end-2004, nominal external debt stood at around US$3¼ billion, of which 90 percent was
owed to multilateral institutions. By comparison, multilateral debt accounted for 29 percent of
total external debt in selected Asian economies. The composition of Nepal’s debt implies a
high degree of concessionality, with an average grant element of close to 50 percent.
Nepal: Composition of External Debt Compared to Selected Asian Countries, 2003

Nepal: Composition of External Debt, 1990–2004

(In percent)

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

100

3,500

3,000

Other
Bilateral
Multilateral

Other

90

Bilateral
80

Multilateral

70

2,500

60
2,000

50
1,500

40
30

1,000

20
500

10
0
1990

0
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Nepal

Selected Asian Countries

B. Assumptions
2.

Baseline projections of PPG debt are based on the following key assumptions:

•

Real sector: Real GDP growth is projected to rise gradually from 3 percent in 2005/06 and
stabilize at 5½ percent after 2009/10, in line with growth rates observed in the early 1990s.
Inflation is projected at 5 percent. The nominal interest rate on domestic debt is expected
to average 7 percent during 2005/06–20009/10, and 6 percent thereafter. The exchange rate
is projected to depreciate against the dollar, in line with movements in the Indian rupee to
which the Nepalese rupee is pegged.

1

The LIC-DSA produces different results from calculations under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative because of different methodologies.

- 35 -

ANNEX II

•

Fiscal sector: The revenue-to-GDP ratio is projected to rise from 13 percent in 2004/05 to
13¾ percent by 2007/08, assuming some increase in the VAT rate and improved tax
collection. The expenditure-to-GDP ratio rises from 16 percent in 2004/05 to 18½ percent
in 2007/08 as development spending picks up, and stabilizes thereafter. Growth of real
primary spending averages 7 percent in 2005/06–09/10 (5¼ percent in 2010/11–2024/25).

•

External sector: Exports of goods and services are projected to average 6¾ percent over
the projection period. Imports of goods and services are expected to rebound in line with
economic activity following the decline in 2004/05, averaging 7¼ percent. The noninterest
current account balance is projected to deteriorate from a surplus of 6 percent of GDP
in 2004/05 to a deficit of 1¼ percent of GDP by 2024/25. Scheduled debt service on
existing external debt increases from around US$120 million in 2004/05 to
US$125 million in 2024/25. New financing is assumed to be moderate during the next
three years, but rising gradually from US$170 million in 2005/06 to US$370 million
by 2009/10. The grant element of new borrowing is assumed to average around 45 percent
during 2004/05–2009/10 and 40 percent thereafter.
C. Baseline

PPG External Debt
3.
A key feature of the LIC−DSA framework is that it compares debt burden indicators
to indicative policy-based thresholds. The thresholds are based on the empirical finding that
low-income countries with stronger policies and
Nepal: Indicative External Debt Burden Indicators
institutions tend to have a higher debt carrying
Indicative
Nepal
capacity. At end-2004, Nepal's NPV of debt-toThresholds 1/
2004/05
exports ratio is estimated at 172 percent (the
NPV of debt, in percent of
Exports
150
172
relevant policy−based indicative threshold is
GDP
40
28
150 percent). The ratio is projected to fall to
Revenues
250
213
148 percent by 2009/10 and 83 percent by 2024/25.
Debt service, in percent of
Exports
20
9
Other relevant indicators remain below the
Revenues
30
12
thresholds throughout the projection period.
1/ Shows indicative policy dependent thresholds under the joint IMFWorld Bank low-income country debt sustainability framework for a
medium policy performer.
4.
In the baseline scenario, debt burden
ratios are projected to fall between 2004/05 and 2024/25 (Table II.1). The NPV of external
public debt-to-GDP (28 percent to 15 percent) NPV of external public debt-to-exports
(172 percent to 83 percent); external public debt service-to-exports ratio (10 percent to 8 percent);
and external public debt service to revenues (213 percent to 109 percent).2

2

Given the high concessionality of external debt, the debt service-to-exports ratio is low, and
at levels similar to most HIPCs after full HIPC debt relief. The ratio reflects debt service on
existing debt and debt service on projected disbursements.

- 36 -

ANNEX II

Total Public Debt
5.
Domestic debt accounts for about 25 percent of total public debt. Under the baseline
scenario, the NPV of public debt-to-GDP ratio declines from 44 percent at end-2004/05 to
30 percent by 2024/25 (Table II.4; Figure II.2). Over the same period, the NPV of public
debt-to-revenue ratio falls from 292 percent to 190 percent, and the public debt service-to
revenue ratio decreases from 23 percent to 16 percent.
D. Sensitivity Analysis
6.

Stress tests suggest that Nepal’s debt profile is susceptible to shocks.

•

Total public debt: Following an extreme shock—a one-time 30 percent real depreciation
in 2005/06 which leads to the highest level of NPV of debt-to-GDP 10 years after the
shock—the NPV ratio peaks at around 54 percent in 2005/06 and falls to about 33 percent
in 2024/25. The debt service to revenue ratio peaks in 2008/09 at 28 percent converging to
the baseline level of 16 percent in 2024/25.

•

External debt: Following an export shock—defined as export value growth at historical
levels minus one standard deviation in the first two years of the shock—the NPV of debtto-exports ratio increases significantly, peaking at 333 percent in the last year of the shock.
The debt service-to-exports ratio peaks at 19 percent in 2014/15. These results are driven
by Nepal’s recent volatile export performance. The combined shocks scenario has a similar
effect, primarily based on the export component of the shock. Under a low growth scenario
(3 percent), the NPV of external debt-to-GDP ratio would be higher by 7 percent of GDP
by 2024/25 relative to the baseline.
E. Staff Assessment

7.
Based on the LIC-DSA, staffs conclude that Nepal’s external debt dynamics are
subject to a high risk of distress. The sensitivity analyses underscore the need to implement
sound macroeconomic policies and reforms, including toward achieving higher export growth,
while maintaining efforts to raise revenue. Those factors combined with foreign financing at
favorable terms—preferably through grants—would help Nepal make progress toward
achieving its MDG targets while containing risks to debt sustainability.
II. ENHANCED HIPC AND MULTILATERAL DEBT RELIEF (MDR) INITIATIVES
8.
Nepal was recently deemed to be potentially eligible—on a preliminary basis—for
HIPC relief under the extended sunset clause. This determination was based on an
estimated end-2004 NPV of debt-to-exports ratio (around 200 percent after traditional debt
relief; the enhanced HIPC threshold is 150 percent). If Nepal’s eligibility is confirmed in early
2006, it could receive relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative and MDRI.

- 37 -

ANNEX II

Figure II.1. Nepal: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005–2025
(In percent)
50

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

45
40
35
30
25
20

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test (combination of shocks)
Threshold

15
10
5
0
2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

2010/11

2012/13

2004/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

2018/19

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

2018/19

2020/21

2022/23

2024/25

350

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
300
250
200
150
Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test (export shock)
Threshold

100
50
0
2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

2010/11

2012/13

2004/15

2016/17

30

Debt service-to-exports ratio
25
20
15
10
Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test (export shock)
Threshold

5
0
2004/05

2006/07

2008/09

2010/11

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

2012/13

2004/15

2016/17

- 38 -

ANNEX II

Figure II.2. Nepal: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005–2025 1/ 2/
(In percent)
60

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
50

40

30

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
Lower growth

20

10

0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

350

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 3/
300
250
200
150

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
Lower growth

100
50
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

30

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 3/
25
20

Baseline

15

Most extreme stress test
10

Lower growth

5
0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2015.
2/ 2005 refers to fiscal year 2004/05.
3/ Revenue including grants.

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

5.6

-0.6
0.1
0.8
-19.4
-14.4
...

...
...
...
...
9.4
9.4
-0.2
-7.8

52.7
50.5
3.0
-4.2
-4.9
13.8
16.8
30.6
-15.9
-2.7
0.1
0.7
0.4
0.3
-0.1
7.1
0.0

5.9

3.4
2.0
0.9
6.0
6.0
...

...
...
...
...
9.6
9.6
-0.1
-2.8

52.6
49.3
-0.2
-5.5
-3.0
13.8
16.9
30.7
-16.5
-0.3
-0.2
-2.3
0.4
-1.7
-1.0
5.3
0.0

6.8

3.4
11.3
1.0
22.2
18.7
...

32.5
180.8
29.6
164.8
9.7
9.7
-0.1
-1.9

51.0
48.1
-1.6
-9.9
-3.4
13.7
18.0
31.7
-17.0
-0.1
0.0
-6.4
0.5
-1.5
-5.3
8.3
0.0
0.2

-0.1

2.0
4.7
0.3
22.6
15.1
...

4.0

-12.4

3.9
1.4
1.1
6.2
6.1
...

3.3

Standard
Deviation 6/

-1.8

Historical
Average 6/

7.4

2.5
6.2
0.9
-2.4
0.8
48.4

30.4
188.8
27.7
172.0
9.5
9.5
-0.3
-2.0

47.1
44.4
-3.9
-6.7
-5.9
13.2
16.1
29.3
-18.4
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
0.4
-1.2
…
2.8
0.0

Estimate
2004/05

8.0

3.0
5.4
0.9
8.8
10.5
42.7

29.1
180.5
26.4
163.7
9.5
9.5
-0.3
-2.5

44.5
41.8
-2.5
-6.1
-5.0
13.7
16.1
29.9
-18.0
-0.7
-0.2
-0.9
0.4
-1.3
…
3.6
0.0

8.4

3.0
2.4
1.0
7.2
15.9
41.3

28.9
176.4
26.1
159.3
9.7
9.7
-0.3
-3.8

43.6
40.8
-0.9
-5.8
-4.7
16.4
16.4
32.8
-17.9
-3.2
-0.2
-0.9
0.4
-1.3
…
4.9
0.0

9.0

4.0
2.3
1.0
8.1
8.1
42.9

28.8
173.0
25.9
155.7
9.5
9.5
-0.3
-3.8

43.1
40.2
-0.5
-5.8
-4.4
16.7
16.7
33.3
-17.8
-3.2
-0.2
-1.2
0.4
-1.6
…
5.3
0.0

9.7

4.5
3.5
1.0
8.4
8.6
40.8

28.4
169.8
25.4
152.1
9.3
9.3
-0.2
-2.7

42.0
39.1
-1.1
-5.4
-3.8
16.8
16.7
33.5
-17.4
-3.1
-0.2
-1.4
0.4
-1.8
…
4.3
0.0

10.4

5.0
2.0
1.1
8.8
7.5
38.9

28.2
166.2
25.2
148.4
9.4
9.4
-0.2
-2.5

41.4
38.4
-0.6
-4.9
-3.1
16.6
17.0
33.6
-16.7
-3.1
-0.3
-1.5
0.4
-2.0
…
4.3
0.0

2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10

Projections

3.7
3.6
1.0
6.5
8.6
42.5

-0.2

-17.7

-4.5

14.7

5.5
1.7
1.3
7.7
6.1
36.8

26.1
149.6
23.0
131.7
9.2
9.2
0.0
-0.1

36.6
33.5
-1.1
-3.1
-1.2
14.8
17.4
32.2
-13.3
-2.7
-0.4
-1.5
0.4
-1.9
…
1.9
0.0

27.7

5.5
0.7
1.3
6.7
5.6
35.1

18.1
100.2
15.0
82.8
8.3
8.3
0.6
2.2

24.5
21.3
-1.1
-0.4
1.1
11.7
18.1
29.8
-8.6
-2.0
-0.5
-1.0
0.3
-1.3
…
-0.7
0.0

2004/05-2009/10
2014/15 2024/25
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (in percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of goods and services (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which : public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
Of which : exceptional financing

Actual
2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table II.1. Nepal: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2001/02–2024/25 1/

5.5
1.2
1.3
7.2
5.9
36.6

-0.4

-11.8

-0.5

2010/11-2024/25
Average

- 39 ANNEX II

- 40 -

ANNEX II

Table II.2. Nepal: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2004/05–2024/25
(In percent)
Estimate
2004/05

Projections
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2004/15 2024/25
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

Baseline

28

26

26

26

25

25

23

15

28
28

29
27

31
27

33
28

34
28

35
28

34
29

13
24

28
28
28
28
28
28

27
29
29
33
35
37

27
33
30
39
45
37

26
32
30
38
44
36

26
32
29
37
43
36

26
31
29
37
42
35

23
28
27
32
37
32

15
17
17
18
21
21

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2005/06–2024/25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2005/06–2024/25 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2005/06 5/

NPV of Debt-to-Exports Ratio
Baseline

172

164

159

156

152

148

132

83

172
172

182
167

188
166

195
167

203
168

205
168

195
166

70
131

172
172
172
172
172
172

164
232
164
203
235
164

159
333
159
236
320
159

156
324
156
229
311
156

152
316
152
222
302
152

148
307
148
216
292
148

132
266
132
184
248
132

83
155
83
102
136
83

9

10

10

9

9

9

9

8

9
9

10
10

10
10

10
10

11
10

11
10

13
10

11
11

9
9
9
9
9
9

10
12
10
10
11
10

10
17
10
11
14
10

9
18
9
11
15
9

9
17
9
11
15
9

9
17
9
11
15
9

9
19
9
14
18
9

8
16
8
11
14
8

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2005/06–2024/25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2005/06–2024/25 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2005/06 5/

Debt Service Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2005/06–2024/25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2005/06–2024/25 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/06–2006/07
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2005/6–2006/07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2005/06 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and nondebt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly
assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

6.3
4.2
2.9
12.9
1.4
15.8
1.2
0.4
0.1
0.4
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2
-0.6
0.9
3.2
1.6
3.4
-4.2

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which : contribution from average real interest rate
Of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)

1/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt.
2/ Historical averages and standard deviations are derived over the past 10 years.

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

67.9
50.5

Public sector debt 1/
Of which : foreign-currency denominated

3.4
0.9
1.8
0.0
4.5
-5.0

-0.7
-2.3
0.1
14.4
2.1
14.5
-2.5
-2.5
-0.2
-2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.6

67.2
49.3

3.4
1.0
0.1
-7.8
5.0
0.9

-2.0
-6.9
-0.3
14.5
2.3
14.2
-6.6
-2.9
-0.7
-2.2
-3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.9

65.2
48.1

Actual
2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

3.9
1.1
0.7
0.7
5.4
4.5

2.4

Historical
Average 2/

2.0
0.3
1.9
4.4
2.0
8.7

1.5

Standard
Deviation 2/

2.5
0.9
0.6
-4.9
4.1
7.0

-4.4
-4.2
-0.3
15.1
2.1
14.8
-3.8
-1.5
0.1
-1.6
-2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

60.8
44.4

Estimate
2004/05

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

3.0
1.0
0.8
-4.2
5.0
11.5

-3.0
-3.5
-0.1
16.1
2.5
16.0
-3.4
-1.6
0.1
-1.8
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

57.8
41.8

3.0
1.1
0.7
-1.4
5.5
6.8

-1.4
-1.3
0.8
15.8
2.2
16.6
-2.1
-1.6
0.1
-1.7
-0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

56.4
40.8

4.0
1.1
1.6
-1.3
5.0
7.0

-1.1
-1.2
1.2
15.9
2.2
17.1
-2.4
-1.9
0.3
-2.2
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

55.3
40.2

4.5
0.0
4.4
-2.4
5.0
4.8

-2.3
-1.8
1.3
15.9
2.2
17.1
-3.0
-2.1
0.3
-2.4
-0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

53.0
39.1

2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09

5.0
1.2
2.6
-1.0
4.0
5.3

-1.9
-1.1
1.3
15.9
2.2
17.2
-2.5
-2.1
0.4
-2.5
-0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

51.1
38.4

3.9
0.9
2.0
-2.0
4.9
7.1

0.7

5.5
1.4
3.0
-0.7
4.0
5.8

-1.3
-0.6
1.5
15.9
2.2
17.4
-2.1
-1.9
0.4
-2.3
-2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

43.0
33.5

5.5
1.5
0.4
-0.7
4.0
4.6

-0.3
-0.2
1.7
16.0
2.2
17.7
-1.9
-1.8
0.2
-1.9
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

36.7
21.3

Projections
2009/10 2005/06- 2014/15 2024/25
09/10
Average

Table II.3. Nepal: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2001/02–2024/25

5.5
1.4
2.1
-0.7
4.0
5.2

1.6

2010/112024/25
Average

- 41 ANNEX II

- 42 -

ANNEX II

Table II.4. Nepal: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2005–2025
Estimate
2005

Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2025

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

44

42

42

41

39

38

36

35

34

33

32

30

44
44
44

44
42
43

45
40
42

45
38
42

44
35
40

44
33
39

44
30
39

44
27
38

44
25
38

44
23
37

44
21
37

44
6
40

44
44
44
44
44

43
46
45
54
42

43
48
47
52
42

42
47
46
51
41

41
45
44
49
39

40
44
42
47
38

39
42
41
45
37

38
41
40
44
36

37
40
39
42
35

36
39
38
41
34

36
38
37
40
33

32
31
30
33
32

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

292

263

264

258

247

239

230

222

215

209

204

190

292
292
292

275
262
265

282
256
266

283
242
263

280
221
253

280
205
248

279
188
242

278
173
238

276
158
235

275
144
233

273
131
232

269
40
248

292
292
292
292
292

266
285
281
333
263

271
303
295
331
264

267
297
289
321
258

256
284
276
307
248

249
275
267
295
241

242
266
258
284
232

237
258
250
274
225

232
251
244
266
219

228
244
238
259
214

224
239
232
252
209

201
198
192
209
200

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

23

23

24

24

23

23

22

21

20

20

19

16

23
23
23

22
23
23

24
24
24

26
24
25

26
22
24

26
21
24

26
20
24

24
18
24

22
16
23

21
15
23

19
13
22

16
3
21

23
23
23
23
23

23
23
23
23
23

24
25
25
25
24

25
28
27
26
24

24
28
27
27
26

24
28
27
25
23

25
28
27
25
24

24
26
25
25
23

23
24
24
24
22

23
24
23
23
21

21
22
22
22
20

17
16
16
16
16

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006/07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

- 43 -

ANNEX III

Nepal—Fund Relations
(As of November 30, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 9/06/61; Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in May 1994

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
71.30
71.31
0.00

% Quota
100.00
100.02
0.00

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
8.10
6.18

% Allocation
100.0
76.28

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
PRGF arrangements

SDR Million
14.26

% Quota
20.00

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)

49.91
33.57
26.11

14.26
16.79
26.11

VI.

Type

Approval
Date

PRGF
PRGF
SAF

11/19/03
10/05/92
10/14/87

Expiration
Date
11/18/06
10/04/95
10/13/90

Projected Obligations to Fund (in millions of SDRs; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2005
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

0.04
0.04

2006
0.13
0.13

2007
0.13
0.13

2008

2009

0.13
0.13

1.43
0.13
1.55

Exchange Rate Arrangement

In February 1993, Nepal unified its exchange rate and eliminated the multiple currency practice
associated with the previous dual exchange rate arrangement. In October 1997, the exchange
arrangement of Nepal was reclassified as that pegged to a single currency unit from pegged to a
currency composite. Currently, all merchandise imports (except for a few goods restricted for
security or related reasons) are freely available through an open general license system, with
foreign exchange provided through the banking system at the market exchange rate. Nepal’s
exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current

- 44 -

ANNEX III

international transactions. As of December 5, 2005, the exchange rate for the Nepalese rupee
(Nr) was US$1=Nrs 74.6.
VIII. Safeguards Assessments
A safeguards assessment of the NRB was completed on September 3, 2002. The assessment
concluded that substantial risks may exist in the area of external and internal audits, and the
internal control system of the NRB. Staff findings and recommendations were reported in IMF
Country Report No. 02/205. Implementation of the measures by the NRB needs to be monitored
by staff. Based on these findings, international audits of NRB 2002/03 and 2003/04 accounts
were included in program conditionality.
IX.

2003 Article IV Consultation

The Executive Board discussed the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation (IMF
Country Report No. 03/283) on August 22, 2003. Nepal is currently on a 24-month consultation
cycle, subject to the provisions of the July 15, 2002 decision on consultation cycles
(Decision No. 129794-(02/76) as amended).
X.

Technical Assistance Since 2001
Department

XI.

Purpose

Date

MFD -

Accounting
Central bank and banking reform
Internal Audit
Monetary Policy
Monetary Operations
Foreign Exchange Reserves Management

10/04, 4/05, 9/05, 11/05
12/01–3/02
10/04, 1/05, 4/05, 9/05, 11/05
6/03
Continuous
5/03, 10/04, 11/05

FAD

Implementation of a large tax payer unit.
Review of Tax policy and VAT administration.
Tax and customs administration reform.
Follow up on the LTO and customs
administration reform

10/03
5/03
10/03

-

8/04

LEG

-

Redrafting of income tax laws.

3/00, 7/01

STA

-

Multisector statistics mission
Balance of payments statistics advisor
Producer price statistics
Monetary Statistics

1/01
4/02, 12/02
1/02, 1/03
7/03

Resident Representative/Advisor

Mr. Sukhwinder Singh has been the resident representative since October 2002.

- 45 -

ANNEX IV

Nepal—Relations with the World Bank Group
(As of December 28, 2005)
A. Partnership in Nepal’s Development Strategy
Since the late 1990s, Nepal’s poverty reduction agenda has been held back by formidable
challenges—the persistent political instability, the escalation of the Maoist insurgency, and the
global economic slowdown. Amidst the turbulence, a group of committed, reform-minded
Government officials and technocrats began implementing reforms in earnest in late 2001.
These initiatives formed the basis for the first Immediate Action Plan (IAP) adopted by the
Government in June 2002. As a result, reform efforts intensified in a number of areas,
including the financial sector, public expenditures, the fight against corruption, infrastructure
regulatory environment and decentralized delivery of public services.
The reform group had been building on the successful experience with the IAP in moving the
reform process forward. In developing the 2003 Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), the scope
of the reforms was broadened and a more integrated approach within a medium-term
perspective was adopted. The PRS spells out specific development targets, foremost among
which is the reduction of the overall poverty ratio from about 40 percent to 30 percent by the
end of FY07. The strategy revolves around four key pillars: (i) achieving sustainable and
broad-based economic growth with an emphasis on the rural economy; (ii) accelerating human
development through improved delivery of basic social services and economic infrastructure;
(iii) ensuring social and economic inclusion of the poor, marginalized groups and less
developed regions; and (iv) vigorously pursuing good governance to achieve better
development results and ensure social and economic justice.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)—formally sent to the World Bank and the IMF
in July 2003—was discussed by the Boards in November 2003 following a joint staff
assessment carried out by the two institutions. Moreover, the Bank and the IMF have
supported Nepal to implement the IAP/PRS. The IMF is in the lead in assisting Nepal maintain
macroeconomic stability. An agreed medium-term macroeconomic framework forms the basis
for the three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) approved by the IMF Board
in November 2003 in support of the reform program. The PRGF focuses on medium-term
fiscal consolidation as well as structural reforms related to the financial system, public sector
management, and government revenue mobilization.
In implementing the 2003 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) considered by the Board at the
same time as the PRSP, the Bank is in the lead with the policy dialogue in the structural and
institutional areas. The Bank has been engaged in intensive dialogue in the formulation of
reform efforts towards rationalization of public expenditures, establishment of a framework
conducive to private sector growth, decentralization for better service delivery, targeted
assistance to vulnerable groups and improving governance. To support these measures, the
Bank’s Board approved the first Poverty Reduction Support Credit I (PRSC I) in
November 2003. The Bank’s future engagement is complemented by a program of financial
assistance articulated in the CAS, but currently that assistance is being reviewed. In that the
Bank’s lending is closely linked to policy performance and reform implementation, there are
currently serious concerns about the slow pace of reform implementation over the last year.

- 46 -

ANNEX IV

B. IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
Areas in which the Bank leads and there is no direct IMF involvement
The areas in which the Bank leads the policy dialogue and there is no direct IMF involvement
are the social sectors, infrastructure, and environment. In the social sphere, the Bank continues
to assist Nepal in poverty analysis as a follow-on to the 1999 study, Poverty at the Turn of the
Twenty-First Century. The Bank provided technical assistance (TA) in conducting the Nepal
Living Standards Survey II (NLSS II) during 2003/04 aimed at updating household level
information on trends in consumption, poverty, and their determinants. The Bank’s TA also
seeks to strengthen Nepal’s capacity to undertake regular household surveys that will facilitate
poverty comparisons over time and to conduct social impact analyses. The NLSS II has been a
key input into the two annual PRS progress reports, as well as the Bank’s planned
comprehensive Poverty Report (FY06).
In education, the Bank and numerous other donors are actively supporting Nepal’s
well-formulated ten-year primary education reform program. IDA along with Denmark,
Finland, Norway and the UK have established a joint financing arrangement whereby donor
funds are pooled with public sector budgetary resources to support the program. IDA support
is in the form of financing for the Education for All project under a Sector Wide Approach
(SWAp) approved in August 2004.
The Bank has encouraged Nepal’s decentralization efforts towards more efficient delivery of
public services. It has played a pivotal role in supporting the transfer of public schools to
community management. The Bank’s dialogue is accompanied by financing in the form of the
Community School Support Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) to improve accountability of
primary schools, build capacity of communities to manage schools and develop the roles of
teachers, local officials and education offices within the devolved framework.
In health, the Bank has been supporting the devolution of sub-health posts to local
communities, and the development of a sector-wide reform strategy. A Health Sector
Operation—approved by the Board in September 2004—supports the sector-wide program.
Key reform priorities include addressing the problems of inadequate financing and inefficient
public spending, weak institutional capacity and over-centralized planning and management,
weak delivery mechanisms and inequitable access to services.
To help generate broad-based growth, the Bank supports investments in key infrastructure
sectors by financing projects in Road Maintenance and Development, Rural Access
Improvement and Decentralization, Power Development, and Telecommunications Sector
Reform. At the same time, project finance is supporting decentralization to improve service
delivery in most of these sectors by promoting grassroots-driven, bottom-up planning and
community-based management. The Road Maintenance and Development Project supports
key sectoral policy reforms by establishing a Roads Board and Road Fund to assure a stable
source of funding for maintenance expenditures, while also promoting motorable access to
isolated regions. The recently approved Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization
Project will help to improve governance and service delivery for rural infrastructure, while at

- 47 -

ANNEX IV

the same time promoting agricultural and rural economic growth, and generating employment
through direct project investments in rural transport infrastructure.
The Power Development Project will help with the development of the country’s hydropower
potential to meet electricity demand, improve access of rural areas to electricity services and
promote private sector participation. The Telecommunications Sector Reform Project supports
sectoral policy reforms in addition to the provision of greater rural access to
telecommunications services through the introduction of a private operator.
While Bank financing of investment and sector operations also supports social inclusion, the
Bank assisted in the design, implementation and evaluation of a Poverty Alleviation Fund
(PAF) instrument. The PAF channels resources to grassroots levels, creating a mechanism for
continuity and coordination of donor programs for poverty reduction. Bank financing for the
PAF project approved in FY04 is supporting the fund’s implementation. In addition, the Bank
is assisting Nepal in gaining a better understanding of the institutional underpinnings of caste,
ethnic and gender-based social and economic exclusion and how these affect poverty
outcomes and the options for policy and institutional reform through a recently completed
Social and Gender Analysis. The Bank along with ILO and UNICEF will continue to build on
the work of the 2003 Nepal Understanding Child Labor Project towards a comprehensive
framework for addressing child labor issues.
In responding to environmental management, Bank assistance is focused on helping Nepal
articulate an effective strategy for environmental conservation, management and capacity
building. A Country Environmental Analysis is being carried out and will be completed in
FY07.
Areas in which the Bank leads and its analysis serves as input into the IMF program
The Bank takes the lead in assisting Nepal with public expenditure analysis. The Bank’s
FY00 Public Expenditure Review (PER) provided analytical support for developing the
strategy on public expenditure reform. Together with the United Kingdom Department for
International Development (DfID), the Bank’s intensive dialogue and technical assistance
have been supporting the reforms, including the development of a credible Medium Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF). In FY03, this framework was applied to the prioritization of
the development budget to ensure efficient budget allocations for FY04 priority projects, and
efforts are underway to apply it to all expenditures in the future. As Nepal implements its PRS,
the MTEF will help the public sector translate the PRS priorities into fiscal realities.
Public expenditure analysis remains an integral part of the Bank’s analytical and advisory
(AAA) work program. An ongoing PER is focusing on evaluating the implementation of the
MTEF. In addition, the Public Finance Management (PFM) Review to be completed in FY07
partly consists of a PER that will examine the fiscal space for development activities and
cross-sectoral allocation of public spending and service delivery.
To complement the economic analysis, studies on the public sector’s framework for financial
accountability and procurement—the Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) and
the Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)—were conducted jointly by the

- 48 -

ANNEX IV

Bank and the Government. Additionally, in response to technical assistance and training needs
on public expenditure management, decentralization and enhancement of financial
accountability, the Bank is providing support through Institutional Development Fund (IDF)
grants or the Bank’s budget.
On the financing side, should there be a reinvigoration of the reform process, future Bank
support could include subsequent PRSCs in line with the programmatic approach articulated in
the 2003 CAS. PRSC I supported the implementation of the PRS by expanding the fiscal space
to increase priority spending, refining the MTEF, improving the efficiency of key parastatals,
and removing impediments to broad-based growth (through improvements in the effectiveness
of irrigation, rural transport and power sector investments and reforms of the labor market, the
financial system and the telecommunications sector). To assist in the reform effort, the
recently approved Economic Reform Technical Assistance Project can provide technical
assistance to any or all of the PRS pillars. The Bank’s AAA program places emphasis on the
need to address the challenges and bottlenecks to broad-based growth. In addition to the
Development Policy Review, key studies on rural sector development and labor are envisioned
to help prioritize future policy reforms.
With respect to governance, in implementing the 1998 CAS and the new strategy, the Bank
has consistently and firmly assisted Nepal in addressing its fundamental constraint to
development—poor governance. The Bank’s strong stance manifested in the restricted new
lending during FY99–FY02—albeit accompanied by intensive dialogue—may have provided
some impetus to the wave of recent reforms. The public expenditure reform program which
has benefited from the Bank’s analytical work and policy dialogue is facing up to the
challenge of improving not only efficiency but also governance. The program includes
measures to fight corruption, ensure civil service accountability and enhance transparency of
public financial management and procurement framework. Bank support on decentralization
includes analytical assistance on the fiscal decentralization framework and promotion of the
expanded roles of local bodies. Following the completion of the CPAR and CFAA, IDF grants
are providing the means for strengthening relevant public sector institutions and implementing
main policy recommendations. The FY07 PFM Review will also comprise a CPAR and a
CFAA aimed at assessing the efficiency of public finance management practices for delivering
value for money and accountability.
Areas of shared responsibility
The Bank and the IMF, in conjunction with other external development partners, provided
assistance in the preparation of the PRS and carried out a Joint Staff Assessment (JSA). In
addressing the PRS pillar on achieving good governance, the Bank and the IMF are assisting
in the area of civil service reform through policy dialogue and technical assistance towards
ensuring an autonomous and professional civil service as well as fiscal sustainability. The
Bank has proposed to carry out a policy note (FY06) on the delineation of responsibilities
between ministers and civil servants with a view to supporting better human resource
management.
The Bank and the IMF are partners in providing analytical support to the Government on
international trade, which is key to attaining broad-based growth. The Bank leads the work

- 49 -

ANNEX IV

with a Trade and Competitiveness Study (FY03) which helped identify major constraints to
Nepal’s further integration into the multilateral trading system in a manner that is supportive
of the PRS. The IMF contributed to the study by assessing macroeconomic policy and its
potential impact on trade performance. In turn, the study is helping the IMF design its
technical assistance program on tax policy, including import tariffs taking into account
Nepal’s WTO accession.
Financial sector reform is a prerequisite for successful implementation of the IAP and PRS.
Since the mismanagement of key financial institutions was a major element of poor
governance, the progress on financial sector reform has been the litmus test of political
commitment to governance reform. The Bank and the IMF are helping to strengthen the
Central Bank’s authority and regulatory capacity, improve the financial health of the two
largest banks, restructure the state banks and upgrade the legislative and institutional
framework for the financial sector. The Bank financed the comprehensive assessment of the
two largest banks and undertook a comprehensive Financial Sector Study in 2002. The
Financial Sector Technical Assistance project supports the restructuring and reengineering of
the Central Bank, introduction of professional management teams into the two large ailing
commercial banks (the first step toward eventual restructuring of those banks), capacity
building towards enhanced credit information, improved public awareness of financial sector
issues and upgrading of staff training in financial institutions. The Financial Sector
Restructuring project—for which Bank financing was approved in FY04—supports further
strengthening of the Central Bank and deepening the reform process within the two large
ailing commercial banks. In FY05, a Legal Financial Review was completed providing a
snapshot of the legal and judicial environment for financial sector growth and development.
Areas in which the IMF leads and its analysis serves as input into the Bank program
The IMF leads the policy dialogue on maintaining sound macroeconomic policies as is the
case with most Bank/IMF member countries. The PRGF-supported program serves as the
macroeconomic policy anchor for ensuring successful implementation of the IAP/PRS and the
Bank’s program of support.
The IMF leads in encouraging reforms that are critical to the maintenance of macroeconomic
stability, primarily on fiscal matters, such as maintaining sustainable domestic borrowing
while allocating resources to priority sectors. Also, the IMF is taking the lead on the revenue
side by setting realistic targets for increasing domestic revenues and advising on tax policy
and administration.
Areas in which the IMF leads and there is no direct Bank involvement
The areas in which the IMF leads and the Bank is not directly involved are monetary policy,
the exchange rate regime, the balance of payments and related statistical and measurement
issues.
C. World Bank Group Strategy and Lending Operations
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). In November 2003, the Board considered a new
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), which discussed the rationale for implementing the Base

- 50 -

ANNEX IV

Case lending program. Indeed, given the nature of the country’s ongoing reforms, the 2002
CAS Progress Report (CAS PR) had already presented the justification for moving to a Base
Case scenario and developing a programmatic approach to financial assistance. However, as
mentioned previously, the assistance strategy is currently under review and could be
substantially revised in light of the limited reform efforts over the past year.
The Base Case Lending Program. In FY04, credit approvals included PRSC I, Financial
Sector Restructuring Project, Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation and Poverty
Alleviation Fund. In FY05, IDA financing was approved for the Education for All Project, the
Health Sector Program, the Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project, and the
Economic Reform Technical Assistance Project.
Bank Assistance Program in Nepal. As of December 28, 2005, IDA’s lending portfolio
consisted of twelve projects with a total commitment of US$425 million and a total
undisbursed balance of US$296 million (Table 1).
Table 1. World Bank Operations
As of December 28, 2005
IDA Amount

Undisbursed 1/

Board Date

(In millions of U.S. dollars, net of cancellations)
Road Maintenance and Development
Telecommunications Sector Reform
Financial Sector Technical Assistance
Power Development
Community School Support
Financial Sector Restructuring (Phase II)
Poverty Alleviation Fund
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation II
Education for All
Health Sector Program
Rural Access Improvement and Development
Economic Reform Technical Assistance
Total

54.5
22.6
16.0
75.6
5.0
75.5
15.0
25.3
50.0
50.0
32.0
3.0

16.2
14.5
8.2
77.6
3.4
27.5
11.4
23.5
38.0
44.4
28.0
2.9

424.5

295.6

2000
2002
2003
2003
2003
2004
2004
2004
2005
2005
2005
2005

1/ Credit accounting is in SDRs. As these figures are in US$, exchange rate fluctuations may result
in undisbursed balances greater than the principal amounts.

Economic and Sector Work. The 2003 Country Assistance Strategy (Report No. 26509-NEP,
11/24/2003) was discussed by the Bank’s Board in November 2003. Recently completed
economic and sector work includes Nepal Development Policy Review: Restarting Growth and
Poverty Reduction (June 2004), Citizens with(out) Rights: Nepal Gender and Social Exclusion
Assessment (June 2005), Nepal Decentralized Organizations Study (March 2004),
Urbanization and Service Delivery in the Context of Decentralization: A Review of the Issues
for the Kathmandu Valley (December 2004), Legal Financial Review (February 2005), and
North South Transport Corridor Options (August 2004).

- 51 -

ANNEX IV

IFC’s Activities in Nepal. As of end-July 2005, IFC-held portfolio in Nepal is
US$67.7 million in two power generation projects, one tourism project and one leasing
company. IFC will continue to support export-oriented manufacturing, private investment in
telecommunications and power generation and distribution, financial market development and
the growth of small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Due to the still weak security situation
and political uncertainties, currently there are few investment opportunities in Nepal large
enough for direct financing, so the IFC does not expect to make many new investments during
the CAS period. Instead, IFC will focus on technical assistance for SMEs through the regional
multi-donor technical assistance facility for SME development—the South Asia Enterprise
Development Facility (SEDF)—based in Dhaka. This facility—funded by IFC in partnership
with Canada, Netherlands, Norway, United Kingdom, AsDB and the European Union (EU)—
will deliver technical assistance programs in Nepal to increase SMEs’ access to financing and
business development services, improve the business environment for SMEs and develop
linkages with larger enterprises.
Questions may be referred to Ms. Dado (473-2545).

- 52 -

ANNEX V

Nepal—Relations with the Asian Development Bank
Lending Program
As of June 30, 2005, total commitments by the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) consisted of
109 loans amounting to $2.17 billion covering projects in agriculture and natural resources, education,
energy, finance, industry and trade, law, economic management and public policy, transport and
communication, and water supply, sanitation and waste management. Undisbursed funds of
$585 million represent 86 percent of the total net loan amount as of June 30, 2005. For the
period 2005–07, 15 projects amounting to $350.00 million are tentatively programmed.
Loans by the Asian Development Bank, 1969–2005
(As of June 30, 2005)
1969–2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Approved Approved Approved Approved Approved Approved
Loans
Agriculture and natural resources
Education
Energy
Finance
Industry and trade
Law, economic and public policy
Transport and communication
Water supply, sanitation and waste
management
Multisector
Total approved
Gross disbursements
Technical assistance projects
Total approved
Gross disbursements

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
656.23
61.1
364.4
7.3
129.18

0
30
0
0
0

236.86

0
19.6
0
0
0
30
46

0

20
0
0
0
0
35
0

70
20
0
0
0
0
20

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

224
127.06
1,806.13
1220.6

0
0
95.60
57.3

0
30
60.00
28.2

39
0
94.00
33.5

0
0
110.00
22.0

0
0
0.00
13.4

96.6
54.1

4.0
5.0

3.9
3.9

4.06
4.17

3.18
4.2

0
2.1

Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank.

Technical Assistance
Since 1968, AsDB has provided Nepal with technical assistance in most sectors. As of June 30, 2005,
total technical assistance consisted of 244 projects totaling $111.8 million, of which 92 valued at
$33.3 million were for preparation of loan projects.
Private Sector Operations
As of June 30, 2005, AsDB has provided five private-sector loans in Nepal: two in industry, two in
hydropower and one in tourism. Direct investment has involved $49.5 million in loans and
$3.3 million in equity for a total of $52.8 million. The AsDB’s public sector lending and technical
assistance program have also been helping Nepal to create a more conducive policy and legal
environment for private sector development.

- 53 -

ANNEX VI

Nepal—Statistical Issues
While the economic and financial database is adequate for program monitoring purposes, the
lack of consistent and timely data hampers analysis and policy formulation and
implementation. A multisector statistics mission (January 2001) prepared recommendations
and an action plan to upgrade Nepal’s statistics to international standards. Nepal provides
core data to the Fund and releases data in government and central bank publications. Nepal
has been a participant in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since May 2001.
Its metadata were initially posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board in
May 2001 and last updated in August 2005.
Real Sector
The Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) compiles national accounts statistics using
the 1968 SNA. These statistics include GDP by industry (current and constant prices) and by
expenditure categories (current prices), and gross national income and savings. The statistics
are deficient due to lack of comprehensive and regular data sources. The limited source data
suffer from inconsistencies, lags in availability, and insufficient detail. There are
shortcomings in record keeping by agencies and access to records is not timely due to
processing lags. Reflecting source data problems, compilation methods rely heavily on fixed
ratios derived from surveys or ad hoc assumptions.
The consumer price index (CPI) was revised following completion of the 1995/96
household expenditure survey. The weights used for calculation of the CPI were updated and
the revised series were published in May 2000. However, the revised CPI covers only urban
areas and the consumption basket refers only to a subset of the population. The wholesale
price index (WPI) was developed by the NRB and first published in July 2001. The weights
for the WPI, based on 1999/2000 data, were derived using a commodity flow approach and
the prices related to the first commercial transaction point. However, the compilation method
needs to be improved to implement weekly or bi-weekly price collection; the number of price
quotations need to be increased; and procedures for adjusting for quality differences should
be implemented. The CBS, with STA assistance, is developing a monthly producer price
index (PPI) series, to replace the manufacturing price index, which is based on unit values
rather than actual transaction prices. The new price index is expected to provide better
deflation of national accounts data and a more accurate measure of industrial sector inflation.
The third STA mission to provide technical assistance on the development of the PPI took
place in April-May 2004.
Fiscal Sector
A revised budget classification system, introduced in 1996/97 and since refined, has
substantially improved fiscal statistics, in particular the division between current and capital
spending. However, fiscal data by functional and economic classification is only provided on
an irregular basis with varying degrees of coverage. In addition, large amounts are still
allocated to the contingency account, and monthly reporting of development spending

- 54 -

ANNEX VI

excludes amounts directly paid by donors. Moreover, a number of fees collected outside the
budget and the operations of local governments are not reported in the annual budget.
More timely data on revenue and expenditure are needed for effective fiscal control. A
financial management project is under way and a system of ‘flash’ reporting covering
selected districts that account for the bulk of expenditure is being developed. Further
improvement of fiscal data collected by the Financial Comptroller General’s Office would
permit the MoF to monitor more effectively actual revenue collections and expenditures, and
to provide assessments during the course of the fiscal year. Such improvements will require
further computerization in the MoF regional offices, donor financing, and additional TA.
Consolidated accounts for the public enterprise sector are not compiled on a regular basis,
and financial reporting by many individual enterprises is subject to long delays. Fund staff
has assisted the authorities in processing surveys of public enterprises. However, further
assistance may be needed in survey design and processing.
The Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) reports data regularly for publication in the Government
Finance Statistics Yearbook.
Monetary Sector
Monetary data provided by the NRB have been subject to revisions with a substantial lag
(up to 12 months), making program monitoring difficult. Money and banking statistics
missions visited Nepal during April/May 1999 and March 2000 to assist in improving
timeliness, compilation procedures, and the coverage of the financial system. The 2001
multisector mission recommended implementation of the residency criterion, instead of the
currency basis, to distinguish foreign and domestic accounts. The mission also encouraged
the NRB to improve procedures for grossing up balance sheet data to account for late
reporting by commercial bank branches, which had led to the underestimation of broad
money. In August 2002, the NRB informed STA about the introduction of new reporting
forms for commercial banks, the implementation of which initially resulted in delayed
transmissions of aggregated data on banks to STA. Beginning May 2003, STA received
revised data on commercial banks for the period August 2001 through April 2003. Nepal’s
country page in the September 2005 edition of IFS shows data for the monetary authorities,
deposit money banks, and interest rates through June 2005. However, some components of
data on deposit money banks are still not reported, which prevents reporting in IFS key
aggregates like claims on private sector and demand deposit liabilities.
The July 2003 monetary and financial statistics mission noted that the NRB has implemented
some important guidelines of the IMF’s Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual, notably
on the sectorization of the economy and categorization of financial assets and liabilities. The
mission identified a number of outstanding deficiencies in monetary statistics and made high
priority recommendations to overcome the following important shortcomings: (1) inadequate
staff and computer resources; (2) interdepartmental data discrepancies on foreign reserve
data; (3) late reporting of commercial banks and other banking institutions; (4) inaccurate

- 55 -

ANNEX VI

estimation for late reporting commercial bank branches; (5) large interbank discrepancies;
and (6) incorrect recording of repurchase agreements. The mission also recommended that
the authorities should consider the establishment of a Statistics Department in the context of
NRB’s ongoing reorganization.
Balance of Payments
A peripatetic Statistical Adviser conducted the last of a series of four missions during
April 2004. Despite improvements, the balance of payments accounts exhibited large net
errors and omissions for 2003/04. Work is underway to improve the estimation of workers’
remittances, and the data sources for private capital flows. Further work is needed to improve
the recording of oil transactions, grants, foreign direct investment, short-term inflows, and
other private capital flows. In September 2003, the authorities began publishing the balance
of payments in the format recommended by Fund technical assistance, but some other
recommendations have not yet been fully implemented. Staffing is being strengthened.
Exports and imports data compiled by the NRB, the Customs Department, and the Trade
Promotion Center (overseas trade only) exhibit discrepancies. Export and import price
indices are not compiled, and information on trade volumes is unavailable. The Customs
Department is being strengthened, but NRB staff continue to estimate unrecorded trade.
Incomplete and conflicting data on government external grants and loans complicate
estimating foreign financing. The NRB monitors cash disbursements and repayments, but
most commodity aid and direct payment are excluded. MoF reporting is also incomplete and
not timely. With technical assistance from the United Kingdom’s DFID, a new database
providing comprehensive data on disbursements, payments, and the stock of outstanding
government debt has been developed and is currently being refined. However, reporting of
direct external grants remains a problem.

- 56 -

Nepal—Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of December 22, 2005

1

Date of
Latest
Observation

Date
Received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
Publication

Exchange rates

Dec. 2005

Dec. 2005

D

W

D

International reserve assets and reserve liabilities of the
1
Monetary Authorities

Nov. 2005

Dec. 2005

W

W

M

Reserve/base money

Aug. 2005

Oct. 2005

M

M

M

Broad money

Aug. 2005

Oct. 2005

M

M

M

Central bank balance sheet

Aug. 2005

Oct. 2005

M

M

M

Consolidated balance sheet of the banking system

Aug. 2005

Oct. 2005

M

M

M

Interest rates2

Nov. 2005

Dec. 2005

W

W

W

Consumer price index

Sep. 2005

Nov. 2005

M

M

M

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of
financing3 – general government4

Nov. 2005

Dec. 2005

W

W

W

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of
financing3 – central government

Nov. 2005

Dec. 2005

W

W

W

Stocks of central government and central governmentguaranteed debt5

2002/03

Jun. 2005

A

A

A

External current account balance

2002/03

Jun. 2005

Q/A

Q/A

A

Exports and imports of goods and services

2003/04

Jan. 2005

M

M

M

GDP/GNP

2003/04

Jun. 2005

A

A

A

Gross external debt

2003/04

Jun. 2005

A

A

A

6

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and
local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), weekly (W), monthly (M), quarterly (Q), annually (A), irregular (I); and not available (NA)
2

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/12
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 2, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Nepal
On January 18, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the 2005 Article IV consultation with Nepal.1
Background
Growth has been affected by the political turmoil and conflict, although inflation has remained
moderate and international reserves are adequate. Real GDP growth averaged 2 percent
during 2000/01−2004/05, compared to the 1990s when growth in agricultural productivity and a
significant trade liberalization contributed to average real GDP growth of 5 percent. Inflation has
remained in the low single digits, although it rose to 7¾ percent in mid-October 2005 (12-month
basis) due to weak agricultural performance following erratic weather conditions, a VAT rate
increase in January 2005, and partial pass-through of higher international oil prices by Nepal Oil
Corporation.
The overall and domestically financed deficits remained limited in 2004/05. The VAT rate was
raised in the revised budget from 10 percent to 13 percent in early-2005, and helped raise
revenue by ¾ percentage point of GDP to 13 percent of GDP. Even so, revenue fell short of the
revised budget target due to weaker than projected growth and imports, continued excise
leakages and delayed excise duty refunds from India. Current spending was lower than the
revised budget: the higher civil service wages and allowances, and security-related
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.

-2expenditures were more than offset by lower spending on development and social sector
projects, especially in the conflict-affected areas. The overall deficit was significantly lower than
budgeted (1 percent of GDP compared to 2½ percent of GDP). As a result, although external
loans fell short of the budget, as assistance from the World Bank, Asian Development Bank,
and donors dwindled, the domestically financed deficit was also lower than budgeted (at
½ percent of GDP).
Monetary and exchange rate policies remained geared to supporting the exchange rate peg to
the Indian rupee. Broad money growth slowed from 12¾ percent in 2003/04 to 8 percent in
2004/05 reflecting substantially lower Net Foreign Assets accumulation by the Nepal Rastra
Bank (NRB). While budget financing from the banking system was limited, private sector credit
grew by 13¼ percent, mainly in consumer lending. Balance sheet consolidation by the two
largest banks undergoing restructuring limited the growth of loans for manufacturing and
services sectors. With high remittances, liquidity was ample, T-bill rates remained low, and
interest rates edged lower.
The current account and overall balance of payments remained in surplus. Despite disruptions
related to the insurgency and the elimination of textile quotas, total exports rose by 10 percent
in 2004/05. This was mainly due to booming exports to India which rose by 30 percent, while
exports to other countries declined by over 15 percent. Export performance in traditional
sectors—garments, carpets, and pashmina—remained weak. Total import growth was stagnant
due to weak economic activity—a 35 percent increase in oil imports reflecting higher
international prices was offset by a 6 percent decline in non-oil imports. Reflecting continued
strong remittances, the current account surplus (excluding official transfers) increased from
1 percent of GDP in 2003/04 to 3 percent of GDP in 2004/05. A small overall surplus in the
balance of payments led to an increase in international reserves to around US$1.5 billion
(7¾ months of imports of goods and services) at end-2004/05.
Financial soundness indicators have broadly improved in recent years due to banking reforms.
External management teams at Nepal Bank Limited (NBL) and Rastriya Banijya Bank (RBB)—
the two largest banks which account for 50 percent of banking system deposits—have made
notable progress over the past three years. They have turned the banks around from
loss-making entities in 2000/01 by lowering cost of funds and eliminating excess staffing
through voluntary retirement schemes. Both banks made profits in 2003/04 and 2004/05.
Management and credit evaluation practices in the banks have also improved significantly.
In addition, Asian Development Bank supported restructuring plans for Agricultural
Development Bank of Nepal have proceeded well. In contrast, the financial condition of Nepal
Industrial Development Corporation remains dismal.
The share of non-performing assets in NBL and RBB remains high. Improvements in the legal
framework over the last two years and new debt recovery mechanisms (blacklisting directives,
the Debt Recovery Tribunal, and an Appellate Tribunal) have helped recoveries from small and
medium-sized defaulters. However, recoveries from large, willful and politically-connected
defaulters remain limited. Recoveries from these defaulters are required to improve NBL and
RBB balance sheets, reduce contingent liabilities for the budget, and pave the way for their

-3privatization. The banks have been reluctant to pursue these cases in the Debt Recovery
Tribunal due to concerns about its limited staff and capacity.
Nepal’s growth prospects are contingent on political stability and improved security, and risks
remain. Staff project real GDP growth of 2½−3½ percent in 2005/06. In this scenario, if political
stability and better security conditions can be established and structural reforms are
implemented, Nepal could see a gradual return to growth rates of 5−5½ percent through
2009/10. This would require a rebound in manufacturing and service sectors, higher tourism
earnings, and a larger contribution from agriculture and government activity. With the peg,
inflation is expected to broadly follow price developments in India. The balance of payments
surplus is projected to broadly decline. Export growth is projected to average 8 percent
assuming Nepal can further diversify its exports beyond traditional sectors. Imports (both oil and
non-oil) are projected to pick up with economic activity. Trade deficits could be covered by
remittances and aid. International reserves are projected to remain around 6−7 months of
imports of goods and services. If the conflict persists and the political impasse stalls reform
implementation, low growth rates are likely to become entrenched, security-related spending
pressures will remain high, and development spending low. In these conditions, the fiscal and
external position could deteriorate, and international reserves could be lower. Key risks going
forward include slow reform implementation which would jeopardize external assistance and
higher global oil prices.
Nepal provided inaccurate information related to the second disbursement made in
November 2004 under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangement due to
weaknesses in its debt recording system. As a result of this misreporting, the disbursement was
noncomplying. The disbursement was made on the basis of a finding that all conditions
applicable to the disbursement, including on the nonaccumulation of external payment arrears,
had been met. This finding later proved incorrect, as Nepal had accumulated external payment
arrears to Austria, including between November 2003 (when the arrangement was approved)
and October 2004 (when the first review under the arrangement was completed). However,
corrective actions have been taken. The arrears which led to the noncomplying disbursement
have been cleared. The arrears are attributable to weak debt management and coordination
problems, which the authorities are now addressing.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that Nepal is currently at a critical juncture, as political uncertainties
and the ongoing insurgency continue to dampen economic growth. They encouraged the
authorities to resolve these uncertainties, improve security, and make progress toward peace as
essential steps to support poverty reduction efforts and private sector led growth.
Directors commended the authorities for maintaining macroeconomic stability under a difficult
environment and for progress made in reform implementation until mid-2004. They encouraged
the authorities to reinvigorate the implementation of policies in Nepal’s Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper, which remains an appropriate framework to address key constraints on growth,
maintain macroeconomic stability, and reduce poverty. This would also help mobilize external
assistance by bringing the PRGF arrangement and donor programs back on track, as well as

-4lay the basis for possible debt relief under the HIPC Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative.
On fiscal policies, Directors commended efforts to mobilize revenue, prioritize expenditure,
increase social sector spending, and limit domestic budget financing. They encouraged further
efforts to improve tax administration to raise collection levels. Directors expressed concern that
security-related spending pressures remain high, and development spending is low relative to
budget targets, especially in conflict-affected areas. They encouraged efforts to raise spending
on infrastructure and social sector projects to achieve PRSP goals, while limiting domestically
financed deficits to levels consistent with medium-term fiscal sustainability. Directors also
favored early implementation of an automatic pricing mechanism for petroleum products in
order to improve the financial condition of the Nepal Oil Corporation so that it does not pose an
additional burden on the budget.
Directors emphasized the need to increase fiscal transparency, improve public expenditure
management, and address donor concerns about the quality of spending. To this end, they
suggested implementation of the fiscal ROSC recommendations, including broader coverage of
off-budget activities. In this context, Directors called for more comprehensive reporting of
security-related spending.
Directors agreed that the exchange rate peg to the Indian rupee remains appropriate.
They noted that the peg enables the economy to benefit from close ties with India and helps to
keep inflation at low levels. Directors considered that the level of the peg should be kept under
review, given Nepal’s growing integration in the world economy through its membership in the
WTO and regional trading arrangements. External competitiveness should be raised through
structural reforms and infrastructure investments to lower transactions and transportation costs.
Directors commended the progress made in financial sector reforms, while observing that much
remains to be done. They welcomed the measures taken to improve the debt recovery
framework, raise efficiency at the Nepal Rastra Bank, and to restructure commercial and
development banks. Going forward, Directors noted that the legal framework for financial sector
activity can be further improved through amendments to the Banking and Financial Institutions
Ordinance. They encouraged the NRB to enhance financial sector supervision, and raise its
internal audit and accounting standards. Directors emphasized that significant loan recoveries
from large, willful defaulters are required to improve the balance sheets of ailing commercial
banks. The delay in the restructuring of the Nepal Industrial Development Corporation should be
addressed by privatizing it promptly and transparently. Given the important role played by
remittances in strengthening the country’s external position and reducing poverty, Directors
encouraged the authorities to facilitate remittances through formal channels by reducing
transaction costs and to help redirect remittances for investment and employment creation in
Nepal. They called on the authorities to press forward with implementation of a strong antimoney laundering and combating the financing of terrorism regime.
Directors recommended an acceleration in the pace of public enterprise and governance
reforms. They stressed that liquidation of unviable loss-making enterprises should proceed
decisively, and encouraged mechanisms—such as share sales and management contracts—

-5to improve the efficiency of large public enterprises. Directors welcomed adoption of the Civil
Service Ordinance to improve governance, and urged early promulgation of the Governance
Ordinance. They emphasized that anti-corruption efforts need to focus on large, prominent
offenders to yield measurable results.
Directors encouraged creation of an enabling environment for private sector activity by
upgrading the regulatory framework and making labor markets more flexible. They welcomed
the promulgation of the Secured Transactions, Company, Securities, and Insolvency
Ordinances. Directors urged early promulgation of the draft Labor Ordinance.
Given the importance of agriculture and the high level of rural poverty, Directors encouraged
progress with implementing Agricultural Perspective Plan policies to raise agricultural
productivity. This involves providing complementary inputs to land and improving rural
infrastructure to promote commercialization and market access for agricultural products.
Directors regretted the misreporting of external payment arrears related to the second
disbursement under the PRGF arrangement. They welcomed the clearance of these arrears
and efforts to strengthen external debt management. With the corrective actions, Directors
approved the request of a waiver for Nepal’s nonobservance of the performance criterion on the
nonaccumulation of external payment arrears.
Directors stressed the need to address data deficiencies to improve policy formulation and
monitoring, and urged full implementation of Fund technical assistance recommendations.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of
the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the
country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article
IV consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional
level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with
longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of
general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-6-

Nepal: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000/01–2004/05 1/
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Est.

3.4
2.0

2.5
6.6

12.2
15.5
11.2
4.3
1.0

13.0
16.0
11.7
4.3
0.9

12.7
9.3

8.0
13.3

(Percent change)
Output and prices
Change in real GDP
Change in CPI (end-period)

5.6
3.4

-0.6
3.5

3.4
6.1

(Percent of GDP)
Budgetary operations
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall deficit 2/

11.4
17.5
11.1
6.4
4.5

11.5
17.2
11.5
5.6
4.3

12.3
16.0
11.4
4.6
1.6

(Percent of GDP)
Money and credit
Broad money
Domestic credit

15.2
18.8

4.4
9.2

9.8
12.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports , f.o.b. 3/
Imports, f.o.b.
Current account 4/
(In percent of GDP) 4/
Overall balance
Gross official reserves
Rupees per U.S. dollar (end-period)

945
1,710
162
2.9
38
1,020
74.7

Sources: Nepalese authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year begins mid July.
2/ After grants.
3/ Includes re-exports.
4/ Excluding grants.

754
1,448
106
1.9
-39
1,048
78.0

653
1,556
16
0.3
93
1,178
74.8

748
1,801
59
0.9
235
1,471
74.1

826
1,806
226
3.1
24
1,507
70.0

Statement by Hooi Eng Phang, Executive Director for Nepal
January 18, 2006

1.

The Nepalese authorities sincerely appreciate the efforts made by the IMF staff in
conducting the Article IV Consultation in October–November 2005 and for preparing
the report on macroeconomic developments and policy challenges facing the Nepalese
economy. The authorities have found the report comprehensive, analytical and, at times
critical on matters relating to the pace of policy implementation. The authorities
gratefully acknowledge the policy advice and would also like to assure the staff, the
management and the Executive Board that policy measures recommended for
institution building, structural reforms and maintaining macroeconomic stability will be
earnestly implemented to facilitate growth and alleviate poverty.

The Current Challenge
2.

Currently, Nepal is at a critical juncture. A decade long insurgency has taken a heavy
toll in terms of loss of human lives, disruption of social life and retardation of economic
growth. After the mid 1990s, frequent changes in the government have created political
instability. Consequently, local elections and general elections could not take place as
scheduled and local bodies and the parliament have remained without any
representation.

3.

Against this background of emerging constitutional crisis, His Majesty the King took
the step on February 1, 2004 to form a new government. The new government has
taken initiatives to hold both local and parliamentary elections which have been
scheduled for February 2006 and April 2007, respectively. Considering the importance
of the election process, His Majesty's Government of Nepal is committed towards the
successful completion of these elections, which will help the country to return to
normalcy and resolve the social and political tensions confronting the Nepalese society
today.

Macroeconomic Developments
4.

The Nepalese economy, which had registered a good performance during the early
1990s, is experiencing a setback and registering modest growth in recent years. The
decade long insurgency induced social tensions and political instability which have
caused growth to fall significantly below trend. Real GDP growth decelerated to
2.5 percent in 2004/05 from 3.4 percent in 2003/04. A decline in agricultural
production owing to unfavorable weather conditions, negative growth of the
construction and trade, hotel and restaurant sub-sectors and slow down in the growth
rate of some other non- agricultural sub-sectors dampened the growth momentum.
While growth in agriculture decelerated to 2.8 percent in 2004/05 from 3.9 percent in
2003/04, non-agriculture GDP growth rate declined to 1.6 percent in 2004/05 from
2.9 percent in 2003/04. Risks to growth still persist. Weather conditions this year have

-2also remained less than favorable. Against this background, economic growth is
expected to remain modest in 2005/06.
5.

Despite the low rate of economic growth, insurgency and political instability, inflation
remained low and controlled in recent years. The CPI-based average annual rate of
inflation remained low at 4.5 percent in 2004/05, albeit a pick up from 4.0 percent in
2003/04. Nonetheless, inflation remained broadly in line with the South Asian regional
average. Restrained monetary expansion, prudent fiscal policy and the pegged
exchange rate arrangement with the Indian currency have contributed to maintain the
rate of inflation below the 5 percent level. However, a build-up in inflationary pressure
is expected in 2005/06. A pick-up in global inflation, an increase in the VAT rate from
10 percent to 13 percent in January 2005, and the adjustment in fuel prices by Nepal Oil
Corporation (NOC) in January and September 2005 have contributed to the recent
surge in inflation. However, with the peg, inflation in Nepal is expected to align with
the trend in the region. Should any deviation occur, the magnitude of deviation from the
regional level of inflation will not exceed 2-3 percentage points in 2005/06.

6.

The overall external sector remained stable despite the shock emanating from the
elimination of the textile quota and the negative impact of insurgency on tourism. Both
the current account and overall balance of payments remained in surplus. Total exports
rose by 10.6 percent in 2004/05 mainly due to the significant growth of 33.3 percent in
exports to India. Total imports fell by 0.7 percent, reflecting stagnation in economic
activities.

7.

Formal inflows of remittances is the single largest source of foreign exchange
accounting for approximately 12 percent of GDP. Remittances, the mainstay of the
Nepalese economy, have contributed to sustaining macroeconomic stability. In the face
of a significant fall in foreign aid, travel receipts and exports, persistent rising inflows
of workers’ remittances contributed to the current account and overall balance of
payments surplus. A significant increase in remittances has also contributed to the
accumulation of international reserves, sufficient to meet the country’s international
obligation and to cover 7.5 months’ of imports of goods and services.

8.

Remittances have exerted positive microeconomic impact especially in poverty
alleviation. This is evident from the result of the second Nepal Living Standards
Survey, which showed a reduction in absolute poverty level from 42 percent in 1995/96
to 31 percent in 2003/04.

9.

Despite the situation of unease, the budget deficit has been kept in check. Nepal's fiscal
deficit stands lower than the South Asian average. This also contributed to maintain
macroeconomic stability in the country. The fiscal deficit, on a cash flow basis,
remained more or less at the preceding year’s level of 2.6 percent of GDP in 2004/05.
Net domestic borrowing also remained below 1 percent (0.9 percent) of GDP in
2004/05. Domestic revenue collection rose to 13.3 percent of GDP in 2004/05, up from
12.6 percent in 2003/04.

-3-

10. The growth of broad money decelerated to 8.3 percent in 2004/05 from 12.8 percent in
2003/04. Lower NFA accumulation together with containment of domestic credit
slowed the growth of broad money.
Developments in Policy Reform
11.

The Nepalese authorities agree with the staff that, among others, the key economic
policy challenges facing Nepal are maintaining macroeconomic stability, restoring
growth and reducing poverty. The authorities are in broad agreement with the staff that
while prudent monetary, foreign exchange and fiscal policies are crucial to maintain
macroeconomic stability, structural reforms in financial and public sectors are key to
restoring growth and reducing poverty. The authorities are committed to using the basic
guidelines of the PRSP for spearheading policy reforms.

12.

Macroeconomic policies have remained prudent and stable despite the difficult
situation prevailing in the country. The Nepalese authorities gratefully acknowledge the
contribution of donor agencies in terms of their advice in formulating and
implementing macroeconomic policies in a prudent manner under the framework of the
PRSP funded by the World Bank, PRGF supported by the IMF and governance reform
program and public sector management aided by AsDB.

13.

The Nepalese authorities concur with the staff's observation that monetary and
exchange rate policies should remain geared to supporting the current exchange rate
peg. The peg has served Nepal well in keeping inflation low and maintaining
macroeconomic stability. However, the authorities are mindful that the level of the peg
needs to be continuously reviewed to take account of its trade competitiveness vis-à-vis
other SAARC countries.

14.

With the enactment of NRB Act 2002, Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) has started the
practice of announcing annual monetary policy at the beginning of the fiscal year. The
mid-term review of monetary policy is also made public. These practices have
streamlined and made the conduct of monetary policy transparent and accountable.
These practices have also made the communication channels of monetary policy
accessible and open to diverse stakeholders. On July 22, 2005, NRB issued the annual
monetary policy for 2005/06. In the face of emerging pressure on prices, NRB signaled
a tight monetary policy stance by increasing the bank rate from 5.5 percent to 6.0
percent. The monetary policy implementation strategy has also been revamped. The
excess reserves of commercial banks, the counter-parties in the conduct of monetary
policy, has been chosen as the operating target of monetary policy. Open market
operations in the form of sale auction, purchase auction, repo auction and reverse repo
auction have been selected as short term instruments in the conduct of monetary policy.
The liquidity monitoring and forecasting framework (LMFF) has been put in place to
guide the monetary operations.

15.

The authorities are vigilant on the likely impact of rising remittances on inflation. In
order to keep money supply, and thereby inflation in check, remittance induced foreign

-4inflows are sterilized through open market operations. Inflation is broadly in check. The
real effective exchange rate has also remained relatively stable.
16.

Fiscal policy has also been geared to maintain stable macroeconomic conditions in
support of private sector led economic growth. The objectives of annual budgets
formulated under the medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) are to improve
revenue mobilization, contain expenditure pressure and limit domestic borrowing. To
meet the shortfall in foreign assistance and thereby to avoid macroeconomic imbalance
arising from resource shortfall, the authorities increased the VAT rate in January 2005.
Performance-based incentive schemes in the Large Taxpayer Office (LTO) are being
planned. The authorities have succeeded in containing government expenditure so as to
contain domestic borrowing within prudential limits and to maintain the fiscal deficit at
a sustainable level.

17.

With regard to the non-observance of the performance criterion on external payment
arrears to bilateral donors at the completion of the first review of Nepal’s PRGF
program in October 2004, the Nepalese authorities would like to assure the Executive
Board that the incidents were unintentional and the result of weak debt data
management in Nepal, including coordination problems among domestic agencies. As
acknowledged by the staff, the Nepalese authorities are making good faith efforts to
service their debt in a timely manner and steps have been taken not only to repay
undisputed arrears but also to improve external debt data management to ensure
accurate monitoring of external debt obligations and to avoid a recurrence of the
problem. In light of these corrective actions taken, the Nepalese authorities request that
the Executive Board grant a waiver for Nepal’s non-observance of the continuous
performance criteria on non-accumulation of external payment arrears.

18.

The authorities are in agreement with the staff that the key structural reform areas are
the financial sector, public enterprises and governance, and the successful
implementation of structural reforms is crucial for accelerating growth.

19.

On the financial sector reforms, the focus is on increasing the loan recovery from large
willful defaulters, improving financial sector legislation, strengthening the central bank
and restructuring insolvent commercial banks and development banks. Nevertheless, it
remains a challenge to recover loans from large defaulters. The tenure of foreign
management teams in large problem banks has been extended. As part of the overall
effort to improve the regulatory framework, the authorities have recently issued the
Secured Transactions, Company, Securities and Insolvency Ordinances.

20.

Voluntary and compulsory retirement schemes were introduced recently in line with the
strategy to re-engineer Nepal Rastra Bank(NRB). The bank has been successfully
downsized. Further efforts are underway to enhance the capacity of existing staff.

21.

The authorities acknowledge that the reform of public enterprises has been rather slow.
Very recently, Lumbini Sugar Factory has been privatized. In line with the governance
reforms, the Civil Service Ordinance was promulgated in July 2005. The authorities are

-5also in the process of promulgating the Governance Ordinance aimed at clarifying
responsibilities between the executive and the civil service.
Technical Assistance
22.

The authorities would like to thank the IMF for the provision of a variety of technical
assistance. NRB has received technical assistance in strengthening money and banking
statistics and reforming the monetary policy implementation strategy and foreign
exchange management. NRB has also been the recipient of technical assistance from
the IMF on safeguard issues. On the advice of the IMF, NRB has appointed
international auditors for the last three years. Technical assistance received from the
IMF for the improvement of internal audit and financial management departments has
been very beneficial. NRB has benefited in terms of capacity building and the adoption
of international best practices in internal audit and financial management.

Conclusion
23.

A decade long insurgency continues to haunt Nepal. The insurgency has slowed the
process of economic growth and impeded poverty reduction efforts. Maintaining
macroeconomic stability, introducing structural and policy reforms, accelerating
economic growth and reducing poverty are the current challenges facing Nepal. To
overcome these challenges, domestic effort alone is not sufficient. Nepal has benefited
from both financial and technical support from the international community in
mitigating the severity of these challenges in the past. Nepal looks forward to the
continued support of the international community in its endeavor to overcome these
challenges in the future.

24.

We are pleased to inform the Board that the Nepalese authorities consent to the
publication of the staff report and the accompanying documents, with necessary
deletions of market sensitive information.

