October 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/360

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Zimbabwe: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Authorities of Zimbabwe
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 25, 2005, with the officials of Zimbabwe on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 29, 2005. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its September 9, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the authorities of Zimbabwe.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ZIMBABWE
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the
2005 Consultation with Zimbabwe
Approved by Benedicte Vibe Christensen and Mark Plant
July 29, 2005

•

The 2005 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Harare during June 13-25,
2005. The staff met with Finance Minister Murerwa, Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
Governor Gono and other senior government officials as well as representatives of the
private sector, political parties, trade unions, NGOs, and the diplomatic community.

•

The staff team comprised Ms. Coorey (head), Mr. Heytens, Ms. Muñoz, and
Mr. Mohapatra (all AFR); and Mr. Andrews and Ms. Mbabazi-Moyo (both MFD).
Mr. Mafararikwa, Senior Advisor to the Executive Director, and World Bank staff
attended some of the meetings.

•

This report covers developments and policy discussions with the authorities through
mid-July. Staff will report on subsequent developments and policies in a staff
supplement issued closer to the Board date.

•

In past Article IV consultations, the Board has strongly urged the authorities to adopt a
comprehensive policy package aimed at restoring confidence and restarting sustained
growth. Despite some policy improvement in 2004—notably in reducing inflation—the
authorities have, on the whole, failed to implement such a package.

•

Zimbabwe has been in continuous arrears to the Fund since February 2001. Following a
decision by the Executive Board on December 3, 2003, the Managing Director issued a
complaint on February 6, 2004 that initiated the procedure on Zimbabwe’s compulsory
withdrawal from the Fund.

•

Zimbabwe has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, but
maintains exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices subject to Fund
approval. Zimbabwe has incurred external payments arrears on official debt.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary .................................................................................................................4
I.

Background and Key Issues.........................................................................................5

II.

Report on the Discussions............................................................................................7
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

Overview..........................................................................................................7
Economic Prospects .........................................................................................7
Fiscal Policy...................................................................................................10
Monetary Policy.............................................................................................11
Exchange Rate and External Policies ............................................................14
The Financial System.....................................................................................16
The Medium-Term Agenda: Structural Reform ............................................17

III.

Data and Other Issues ................................................................................................19

IV.

Staff Appraisal ...........................................................................................................20

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.

Prices and Money....................................................................................................... 23
Exchange Rates.......................................................................................................... 24
Savings/Investment and External Balances ............................................................... 25
Government Finances ................................................................................................ 26

Box
1.

Land Reform and Agriculture.................................................................................... 19

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Selected Economic Indicators, Baseline Scenario, 2001-2006.................................. 27
Medium Term Outlook, 2003-2010........................................................................... 28
Millennium Development Goals................................................................................ 29
Balance of Payments, 2001-2005 .............................................................................. 30
Central Government Operations, 2001-2005............................................................. 31
Monetary Survey, 2001-2005 .................................................................................... 33
Selected Economic Indicators, Revised December Commitment, 2003-2006 .......... 35
External Debt Outstanding by Creditors, 1998-2004 ................................................ 36
Financial Soundness Indicators, 1999-2004 .............................................................. 37

-3-

Contents

Page

Appendices
I.
II.
III.
IV.

Relations with the Fund .........................................................................................38
Relations with the World Bank Group...................................................................43
Statistical Issues .....................................................................................................44
Debt Sustainability Analysis..................................................................................48

-4-

Executive Summary
After some improvement in 2004, Zimbabwe’s economic and social conditions have
deteriorated sharply this year. Staff estimates a further contraction in real GDP of
4 percent in 2004. While inflation slowed from a peak of 623 percent in early 2004 to around
130 percent in early 2005, it has picked up again to 164 percent in June. With the official
exchange rate overvalued and imports restricted, shortages of basic goods have become
pervasive. The parallel market premium widened sharply to 100 percent by early July 2005.
Social indicators have worsened and Zimbabwe is off-track in meeting all but two MDGs.
The authorities have not met the policy commitments made last December and, absent
decisive policy action, the outlook appears bleak. Staff projects a further decline in real
GDP of 7 percent in 2005, mainly due to difficulties in agriculture. The fiscal deficit would
widen to 14 percent of GDP (from 4¾ percent of GDP in 2004) and contribute—together
with the RBZ’s expanding quasi-fiscal activity—to a pick up in inflation to 320 percent by
end-2005. Food security is an urgent concern. Non-food imports will be squeezed further,
increasing vulnerability to a rise in world oil prices. “Operation Restore Order” could add to
fiscal pressures and—by curtailing informal markets—could lower GDP and raise price
pressure. Over the medium term, GDP would continue to contract given difficulties in
agriculture and foreign exchange shortages. Inflation would remain in the 200-300 percent
range reflecting substantial fiscal deficits and quasi-fiscal activities. Given limited external
financing, the current account would be broadly stable and arrears would accumulate.
Staff pressed for a comprehensive policy package to achieve sustained growth, external
viability, and low inflation. Macrostabilization, the immediate priority, could be achieved
by: (i) strong fiscal adjustment to limit this year’s deficit to 5 percent of GDP to ensure a
broadly neutral fiscal stance; (ii) liberalizing the exchange regime and unifying the exchange
rate, with immediate substantial depreciation; (iii) tightening monetary policy to achieve the
authorities’ end-year inflation target of 80 percent; and (iv) curtailing the RBZ’s quasi-fiscal
activity. Staff noted that the financial system appeared to be adequately supervised and
resilient to significant shocks. It would be critical to ensure that supervisors remain
empowered to take timely action to address identified weak institutions.
Fundamental structural reform is essential over the medium term to ensure a stable and
efficient financial system; increase the role of markets; place the fiscal accounts on a strong
medium-term footing and reform public enterprises; improve agricultural productivity
including through further land reform; and strengthen governance. Relations with the
international community would need to be rebuilt and a strategy formulated to reduce arrears.
The authorities had a different view of prospects and policies. In their estimate, output
would grow by 2 percent this year due to strong performance in tobacco, wheat and mining.
Moreover, inflation was still much lower than early last year. They would attempt to stay
within the budget deficit limit by taking offsetting measures for appropriated (discretionary)
spending. Their room for maneuver on the exchange rate was limited, but sufficient
flexibility would be maintained to ensure export viability. Broad money growth would be
lowered to 80 percent by end-2005, in line with their inflation target. Producer and credit
subsidies were needed, given the lack of foreign financing, and would be effective in
lowering inflation through increases in productivity and output growth. Credit subsidies
would be eliminated by end-2006.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES
1.
Zimbabwe’s economy has deteriorated sharply since 1997. Real GDP declined
by almost 30 percent from 1997 to 2003, while inflation soared from about 20 percent in
December 1997 to a peak of 623 percent in January 2004 (Table 1 and Figure 1).
Agricultural production—the mainstay of the economy—collapsed with the disruption
caused by the violent implementation of fast-track land reform. With the official exchange
held constant at Z$55 per U.S. dollar—and later at Z$824 per U.S. dollar—(Figure 2) , and
declining exports and foreign financing, the supply of foreign exchange to the official
market shrank, leading to sharp restrictions on imports and accumulation of external arrears
(Figure 3). Investment fell sharply and shortages of food, fuel, electricity and other basics
became pervasive. The performance of the economy lagged markedly behind those of other
countries in the region.
Real GDP Growth
(In percent)

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

Overall

Growth (%)
6
Botswana
4

Namibia

2

South Africa

Real GDP growth and inflation
(Annual average, 1998-2004)

Zambia

0

-10

-10

-2

Agriculture

-15

-15

-20

-20

-25

-25
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-4
Zimbabwe

-6
0.0

20.0

40.0

60.0

80.0

100.0

120.0

140.0 160.0
Inflation (%)

2.
The human cost of these policies has been high. Zimbabwe’s human development
indicators—once among the best in sub-Saharan Africa—have deteriorated sharply to a rank
of 147th out of 177 countries in the world. More than
Percentage of population living in poverty
90
two out of three Zimbabweans are unemployed
80
while poverty and emigration have risen sharply.
70
The HIV/AIDS pandemic has been left largely
60
unchecked, with the infection rate estimated at
50
about 25 percent of the adult population. Life
40
expectancy has declined to below 40 years from
30
around 60 years fifteen years ago, while child
20
mortality has risen sharply to 126 (per 1,000 live
births) from 90 in 1995, partly reflecting declining 10
0
immunizations and the AIDS pandemic.
South Africa

Uganda

1990-93

1995-97

Zimbabwe

2000-04

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

-6Selected Social Indicators
(latest data available)

GNI per capita (World Bank Atlas Method)
Human Development Indicator (HDI) rank
Unemployment
Poverty Headcount ratio
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Child mortality under 5 (per 1,000 live births)

Zimbabwe

South Africa

Zambia

Botswana

Uganda

480
147
70.0
80.0
38.5
126.0

2500
119
29.5
48.5
46.5
65.0

340
164
...
72.9
36.9
182.0

3010
128
22.8
30.3
38.1
110.0

240
146
...
38.0
43.1
141.0

Source: United Nations, Human Development Report 2004; World Bank, WDI 2005; and IMF staff estimates.

3.
Zimbabwe’s political situation mains difficult. Relations with the international
community have become increasingly strained—the United States and European Union
imposed targeted sanctions on top officials in 2002, and external financial support is
confined to humanitarian assistance. The ruling ZANU-PF party won a two-thirds
majority in the parliamentary elections held on March 31, 2005. Although less violence
was reported than in the past, the opposition party and Western governments have
criticized the elections as being neither free nor fair, but governments in the region, as
well as the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the African Union
have accepted the results.
4.
As of June 30, 2005, Zimbabwe’s arrears to the Fund totaled
SDR 199.6 million (US$ 290.7 million).1 The authorities have followed through on their
pledge to increase payments to US$9 million per quarter beginning in April 2005, which
has begun to reduce arrears. The Executive Board at its February 16 meeting deferred for
another six months taking action on the Managing Director’s complaint regarding
Zimbabwe’s compulsory withdrawal in order to provide the country a further opportunity
to significantly strengthen cooperation with the Fund. The next review of Zimbabwe’s
overdue financial obligations will take place at the time of the Board’s discussion of the
2005 Article IV consultation.2
5.

Against this background, the discussions focused on the following key issues:

•

What are the prospects and risks for Zimbabwe’s economy?

•

Are the authorities’ macroeconomic and structural policies adequate for
addressing Zimbabwe’s pressing economic problems? How sound is the banking

1

At end-June 2005, arrears to the World Bank stood at US$352.8 million and arrears to
the African Development Bank at US$270.8 million.
2

See “Zimbabwe—Overdue Financial Obligations to the Fund—Further Consideration
of Complaint with Respect to Compulsory Withdrawal” (to be issued).

-7-

system, financial supervision, and the authorities’ framework for resolving
problem banks?
•

What macroeconomic and structural policies are needed for Zimbabwe, both in
the short and medium term, to achieve sustained growth with low inflation as well
as improved cooperation with the Fund?
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
A. Overview

6.
The discussions took place against the backdrop of a deteriorating economic
and social situation. In view of economic prospects and risks, staff pressed for a
comprehensive package of measures to stabilize the economy and create the conditions
for sustained growth, external viability, and low inflation.
•

Macro stabilization is the immediate priority and could be achieved with a
package comprising: (i) strong fiscal adjustment; (ii) liberalizing the exchange
rate regime and unifying the exchange rate; (iii) tightening monetary policy; and
(iv) curtailing the quasi-fiscal activities of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ).

•

Fundamental structural reforms initiated in 2005-06 and followed through by a
comprehensive medium-term program will be essential, particularly to: ensure a
stable and efficient financial system; increase the role of markets; strengthen the
fiscal position and public enterprises; improve the conditions in agriculture,
including through land reform; and strengthen governance.

•

Relations with the international community will need to be rebuilt to obtain
external support for domestic policy reforms.
B. Economic Prospects

7.
The pace of economic deterioration slowed somewhat in 2004, but showed
signs of picking up again in the first five months of 2005. Staff estimates that real GDP
fell by about 4 percent in 2004, compared with a contraction of 10½ percent the
preceding year, reflecting a marked recovery in mining and a slower decline in services
that partly offset the continued contraction in agriculture. Year-on-year inflation
decelerated sharply from a peak of 623 percent in January 2004 to stabilize around 130
percent in early 2005, before picking up again to 164 percent in June.3 (Seasonallyadjusted 3-month data indicate rising price pressure since November 2004). Price
3

The CPI likely understates inflation, (see paragraph 35), but the extent is difficult to
quantify. Inflation is also probably repressed as publicly-administered prices (e.g., for
electricity and fuel) are held at artificially low levels.

-8-

controls were reinstated and an Income and Price Commission was established to review
public and private sector prices. With the Reserve Bank able to meet only 4-8 percent of
bids in its foreign exchange tender, shortages of basic necessities, especially fuel, have
become more acute, particularly since end-March. The parallel market premium which
had narrowed markedly in the first quarter of 2004, widened sharply from 45 percent in
January 2005 to about 100 percent by early July.
Contribution to GDP growth
(Annual growth rates in percent)

Zimbabwe: CPI Inflation

4

1,200

2

2

1,050

0

0

900

-2

-2

750

-4

-4

600

-6

-6

450

-8

-8

300

300

-10

-10

150

150

-12

0

450

8.
Without decisive policy action, the outlook for 2005 and beyond is bleak.
Staff projects that continued difficulties agriculture (the maize crop was well below
expectations partly due to low rainfall), rising inflation, and foreign exchange shortages,
particularly for fuel imports, would cause real GDP to contract by some 7 percent this
year (Table 1). The widening fiscal deficit and quasi-fiscal activities would contribute to
money growth, pushing inflation to about 320 percent by end-2005. The current account
deficit would widen temporarily to 7½ percent of GDP due to higher food imports.
Output is projected to contract again in 2006, with a less severe decline in agriculture
assuming normal levels of rainfall. Inflation would decelerate to 200 percent by end-year
as the fiscal deficit is held back by the erosion of government expenditure in real terms.
9.
Over the medium term, output would decline further in the absence of
significant structural reform (Table 2). Following past patterns, the fiscal deficit is
projected to narrow and then widen again, with inflation fluctuating in the 200-300
percent range. 4 With no appreciable change in external assistance, the current account
would remain broadly stable in U.S. dollar terms and arrears would accumulate.
10.
Zimbabwe is off-track in achieving most Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). A recent assessment indicated that under current policies only two targets are
4

In the past, fiscal deficits and inflation have followed a cyclical pattern, partly related to
the election cycle, with the deficit periodically narrowing as inflation is allowed to erode
expenditure in real terms (Figure 4). See Selected Issues paper on “Fiscal Deficits and
Inflation”.

May-05

Jan-05

Mar-05

Nov-04

Jul-04

0

Sep-04

2004

600

Year-on-year inflation

May-04

2003

750

Jan-04

2002

900

Annualized quarterly inflation

Mar-04

-12

1,200
1,050

Nov-03

Other

Jul-03

Services

Sep-03

Manufacturing

Mar-03

Mining

May-03

Agriculture

Jan-03

4

-9-

achievable: immunization of one-year olds against measles and access to safe drinking
water (Table 3).5 The HIV/AIDS pandemic, falling incomes, and the rapidly deteriorating
health and education services affects most of the other MDGs. Progress will depend on
achieving sustainable growth, controlling the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and improving food
security.
11.
The authorities took a different view of recent developments and the
economic outlook. In their estimate, output declined by only 2½ percent in 2004 and
will grow by 2 percent this year. Although drought had severely affected the 2004-05
maize crop,6 tobacco and wheat (which were less affected) as well as mining would
perform well this year while manufacturing would bottom out. The support prices and
subsidized credit facilities for agriculture and manufacturing were evoking a supply
response and would increase flows into the official market. Moreover, they stressed that
in comparison to the peak in early 2004, inflation had declined considerably by mid-2005
on account of their policies to turn around the economy.
12.

Staff noted several risks and vulnerabilities to the outlook. In particular,

•

Food security. Food imports will need to rise sharply this year, with the World
Food Programme aiming to raise 300,000 tons of maize out of an import
requirement of 1.2 million tons during April 2005-March 2006. Moreover,
capacity constraints at ports and railways could hamper rapid delivery of large
quantities of maize. The authorities indicated that they had obtained private
external financing to meet grain import needs this year.

•

The squeeze on non-food imports. Staff’s balance of payments projection
indicates that even with food imports financed externally, non-food imports
would decline by some 15 percent in real terms—a sharp compression from
already low levels (Table 4). Zimbabwe would thus be highly vulnerable to any
deterioration in the terms of trade, particularly a further rise in world oil prices.

•

The economic consequences of “Operation Restore Order,” the government’s
recent effort to remove unauthorized dwellings and structures. Given uncertainty
over the magnitudes, the projections do not fully incorporate these consequences.
Pressures for additional fiscal spending may result (see paragraph 14). Also, by
reducing informal market activity and real incomes, the operation could
contribute to lower GDP and upward price pressures.

5
6

See Selected Issues paper on “Recent Trends in Poverty and Social Indicators.”

Many farmers’ groups, and international organizations, however, noted that while
rainfall was low during the 2004-05 growing season, the main reasons for the poor maize
crop were unsettled conditions in agriculture following land reform, official delays in
getting seeds and fertilizer to farmers, and the lack of extension services to new farmers.

- 10 -

C. Fiscal Policy
13.
The fiscal deficit for 2004 is estimated at 4.7 percent of GDP, compared with
a projected deficit in the budget of 7½ percent of GDP and an estimated deficit of
3 percent of GDP reported at the February Board meeting. Revenue performance
was broadly in line with expectations in February, but final data indicate that statutory
spending on pensions and interest payments picked up sharply late in the year (Table 5).7
14.
Staff projects the fiscal deficit to increase substantially in 2005 to
14.3 percent of GDP due to higher spending. This estimate well exceeds the projected
deficit of 7½ percent in the budget and the authorities’ commitment communicated to the
Board in February to keep the fiscal deficit unchanged from the previous year. Revenue
is expected to perform as budgeted despite lower-than-expected customs duties (due to
lower non-food imports), given efforts to improve collections by bringing new tax payers
into the tax net and the strong performance of corporate taxes, partly reflecting the shift
to taxation of contemporaneous income. Expenditure would rise due to higher-thanbudgeted spending on elections; drought-related welfare programs; larger pension
payments from unexpectedly large retirements (particularly from the military); higher
interest costs from the doubling of treasury bill issues in the first quarter; as well as
Z$1 trillion (1½ percent of GDP) in unbudgeted spending to address the consequences of
“Operation Restore Order”.8
15.
Staff urged the authorities to submit a
mid-year supplementary budget to lower the
deficit to 5 percent of GDP as part of a
comprehensive stabilization package and in line
with previous commitments. Such a level of the
deficit—unchanged from the previous year—would
provide a broadly neutral fiscal stance to support
the stabilization.9 With the expenditure ratio now
close to 50 percent of GDP, the bulk of the
adjustment would need to come from spending
restraint, particularly on the wage bill. Staff noted
that Zimbabwe’s government wage bill was high

Fiscal indicators, 2004
(In percent of GDP)

Zimbabwe
Botswana
Lesotho
Mozambique
South Africa
Zambia
Tanzania
Uganda

Tax Revenue

Wage bill

32.6
37.1
39.0
13.1
23.5
17.6
11.2
11.7

15.4
14.2
12.9
7.5
9.4
7.8
3.9
5.2

7

There are two types of fiscal spending: appropriated (discretionary) spending that
requires parliamentary approval and statutory spending (such as pensions and interest)
that requires only a ministerial warrant to exceed the approved budget allocation.
8

The actual deficit in January-April, 2005 reached some 14½ percent of GDP. Staff’s
projections assume that food imports will be financed externally (see paragraph 12).
9

The authorities committed last December, prior to the February Board review of
Zimbabwe’s overdue obligations, to keep the fiscal stance broadly neutral in 2005.

- 11 -

by regional standards—even before the 270 percent wage increase at the beginning of
2005. Although expenditure was concentrated on education and health, there was a
sizeable deficit of workers in these areas (due to emigration and AIDS) and government
wages were considered low.10 Staff urged an overall hiring freeze as well as a payroll
audit to eliminate possible ghost workers and improve spending efficiency—without
compromising the already deteriorating quality of services. Civil service reform would be
needed over the medium term to obtain a sustained reduction in the wage bill. Capital
outlays and transfer payments, which have risen sharply, could also be curtailed while
cash management practices could be improved. Given the size of the adjustment, some
revenue measures would also be needed, such as a significant narrowing of exemptions
and zero rating in the VAT and an increase in income tax and VAT rates.
16.
The authorities indicated their intention to stay within the budget’s deficit
limit, while emphasizing the difficulties given the lack of external support. They
acknowledged that the front-loading of expenditure in the first quarter would make it
more difficult to find cuts later in the year, but underscored their track record of overperforming on budget targets in recent years. They were already implementing a hiring
freeze (excluding limited additional posts created after the elections for a Senate and an
expanded Cabinet) and were limiting capital spending to completing existing projects. A
supplementary budget would likely be submitted to Parliament in July to accommodate
the additional spending pressures (noted above), which would be offset by cutbacks in
other spending and revenue measures, such as a drought levy that could augment selected
taxes by some 5 percent. The authorities acknowledged, however, that even if they stayed
within the budget limit for appropriated expenditure, the increase in statutory spending on
pensions and interest would increase the fiscal deficit to about 10 percent of GDP.
D. Monetary Policy
17.
Monetary policy was tightened in 2004, but the stance was relaxed
prematurely. Overnight interest rates were raised sharply in early 2004 and lowered
subsequently as inflation declined, with real interest rates maintained at high levels for
most of the year (albeit with credit subsidies for selected borrowers). Interest rates were
lowered sharply around the end-2004 and reduced further in early 2005, despite evidence
from monthly data of rising price pressures. The January Monetary Policy Statement
preannounced a path of further rate cuts if inflation continued to decline, although this
was reversed in May by an increase in the RBZ’s overnight rate to 390 percent
(annualized).

10

See Selected Issues paper, “Recent Trends in Poverty and Social Indicators.”

- 12 Inflation and Money Growth
(annual percent change)

700
600

Short-term annualized nominal and real interest rates
(percent change)

700
600

CPI inflation

1550
1350

500

500

1150

400

400

950

300

Currency
growth

300
200

100
0
Jan-02

Jul-02

Jan-03

Jul-03

Jan-04

Jul-04

Jan-05

1350
1150
950

750
550

Broad money
h

200

1550

Peak: 5242
percent in
March

Annualized real
secured overnight rate

350

100

150

0

-50

Annualized nominal
secured overnight rate

550
350
150
-50

Jan-04

Apr-04

Jul-04

Oct-04

Jan-05

18.
The high rates of money growth that have fuelled the triple-digit inflation are
mainly due to the RBZ’s quasi-fiscal activities, reflected in mounting losses on its
balance sheet (Table 6). Although fiscal deficits eventually lead to high inflation, the
link is indirect in Zimbabwe given the scope for non-RBZ financing through treasury
bills. Much of the reserve money growth in 2004 can be attributed to: (i) exchange losses
from foreign exchange purchases from exporters at a higher exchange rate than sales to
importers (see text table below);11 and (ii) the RBZ’s initial provision of prolonged
liquidity support to troubled banks. Following the resolution of troubled banks (see
paragraph 28), credit to banks declined and reserve money growth in early 2005
stemmed mainly from substantial losses due to interest payments on RBZ bills issued to
mop up liquidity, as well as to
Holders of Treasury bills
continued exchange losses.
(In millions of Zimbabwe dollars)
Subsidies paid to gold and
6,000,000
tobacco producers also
5,000,000
contributed. With the higher
fiscal deficit, continued
4,000,000
interest payments on
outstanding RBZ bills, as well 3,000,000
as the enlargement and
2,000,000
proliferation of producer and
credit subsidies in the May
1,000,000
2005 Monetary Policy
0
Statement, staff projects broad
Jan-02
Jul-02
Jan-03
Jul-03
Jan-04
Jul-04
Jan-05
money growth to pick up to
Reserve Bank
Rest of the banking system
Others 1/
almost 250 percent by end1/ Includes companies, pension funds, individuals and corporates.
2005 from over 200 percent at
end-April (Table 6).

11

750

In 2004, almost half the inflows to the official market—purchased at the higher auction
rate—were sold at Z$824/US$ for official imports of oil, electricity, and essential inputs.

Apr-05

- 13 -

Contributions to Changes in Reserve Money 1/
(In billions of Zimbabwe dollars)

∆ Reserve Money

∆ NIR
∆ Claims on Banks
∆ Troubled Bank Fund 3/
∆ Overnight loans 3/
∆ Net Claims on Government
∆ RBZ Securities
∆ Other items net 4/
∆ Subsidies
∆ Exchange losses
∆ Losses of the central bank

Dec-03

Dec-04

Apr-05 2/

585

1,596

2,334

-227

-2,529

881

361

2,379

-31

131

1,841

130

230

472

-282

239

544

201

0

-3,794

-2,224

213

4,997

3,507

68

199

207

329

3,092

923

0

1,207

1,382

1/ These detailed data are based on the authorities' monetary control program and do not
correspond precisely with the balance sheet data in Table 6.
2/ Change since end of previous year.
3/ Liquidity support for banks.
4/ Includes losses related to exchange rate losses, the gold and tobacco subsidies, losses of
the central bank and discrepancy in RBZ/IMF Fund Credit Reporting.

19.
Staff urged the authorities to tighten monetary policy—and the growth in the
monetary aggregates—sufficiently to ensure the achievement of their inflation
target of 80 percent by end-2005 and to limit the RBZ’s activities to its core function
of achieving low inflation via a money anchor.12 Staff estimates that reserve money
growth will need to be brought down sharply to about 60 percent by end-year in order to
ensure a rate of broad money growth consistent with such a target (Table 7). Such a
monetary program would be tighter than the one committed to by the authorities last
December—notwithstanding the relaxation of the inflation target—as real money demand
is likely to have declined with the deterioration in confidence and the increase in inflation
expectations (signaled by the sharp depreciation in the parallel market rate).13 Staff noted
that producer and credit subsidies would need to be phased out without delay and the
losses of the RBZ (especially from interest payments on RBZ and PLARP bills) 14
transferred to the budget in order for money growth—and hence inflation—to be reduced
on a sustained basis. In this context, staff regretted the apparent change in procedures
last year that postponed the transfer of these losses to the budget as it reduces
transparency. Staff also cautioned against the issuance of bonds indexed to inflation

12

The authorities’ inflation objective for end-2005 was revised upward from 60 percent.
Staff accepted the revision given the deterioration in economic conditions.

13
14

See Selected Issues paper on “High Inflation and the Demand for Money.”

See paragraph 32 for a description of the Parastatal and Local Authority Reorientation
Program (PLARP).

- 14 -

(recently floated to support PLARP) given the prospect for continued high inflation and
the potentially unsustainable debt burden arising from fiscal and quasi-fiscal activity.
20.
The authorities emphasized that they intended to run a tight monetary policy
to achieve their inflation target by end-year and single-digit inflation by end 2006.
Broad money growth would be lowered to 80 percent by end-year given: (i) there was a
limit on the government’s overdraft with the RBZ; (ii) exchange losses would not recur
since exporter and importers now face the same tender rate; and (iii) the new credit
facilities were based on recycling banks’ statutory reserves. In addition, they explained
that producer and credit subsidies—targeted at key sectors—were needed given the
dearth of foreign financing and would contribute to lowering inflation through increases
in productivity and output growth. Moreover, they intended to gradually eliminate credit
subsidies by end-2006. Staff noted that the limit on the government’s overdraft had been
exceeded in the past; and moreover, that, like the PSF, the new credit facilities would add
to broad money growth even if they were notionally netted out of statutory reserves (see
footnote 1 to Table 6).
E. Exchange Rate and External Policies
21.
The official exchange rate was effectively depreciated significantly in 2004,
but the degree of overvaluation appears to have increased again this year. The
introduction of a foreign exchange tender system early in 2004 and the gradual relaxation
of surrender requirements on exporters resulted in a de facto depreciation of the official
rate from Z$824/US$ at end-2003 to about Z$6,100/US$ by mid-May 2005. The tender
rate was allowed to depreciate further to some Z$10,500 by early July. Nevertheless the
sharp widening of the parallel market premium this year reflected the loosening of
monetary policy in early 2005 and declining availability of foreign exchange at the
tender. Zimbabwe’s foreign exchange position remains precarious—usable international
reserves remained essentially constant during 2004 at just US$25 million (0.1 months of
imports).
Tender amounts (millions of US$)

Exchange Rates (Z$/US$)

25,000

25,000

20,000

300

300

250

250

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0
Jun-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Feb-05

Nov-04

May-05

Jan-05

Sep-04

Jan-04

May-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

May-02

Jan-02

-

Oct-04

0

5,000

Jul-04

Tender Rate
Official/Surrender Rate

Sep-04

5,000

Jun-04

10,000

Mar-04

10,000

May-04

15,000

Parallel Rate

Jan-04

15,000

Feb-04

20,000

Amount Allotted
Amount of Bids After Prioritization

22.
Staff urged the authorities to fully liberalize the foreign exchange regime for
current account transactions and unify the exchange rate by end-year as part of a

- 15 -

comprehensive stabilization package. Eliminating foreign exchange restrictions, multiple
currency practices, and abolishing the surrender requirements were key (see Appendix I).15
Staff noted that with international reserves low, the exchange rate should be determined by
the market (via commercial banks)—which would be feasible in Zimbabwe given its
relatively developed domestic financial sector. As a first step towards unification, the official
exchange rate should be depreciated immediately and substantially (say by 60–65 percent
based on June data) while monetary policy is tightened.16 The foreign exchange tender needs
to be operated as a true auction—with the exchange rate allowed to depreciate to meet all
bids—and producer and credit subsidy schemes quickly phased out. Indeed, there was a
widespread view among the private sector participants that a depreciation of this magnitude
would be appropriate from a purchasing power parity perspective and that the inflationary
impact would be minimal as traded goods were already priced at the more depreciated
parallel market rate.
23.
The authorities indicated that their room for maneuver on the exchange rate
was limited, in part because of the lack of foreign financing and concerns about the
inflationary impact, but they intended to maintain sufficient exchange rate flexibility to
ensure export viability. They voiced some doubt about the responsiveness of exports to a
more depreciated tender rate in short run given that the output of agricultural exports such as
tobacco was already set for the year. They were also of the view that producer supports and
subsidized credit were necessary, and indeed more effective, in ensuring competitiveness of
exporters at the auction exchange rate and market interest rates. Staff noted that even with a
given output, an official depreciation could elicit a shift of export earnings to the official
market.17 Moreover, producer and credit subsidies were not only costly and ultimately
inflationary, but also ineffective, as it was difficult to ensure that the cheap credit was being
put to the use for which it was intended.
24.
Zimbabwe has an unsustainable debt burden and is projected to continue to
accumulate external arrears over the medium term. Available data (which are not of a
high quality) indicate that approximately 70 percent of external debt is owed to official
creditors with half of the total in arrears (Table 8). The standard low-income debt
sustainability analysis indicates a NPV-of-debt to export ratio in excess of 225 percent over
the medium term (Appendix IV).

15

Since the last Article IV consultation, two new multiple currency practices have been
identified: the preferential exchange rate for inward family remittances and the surrender of
export receipts from international gold sales.

16
17

See Selected Issues paper on “Estimating the Short-Run Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate.”

See Selected Issues paper on “Export Performance: the Impact of the Parallel Market and
Governance Factors.”

- 16 -

25.
Staff encouraged the authorities to rebuild relations with the international
community, including the Fund, by implementing sound economic and social policies
and eliminating arrears. A strategy should be formulated for reaching understandings with
foreign creditors to settle arrears and restructure debt. Social policies need to be improved to
facilitate progress toward the MDGs, particularly by combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Greater efforts could also be made to obtain external assistance to support such policies and,
in the short run, especially to finance food imports and address the substantial humanitarian
and economic consequences of “Operation Restore Order”. Staff noted that over the longerterm, domestic policy reforms would be better sustained if they receive external support,
including both technical and financial assistance. The authorities stressed that implementing
a turn-around strategy was made doubly difficult by the lack of external assistance. They had
been repaying the Fund in accordance with their December commitment, despite foreign
exchange shortages, and felt their efforts deserved greater external support.
F. The Financial System
26.
Zimbabwe’s financial system has shown remarkable resilience to the very
difficult macroeconomic environment. Despite the turmoil in 2004 from the collapse of a
number of insolvent institutions, the stability of the banking system—where five large banks
account for almost 65 percent of deposits—was not threatened. With the exit of weak
institutions, the sector is now largely populated by banks with high capital adequacy ratios,
little foreign exchange risk, and very short-term maturities for both assets and liabilities to
cope with fluctuating interest rates (Table 9).
27.
Staff noted that the banking system appeared generally sound, supervision
broadly adequate, with stress tests indicating that the system is resilient to significant
shocks, including credit, interest rate, and foreign exchange risks.18 Although loan
quality has deteriorated significantly, banks’ vulnerability has been reduced by the shift in
asset composition towards short-term low-risk securities (treasury bills), with loans now
accounting for only about 25 percent of total assets. The few remaining troubled banks are
known and regularly monitored and the risk of contagion is minimal given their limited
trading in the interbank market. Staff supported the efforts since end-2003 to strengthen bank
supervision and standards of governance and risk-management in the financial sector. Staff
stressed that the provision of full powers for banking supervision to the RBZ was
instrumental in ensuring timely intervention in problem banks. In this context, the recent
revision to the Banking Act requiring the RBZ to consult with the Minister of Finance in
registering banks and intervening in troubled banks is a regressive step.
28.
Staff commended the decisive action taken by the RBZ to deal with troubled
financial institutions in 2004, but questioned the previous approach of providing
18

A detailed analysis is provided in the Selected Issues Paper “The Soundness of the
Zimbabwe Banking System.”

- 17 -

liquidity assistance to insolvent banks. The authorities acknowledged that systemic
stability had not been at risk and indicated that the liquidity support had been motivated by a
desire to preserve the existing degree of domestic ownership of the banking sector. Staff
noted that the RBZ’s resolution of troubled banks was in line with recommended
international practice,19 but cautioned that the holding arrangements for the ZABG need to be
regularized at the earliest opportunity. Also, while recoveries by curators and liquidators
have been impressive in nominal terms, the costs of bank restructuring have been financed by
an inflation tax on depositors and creditors (including the RBZ) whose claims have fallen
sharply in real terms.
29.
Staff suggested strengthening the adequacy and effectiveness of the deposit
insurance scheme through a broader mandate dealing with receivership and
liquidation. While the fund is relatively new and may be built up over time, its effectiveness
in strengthening confidence is constrained by its limited mandate—which allows it to only
pay out when a bank is in liquidation—and by limited awareness among depositors.
30.
Staff also noted that the very high statutory reserve requirements (60 percent
of demand deposits) were impeding the ability of the financial sector to effectively
intermediate saving and investment to support economic growth. These resources were
not only being notionally “used” by the RBZ to undertake directed lending at subsidized
rates, but also contributed to high lending rates and low deposit rates. The growing rules
and restrictions were adding to the administrative burden of borrowers and banks and,
furthermore, substantially diverting the RBZ’s supervisory resources to policing restrictions
that had no prudential foundations. Staff suggested that policy objectives could be better
achieved by lowering reserve requirements over the medium term, with offsetting open
market operations to mop up excess liquidity whose costs would be transferred to the budget.
31.
The authorities were receptive to staff’s recommendation to cease the practice of
extending liquidity support to insolvent banks and to take faster action to intervene in
identified troubled banks. Efforts would continue to train and develop new staff and
improve off- and on-site analysis. The authorities indicated that the mandate and powers of
the deposit protection fund would be reviewed during the coming year. As noted above, they
did not see scope for reducing the producer and credit subsidies and were convinced that
administrative controls would be effective in ensuring that such subsidies were not misused.
G. The Medium-Term Agenda: Structural Reform
32.
The authorities have embarked on an ambitious medium-term public enterprise
reform program—run by the RBZ—to address the problem of poor performance and
19

In late 2004, nine deposit-taking institutions were placed in curatorship and three others
were liquidated. Based on the determination of the curators, the Zimbabwe Allied Banking
Group (ZABG) was created to receive assets and liabilities of three of the failed banks.

- 18 -

high costs in that sector. A Parastatal and Local Authorities Reorientation Program
(PLARP) is being created to reform public enterprises and local government. The RBZ plans
to issue medium-term bonds of Z$10 trillion dollars (around 16 percent of GDP) starting in
2005 to finance the program, with the debt to be serviced by the budget starting in 2006. The
authorities explained that the intention is to provide financing to public enterprises that come
forward with externally audited financial statements and substantive restructuring plans that
would place them on a commercial footing. Privatization could be an option for some
enterprises further down the road. While agreeing on the need for public enterprise reform,
staff expressed reservations that the PLARP could prove costly in the absence of a hard
budget constraint on public enterprises, including the option to wind down nonviable
enterprises. Staff noted the importance of increasing the transparency of the process,
including with regard to the auditing and evaluation standards used to assess restructuring
plans and progress, and access to public funds.
33.
Land and agricultural reforms are key for sustaining growth over the medium
term. Most of the country’s private commercial farms have now been seized under the
authorities’ fast-track land reform policy. However, actual resettlement continues to fall
significantly short of the government’s targets and large areas of productive land remain
idle.20 In addition, the introduction of 99-year leases has been delayed and appears not to
provide adequate tenure security to new farmers. Weak technical know-how, equipment and
input shortages, deteriorating infrastructure, and a lack of extension services also continue to
impede agricultural recovery. Staff stressed the need to move rapidly on key issues, such as
providing security of tenure and extension services to farmers, followed by a coordinated
program of reform over the medium term (Box 1). The authorities noted President Mugabe’s
commitment to investment protection and desire to compensate investors who might have
been inadvertently harmed by the land reform program. They indicated that issues such as
allowing land to be mortgaged as collateral were being worked out and that solutions could
be found that would allow farmers access to financing without running the risk that banks
would end up owning the land (for instance, by increasing the role of the state-owned
Agribank).
34.
Staff also urged the authorities to initiate action in several other key areas as
part of a medium-term agenda for reform:
•

20

Deregulation and liberalization to increase market forces in the economy. Actions
include eliminating price controls and other, less formal, means of setting prices, as
well as dismantling the monopoly positions held by public enterprises in the
distribution sector, particularly in fuel and grains.

See Selected Issues paper, “Land Reform, Agricultural Policies, and Outcomes.”

- 19 -

•

Fiscal reforms, particularly civil service restructuring to achieve a sustainable wage
bill and strengthen the medium-term fiscal position, as well as improvements to
expenditure and cash management systems.

•

Improving governance to increase investor confidence, reduce corruption, and
encourage private business activity. Strengthening the protection of property rights
and reducing the threat of nationalization are key.

Box 1: Land Reform and Agriculture
A recent World Bank study recommends a strategy for agricultural recovery and social protection based on
five pillars: 1/
•

Increase security of tenure and complete the land reform program.

•

Provide strong market-based incentives for production and investment in agriculture, especially by
restoring and enhancing profitability in the sector.

•

Implement a broader social protection program for poor and marginalized groups of the population.

•

Build and/or rebuild a cohesive policy and institutional framework for land administration and
management, and for agricultural growth and development.

•
Mobilize financial resources from taxation, community and private sectors, and external partners.
_____________________
1/ Agricultural Growth and Land Reform in Zimbabwe: Assessment and Recovery Options, The World Bank
Report No. 31699-ZW, February 28, 2005.

III. DATA AND OTHER ISSUES
35.
Zimbabwe’s statistical base has important weaknesses for surveillance
purposes—including with regard to timeliness and coverage. The CPI is likely
understating inflation because of the use of controlled or administered prices, rather than
market prices, in the index and outdated weights (from 1997), which may understate the
importance of items such as rent and transportation. The coverage and timeliness of balance
of payments and external data could be improved. Comprehensive fiscal data are also needed
on general government, consolidated public sector debt, as well as the operations and
financial position of public enterprises. Moreover, monetary data need to be reconciled with
the fiscal accounts. In addition, the lag in receiving fiscal and monetary data has increased to
about 4-6 months from 2-3 months previously.
36.
On trade policy, the authorities face conflicting obligations arising from
membership of Southern African Development Community and the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa, as well as recent bilateral trade agreements with
Botswana, Zambia and Malawi. They are participating in ongoing regional discussions
toward an Economic Partnership Agreement with the European Union. The authorities have

- 20 -

continued to lower intra-regional tariffs in line with their commitments, reducing the average
tariff to about 10 percent.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
37.
Zimbabwe faces immense challenges in arresting the ongoing economic and
social decline and turning the economy around to achieve sustained growth, external
viability, and low inflation. Without a bold change in policy direction, the economic
outlook is bleak, with likely prospects of continued triple-digit inflation and further output
declines, with particularly detrimental effects on the poorest segments of the population.
Food security is an urgent concern. Given stagnant export earnings and the necessary
increase in food imports, non-food imports will be squeezed, increasing Zimbabwe’s
vulnerability to external shocks, including further increases in world oil prices. By reducing
informal market activity, “Operation Restore Order” could contribute to lower GDP and
upward price pressures.
38.
Staff urges the authorities to implement without delay a comprehensive package
of macroeconomic measures to stabilize the economy—an immediate priority.
Fundamental structural reform and rebuilding relations with the international community,
including the Fund, will also be key for laying the basis for sustained growth, low inflation,
and external viability over the medium term. A stabilization package would need to comprise
several mutually reinforcing actions: strong fiscal adjustment; liberalizing the exchange rate
regime and unifying the exchange rate; tightening monetary policy; and curtailing the quasifiscal activity of the RBZ.
39.
Decisive fiscal adjustment is essential in the near term. A supplementary budget
should be submitted to Parliament without delay, with measures to contain this year’s fiscal
deficit to no more than 5 percent of GDP, which would ensure a broadly neutral stance in
support of stabilization. Given the high spending ratio, the bulk of the adjustment would need
to come from spending cuts, especially in the wage bill, subsidy/transfer payments, and
capital outlays. Cash management could be improved and revenue measures taken—such as
a significant narrowing of VAT exemptions and zero rating and an increase in income tax
and VAT rates.
40.
The exchange rate regime needs to be fully liberalized for current account
transactions and a unified exchange rate established by end-year. The tender rate
remains highly overvalued. As a first step towards unification, this rate needs to be
depreciated substantially (by about 60-65 percent) without delay while monetary policy is
tightened. The tender should be operated as a true auction. Exchange controls on current
payments and all surrender requirements should be eliminated subsequently and the
determination of the exchange rate left to the market.
41.
Monetary policy should be tightened substantially and immediately. To achieve
the end-year inflation target of 80 percent, reserve money growth will need to be brought
down sharply to keep broad money growth by end-2005 well below the inflation target given

- 21 -

the likely reduction in the demand for real money balances this year. The RBZ should thus
shift to a broad money anchor with reserve money as the operational target, in conjunction
with the freely floating exchange regime. With any delay in taking such action, the
authorities’ end-2005 inflation target will remain illusory.
42.
The RBZ should focus on its core function of ensuring price stability and rapidly
phase out the many quasi-fiscal activities that fuel money growth and inflation. A
unified exchange rate would obviate the need for costly producer and credit subsidies, which
in any case, are likely to be ineffective. Moreover, the many quasi-fiscal activities of the
RBZ are increasing the web of controls that hamper the efficient functioning of the economy.
Staff cautions against the issuance of bonds that are indexed to inflation given the prospect
for continued high inflation and the potentially unsustainable public debt burden. To lower
money creation durably, the losses of the RBZ (particularly from interest payments on RBZ
and PLARP bills) would need to be transferred to the budget, which would also help increase
the transparency necessary for policy makers to make informed choices.
43.
Decisive action to deal with troubled financial institutions in late 2004 was a
welcome departure from the previous approach. Systemic stability was never at risk and
the earlier decision to provide liquidity support to preserve indigenous ownership of small
banks has proved costly. The subsequent placement of troubled institutions under curatorship
or liquidation is broadly in line with recommended international practice and has stemmed
the provision of liquidity support, although the holding arrangements for the ZABG need to
be regularized at the earliest opportunity.
44.
Measures taken by the RBZ to strengthen banking supervision and standards of
governance and risk management in the financial sector are commendable and it will be
critical, moving forward, to ensure that supervisors remain empowered to take timely
action to address identified weak institutions. Based on current data, the banking system
appears resilient to significant shocks, having taken a number of steps to adapt to the very
difficult macroeconomic environment. The measures to strengthen supervision will take a
number of years to implement fully. In particular, there is scope for further training and
development of the supervision staff as well as to improve the quality of off-site analysis and
on-site inspections. Timely and independent supervisory action to address any identified
weak institutions will be key. The adequacy and effectiveness of the deposit insurance
scheme could also be strengthened.
45.
Over time, the RBZ should lower the very high statutory reserve requirements,
which impede the financial sector’s ability to effectively intermediate saving and
investment to support economic growth. The notional use of these resources for
subsidized, directed lending operations are diverting supervisory resources to greater policing
activity that has no prudential foundations. Statutory requirements should be lowered over
the medium term and the costs of offsetting mopping up operations absorbed by the budget.
46.
Over the medium term, fundamental structural reform will be essential for
sustaining macroeconomic stability and achieving durable growth. Staff urges the

- 22 -

authorities to initiate action without delay in at least five key areas, followed up by a
comprehensive medium-term reform program: deregulation to increase market forces in the
economy; public enterprise reform; fiscal reforms, particularly civil service reform, to
achieve a sustainable fiscal position; land and agricultural reform; and improvements in
governance to increase investor confidence, reduce corruption, and encourage private
business activity. The ongoing public enterprise reforms should be geared to ensuring that a
hard budget constraint is imposed on enterprises—including the option to wind down
nonviable entities—and that the transparency of the restructuring process is increased. Land
and agriculture reforms are essential for restoring orderly conditions in the agricultural
sector. Key issues such as the provision of security of tenure and extension services to
farmers should be resolved urgently.
47.
There is considerable scope for improving the provision of data for surveillance
purposes. The methodology underlying the CPI should be scrutinized to ensure that market
prices are being recorded and that the weights are representative of the current consumption
basket. Better coverage and timeliness of balance of payments and external debt data as well
as comprehensive data on general government, consolidated public debt, and public
enterprises are key as is the reconciliation of the fiscal and monetary accounts.
48.
Staff urges the authorities to rebuild relations with the international community,
including the Fund, through the implementation of sound policies and a strategy to
reach understandings with external creditors to settle arrears and restructure debt.
Social policies need to be improved and donor assistance could be sought in the short-term to
finance food imports, address the consequences of “Operation Restore Order”; combat
HIV/AIDS, and facilitate progress towards the MDGs. Over the longer term, external
assistance—both technical and financial—could help support domestic reform efforts.
49.
In the absence of a timetable for its elimination, staff does not recommend
approval by the Fund of the newly-identified multiple currency practices in the form of a
preferential exchange rate for inward remittances and the surrender of export receipts from
international gold sales.
50.

It is proposed that Zimbabwe remain on the standard 12-month consultation cycle.

- 23 Figure 1. Zimbabwe: Prices and Money
800

450

Money and Inflation 2/

Overall and Food Inflation 1/
400

700

350

600

300

500
Food

400

250
200

300
150
200

100

100
Inflation 3/

Overall
50

0

0
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

600

Interest Rates and Broad Money 2/

1997

400

10,000

Broad money
growth

200

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Stock Market and CPI Index 4/
12,000

300

1998

14,000

500

100

Broad money
growth

8,000

Industrial Index

6,000
Treasury
bill rate

4,000
CPI
Index

0

2,000
Real interest rate

-100

0
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

2001

2002

2003

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; Zimbabwe market sources; and staff estimates for 2004.
1/ Percentage change in consumer prices (year-on-year).
2/ In percent.
3/ Percentage change in consumer prices (yearly average).
4/ Index 2000=100.

2004

2005

- 24 Figure 2. Zimbabwe: Exchange Rates
25,000

Nominal Exchange Rates 1/
20,000

15,000

10,000
Parallel
5,000
Official
0
2001

2002

2005

2004

2003

600
550

Effective Exchange Rates 2/

500
450
400
350

Real

300
250
200
150
100
50

Nominal

0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; Zimbabwe market sources; and staff estimates for 2004.
1/ In Zimbabwe dollars per US$. From January 2004 onwards, the official rate reflects a blend between the
surrender rate of Z$824 per US$ and the average tender rate.
2/ Index 1990=100. Based on the offical exchange rate.

- 25 Figure 3. Zimbabwe: Saving/Investment and External Balances
20

Savings and Investment 1/
15

10

Gross investment

5

0
Gross national
saving 2/

-5

-10
1997

1998

1999

10

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

External Developments 1/

8
6
Gross public borrowing
(including arrears) 3/

4
2
0
-2
Trade
balance

-4
-6

Current account

-8
-10
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates for 2004.
1/ In percent of GDP.
2/ Excludes grants.
3/ Includes IMF.

2002

2003

2004

- 26 Figure 4. Zimbabwe: Government Finances

50

Central Government 1/
Total expenditure

40
30

Total revenue 2/

20
10

Primary balance 2/
0
-10
-20
Overall fiscal balance 3/
-30
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

16,000

140

Average Wage in the Central Government 4/
14,000

120

12,000

100

Real
(right scale)

10,000

80
8,000
60
6,000
40

4,000
Nominal
(left scale)

2,000

20
0

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates for 2004.
1/ In percent of GDP.
2/ Excluding grants.
3/ Including grants (cash basis).
4/ In thousands of Zimbabwean dollars per employee.

2002

2003

2004

- 27 Table 1. Zimbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators, Baseline Scenario, 2001-2006
2001

2002

2003

2004
Est.

GDP
Real GDP (market prices; percentage change)
Real per capita GDP (percentage change)

2005
Baseline
Scenario

2006

-2.7
-2.4

-4.4
-4.1

-10.4
-11.3

-4.2
-3.9

-7.1
-7.1

-4.8
-4.8

1.0
1.6

0.8
1.5

-1.2
2.0

-2.2
5.1

0.6
7.3

4.2
6.2

Prices and interest and exchange rates (percent)
Consumer price inflation (annual average)
Consumer price inflation (end of period)
91-day treasury bills (annualized yield; end of period)
Real effective exchange rate (percentage change)

73.4
112.1
25.9
47.6

133.2
198.9
26.6
131.5

365.0
598.7
60.7
28.7

350.0
132.7
105.0
...

190.4
320.7
150.0
...

253.1
199.0
130.2
...

Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Of which : interest on central government debt
Overall balance, commitment basis (excluding grants)
Primary balance, excluding grants
Overall balance, cash basis (including grants)
Domestic financing (including privatization)
External financing

19.2
26.6
7.4
-7.5
0.0
-5.4
5.3
0.1

17.9
20.7
2.9
-2.8
0.1
-2.2
2.3
-0.1

24.9
25.3
1.3
-0.4
0.9
-0.2
0.2
0.0

33.9
41.0
5.5
-7.1
-1.7
-4.7
4.7
0.0

35.6
51.7
5.4
-16.1
-10.7
-14.3
14.3
0.0

35.5
45.0
2.5
-9.4
-7.0
-8.4
8.4
0.0

Money and credit (percentage change; end of period)
Broad money (M3)
Domestic credit
Of which : real credit to the private sector

102.7
79.1
-21.2

164.8
130.0
-6.0

413.5
433.8
-11.0

222.6
179.0
0.7

248.0
205.9
-36.1

153.2
95.2
-52.1

External trade (percentage change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

-20.3
-0.5
-4.8

-14.3
-0.5
1.3

4.1
-19.8
-5.8

-9.5
-6.2
-6.8

-3.8
-7.6
-6.6

6.6
-9.2
-1.1

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP at the official exchange rate) 1/
(In percent of GDP at world prices) 2/
Overall balance

2.1
-1.8
-0.1
-0.6
-1.0
-0.2

1.8
-1.8
-0.2
-0.7
-2.6
-0.5

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-3.1
-4.6
-0.5

1.7
-2.0
-0.4
-7.3
-5.7
-0.2

1.6
-2.0
-0.5
-6.8
-7.7
-0.3

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-2.0
-3.8
-0.3

Official reserves (gold valued at market price)
Usable reserves (millions of U.S. dollars; end of period)
(months of imports of goods and services)
(percent of reserve money)

16.0
0.1
43.3

15.1
0.1
0.6

15.6
0.1
1.8

24.8
0.1
5.3

24.8
0.1
3.2

24.8
0.1
3.5

External debt and arrears (including private debt)
Total external debt (percent of GDP at world prices; end of period) 2/
Of which: total external arrears
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and services)

45.3
9.5
23.2

53.0
18.4
25.3

64.4
28.5
23.5

67.4
35.1
18.7

74.4
41.5
18.5

80.6
47.2
18.0

Social indicators
Life expectancy at birth (in years)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Adult illiteracy rate (percent of adults ages 15 and above)
HIV/AIDS adult infection rate (percent of adults ages 15-49)

39.5
76.0
10.7
...

39.0
76.0
10.0
...

...
...
...
24.5

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Savings and investment (percent of GDP) 1/
Gross national savings (excluding grants)
Gross investment

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; World Bank, World Development Indicators 2004, UNAIDS and CDC (2003) ; and IMF staff estimates and
projections.

1/ Foreign currency units are converted into Zimbabwe dollars at the official exchange rate.
2/ GDP at world prices using real GDP growth and trading partner countries' inflation (base year is 1996).

- 28 Table 2. Medium Term Outlook, 2003-2010
2003

2004
Est.

2005
Proj.

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

GDP
Real GDP (market prices; pct change)
Real per capita GDP (percentage change)

-10.4
-11.3

-4.2
-3.9

-7.1
-7.1

-4.8
-4.8

-3.6
-3.6

-2.9
-2.9

-2.4
-2.4

-0.8
-0.8

Savings and investment (percent of GDP) 1/
Gross national savings (excluding grants)
Gross investment

-1.2
2.0

-2.2
5.1

0.6
7.3

4.2
6.2

3.2
5.6

3.6
6.2

2.8
5.6

1.2
5.0

Prices and interest rates (percent)
Consumer price inflation (annual average)
Consumer price inflation (end of period)
91-day treasury bills (annualized yield; end of period)

365.0
598.7
60.7

350.0
132.7
105.0

190.4
320.7
150.0

253.1
199.0
130.2

210.2
219.7
169.2

262.9
300.9
237.2

248.7
206.4
184.2

178.7
156.0
115.2

Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Of which : interest on central government debt
Overall balance, commitment basis (excluding grants)
Primary balance, excluding grants
Overall balance, cash basis (including grants)
Domestic financing (including privatization)
External financing (including principal arrears)

24.9
25.3
1.3
-0.4
0.9
-0.2
0.2
0.0

33.9
41.0
5.5
-7.1
-1.7
-4.7
4.7
0.0

35.6
51.7
5.4
-16.1
-10.7
-14.3
14.3
0.0

35.5
45.0
2.5
-9.4
-7.0
-8.4
8.4
0.0

34.8
42.5
3.7
-7.8
-4.1
-7.2
7.0
0.2

35.9
47.6
3.6
-11.7
-8.2
-11.0
10.7
0.3

35.0
43.6
2.9
-8.6
-5.7
-7.9
7.4
0.4

33.5
41.1
2.5
-7.7
-5.2
-6.9
6.5
0.4

Domestic debt (percent of GDP)

10.7

7.2

17.0

13.4

11.5

13.9

11.5

10.7

Money and credit (percent change; end of period)
Broad money (M3)
Domestic credit

413.5
433.8

222.6
179.0

248.0
205.9

153.2
95.2

200.0
176.9

278.9
390.5

191.4
226.1

147.7
195.3

External trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

4.1
-19.8
-5.8

-9.5
-6.2
-6.8

-3.8
-7.6
-6.6

6.6
-9.2
-1.1

4.7
6.5
-0.3

5.2
5.4
0.0

4.8
5.5
0.1

5.2
9.4
1.2

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP at the official exchange rate) 1/
(In percent of GDP at world prices) 2/
Overall balance

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-3.1
-4.6
-0.5

1.7
-2.0
-0.4
-7.3
-5.7
-0.2

1.6
-2.0
-0.5
-6.8
-7.7
-0.3

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-2.0
-3.8
-0.3

1.8
-1.9
-0.3
-2.4
-4.5
-0.3

1.9
-2.1
-0.3
-2.6
-4.6
-0.3

2.0
-2.2
-0.3
-2.8
-5.0
-0.3

2.1
-2.4
-0.4
-3.8
-6.6
-0.4

Official reserves (gold valued at market price)
Usable reserves (millions of U.S. dollars; end of period)
(months of imports of goods and services)
(percent of reserve money)

15.6
0.1
1.8

24.8
0.1
5.3

24.8
0.1
3.2

24.8
0.1
3.5

24.8
0.1
3.7

24.8
0.1
3.9

24.8
0.1
4.1

24.8
0.1
4.2

External debt and arrears (including private debt)
Total external debt (percent of GDP at world prices; end of period) 2/
Of which: total external arrears
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and services)

64.4
28.5
23.5

67.4
35.1
18.7

74.4
41.5
18.5

80.6
47.2
18.0

85.9
52.5
17.6

91.0
57.6
16.9

95.8
62.4
16.0

100.5
67.4
16.0

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Foreign currency units are converted into Zimbabwean dollars at the official exchange rate.
2/ GDP at world prices using real GDP growth and trading partner countries' inflation (base year is 1996).

- 29 Table 3. Zimbabwe: Millennium Development Goals
1990

1995

25.8
43.0
11.5
...

34.9
44.0
15.5
4.6

80.0 (2004)
39.0 (2001)
13.0 (2001)
4.6 (1995)

[12.9]
[21.5]
[5.8]
...

...
...
6.1

...
...
4.1

79.9 (2002)
37.8 (2002)
2.4 (2002)

[100.0]
[100.0]
[0.0]

Goal 3 - Promote gender equality and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary education (%)
Ratio of girls to boys in secondary education (%)
Ratio of girls to boys in tertiary education (%)

99.0
87.6
35.8

97.1
83.9
41.7

98.4 (2002)
88.6 (2002)
57.6 (2001)

[100.0] 2/
[100.0] 2/
[100.0]

Goal 4 - Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (% of children 1-2 year old)

80.0
87.0

90.0 126.0 (2003)
87.0 80.0 (2003)

[26.7]
[100.0]

Goal 5 - Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

570.0
69.6
43.1

610.0 1100.0 (2001)
69.2 72.5 (2001)
48.1 53.5 (1999)

[142.5]
...
...

Goal 1 - Erradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Poverty Headcount 1/
Undernourished people (as % of total population)
Under-weight children under 5
Share of poorest 20 percent in national income
Goal 2 - Achieve universal primary education
Net school enrollment, primary
Net school enrollment, secondary
Youth illiteracy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 6 - Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
HIV prevalence ratio among adults (15-49 years)

Latest
data

2015
MDG Target

...

...

24.6 (2003)

...

Goal 7 - Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to sanitation facilities (% of population)
Access to safe driking water (% of population)

56.0
78.0

...
...

62.0 (2001)
83.0 (2001)

...
[89.0]

Goal 8 - Develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

12.6
0.2

14.2
3.1

57.8 (2003)
52.7 (2003)

...
...

Memorandum Items:
GDP per capita (constant 2000 U.S. dollars)
Population growth
Aid (% of GDP)
Investment (% of GDP)
GINI index 3/

601.8
3.1
4.0
17.4
...

570.1 479.2 (2002)
1.9
0.8 (2003)
7.2
1.9 (2001)
19.7
8.3 (2002)
56.8
...

Source: World Development Indicators 2005, Zimbabwe Human Development Report 2004, UN Statistics Division,
UNAIDS and IMF estimates.
1/ The poverty headcount ratio is the proportion of population below the poverty line.
2/ Preferably by 2005.
3/ A value of the GINI index of 1 denotes perfect distribution or equality, while a value smaller than 1 denotes degree of
inequality.

- 30 Table 4. Zimbabwe: Balance of Payments, 2001-2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Baseline
Scenario

Current account (excluding official transfers)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Food
Nonfood

-82
323
2,114
-1,791
-68
-1,724

-213
-18
1,802
-1,821
-337
-1,580

-346
-108
1,670
-1,778
-206
-1,573

-421
-310
1,680
-1,989
-161
-1,828

-534
-359
1,644
-2,003
-347
-1,656

Nonfactor services
Receipts
Payments

-186
256
-441

-181
217
-398

-216
185
-401

-108
317
-424

-169
310
-479

Investment income
Interest
Receipts
Payments
Other

-333
-149
10
-159
-184

-242
-123
10
-133
-119

-191
-114
10
-124
-76

-208
-99
7
-106
-109

-194
-93
7
-100
-101

114

228

169

204

188

-386
40
0
-68
-285
-203
8
-211
-59
-23
-73
13
-86

-317
38
23
-2
-281
-183
3
-186
-62
-37
-94
-13
-81

-210
38
4
4
-228
-168
0
-168
-36
-24
-27
0
-27

-170
24
9
2
-221
-138
0
-138
-60
-24
17
0
17

187
77
13
0
7
-162
0
-162
185
-17
91
145
-54

Private transfers (incl. transfers to nongovernmental organizations)
Capital account (including official transfers)
Official transfers
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Long-term capital
Government
Receipt
Payment
Public enterprises
Private sector
Short-term capital
Public sector
Private sector
Errors and omissions 1/
Overall balance
Financing
Gross official reserves (- increase)
Net use of Fund resources
Drawings
Repayments
Other short-term liabilities (net)
Change in arrears (decrease, -)
Debt relief/rescheduling
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (in percent of nominal GDP at world prices)
Current account balance (in percent of nominal GDP)
Gross official reserves 2/ 3/
In months of imports of goods and services
Reserve liabilities 4/
Net international reserves 4/
External debt
Of which: arrears
External debt service due 5/
Debt service ratio (as a percent of exports of goods and non-factor services)
Nominal GDP at the official exchange rate (US$ millions)
Nominal GDP at world prices (US$ millions) 4/

292

74

79

344

0

-177

-456

-476

-247

-347

177
6
-86
0
-86
-41
292
0

456
1
-86
0
-86
-30
570
0

476
1
-65
0
-65
98
443
0

247
9
-23
0
-23
21
240
0

347
0
-7
0
-7
0
354
0

-1.0
-0.6
16
0.1
347
-331
3,845
803
549
23.2
12,883
8,492

-2.6
-0.7
15
0.1
325
-310
4,370
1,520
510
25.3
30,856
8,243

-4.6
-3.1
16
0.1
452
-436
4,843
2,141
436
23.5
11,080
7,524

-5.7
-7.3
25
0.1
487
-462
4,960
2,584
373
18.7
5,762
7,356

-7.7
-6.8
25
0.1
467
-442
5,184
2,895
361
18.5
7,901
6,968

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Include flows associated with underinvoicing of exports and arrears on short-term private debt.
2/ End of period.
3/ Gold valued at market prices. Usable gross reserves.
4/ Nominal U.S. dollar GDP adjusted for real growth and international inflation (1996 base year).

-7.5
0.0
0.4
1.6
-5.4
0.1
5.3

Budget balance, excl. grants (commitment basis) 1/
Of which : primary balance

Grants
Foreign interest arrears
Budget balance, incl. grants (cash basis)

External financing (net)
Domestic financing (net)

709
27.4

26.6
14.1
9.1
5.0
...
7.4
5.8
3.4
1.7
1.6
0.1

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure on goods and services
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Of which: unallocated reserve
Interest payments
Of which: domestic
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditure and net lending
Capital expenditure
Net lending

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of Zimbabwe dollars)
Domestic debt (in percent of GDP)

19.2
18.1
15.7
2.5
1.0

Total revenue
Tax revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Nontax revenue

2001

1,698
20.4

-0.1
2.3

0.0
0.5
-2.2

-2.8
0.1

20.7
12.7
7.3
5.4
...
2.9
2.4
3.3
1.8
1.5
0.3

17.9
16.8
15.2
1.6
1.2

2002

5,519
10.7

0.0
0.2

0.1
0.1
-0.2

-0.4
0.9

25.3
16.7
9.6
7.2
...
1.3
1.2
4.3
2.9
2.0
1.0

24.9
24.0
22.3
1.7
0.9

2003
Prel.
Est.
Feb. 2005

2004

24,630
...

0.0
7.3

0.0
0.0
-7.3

-7.4
-3.3

35.3
22.7
12.9
9.8
5.6
4.1
4.0
4.7
3.9
3.9
0.0

24,655
...

0.0
2.5

0.0
0.0
-2.5

-2.5
-0.1

35.4
22.8
14.8
8.0
...
2.4
2.4
6.2
4.0
3.7
0.3

32.9
31.9
27.7
4.2
1.0

(In percent of GDP)
28.0
27.0
25.3
1.7
1.0

Original
Budget

Table 5. Zimbabwe: Central Government Operations, 2001-05

23,802
7.2

0.0
4.7

0.1
2.4
-4.7

-7.1
-1.7

41.0
21.1
15.4
5.7
...
5.5
3.1
8.8
5.7
5.1
0.6

33.9
32.6
28.7
3.9
1.3

Revised
Est.
June 2005

60,003
...

0.0
7.5

0.0
0.0
-7.5

-7.5
-5.8

45.8
27.4
19.1
8.3
...
1.7
1.2
8.4
8.3
7.9
0.5

38.3
36.8
32.8
4.0
1.6

Budget

65,903
...

0.0
10.0

0.0
1.8
-10.0

-11.8
-6.8

46.7
25.0
17.4
7.5
...
5.0
2.8
9.2
7.6
7.1
0.4

34.9
33.5
29.8
3.6
1.4

Auth.
Baseline

2005

64,188
17.0

0.0
14.3

0.0
1.8
-14.3

-16.1
-10.7

51.7
29.1
18.2
10.9
...
5.4
3.2
9.4
7.8
7.3
0.4

35.6
34.8
32.7
2.1
0.8

Staff
Proj.

- 31 -

188.9
99.9
64.5
35.4
...
52.8
41.1
24.1
12.2
11.6
0.6
-53.0
-0.2
3.0
11.5
-38.5
0.7
37.8

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure on goods and services
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Of which: unallocated reserve
Interest payments
Of which : domestic
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditure and net lending
Capital expenditure
Net lending

Budget balance, excl. grants (commitment basis) 1/
Of which: primary balance

Grants
Foreign interest arrears
Budget balance, incl. grants (cash basis)

External financing (net)
Domestic financing (net)

1/ Commitments with respect to foreign interest payments.

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

136.0
128.5
111.1
17.4
7.4

Total revenue
Tax revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Nontax revenue

2001

-1.5
39.2

0.7
8.8
-37.7

-47.2
2.3

351.3
216.0
123.9
92.1
...
49.5
40.3
55.2
30.6
25.2
5.4

304.2
284.6
257.4
27.2
19.6

2002

0.9
9.6

6.1
3.3
-10.5

-19.8
49.3

1,394.6
924.3
528.0
396.4
...
69.2
65.9
239.7
161.4
107.7
54

1,374.7
1,325.8
1,232.9
92.9
49.0

2003
Prel.
Est.
Feb. 2005

2004

-1
1,805

12
...
-1,804

-1,816
-816

8,704
5,589
3,181
2,407
1,368
1,000
996
1,159
956
948
8

6,888
6,646
6,227
419
243

-1
611

12
...
-610

-622
-22

8,740
5,620
3,652
1,968
...
600
600
1,528
992
912
80

8,106
7,870
6,823
1,047
236

-2
1,117

23
568
-1,115

-1,699
-397

9,771
5,016
3,658
1,359
...
1,302
734
2,092
1,360
1,220
140

8,072
7,763
6,833
930
309

Revised
Est.
June 2005

(In billions of Zimbabwe dollars)

Original
Budget

Table 5. Zimbabwe: Central Government Operations (concluded), 2001-05

0
4,494

0
0
-4,494

-4,494
-3,494

27,494
16,444
11,489
4,955
...
1,000
748
5,056
4,994
4,712
282

23,000
22,060
19,660
2,400
940

Budget

0
6,600

0
1,163
-6,600

-7,762
-4,478

30,762
16,444
11,489
4,955
...
3,285
1,870
6,040
4,994
4,712
282

23,000
22,060
19,660
2,400
940

Auth.
Baseline

2005

0
9,178

0
1,163
-9,178

-10,341
-6,877

33,208
18,711
11,703
7,008
...
3,464
2,049
6,040
4,994
4,712
282

22,867
22,327
20,983
1,344
540

Staff
Proj.

- 32 -

- 33 -

Table 6. Zimbabwe: Monetary Survey, 2001-2005
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Feb.

Jan.

Mar.

Apr.

2005
Baseline
Scenario 1/

(Annual percentage change)
Reserve money

164.9

171.2

394.8

217.6

284.3

369.1

453.1

411.5

232.2

Broad money (M3)
Currency
Deposits

102.7
161.1
97.6

164.8
215.8
158.9

413.5
456.0
407.6

222.6
267.3
215.7

177.6
256.6
166.8

218.5
287.2
208.1

210.4
369.0
188.3

207.6
313.1
191.7

248.0
232.2
250.8

(Contribution to reserve money growth, in percent)
Monetary authorities
Net foreign assets of reserve bank 2/

-7.2

-3.0

-153.7

-232.6

-288.9

-189.6

-124.0

-76.0

-53.7

Net domestic assets of reserve bank
Credit to government (net)
Credit to non-financial public enterprises
Credit to private sector
Other items (net) 3/
RBZ bills

172.1
102.4
6.7
71.1
-8.1

174.2
31.7
-2.5
66.5
78.5

548.5
167.9
-0.4
246.9
134.1

450.2
39.5
34.7
330.2
746.5
-700.6

573.2
161.9
46.3
358.4
923.9
-917.2

558.8
86.7
54.6
299.6
1069.3
-951.4

577.1
289.3
47.8
262.2
857.7
-879.9

487.5
39.9
37.7
144.1
782.3
-516.5

286.0
78.8
95.5
-25.3
264.2
-127.3

Reserve money 4/
Currency outside banks
Nonbank deposits
Other banking inst. reserves
Deposit money bank (DMB) reserves

164.9
73.8
0.2
2.9
88.0

171.2
97.4
0.9
2.6
70.3

394.8
239.6
4.4
4.9
145.9

217.6
157.9
6.2
6.8
46.8

284.3
195.8
7.1
7.2
74.2

369.1
242.3
8.9
7.8
110.1

453.1
287.9
9.5
20.2
135.5

411.5
235.3
6.0
11.4
158.7

232.2
158.6
4.3
6.0
63.3

Monetary survey

(Contribution to broad money growth, in percent)

Net foreign assets

-0.2

0.0

-20.7

-46.5

-43.5

-26.3

-17.5

-13.7

-9.8

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 5/
Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)

102.9
97.1
38.5
9.0
49.6
5.8

164.8
141.1
19.4
11.3
110.4
23.7

434.2
408.9
44.4
26.5
338.0
25.3

269.1
175.4
55.2
14.7
105.4
93.8

221.1
146.1
55.7
10.5
79.9
75.0

244.8
158.6
77.8
12.3
68.5
86.1

227.9
180.4
118.0
7.9
54.4
47.5

221.3
128.9
68.0
6.7
54.3
92.4

257.8
174.4
52.7
25.5
96.3
83.4

Broad money (M3)
Currency
Deposits

102.7
12.9
89.8

164.8
22.3
142.4

413.5
56.3
357.2

222.6
35.7
186.9

177.6
30.9
146.7

218.5
37.6
180.8

210.4
45.1
165.3

207.6
41.0
166.6

248.0
35.3
212.7

22.6
10.9
3.6
...
123.7
61.3
-27.9

21.4
13.3
3.4
...
129.1
67.5
-26.9

17.0
7.4
4.7
3.2
320.7
169.0
-36.1

(Ratios, unless specified otherwise)
Memorandum items:
Currency-deposit ratio
Reserves-deposit ratio
Money multiplier (M3/reserve money)
Velocity (GDP/M3)
CPI inflation (12 months end-of-period; percent)
Private sector credit growth (12 months; percent)
Real private sector credit growth (12 months percentage change)

11.5
14.0
4.4
3.1
112.1
67.1
-21.2

14.1
12.6
4.3
3.4
198.9
181.0
-6.0

15.4
10.5
4.4
4.1
598.7
522.1
-11.0

18.0
7.8
4.5
2.9
132.7
134.4
0.7

18.3
7.0
4.6
...
133.6
100.7
-14.1

18.9
7.8
4.4
...
127.2
75.3
-22.8

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Reserve money growth slows more sharply than broad money growth from April 2005 to end-2005 due to the netting out from banks' statutory reserves of loans under the new credit facilities
(especially PSF). This reduction would be more than offset by an increase in the money multiplier due to the effective reduction in the required reserve ratio. (A reversal of this process, as the PSF
was wound down, partly explains the increase in reserve money and the fall in the multiplier from December 2004 to April 2005).
2/ Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe's net foreign assets and net domestic assets have been adjusted for memorandum of deposits. Includes valuation effects.
3/ Subsidies and exchange rate losses amounted to Z$ 3,688 billions in 2004.
4/ Reservey money also includes liquidity support provided by RBZ to trouble banks.
5/ Credit to the government differs from the fiscal table as it includes accrued interest on domestic government debt, while domestic interest in the fiscal table is recorded as it falls due.

- 34 -

Table 6. Zimbabwe: Monetary Survey, 2001-2005 (concluded)
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Feb.

Jan.

Apr.

2005
Baseline
Scenario 1/

(In billions of Zimbabwe dollars)

Monetary authorities
Net foreign assets of reserve bank 2/

Mar.

-13.0

-14.7

-243

-1,949

-2,072

-2,228

-1,990

-1,907

-3,200

Net domestic assets of reserve bank
Credit to government (net)
Credit to nonfinancial public enterprises
Credit to private sector
Credit to deposit money banks
Credit to nonbank private sector
Other items net 3/
RBZ bills

67.7
25.8
2.0
31.0
28.7
2.3
8.9

162.9
43.1
0.6
67.4
64.7
2.7
51.8

976
292
0
433
426
7
251

4,278
582
254
2,856
2,820
35
5,726
-5,139

4,515
1,212
294
2,834
2,752
82
6,374
-6,200

5,186
439
344
3,041
2,927
114
7,995
-6,634

5,969
2,021
344
3,560
3,446
114
7,616
-7,572

6,571
693
344
2,906
2,790
115
8,647
-6,018

10,941
2,417
2,480
2,266
2,163
103
11,882
-8,105

Reserve money 4/
Currency outside banks
Nonbank deposits
Other banking institution reserves
Deposit money bank reserves

54.7
24.7
0.2
1.3
28.6

148.2
77.9
0.7
2.7
67.0

734
433
7
10
283

2,330
1,591
53
60
626

2,442
1,729
50
62
601

2,957
2,059
60
66
772

3,979
2,632
91
167
1,089

4,664
2,831
84
126
1,624

7,741
5,286
153
200
2,101

0.7

2.3

100

299

315

391

480

442

522

31.9

91.5

620

4,092

4,390

4,968

5,655

5,995

10,406

Net credit from the reserve bank

-19.1

-61.2

-474

-2,990

-3,337

-1,874

-2,279

-1,393

-2,163

Total credit
Credit to government (net)
Credit to nonfinancial public enterprises
Credit to private sector
Other items (net)

228.5
67.8
17.7
143.1
-28.6

548.4
96.7
45.9
405.8
-28.6

2,876
128
214
2,534
-322

7,986
1,629
437
5,921
-577

8,815
2,090
391
6,334
-774

10,238
3,394
481
6,362
-2,907

10,735
3,864
401
6,470
-3,049

11,120
3,757
439
6,924
-2,993

22,091
5,300
873
15,918
85

Total deposits

213.5

552.4

2,800

8,811

9,409

10,816

11,542

13,171

30,941

Net foreign assets

-12.3

-12.4

-143

-1,650

-1,758

-1,837

-1,510

-1,465

-2,678

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 5/
Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)

250.6
258.6
93.5
19.7
145.3
-8.0

643.3
594.8
139.8
46.5
408.4
48.5

3,383
3,175
420
214
2,541
208

12,104
8,857
2,210
691
5,956
3,247

12,946
10,403
3,302
686
6,416
2,543

14,773
11,135
3,833
825
6,476
3,638

15,775
13,215
5,885
745
6,584
2,560

17,551
12,272
4,450
783
7,039
5,279

39,059
27,092
7,717
3,353
16,021
11,968

Broad money (M3)
Currency
Deposits

238.3
24.7
213.6

631.0
77.9
553.1

3,240
433
2,807

10,454
1,591
8,863

11,189
1,729
9,459

12,935
2,059
10,876

14,265
2,632
11,633

16,086
2,831
13,255

36,381
5,286
31,095

Deposit money banks and other banking institutions
Net foreign assets
Reserves

Monetary survey

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
Net foreign assets of reserve bank

-237

-267

-294

-340

-348

-368

-327

-312

-320

16
13

15
42

16
121

...
52

...
53

...
65

...
79

...
72

52

Of which : gross usable reserves
Net foreign assets of banking system
Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

1/ Reserve money growth slows more sharply than broad money growth from April 2005 to end-2005 due to the netting out from banks' statutory reserves of loans under the new credit facilities
(especially PSF). This reduction would be more than offset by an increase in the money multiplier due to the effective reduction in the required reserve ratio. (A reversal of this process, as the PSF
was wound down, partly explains the increase in reserve money and the fall in the multiplier from December 2004 to April 2005).
2/ Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe's net foreign assets and net domestic assets have been adjusted for memorandum of deposits. Includes valuation effects.
3/ Subsidies and exchange rate losses amounted to Z$ 3,688 billions in 2004.
4/ Reservey money also includes liquidity support provided by RBZ to trouble banks.
5/ Credit to the government differs from the fiscal table as it includes accrued interest on domestic government debt, while domestic interest in the fiscal table is recorded as it falls due.

- 35 -

Table 7. Zimbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators, Revised December Commitments, 2003-2006

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

2006
Proj.

-10.4
-11.3

-4.2
-3.9

-5.1
-5.1

1.6
1.6

-2.2
2.0

-2.3
5.1

-8.9
2.9

-13.1
3.4

Prices and interest rates (percent)
Consumer price inflation (annual average)
Consumer price inflation (end of period)
91-day treasury bills (annualized yield; end of period)

365.0
598.7
60.7

350.0
132.7
105.0

116.7
80.0
90.0

57.9
40.0
50.0

Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Of which : interest on central government debt
Overall balance, commitment basis (excluding grants)
Primary balance, excluding grants
Overall balance, cash basis (including grants)
Domestic financing (including privatization)
External financing

24.9
25.3
1.3
-0.4
0.9
-0.2
0.2
0.0

33.9
41.0
5.5
-7.1
-1.7
-4.7
4.7
0.0

36.6
44.1
10.0
-7.5
2.5
-4.9
4.9
0.0

35.7
38.9
5.6
-3.2
2.4
-0.9
-0.1
1.0

Domestic debt (percent of GDP)

10.7

7.2

8.4

5.2

Money and credit (percent change; end of period)
Broad money (M3)
Domestic credit
Of which : real credit to the private sector
Velocity (GDP/M3)
Reserve money (percent change; end of period)

413.5
433.8
-11.0
4.1
394.8

222.6
179.0
0.7
2.9
217.6

51.7
106.6
6.6
3.1
59.8

58.8
20.0
3.2
1.8
57.3

External trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

4.1
-19.8
-5.8

-9.5
-6.2
-6.8

48.4
24.2
-6.6

-3.2
-5.7
-1.1

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP at the official exchange rate) 1/
(In percent of GDP at world prices) 2/
Overall balance

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-4.2
-4.6
-0.5

1.7
-2.0
-0.4
-7.4
-5.7
-0.2

2.5
-2.7
-0.3
-11.8
-4.7
-0.2

2.4
-2.6
-0.3
-16.5
-4.6
-0.2

Official reserves (gold valued at market price)
Usable reserves (US$ millions, end of period)
(months of imports of goods and services)
(percent of reserve money)

15.6
0.1
1.8

24.8
0.1
5.3

135.2
0.7
104.5

284.5
1.1
195.7

External debt and arrears (including private debt)
Total external debt (percent of GDP at world prices; end of period)
Of which: total external arrears
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and services)

64.4
28.5
23.5

67.4
35.1
18.7

72.8
40.7
13.9

73.9
43.3
15.3

GDP
Real GDP (market prices; percentage change)
Real per capita GDP (percentage change)
Savings and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings (excluding grants)
Gross investment

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Foreign currency units are converted into Zimbabwean dollars at the official exchange rate.
2/ GDP at world prices using real GDP growth and trading partner countries' inflation (base year is 1996).

- 36 -

Table 8. Zimbabwe: External Debt Outstanding By Creditors, 1998-2004

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Public and publicly guaranteed debt (excl. arrears)

3,785

3,556

3,112

2,664

2,594

2,545

2,306

Medium- and long-term debt (excl. arrears)
Bilateral creditors
Multilateral institutions
IMF
IBRD
Others
Private creditors

3,553
1,238
1,904
392
498
1,014
410

3,324
1,141
1,829
368
473
989
353

2,880
1,031
1,582
284
416
881
267

2,432
926
1,320
190
392
738
186

2,362
977
1,229
98
421
710
156

2,313
1,019
1,170
41
449
680
124

2,074
935
1,038
7
417
614
102

232

232

232

232

232

232

232

672

642

498

377

256

157

70

4,457

4,198

3,610

3,042

2,850

2,702

2,376

9

123

404

803

1,520

2,141

2,584

Medium- and long-term debt
Bilateral creditors
Multilateral institutions
IMF
IBRD
Others
Private creditors

9
1
0
0
0
0
8

7
1
0
0
0
0
6

213
69
78
0
0
78
66

636
166
314
76
5
233
157

1,173
337
585
169
0
416
251

1,703
519
839
262
62
515
344

2,049
642
1,009
305
95
609
398

Short-term external debt

0

7

44

57

65

71

84

Other public and publicly guaranteed arrears1/

0

109

147

109

282

368

451

9

123

404

803

1,520

2,141

2,584

4,466
3,794
672

4,321
3,679
642

4,014
3,516
498

3,845
3,468
377

4,370
4,114
256

4,843
4,686
157

4,960
4,890
70

Short-term debt (excl. arrears)
Private debt (excl. arrears)
Total debt (excl. arrears)

Arrears on public and publicly guaranteed debt

Total arrears
Total debt
Public and publicly guaranteed debt
Private debt

(In percent of GDP)
Medium and long-term debt
Of which : public and publicly guaranteed
Short-term debt

40.9
38.3
7.2

40.6
38.1
7.2

40.6
37.9
6.4

39.7
37.4
5.6

48.2
46.3
4.9

60.0
58.3
4.4

63.7
62.2
3.7

9,294

9,037

8,545

8,492

8,243

7,524

7,356

Memorandum item:
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)2/

Sources: Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, World Bank, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Arrears on supplier credits and interest on arrears.
2/ Nominal U.S. dollar GDP adjusted for real growth and international inflation (1996 base year).

- 37 -

Table 9. Zimbabwe: Financial Soundness Indicators, 1999-2004
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated 1/)
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

15.3
11.9
6.0

18.3
16.9
9.5

22.4
12.1
10.4

16.2
7.1
8.0

15.0
12.4
7.5

34.4
33.4
12.1

14.1
38.9
48.2

18.2
45.4
45.5

13.7
50.0
35.7

7.9
70.5
10.1

4.2
75.5
14.9

23.2
48.6
38.2

15.8
1.5
1.6
17.4
3.1
2.7
17.6
7.2
19.9
3.3
8.7
1.2

14.5
4.3
0.7
16.5
12.1
7.4
14.0
9.7
11.3
3.4
5.6
0.4

12.8
1.9
3.0
27.8
10.8
1.6
20.6
4.4
6.7
2.3
6.5
1.6

11.2
2.3
1.3
23.8
5.0
6.8
20.9
2.5
14.0
3.3
7.8
1.2

10.9
3.1
0.7
22.0
1.7
2.1
19.1
6.0
18.7
2.3
11.6
1.8

21.4
2.2
2.5
15.3
0.4
0.3
20.6
9.5
15.1
3.1
7.6
2.0

2.4
50.1
482.0
89.0
16.1

3.8
43.1
515.0
103.3
15.3

1.4
18.7
230.0
351.1
28.1

3.4
62.7
300.0
565.3
21.3

6.1
121.6
482.7
77.3
10.4

9.7
125.8
744.1
176.6
13.2

..
..
..

..
53.5
..
..

..
44.8
..
..

..
53.9
..
..

18.1
56.6
74.1
6.8

47.4
164.2
65.0
12.0

..

..

..

..

-5.9

3.8

Capital adequacy
Capital to risk-weighted assets
Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets
Capital to total assets
Asset quality
NPLs to gross loans
Total provisions to NPLs
NPLs net of specific provisions to capital
Loan concentration
Agriculture
Construction
Communication
Distribution
Finance & investments
Financial Organizations
Manufacturing
Mining
Services
Transportation
Individuals
Others
Earnings and profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity
Interest income to noninterest income
Net interest income to interest expenses
Personnel expenses to gross income
Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Liquid assets to demand deposits
Total (non-interbank) loans to customer deposits
FX deposits to total deposits
Sensitivity to market risk
Net open positions in FX to capital
Source: Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
1/ Based on commercial banks only which account for about 80 percent of total banking sector assets.

APPENDIX I

- 38 -

Zimbabwe: Relations with the Fund21
(As of May 31, 2005)
I.
II.

Membership Status: Joined: 09/29/1980; Article VIII obligations accepted 2/5/1995.
General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
353.40
462.47
0.33

% Quota
100.0
130.86
0.09

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
10.20
0.00

% Allocation
100.0
0.0

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-By Arrangements
Extended Arrangements
Poverty Reduction Growth Facility
(PRGF) Arrangements

SDR Million
63.94
46.45
75.23

% Quota
18.09
12.86
21.29

V. Financial Arrangements:
Type
Stand-By Arrangement
Stand-By Arrangement
Extended Fund Facility
(EFF)
VI.

Approval

Expiration

Date
08/02/1999
06/01/1998
09/11/1992

Date
10/01/2000
06/30/1999
09/10/1995

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)
141.36
130.65
114.60

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
24.74
39.20
86.90

Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):
Overdue22
Forthcoming
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
05/31/2005
Principal
184.63
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Charges/interest
20.03
2.54
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.66
Total
204.66
2.54
4.67
4.67
4.67
4.66

21

For further information, please contact Mr. Heytens (IMF/AFR, (202) 623 99 23), or
Ms. Muñoz, (IMF/AFR, (202) 623 66 53).

22

The projection of charges and interest assumes that overdue principal at the report date will
remain outstanding, but forthcoming obligations will be settled on time.

- 39 VII.

APPENDIX I

Application of Remedial Measures under the Arrears Strategy

Zimbabwe has been in continuous arrears to the Fund since February 2001. On September
24, 2001 the Executive Board declared the country ineligible to use the general resources of
the Fund and removed it from the list of PRGF-eligible countries. On June 13, 2002, the
Board issued a declaration of non-cooperation with respect to Zimbabwe and suspended all
technical assistance to the country. On June 6, 2003, the Board suspended Zimbabwe’s
voting and related rights in the Fund. A complaint with respect to compulsory withdrawal
was issued on February 6, 2004. The Executive Board has so far considered this complaint
twice—on July 7, 2004 and on February 16, 2005. On both occasions the Board decided—in
light of increased payments and some improvements in policy implementation—to postpone
a recommendation for compulsory withdrawal in order to provide Zimbabwe a further
change to improve cooperation with the Fund. The Board will again consider the Managing
Director’s complaint no later than August 16, 2005.
VIII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Zimbabwe has a rationed multiple exchange regime (3 "official" rates) where most
transactions take place at the main auction ruling rate (Z$10,150/US$ on July 4, 2005) but
have foreign exchange controls on current account transactions (and hence an active parallel
exchange market). The authorities maintain a secondary rate of Z$9,000/US$ for inward
remittances and a surrender exchange rate of Z$824/US$ that has been eliminated for export
remittances. Subsidies to gold, tobacco and cotton, and incentives to exporters are
implemented to compensate for the overvalued exchange rate. Effective January 30, 2005,
Zimbabwe’s exchange arrangement has been reclassified to the category of managed floating
with no preannounced path for the exchange rate from the category of conventional pegged
arrangement.
•

A tender system operates by the RBZ to sell foreign exchange three times a week
(US$100 million per month for the main auction and US$2 million per month for
SMEs and individuals). Authorized dealers submit detailed bids on behalf of
customers, including transaction information such as intended use of foreign
exchange and approval number by the RBZ. An RBZ committee scans the bids and
eliminates those that are for non-priority purposes. The rest of the bids are admitted to
the tender system and allocated foreign exchange on the basis of price. The main rate
at the auction is heavily managed in the sense that although bids are submitted, an
increasing number are not met—which would not be the case in a true auction.

•

A “carrot and stick” retention scheme is in place in order to encourage faster
repatriation of export proceeds. Exporters are allowed to retain 55 percent in foreign
currency accounts (FCAs) if earnings are repatriated before 30 days for a maximum
period of 21 days and the remainder is sold to the tender at the ruling rate. The
surrender requirement at the tender exchange rate increases in a graduated fashion up
to a maximum of 80 percent for export proceeds repatriated after 90 days. Foreign
currency retentions are stricter for horticulture.

•

Tobacco prices are quoted in US dollars at the auctions, but producers receive the
local currency equivalent at the tender exchange rate, and in addition receive a direct
subsidy of Z$5,000 per kilogram (from May 19, 2005) for tobacco sold on the
auction. The producer subsidy is invariant to the price received on the auction.
Tobacco producers from February 2005 were treated as direct exporters for purposes

- 40 -

APPENDIX I

of exchange rate management and, like all direct exporters, surrender their export
proceeds at the prevailing tender rate.
•

Gold producers sell 60 percent of their output at a fixed support price—which was
raised to Z$175,000/gram on May 19, 2005—and sell the remaining 40 percent on the
international market. The proceeds from the latter are deposited in the producers’
FCAs, which are subject to the same retention periods as other exporters (see the
second bullet above).

•

A new subsidy amounting to Z$3,500/kg for cotton producers was introduced on July
1, 2005.

•

The parallel market exchange rate has depreciated since mid-2004 and was trading at
about Z$20,000/US$ in early July 2005.

•

The authorities have stated that the RBZ no longer allocates foreign currency at the
Z$824/US$ rate for Treasury operations, NOCZIM, ZESA and GMB imports, and
debt service with Afreximbank, but has not provided documentary evidence of this.

After an initial appreciation of the tender rate from Z$4,197/US$ in mid-January to
Z$3,520/US$ in early February 2004, the tender rate depreciated to about Z$10,500/US$ by
early July 2005. The tender is managed in a way that does not allow the tender rate to fully
reflect market forces.
As a result of this system, Zimbabwe currently has restrictions on the making of transfers and
payments for current international transactions, and multiple currency practices, inconsistent,
respectively, with Article VIII Sections 2(a) and 3 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.
Zimbabwe maintains multiple currency practices (MCP) arising from the lack of a
mechanism to prevent a divergence of more than 2 percent between (i) the exchange rates in
the official and parallel markets, (ii) the exchange rates applicable for private sector imports
and government imports, (iii) the exchange rates paid by successful bidders in the same
tender, (iv) the exchange rate used for surrender of export receipts, including from
international gold sales (weighted average rate from each auction) and the other rates in the
exchange market, and (v) the exchange rate applicable to inward remittances of foreign
exchange. Zimbabwe also maintains exchange restrictions arising from (i) limitations on the
availability of foreign exchange, in the form of priority lists that limit the provision of foreign
exchange for certain specified transactions which are subject to the approval of the RBZ, and
(ii) the existence of private sector external payment arrears inconsistent with Article VIII
Section 2(a). These restrictions and MCPs have not been approved by the Board.
Staff was informed of the existence of bilateral payments arrangements with Fund members,
which may raise issues of compliance by Zimbabwe with Article VIII obligations. Staff was
unable to obtain relevant materials, but is continuing to seek information from the authorities
in order to reach a conclusion on these issues. Exchange restrictions arising from certain
outstanding contracts under a discontinued RBZ scheme for foreign exchange cover have
been discontinued.
IX.

Article IV Consultation:

Zimbabwe is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation
was concluded on July 7, 2004 (Country Report No. 04/297).

- 41 -

X.

APPENDIX I

Technical Assistance:

The Executive Board suspended Fund technical assistance to Zimbabwe in June 2002. Past
Fund technical assistance to Zimbabwe is summarized in the attached table. A long-term
advisor sponsored by MFD provided assistance in the area of banking supervision between
August 1996 and October 1999. Another MFD expert on monetary operations provided
advice to the RBZ and trained staff in the implementation of open market operations and the
use of repurchase agreements during October 1998 – October 2000. A third MFD expert on
the payments system, who also advised the RBZ on the array of monetary instruments to be
used to monitor and manage liquidity in the financial sector, completed a one-year
assignment in October 1999.
XI.

Resident Representative:

A resident representative office was opened in July 1993. Mr. G. G. Johnson’s term as Senior
Resident Representative expired at end-September 2003. The office remained open with local
staff until September 2004 when it was closed.

- 42 -

APPENDIX I

Zimbabwe: Technical Assistance from the Fund (Since the Inception of the PRGF/EFF
Arrangements in September 1992)
Date

Department

Purpose

Result

November 1992

STA

Revise monetary statistics.

Revision initiated.

April 1993

MFD

Liberalize foreign exchange
system.

Comprehensive
reforms launched;
completed in July
1994.

Spring 1994

LEG

Revise the Reserve Bank Act
and the Banking Act.

Completed.

Spring 1995

FAD

Improve the system of
budgeting and public
expenditure control.

Initial steps taken.

Spring 1995

STA

Harmonize the reporting
system for monetary
statistics.

Harmonization
completed.

Winter 1995

STA

Provide training in balance of
payments methodology.

Seminar provided.

January 1996

STA

Improve foreign
trade statistics.

Advice being
implemented.

August 1996

MFD (long term)

Strengthen banking
supervision.

Some of the advice
being implemented.

October 1996

STA

Improve national accounts.

Some of the advice
being implemented.

January 1996,
November 1996

MFD

Improve monetary and
foreign exchange operations.

Some of the advice
being implemented.

November 1997

MFD

Improve monetary
operations.

Some of the advice
being implemented.

May 1999

MFD

Report
recommendations
being reviewed.

July 2001

MFD

Review and advise on
monetary operations, the
payments system, and
supervision; assess
vulnerability of the financial
sector.
Deposit insurance scheme.

Report
recommendations
being reviewed.

- 43 -

APPENDIX II

Zimbabwe: Relations with the World Bank Group
While noting continuing and serious concerns about governance and human rights, as well as the
overall decline in political and economic conditions in the country, the Board of Executive
Directors of the World Bank has endorsed a one-year Interim Strategy for Zimbabwe on March
17, 2005. The Strategy aims to close vital analytical gaps in the areas of poverty and safety nets,
social service delivery, and agriculture and infrastructure sectors. It also includes the HIV/AIDS
pilot project initiative. The activities to be carried out under the Strategy will cost US$ 1.8
million and that funds will be sourced from administrative sources and the LICUS Trust Fund.
While implementation will be coordinated with the government, development partners or local
organizations will be the implementing agents. Zimbabwe went on non-accrual (i.e.
disbursements are suspended) status in October 2000. The stock of arrears to the Bank will reach
US$ 347.2 million by April 1, 2005, representing an increase by US$ 62 million since end-July
2004. A resumption of lending would be contingent upon clearance of arrears.
Currently, the Bank does not have any active lending projects in Zimbabwe. The last active
project was canceled in December 2002.
Zimbabwe was historically one of IFC’s largest portfolios in Africa and has hosted a strong
private sector. IFC’s portfolio totals US$20.6 million disbursed as of August 1, 2004, with a
focus on financial sector. IFC’s current priority is to monitor the existing portfolio and to work
with the companies which have IFC investment in managing the financial difficulties caused by
the current economic crisis. In anticipation of losses, the IFC has substantially increased loan loss
provisions for its investments in Zimbabwe and constantly reviews the need to make additional
provisions.
While investors have expressed interest in MIGA’s coverage for projects in Zimbabwe, the
current internal political climate is not conducive to FDI. MIGA’s on-line investment promotion
services (www.fdixchange.com and www.ipanet.net) feature 61 documents on investment
opportunities and the related legal and regulatory environment in Zimbabwe.
World Bank Loan/Credit Summary for Zimbabwe
(in millions of U.S. dollars; as of January 31, 2005)
IBRD
Original principal
Cancellations
Disbursed
Undisbursed
Repaid
Due
Exchange adjustment
Borrower's obligation23
23

Does not include interest arrears.

896.20
53.21
842.92
76.12
414.62
428.29
31.62
459.91

IDA
661.95
202.96
459.07
1.59
5.31
506.93
0.00
506.93

TOTAL
1,558.15
256.17
1,301.99
77.71
419.93
935.22
31.62
966.84

- 44 -

APPENDIX III

Zimbabwe: Statistical Issues
The economic and financial statistics database in Zimbabwe is inadequate, its quality is
deteriorating, and data provision to the Fund is not timely. While some monetary data are
of adequate quality, foreign reserves are not reported in a meaningful fashion by the Reserve
Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ), data on external arrears are not reported systematically, and
budgetary and monetary data are reported to the staff with a substantial lag. The Central
Statistical Office (CSO) conducts several sectoral surveys, but GDP data are reported with a
substantial lag and harbor major inconsistencies. There are also shortcomings in external
trade and finance data, the consumer price index (CPI) most likely understates inflation
because of the use of controlled and administered prices, and no information is available
about unemployment and wages.
Zimbabwe participates in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) project for
Anglophone African countries. Metadata for Zimbabwe (posted on the Fund’s Dissemination
Standards Bulletin Board in November 2002) indicate the country’s plans for improvements
in macroeconomic, financial, and sociodemographic statistics. Under the GDDS, the
authorities were to have confirmed the accuracy of, or updated, the metadata and plans for
improvement on Zimbabwe’s GDDS participation anniversaries in November 2003 and
2004. Despite reminder letters, no confirmation or update has been received. However, in the
absence of technical assistance and funding, progress in improving the quality, coverage, and
timeliness of Zimbabwe’s statistical base is likely to be slow.
Real sector statistics
National accounts. The CSO benefited from substantial technical assistance from the Fund,
the World Bank, and the United Kingdom in 1996-97. This allowed the CSO to publish
revised national accounts in late 1997, covering the period 1985-96, with 1990 as the base
year for constant price estimates. STA provided a peripatetic advisor to assist with the
improvement of real sector statistics in 2001, but these efforts were discontinued because of
the deteriorating security situation. While the revised national accounts are a significant
improvement over the previous estimates, the coverage of economic activity in the informal
sector remains poor. National accounts data for 2001 were not published until March 2004
and had inconsistencies between sectoral developments and other activity indicators, and are
being reviewed. Historical data is constantly revised.

- 45 -

APPENDIX III

Prices, production, labor. The CSO produces a CPI. In 2001, the base year was changed
from 1990 to 1995 and expenditures weights based on a 1995-96 household survey. A
number of prices in the index are either controlled or administered. A manufacturing
production index, with a base year of 1990 is reported with a significant delay. Data on
employment and wages, which had very limited coverage, are no longer published. A
comprehensive labor market survey is long overdue.
Government finance statistics
Key weaknesses continue to impair the analysis of fiscal developments and the formulation
of appropriate adjustment policies. Monthly revenue and expenditure data for the central
government’s budgetary accounts are generally available with a lag of 6 to 8 weeks. There
are discrepancies between the budget financing need (computed from the income/expenditure
side) and financing data from banking and other sources. In addition, a significant part of
donor-financed development expenditure is off budget, the economic classification of
expenditure is insufficiently disaggregated, and a functional classification of expenditure is
not available. Large quasi-fiscal operations by the RBZ and significant contingent liabilities,
including in the form of loan guarantees, are not systematically reported.
The authorities do not provide Fund staff with budget data according to an organizational
classification on a regular basis. They provide limited access to source data, so staff has to
rely on aggregated data of unverifiable quality. Also, the operations of the social security
fund and several self-financing funds under the purview of the central government are not
included in reported data. Furthermore, although operating targets for public enterprises are
provided occasionally, it is still not possible to compile reliable consolidated accounts for the
nonfinancial public sector, since financial operations of public enterprises are neither
reported nor regularly audited The accounts of local governments become available only with
a lag of several years, and consolidated general government accounts are not compiled.
The latest published data in the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook are for 1997.
No recent fiscal data have been provided for publication in International Financial Statistics
(IFS).
Monetary and financial statistics
Significant progress has been made in developing a unified system for reporting monetary
statistics to the Fund based on international standards of data classification, and in improving
the collection and reporting of financial data. However, there continues to be some difficulty
in reconciling the balance sheet of the RBZ provided in the monetary control program (MCP)
with the monetary survey (MS). More recently, an issue has emerged with respect to the
accounting for treasury bills issued by the RBZ in the monetary data. The monetary control
program used to be available within two weeks of the end of each month, and the monetary
survey was produced within six-eight weeks of the end of each month; recently, delays in
submitting these data have increased to 2 to 3 months. In addition, serious discrepancies are
frequently detected in the data reported to STA. For example, RBZ bills outstanding in

- 46 -

APPENDIX III

liabilities of RBZ accounts is always reported as zero while RBZ bills held in assets of
commercial banks, discount houses, accounting houses and merchant banks are reported in a
significant amount (e.g., 732.2 million Zimbabwe dollars in total as of December 2004).
Furthermore, the IMF No. 1 Account is not systematically reported in same location in the
RBZ balance sheet, thereby affecting the gross international reserves. Discrepancies among
the different components of reserve money figures between the MS and MCP were recorded
since early 2004.
External sector statistics
There is a pressing need for the authorities to compile and provide comprehensive external
sector data on a more timely basis.
The trade balance in goods is still being reported with lags of more than 4 to 5 months, even
though, following the installation of the new Automated System for Customs Data
(ASYCUDA) at the customs department, data are being provided by customs to the CSO
within seven days of the end of each month. Private remittance inflows have become
significant in recent years, but the authorities report only the small proportion of remittances
made through official channels.
Compilation of capital and financial account transactions suffers from considerable delays,
and there is a significant lag in reporting balance of payments data to the Fund. The RBZ
provides estimates of the balance of payments for surveillance purposes, but these require
substantial adjustments. Measures are also needed to improve the estimates and shorten the
lag in the compilation and reporting of such data. Balance of payments data published in the
IFS and Balance of Payments Yearbook are even less timely—the latest data are for 1994, as
annual data through 2001 provided for publication are of questionable quality. Data on shortterm external debt are reported to the Fund by the RBZ with a one- to two-month lag.
External debt data (by debtor/creditor) are reported with a considerable delay and
information on the terms and maturity profile of the external debt is not systematically
available from the authorities. The authorities have provided staff only with partial
information on the extent of their collateralized external borrowing.
There are no data available on Zimbabwe’s international investment position.
Sociodemographic data statistics
The CSO produces various sociodemographic statistics, offering information on population,
the provision of health and education services, and indicators of poverty. However, since the
data are usually collected through infrequent surveys and population censuses, the
information is somewhat dated

- 47 -

APPENDIX III

ZIMBABWE: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF JULY 7, 2005
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
5
Data

Frequency
of
5
Reporting

Frequency
of
5
publication

Exchange Rates

July 4 2005

7/4/2005

D

M

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
of the Monetary Authorities

Apr. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Apr. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Broad Money

Apr. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Apr. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Apr. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Mar. 2004

6/13/2005

M

M

M

Interest Rates

1

Consumer Price Index
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
2
3
Financing – General Government

May 2005

6/20/2005

M

M

M

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
2
Financing – Central Government

Apr. 2005

6/15/2005

M

I

NA

Stocks of Central Government and Central
4
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Jan. 2005

6/13/2005

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

2004

6/13/2005

A

V

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2004

6/13/2005

A

V

A

GDP/GNP

2004

6/13/2005

A

V

A

Gross External Debt

2004

6/13/2005

A

V

A

1

Officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, and rates on treasury bills.
Domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
3
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
4
Including currency and maturity composition.
5
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); on mission or staff visits (V); Not Available (NA).
2

- 48 -

APPENDIX IV

Zimbabwe: Debt Sustainability Analysis24
Under the staff’s baseline scenario, Zimbabwe’s external debt is not expected to be
sustainable in the absence of a debt rescheduling. The baseline scenario assumes an
average negative real GDP growth at 4 percent until 2010 and an average positive growth
of 3 percent thereafter with exports growing at 5 percent. On the fiscal front, budgetary
consolidation is not expected in the near future although deficit declines after 2009.
Zimbabwe’s total external public debt was US$5 billion (67 percent of GDP) at end2004, of which US$2 billion were owed to multilateral creditors. Domestic public debt
denominated in local currency accounted for about 7 percent of GDP in 2004. The
baseline assumes a tentative arrears rescheduling in 2011—outside of the medium-term
scenario. The total stock of outstanding debt at the end of 2011 would amount to US$2.4
billion (34 percent of GDP).
In the baseline scenario, all public and publicly guaranteed external debt indicators
are projected to improve only slowly following the debt rescheduling. The NPV of
the debt-to-GDP ratios are expected to fall to about 50 percent, the NPV of the debt-toexports ratios to fall about 130 percent and the debt service-to-exports would decline to 1
percent in the long-run. However, private external debt is projected to increase from 2010
given the need to obtain foreign financing.
The debt dynamics are most vulnerable to a depreciation and export decline. A onetime 30 percent depreciation would push up the NPV of the debt-to-GDP ratio to about
120 percent in 2010. A one-time two standard deviation shock in exports would raise the
debt service-to-exports to 30 percent compared with 20 percent in 2025 in the baseline
scenario, and the NPV of the debt-to-exports ratio would rise to 217 percent compared
with 122 percent in the baseline scenario in 2015.
The public debt sustainability analysis could not be conducted due to difficulty in
choosing applicable exchange rates since the analysis is undertaken in national
currency. Given the highly overvalued official exchange rate and the multiple exchange
rate system, large swings in the exchange rate have a dramatic effect on dollars amounts
converted into national currency that are to be divided by GDP in national currency. To
circumvent this problem we use nominal U.S. dollar GDP calculated by using the
national real growth and the international inflation (1996 base year) in the external DSA
since the analysis is undertaken in U.S. dollars.

24

Standard Fund templates for low income countries and sensitivity tests are used to assess
Zimbabwe’s debt dynamics. The DSA was undertaken by the Fund only.

8.2

7.5

-10.4
1.8
2.8
-8.1
-1.7
...

...
...
...
...
23.5
22.2
1.1
-8.4

64.4
62.2
11.4
9.6
2.9
4.3
24.7
29.0
-2.2
0.9
0.0
6.7
1.7
6.0
-1.0
1.7
-5.9

2003

7.4

-4.2
2.0
2.2
7.6
10.7
...

68.8
253.7
67.4
248.5
18.7
17.6
1.0
1.2

67.4
66.0
3.1
7.1
4.3
5.7
27.1
32.8
-2.8
1.4
-0.1
2.9
1.4
2.7
-1.3
-4.0
-3.3

2004

1.4

-0.9

5.5
3.2
0.8
11.0
13.6
...

0.5

-2.0

-2.1
3.0
3.7
-1.1
0.6
...

2.7

Standard
Deviation 6/

1.4

Historical
Average 6/

7.0

-7.1
2.0
2.0
-2.1
2.8
7.9

75.1
267.9
74.0
263.9
18.5
18.0
1.1
-0.7

74.4
73.3
7.0
12.6
6.2
7.6
28.0
35.6
-2.7
1.3
-0.2
6.5
1.4
5.1
…
-5.6
-5.1

2005

Estimate

6.8

-4.8
1.9
3.4
6.2
-8.3
7.9

80.8
263.4
77.3
252.0
18.0
17.4
0.9
-4.9

80.6
77.1
6.2
7.5
1.2
3.0
30.7
33.7
-2.8
1.1
0.0
6.2
2.6
3.6
…
-1.3
-4.3

2006

6.7

-3.6
2.0
3.5
4.0
5.1
7.9

85.9
264.9
80.0
246.7
17.6
16.7
1.1
-3.8

85.9
80.0
5.4
7.4
1.6
3.6
32.4
36.0
-2.9
0.9
0.0
5.8
2.9
2.9
…
-2.0
-4.6

2007

6.6

-2.9
2.1
3.6
5.6
5.2
7.9

90.8
262.8
82.5
238.7
16.9
15.6
1.2
-3.5

91.0
82.7
5.0
7.2
1.5
3.7
34.6
38.2
-2.9
0.7
0.0
5.7
3.1
2.5
…
-2.1
-4.7

2008

6.6

-2.4
2.1
3.8
5.4
5.4
7.9

95.6
261.6
84.9
232.3
16.0
14.5
1.4
-3.2

95.8
85.0
4.8
7.2
1.5
3.9
36.5
40.4
-2.9
0.6
0.0
5.6
3.4
2.2
…
-2.4
-4.6

2009

6.7

-0.8
2.2
3.9
5.9
8.8
7.9

100.5
263.1
87.5
229.3
16.0
14.2
1.7
-1.9

100.5
87.6
4.8
7.4
2.9
5.2
38.2
43.4
-2.9
0.6
0.0
4.5
3.7
0.7
…
-2.6
-5.8

2010

Projections

-3.6
2.0
3.4
4.2
3.2
7.9

2005-10
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years.

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

-4.4
1.5
3.5
-14.8
-0.6
...

...
...
...
...
25.3
22.8
1.0
-6.8

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions

53.0
49.8
7.7
3.7
1.0
2.4
24.5
26.9
-2.8
1.3
-0.3
3.0
1.6
2.0
-0.7
4.1
-6.9

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2002

Actual

Table 1a. Zimbabwe: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002-2025 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

8.5

3.0
1.9
2.3
5.0
4.5
22.0

57.2
149.9
46.7
122.4
5.4
2.5
1.9
6.4

33.0
22.5
-0.5
4.7
5.9
4.2
38.2
42.4
-2.5
4.2
-1.0
-0.2
0.7
-1.0
…
-5.2
0.0

2015

13.2

3.0
1.5
1.5
5.0
4.5
12.3

60.1
150.0
53.0
132.3
2.7
0.8
2.0
5.2

28.1
21.0
-0.6
3.2
4.6
2.3
40.0
42.4
-1.9
4.2
-1.0
-0.4
0.4
-0.8
…
-3.8
0.0

2025

2.7
2.0
2.0
5.0
4.5
16.6

-1.0

-2.3

5.5

2011-25
Average

- 49 APPENDIX IV

- 50 -

APPENDIX IV

Table 1b. Zimbabwe: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2005-25
(In percent)
Estimate
2005

Projections
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2015

2025

74

77

80

82

85

88

47

53

74
74

74
77

74
80

74
82

74
85

75
88

22
54

31
76

74
74
74
74
74
74

80
82
79
79
82
110

86
94
83
83
94
113

89
97
86
86
97
117

91
100
89
89
100
120

94
103
91
91
103
124

50
58
49
50
58
66

57
55
55
54
56
75

264

252

247

239

232

229

122

132

264
264

241
252

227
247

214
239

203
232

197
229

57
142

79
189

264
264
264
264
264
264

252
323
252
257
302
252

247
413
247
257
358
247

239
401
239
249
347
239

232
391
232
243
339
232

229
386
229
240
334
229

122
217
122
130
187
122

132
197
132
134
173
132

18

17

17

16

14

14

3

1

21
21

17
17

15
16

13
14

10
12

9
10

4
9

15
23

B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

21
21
21
21
21
21

17
21
17
17
20
17

16
24
16
16
21
16

14
22
14
14
19
14

12
19
12
12
17
12

10
17
10
10
14
10

7
16
7
8
13
7

20
30
20
20
26
20

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

11

11

11

11

11

11

11

11

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2/
B. Bound Tests

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 51 -

APPENDIX IV

Figure 1. Zimbabwe: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2025
(In percent)
140

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
120
100
80
60
40

Baseline
Historical scenario

20

Most extreme stress test
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
450
400

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

350
300
250
200
150
Baseline

100

Historical scenario

50

Most extreme stress test

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
35

Debt service-to-exports ratio
30
25
20
15
10
Baseline
5

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

Statement by Dr. Gideon Gono
Governor, Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
September 9, 2005
Introduction
The Government of Zimbabwe greatly appreciates the opportunity granted to it to present the
country’s case before the IMF Board. Zimbabwe has, over the past seven years faced several
socio-economic challenges as reflected in; high inflation, foreign exchange shortages, decline
in overall economic output, rising unemployment, low savings and investment levels. These
setbacks were exacerbated by recurrent droughts, absence of Balance of Payments (BOP)
support, the rising fuel prices, among others. The Government’s Land Reform Program that
began in 1997, which has now been largely completed has had its own fare share of
challenges and obstacles that have inhibited its smooth implementation. Most of the
challenges and or shortcomings are, however, being addressed with a view to bringing the
redistributed land to full and viable production.
Relations with the IMF
Zimbabwe’s relations with the IMF over the past five years have not been as they should be,
with some divergence of views with the Fund on some aspects of economic policy and with
the country accumulating arrears to the institution. The Zimbabwean Government has, over
the past 20 months, therefore, been persistently working to address the three main areas of
concern raised by the IMF Management, which are: (a) non-payment of arrears, (b) the need
for implementation of a comprehensive macroeconomic package of measures to stabilize the
economy, (c) cooperation with the IMF in respect of communication and data exchange.
Economic Turnaround Measures Implemented
Payments to the IMF
The Zimbabwe Government has, over the past 20 months, consistently complied with
commitments it made to the IMF on payments of arrears. This saw the country’s payments
being increased from an initial US$1,5 million per quarter, to the current US$9 million per
quarter, which we yet again commit to increase to US$15 million per quarter, with effect
from the fourth quarter of 2005, and to US$40 million per quarter beginning April, 2006. In
order to relieve the burden imposed by Zimbabwe’s arrears on Fund membership, Zimbabwe
made a payment of US$120 million to the General Resources Account (GRA) out of the
country’s own resources. This payment significantly reduced Zimbabwe’s arrears in the GRA
to US$ 51,3 million. This decision was made notwithstanding the non-existence of
international balance of payments support, the current severe drought and food shortages and
the acute shortage of foreign currency for essential imports. The Zimbabwean Government is
committed to ensuring that the remaining outstanding amount under the GRA and the PRGF
accounts are fully repaid by 30 November, 2006.

-2-

The Government has also been and continues to attach great importance on making good its
financial obligations with other international creditors, as reflected in the schedule below and
the Zimbabwe Government commits to maintaining the momentum of these external debt
repayments as an integral part of the turnaround program.
Loan Repayments to International Creditors: A Selected Sample of some of the
Payments made
Creditor
IMF
World Bank
AfDB
DFID
Govt. of Botswana
ZESA Trade Creditors
(Electricity)
NOCZIM (Trade
Creditors (Fuel)
1/

Repayments
2004 Jan-Dec
2005 Jan-Sept
US$ million
US$ million
22.57
134,0
3,0
61
4,3
6,41
1,17
-6,05
-48,2
9,1
80,0

25,5

Growth
%
449%
100%
49%
-----

Commitment to pay by end-September 2005.

Macroeconomic Policies
The Zimbabwean Government has, over the past 20 months, implemented bold
macroeconomic policies to stabilize the economy. Reflecting the positive impact of greater
flexibility in the exchange rate, as well as the supportive structural policies being
implemented, export performance has increased over the period January, 2004 to August,
2005. Export volumes are expected to register a positive growth of 12.5% in 2005, further
strengthening the country’s recovery prospects.
Removal of Subsidies
The Zimbabwean Government has also taken bold steps to eliminate distortions in the
economy, as reflected by the elimination of the following subsidies: (a) lending to productive
sectors at concessional rates was discontinued with effect from 30 June, 2005; (b) a 5%
credit facility to exporters was discontinued with effect from 21 July, 2005; (c) a 25% bonus
scheme that used to be paid to exporters was discontinued with effect from 21 July, 2005;
(d) subsidies paid to gold, cotton and tobacco exports were abolished with effect from 21
July, 2005; (e) exchange rates to exporters and importers were converged, such that
importers no longer impose a burden on the balance sheet of the central bank through any
form of implicit subsidies; and (f) preferential exchange rates for priority Government
payments were abolished such that with effect from May 2005, all Government payments are
effected at the Auction rate.

-3-

Exchange Rate Adjustment
In place of the above supporting schemes which were creating distortions in the economy and
imposing a burden on the Government budget and the balance sheet of the central bank,
Government has allowed the exchange rate to substantially adjust from Z$824/US$ at the
start of 2004, to the current level of Z$24500/US$, representing a cumulative adjustment of
2873%. At current levels, the exchange rate is now in line with recent submissions by
exporters and consistent with the purchasing power parity (PPP) thresholds.
Monetary Policy; Interest Rates and Nominal Anchor
The Zimbabwean Government had fruitful interactions with the various IMF Staff Missions
over the past 20 months and cultivated convergence of minds on the need to allow for interest
rates convergence, as well as maintenance of positive real interest rates. Against this
background, interest rates have been realigned to levels above inflation, except for the
support to the agricultural sector. The highly positive real rates now obtaining in the
economy are expected to restrain inflationary credit expansion, at the same time, promoting
growth in aggregate savings.
Government deliberations with the most recent IMF Mission Staff culminated in a
convergence of minds that the bold decision on the exchange rate front needs to be buttressed
by greater monetary austerity to anchor and thaw down inflation expectations. In this regard,
the central bank is implementing a tighter monetary program, supported by adept liquidity
management and positive real interest rates.
Curtailment of Central Bank Quasi-Fiscal Operations
The Government fully acknowledges concerns raised by IMF Staff regarding the Central
Bank’s quasi-fiscal operations over the past 20 months. These operations were intended to
avert a worsening of the recession, rejuvenate a supply response and engineer a soft landing
of the economy. There was also the conscious realization that parastatals (public enterprises)
and local authorities had become a retardation and a missing link on the structural side of the
economy, so much as to blunt the effectiveness of the supply response to fiscal and monetary
policy interventions. Official intervention in these entities was also aimed at imposing a hard
budget constraint, instilling greater accountability, sound corporate governance and
operational and managerial efficiency.
Satisfactory progress has been registered in re-orienting parastatals and local authorities to an
extent where official support and intervention are no longer necessary. Thus, with immediate
effect, the central bank has scaled down the Parastatals and Local Authorities Reorientation
Program (PLARP) from the original Z$12 trillion, to no more than Z$3 trillion. This policy
position, thus, entails that henceforth, the Central Bank will tail off further disbursements,
and work to manage down the under Z$3 trillion exposure, through an adept sinking fund
framework with the beneficiary parastatals and local authorities.

-4-

Financial Stability
Notwithstanding the transitory problems experienced at a few institutions in the financial
sector during 2004 and the current prevailing difficult operating environment, Zimbabwe’s
banking sector remains generally stable and sound, both in terms of liquidity and solvency.
The disruptions at the few institutions in 2004 did not inflict any systematic problem on the
entirety of the financial sector, given the central bank’s resolute action in dealing with the
few affected institutions, which accounted for less than 10% of the market share. The
Government commits to ensuring that the financial sector remains stable and sound, through
a swift and responsive surveillance and supervision framework.
Fiscal Consolidation
Zimbabwe faced a number of expenditure pressures in 2005, emanating from the ongoing
and ravaging drought, the devastation being caused by the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the need to
realign Zimbabwe’s Electoral Code to the regional SADC code, increase in interest and
pension payments, supporting a supply response in the economy in the face of economic
decline and the need to cool social pressures in an environment of high unemployment. The
difficult economic environment is also undermining the revenue base. Notwithstanding these
setbacks, Government maintained tight control on expenditures to ensure that the fiscal
budget deficit is contained to sustainable levels and that fiscal policy plays a complementary
role in reducing inflation. Reflecting this, the fiscal budget deficit for 2005 is expected to be
no more than 8,6% of GDP, inclusive of the drought-induced budgetary obligations.
This restrained position is being supported by the following measures on the fiscal front:
(a) deferment of salary reviews for the public service to the 2006 budget; (b) adoption of a
strict cash budgeting framework across all line ministries; (c) redeployment of existing public
service staff to new ministries to minimize cost effects of the new arms of Government; (d)
expenditure cuts across line ministries, which has saved Z$3 trillion; (e) carrying out a civil
service audit, as well as restructuring the public service to enhance cost-effectiveness; (f)
employment freeze across all ministries; (g) tighter control on usage of Government assets to
ensure value for money; (h) shifting from a defined benefit to a defined contribution pension
system for Government employees; (i) enhancement of revenue buoyancy, through improved
tax administration and broadening of the tax base, increase in VAT tax from 15 percent to
17.5 percent, broadening the VAT base and other tax measures.
Privatization Program
As part of the economic turnaround, Government has commenced a comprehensive State
Enterprise Restructuring program with the following key features: (a) commercialization of
targeted enterprises; (b) entering into joint ventures with strategic partners, through an
articulate divestiture program; (c) privatization of non-strategic state enterprises; (d) winding
down of price controls; and, (e) targeting subsidies to the most vulnerable groups.

-5-

Economic Outlook and Targets
Real GDP
The above fiscal, monetary and structural policy initiatives are expected to arrest further
GDP decline over the outlook period. On the back of the unanticipated set-backs of the
drought, the cost push effects of rising global fuel prices, the resource constraints arising
from the need to comply with the SADC principles on elections, as well as the lower than
anticipated absorptive capacity of the non-agricultural sectors, the Government estimate a
moderate real GDP decline of -1,5% in 2005. Adherence to a policy regime that will
successfully stabilize the economy, supported by the expected normal rainy season for
2005/2006, are expected to contribute to the country’s overall economic performance
rebounding to a positive growth of 4,5 – 5% in 2006.
Inflation
Reflecting the exogenous effects of the drought, the sharp increase in oil prices, the short-run
knock-on effects of exchange rate depreciation, the supply side constraints attendant in the
economy, as well as high monetary expansion, the country is experiencing a temporary
resurgence in inflation to around 260% by end of 2005. Thereafter, the Government’s
refocused anti-inflation strategy, where monetary targeting has become the nominal anchor,
supported by the austerity measures being implemented on the fiscal and structural sides of
the economy, inflation has been targeted to decline to 50-70% by end of 2006; and to single
digit by March 2007.
The following deliberate efforts currently underway to enhance productivity in agriculture
are also expected to play a supportive role in increasing food production, boosting real GDP
growth and hastening the disinflation process: (a) finalization and implementation of the 99year lease framework; (b) comprehensive redress of any infringements on investments
protected under Bilateral Investment Protection Agreements (BIPAs); (c) irrigation
rehabilitation, which seeks to dilute the country’s dependence on dry-land agricultural
production; (d) creation of the Agricultural Marketing Authority (AMA), whose main
purpose is to guarantee farmers’ viability through better coordination in the marketing and
pricing of produce.
Cooperation with IMF
Underscoring the strategic importance Zimbabwe attaches to cordial engagement with the
Fund, the Government has, over the past 20 months consistently cooperated with the IMF,
which culminated in the meeting between His Excellency the President of Zimbabwe and the
Director of the African Department, Mr. Bio-Tchane in November, 2004. Zimbabwe has also
persistently cooperated with various IMF Staff Missions, which has provided invaluable
interface for policy dialogue and advice. The Zimbabwean Government commits to the IMF
Board that this cordial and cooperative engagement will be persistently upheld, as the
country further consolidates its turnaround program.

-6-

Conclusion
Notwithstanding the difficult current macroeconomic environment, the Zimbabwean
Government is committed to restoring macroeconomic stability within the time frames as set
out in the foregoing. The painful self-imposed road of macroeconomic adjustment the
country and its people is traversing will bear fruit, and the Government of Zimbabwe pleas to
the IMF to support this process of adjustment through allowance for the measures being
implemented to take their full effect within the time frame to December, 2006. A decision to
expel Zimbabwe from the IMF Community would not only be precipitous in terms of
eroding confidence in Zimbabwe and worsen the economic situation, but also in terms of
eternally destroying the Zimbabwean public’s faith in self-imposed macroeconomic
adjustment.
The Government of Zimbabwe remains concerned by the outstanding arrears, especially to
the PRGF Trust and their impact to the rest of the membership. The Government is working
tirelessly to clear these outstanding IMF arrears, and it is the humble appeal of the authorities
that the IMF Board and Management notices the sincere efforts Zimbabwe is making,
notwithstanding the 7 years of no external BOP support and the ongoing severe drought.
Finally, Zimbabwe is making a sincere appeal to the IMF Board to recognize the country’s
efforts in single-handedly resolving what could have been a catastrophic financial crisis, and
grant Zimbabwe the benefit of qualifying for technical assistance. Such technical assistance
is needed to strengthen the resolve in formulating a consistent macroeconomic framework,
designing a nominal anchor, liquidity forecasting, fiscal consolidation, strengthening the
financial sector and other critical areas. Zimbabwe’s experience indicate that denial of
technical assistance should not form part of any remedial measures under the Fund’s
Strengthened Arrears Strategy as such ban on TA does more harm than good in any effort to
reform.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/139
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 4, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with
Zimbabwe
On September 9, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe.1
Background
Zimbabwe’s pace of economic deterioration slowed somewhat in 2004, but appears to have
picked up again in the first half of 2005. Staff estimates that real GDP fell by about 4 percent in
2004, compared with a contraction of 10½ percent the preceding year. Year-on-year inflation
decelerated sharply from a peak of 623 percent in January 2004 to stabilize around
130 percent in early 2005, before surging again to 254 percent in July 2005. Staff projects that
continued difficulties in agriculture, rising inflation, and foreign exchange shortages, particularly
for fuel imports, will cause real GDP to contract by some 7 percent this year. The widening
fiscal deficit and quasi-fiscal activities would contribute to money growth, pushing inflation to
over 400 percent by end-2005.
Monetary policy has been tightened, but not consistently. Overnight interest rates were raised
sharply in early 2004 and lowered subsequently as inflation declined, with real interest rates
maintained at high levels for most of the year (albeit with credit subsidies for selected
borrowers). Interest rates were lowered sharply around the end-2004 and reduced further in
early 2005, despite evidence from monthly data of rising price pressures. In late August, the
overnight rate was raised to the equivalent of 1,373 percent (on a compounded annualized
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.
1

-2basis) from 394 percent in June. The high rates of money growth that have fuelled the tripledigit inflation were mainly due to the sharp increase in the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe’s (RBZ)
quasi-fiscal activities during 2004 and first half of 2005 that have resulted in mounting losses
on its balance sheet. Some of these quasi-fiscal activities have recently been reduced or
discontinued. In particular, the authorities have indicated that all official foreign exchange
transactions are now conducted at a unified tender rate, tobacco and gold price supports have
been discontinued, and producer price support for cotton will be discontinued, effective
January 2006.
Staff projects the fiscal deficit to widen substantially in 2005 to 11½ percent of GDP from
4.7 percent of GDP in 2004 due to higher spending. While much of this increase is due to
higher interest payments, the primary deficit (excluding interest payments) is also projected to
increase by almost 2½ percent of GDP, compared with the outcome in 2004. This expansion is
due to a sharp increase in the government wage bill from 15½ percent of GDP in 2004 to
about 20 percent of GDP in 2005, a level that is very high by international standards, as well
as other spending increases. This higher spending is projected to be only partially offset by
higher revenue, due in part to measures adopted in the August 2005 supplementary budget,
including an increase in the VAT rate to 17½ percent from 15 percent and a broadening of the
VAT base. The authorities also announced public service and pension reforms, with details to
be unveiled in the 2006 budget.
The official exchange rate was effectively devalued in 2004 and allowed to depreciate during
the first eight months of 2005 but the parallel market premium widened. The introduction of
a foreign exchange tender system early in 2004 and the gradual relaxation of surrender
requirements on exporters resulted in a de facto depreciation of the official rate from
Z$824/US$ at end-2003 to about Z$6,100/US$ by end-May 2005. The tender rate was allowed
to depreciate further to some Z$24,500/US$ by early September 2005. Nevertheless the
parallel market premium which had narrowed markedly in the first quarter of 2004, widened
sharply from 45 percent in January 2005 to about 100 percent by early September 2005. The
exchange rate regime remains highly restricted. The proportion of bids met at the foreign
exchange tender has declined to about 10 percent and has been reflected in acute shortages
of basic goods, particularly fuel and food.
Zimbabwe’s financial system has shown remarkable resilience to the very difficult
macroeconomic environment. Despite the turmoil in 2004 from the collapse of a number of
insolvent institutions, the stability of the banking system was not threatened. With the exit of
weak institutions, the sector is now largely populated by banks with high capital adequacy
ratios, little foreign exchange risk, and very short-term maturities for both assets and liabilities
to cope with fluctuating interest rates. The provision of full powers for banking supervision to
the RBZ was instrumental in ensuring timely intervention in problem banks, although the
Banking Act was recently amended to require the Governor of the RBZ to consult with the
Minister of Finance in registering and intervening in troubled banks.
Progress has been limited on structural reforms. The authorities have embarked on a reform
of public enterprises, but noted the difficulties with imposing hard budget constraints on
these enterprises. They underscored their recent decision to privatize non-strategic public
enterprises and to enter into joint ventures. The authorities also indicated their intention to

-3remove price controls. On land reform, the private sector expressed concerns that the recent
constitutional amendment and the lack of both transferability and protection from cancellation
of the 99-year leases would adversely affect economic activity.
Zimbabwe’s social situation remains difficult. According to the United Nations Special Envoy’s
report “Operation Restore Order”, issued in late July, the government’s recent drive to remove
unauthorized dwellings and structures, has left some 700,000 people across the country either
homeless, or without any source of livelihood, or both, and a further 2.4 million people
indirectly affected in varying degrees. Food security is also an urgent concern given the
drought and the slow progress in mobilizing food assistance.
Zimbabwe’s recent payments performance to the IMF compares favorably with its past
payments record. On August 29, Zimbabwe paid the Fund US$120 million (SDR 82 million) to
settle its arrears to the General Resource Account (GRA). With this payment, Zimbabwe’s total
arrears to the Fund now stand at SDR 119 million (about US$175 million). Of this amount,
arrears to the GRA are SDR 37 million (about US$54 million) and those to the PRGF Trust are
SDR 82 million (about US$121 million).
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors expressed deep concern over the continued sharp economic and social
decline in Zimbabwe, with prospects of continued triple-digit inflation, further output declines,
and increased poverty. Food security is an urgent issue, given the sharp fall in agricultural
production. Directors noted that stagnant export earnings and the necessary rise in food
imports will squeeze non-food imports, increasing Zimbabwe’s vulnerability to external
shocks. In addition, the substantial humanitarian and economic consequences of “Operation
Restore Order” pose further downside risks to the outlook. Directors observed that without a
bold change in policy direction, the economic outlook will remain bleak, with particularly
detrimental effects on the poorest segments of the population.
Directors urged the authorities to implement a comprehensive package of macroeconomic
policies and structural reform to lay the basis for sustained growth, low inflation, and external
viability. While welcoming recent measures, they noted that current policies fall short of what is
needed to address the deteriorating economic situation. There is a significant risk that unless
strong macroeconomic policies are implemented urgently, economic conditions—particularly
inflation—will deteriorate even further. Directors therefore called for urgent implementation of
a comprehensive package comprising several mutually reinforcing actions. These should
include: strong fiscal adjustment; full liberalization of the exchange rate regime; adoption of
a strong monetary anchor; elimination of all quasi-fiscal activity by the Reserve Bank of
Zimbabwe (RBZ) and the absorption of RBZ losses by the budget; and fundamental structural
reform, including improvements in governance. Strengthening relations with the international
community and providing adequate social safety nets and food security for vulnerable groups,
particularly those affected by “Operation Restore Order” and HIV/AIDS, are critical priorities
that will also contribute to progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. A number of
Directors suggested that the Fund could consider resuming technical assistance to Zimbabwe
to facilitate strengthening of policies and co-operation with the Fund.

-4Directors stressed that decisive fiscal adjustment is essential in the near term. While regretting
the substantial deterioration in the fiscal position in 2005, Directors stressed that a sharp fiscal
tightening will be required in the 2006 budget. Given the high spending ratio, the bulk of the
adjustment will need to come from spending cuts, especially in the wage bill and subsidy and
transfer payments. In this context, Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to undertake
public service and pension reforms, which should be aimed at cutting the wage bill while
improving public service delivery. Directors noted that cash management could also be
improved.
Directors urged the authorities to move towards full liberalization of the exchange rate regime
for current account transactions. They welcomed the recent unification and increased flexibility
of the tender rate, but noted that, despite the recent depreciation, the tender rate remains
overvalued, as indicated by the substantial parallel market premium. Exchange controls on
current payments and all surrender requirements should be eliminated, and the determination
of the exchange rate left to the market in conjunction with establishment of a strong, credible
monetary anchor. Directors noted that Zimbabwe continues to maintain exchange restrictions
and multiple currency practices that have not been approved by the Fund under Article VIII,
Section 2 (a) and 3. They urged Zimbabwe to eliminate these exchange restrictions and
multiple currency practices as soon as possible.
Directors welcomed the recent tightening of monetary policy, and noted that a further
sustained tightening along with the establishment of a monetary anchor is urgently needed to
bring inflation under control. Given the likely reduction in the demand for real money balances,
reserve money growth will need to be brought down sharply to keep broad money growth in
2005-06 well below the inflation target. The RBZ should shift to a broad money anchor with
reserve money as the operational target.
Directors welcomed the recent announcements by the RBZ to discontinue cotton, tobacco, and
gold subsidies, which were helping to fuel money growth and inflation. To lower money
creation durably and help increase transparency, Directors suggested that the losses of the
RBZ need to be absorbed by the budget, with fiscal measures taken, as noted above, to offset
these costs. Directors cautioned against the issuance of bonds that are indexed to inflation
given the prospect for continued high inflation and the potentially unsustainable public
debt burden. They also urged the authorities to delay the operation of the Infrastructure
Development Bank of Zimbabwe pending further review, given the risk of new quasi-fiscal
activity and potential contingent public liabilities.
Directors commended the measures taken by the RBZ to strengthen banking supervision and
standards of governance and risk management in the financial sector. They underlined the
importance of ensuring that supervisors remain empowered to take timely action to address
identified weak institutions, and in this context they regretted the recent amendment to the
Banking Act requiring the RBZ to consult with the Minister of Finance before granting or
withdrawing the licenses of financial institutions. Directors recommended that, over time, the
RBZ should lower the very high statutory reserve requirements, which impede the financial
sector’s ability to effectively intermediate saving and investment to support economic growth.

-5Directors stressed that fundamental structural reforms will be essential for sustaining
macroeconomic stability and achieving durable growth over the medium-term. They urged the
authorities to initiate action without delay in a number of areas, including: deregulation to
increase market forces in the economy; public enterprise reform; fiscal reforms and particularly
civil service reform to achieve a sustainable fiscal position; land and agricultural reform; and
improvements in governance to increase investor confidence, reduce corruption, and
encourage private business activity. While welcoming the ongoing public enterprise reforms,
Directors emphasized that these should be geared to ensuring that a hard budget constraint is
imposed on enterprises—including the option to wind down nonviable entities—and that the
transparency of the restructuring process should be increased. On land reform, Directors
urged steps to restore orderly conditions in the agricultural sector, including stronger security
of land tenure and transferability, and the provision of extension services to farmers.
Directors agreed that there is considerable scope for improving the provision of data for
surveillance purposes, particularly on the balance of payments, international reserves, and
external debt data as well as comprehensive data on general government, consolidated public
debt, public enterprises, and the reconciliation of the fiscal and monetary accounts.
Directors called for strengthened cooperation with the Fund, including a satisfactory track
record on payments, and timely disclosure of information. In this context, they welcomed
Zimbabwe’s recent payment to the Fund, which has substantially reduced arrears. A number
of Directors sought clarification regarding the source of the funds for this payment. The
Executive Board urged the authorities to resolve Zimbabwe’s outstanding overdue financial
obligations to the Fund, and decided to give Zimbabwe more time to demonstrate its
commitment to improving cooperation with the Fund before considering a recommendation to
the Board of Governors with respect to the Managing Director’s complaint for Zimbabwe’s
compulsory withdrawal from the Fund. It was agreed that the Board will review Zimbabwe’s
overdue financial obligations and the Managing Director’s complaint again in six months.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-6-

Zimbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002-2005

GDP
Real GDP (market prices; percentage change)
Savings and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings (excluding grants)
Gross investment
Prices and interest rates (percent)
Consumer price inflation (annual average)
Consumer price inflation (end of period)
91-day treasury bills (simple annual, end of period)
Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Of which: interest on central government debt
Overall balance, (excluding grants, including interest arrears)
Primary balance, excluding grants
Overall balance, (including grants, excluding interest arrears)
Domestic financing (including privatization)
External financing
Combined government and RBZ balance 1/

2002

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

-4.4

-10.4

-4.2

-7.2

0.8
1.5

-1.2
2.0

-2.1
5.1

-4.8
4.9

133.2 365.0 350.0 219.2
198.9 598.7 132.7 404.6
26.6 60.7 105.0 186.1
17.9
20.7
2.9
-2.8
0.1
-2.2
2.3
-0.1
...

24.9
25.3
1.3
-0.4
0.9
-0.2
0.2
0.0
...

33.9
41.0
5.5
-7.1
-1.7
-4.7
4.7
0.0
-24.4

36.7
51.0
10.1
-14.2
-4.1
-11.6
11.6
0.0
-30.6

Money and credit (percent change; end of period)
Broad money (M3)
Domestic credit
Of which: real credit to the private sector
Velocity (M3) 2/
Reserve money (percent change; end of period)

164.8 413.5 222.6 275.8
132.7 426.4 180.6 195.6
-6.6 -10.6
1.5 -40.5
3.4
4.1
2.9
3.6
171.2 394.8 217.6 258.8

External trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

-17.6
-0.5
1.4

-19.3
-19.9
-5.9

-9.0
-5.8
-6.6

-7.3
-11.9
-7.9

1.8
-1.8
-0.2
-0.7
-2.6

1.7
-1.8
-0.3
-3.1
-4.6

1.7
-2.0
-0.4
-7.2
-5.7

1.6
-1.9
-0.5
-9.7
-7.5

Balance of payments (billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP at the official exchange rate) 3/
(In percent of GDP at world prices) 4/

-7-

Overall balance

Zimbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002-2005
-0.5

Official reserves (gold valued at market price)
Usable reserves (US$ millions, end of period) 5/
(months of imports of goods and services)
(percent of reserve money)

15.1
0.1
10.2

-0.5

-0.2

-0.2

15.6
0.1
1.8

24.8
0.1
5.3

24.8
0.2
11.7

Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Combines (i) the central government overall balance, including grants and excluding interest
arrears, and (ii) the RBZ's net losses, including from subsidies, exchange rate losses, and net interest
expense.
2/ Velocity is calculated using end-period stock of money, and real GDP valued at end-period prices.
3/ Foreign currency units are converted into Zimbabwean dollars at the official exchange rate.
4/ GDP at world prices using real GDP growth and trading partner countries' inflation (base year is 1996).
5/ These data are not consistent with data on the RBZ's inflows and outflows of foreign exchange.

