July 2008
IMF Country Report No. 08/231

© 2008 International Monetary Fund

Islamic Republic of Mauritania: 2008 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under
the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility—Staff
Report; Staff Supplement; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2008 Article IV
consultation with the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and the third review under the three-year
arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, the following documents have been
released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under the Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, prepared by a staff team of
the IMF, following discussions that ended on March 20, 2008, with the officials of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
May 5, 2008. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A staff supplement on the joint IMF/World Bank debt sustainability analysis.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its May 19, 2008, discussion of the staff report on issues
related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
2008 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under the Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Amor Tahari and Anthony R. Boote
May 5, 2008



Discussions were held in Nouakchott from March 9–20, 2008. The mission met with the President, the
Prime Minister, the Governor of the Central Bank of Mauritania, the Ministers of Economy and Finance,
Petroleum and Mining, Agriculture and Livestock, Commerce and Industry, the National Delegate for
private investment, and development partners.



The staff team comprised Messrs. Guillaume (head), Saadi Sedik (MCD), Berndt (PDR), and Michel
(FAD), and Mses. Hijazi and Vimond (MCD). Mr. Tahari (MCD) joined the mission for policy
discussions. Mr. Frécaut (MCM) overlapped and liaised with the mission to provide assistance on bank
restructuring. The mission was assisted by the resident representative in Mauritania, Mr. Carre. Mr. Sidi
Bouna (OED) also participated in the mission.



At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on June 21, 2006, Executive Directors noted that
Mauritania should focus on consolidating macroeconomic stability and strengthening the external position
through prudent budgetary use of new oil revenue. Since then, the authorities have achieved some
macroeconomic stability and engaged in a comprehensive reform agenda. They are now facing new
challenges with a possible food access crisis and diminished oil production prospects in the next few
years.



Mauritania accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2 (a), 3, and 4 in 1999. The exchange rate is
now de facto classified as a managed float with no pre-announced path, by contrast to a peg to the U.S.
dollar during the last Article IV consultation.



Despite shortcomings in national accounts, fiscal and balance of payments statistics, data provision to the
Fund is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes.



The PRGF arrangement covering October 2006–September 2009, in an amount of SDR 16.1 million
(25 percent of quota), was approved on December 18, 2006. Completion of this review would enable
Mauritania to request a disbursement in an amount equivalent to SDR 1.93 million. In the attached letter
(Attachment I), the authorities inform the Managing Director of the progress in implementing the PRGFsupported program.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................4
II. Recent Developments............................................................................................................5
III. Policy Discussions ...............................................................................................................6
A. Maintaining Macroeconomic Stability......................................................................6
B. Enhancing Competitiveness and Accelerating Growth.............................................8
C. Consolidating the Financial Sector .........................................................................10
IV. Program Implementation ...................................................................................................14
A. Macroeconomic Outlook for 2008..........................................................................14
B. Fiscal Policy and Reforms.......................................................................................14
C. Monetary Policies and Financial Sector Reforms ...................................................18
D. External Sector........................................................................................................18
E. Other Issues .............................................................................................................18
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................19
Boxes
1. Assessment of the Real Effective Exchange Rate .................................................................9
2. Enhancing Competitiveness.................................................................................................11
3. Banking Sector Reforms ......................................................................................................13
4. Mauritania’s Response to the Food Access Crisis...............................................................15
Figures
1. Real Sector Developments...................................................................................................21
2. Monetary Policy Developments...........................................................................................22
3. Fiscal Developments............................................................................................................23
4. External Sector Developments.............................................................................................24
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003–13 .......................................................25
2. Central Government Operations, 2006–13 ..........................................................................26
3. Balance of Payments, 2006–13............................................................................................28
4. Monetary Situation, 2003–08...............................................................................................29
5. Millenium Development Goals, 1990–2015........................................................................30
6. Reviews and Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangements, 2006–09.............................31
Attachments
I. Letter of Intent ......................................................................................................................32
II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding.........................................................................40
Annexes
I. Relations with the Fund........................................................................................................48
II. Relations with the World Bank ...........................................................................................53
III. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................59

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
Mauritania’s macroeconomic performance was satisfactory, despite a steeper-than-expected
decline in oil production reflecting persistent technical problems, and difficult external
environment. All end-December 2007 quantitative and structural performance criteria and
benchmarks were met. The real non-oil GDP growth is estimated to have increased to 5.9 percent
in 2007, driven by a rebound in agriculture and new mining projects. Sound macroeconomic
policies contributed to a decline in inflation despite an acceleration in the second half of 2007
resulting from higher food and oil import prices. The current account deficit deteriorated,
reflecting higher food prices and lower oil exports. Gross international reserves position
strengthened to 1.9 months of imports of goods and services at end-December 2007. The budget
deficit was held within the limits set in the program.
Views of the authorities
The government is strongly committed to the reform program supported by the PRGF
arrangement, while underlining the need to take measures to avoid a potential food access crisis,
which could cause social and political unrest if not addressed.
The authorities are aware of the need to accelerate economic growth to raise the standard of
living of Mauritanians, in the context of limited oil revenue prospects for the next few years. To
this end, the government intends to promote private sector development by improving the
business climate, fostering investment, and strengthening the competitiveness of the economy.
Accordingly, they plan to make the tax framework more favorable to investment, facilitate
access to credit by strengthening commercial banks, develop basic infrastructures, and enhance
governance and the effectiveness of the judicial system.
Staff recommendations
The authorities’ response to the potential food access crisis is comprehensive, but they should
monitor closely the situation.
Reducing poverty will require the implementation of policies to enhance growth and encourage
private sector investment, including maintaining macroeconomic stability and enhancing
competitiveness. Measures to consolidate banks and expand the financial sector should be
implemented, including the restructuring of banks’ loan portfolio. The authorities should also
urgently finalize and implement a restructuring strategy for key public enterprises.

4
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The democratization process that was initiated by transition authorities has been
successful. Steps toward democracy included a referendum on constitutional amendments in
June 2006, followed by parliamentary elections in November 2006, and culminating in the
election of Sidi Mohamed Ould Cheikh Abdallahi as president in March 2007. International
observers expressed satisfaction with the transparency and fairness of the elections. The new
president appointed Zeine Ould Zeidane, a former central bank governor, as prime minister
and a new government was formed in April 2007.
2.
Poverty incidence remains high at about 47 percent, with 75 percent of the poor
living in rural areas.1 Real GDP growth averaged 4.7 percent in the period 2001–07, which
translated into an average per capita real GDP growth of 2.2 percent. However, despite
progress over the past few years, Mauritania ranked 137 out of 177 countries according to the
Human Development Index in 2007. The probable hike in inflation caused by high
international food and fuel prices is expected to adversely affect poor households and could
increase the share of population living below the poverty line.
3.
Medium-term oil production perspectives have been substantially revised
downward since the last Article IV consultation. This reflects both technical difficulties
encountered in Chinguetti, the first offshore field that went into production in early 2006, and
uncertainties on the timing of the beginning of the exploitation of the Tevet and Tiof
oilfields, which is likely to be delayed until 2012. Oil production averaged 36,000 barrels a
day in 2006 and 15,000 in 2007, far below the original projections of 59,000 barrels per day
for 2006 and 63,000 for 2007.

ov
-0
6
Ja
n07
M
ar
-0
7
M
ay
-0
7
Ju
l-0
7
Se
p07
N
ov
-0
7
Ja
n08

N

6

06

p-

Se

06

l-0

Ju

ar

Figures are based on a 2004 household survey.

ay
-

M

1

M

-0
6

4.
The authorities have engaged in a comprehensive reform agenda to stimulate
non-oil growth and reduce poverty in the context of the PRGF-supported program. In
particular, they intend to improve
70000
infrastructure, enhance competitiveness,
Oil production in barrels per day
60000
(average)
promote private sector development, improve
50000
fiscal management, fight corruption, maintain
40000
macroeconomic stability, and increase
30000
government’s efficiency in delivering public
20000
services. To support their development plan,
10000
the authorities successfully organized a
0
consultative group meeting in Paris in
December 2007, where they received financial
pledges amounting to $2.1 billion.

5
5.
The president and the prime minister reiterated the government’s strong
commitment to the reform program supported by the PRGF arrangement, while
underlining the need to take measures to avoid a potential food access crisis, which could
cause social and political unrest if it remained unaddressed.
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
6.
Notwithstanding a steeper-than-expected decline in oil revenue, macroeconomic
developments remain broadly in line with program objectives (Table 1). Real GDP
growth is estimated at 1 percent in 2007, compared to 11.4 percent in 2006, despite an
increase in real non-oil GDP growth from 4.1 percent in 2006 to 5.9 percent in 2007 driven
by a rebound in agriculture and new mining projects. The current account deficit increased
from 1.3 percent of GDP in 2006 to 11.4 percent in 2007, reflecting higher food prices and
lower oil exports. Gross international reserves amounted to $208.8 million (equivalent to
about 1.9 months of imports of goods and services) at end-December 2007, as the negative
impact of a shortening of oil import credit was partly compensated by higher repatriation of
profits from the public iron company SNIM.
7.
The partial pass-through of increases in international food and petroleum prices
led to large-scale demonstrations in November 2007. In response, the authorities adopted
additional fiscal measures in the 2008 budget to alleviate the social impact of price increases
while maintaining the non-oil fiscal balance unchanged.2 By end-2007, year-on-year inflation
had picked up from 5.9 percent in September to 7.4 percent in December, but was still lower
than the 7.9 percent program estimate for 2007, and the 8.9 percent realized in 2006.
8.
All the quantitative performance criteria at end-December 2007 were met
(Attachment I, Table 1). In particular, the basic—excluding foreign-financed spending—
non-oil fiscal deficit reached 2.5 percent of non-oil GDP (compared to 2.9 percent envisaged
under the program), reflecting higher-than-expected tax revenues as a result of more efficient
tax collection. Both quantitative indicative targets were also met. First, the stock of
outstanding payments at the treasury was cleared due to improved monitoring of the cash
position, and computerization and deconcentration of the expenditure process; second,
poverty related spending also exceeded the program target as pro-poor spending accelerated
in the second half after some initial difficulties in implementing poverty reduction programs
in the first half of the year.
9.
The authorities have maintained a prudent monetary policy stance (Table 4).
The Central Bank of Mauritania (BCM) absorbed commercial banks’ excess liquidity
through the issuance of treasury bills in coordination with the ministry of finance. Treasury
bills rates remained relatively stable in the 10–11 percent range and the discount rate was
unchanged at 12 percent. The exchange rate vis-à-vis the dollar appreciated from UM/$268.6
2

See the supplement to the Letter of Intent (Country Report No. 07/375).

6
at end-2006 to UM/$252 at end-2007, as a result of increased confidence in the domestic
currency and occasional BCM’s intervention to limit the inflationary impact of the Euro
appreciation against the dollar. The parallel market premiums have remained insignificant
since February 2007.
10.
Structural performance criterion and benchmarks were also met (Attachment I,
Table 2). VAT and custom duties exemptions were eliminated on a list of essential goods; a
centralized taxpayer database covering the main cities, Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, was
introduced in December; and the BCM addressed all external audit qualifications on its 2006
financial statements within its immediate control.3 Transparency in the oil sector was further
enhanced by the finalization of the audit of the 2006 financial statements of the national
hydrocarbon company (SMH) and the publication of oil production sharing contracts. A new
mining code setting a clear regulatory and fiscal regime that is favorable to investors was
transmitted to parliament.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
11.
While medium-term prospects are favorable with (a) the expected disbursements
of financial pledges made during the recent consultative group meeting; (b) the projected
exploitation of new oil—and potentially gas—fields; and (c) progress made in maintaining
macroeconomic stability, the Mauritanian economy will remain vulnerable in the next
few years because of limited oil revenue prospects, and increasing inflationary
pressures resulting from high international food and fuel prices. In this context, and
given the pressing need to reduce poverty, policy discussions centered on: (a) maintaining
macroeconomic stability; (b) enhancing competitiveness and accelerating growth; and
(c) consolidating the financial sector.
A. Maintaining Macroeconomic Stability
12.
Mauritania has reached some macroeconomic stability in the last couple of
years. In particular, the authorities have (a) contained the non-oil primary deficit through
enhancing revenue collection and prioritizing spending, notably via the adoption of a
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF); (b) accumulated some oil revenue in the oil
fund as a liquidity buffer; (c) reduced inflation to single digit levels; (d) introduced a flexible
exchange rate policy; and (e) strengthened the level of official reserves.
13.
Government policy is geared toward maintaining macroeconomic stability by
continuing prudent and coordinated fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies. Real
non-oil GDP growth is projected to be sustained at 6.2 percent per year on average over
2008–12, reflecting the step-up in public investment related to consultative group and an
3

During the upcoming financial audit of the BCM, auditors are expected to confirm that they are satisfied with
the measures taken by the BCM.

7
increase in mining production capacity. With oil production expected to rebound with the
exploitation of new fields in 2012, real GDP growth is projected to average 7.1 percent per
year in the medium term, though it would remain at 5.9 percent in the next four years. After a
peak in 2008 resulting from high international food and fuel prices, inflation is projected to
decline gradually to 5 percent by 2012. The level of international reserves should strengthen
to about 3.5 months of imports of goods and services by 2011.
14.
With limited oil revenue prospects in the immediate period ahead, the
government will continue to pursue cautious fiscal policy in the medium term despite
some small relaxation of the fiscal stance in 2008 in response to escalating fuel and food
prices. The basic non-oil fiscal deficit is projected to remain in the range of 1.7–2.2 percent
of non-oil GDP in 2009–13. This prudent fiscal stance is key to the authorities’ plan to foster
externally financed investment by improving the credibility of their policies and investors’
confidence.
•

On the revenue side, the authorities will take measures to improve domestic
taxation, aiming at broadening the tax base, promoting investments, and
reducing the share of the informal sector. However, total non-oil revenue should
remain broadly stable, as the increase in tax revenue will be offset by a decline in
nontax revenue, reflecting notably a decrease of fishing exploitation rights paid by the
European Union. Grants are expected to hover around 3 percent of non-oil GDP
between 2008 and 2012 pushed up by disbursement of pledges from donors at the
December 2007 consultative group meeting.

•

On the expenditure side, the government will continue to increase capital and
poverty reducing expenditures and contain current expenditures. Capital
expenditures should increase gradually to 11 percent of non-oil GDP by 2012,
reflecting disbursements from pledges made during the consultative group meeting
and an increase in domestically financed investment that results from better
expenditure prioritization. Poverty reducing expenditures will benefit from high
investment spending and will double between 2008 and 2013 in nominal terms. The
implementation of the civil service reform, conducted with the assistance of the
World Bank, will be key to modernize public administration and control the wage
bill, which is expected to decline slightly between 2008 and 2013 as a percent of
non-oil GDP.

15.
The authorities will continue to implement a monetary policy consistent with
their macroeconomic stabilization objectives in the context of a flexible exchange rate.
Money supply should increase in line with non-oil GDP growth over the medium term.
Market-determination of the exchange rate, with central bank intervention aimed at
achieving its international reserve objective, limiting inflation, and smoothing daily
exchange rate volatility, is consistent with a de facto classification of the exchange rate
as a managed float, rather than a peg as indicated in the last Article IV consultation.

8
16.
Mauritania’s exchange rate is currently in line with fundamentals (Box 1).
Whilst the analysis suffers from the absence of reliable long-term time series, results from
the implementation of the CGER-type methodologies indicate that misalignment estimates lie
within the range of statistical error.4 These results are confirmed by the absence of a
significant premium on the parallel exchange rate market since the introduction of the foreign
exchange market auctions in January 2007.
17.
Notwithstanding the impact of food and oil price increases, the medium-term
external outlook is positive. The hitherto dependence on fishing and iron as the predominant
sources of export receipts to finance Mauritania’s balance of payment has been eased by
increased receipts from aid, oil, copper, and gold exports since 2006–07. While the current
account deficit has been fully financed by aid and FDI since 2006, it remains very volatile
due to Mauritania’s great dependence on imported essential goods such as food.
18.
The results of the debt sustainability analysis indicate that Mauritania’s risk of
external debt distress remains moderate (Appendix IV). This assessment is based on
relatively conservative assumption on the volume of prospective oil exports, reasonable
non-oil growth assumption, and a positive outcome of current negotiations of debt in arrears,5
which had not been treated under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative in
2006. These arrears constitute about half of Mauritania’s external debt. Stress tests indicate,
however, that Mauritania remains somewhat vulnerable to adverse shocks, notably to the risk
of lower-than-projected growth of GDP and exports, including of oil. However, there is a
significant upward risk resulting from the expected materialization of ongoing discussions
with large foreign investors, which is yet to be quantified. In the absence of a resolution of
the arrears, the NPV of external debt would exceed all thresholds.
B. Enhancing Competitiveness and Accelerating Growth
19.
Medium-term growth prospects are likely to be enhanced by higher public and
private investment levels. Following the consultative group meeting organized in December
2007 where donors pledged $2.1 billion, several financing agreements have already been
signed. Foreign investors, particularly from Gulf countries, have expressed their intention to
start investing in banks, tourism, construction, mining, transport, fisheries, and agriculture.
To support further growth, the government intends to promote the development of the private
sector by improving the business climate, fostering investment, and strengthening the
competitiveness of the economy.

4

Due to uncertainties in Mauritanian historic data, the analysis is based on estimated relationships from other
cross-country studies (“Methodology for CGER Exchange Rate Assessments; November 2006”).

5

The authorities have sent letters to Kuwait and Libya proposing the cancellation or rescheduling of debt under
the enhanced HIPC initiative.

9

Box 1. Assessment of the Real Effective Exchange Rate
There are no signs of exchange rate misalignment. Parallel market premiums are insignificant and results
from the CGER-type analyses indicate that the Mauritanian real exchange rate is in line with fundamentals.1
Over the course of 2007, Mauritania’s real effective exchange
rate has depreciated by about 4 percent, mainly as a result of a
nominal depreciation. This development reversed a trend of real
appreciation since 2004 caused by increases in relative prices in the
course of 2004 and 2006. The recent effective nominal depreciation
was mainly due to a depreciation against the Euro, which
denominates more than half of Mauritania’s trade, outweighing the
nominal appreciation against the U.S. dollar.

Effective exchange rates for Mauritania
(2000=100)
110
105
100

Real effective
exchange rate

95
90
85
80
75

•

•

1

The external sustainability (ES) approach provides estimates
of the real exchange rate adjustment needed to stabilize the net
foreign assets to GDP ratio at its 2006 level. The ES approach
indicates that the exchange rate is at its equilibrium; and
The equilibrium real exchange rate (ERER) approach
estimates directly an equilibrium real exchange rate for
Mauritania as a function of fundamentals. The exchange rate
adjustment needed to restore equilibrium over the medium term
is calculated as the difference between the estimated equilibrium
real exchange rate and its current value. The ERER approach
suggests that the exchange rate is overvalued by about 2 percent.

Jan-2007

Jan-2006

Jan-2005

Jan-2004

Jan-2003

Jan-2002

Jan-2001

Jan-2000

240
Central bank rate
260
280
300
320
Parallel market
t

340

1/2/2008

7/2/2007

1/2/2007

7/3/2006

1/2/2006

7/2/2005

360
1/2/2005

The macroeconomic balance (MB) approach calculates the real
exchange rate adjustment needed to eliminate the difference
between current account balance projected over the medium
term and an estimated equilibrium current account balance, or
“CA norm”. The MB shows that the exchange rate is overvalued
by about 10 percent;

Official and parallel market exchange rate
UM/USD

7/1/2004

•

Nominal effective
exchange rate

65

1/4/2004

Due to uncertainties on Mauritanian historic data, assessments of
the real exchange rate were based on estimated relationships
between fundamentals and the real exchange rate from other
cross-country studies. These analyses suggest that the current level
of the Mauritanian real effective exchange rate lie within the margins
of statistical error. The results presented in the chart rely on three
approaches:

70

8/3/2003

The central bank has successfully moved toward a more flexible
exchange rate regime in mid-2007, with parallel market
premiums virtually disappearing since end-2006. After having
kept the exchange rate stable for more than 18 months, since April
2007 the central bank has started to gradually allow the Mauritanian
ouguiya to appreciate against the U.S. dollar. The comovement of the
parallel and market rates is an indication of the successful
implementation of the new more flexible regime.

Misalignment as percentage deviation from estimated equilibrium,
overvaluation (+), undervaluation (-)
14
12

MB, 10.70

10

Average
misalignment,
4.27

8
6
4
2
0

ERER, 2.11
ES, -0.01

-2

These methodologies are presented in “Methodology for CGER Exchange Rate Assessments; November
2006”: www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2006/110806.pdf.

10
20.
However, competitiveness indicators suggest that Mauritania needs to accelerate
structural reforms to improve the investment climate and promote growth (Box 2).6 The
findings of various studies and surveys of the business environment in Mauritania overlap
with regard to constraints to competitiveness, and suggest several areas in need of
improvement, including access and cost of bank financing, tax regulations and burden,
infrastructure (mainly electricity), customs and trade regulations, delays in opening a
business, and labor market regulations. Moreover, real GDP growth has so far mainly been
driven by the tertiary sector and extractive industries (including oil and mining), while other
industries and agriculture have had a smaller contribution.
21.
In response, and with the assistance of the World Bank and other development
partners and in collaboration with the private sector, the authorities are outlining a
strategy to enhance competitiveness and enhance private sector’s growth potential
(Box 2 concluded). In particular, they are focusing on addressing the physical, structural,
and institutional impediments to economic diversification, and developing sectors with a
potential for high value-added and job creation such as agriculture, livestock, fishing, and
mining.
C. Consolidating the Financial Sector
22.
The Mauritanian financial sector, while not exhibiting any sign of immediate
distress, is small and does not support economic development according to the latest
Financial Stability Assessment Program (FSAP) evaluation. Banks, which dominate the
financial sector, remain generally vulnerable and suffer from deficiencies in transparency
standards, lack of competition, poor governance, and weak infrastructure. This significantly
constrains access to credit, considered as one of the main impediments to competitiveness
and growth. Without raising immediate stability concerns, the recently finalized 2005
commercial banks audits, which complied with international standards, confirmed the weak
situation of the banking system.7
23.
Along the lines of the FSAP recommendations, the Mauritanian authorities have
been undertaking some critical reforms (Box 3). The authorities have upgraded the legal
framework by adopting a new banking law. They have also aimed at gradually enhancing
competition by allowing the entry of two foreign banks, which have become fully
operational, and granting a license to a third foreign bank. The adoption of implementation
regulations for the new banking law will pave the way for further strengthening of the
financial sector, including through the opening up of existing banks to foreign capital and
possible the entry of additional foreign banks. The authorities have also started implementing

6

See the 2007 World Bank’s Investment Climate Assessment for Mauritania.

7

Already one bank has been put under the administrative control of the central bank.

11

Box 2. Enhancing Competitiveness
Out of 178 countries, Mauritania ranks 157 in
the 2008 World Bank’s Doing Business Survey…

Mauritania
Ease of Doing Business Indicators

Ease of Doing Business Rank
200
180
160

Registering Property
2008

Enforcing Contracts

2007

Getting Credit

131

129

125

140
120

176

166

162

158

157

… highlighting taxation and difficulties in starting
a business as the worst doing business indicators.

Employing Workers

88

100
80

Protecting Investors
Dealing with Licenses

60
40

Closing a Business
Trading Across Borders

20
0

Starting a Business

u

a

Overall Rank

G

aBi

ss
a

ne

l

ui

ga

i
al

ne

M

Se

ia

a
bi

r it
an
au

am

0

50

100

150

200

G

ui

ne

M

M

G

ria
ge

si
ni

Al

Tu

or
oc
co

a

Paying Taxes

Source: World Bank Doing Business 2008.

Source: World Bank Doing Business 2008.

Access and cost of financing seems to be a major
constraint to manufacturing activity according to
World Bank’s 2007 Investment Climate.

The 2007 World Bank’s Logistics Performance
shows infrastructure to be a main obstacle to
trade.

The top six constraints cited by manufacturing firms in
Mauritania
60

Mauritania
Logistics Performance Indicators

51.2

50

Domestic logistics costs

43.5

40

Tracking and tracing

34.3

33.8

33.7

31.7

30

Logistics competence
Customs

20

Timeliness

10

International shipments

Source: World Bank Investment Climate Assessment for Mauritania 2007.

Tax rates

Inadequately
educated
workforce

Custom s
and trade
regulations

Practices of
inform al
sector
com petitors

E lectricity

Access and
cost of
financing

0

Infrastructure
0

20

40

60

Source: World Bank Logistics Performance Index. 2007

80

100

120

12

Box 2. Enhancing Competitiveness (concluded)
With the support of their development partners, including the World Bank, the authorities have identified a few
key structural reforms to improve the weak investment climate in Mauritania, including:
A.

Financial sector reforms to facilitate access to credit particularly by:
- Dealing with weak banks and the restructuring of nonperforming loan portfolios;
- Finalizing the implementing decrees for the new banking law;
- Enforcing prudential norms;
- Strengthening on-site supervision of banks and internal control mechanisms;
- Implementing transparent accounting practices; and
- Ensuring transition to IFRS.

B.

Tax reforms policy and administration with a view to:
- Improving the effectiveness of the VAT refund mechanism;
- Increasing the threshold for VAT and account-based income tax;
- Developing an intermediate tax regime to lighten tax administration for small and medium
enterprises;
- Preparing a tax reform plan aimed at simplifying the direct taxation system and encouraging
investment; and
- Modernizing custom and tax administration.

C.

The restructuring of energy and transport sectors through:
- Improving the management and control of public enterprises and adopting performance contracts;
- Implementing a restructuring strategy for the electricity company to reduce cost, foster competition in
the production of electricity, and diversify sources of energy;
- Extending transportation services to rural and remote areas;
- Developing port infrastructure; and
- Modernizing and rehabilitating airport infrastructure.

D.
The enhancement of transparency and governance. While the new government has made good
governance one of its key priorities and put the fight against corruption at the heart of its reform agenda,
corruption remains an issue in Mauritania. The Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency
International ranks Mauritania 123 amongst 172 countries surveyed in 2007. Additional measures to combat the
corruption phenomenon and enhance transparency should focus on:
- Reinforcing transparency in the oil sector;
- Adopting a new mining code;
- Maintaining publication of the EITI report and of the audit of the oil fund;
- Developing a new code of conduct for public employees;
- Adopting a new commerce code;
- Producing credible and transparent financial statements for enterprises; and
- Improving the judicial and legal business environment.

13

Box 3. Banking Sector Reforms
•

The 2006 FSAP pointed out that the Mauritanian banking sector did not support economic development
and presented significant challenges; banks were vulnerable, with opaque financial statements, and
inefficient; they primarily served their affiliated economic groups, with limited competition; access to
financial services for nonconnected parties was severely curtailed. Financial sector regulation required
additional improvement, enforcement was still weak, while financial sector infrastructure needed to be
modernized.

•

The authorities have since launched an ambitious, multi-pronged banking sector reform strategy.
International audits of end-2005 accounts for all domestic banks revealed the scope and depth of their
operational and governance shortcomings, indicating that three of them were facing serious financial
difficulties. The audits—to be repeated for end-2007—were relied upon to draft memoranda of
understanding setting up individual improvement programs for most domestic banks, while the weakest
was placed under conservatorship.

•

Bank minimum capital is being raised in steps to UM 6 billion ($22 million) by end-2010 to strengthen
banks’ financial position and foster mergers and associations with foreign partners. At the same time, loanloss provisioning regulations are enforced more vigorously. Two foreign banks entered the market in 2006
and 2007, bringing some competition and raising the standards of service, and a few more are expected to
also get licenses in the near future.

•

One of the main remaining challenges is to accelerate the disposal of the large stock of nonperforming
loans—some 40 percent of total loans—held by the legacy banks. The authorities are exploring their
options, including setting-up private assets management companies. A review of the issue by staff indicates
that a large share of all nonperforming loans is held by a limited number of defaulting borrowers. Perusing
through these cases could probably lead to the early resolution of several of them, and would make it
possible to identify common traits on the basis of which resolution approaches could be developed and
applied to the rest of the population of defaulters.

Distribution of Nonperforming Loans by Sectors
Total loans
As of December 2006

Sundry services

Nonperforming Loans

Amount
UMBn

Share
(percent)

Amount
UMBn

Share
(percent)

25.08

18.1

11.87

20.9

Fisheries

21.27

15.3

13.83

24.3

Construction and public works

18.51

13.4

7.81

13.7

Other economic sectors

73.75

53.2

23.38

41.1

138.61

100

56.89

100

Total

14
IMF safeguards recommendations, including (a) the appointment of an external auditor who
will continue the semi-annual reviews of foreign reserves data and an annual and an interim
audit of the BCM; and (b) the adoption of a program of conversion of BCM’s financial
statements to IFRS standards and of a new chart of accounts.
24.
The authorities have prepared a comprehensive medium-term strategy for the
financial sector (Box 3). They are also reviewing possible gradual measures to deal with
weak banks and restructure nonperforming loan portfolios.
IV. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
A. Macroeconomic Outlook for 2008
25.
The immediate outlook is marked by increasing inflationary pressures resulting
from high international food and fuel prices (representing 65 percent of the CPI
basket), which could potentially lead to a food access crisis. Despite a tightened monetary
policy, and measures to limit the pass-through of international prices of certain commodities,
year-on-year consumer inflation is expected to reach 12 percent by end-year.
26.
The prospect for growth outside the oil sector is good in 2008. Real non-oil GDP
growth could reach 5.7 percent, reflecting in particular a good performance of the mining
sector following marked increases in the prices of iron, copper, and gold. However, because
of technical difficulties affecting exploration of the Chinguetti oil field and delays in
developing new operating wells, annual oil production is expected to continue to decline in
2008, resulting in overall GDP growth of around 5.0 percent.
B. Fiscal Policy and Reforms
27.
In response to escalating social pressure, and encouraged by international aid
agencies such as the World Food Program, the president unveiled an emergency
response plan of about $90 million to address a potential food access crisis and help
limit inflationary pressures (Box 4 and Attachment I, paragraph 8). The 2008 budget
will be adjusted accordingly through a supplementary budget law that will finance the
emergency plan, partly through higher tax revenues resulting from a more efficient tax
collection and higher nontax revenue from the mining company, and partly through an
increase of the basic non-oil fiscal deficit for 2008 from 1.9 percent of non-oil GDP to
2.9 percent. This additional deficit will be financed through the issuance of treasury bills.
The emergency response plan, which was discussed with the mission, contains a
comprehensive set of first immediate, one-off measures aimed at ensuring food access
through: (a) a sufficient replenishment of food stocks throughout the country ahead of the
lean season (by supporting private imports through guaranteeing normal credit lines for
imports, and having the public importer provide sufficient stocks at international price with

15

Box 4. Mauritania’s Response to the Food Access Crisis
With an average food deficit of 70 percent and a
highly volatile food production, Mauritania’s
food situation remains structurally precarious
and affects the poorest strata of the population.
Natural disasters such as drought, off-season rains or
cold snaps, desert locust invasion, and floods
regularly ruin a mostly traditional agriculture of
rained crops on floodplains. During the lean season,
from May to November, food rationing affects
inhabitants of rural areas, and of the peri-urban
periphery of Nouakchott. Two surveys reported by the
World Food Program in 2006–07 estimate that about
400,000 Mauritanians (12 percent of population) are
subject to food insecurity, and that chronic malnutrition
hits 24.5 percent of children under age 5.

Mauritania's Production of Cereals, 1961–2007
(In tons)
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
1961 1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005

Source: FAO.

Despite a relatively good cereal harvest in 2007, food prices remain on the rise in West Africa, with local
price spikes reflecting weaknesses in the regional market. The 2007/2008 gross cereal production reached
47.2 millions of tons compared to 49.7 millions in
WEO Food prices
2006/2007 but remained above five- or ten-year
(Percentage change)
averages. However, a decline in coarse grain
20.0
production in a few countries along the Gulf of
15.0
Guinea and the pass-though of international prices,
notably in Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, and Senegal,
10.0
tightened food supply and bolstered local prices.
Average regional food price inflation (year-on-year)
5.0
reached 10.8 percent in December 2007, compared
0.0
with 9.5 percent one year earlier. But local price
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
spikes can be much higher: wheat, rice, and oil
-5.0
prices rose by more than 50 percent in Nouakchott
-10.0
over the period; and abnormal price increases for
cereal products were confirmed on important
-15.0
wholesale markets. The impact of high food prices
has been even more severe in rural areas where yields were severely reduced by delayed rains or floods. Local
imbalances in the food supply chain, more developed than usual, have favored speculative behaviors.
Decided in reaction to escalating social pressure, noncoordinated government interventions may further
deteriorate the regional market. Food-related riots erupted in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ivory Coast,
Mauritania, Niger, and Senegal in recent months. In response, many countries have adopted some form of price
control, reduced tax, or import duties, introduced subsidies, or started selling strategic food stocks. Some weak
targeted subsidies risk wasting resources by locally inducing overconsumption or stockpiling. In addition,
countries have progressively been restricting food exports (following, at a more global level, the examples of
Argentina, Cambodia, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Russia, Thailand, and Ukraine). For Mauritania, there are
indications that imports may be limited from neighboring suppliers from Burkina Faso, Mali, and Senegal
(although increased competition between local and foreign buyers may also play a role).
International market conditions have led private importers to reduce activity and stocks. The global
tightening of banking credit has led operators to reduce their net long positions on agricultural commodity
markets, whose volatility keep increasing. Stocks are being reduced as their real costs increase with market
prices and risks. In Mauritania’s case, imports of wheat were limited to 60 percent of normal levels in the first
quarter of 2008, which did not allow replenishing stocks at the very approach of the rain season.

16

Box 4. Mauritania’s Response to the Food Access Crisis (concluded)
The combined effects of these factors are particularly acute in Mauritania and have led the president to
unveil an emergency response plan of about $90 million (3 percent of non-oil GDP) on April 6. While
immediate measures were authorized by an advance
decree, the plan will be submitted to the parliament’s
Projected Food Security Conditions in West Africa,
2nd Quarter of 2008
approval in the upcoming supplementary budget law and
its execution will be regularly reported to the legislature.
The response plan contains a comprehensive set of
immediate, one-off emergency actions aimed at ensuring
some replenishment of food stocks ahead of the lean
period and preventing a pass-through of international
prices to gas, electricity, water, rice, bread, and cattle
food. Food imports will be supported by publicly
guarantying short-term credit lines to private importers,1
and increasing the working capital of the public food import
company (Sonimex). Security stocks will be directly
purchased by the government. Free food distributions will
be targeted via existing food stamps programs. Bread prices
will be controlled and import tariffs on rice will be
Source: Famine Early Warning Systems Network
eliminated. Similar rules will apply to cattle food to preserve
(FEWSN) / USAID.
livestock in rural areas. Preventive health actions toward
children under 5 and pregnant and breast-feeding women will
be stepped up and delivered through community programs. Gas, electricity, and water prices will also be
stabilized to help contain imported inflation that impact more disproportionally the poorest segments of the
population. All these measures are temporary in nature and will be reexamined in the context of the 2009
budget.
Medium-term measures are designed to foster agricultural output to reduce dependency on food imports,
and develop income-generating activities for poor suburban populations. Expanding harvested areas and
encouraging consumption of locally grown crops could reduce the food deficit to about 45 percent. Incomegenerating activities will be targeted toward unemployed youth. The partial containment of the decrease of civil
servants wages—through a 10 percent wage increase at mid-year—is less targeted but should play a role in
mitigating the impact of a possible food access crisis through extended family solidarity networks.

1/ The performance criterion on short-term debt is being modified accordingly.

17
normal commercial margins, which will help prevent speculative behavior from private
importers); (b) short-term measures to help maximize agricultural output for the next crop to
reduce external dependency; (c) free food distribution to the most vulnerable segment of the
population through food stamps and community service “work for food” programs;
(d) eliminating the import tariff on rice that had created adverse incentive for commercial
importers in the presence of large smuggling activity from neighboring countries where such
tariff does not exist; (e) the continuation of limited bread subsidy; and (f) limited distribution
of cattle food to help preserve livestock of the most vulnerable population. The plan also
contains measures aimed at developing income-generating activities for poor suburban
populations, and limiting the decline of civil servants’ wages in real terms through a
10 percent wage increase for central government’s workers at mid-year. Finally, to help
mitigate the impact on inflation of high international energy prices, and in view of the
21.6 percent electricity and 20.6 percent water tariff increases in November 2007, the
government has decided to avoid further electricity and water tariff adjustments in the
remainder of 2008 as further increases could have a major negative impact on the poorer,
economic activity, and price stability. To this end, the electricity company will effectively
implement measures to reduce technical losses and increase fuel efficiency, and adopt a
medium-term restructuring strategy. It might also benefit from limited and temporary
government subsidies as needed. The amount of the subsidy for gas bottles will be increased
to offset higher international prices, and avoid severe damages to the country’s natural
environment that would result from the use of wood for domestic purpose by the poorer.
28.
In line with FAD advice, the authorities will implement important tax reforms in
the context of the 2008 supplementary budget law (Attachment I, paragraph 9). In
particular, the authorities will (a) fully implement the VAT refund mechanism, increase the
threshold for VAT and account-based income tax, and develop an intermediate regime to
lighten tax administration for small and medium enterprises; and (b) announce a tax reform
plan aimed at simplifying the direct taxation system and encouraging investment, as a first
step toward a complete overhaul of the general tax code. Specifically, the minimum flat
turnover tax rate will be reduced from 3 percent to 1 percent as of January 1, 2009, which
will be offset by the introduction of a quarterly prepayment system for the industrial and
commercial profits tax.8 An investment code will be adopted by end-2008.
29.
The authorities have engaged in a comprehensive Public Financial Management
reform agenda, covering the adoption of a new budget and accounting classification system,
compliant with the 2001 Government Finance Statistics Manual, and the strengthening of
execution monitoring procedures, especially for investments and the wage bill, to improve
cash management (Attachment I, paragraph 10).

8

Revenues are recorded on a cash basis.

18
C. Monetary Policies and Financial Sector Reforms
30.
Monetary policy will remain geared toward containing inflation in the context of
a flexible exchange rate policy (Attachment I, paragraph 11). In this respect, the revised
monetary program targets an expansion in broad money of less than 19 percent in 2008, in
line with the nominal GDP growth rate, while still allowing for a sufficient private sector
credit expansion. To achieve this objective, the BCM will enhance its liquidity management
efforts by strengthening further its liquidity forecasts, advancing with the preparation of a
securitization plan for BCM’s existing claims on the government in line with MCM
recommendations, and improving coordination with the ministry of finance with regard to
monetary objectives. The BCM will continue to implement a flexible exchange rate policy to
deal with the fluctuating terms of trade and preserve the competitiveness of the Mauritanian
economy.
31.
The authorities are committed to accelerating the implementation of ambitious
central bank and financial sector reforms (Attachment I, paragraphs 12–13). They are
enhancing efforts toward implementing the safeguards assessment recommendations,
particularly those related to the strengthening of the central bank accounting framework and
reporting standards. The authorities are also strengthening regulation and supervision and
consolidating the banks’ financial situation.
D. External Sector
32.
Several factors should affect positively the external outlook in 2008, bringing
international reserves from $209 million to $330 million (equivalent to 2.8 months of
imports) by year-end: (a) a reversal of the oil import credits’ maturity back from 90 days to
180 days will reduce payment of the oil bill in the third quarter; (b) the opening of short-term
credit lines for food imports guaranteed by the central bank amounting to $40 million to cope
with the high international food prices; and (c) higher repatriation of profits by the public
iron company, SNIM.
E. Other Issues
33.
The government has decided to restructure their public enterprise portfolio in
order to improve the quality of the services they provide, guarantee their financial
viability, and introduce greater competition (Attachment I, paragraph 15). In this
regards, Air Mauritania has been liquidated by a court’s decision in January 2008. With the
assistance of the World Bank, the government is also preparing a restructuring strategy for
the electricity company (SOMELEC) as well as performance contracts with SOMELEC, the
national water utility, and the public oil company.
34.
Even though data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, the
authorities are conscious of the need to further strengthen economic statistics to

19
improve economic decision-making, particularly through (a) updating the national
accounts; (b) strengthening the monitoring of public enterprises; and (c) improving fiscal,
balance of payment, and debt statistics.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
35.
Mauritania’s macroeconomic performance has been satisfactory despite a
difficult external environment. In particular, the authorities have contained the non-oil
primary deficit, reduced inflation to single digit levels, introduced a flexible exchange rate
policy, enhanced liquidity management, and strengthened the level of official reserves.
Despite a substantial downward revision of oil production prospects since the last Article IV
consultations, macroeconomic developments were broadly in line with program projections.
All end-December 2007 quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks
were met. Looking ahead, medium-term growth prospects are likely to be enhanced by
higher public and private investment levels, although the immediate outlook is marked by
increasing inflationary pressures resulting from high international food and fuel prices, which
could potentially turn into a food access crisis if not addressed adequately.
36.
The authorities’ response to the potential food access crisis is comprehensive, but
they should monitor closely the situation. The response plan contains a set of immediate,
one-off, emergency actions that should ensure some replenishment of food stocks ahead of
the lean period, prevent private sector speculation, and foster domestic agriculture
production. Food stamps program and the development of income-generating activities for
poor suburban populations will also help support the most vulnerable segments of the
population. Measures to avoid further electricity, water, and gas tariff increase will help
contain inflation that would adversely affect the poorer. The government in collaboration
with its partners should monitor closely food access developments and the impact of these
measures.
37.
In the context of limited oil revenue prospects for the next few years, reducing
poverty will require the implementation of policies to accelerate growth and encourage
private sector investment. It is, therefore, essential that the authorities effectively tackle the
most significant impediments to growth, including access and cost of bank financing, tax
regulations and burden, infrastructure (mainly electricity), customs and trade regulations,
delays in opening a business, and labor market regulations. At the same time, the authorities
should accelerate the development of sectors with a potential for high value-added and job
creation. In particular, the authorities should address the physical, structural, and institutional
impediments to economic diversification, and develop agriculture, livestock, fishing, and
mining.
38.
Mauritania should maintain macroeconomic stability by continuing to pursue
prudent and coordinated fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies. In particular, the

20
government should continue implementing a sound fiscal policy by containing the basic
non-oil fiscal deficit, and a monetary policy consistent with the objective of controlling
inflation in the context of a flexible exchange rate policy.
39.
In the context of the 2007 Decision on Bilateral Surveillance, staff has assessed
that the real exchange rate is in line with fundamentals. The staff welcomes the
successful implementation of the flexible exchange regime that resulted in the virtual
elimination of parallel market premiums. The new exchange rate regime—a managed float
with no pre-announced path—is appropriate.
40.
The authorities have undertaken an ambitious multi-pronged banking sector
reform strategy, in line with the FSAP recommendations. The staff welcomes the
completion of international audits of accounts for all domestic banks, and measures to
increase banks minimum capital and enhance competition. One of the main remaining
challenges is to accelerate the disposal of the large stock of nonperforming loans.
41.
Efforts should be sustained to restructure key public enterprises. In particular,
the authorities should urgently finalize and implement a restructuring strategy for the
electricity company.
42.
While pursuing a prudent debt strategy, the authorities need to strengthen their
debt management framework. In view of its limited oil revenue prospects for the next few
years, Mauritania needs to continue mobilizing concessional support to finance its poverty
reduction strategy, including the concretization of pledges made during the December 2007
consultative group meeting in Paris, and to pursue discussions with creditors that have not
yet provided debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative to reach agreements on
comparable terms.
43.
The staff urges the authorities to strengthen further economic statistics,
including debt data to improve economic decision-making.
44.
The staff recommends the completion of the third review under the PRGF-supported
program.
45.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Mauritania be held under the
24-month cycle in accordance with the provisions of Decision N. 12794-(02/76) of July 15,
2002, as amended.

21
Figure 1. Real Sector Developments
... driven mainly by the expansion of production of oil
and mining.

Real GDP growth has been satisfactory...
14

8

Real oil and non-oil GDP

Central contributions to real GDP growth (In percent)

12

/1

6

10

4

8

2

6

0

4

-2

2003

2005

2006

2007

Oil production started in 2006

GDP at market price

2

2004

-4

Non oil GDP at market price

Oil

Mining

Agriculture and fishing

Other

-6

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

1/ GDP at factor costs.
Inflation has declined to single digit levels,
but inflationary pressures are increasing...

At the same time, international oil and mining prices have
increased significantly, resulting in an improvement of terms
of trade.
280

25

Terms of trade

Consumer price index, Dec. 2004–Feb. 08
(year-on-year growth, in percent)

260
20

240

Overall
Food
Nonfood

220
15

200
180

10

160
140

Terms of trade
Exportprice index
Import price index

120
100
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

5

0
Dec-04

0.0035

Jun-0 6

Dec-06

Jun-0 7

Dec-07

80.0

Exchange rate, Jan. 04–Jan. 08

Food prices
20.0

Dec-05

…and of the depreciation of the exchange rate
vis-à-vis Euro.

… partly as a result of higher international food prices...
25.0

Jun-0 5

78.0

0.0033

76.0
74.0

15.0

0.0031

72.0
70.0

10.0
0.0029

68.0

5.0

66.0

Food
WEO food price

0.0
2004

2006

64.0
EUR/MRO
NEER

2007

62.0

0.0025

60.0
Jan-08

Oct-07

Jul-07

Apr-07

Jan-07

Oct-06

Jul-06

Apr-06

Jan-06

Oct-05

Jul-05

Apr-05

Jan-05

Oct-04

Jul-04

Apr-04

Jan-04

(5.0)

2005

0.0027

22
Figure 2. Monetary Policy Developments
… while replenishing significantly its foreign
reserves and improving the net foreign position
of commercial bank s...

The central bank has been following a prudent
monetary policy, allowing broad money to grow
in line with GDP over the past few years...
100

30

Total NFA of the banking system (US$ million)

Monetary situation (in percent)
25

50

20

0

15

-50

2003

10

Nominal non-oil GDP Growth

60.0

2004

2005

2006

2007

… and absorbing additional bank liquidity through
treasury bills issuance, but without crowding-out
private credit...

190.0

Credit (in billion ouguiya)

180.0

50.0

170.0

40.0
30.0
stock of TBs -LHS

10.0

Stock of Private CreditRHS

0.0
Dec-04

Dec-05

Dec-06

… while maintaining positive real interest
t
14.0

150.0

8.0

130.0

4.0

110.0

2.0

Banks deposits to GDP (in percent)

Average inflation rate

0.0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

However nonperforming loans (NPLs) weigh heavily
on Mauritanian bank s balance sheets in comparison
to the Maghreb countries.

Bank s deposits have not been increasing, but new
bank s are entering the mark et.
25.0

Weighted Tbs rate

6.0

120.0

Dec-07

Key rates (in percent)

12.0
10.0

100.0
Dec-03

2007

-200

160.0
140.0

20.0

2006

Commercial
banks
Central Bank

-150

0
2003

2005

-100

Broad money growth

5

2004

35
NPLs total loans (in percent)
30

20.0

25
15.0

20
15

10.0

10
5.0
5
0.0

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Morocco Tunisia

Libya

Algeria Mauritania

23
Figure 3. Fiscal Developments
(In percent of non oil GDP)
Overall and basic fiscal balances have
improved, reflecting a cautious fiscal
policy…

...and new oil revenue.

12

5

Fiscal balance

Oil revenues
10

0

8

Overall
balance,
including
grants

-5

-10

Oil revenue

Overall
balance,
excluding
grants

-15

6

Basic nonoil
balance,
program
definition

oil fund
balance

4
2
0

-20
2003

2004

2005

2006

2004

50

45
Revenues
Fishing revenues

35

20
15

Spending
Non interest current spending

40

Domestically financed investment
Externally financed investment

25
20
15
10

Tax
revenue

5

2007

30

Nontax
revenue,
excluding
fishing
sector

10

2006

45

35
30
25

2005

...current spending has been contained.

Tax revenue have increased, but are more
than offset by decreasing nontax revenue...

40

2003

2007

5
0

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2003

2007

The wage bill remains moderate in comparison to
neighboring countries.
25

2004

2005

2006

2007

Domestic financing has been contained.
10

Wage bill

External
financing,
excluding
MDRI

8

20

6

Financing
Domestic
financing

4
15

2

Maghreb

0

10

-2
Mauritania

-4

5

-6
-8

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Domestic
financing
central
bank
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

24

Figure 4. External Sector Developments
Gold, copper, and oil exports have led to a
diversification of Mauritania's exports, which used to
be dominated by fish and iron exports.
60

The trade and current account balances have
improved markedly, but the current account balance
remains negative.
60

Exports (in percent of GDP)
50

Other exports

40

Oil

30

Gold and
copper

20

Current transfers
Exports of
services

External balance (in % of GDP)

40

Exports of goods

20

Trade balance
Current acount
balance

0

Imports of
d

-20
-40

Iron
10

Fishing
0
2003

2004

2005

2006

-60

Imports of
services 1/

-80

Including net
revenues

-100

2007

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

International reserves are steadily reconstituting. The change
in import credit maturity, which has strained the 2007 reserves
level, is being reversed in 2008.

Current account deficits were mainly financed by
FDI and lately by concessional borrowing.

3.0

60

Current account balance and selected items (In
percent of GDP)

50

2.5

International Reserves
(in months of imports)

2.0

40

Impact of the oil
import credit maturity
reduction in 2007

1.5

30

current
account
deficit

20

10

1.0
Official
net loans and
exceptional
financing
FDI

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

0.5
0.0
2003

2007

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008
(projection)

Consequently, debt service has declined
commensurately.

With HIPC and MDRI, external debt has declined
significantly, though debt in areas remains high as it is
being treated under HIPC.
40

250

External debt service (in percent of exports)

External debt stocks (in percent of GDP)
Private debt

200
HIPC/ MDRI

30

150

Interest due
20

100
Public
debt

50

Public
debt in
arrears

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Amortization due
10

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

265.6
318
468
338
338
1,276
2.7
474
-10.6
28.9
...

256.2
440
625
397
397
1,493
2.8
541
9.6
37.8
...

3151.1
211.1

2869.1
224.9
268.6
625
781
493
493
1,857
2.8
658
7.5
53.4
...

3318.4
178.7

26.6
26.6
24.5
0.0
33.7
-7.1
-9.2
-7.1

61.5
14.3

14.6
14.8

70
1.1

42.2
42.2
54.7
24.8
5.4
-47.2
-7.4
-4.0

5.4
5.4
18.0
18.0
12.1
5.8

2005

268.6
1,367
847
725
565
2,699
2.9
933
-1.3
64.3
11.2

2540.9
94.1

82.5
71.8
27.1
10.7
36.5
46.0
-9.4
35.3

25.0
23.7

15.7
35.3

194
2.6

118.6
15.9
-18.3
8.5
3.4
-1.3
-3.7
10.5

11.4
4.1
31.9
10.1
6.2
8.9

2006
Prel.
Prel.
Est.

2008
Proj.

209
1.9

6.4
54.0
22.7
35.1
2.7
-11.4
-10.1
0.6

1.0
5.9
0.2
13.4
7.3
7.4

330.4
2.8

38.0
47.9
25.7
32.9
4.4
-6.3
-8.3
28.6

5.0
5.7
17.4
19.0
12.5
12.0

...
1,343
955
724
667
2,762
3.0
933
...
68.5
5.7

2667.0
96.6

29.1
25.8
23.9
3.4
32.1
-3.0
-8.2
-6.3

22.5
15.8

252.0
1,454
1,145
734
679
2,819
3.0
952
-4.0
71.1
5.5

2708.9
96.1

30.1
27.2
24.8
2.9
32.1
-2.0
-7.3
-4.9

22.4
11.0

...
2,006.7
1,521
905
853
3,625
3.0
1,196
...
95.5
3.9

2134.3
58.9

30.3
27.4
24.3
2.8
34.1
-3.9
-9.8
-6.7

21.9
15.7

15.5
18.9
18.4
-1.2
3.8
16.0
(In percent of non-oil GDP)

148
1.8

-1.8
42.6
2.7
12.7
3.8
-6.7
-5.7
-0.1

0.9
5.7
-1.6
11.0
7.6
7.9
8.0
1.6
2.2
0.8
4.4
-3.0
-7.4
5.5

6.8
5.9
6.2
3.7
9.5
7.0

2009
Proj.

...
2,167
1,534
1,026
937
4,095
3.10
1,319
...
94.5
5.5

2202.7
53.8

28.9
25.9
22.7
3.0
30.9
-2.0
-8.2
-5.0

21.8
18.8

...
...

345.7
2.8

(Percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

2007
Proj.
Country Report
No. 07/375

...
2,078
1,644
1,088
1,010
4,301
3.18
1,353
...
93.3
4.9

2569.6
59.7

28.4
25.0
22.4
3.3
31.0
-2.6
-8.6
-6.0

26.6
15.4

...
...

416.7
3.1

-4.1
-2.0
13.0
7.2
3.8
-11.2
-12.2
1.8

5.7
6.2
0.2
1.5
6.5
6.0

2010
Proj.

...
2,074
1,765
1,159
1,101
4,584
3.26
1,408
...
92.8
4.0

2888.6
63.0

28.5
25.7
21.9
2.7
31.2
-2.8
-9.3
-5.5

34.4
13.1

...
...

506.1
3.5

-0.2
4.8
18.8
7.3
4.1
-21.3
-12.7
1.6

6.0
6.6
0.5
2.2
5.5
5.0

2011
Proj.

...
3,179
1,872
1,524
1,212
5,998
3.33
1,799
...
92.5
15.4

3185.0
53.1

33.0
25.1
21.8
7.9
30.7
2.3
-8.9
-5.6

22.1
19.6

...
...

724.4
4.8

53.2
6.5
1.8
6.1
3.0
-2.5
-12.4
5.7

12.7
6.8
16.6
3.1
5.0
5.0

2012
Proj.

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The decline in the deflator in 2007 reflects the sharp decline in the share of the oil sector in total GDP that year and the fact that, owing to the authorities' choice of 1998 (when oil prices were particularly low) as the base
year for the calculation of national accounts at constant prices, the price index for oil is much higher than the indices for other sectors.
2/ Excluding oil account.
3/ Excluding oil exploration/production and other mining-related activities, and imports financed by FDI and aid.
4/ Including oil signature bonuses.
5/ Includes both public and private sector external debt. Revised estimates are based on new debt stock data as of 2007 after HIPC and MDRI debt relief, include estimates for additional new borrowing in 2008 following pledges
made at the consultative group meeting.
6/ Excluding oil, copper, and gold -related activities, and imports financed by other FDI.

Memorandum items:
Ouguiya/US$ exchange rate (end of period)
Exports, f.o.b. (in millions of US$)
Imports, f.o.b. (in millions of US$) 6/
Nominal GDP (in billions of UM)
Nominal non-oil GDP (in billions of UM)
Nominal GDP (in millions of US$)
Population (in millions)
GDP per capita (in US$)
REER (12-month percentage change; end of period)
Price of oil (US$/barrel): APSP baseline: February 29, 2008
Annual production of oil (in millions of barrels)

32.9
32.9
29.7
0.0
37.7
-4.8
-8.0
-4.8

51.7
17.1

13.5
-3.4

39
0.6

38.1
38.1
70.3
33.7
4.1
-34.6
-12.0
-7.3

5.2
5.2
11.5
11.5
10.4
16.1

2004

35.4
35.4
30.7
0.0
47.2
-11.8
-16.5
-11.8

34.3
20.7

Investment and savings
Gross investment
Gross savings

Consolidated government operations
Revenue and grants
Revenue and grants (excluding oil)
Idem, excluding grants
Oil revenue 4/
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance including grants
Overall non-oil balance excluding grants
Overall non-oil balance including grants
External debt
Nominal external debt (in millions of US$) 5/
Nominal external debt (in percent of GDP) 5/

25.5
47.5

32
0.7

-4.1
-4.1
25.7
22.1
6.9
-13.7
-7.1
-10.0

5.6
5.6
2.5
2.5
5.3
2.9

Money and interest rates
Money and quasi-money
Currency in circulation

Official reserves
Gross official reserves (in millions of US$, end-period) 2/
In months of following year's imports of goods and services 3/

External sector
Exports of goods, f.o.b. (percentage change in US$)
Of which: Non-oil
Imports of goods, f.o.b. (percentage change in US$)
Idem excluding oil, copper, and gold activities
Official transfers (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Idem excluding oil, copper, and gold activities
Overall balance (in percent of GDP)

National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
Non-oil GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
Non-oil GDP deflator 1/
Consumer price index (period average)
Consumer price index (end of period)

2003

Table 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003–13

...
3,599
1,903
1,749
1,325
6,781
3.41
1,986
...
92.5
20.1

3437.7
50.7

32.8
22.9
21.8
9.9
28.9
4.0
-7.1
-6.0

17.5
22.9

...
...

941.6
5.9

13.2
0.5
-4.2
1.6
0.9
5.4
-10.2
6.3

6.2
4.3
8.1
4.8
5.0
5.0

2013
Proj.

25

26
Table 2. Central Government Operations, 2006–13
(In billions of ouguiya, unless otherwise indicated)
2006
Prel.

2007
Country Reportr Prel. Est.
No. 07/375

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Non-oil revenue and grants
Non-oil revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income and profit
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade
Other
Nontax revenue
Of which: Revenue from the fishing sector
Public enterprises dividends
Total grants
Of which: Projects
Expenditure and net lending 1/
Current expenditure
Compensation of employees
Goods and services
Subsidies and transfers 2/
Interest
External
Domestic
Special accounts and others
Of which : Oil sector development
Capital expenditure
Foreign-financed investment 3/
Domestically financed investment
Restructuring and net lending
Common reserves
Emergency reserves

406.0
153.5
97.1
26.7
45.0
14.8
10.6
56.4
39.4
8.3
252.5
2.1
206.4
157.9
52.8
71.6
15.1
13.5
5.0
8.5
4.8
...
44.6
20.7
23.9
3.8
0.0
0.0

171.9
159.5
100.6
30.5
50.0
17.7
2.3
58.9
41.5
8.8
12.4
8.5
214.2
157.2
63.0
61.9
15.2
11.9
4.1
7.8
5.2
1.3
57.0
30.0
27.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

184.4
168.1
106.9
32.9
52.7
19.1
2.1
61.3
41.4
9.1
16.3
10.0
217.9
159.4
64.6
63.8
15.2
13.5
4.4
9.1
2.3
...
58.5
28.6
29.9
0.0
0.0
0.0

234.0
207.7
133.0
35.0
69.3
24.4
4.3
74.7
47.7
13.1
26.3
24.3
291.3
198.0
70.4
55.1
50.9
12.3
4.2
8.1
9.4
1.3
82.2
51.2
31.0
0.2
7.8
3.0

242.7
212.8
144.8
35.6
76.3
28.4
4.5
68.0
45.3
13.1
29.9
22.2
289.6
187.5
76.4
61.0
28.1
15.7
6.7
9.0
6.3
1.3
92.2
52.8
39.4
2.1
7.8
0.0

252.8
226.2
157.8
40.3
78.7
34.1
4.8
68.5
45.8
13.1
26.6
17.2
313.0
201.3
81.4
66.0
29.4
18.2
8.3
9.8
6.3
1.3
103.9
58.2
45.7
0.0
7.8
0.0

283.1
241.1
172.8
44.1
85.9
37.7
5.2
68.3
46.4
13.1
42.0
35.1
343.9
211.9
86.7
73.5
28.7
16.8
7.2
9.7
6.3
1.3
122.5
73.3
49.1
0.0
9.5
0.0

304.0
263.9
193.9
49.0
96.8
42.4
5.7
70.0
47.9
13.1
40.0
38.6
372.2
221.5
91.0
82.1
25.0
17.1
7.9
9.2
6.3
1.3
137.9
80.1
57.8
0.0
12.8
0.0

303.8
288.8
217.0
54.3
108.5
47.9
6.3
71.8
49.5
13.1
14.9
13.4
382.6
242.2
100.1
91.1
26.3
18.4
7.9
10.4
6.3
1.3
126.1
56.5
69.5
0.0
14.4
0.0

Non-oil balance excluding grants (deficit -)
Non-oil balance including grants (deficit -)

-52.9
199.6

-54.7
-42.3

-49.8
-33.5

-83.6
-57.3

-76.8
-46.9

-86.8
-60.2

-102.8
-60.8

-108.2
-68.2

-93.8
-78.8

Basic non-oil balance; program definition 4/

-24.4

-19.6

-16.8

-25.1

-17.3

-20.2

-22.3

-20.3

-29.3

60.5

22.4

19.9

24.1

28.2

33.7

30.0

96.0

131.2

7.6
260.1

-32.3
-19.8

-29.9
-13.6

-59.5
-33.1

-48.6
-18.7

-53.1
-26.5

-72.8
-30.8

-12.2
27.8

37.4
52.4

-260.1
-38.7
-47.7
-27.3
-27.3
0.0
-20.3
4.6
22.2
-17.8
3.7
-21.5
-223.9
-13.1
-60.5
47.4
-210.8
6.4
10.7
-227.9
2.5
0.0

19.8
-1.6
3.6
5.1
5.1
…
-1.5
4.9
0.0
-10.0
-7.9
-2.2
23.0
2.8
-22.4
25.3
20.2
12.1
8.1
0.0
-1.6
0.0

13.6
3.0
7.6
-0.2
-0.2
…
7.9
5.5
0.0
-10.2
-8.0
-2.1
15.1
-2.2
-19.9
17.7
17.3
9.2
8.1
0.0
-4.6
0.0

33.1
7.9
4.8
-2.8
-2.8
…
7.6
0.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.2
-0.1
-25.6
25.6
25.3
17.4
7.9
0.0
0.0
0.0

18.7
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
…
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
21.5
-5.8
-28.2
22.4
27.3
21.2
6.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

26.5
-4.1
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
…
0.0
-1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.6
-7.0
-33.7
26.7
37.6
31.9
5.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

30.8
-1.0
-2.8
-2.8
-2.8
…
0.0
-1.2
0.0
3.0
3.0
0.0
31.8
-1.9
-30.0
28.1
33.7
29.7
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-27.8
-17.3
-17.2
-12.3
-12.3
…
-4.9
-1.1
0.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
-10.6
-37.5
-96.0
58.6
26.9
23.1
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

-52.4
-16.1
-20.4
-16.0
-16.0
0.0
-4.4
-1.0
0.0
5.3
5.3
0.0
-36.3
-54.9
-131.2
76.3
18.6
18.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

223.4
48.8
40.0
32.3
14.6
12.5
49.9

81.5
38.3
43.4
30.8
4.6
4.6
64.1

56.8
59.1
39.4
28.8
4.5
4.4
64.6

95.2
53.7
62.2
49.0
4.5
4.4
81.5

110.6
71.3
62.2
49.0
4.5
4.4
92.9

129.5
99.0
60.9
49.0
4.5
4.4
99.0

113.9
106.6
59.7
49.0
7.5
7.4
105.9

369.6
254.0
53.7
44.1
8.5
8.4
139.8

492.1
466.9
48.4
39.7
13.8
13.7
161.1

Net revenue from oil
Overall balance excluding grants (deficit -)
Overall balance including grants (deficit -)
Financing
Domestic financing 4/
Banking system
BCM 5/
Excluding MDRI
Of which: MDRI (IMF)
Commercial banks
Nonbanks
Privatization and other 6/
Domestic arrears 7/
Float 8/
Others
External financing
Oil account (net)
Net revenue from oil (net)
Oil account contribution to the budget
Other (net)
Net borrowing (net)
Exceptional financing
MDRI (IDA and AfDF)
Errors and omissions
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Oil revenue (millions of US$)
Oil account balance (e.o.p., in millions of US$)
Stock of treasury bills
Of which : Commercial banks
Stock of (identified) domestic arrears 7/
Treasury float (registered payment orders) 8/
Poverty reducing expenditure

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

27
Table 2. Central Government Operations, 2006–13 (concluded)
(In percent of non-oil GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2006
Prel.

2007
Country Report Prel. Est.
No. 07/375

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Non-oil revenue and grants
Non-oil revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on goods and services
Taxes on international trade
Other tax revenue
Nontax revenue
Of which: Fishing sector revenue
Public enterprises dividends
Total grants
Of which: Project grants
Expenditure and net lending 1/
Current expenditure
Compensation of employees
Goods and services
Subsidies and transfers 2/
Interest
External
Domestic
Special accounts and others
Capital expenditure
Foreign-financed investment
Domestically financed investment
Restructuring and net lending
Common reserves
Emergency reserves

71.8
27.1
17.2
4.7
8.0
2.6
1.9
10.0
7.0
1.5
44.7
0.4
36.5
27.9
9.3
12.7
2.7
2.4
0.9
1.5
0.9
7.9
3.7
4.2
0.7
0.0
0.0

25.8
23.9
15.1
4.6
7.5
2.7
0.4
8.8
6.2
1.3
1.9
1.3
32.1
23.6
9.4
9.3
2.3
1.8
0.6
1.2
0.8
8.5
4.5
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

27.2
24.8
15.7
4.9
7.8
2.8
0.3
9.0
6.1
1.3
2.4
1.5
32.1
23.5
9.5
9.4
2.2
2.0
0.6
1.3
0.3
8.6
4.2
4.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

27.4
24.3
15.6
4.1
8.1
2.9
0.5
8.8
5.6
1.5
3.1
2.8
34.1
23.2
8.3
6.5
6.0
1.4
0.5
1.0
1.1
9.6
6.0
3.6
0.0
0.9
0.4

25.9
22.7
15.5
3.8
8.1
3.0
0.5
7.3
4.8
1.4
3.2
2.4
30.9
20.0
8.2
6.5
3.0
1.7
0.7
1.0
0.7
9.8
5.6
4.2
0.2
0.8
0.0

25.0
22.4
15.6
4.0
7.8
3.4
0.5
6.8
4.5
1.3
2.6
1.7
31.0
19.9
8.1
6.5
2.9
1.8
0.8
1.0
0.6
10.3
5.8
4.5
0.0
0.8
0.0

25.7
21.9
15.7
4.0
7.8
3.4
0.5
6.2
4.2
1.2
3.8
3.2
31.2
19.3
7.9
6.7
2.6
1.5
0.7
0.9
0.6
11.1
6.7
4.5
0.0
0.9
0.0

25.1
21.8
16.0
4.0
8.0
3.5
0.5
5.8
4.0
1.1
3.3
3.2
30.7
18.3
7.5
6.8
2.1
1.4
0.7
0.8
0.5
11.4
6.6
4.8
0.0
1.1
0.0

22.9
21.8
16.4
4.1
8.2
3.6
0.5
5.4
3.7
1.0
1.1
1.0
28.9
18.3
7.6
6.9
2.0
1.4
0.6
0.8
0.5
9.5
4.3
5.3
0.0
1.1
0.0

Non-oil balance excluding grants
Non-oil balance including grants

-9.4
35.3

-8.2
-6.3

-7.3
-4.9

-9.8
-6.7

-8.2
-5.0

-8.6
-6.0

-9.3
-5.5

-8.9
-5.6

-7.1
-6.0

Basic non-oil balance; program definition 3/

-4.3

-2.9

-2.5

-2.9

-1.8

-2.0

-2.0

-1.7

-2.2

Net revenue from oil

10.7

3.4

2.9

2.8

3.0

3.3

2.7

7.9

9.9

Overall balance excluding grants
Overall balance including grants

1.3
46.0

-4.8
-3.0

-4.4
-2.0

-7.0
-3.9

-5.2
-2.0

-5.3
-2.6

-6.6
-2.8

-1.0
2.3

2.8
4.0

Financing
Domestic financing 4/
Of which: Banking system
External financing
Of which: Oil account
Errors and omissions
Financing gap

-46.0
-6.8
-8.4
-39.6
-2.3
0.4
0.0

3.0
-0.2
0.5
3.4
0.4
-0.2
0.0

2.0
0.4
1.1
2.2
-0.3
-0.7
0.0

3.9
0.9
0.6
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
-0.3
-0.3
2.3
-0.6
0.0
0.0

2.6
-0.4
-0.3
3.0
-0.7
0.0
0.0

2.8
-0.1
-0.3
2.9
-0.2
0.0
0.0

-2.3
-1.4
-1.4
-0.9
-3.1
0.0
0.0

-4.0
-1.2
-1.5
-2.7
-4.1
0.0
0.0

Memorandum items:
Non-oil GDP (in billion of ouguiya)
Non-oil primary balance including grants
Total revenue
Total public debt e.o.p. 8/
Float (in billion of ouguiya) 9/
Oil fund balance (in billion of ouguiya)
Poverty reducing expenditure

565.3
37.7
37.8
142.1
12.5
13.1
8.8

667.4
-4.6
27.3
123.2
4.6
10.3
9.6

678.7
-2.9
27.7
121.8
4.6
14.8
9.5

853.4
-5.3
27.2
75.3
4.4
13.4
9.6

936.8 1010.1 1100.5 1211.8 1324.7
-3.3
-4.2
-4.0
-4.2
-4.6
25.7
25.7
24.6
29.7
31.7
70.9
74.3
74.9
73.1
71.2
4.4
4.4
7.4
8.4
13.7
17.9
25.1
26.9
64.5 120.4
9.9
9.8
9.6
11.5
12.2

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Reflecting the authorities new classification, which is closer to GFS standards; estimates for 2006.
2/ Including transfers to public entities outside the central government.
3/ Domestic financing was adjusted in line with paragraph 17 of the TMU.
4/ Defined as government non-oil revenue (excluding grants) minus government expenditure (excluding foreign-financed investment
expenditure and interest on external debt).
5/ BCM financing was adjusted in line with paragraph 17 of the TMU.
6/ In 2006, includes receipts from the sales of a telecom license for $103 million. Adjusted for the repatriation, in 2008, of a grant
received from Koweit in 2007 on a special account.
7/ Treasury float and other unpaid obligations recognized by the government.
8/ After MDRI stock of debt operation. Domestic debt excludes the "float".

28
Table 3. Balance of Payments, 2006–13
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2006
Prel.

2007
Country Report
No. 07/375

2012
Proj.

2013
Proj.

143.7
22.9
207.4
328.4
0.8 -394.6
666.0
1342.5 1454.4 2006.7 2166.7 2078.3 2074.3 3178.6
533.0
575.0
974.6
897.5
776.7
750.8
768.6
205.9
254.3
254.3
264.6
275.3
286.4
297.9
309.8
338.7
356.9
490.0
434.9
352.3 1345.1
183.6
183.5
199.0
218.9
240.8
264.9
291.4
58.2
59.2
167.9
183.0
192.5
210.0
207.8
-1198.8 -1431.5 -1799.2 -1838.3 -2077.6 -2468.9 -2512.7
-276.8 -290.4 -443.6 -456.3 -473.0 -503.0 -544.1
-339.6 -493.7 -459.2 -434.9 -568.7 -856.5 -792.8
-582.4 -647.4 -896.4 -947.1 -1035.8 -1109.3 -1175.8
-499.0 -488.5 -659.6 -700.4 -725.5 -857.2 -1093.6

1192.4
3598.7
869.4
310.0
1756.6
145.7
211.5
-2406.3
-546.7
-685.5
-1174.2
-1012.7

Est.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

Trade balance
Exports
Of which: Iron ore
Fish
Crude oil
Copper
Gold
Imports, fob
Petroleum products
Equipment extractive industries and other FDI
Other
Services and income (net)

199.6
1366.6
467.2
200.6
642.1
5.6
1.6
-1167.0
-227.4
-434.4
-505.2
-393.9

Services (net)
Credit
Of which: Fishing licenses
Debit
Of which: Freight (including oil and mining)

-319.6
86.7
33.7
-406.3
-159.1

-413.2
100.1
44.5
-513.3
-163.5

-427.7
84.2
37.8
-511.8
-193.8

-522.9
116.9
64.6
-639.8
-245.3

-511.1
125.2
68.5
-636.3
-250.7

-559.6
140.6
72.5
-700.2
-283.3

-604.1
158.9
78.4
-763.0
-336.7

-597.6
175.9
82.3
-773.5
-342.6

-547.5
192.1
83.9
-739.6
-328.1

Income (net)
Credit
Of which: EU fishing compensation
Debit
Of which: Interest due on public debt
Oil sector profits and salaries 1/

-74.3
119.0
108.0
-193.3
-27.4
-160.0

-85.7
143.1
115.9
-228.8
-24.5
-101.6

-60.8
140.9
118.4
-201.7
-24.3
-102.8

-136.7
145.4
126.5
-282.1
-30.5
-121.5

-189.2
136.4
112.3
-325.6
-31.2
-166.8

-165.9
137.0
104.2
-302.9
-37.3
-123.7

-253.1
143.8
105.2
-396.9
-32.0
-98.7

-496.0
153.6
106.4
-649.6
-34.1
-343.2

-465.2
172.4
106.4
-637.6
-37.8
-428.9

158.7
66.5
92.1
14.3

170.8
68.5
102.2
8.2

144.3
70.2
74.0
8.4

225.1
75.6
149.5
6.1

250.3
82.5
167.8
6.0

241.7
89.5
152.2
5.7

275.3
97.5
177.8
9.9

280.4
113.0
167.4
2.9

184.5
123.3
61.2
2.9

-121.0
-35.6

-211.5
-184.5

-359.9
-321.3

-382.0
-227.1

-379.9
-121.7

-607.1
-483.1

-660.5
-976.5

-823.4
-147.3

-741.1
364.2

Current transfers (net)
Private unrequited transfers (net)
Official transfers
Of which: Multilateral HIPC assistance 2/
Current account (including transfers but
excluding oil)
Current account balance
Capital and financial account

257.8

154.5

316.3

1262.9

347.3

561.1

1049.2

487.4

61.2

Capital account
Of which: MDRI and other debt stock relief 3/

1107.2
48.5

7.0
0.0

50.8
48.1

1117.2
1117.2

218.7
218.7

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Financial account
Direct investment (net)
Of which: Oil exploration (net)
Official medium- and long-term loans
Disbursements
Amortization
Other financial flows
Of which: Change in private external arrears

-849.4
154.6
1.6
-835.7
73.8
-909.5
-168.3
-74.1

147.5
152.9
151.1
64.6
117.1
-52.5
-70.0
0.0

265.6
138.3
127.5
79.3
162.3
-83.0
48.0
0.0

145.8
103.2
138.0
260.7
306.9
-46.2
-218.1
0.0

128.6
44.0
97.0
261.1
305.2
-44.1
-176.5
0.0

561.1
253.1
280.2
361.1
404.7
-43.5
-53.1
0.0

1049.2
713.3
672.0
310.6
355.0
-44.4
25.3
0.0

487.4
168.3
-75.0
285.8
330.8
-45.0
33.3
0.0

61.2
-157.1
-433.4
248.1
295.9
-47.8
-29.8
0.0

60.2

26.3

20.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

282.3

-3.7

15.8

1035.9

225.6

78.0

72.7

340.2

425.4

-15.8 -1035.9

Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Net foreign assets
Central bank (net)
Assets
Liabilities
Commercial banks (net)
Oil account flow
Exceptional financing
Financing gap (shortfall +)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions US$)
Trade Balance (in percent of annual GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of annual GDP)
Idem, excluding oil and other mining (except SNIM)
Gross official reserves
In months of imports 4/
Oil account

-282.3

3.7

-315.7
-162.0
-124.2
-37.8
-104.9
-49.2

-30.1
16.2
46.6
-30.4
-57.2
10.9

-225.6

-78.0

-72.7

-340.2

-425.4

32.0
-118.3
-121.7
3.4
144.9
5.4

-22.8
-12.8
-15.2
2.5
7.5
-17.5

-93.0
-73.0
-71.0
-2.0
7.8
-27.7

-88.6
-91.2
-89.4
-1.8
10.1
-7.5

-355.1
-218.3
-218.3
0.0
10.7
-147.5

-425.4
-218.4
-217.2
-1.2
5.8
-212.8

33.4

33.8

...

0.0

39.2 -1067.9
0.0

0.0

-202.8

15.0

15.9

14.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2699
7.4
-1.3
-3.7
194.4
2.6
49.2

2762
5.2
-6.7
-5.7
147.8
1.8
38.3

2819
0.8
-11.4
-10.1
208.8
1.9
59.1

3625
5.7
-6.3
-8.3
330.4
2.8
53.7

4095
8.0
-3.0
-7.4
345.7
2.8
71.3

4301
0.0
-11.2
-12.2
416.7
3.1
99.0

4584
-8.6
-21.3
-12.7
506.1
3.5
106.6

5998
11.1
-2.5
-12.4
724.4
4.8
254.0

6781
17.6
5.4
-10.2
941.6
5.9
466.9

-55.0
-32.2
-14.4
-17.9
-12.9
-9.9

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Figures based on staff estimates and projections, for lack of data provision from the respective FDI companies.
2/ Excluding HIPC grants on debt service that have fallen subject to MDRI relief.
3/ MDRI debt and assumed arrears relief is treated as a one-time stock operation.
4/ Imports of goods and services for the year ahead, excluding FDI- and external aid-financed imports.

29
Table 4. Monetary Situation, 2003–08
(In billions of ouguiya at end-of-period exchange rates, unless otherwise indicated)
2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

2005
Dec.

Dec. 2007
2006
Prel. Country Report
No. 07/375

-57.5
-48.3
-9.1
175.7
198.9
82.0
129.9
-47.9
116.9
-23.2
118.3
44.3
55.8
18.1

-68.5
-47.0
-21.4
202.7
264.0
129.9
143.4
-13.6
134.1
-61.3
134.3
42.8
68.0
23.5

-71.0
-38.9
-32.1
224.8
303.1
159.7
181.9
-22.3
143.5
-78.4
153.8
49.1
79.2
25.5

0.7
4.6
-3.9
177.2
266.2
112.3
158.5
-46.2
153.9
-89.0
177.9
66.4
82.3
29.2

Net foreign assets
Assets
Liabilities 1/
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the government 1/
Of which: Central government
Claims
Deposits
Of which: Central government
Claims on private sector
Claims on commercial banks
Credit to banks (discount window)
BCM bills
Other items net
Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Reserves of banks

-48.3
8.4
-56.7
109.7
76.5
76.5
124.3
-47.8
-47.8
2.7
1.3
1.3
…
29.2
61.4
44.3
17.1

-47.0
10.0
-57.0
117.0
122.2
122.2
135.3
-13.1
-13.1
3.3
0.8
0.8
…
-9.2
69.9
42.8
27.1

-38.9
18.9
-57.7
106.9
112.6
115.9
134.6
-22.0
-18.7
3.5
0.0
0.0
…
-9.2
68.0
49.1
18.9

Commercial banks
Net foreign assets
Assets
Liabilities
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Claims
Of which: Treasury bills
Deposits
Credit to the economy
Net claims on the BCM
Total Reserves
Credit from BCM
Other items net
Deposit liabilities to nonbank residents

-9.1
6.8
-16.0
83.1
119.7
5.4
5.6
8.1
-0.1
114.2
15.8
17.1
-1.3
-52.4
74.0

-21.4
7.8
-29.3
112.9
138.6
7.7
8.1
13.6
-0.4
130.9
26.4
27.1
-0.8
-52.0
91.5

2.9
37.4
25.5
21.9
31.7
-213.6
-182.0
-197.7
25.8
-60.2
-34.4
268.1
265.6
338.0

3.0
31.9
13.5
14.7
38.8
-222.4
-183.6
-210.7
30.6
-114.3
-83.6
265.6
256.2
397.0

Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
BCM
Commercial banks
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Claims
Deposits
Credit to the economy
Other items net
Broad money
Currency in circulation
Demand deposits
Term deposits

Prel.

2008
Proj.

11.4
0.3
11.1
194.2
292.3
115.9
156.4
-40.5
176.4
-98.1
205.6
65.6
103.7
36.2

12.0
12.4
-0.4
199.5
305.0
121.9
167.6
-45.7
183.2
-105.5
211.6
68.9
102.1
40.5

5.3
41.6
-36.4
245.2
350.7
126.7
175.2
-48.5
224.0
-105.5
250.5
80.0
122.6
48.0

4.6
52.2
-47.6
79.3
85.4
88.6
131.0
-45.6
-42.4
2.0
0.3
0.3
…
-8.3
84.0
66.4
17.5

0.3
38.4
-38.2
84.2
90.5
93.7
130.4
-39.8
-36.6
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-8.3
84.5
65.6
18.9

12.4
52.4
-40.0
83.5
87.7
87.7
132.2
-44.5
-44.5
2.4
3.6
3.6
…
-10.2
95.9
68.9
27.0

41.6
82.0
-40.4
67.1
84.9
84.9
132.2
-47.3
-47.3
2.4
-10.0
0.0
-10.0
-10.2
108.7
80.0
28.7

-32.1
16.5
-48.6
136.8
187.0
47.0
47.4
52.3
-0.3
140.0
18.9
18.9
0.0
-69.2
104.7

-3.9
30.1
-34.0
115.4
178.8
26.8
27.5
32.3
-0.7
151.9
17.2
17.5
-0.3
-80.6
111.5

11.1
29.1
-18.0
128.8
199.8
25.3
26.0
30.8
-0.7
174.5
18.9
18.9
0.0
-89.8
139.9

-0.4
25.6
-26.0
143.0
215.0
34.2
35.4
41.4
-1.2
180.8
23.4
27.0
-3.6
-95.3
142.6

-36.4
25.3
-61.6
206.9
263.5
41.8
43.0
47.8
-1.2
221.6
38.7
28.7
10.0
-95.3
170.5

3.2
31.9
14.6
7.0
70.2
-215.0
-144.8
-162.5
61.6
-180.9
-119.4
268.6
268.6
497.0

3.2
37.3
15.7
7.2
194.4
-177.2
17.2
7.8
112.1
-126.6
-14.5
268.6
268.6
565.3

3.2
31.9
15.5
14.6
147.8
-146.8
1.0
-8.8
112.1
-69.4
42.7
268.6
260.0
667.4

3.2
32.6
18.9
19.0
208.8
-159.3
49.5
32.5
101.8
-103.4
-1.6
268.6
252.0
674.3

3.4
31.9
18.4
22.3
330.5
-162.7
167.8
150.9
101.8
-248.4
-146.5
268.6
…
853.4

Monetary authorities

Memorandum items:
End of the period velocity of broad money
Currency/broad money (in percent)
Broad money (in percent) 2/
Credit to private sector (in percent) 2/
Foreign assets of the BCM (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign liabilities of the BCM (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets of banks (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign liabilities of banks (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net foreign assets of banks (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Program exchange rate UM/US$
Actual exchange rate UM/US$
Nominal non-oil GDP (in billions of ouguiya)

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Reflects MDRI debt relief from the Fund.
2/ Change relative to the end of the previous year.

30
Table 5. Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015

1990

1996

2000

2002

PRSP
2010
2015

2004

MDGs
2015

(In percent of total population)
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Overall poverty incidence
Incidence of poverty in Nouakchott
Prevalence of child malnutrition

56.6
36.1
47.6

54.3
25.4
...

51.0
29.2
32.0

...
...
...

46.7
25.9
30.2

35.0
...
26.0

25.0
...
21.0

28.3
...
23.8

100.0

100.0

(In percent of primary school age group)
2. Achieve universal primary education
Gross primary enrollment ratio

46.0

82.0

87.0

88.0

95.1

98.0

(In percent of students enrolled in first grade)
Retention rate at the entrance of the 5th
grade in primary education

….

….

55.0

48.0

48.8

68.8

100.0

100.0

49.0

50.0

50.0

128.0

55.0

45.7

400.0

300.0

...

<1.1

<1.0

1.0

(In percent of total enrollment)
3. Promote gender equality
Share of girls in total primary enrollment

42.0

46.0

48.0

49.0

49.8

(Per 1,000 live births)
4. Reduce child mortality
Child mortality (under five years)

137.0

122.0

135.0

...

...

(Per 100,000 live births)
5. Improve maternal health
Reduce the rate of maternal mortality

...

...

747.0

...

...

(In percent of ages 15–24)
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Reduce by half the incidence of HIV/AIDS

...

...

0.5

0.6

0.5

(In percent of population)
7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to improved water source
Access to electricity
Memorandum items:
Population (in millions) 1/
UNDP Human Development Index
Gini index of inequality
Child vaccination rate (in percent)

...
...

...
...

60.4
18.0

...
...

63.7
23.8

65.0
...

75.0
...

...
...

1.96
0.387
...
...

2.27
0.423
0.34
30

2.51
0.449
0.39
40

2.63
0.465
...
70

2.82
...
0.39
93

...
...
0.40
...

...
...
0.41
...

...
...
...
...

Sources: Mauritanian authorities, World Development Indicators, and UNDP Human Development Indicators (2004).
1/ Estimates based on the population census data in 1988 and 2000.
Goal 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than $1 a day.
Goal 2. Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Goal 3. Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education.
Goal 4. Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
Goal 5. Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
Goal 6. Have halted the spread of HIV/AIDS, incidence of malaria and other major diseases and begin to reverse.
Goal 7. Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of
environmental resources. Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water.

31
Table 6. Reviews and Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement, 2006–09

Decision
Date

Action/Status

Amount of the Disbursement
In percent of
In SDRs
quota 1/

Disbursement
Date

December 18, 2006

Board approval of a PRGF arrangement

4.52 million

7.0

January 12, 2007

April 23, 2007

Completion of the first review first review

1.93 million

3.0

April 27, 2007

November 2007

Completed second review based on end-June 2007
performance criteria

1.93 million

3.0

Novembre 28, 2007

March 2008

Completed third review based on end-December 2007
performance criteria

1.93 million

3.0

September 2008

Completed fourth review based on end-June 2008
performance criteria

1.93 million

3.0

March 2009

Completed fifth review based on end-December 2008
performance criteria

1.93 million

3.0

September 2009

Completed sixth review based on end-June 2009
performance criteria

1.93 million

3.0

16.1 million

25.0

Total
1/ Mauritania's quota is SDR 64.4 million.

32
ATTACHMENT I. LETTER OF INTENT

Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20431
USA

Nouakchott, May 2, 2008

Dear Mr. Managing Director:
1.
Further to our letter of November 2, 2007 and the accompanying Memorandum on
Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), we wish to advise you of the progress in
implementing the three-year program that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has
decided to support through the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).
2.
The macroeconomic performance in the fourth quarter of 2007 was generally in line
with program targets, in spite of difficult economic conditions. Oil production fell faster than
expected owing to recurrent technical problems. Oil production averaged 15,000 barrels a
day in 2007, compared with 36,000 in 2006. However, non-oil GDP growth was in line with
expectations at 5.9 percent, compared with 5.7 percent in the program, benefiting from the
rebound in agricultural production and the development of new mining projects. In spite of
inflationary pressures, due especially to higher prices for a number of imported food
products, year-on-year inflation fell from 8.9 percent at end-2006 to 7.4 percent at end-2007,
compared to 7.9 percent in the program. The current account went from a deficit of
1.3 percent of GDP in 2006 to 11.4 percent of GDP in 2007, compared with 6.7 percent in
the program, mainly due to lower oil exports and the adverse effect of higher import prices.
The reserves of the Central Bank of Mauritania (BCM) stood at $208.8 million at endDecember 2007, equivalent to 1.9 months of imports of goods and services, which is slightly
higher than expected owing mainly to an acceleration of the repatriation of mining profits.
The budget deficit was kept within the limits set in the program (2.5 percent of non-oil GDP).
3.
All the quantitative performance criteria at end-December 2007 were met (Table 1).
In particular, we have maintained the basic fiscal balance above the programmed floor,
thanks especially to a strong tax performance, which more than compensated for the
additional wage expenditure related to inaccuracies in the projection base. The two
quantitative indicative targets were also met. Moreover, the stock of payments outstanding at
the treasury was cleared due to improved monitoring of the cash position and
computerization and decentralization of the expenditure process. In addition, although some

33
ministries experienced difficulties in implementing poverty reduction programs in the first
semester, pro-poor spending accelerated in the second semester and the poverty reduction
expenditure benchmark was met.
4.
All the structural performance criterion and benchmarks were also met (Table 2). In
particular, we have continued to strengthen the tax administration by creating a central
taxpayer database covering Nouadhibou and Nouakchott, based on a unique identifier. We
have also reduced VAT and tariff rate exemptions for an updated list of essential products.
Moreover, the BCM has addressed all the external audit qualifications on its 2006 financial
statements of the BCM within its immediate control. We have kept up efforts to ensure sound
management and transparency in the extractive industries. In this respect, the audit of
accounts at end-December 2006 of the Société Mauritanienne des Hydrocarbures (SMH) has
been finalized and published. Production sharing contracts in the oil sector have also been
published.
5.
The main challenge facing our country is to accelerate economic growth to reduce the
unemployment rate and raise the standard of living of our citizens. To this end, the
government intends to promote the development of the private sector by improving the
business climate, fostering investment, and strengthening the competitiveness of our
economy. Accordingly, we are going to make the tax framework more favorable to
investment, facilitate access to credit by rehabilitating the banks, develop basic
infrastructures, and strengthen good governance and the effectiveness of the judicial system.
To support our development plan, we successfully organized a consultative group meeting in
Paris from December 4 to 6, 2007, where we received financial pledges amounting to
$2.1 billion. We will prepare a monthly report to monitor the implementation of those
promises. Private foreign investors, especially from the Gulf States, have also indicated their
intention, as of 2008–09, to invest in key sectors of the economy, such as the financial
system, tourism, real estate, mining, transport infrastructures, fisheries, and agriculture.
6.
The outlook for growth outside the oil sector is good in 2008. Real non-oil GDP
growth could reach 5.7 percent, reflecting in particular a good performance of the mining
sector following marked increases in the prices of iron, copper, and gold. However, in spite
of a sharp rise in oil price per barrel, technical difficulties affecting exploitation of the
Chinguetti oil field, and delays in developing new operating wells, it should be possible to
increase annual oil production by end-2008, resulting in overall GDP growth of about
5.0 percent. The adoption of price support measures for certain staples should make it
possible to moderate the effects of increases in the international prices of foodstuffs and oil
products and contain year-on-year inflation to 12 percent. International reserves should reach
the equivalent of $330 million, or 2.8 months of imports of goods and services at the end of
year.

34
7.
One of the government’s key concerns is to find an appropriate response to the foodsupply crisis that could result from high international food prices and more restricted
commercial import channels. As early as November 2007, in the supplement to our letter of
intent, we announced two measures introduced in the 2008 budget law to moderate the
impact of the price increases: lower taxes on the wages and salaries of the lowest income
groups and a subsidy to stabilize the price of bread. Owing to the scarcity of stocks of raw
materials on markets, we felt the need to facilitate imports to increase national food stocks
before the start of the lean period by adopting an advance decree, in particular to increase the
financial resources of the public import company, Sonimex, and by opening lines of credit
for food importers guaranteed by the BCM.
8.
To mitigate the impact of high international prices for raw materials and to forestall a
serious food crisis, we have adopted an emergency program and price measures in the
context of the 2008 supplemental budget law. The emergency program is intended to increase
agricultural production and protect the livestock threatened by drought, facilitate the
distribution of foodstuffs in the most vulnerable or most remote regions, and to develop
income-generating activities in peri-urban areas. Those activities are particularly important
for marginalized young people. Moreover, common reserves will be increased by
UM 3 billion to cover additional emergency expenses, if the envisaged additional receipts
materialize. We are also adopting measures designed to limit increases in rice and bread
prices and to prevent increases in gas, electricity, and water prices in 2008. Salary and
pension increases, limited to UM 3.5 billion, should also alleviate the impact of price rises in
2008. In spite of a 13 percent increase in non-oil revenues, mostly produced by a strong fiscal
performance and the mining sector, additional expenditures will increase the non-oil basic
fiscal deficit from 1.9 percent in the budget law to 2.9 percent, which will be financed by
mobilizing domestic savings. This emergency program will be monitored by a steering
committee that has already been set up. The committee will prepare a report on the
implementation and the outcomes of these measures, which the government will be required
to submit quarterly to the National Assembly.
9.
Under the 2008 Supplementary budget law (LFR), we will announce the streamlining
of the ordinary law direct tax regime and the eventual overhaul of the general tax code. This
reform will allow a substantial reduction in the taxation of investments and a reduction of the
effective marginal tax rate to 25 percent (i.e., the tax rate on corporate profits). A key stage in
this streamlining will be the reduction of the minimum flat turnover tax from 3 percent to
1 percent, applicable as of January 1, 2009, which will be offset by the introduction of a
quarterly prepayment system for the industrial and commercial profits tax. In addition to this
tax reform, which benefits businesses and private investment, an investment code will be
adopted by end-2008 to substantially simplify investment procedures, in particular by
introducing a one-stop window. The new investment code will also contain provisions under
which investments deemed as strategic will be exempted from the ordinary tax system by
means of agreements that will be approved by the National Assembly and published. We will
also pursue our tax administration reforms by fully implementing the VAT refund

35
mechanism and raising the threshold for the VAT and the account-based income tax to
UM 30 million by end-June 2008, with effect from January 1, 2009. We will also pursue civil
service reforms. The comprehensive census of civil servants will be completed by end-June
2008 and supplemented by an assessment of functional staffing needs in some pilot
ministries by end September 2008. We will assess our pension and retirement system in 2008
with a view to future restructuring.
10.
Improving fiscal management remains a priority for the government. To this end, the
following will be prepared: (a) a monthly report on the status of expenditures by ministry,
accompanied by a summarized reconciliation of the fiscal position and the government
financial reporting table; and (b) a quarterly execution report on investment expenditure and
the wage bill. The weekly fiscal and monetary policy coordination committee will issue
decision minutes regarding the cash position and forecasts for a 30-day rolling period, as well
as recommendations for budget execution and BCM intervention on the monetary and
foreign exchange markets. We will conduct an external audit of the government’s arrears to
its suppliers, the results of which will be discussed with IMF staff.
11.
The BCM will continue to pursue a prudent monetary policy that is consistent with its
objective of containing inflationary pressures. Money supply growth is not expected to
exceed 19 percent in 2008, below the nominal GDP growth rate. In keeping with this
objective, we will actively manage bank liquidity. In close coordination with monetary
policy, the BCM will continue to implement a flexible exchange rate policy to deal with the
fluctuation of our terms of trade and preserve the competitiveness of the Mauritanian
economy. We will conclude by May the agreement defining the relationship between the
ministry of finance and the BCM, with the specific goal of ensuring the autonomy of the
BCM in terms of financing its monetary policy.
12.
The BCM will expedite the implementation of safeguards assessment mission
recommendations, in particular those related to improving accounting procedures, ensuring
their consistency with IFRS standards, and the effective start of internal audits. In particular,
a computer system should be selected by end-June 2008, and the procedures manual will be
completed by end-September 2008.
13.
In keeping with the report of the Financial System Stability Assessment Program, we
have adopted a strategic plan to develop financial markets and system, supported by the
reorganization of the BCM. In this regard, and with technical assistance from the Bank of
France, the BCM has already prepared some of the regulations of the Banking Law,
particularly the instructions on bank licensing conditions, capital, and the creation of a
deposit guarantee fund. Instructions on other prudential rules, penalties, and management
rules applicable to related parties are being finalized. In an effort to strengthen the banking
system, we have signed agreements with banks to monitor financial audit recommendations
and will encourage them to consolidate the portfolio of nonperforming loans by giving
priority to the largest debts.

36
14.
The government will continue its efforts to improve governance and transparency,
particularly in the extractive industries. We have published the external audit of the National
Hydrocarbons Revenue Fund (FNRH) for 2006. We will henceforth expand the FNRH audit
to cover all potential FRNH resources. We will also continue to publish the annual reports of
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, as well as the annual budget of the SMH,
the contacts it has signed, and the audit of its accounts.
15.
We have decided to restructure our portfolio of public enterprises to improve the
quality of their services, ensure their financial sustainability, and introduce more competition.
Our portfolio will be restructured with the greatest possible transparency, and will be subject
to broad consultations. In this context, Air Mauritania was placed in liquidation on
January 17, 2008 by the presiding judge of the Nouakchott commercial court. Operational
audits will be conducted for SOMELEC and the National Water Company to conclude
performance contracts with these enterprises by end-2008. A performance contract with
SMH will be finalized by end-June 2008. In addition, in consultation with the World Bank,
we will adopt by end-June 2008 a strategy for restructuring SOMELEC, notably with the aim
of reducing its costs.
16.
The perspective of a negotiated resolution to our outstanding debt with some of our
multilateral and bilateral partners, in particular Kuwait and Libya, on terms comparable to
those of the Paris Club, should serve to ensure the sustainability of Mauritania’s debt. The
updated debt sustainability analysis reveals a moderate risk of debt overhang, however, and
the need for Mauritania to continue borrowing on concessional terms. To this end, we have
adopted a decree establishing fiscal and accounting mechanisms for external debt
management, which in particular provides for the obligation to consult the Debt Directorate
of the ministry of finance and the research directorate of the central bank before ratifying any
agreements, including technical agreements that may lead to a new lending arrangement.
17.
Improving the coverage and the quality of statistical data is crucial for program
monitoring. To this end, the government will ensure the implementation of the National
Statistics Development Strategy adopted in January 2008 by the National Statistics Council.
This strategy will serve to launch the institutional reform of the National Statistics Office and
produce reliable economic statistics for economic analysis, the national accounts, the balance
of payments, and the implementation of the General Data Dissemination System. The
government published the final national accounts for 2001 and will publish the final accounts
for 2002 to 2006 by end-August 2008.
18.
Table 1 lists the quantitative performance criteria at end-June 2008 established at the
third review and the quantitative benchmarks for end-September and end-December 2008.
Table 2 specifies the structural benchmarks and the corresponding dates. Program
implementation will be assessed every six months in consultation with IMF staff. Conditions

37
for the sixth and seventh disbursements will be established at the fourth and fifth review,
respectively, and the fourth, fifth, and sixth review will be completed no later than endSeptember 2008, end-March 2009, and end-September 2009, respectively.
19.
The government is convinced that the measures described in this letter are sufficient
to achieve the program objectives, but it will take any further measures that may become
necessary for this purpose. The government will consult with the IMF on the adoption of
these measures and prior to any revision of the policies described in the MEFP and its letters
of intent, in accordance with the Fund’s rules on such consultations.
20.
In light of the achievements of this program and the content of the policies explained
in this letter, we request that the IMF conclude the third review under the PRGF arrangement
and approve the fourth disbursement in the amount of SDR 1.93 million.
Sincerely yours,

/s/
Ousmane Kane
Governor of the Central Bank of Mauritania

/s/
Abderrahmane Ould Hama Vezaz
Minister of Economy and Finance

3.6

268.6

FNRH contribution to the budget

Memorandum item:
UM/$ exchange rate (program)

4/ Indicative target.

11.6

-41.3

3/ Adjusted upward (NIR) and downward (NDA) by net international assistance and FNRH contribution to the budget.

2/ Performance criteria, unless otherwise indicated.

1/ For definitions and adjustors, see the technical memorandum of understanding (IMF Country Report 07/43).

Sources : Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff projections.

94.0

…

Cumulative amounts of external cash debt service payments

0.0
-18.6

…
…

Impact of any additional debt relief

0.0

-18.6

64.1

-7.0

0.0

-42.2

…

…

…

12.5

0.0

42.5

0.0

-19.6

4.9

-16.6

63.7

-19.7

0.0

0.0

-19.7

64.6

-8.0

0.0

-42.2

0.0

-16.8

4.2

38.6

End-December 2007 2/
Target
Adj. Target
Actual

Cumulative disbursements of official loans and grants in foreign currency

Net international assistance

Adjustors (in million of US$)

Poverty reducing expenditures (floor); in billion of UM 4/

Treasury float (ceiling); in billion of UM 4/

New external payments arrears (continuous ceiling); in million of US$

Short-term debt (ceiling); in million of US$

…
0.0

New medium- and long-term nonconcessional debt contracted or
guaranteed by the government and the BCM (ceiling); in million of US$

79.3

Basic non-oil government balance (floor); in billion of UM

Net domestic assets of the BCM (ceiling); in billion of UM 3/

Net international reserves of the BCM (floor); in million of US$ 3/

Quantitative targets

Initial Level
End-December
2006
Stock

53.4

-2.8

0.0

0.0

-2.8

16.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-13.4

-3.6

-8.7

End-March
2008
Program

88.0

-11.7

0.0

0.0

-11.7

36.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-45.4

-5.0

6.6

End-June
2008
Program 2/

108.1

-15.4

0.0

0.0

-15.4

61.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-42.9

-6.4

65.5

End-September
2008
Program

102.4

-27.4

0.0

0.0

-27.4

81.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-25.1

-16.4

118.3

End-December
2008
Program

Table 1. Mauritania: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets for the First and Second Year of the PRGF-Supported Program 1/
(Cumulative change from end-December 2006 for the 2007 targets, and from end-December 2007 for the 2008 targets)

38

39
Table 2. Performance Criterion and Structural Benchmarks for the Second Year of
the PRGF-Supported Program
Date

Status

End-December 2007

Met

• Assignment of a single tax identifier to all taxpayers registered in
Nouadhibou and Nouakchott and establishment of a centralized
taxpayer database.

End-December 2007

Met

• Resolution of the external audit qualifications on the BCM's 2006
financial statements within the immediate control of the BCM.

End-December 2007

Met 1/

• Adoption of an order instituting fiscal and accounting systems and
modalities for disseminating information on the government external
debt.

End-March 2008

Met

• Adoption by the monetary policy council of implementing
regulations of the banking sector law on licensing of banks, risk
concentration, and rules of management applicable to affiliates.

End-March 2008

Partially Met 2/

Performance criterion:
• Submission to Parliament of a list of products for which VAT or
customs tariff exemptions will be eliminated.
Structural benchmarks:

• Submission to parliament of a law raising the threshold for VAT and real
tax regime to 30 billion ouguiya

End-June 2008

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff.
1/ During the upcoming financial audit of the BCM, auditors are expected to confirm that they are satisfied with the
measures taken by the BCM.
2/ Implementing regulations for the licensing of banks, and risk concentration have been adopted. The regulation on
rules of management applicable to affiliates is being drafted with the technical assistance of the Banque de France.

40
ATTACHMENT II. TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
This memorandum sets out the definitions of the quantitative targets for the period
July 1, 2007–September 30, 2008, which are set forth in the Memorandum of Economic and
Financial Policies (MEFP) and reported in Table 3. It also establishes the content and
frequency of the data to be provided to IMF staff for monitoring the program. For the
purpose of this memorandum, the government is defined to include only the central
government.
2.
The quantitative targets are defined as ceilings or floors for cumulative changes
between the reference period described in Table 3 and the end of the month indicated.
VI. DEFINITIONS
A. Performance Criteria and Quantitative Benchmarks
3.
Net international reserves (NIR) of the Central Bank of Mauritania (BCM) are
defined as the reserve assets of the BCM (i.e., the external assets that are readily available to,
and controlled by, the BCM, as per the 5th edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual)
minus the foreign exchange liabilities of the BCM to residents and nonresidents. The gold
holdings will be evaluated at the gold price in effect on June 30, 2006 ($613.50 per oz.) and
the U.S. dollar value of reserves assets (other than gold) and foreign exchange liabilities will
be calculated using program exchange rates, namely: the June 30, 2006 exchange rates
between the U.S. dollar and the ouguiya (UM/$268.6), the SDR ($/SDR 1.4794), the Euro
(Euro/$1.2713), and other nondollar currencies as published in the IFS.
4.
Net domestic assets (NDA) of the BCM are defined as reserve money minus net
foreign assets (NFA) of the BCM. Reserve money comprises: (a) currency in circulation
(currency outside banks and commercial banks’ cash in vaults); and (b) deposits of
commercial banks at the BCM. NFA is defined as gross foreign assets of the BCM, including
the external assets not included in the reserve assets, minus all foreign liabilities of the BCM
(i.e., NDA = Reserve Money – NFA, based on the BCM balance sheet). NFA will be
measured at the program exchange rates as described in paragraph 3.
5.
Government balance is defined for program monitoring purposes as non-oil central
government basic balance excluding grants, which is equal to non-oil government revenue
(excluding grants) minus government expenditure (excluding foreign-financed investment
expenditure and interest due on external debt). The government balance will be measured
based on treasury data. Revenue are defined in accordance with the Government Financial
Statistics manual (GFSM 2001), excluding the revenue related to oil- and other hydrocarbonrelated activities and transfers from the National Hydrocarbon Revenue Fund (FNRH) to the
budget. They will be monitored on a cash basis (recettes encaissées par le Trésor).
Expenditure will be monitored on the basis of payment orders, including the interest on
domestic debt (paid by the treasury or automatically debited from the treasury account at the

41
BCM, including but not limited to discounts on treasury bills held by banks and nonbanks
and interest charges on the consolidated debt of the government vis-à-vis the BCM).
6.
The new medium- and long-term nonconcessional external debt contracted or
guaranteed by the government and the BCM is defined as the foreign currency debt, with
maturities of one year or longer, contracted or guaranteed by the government or the BCM
with a grant element (defined as 1 minus the NPV-to- face value ratio, and estimated on the
basis of the currency and maturity specific discount rates reported by the OECD (commercial
interest reference rates) of less than 35 percent. This definition applies not only to debt as
defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign
Debt (IMF Executive Board Decision No. 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000; see Annex) but
also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not been received.1 For
program purposes, the following will be excluded from the ceiling on medium- and longterm nonconcessional external debt contracted or guaranteed by the government or the BCM:
(a) the SDR 5.1-million loan and the Euro 10-million leasing agreement between the national
electricity company (SOMELEC) from the Islamic Development Bank effective on June 17
2007; and (b) the 37 million Kuwaiti dinars loan between Mauritania and the Arab Fund for
Economic and Social Development effective on May 26, 2007.
7.
The short-term debt is defined as the stock of foreign currency debt, with original
maturity of less than one year, contracted or guaranteed by the government or the BCM. This
definition applies to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria
with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274-(00/85) August 24, 2000; see Annex).
This definition excludes foreign currency deposits with the BCM. It also excludes normal
import-related credits.
8.
External payments arrears are defined as overdue payments (principal or interest)
on the external debt contracted or guaranteed by the government or the BCM.
9.
Treasury float (Paiements en instance au Trésor) is defined as the outstanding
stock of payment orders registered at the treasury and not yet executed by the treasury. Once
the RACHAD payment module is implemented, the float will be defined as the payment
orders validated by the RACHAD payment module and not yet executed by the treasury.
10.
Poverty reducing expenditures will be estimated on the basis of the public
expenditure functional classification based on the recommendations of the January 2006
technical assistance mission report of the IMF Fiscal Affairs Department (“Les réformes en
cours de la gestion budgétaire et financière”, March 2006). This estimate will only take into
account domestically financed expenditures.
1

Although the definition does not include public enterprise loans that are not government-guaranteed, this type
of borrowing is to be avoided except in exceptional circumstances an after consultation with IMF staff.

42
B. Performance Criteria and Structural Benchmarks
11.
Submission to parliament of a list of products for which VAT or customs tariff
exemptions will be eliminated. The list of goods will include some fruits and milk products,
and heavy fuel.
12.
Assignment of a single tax identification number to all taxpayers registered in
Nouadhibou and Nouakchott and establishment of a centralized taxpayer database. To
meet this structural benchmark, the authorities will have to submit by end-December 2007 to
the IMF staff the Nouadhibou and Nouakchott taxpayer databases, as well as a database
covering all these taxpayers and assigning them a single tax identification number.
13.
Resolution of the qualification of the external audit of BCM’s 2006 financial
statements within the immediate control of the BCM. These qualifications relate to loans
to personnel, personnel costs, and provisioning of employee social benefit liabilities.
14.
Adoption of regulations establishing budgetary and accounting mechanisms and
modalities for disseminating information on the government external debt.
15.
Adoption by the monetary policy council of implementing regulations of the
banking sector law on bank licensing, risk concentration, and rules of management
applicable to affiliates.
16.
Submission to parliament of a law raising the threshold for VAT and real tax
regime to 30 billion ouguiya.
VII. PROGRAM ADJUSTORS
16.
NIR and NDA targets are derived based on the projected amounts of the FNRH
contribution to the budget and of the net international assistance. The latter is defined as
the difference between (a) the sum of cumulative disbursements of official loans and grants
(budget support; excluding HIPC assistance and project-related loans and grants) in foreign
currency and of the impact of any additional debt relief obtained after June 30, 2006; and
(b) the toil amount of external cash debt service payments (including interest on foreign
liabilities of the BCM).
17.
In case net international assistance or the contribution of the FNRH to the
budget falls short of the amounts projected in Table 3, the floor for NIR will be adjusted
downward and the ceiling on NDA will be adjusted upward by an amount equivalent to the
difference between the actual levels and the projected levels. In the case of the NDA, this
amount will be converted into ouguiyas at the program exchange rates. The cumulative
downward adjustments to NIR will be limited to $25 million. The cumulative upward
adjustments to NDA will be limited to the ouguiya equivalent of $25 million at program
exchange rates. In case the contribution of the FNRH to the budget exceeds the amounts

43
projected in Table 3, the floor for NIR will be adjusted upward and the ceiling on NDA will
be adjusted downward by an amount equivalent to the difference between the actual levels
and the projected levels.
18.
The floor on the government balance will be adjusted downwards by an amount
equivalent to the national aid collected to finance solidarity expenditures related to the
floods in Tintane and the repatriation of persons displaced abroad. National aid contributions
will be deposited in a special allocation account created for that purpose and spending will
originate from that account.
VIII. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
19.
To allow for the monitoring of economic developments and program performance,
the Mauritanian authorities will provide the IMF with the following specific information.
BCM
•

The monthly balance sheet of the BCM, and monthly data on (a) BCM’s gross foreign
exchange reserves (at program exchange rates and at actual official exchange rates); and
(b) the FNRH (National Hydrocarbon Revenue Fund) balances, as well as receipts and
outlays (transfers to the treasury account) and their timing, within two weeks following
the end of each month.

•

The monthly monetary survey, the aggregated balance sheet of the commercial banks,
and monthly data on foreign exchange positions of individual commercial banks by
currency and on a consolidated basis at actual official exchange rates within three weeks
from the end of each month.

•

Data on treasury bills auctions within a week following each auction.

•

Monthly data on the level of liabilities of each public enterprise to the banking sector,
within three weeks from the end of each month.

•

Monthly external debt data within one month of the end of each month, following the
monthly meeting of the technical debt committee, the minutes of which will be attached.
This information shall include:

1) The external debt data file: service of the external debt of the BCM, government, and
SNIM, including changes in arrears and rescheduling operations, debt service due and paid in
cash, HIPC relief granted by multilateral and bilateral creditors and the amount of HIPC
relief provided to Mauritania in the form of grants.
2) The monthly list of medium- and long-term public or publicly guaranteed external
loans contracted during each month, identifying, for each loan: the creditor, the borrower, the

44
amount and currency, the maturity and grace period, interest rate arrangements and
commissions. The list must also include any loans currently being negotiated.
•

Quarterly complete balance of payments and data on the outstanding stock of external
debt (by creditor, by debtor and by currency) within one month following the end of each
quarter.

•

Bimonthly table projecting foreign exchange flows and flows of monetary liquidity
within one week.

Ministry of Economy and Finance
•

The treasury’s monthly cash and liquidity management plan, updated by the fiscal and
monetary policy coordination committee, will be reported on a monthly basis along with
the minutes of the weekly meetings.

•

Monthly treasury data on budget operations, revenues (including transfers from the
FNRH), expenditures, and financing items, data on operations of special accounts, data
on the execution of the domestically financed part of the investment budget (including
the data on capital spending, spending on goods and services, and salaries included in the
investment budget), and Customs and Tax Departments monthly revenue collection
reports (Rapports mensuels des recettes) within two weeks following the end of each
month.

•

Monthly data reconciled between the treasury and the Budget Directorate on the
execution of expenditure on wages, including the breakdown of civil service base pay and
back pay, wages for which payment has been authorized or is pending authorization for
diplomatic missions, the military, the police, the national guard, and public institutions.

•

Monthly data on the execution of the foreign-financed part of the investment budget
based on the summary presentation included in the Consolidated Investment Budget
document (Budget consolidé d’investissement) and data on foreign grants and loans
received by government, its agencies, and by public enterprises by donor or creditor and
by currency of disbursement within two weeks following the end of each month

•

Monthly reports on oil- and other hydrocarbon-related production and financial flows,
including data on oil sales and repartition of oil revenue among all partners involved in
oil production within one month from the end of each month.

•

Annual balance sheets audited or certified by a statutory auditor of the accounts of public
enterprises and autonomous public institutions.

•

Quarterly data on the operations of oil sector enterprises and on those in the mining
sector.

45
National Statistical Office
•

Monthly consumer price index within two weeks following the end of each month.

•

Quarterly industrial production index within one month of the end of each quarter.

•

Quarterly foreign trade bulletin within one month of the end of each quarter.

20.
All data will be transmitted electronically. Any revisions to previously reported data
accompanied by an explanatory note shall be promptly communicated to the staff.
IX. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS TABLE
21.
The treasury will prepare a monthly budget execution report in the format of a Central
Government Operations Table (TOFE). In preparing this table, the following definitions shall
be used:
•

Grants are defined as a sum of: foreign project grants (grants used in the execution of the
foreign-financed investment projects included in the central government and the EPA
parts of the consolidated investment budget and (parties BE et BA)); and foreign program
grants for budget support including the multilateral HIPC debt relief on the government
external debt budget and HIPC debt relief on the external debt of BCM and SNIM
(including the part of the AFD/BFD debt relief on Cologne terms).

•

Domestic bank financing of the government deficit is defined as a change in the net
credit to the government from the banking system, defined as claims on the government
minus deposits of the government with the banking system (including the HIPC account)
The treasury current account at the BCM is adjusted for changes in items for collection
and the treasury float during the month at the BCM. Domestic bank financing does not
include the deposits of public establishments and other administrative units (EPA) with
the BCM, namely, the subaccounts and former earmarked accounts (CAS) with the BCM.
The BCM shall provide detailed data on the deposits of public establishments and other
administrative units on a monthly basis.

•

Domestic nonbank financing of the government deficit is defined as a net change in
holdings of treasury bills by nonbanks.

•

Domestic arrears are defined as a net change in the treasury float and in the stock of
domestic claims on government acknowledged by the ministry of economy and finance
(including but not limited to accumulated payment arrears to public enterprises (utilities),
international organizations, procurement contracts, and court orders).

•

Changes in deposit and reciprocal accounts shall be taken into account in domestic
financing.

46
•

External financing is defined as the sum of: the net outflows from (i.e., the opposite of
the change in the balance of the FNRH’s offshore account); net disbursements of foreign
loans; and exceptional financing. The latter comprises (a) the accumulation of arrears on
the debts owed to Algeria, Kuwait, Libya, the United Arab Emirates, and Arab
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, as defined in paragraph 8; and (b) debt
relief obtained on external government debt net of the HIPC assistance that is treated as
grants.

47
ANNEX: DEFINITION OF DEBT SET FORTH IN NO. 9 OF THE GUIDELINES
The definition of debt set forth in No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with
Respect to Foreign Debt reads as follows:
(a) for the purpose of this guideline, the term “debt” will be understood to mean a current,
i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a contractual arrangement through the provision
of value in the form of assets (including currency) or services, and which requires the obligor
to make one or more payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some
future point(s) in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities
incurred under the contract. Debt can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as
follows: (i) loans, i.e., advances on money to the obligor by the lender made on the basis of
an undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the future (including deposits, bonds,
debentures, commercial loans, and buyers’ creditors) and temporary exchanges of assets that
are equivalent to fully collateralized loans under which the obligor is required to repay the
funds, and usually pay interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future
(such as repurchase agreements and official swap arrangements); (ii) suppliers’ credits, i.e.,
contracts where the supplier permits the obligor to defer payments until some time after the
date on which the goods are delivered or services are provided; and (iii) leases, i.e.,
arrangements under which property is provided which the lessee has the right to use for one
or more specified period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total expected service life
of the property, while the lesser retains the title top the property. For the purpose of the
guideline, the debt is the present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments
expected to be made during the period of the agreement excluding those payments that cover
the operation, repair or maintenance of the property.
(b) Under the definition of debt set out in point 9(a) above, arrears, penalties, and judicially
awarded damages arising from the failure to make payment under a contractual obligation
that constitutes debt. Failure to make payments on an obligation that is not considered debt
under this definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will not give rise to debt.

48
ANNEX I. RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
As of February 29, 2008
I.

Membership Status: Joined: September 10, 1963

II.

General Resources Account

SDR Million

% Quota

64.40
64.40
0.00

100.00
100.00
0.00

SDR Million

% Allocation

9.72
0.01

100.00
0.08

SDR Million

% Quota

8.38

13.01

Expiration
Amount Approved
Date
(SDR Million)
Dec. 17, 2009
16.10
10
6.44
Nov. 07, 2004
Dec. 20, 2002
42.49

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
8.38
0.92
42.49

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve Position
III.

SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans
PRGF Arrangements

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements
Type
PRGF
PRGF
PRGF

VI.

Article VIII

Approval
Date
Dec. 18, 2006
Jul. 18, 2003
Jul. 21, 1999

Projected Payments to Fund

(In millions of SDRs; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total
VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative
Enhanced

10

Cancellation date.

2008
0.00
0.26
0.26

Forthcoming
2009
2010
0.00
0.00
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34

2011
0.00
0.34
0.34

2012
0.65
0.34
0.98

49
Framework
I.

II.

Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed by all creditors ($millions)1
Of which: IMF assistance ($millions)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date
Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR millions)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income2
Total disbursements

Feb. 2000
622.00
46.76
34.80
Jun. 2002
34.80
16.88
17.92
3.63
38.43

Decision point—point at which the IMF and the World Bank determine whether a country
qualifies for assistance under the HIPC Initiative and decide on the amount of assistance to
be committed.
Interim assistance—amount disbursed to a country during the period between decision and
completion points, up to 20 percent annually and 60 percent in total of the assistance
committed at the decision point (or 25 percent and 75 percent, respectively, in exceptional
circumstances).
Completion point—point at which a country receives the remaining balance of its assistance
committed at the decision point, together with an additional disbursement of interest income
as defined in the footnote above. The timing of the completion point is linked to the
implementation of pre-agreed key structural reforms (i.e., floating completion point).
VIII. Implementation of MDRI Assistance
I. Total Debt Relief (SDR Million)3
Of which: MDRI
HIPC

32.91
30.23
2.68

1

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the
decision point. Hence these two amounts cannot be added.
2

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim
period.

3

The Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries
that are qualified for the assistance. The debt relief covers the full stock of debt owed to the Fund as of
end-2004, which remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief. The MDRI is
financed by bilateral contributions and the Fund's own resources, as well as the resources already disbursed to
the member under the HIPC Initiative (see Section VII above).

50
II. Debt Relief by Facility (SDR Million):

Delivery Date
June 2006
IX.

GRA
n/a

Eligible Debt
PRGF
32.91

Total
32.91

Safeguards Assessments

An update safeguards assessment of the Banque Centrale de Mauritanie (BCM) was
completed on April 17, 2007. The assessment identified serious vulnerabilities in the central
bank's safeguards framework and concluded that with the exception of appointing an
international audit firm, the central bank had made little progress in strengthening the
framework since the 2004 assessment. In particular, critical vulnerabilities were found in the
areas of financial reporting (including reporting of monetary data to the Fund), and controls.
A number of recommendations were made to address these vulnerabilities, including with
respect to audits of reserves and quarterly monetary program data, the preparation of
financial statements on the basis of International Financial Reporting Standards, and
measures to improve controls in reserves management. Measures have been taken in some
areas. At this stage, recommendations related to monetary program data remain relevant in
the context of possible future programs.
X.

Exchange Rate Arrangement

The currency of Mauritania is the ouguiya (UM). In August 2002, the BCM issued two
circulars: the first sets limits on, and regulates, the handling of foreign bank notes and the
second imposes a variant of a surrender requirement where 70 percent of fishing export
receipts should be repatriated via the BCM. In July 2005, this surrender requirement was
reduced to 60 percent. In July 2006, the surrender requirement was cancelled for small-scale
pelagic fish exports and in October 2006, it was further reduced to 25 percent for exports of
the public trading company SMCP. The BCM eliminated in October 2006 foreign exchange
rationing, which constitutes a restriction on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions under Article VIII, section 2 (a). From October 2005 to January
2007, the ouguiya was de facto pegged to the U.S. dollar, at an exchange rate of UM 268.6
per dollar. The BCM launched a foreign exchange auction market in late January 2007. After
remaining essentially unchanged over the first few months of 2007, the exchange rate vis-àvis the dollar has appreciated from UM 268.5 per dollar on April 25 to UM 252 per dollar at
end-December 2007. The de facto exchange rate is now classified as a managed float with no
pre-announced path.

51
XI.

Last Article IV Consultation

Discussions for the 2006 Article IV consultation were held in Nouakchott from April 26 to
May 9, 2006. The Country Report No. 06/272 was considered by the Executive Board on
June 21, 2006.
XII.

FSAP Participation, ROSCs and Offshore Financial Center (OFC) Assessments

A joint Fund/Bank FSSA, based primarily on work undertaken during two visits to
Mauritania in February 2005 and February–March 2006 as part of the Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP), was presented to the Executive Board in April. Its main
findings are that:
•

The financial sector, while not exhibiting any sign of distress, does not support
economic development and presents significant challenges.

•

Banks are vulnerable and inefficient; they primarily serve their affiliated economic
groups.

•

Nonbank financial intermediaries are underdeveloped; microfinance is emerging,
with institutions depending on subsidies.

•

Financial sector regulation still needs some additional improvement and enforcement,
in spite of recent progress, is still weak.

•

The financial sector infrastructure needs to be modernized—including the legal and
judicial framework, accounting and auditing practices, and the payment system.

Some recommendations have already been implemented, including: upgrading the financial
sector legal framework and gradually increasing competition in the banking sector by
encouraging entry of reputable international banks.
The fiscal transparency module of the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(ROSC) was based on two missions, conducted from May 14–24, 2002, and from
August 6–13, 2002, respectively. The final fiscal ROSC report is published on the IMF
website.
XIII. Technical Assistance (since 2005)
1.

MCM
TA mission on foreign exchange market issues: January 9–23, 2005.
Peripatetic TA missions by panel expert on foreign exchange reserves management:
July13–26, 2005.
TA mission on money market instruments: March 7–19, 2006.

52
TA mission on foreign exchange market, December 17–19, 2006.
TA mission on central Bank accounting, March 6–May 4, 2007.
TA mission on securitization of government debt, September 9–21, 2007.
TA mission on central Bank accounting, October 20, 2007–October 20, 2008.
2.

FAD
TA mission on public expenditure management: April 3–19, 2005.
TA mission on fiscal administration reform: June 14–18, 2005.
TA mission on tax policy: May 25–June 8, 2006.
TA mission on customs administration: June 5–16, 2006.
TA mission on oil revenue management: October 24–November 7, 2006.
TA mission on tax administration: March 12–23, 2007.
TA mission on tax policy: February 27–March 11, 2008.

3.

LEG
TA mission on the drafting of laws to combat money laundering and the financing of
terrorism: February 23–March 1, 2005.

4.

STA
TA consultant on banking and monetary statistics: November 8–22, 2005.
TA mission on balance of payments statistics: April 5–18, 2006.
TA mission on monetary and financial statistics: July 13–26, 2006.
TA mission on National Accounts Statistics, April 16–27, 2007.

5.

AFRITAC
Several TA missions in 2005–07, including on tax and customs administration,
computerization of public expenditure chain, external debt management, public
finance statistics, and microfinance supervision and regulation.

XIV. Resident Representative
Mr. Marc Carre has been resident representative in Mauritania since January 2007.

53
ANNEX II. RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
As of January 30, 2008
Partnership in Mauritania’s Development Strategy
1.
Mauritania’s second PRSP (PRSP-2), which was discussed by the Boards of the IMF
and the World Bank in December 2006 and January 2007, respectively, builds on the lessons
learned from the implementation of the first PRSP and was prepared in a participatory way.
Covering the period 2006–10, one of the central themes in the PRSP-2 is the transparent and
prudent management of the country’s new oil wealth, with the objective of maintaining
macroeconomic stability and achieving broad-based growth.
2.
Under the transition government (2005–07), an ambitious program aimed at
improving public financial management, strengthening the rule of law and reestablishing
democracy has begun to be implemented. The progress made to date was acknowledged at a
stock taking meeting between the government and Mauritania’s development partners, held
on March 6, 2007. The governance environment is also improving considerably, thanks to
several important initiatives including the adherence to the Extractive Industries Initiative
(EITI) and the launch of a National Anti-Corruption Strategy (currently under preparation).
The transition to democracy was completed with a new, democratically elected government
taking office in April 2007.
3.
The World Bank and the IMF continue to cooperate closely in assisting the
Government of Mauritania to implement its medium-term poverty reduction strategy with
each institution taking the lead in the policy dialogue in its areas of expertise. The Bank leads
the policy dialogue on sectoral structural reforms, including the financial sector, private
sector development and poverty monitoring and evaluation. The two institutions cooperate
closely in advising the government on the implementation of the PRSP. Other areas of close
collaboration include public financial management, the oil sector, the financial sector, public
sector enterprises, external debt sustainability, poverty and social impact analysis, and private
sector development.
Bank Group Country Assistance Strategy
The Country Assistance Strategy
4.
The World Bank supported the implementation of the government’s first PRSP
(PRSP-1) through its Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, FY03–05—extended to cover
FY06). The CAS program of lending and nonlending operations was specifically designed to
support implementation of the four strategic axes of the PRSP-1, with particular emphasis on
capacity building. In the 2002 CAS, it was assumed that a series of Poverty Reduction
Support Credits (PRSCs) would gradually become the main pillars of the lending program,

54
but this shift did not materialize, mainly as a result of the deterioration of macrobudgetary
discipline, which emerged in 2004. Since then, the macrobudgetary framework has greatly
improved.
5.
The new CAS (FY08–11) was discussed and approved by the Board in July 2007. It
presents a Bank program that is closely aligned with the priorities of the second PRSP and
outlines the Bank’s strategy for transitioning to Mauritania’s possible graduation from IDA
to IBRD. Taking into account the Bank’s comparative advantages and offering a flexible
range of financing instruments, the new CAS focuses on: (a) economic governance and
public sector capacity; (b) diversified growth through investment climate improvement, and
possibly key enabling infrastructures through enclave operations; and (c) continued efforts to
fight poverty and inequalities in both urban and rural areas. The CAS will be implemented
through both upcoming and recently approved lending operations and analytical and advisory
activities (AAA). The Bank may consider possible IBRD enclave operations in support of
port development and the energy sector.
6.
To advance the collaborative implementation of the new PRSP and CAS by the
government and all development partners, the Bank—together with assistance from the EU
and UNDP—helped to prepare a Consultative Group (CG) meeting in December 2007 to
facilitate donor coordination and new lender mobilization. To support discussions, financing
gaps were calculated on the basis of MDG Costing and the 3-year MTEF. With more than
40 delegations representing several development partners and international institutions, a
record sum of $2.1 billion was pledged in support of the Mauritania’s development plan. A
special focus of discussions was placed on improved development and engagement of the
private sector and attracted more than 250 Mauritanian and foreign companies.
The Bank Portfolio
7.
To date, the World Bank has approved 60 projects in Mauritania for a total of
$947.2 million. The current portfolio has 11 operations for a total of $294.5 million in
commitments, with an undisbursed balance of $136.1 million as of January 2008. The
portfolio also includes three regional projects, for which Mauritania’s share is $66.9 million,
and an additional GEF project. With the regional program, the total Mauritania portfolio is
$361.4 million. The Bank's program concentrates on rural development, urban development
and social sector operations (health and education), with other specific investments in
growth-stimulating sectors, such as mining, energy, and transport. In FY06, the Bank
delivered the second Health and Nutrition Project ($10 million), a GEF Community based
Watershed Management Project ($6 million) and two regional projects: (a) the Senegal River
Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development Project (Credit to Mauritania:
$31.78 million); and (b) the Felou Hydroelectric Project (Credit to Mauritania: $25 million).
In the first quarter of FY07 the Bank also delivered a Public Sector Capacity Building Project
(PRECASP—$13 million), and an Additional Financing Credit to the Second Mining Sector
Capacity Building Project ($5 million) to provide technical assistance to the oil sector. For

55
FY08, a Business Environment Enhancement Project is planned (for $5–7.5 million under
remaining IDA-14 funding). For FY09 a Transport Technical Assistance Grant and a Port of
Nouakchott Development SIL are in the pipeline.
8.
The Bank’s program also encompasses nonlending services including Economic and
Sector Work (ESW), the provision of Institutional Development Facility (IDF) grants and
Trust Funds (TF). A Public Expenditure Review update—which benefited from the revision
of all main economic data—was completed in FY06, along with an update of the 2003
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), focusing chiefly on natural resources management
(oil and mining). A Gender Assessment and an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) were
completed in March and June 2007 respectively. The current ESW portfolio also includes a
Study on Corruption in Mauritania (including a paper on the effects of corruption on private
sector development), which will serve as an input into the government’s Anti-Corruption
Strategy, a Poverty Map and a Sources of Growth study, to be completed in FY08–09. Land
tenure and fisheries studies, and a Country Procurement Assessment are also planned in
FY08. The Bank provided $448,000 in an IDF for the Justice Sector (which closed in
September 2005). In addition, the Bank is currently providing $273,000 through an IDF to
support the accountancy profession and $349,000 through an IDF to strengthen the public
procurement function. A Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building ($105,930) was
approved in September 2005 and aims at supporting the development of a statistical master
plan.
Main Policy Reform Areas
The Bank supports the authorities in the implementation of the four priority areas at
the core of the PRSP-1 and PRSP-2.
9.

10.
Accelerate growth and maintain macroeconomic stability. One of the key objectives
of the government is to strengthen macroeconomic policy, to optimize the impact of oil
production on growth, and to stimulate private sector development. The Bank’s policy
dialogue in this area focuses, inter alia, on: (a) identifying and implementing structural
reforms and macroeconomic policies, through the PRECASP project and the ESW program
(including the Sources of Growth and Fisheries studies); (b) improving access to financial
services; and (c) improving the business environment through legal and judicial reform, and
through a detailed analysis of the ICA. The Bank is also promoting the growth agenda in its
rural operations, particularly through the activities supported by the PDIAIM project, which
works with private sector operators in the Senegal valley area. IFC will closely coordinate its
interventions with the Bank in supporting government reforms, privatization and investment
opportunities. IFC’s strategy for Mauritania is focused on: (a) improving the investment
climate; (b) building up the capacity of MSMEs and institutions that can support them; and
(c) proactive support to project development in the financial, tourism and oil/mining sectors.
As of January 2008, IFC’s committed portfolio is comprised of projects in banking, tourism,
cement and agribusiness sectors, and amounts to $37.02 million, out of which $16.25 million

56
is outstanding. IFC advisory services have also been invited by the government to assist in
the design of the partial privatization and selection of a strategic investor for SNIM, the
country’s national mining and industrial company. IFC’s assistance on this project, to be
delivered in close collaboration with the WB program for the mining sector, represents a
greater effort to provide Mauritania with assistance across the World Bank Group (IDA,
IBRD, IFC and MIGA), particularly in the areas of infrastructure development and natural
resource management. A Memorandum of Understanding to this effect has been signed with
the government on January 28, 2008 on possible support to the modernization of SNIM, the
expansion of the port of Nouakchott as well as to the energy and hydrocarbon sectors.
11.
Anchor growth in the economic sphere of the poor. This requires: (a) renewed efforts
to ensure a sustainable urban development; and (b) a comprehensive approach to rural
development. In the urban sector, following the successes of the ongoing UDP project, a
second phase project is being prepared, with the participation of other donors, which will
continue to address economic development of cities, improvement of urban management
with greater devolution of management and resources to the municipalities. In the rural
sector, the government has prepared a review of the sector as a first step toward the
preparation of a comprehensive rural development strategy. The Bank’s rural strategy and
portfolio will be revisited accordingly to ensure alignment of support with government
priorities. This would include measures to increase productivity in the livestock and
agricultural sectors, which employ a large swathe of the rural poor. In livestock, the policy
dialogue centers, on the one hand, on growth and poverty reduction, paying particular
attention to key value chains identified in the strategy, such as meat export, cattle and leather
production. On the other hand, the Bank will encourage a concrete application of the new
Livestock Code elaborated with the assistance of the German cooperation agency. In
agriculture, attention is being paid to improving farm productivity by easing access to inputs
and credit and promoting training schemes for farmers. Efforts are also being undertaken to
improve living conditions at the local level (village communities) by stimulating income
generating activities, expanding access to basic socioeconomic services and roads, and
improving natural resource management practices. Bank support will also promote
decentralization and local development with particular focus on direct transfer of funds to
poor rural communities, including through access to micro finance, which will prevent the
marginalization of the sector and rural poor.
12.

Develop human resources and provide access to basic social services.
a.

Education. The Bank’s operations and policy advice support the objectives of
the National Program for the Development of the Education Sector (PNDSE
2002–10). Main actions have led to: (a) the expansion of infrastructure to boost
access to schools; (b) the recruitment of new tutors and teachers; (c) the reform
of the teacher training institutions in line with the bilingual teaching
requirements; and (d) the implementation of training schemes for teachers to
strengthen education quality. The Bank also supports higher education reform

57
through the Higher Education Development Project, including technical
assistance and the construction of a new university campus. Mauritania has also
benefited from the Education for All Fast Track Initiative to accelerate the
implementation of the national education program (receiving a total of $9
million in 2004–05), and it currently is in the process of requesting additional
assistance.
b.

Health. Additional efforts are needed to accelerate progress toward the health
and nutrition related MDG targets. Actions—which will continue to be
supported by the Bank mainly through the upcoming Health and Nutrition
Support Project—have resulted in: (a) greater access to primary health;
(b) improvements in the quality of health services, especially for the poor; (c) the
establishment of new benefit packages to attract health personnel in rural areas;
and (d) the recruitment of additional health personnel. The authorities have
adopted a multisectoral approach to combat HIV/AIDS, which is supported by
the Bank's ongoing Multisector HIV/AIDS Control Project. The leadership for
this program is located in the prime minister’s office and has translated to date in
strong cross-sectoral response at both the central and local levels.

13.
Promote good governance and institutional capacity building. The new government
has made good governance one of its key priorities and an important first step was
Mauritania’s signing of the UN Convention against Corruption during the democratic
transition process. An Ethics Code of civil servants has been approved. The authorities have
been working on elaborating a national Anti-corruption Strategy, which the Bank is
supporting through a comprehensive anti-corruption study (of which a first draft was
delivered to the government for comments in December 2007). The Bank also advises the
government on its Anti-Money Laundering (AML) program, following the recently passed
AML legislation and Mauritania’s adherence to the Financial Action Task Force against
Money Laundering for the Middle-East and North Africa (MENAFATF). Finally, the
PRECASP project supports governance reforms in a number of areas, including public
expenditure management, decentralization, and modernization of public administration and
strengthening of civil society capabilities.
Bank-Fund Collaboration in Specific Areas
14.
As part of its overall assistance to Mauritania––through lending, country analytical
work, and technical assistance––the Bank supports policy reforms in close collaboration with
the Fund, in the following areas:
15.
Public Expenditure Management. The Fund and Bank jointly emphasize the need to
significantly improve public expenditure management (PEM), accountability, and
transparency. Substantial progress has been made in key areas of PEM, most notably: (a) the
preparation of monthly treasury balances and fiscal reports, reconciled with the Central Bank

58
(BCM); (b) the adoption of a functional classification to facilitate public expenditure
tracking; (c) an update of the global Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF); (d) the
new Automated Expenditure Chain Network (RACHAD), put in place in November 2005 on
a pilot basis, which integrates all budget execution procedures; and (e) the deconcentration of
authority over payment orders to the ministerial level and at the regional level.
16.
Oil. The government has established a National Hydrocarbon Revenue Fund (FNRH),
an offshore account administered by the Central Bank, which will receive all government oil
revenues. The transparency surrounding oil revenues has also been strengthened through the
transparent treatment of oil revenues in the 2006 and 2007 budgets; and the government’s
commitment to adhere to the EITI. Further progress is required to elaborate, finalize and
enact the National Hydrocarbon Law. The Bank and Fund actively support the authorities in
the implementation of the EITI, the management of oil revenues, and in defining the role of
the National Hydrocarbon Society (SMH). The World Bank Treasury is also providing
technical assistance to the BCM in the area of reserve management, following a specific
request from the authorities and in agreement with the IMF.
17.
Financial Sector Reform. As part of the CAS, the Bank, in close collaboration with
the Fund, is helping the authorities in improving financial sector intermediation for private
sector development, and mobilizing savings, while promoting competition in the financial
sector. A Financial Sector Study was completed in 2004. A joint Bank/IMF in-depth review
of the financial sector (FSAP) took place in late March/early April 2006 and found that:
(a) financial services in Mauritania are underdeveloped, with the banking system still
accounting for an overwhelming share of the financial sector; (b) credit risk, including risk
concentration, is Mauritanian banks’ main vulnerability; (c) banking supervision has been
strengthened but the regulatory framework still lags significantly behind international
standards; and (d) nonbank financial services (e.g., microfinance, insurance) are at an early
stage of development. The authorities have asked the Bank to assist with the implementation
of the FSAP proposed action plan and a proposed financial/private sector and judicial project
is under preparation for delivery in FY08.
18.
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA). The Bank and Fund have agreed to
review closely the poverty and social impact of reforms that are being implemented. To date,
benefit-incidence analysis has been conducted in the health and education sectors to assess
the welfare impact of public spending on different groups of people. In the mining sector, a
PSIA has been conducted to evaluate the impact of reducing the auxiliary services provided
by the national mining company (SNIM) to different groups of people (electricity and water).
Additional poverty related analytical work includes: (a) a survey on the dynamics of rural
labor markets (finalized); and (b) the elaboration of poverty maps (ongoing).
Contact Persons. Questions may be addressed to Mr. James Bond, Country Director,
ext.; 32644; Mr. Francois Rantrua, Country Manager, ext. 5353–312, or Mr. Nicola Pontara,
Senior Economist, ext. 8040.

59
ANNEX III. STATISTICAL ISSUES
(As of April 2008)
The authorities have made significant efforts to improve the data compilation and reporting
system, particularly within the context of the latest SMP and the ongoing PRGF. While data
provision to the Fund is now broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, shortcomings in the
national accounts and balance of payments statistics persist. However the authorities are now
committed to maintaining full data transparency in all sectors, in line with their participation
in the GDDS, which began in September 2004. The National Statistics Council (CNS) called
for by the Statistics Law of January 2005 was established in February 2006.
Real sector
The national accounts require substantial improvement and work, to implement the statistical
methodologies of the 1993 System of National Accounts (1993 SNA) and rebase constant
price estimates to 1998, has been under way for several years. To date, the National
Statistical Office (ONS) has finalized estimates for 1998–2001 and produced provisional
estimates for 2002–05. The ONS plans to complete the 2006 estimates by mid-2008.
AFRITAC West is providing technical assistance.
The current edition of the consumer price index (CPI), developed with the assistance of
AFRISTAT, has been published since May 2004. Geographical coverage of the CPI is
limited to Nouakchott, the capital.
Government finance
The monthly treasury balance is reconciled with the treasury accounts at the Banque Centrale
de Mauritanie (BCM), and it constitutes the basis for a monthly fiscal reporting table (TOFE)
that is produced with a maximum lag of one month. Expenditures are recorded on a payment
order basis, and since April 2006, on the basis of a functional classification of expenditure,
thus allowing for monthly tracking of the execution of poverty-reducing expenditure. A
detailed quarterly budget execution report will be published on the treasury website
(www.tresor.mr). No government finance statistics are reported to STA. With ongoing
methodological improvements, the monthly statements of treasury accounts could provide
the basis for reporting budgetary central government finance statistics to STA.
Monetary and financial statistics
In November 2005, a STA expert provided detailed recommendations on how central bank
statistics should be derived from the central bank accounts to ensure accurate data reporting
of monetary data to the Fund. And in July 2006, a STA mission assisted the BCM in bringing
monetary statistics in line with the statistical methodologies of the Monetary and Financial
Statistics Manual and data dissemination recommendations of the GDDS. More specifically,

60
the mission helped the BCM develop and implement bridge tables from source data for
monetary statistics to the new Standardized Report Form (SRFs) for reporting monetary
statistics to STA.
In parallel, the BCM pursued the implementation of the recommendations of the January
2004 IMF safeguards assessment mission, particularly those relating to the improvement in
the presentation of the central bank accounts. The final audit reports for the BCM’s financial
statements for 2003, 2004, and 2005 were released to Fund staff. The audited statements and
revised monetary data are now broadly consistent.
A STA expert visited the BCM in March 2008 to help resolve inconsistencies and
misclassifications in the central bank’s accounts and in source data reported by commercial
banks. The mission also completed SRFs 1SR (on central bank), 2SR (on other depository
corporations), and 5SR (on monetary aggregates). The BCM is now expected to submit
monetary data to STA monthly by using the SRFs 1SR, 2SR, and 5SR beginning with endJanuary 2008 data onwards and to progressively compile SRFs back to December 2001.
Monetary and financial statistics are not regularly reported to STA, and the most recent
monetary data received and published in the IFS refer to March 2004. However, the BCM
posts monetary statistics on its official website (the most recent data refers to December
2007).
Balance of payments
Balance of payments statistics are compiled on the basis of foreign exchange records of the
central bank (which requires commercial banks to regularly report details of external
transactions they conduct on behalf of their customers), supplemented by trade data (from
Customs), external debt statistics, and data communicated directly by the state-owned iron
ore company. Many components are routinely based on estimates as there are no systematic
efforts to collect data on certain types of transfers, foreign direct investment, or tourism
receipts. In addition nonmining exports, services, and short-term capital flows are not well
measured as under-reporting of external transactions by commercial banks is problematic. No
balance of payments statistics are reported to STA.
Poverty and social indicators
Household expenditure surveys, conducted at the national level for the years 1990, 1996,
and 2000, are the main source for building poverty profiles and setting poverty reduction
targets. In 2004, ONS conducted a limited survey for Nouakchott (which hosts about onethird of the country’s population).

61
TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
As of April 2008
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data6

Frequency
of
Reporting 6

Frequency
of
publication6

Exchange Rates

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities1

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

NA

Reserve/Base Money

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

NA

Broad Money

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

NA

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

NA

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

NA

Interest Rates2

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

W

W

W

Consumer Price Index

Apr. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3 – General
Government4

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing3– Central
Government

Mar. 2008

Apr. 2008

M

M

I

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

Dec. 2007

Jan. 2008

A

A

I

External Current Balance

Mar. 2008

Apr. 2008

Q

Q

I

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Mar. 2008

Apr. 2008

Q

Q

I

2007 7

Mar. 2008

A

A

I

Dec. 2007

Jan. 2008

A

A

I

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills,
notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social
security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I), Not Available (NA).
7
Preliminary.
2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund
and the International Development Association
approved by Amor Tahari and Anthony Boote (IMF)
and Sudhir Shetty and Carlos Braga (World Bank)
May 2, 2008
The joint IMF-World Bank low-income country debt sustainability analysis (LIC DSA) shows
that on the basis of a relatively conservative assumption on the volume of prospective oil
exports, a reasonable non-oil growth assumption, and a positive outcome of current
negotiations of debt in arrears, Mauritania is at moderate risk of debt distress.1 Under the
baseline scenario, all debt burden indicators remain below their policy-dependent indicative
thresholds, except for a marginal breach of threshold for the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio.
However, stress tests indicate that Mauritania is somewhat vulnerable to adverse shocks,
notably the risk of lower-than-projected growth of GDP and exports. The public DSA, which
takes into account the large accumulation of external assets in the oil fund, suggests that
Mauritania’s overall public sector debt dynamics are sustainable in light of the current size
and the evolution of the domestic debt stock while remaining vulnerable to some shocks.
I. BACKGROUND
1.
The last DSA was undertaken after the country received substantial HIPC and
MDRI relief.2 This analysis updates the long-term macroeconomic framework presented in
the last DSA. In particular, the revised projections reflect new information on (a) the real
sector; (b) debt stocks; and (c) the outcome of the Consultative Group Meeting in
December 2007.

1

The external and public sector LIC DSAs presented in this document are based on the common standard LIC
DSA framework. See “Debt Sustainability in Low-Income Countries: Proposal for an Operational Framework
and Policy Implications” (http://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/sustain/2004/020304.htm and
IDA/SECM2004/0035, 2/3/04) and “Debt Sustainability in Low-Income Countries: Further Considerations on
an Operational Framework, Policy Implications” (http://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/sustain/2004/091004.htm
and IDA/SECM2004/0629, 9/10/04) and “Applying the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income
Countries Post Debt Relief” (IDA/SecM2006-0564, 8/11/06).

2

See IMF Country Report 07/43, Appendix II, and World Bank, “Mauritania: Joint Bank-Fund Debt
Sustainability Analysis”, February, 2007.

2

HIPC/ MDRI

250
2.
The evolution of the publicly
External debt stocks (in percent of GDP)
guaranteed external debt over the past years
Private debt
200
was mainly influenced by the HIPC debt relief
and MDRI assistance. Mauritania reached its
150
completion point under the HIPC Initiative in
100
2002 and received MDRI assistance in 2006.
Public
In particular, MDRI assistance brought
debt
50
Mauritania’s total external debt down from
Public
debt in
arrears
almost 170 percent of GDP at end-2005 to below
0
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
100 percent at end-2006. However, there
remains a large proportion of debt in arrears that
has not yet been treated under the HIPC initiative. These arrears were estimated at
US$1.2 billion at end-2007, representing about half of Mauritania’s total external nominal
debt and contributing disproportionately to its NPV.3

3.
After a long process of consolidation of central bank (BCM) claims and domestic
arrears, Mauritania’s stock of gross domestic public debt stabilized at approximately
19.7 percent of GDP at end-2006, consisting of central bank claims on the treasury
(equivalent to 14.3 percent of GDP), and short-term treasury bills mostly held by banks
(equivalent to 5.5 percent of GDP). Most arrears toward domestic suppliers were eliminated
in 2006. BCM’s consolidated claims on the government comprise two types of instruments:
claims repayable over 30 years with an average interest rate of 4.65 percent, and interest-free
provision for accumulated foreign exchange losses, repayable over 37 years, with a grace
period extending until 2015.
II. UNDERLYING DSA ASSUMPTIONS
4.
The macroeconomic framework underlying the DSA is consistent with the
government’s medium-term reform program. The framework is characterized by a
relatively conservative scenario for oil revenues and sustained non-oil GDP growth, and a
realistic set of assumptions about economic policies and outcomes (Table 1; Box 1). It is
assumed that oil resources are limited and that their extraction will end by 2027. The baseline
scenario features a transitory decrease in oil production in 2008–11. As a result of a spur in
FDI in extractive industries, production subsequently is expected to peak at 62,000 barrels
per day in 2014 and gradually decline to close to zero in 2027. Under this profile, the
cumulative oil production reaches about 300 million barrels corresponding to the estimated
3

These arrears originate from liabilities that were considered to be “passive debt”. They were thus excluded
from HIPC calculations because there was no indication that the respective creditors (Libya, Kuwait, Algeria,
the United Arab Emirates, and the Arab Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) were requesting the
repayment of these debts. Since the HIPC completion point, these creditors have indicated that the claims have
not been waived. There has been no debt service paid on these debts for several years. After resolution with
three creditors the largest remaining portion of arrears is owed to Kuwait (about $1 billion, mostly consisting of
late interest charges). The rest is with Libya, amounting to about $200 million.

3
cumulative capacity of the existing Chinguetti deep offshore oil field and other fields to be
developed, including Tiof. Regarding the non-oil economy, it is assumed that there will be a
spurt of growth early on reflecting the ongoing new mining developments and the step-up in
public investment. Real GDP growth projections remain moderate, and do not take into
account the impact of very large FDI-financed projects currently under discussion and yet to
be quantified. Average annual inflation should gradually decline to 5 percent in 2012 and
stay at this level during the remainder of the projection period.
5.
Outstanding arrears to Kuwait and Libya are assumed to be treated in 2008 and
4
2009. Following this resolution and a surge of disbursements as a consequence of the
Consultative Group meeting, the gross external debt is expected to decrease gradually from
63.6 percent to 27.4 percent of GDP between 2008 and 2027. Simultaneously, deposits are
assumed to accumulate on the oil fund that could reach 23.4 percent of GDP in 2027.
6.
An ambitious public investment program between 2008 and 2012 is projected to
be financed by donor funds pledged at the recent Consultative Group meeting. The
framework underlying this DSA assumes disbursement of $1.6 billion of loans and grants
pledged over 2008–12. This financial aid represents an average annual gross aid inflow of
about 12 percent of GDP between 2008 and 2012. Beyond 2012, the framework assumes
continued significant but lower foreign borrowing. Some blending with nonconcessional
resources is expected to become more prominent over the medium to long term, driving the
projected average grant element on new borrowing down from an average of 51.9 percent
in 2008–13 to 40.3 percent by 2018 and finally to 22.2 percent by 2027.5
7.
As in the previous DSA, the external DSA is presented on a gross basis (i.e.,
excluding the oil reserve fund from external debt). The current framework maintains some
accumulation of oil reserves, as opposed to an early repayment of external debt as the return
on assets in the oil fund is higher that the cost of predominantly concessional external debt,
and with a view to maintaining a liquidity buffer to respond to potential adverse shocks,
including in oil prices or production. However, the public debt analysis is conducted on a net
basis (that is, after netting out the oil reserve fund from external debt), in light of the liquidity
of oil reserves deposited at the French Central Bank, the transparency and security of the oil
fund, and its nature (for liquidity rather than intergenerational purposes).

4

Under the LIC DSA guidelines for post completion point countries, the baseline scenario should incorporate
HIPC and MDRI relief. Accordingly, the LIC DSA assumes debt relief by Kuwait and Libya in line with the
debt reduction required under HIPC. See “Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Bank-Fund Debt
Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries” available at www.imf.org and www.worldbank.org.
5

All NPV calculations are based on a unified discount rate of 5 percent per annum.

4

Box 1: Baseline Macroeconomic Assumptions
Real GDP growth: Real non-oil GDP growth is projected to be sustained at 6.2 percent per year on
average over 2008-12, reflecting the step-up in public investment mobilized at the recent Consultative
Group meeting and an increase in mining production capacity. After 2013, growth returns to a
sustainable level averaging 4 percent per year.
Inflation: After a peak in 2008 resulting from high international food and fuel prices, consumer price
inflation is projected to decline gradually to 5 percent by 2012. It is projected to remain at 5 for the
remaining projection period.
Current account balance: The current account deficit is expected to peak at about 21 percent of GDP
in 2011, mainly driven by FDI and aid-financed imports. After that, a reversal of this balance is expected
once oil exports pick up bringing the current account to a surplus of 10 percent of GDP in 2015.
Thereafter, the current account position is expected to deteriorate gradually, returning to deficits of 6-7
percent of GDP by the end of the projection period.
Government balances: The framework assumes the following: (a) non-oil revenue remains stable at
about 23 percent of non-oil GDP throughout the period; (b) grants return to their historical average in
2013; and (c) oil revenue including interest on oil fund will peak at 11 percent in 2014 before declining
by approximately 10 percent a year until 2027. The government’s non-oil deficit including grants is
projected to improve gradually from 8 percent to about 2 percent of non-oil GDP between 2008 and
2027. The projected primary balance improves from a deficit of 3.6 percent of GDP in 2014 to a surplus
of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2027.
External assistance and scaling up: The framework assumes full realization of the additional aid
resources pledged at the December 2007 consultative group meeting amounting to an average of
10 percent of GDP of additional inflows, which almost triples previous expectations of aid inflows in
this period. 46 percent of the aid inflows between 2008 and 2012 are assumed to come in the form of
concessional loans. The remainder consists of grants.
Domestic borrowing: Oil revenue should allow reimbursing the consolidated long-term debt to the
BCM in full by 2016 and halving the level of short-term debt by 2018.
Real interest rates: The compound real interest rate of the consolidated long-term debt vis-à-vis the
BCM amounts to 3 percent. The real interest rate of the short-term domestic debt (treasury bills)
approaches 10 percent.

III. EXTERNAL DSA
8.
The analysis shows that Mauritania’s external debt is at a moderate risk of debt
distress.6 The analysis was conducted under the debt sustainability framework for
low-income countries (LICs). Throughout, the debt burden thresholds used for the analysis
6

According to the LIC DSA guidelines, the existence of arrears could suggest that a country is in debt distress,
unless there are other reasons than debt-service burden for not servicing its debt. Despite having substantial
arrears to external creditors, Mauritania is not assessed as being in debt distress because its arrears are related to
debts that were previously categorized as “passive”.

5
are those applying to poor performers. According to the World Bank CPIA rating,
Mauritania’s policies and institutions are assessed as those corresponding to a “poor
performer”.7 The debt-burden thresholds for countries in this category are: (a) the NPV of the
debt-to-exports of goods and services of 100 percent; (b) NPV of the debt-to-GDP of
30 percent; and (c) NPV of the debt-to-fiscal revenues of 200 percent. The relevant debt
service ratios are: (a) 15 percent of exports of goods and services; and (b) 25 percent of
revenues.
9.
All indicators of the NPV of the external debt would remain under the policy
dependent threshold throughout the period except for a short and slight breach between 201013 of the NPV of debt-to-GDP (Figure 1). This outcome critically depends on the
resolution of outstanding arrears under Cologne terms. In the absence of such resolution, the
NPV of external debt would exceed all thresholds. These ratios are calculated on a gross
basis and do not take into account the accumulated external assets in the oil fund. Under the
assumption of a return on oil fund assets of 5 percent, the ratios of NPV of net external debt
would become negative after 2021, indicating that the discounted present value of returns on
assets in the oil fund would outweigh the present value of expected external debt service.
10.
The less favorable outcome obtained from the stress tests reflects the moderate
vulnerability of external debt solvency to adverse shocks. Under the historical scenario—
which assumes that key macroeconomic variables evolve in line with the record of the past
seven years, where oil revenues were limited—all NPV ratios of the external debt would
eventually deteriorate above the thresholds. Additional tests assessing the impact of less
favorable lending conditions—specifically, new borrowing at 2 percentage points higher
interest rates—also yield less favorable sustainability outcomes for the NPV of external
debt-to-GDP ratio (Table 3). Under the “most extreme stress test”,8 all indicators except the
external debt service-to-revenue ratio would breach their thresholds (Table 3; Figure 1).
IV. PUBLIC DSA
11.
Under the baseline assumptions, the NPV of net government debt-to-GDP ratio
is projected to decline continuously over the projection period. The fiscal sustainability
7

In the LIC DSA framework, the quality of a country’s policies and institutions is measured by the World
Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) index, and classified into three categories: strong,
medium and poor. The latest CPIA rating for Mauritania in 2006 is 3.28, bringing the 3-year average to 3.23,
below the 3.25 threshold (see http://siteresources.worldbank.org/IDA/Resources/tablesCPR.pdf). The 2007
CPIA is currently being finalized by the World Bank. A further improvement is expected. However, this would
not affect the overall risk assessment which would remain at moderate even with elevated thresholds.
8
For the NPV of debt-to-GDP and the NPV of debt-to-revenue ratios this corresponds to a combination of real
GDP growth at historical average minus half a standard deviation, export value growth at historical average
minus half a standard deviation, U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus half a standard deviation,
and net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009–10. For the NPV of
debt-to-exports and the debt service-to-exports ratios, this corresponds to export value growth at historical
average minus one standard deviation in 2009–10.

6
analysis largely mirrors the external DSA: the long-term sustainability of the public debt
rests crucially on the resolution of debt arrears and the materialization of oil revenues, and
the disbursement of aid pledged at the Consultative Group meeting. Under the current
framework, the sharp increase in oil revenue concomitant to the final disbursements from the
CG meeting financial aid allows (a) the reimbursement of consolidated long-term debt to the
BCM in full by 2016; and (b) the reduction by half of the level of short term debt by 2018.
Gross public debt is projected to decrease from 110.5 percent of GDP to 40.4 percent
between 2006 and 2017 (eventually reaching 31.1 percent of GDP in 2027). The reduction in
public debt net of deposits on the oil fund is even more pronounced in the second decade,
with the NPV of net government debt-to-GDP ratio decreasing from 57.1 percent in 2006 to
19.9 percent in 2017, and 8.8 percent in 2027.
12.
The prospects of long-term fiscal sustainability could worsen under adverse
circumstances simulated by the stress tests. Under the “most extreme” stress test (featuring
real GDP growth to its historical average minus one standard deviation in 2008–09), the NPV
of net public debt-to-GDP and the NPV of the net public debt-to-revenue ratio would exhibit
unsustainable upward trends. If GDP growth was about 1 percentage point lower than under
the base line over the entire projection period, the NPV of net public debt-to-GDP would
hover between 20 percent and 50 percent. If, however, real GDP growth and the primary
deficit remained at the average level of the past ten years, the outcome would quite closely
reflect projections under the baseline scenario (Table 5).
V. DEBT DISTRESS CLASSIFICATION AND CONCLUSIONS
13.
This LIC DSA presented here shows that on the basis of a relatively conservative
assumption on the volume of prospective oil exports, a reasonable non-oil growth
assumption, and a positive outcome of current negotiations of debt in arrears, Mauritania’s
risk of debt distress remains moderate. The overall risk of debt distress is even lower when
the NPV of debt is taken net of assets in the oil fund. This assessment, which is in line with
the last DSA, is contingent on a positive outcome of current negotiations of arrears
clearances and a realization of the concessionality objective for the recently pledged scaling
up of aid. The analysis highlights Mauritania’s vulnerability to GDP and exports shocks. It is
thus critical that Mauritania continues to pursue a cautious borrowing strategy, limited
exclusively to concessional borrowing, and improves its debt management.

7
Table 1. Macroeconomic Framework, 2007–27
Projections 1/
2011
2012

2007

2008

2009

2010

1.0
5.9
13.4
7.3
7.4

5.0
5.7
19.0
12.5
12.0

6.8
5.9
3.7
9.5
7.0

5.7
6.2
1.5
6.5
6.0

Consumption
Government
Nongovernment

92.0
21.7
70.3

86.8
21.9
64.9

82.7
18.8
63.9

86.4
19.0
67.4

87.4
19.2
68.2

Gross investment
Oil-related
Non-oil related investment
Government
Nongovernment

22.4
5.3
17.0
6.0
16.4

21.9
4.2
17.8
6.8
15.1

21.8
4.7
17.1
6.7
15.1

26.6
8.2
18.4
7.2
19.4

Gross savings
Government
Nongovernment

11.0
2.3
8.7

15.7
-0.3
16.0

18.8
3.3
15.5

15.4
2.9
12.4

27.2
25.0
24.8
15.7
15.7
32.1
30.1
8.6
2.0
-7.3
-4.9

27.4
24.6
24.3
15.6
15.1
34.1
32.7
9.7
1.4
-9.8
-6.7

25.9
23.0
22.7
15.5
15.0
30.9
29.2
10.1
1.7
-8.2
-5.0

25.0
21.8
22.4
15.6
14.5
31.0
29.2
10.3
1.8
-8.6
-6.0

Percentage change

Economic growth and prices
Real GDP
Non oil Real GDP
Implicit non-oil GDP deflator
Consumer price index (period average)
Consumer price index , eop

6.2
4.3
4.8
5.0
5.0

4.0
4.4
5.1
5.0
5.0

3.9
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.0

4.9
5.0
5.2
5.7
5.5

76.8
15.7
61.1

73.0
14.6
58.4

76.5
14.9
61.6

89.0
16.4
72.6

82.6
16.4
66.1

34.4
15.4
19.0
7.9
26.5

22.1
6.3
15.8
6.8
15.3

17.5
3.7
13.8
5.4
12.1

15.3
0.8
14.5
5.8
9.5

16.5
0.4
16.1
6.5
10.0

18.3
2.5
15.8
6.4
12.0

13.1
3.9
9.2

19.6
7.8
11.8

22.9
7.7
15.1

22.6
8.8
13.8

13.1
6.4
6.7

17.8
6.6
11.2

22.9
13.3
21.8
16.4
13.5
28.9
27.5
9.5
1.4
-7.1
-6.0

23.2
14.5
22.6
18.2
15.3
28.5
27.7
10.0
0.8
-5.9
-5.3

21.4
16.9
21.1
18.0
16.6
27.2
26.6
9.7
0.6
-6.1
-5.8

23.2
17.1
22.1
17.4
15.5
28.9
27.9
10.0
1.0
-6.8
-5.6

6.0
6.6
2.2
5.5
5.0

12.7
6.8
3.1
5.0
5.0

In percent of GDP

Investment and Savings

In percent of non-oil GDP

Consolidated government operations
Revenue and grants
Of which : non-oil revenue
Revenue, excluding grants
Of which : tax revenue
non- oil tax revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Primary expenditure
Of which : capital
Interest (net)
Non-oil balance excluding grants
Non-oil balance including grants

2013 2014–20 2021–27 2008–27

25.7
23.1
21.9
15.7
14.7
31.2
29.7
11.1
1.5
-9.3
-5.5

25.1
17.3
21.8
16.0
13.6
30.7
29.3
11.4
1.4
-8.9
-5.6

In percent of GDP
Current account (including official transfers
and oil)
Balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net income
Net transfers

-11.4

-6.3

-3.0

-11.2

-21.3

-2.5

5.4

7.3

-3.3

-0.6

-14.4
54.6
68.9
-2.2
5.1

-8.7
58.6
67.3
-3.8
6.2

-4.5
56.0
60.4
-4.6
6.1

-13.0
51.6
64.6
-3.9
5.6

-21.8
48.7
70.5
-5.5
6.0

1.1
55.9
54.8
-8.3
4.7

9.5
55.9
46.4
-6.9
2.7

8.2
48.4
40.2
-3.6
2.8

-5.4
36.5
42.0
-0.7
2.8

-0.9
46.1
47.0
-3.2
3.5

In percent of non-oil GDP, unless otherwise specified.
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of ouguiyas)
External public debt outstanding
(in US$ million)
Financial assets of the government net of
external debt (US$ million)
Gross official reserves of the BCM
(US$ million)
GNP per capita (US$)
Population (millions)
Mauritania's price of oil (US$/barrel)
Annual production of oil (millions of barrels)

734.2

904.8 1,026.4 1,087.9 1,158.7 1,523.8 1,749.0 2,489.6 4,183.7 2,708.2

2,536.0 1,816.4 1,877.4 2,236.6 2,545.4 2,831.2 3,078.1 3,370.9 3,786.6 3,224.4
2,595.1 1,870.2 1,948.7 2,335.6 2,652.0 3,085.2 3,545.0 5,103.0 6,881.2 4,966.3
208.8
330.4
345.7
416.7
506.1
724.4
941.6 1,271.2 1,729.2 1,213.4
931.6 1,150.5 1,257.9 1,300.6 1,330.2 1,650.2 1,850.0 2,219.8 2,666.2 2,137.1
3.0
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.8
4.4
3.8
65.8
91.1
89.5
88.3
87.8
87.5
87.5
95.6
111.3
99.0
5.5
3.9
5.5
4.9
4.0
15.4
20.1
20.7
11.4
13.9

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ For the last three columns, average unless otherwise specified.

2.8

1.0
3.4
1.0
5.9
23.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
...
...

81.3
148.9
75.1
137.7
317.7
0.8
0.1
0.1
0.2
8.6

96.1
89.9
1.9
2.5
10.5
14.4
54.6
68.9
-5.1
-2.6
1.3
-4.9
-3.2
0.9
-0.9
-3.1
-0.5
1.4
13.7

-10.6

3.2
13.7
0.5
36.3
26.0
...

1.8

-8.0

4.4
3.6
0.7
16.9
14.7
...

16.7

13.2

Historical
Standard
Average 6/ Deviation 6/

3.6
-32.7

5.0
22.5
1.4
38.0
25.5
42.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
6.4
56.2

41.8
71.3
33.0
56.3
142.9
3.4
2.7
7.0
0.2
42.5

58.9
50.1
-37.2
-0.3
5.2
8.7
58.6
67.3
-6.2
-4.1
2.8
-2.8
-2.7
1.0
-3.7
…
-36.9
-29.5

2008

4.1
0.6

6.8
5.8
1.7
7.9
1.5
38.8
0.0
0.1
0.0
6.3
49.0

37.7
67.4
29.8
53.2
145.1
4.0
3.4
9.2
0.1
7.1

53.8
45.8
-5.1
-1.7
2.1
4.5
56.0
60.4
-6.1
-4.1
3.7
-1.1
-2.6
0.9
-3.5
…
-3.4
-5.0

2009

4.3
6.0

5.7
-0.7
2.0
-3.2
12.2
38.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
5.2
47.3

41.8
81.0
34.1
66.0
163.6
3.8
2.9
7.2
0.3
4.2

59.7
52.0
6.0
2.4
10.2
13.0
51.6
64.6
-5.6
-3.5
2.8
-5.9
-1.9
1.0
-2.9
…
3.5
0.3

2010

4.6
5.1

6.0
0.5
1.9
0.6
16.4
37.9
0.0
0.1
0.0
6.0
55.4

44.2
90.8
36.8
75.5
176.8
4.2
3.3
7.7
0.3
17.0

63.0
55.5
3.3
2.4
20.2
21.8
48.7
70.5
-6.0
-3.9
4.4
-15.6
-2.3
1.1
-3.4
…
0.9
0.3

2011

6.0
4.3

12.7
16.1
1.8
50.2
1.7
41.4
0.0
0.2
0.0
4.8
59.8

37.3
66.7
31.4
56.2
182.2
3.0
2.4
7.7
0.0
11.5

53.1
47.2
-9.9
-6.5
1.6
-1.1
55.9
54.8
-4.7
-2.8
7.4
-2.8
-5.3
0.9
-6.1
…
-3.4
0.2

2012

6.8
3.3

6.2
6.5
1.8
13.0
-4.3
34.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
2.3
43.9

36.0
64.4
30.7
54.9
187.9
2.9
2.4
8.1
-0.2
-3.8

50.7
45.4
-2.4
-6.0
-6.2
-9.5
55.9
46.4
-2.7
-0.9
6.0
2.3
-2.1
0.8
-2.9
…
3.6
0.0

2013

Projections

-2.2

7.1
8.4
1.8
17.8
8.8
38.9

2008–13
Average

8.7
0.5

3.9
0.9
1.7
0.9
5.2
30.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
42.5

31.8
66.2
27.2
56.7
152.7
5.1
4.5
12.1
-0.2
-7.2

43.7
39.2
-1.2
-5.2
-8.4
-8.1
48.0
39.8
-2.7
-0.9
2.5
4.2
-0.9
0.7
-1.7
…
4.0
0.0

2017

14.1
0.3

2.5
4.0
2.1
2.0
6.3
17.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
22.2

21.9
69.0
18.0
56.5
91.8
9.8
9.1
14.8
0.8
7.6

32.8
28.8
-1.1
2.7
6.5
10.4
31.8
42.2
-2.7
-0.5
-1.1
-3.7
-0.2
0.7
-0.8
…
-3.8
0.0

2027

0.4

0.9
35.3

3.9
1.4
1.8
1.2
4.7
25.8

0.7

-2.8

-2.7

2014–27
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange
rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the NPV of new debt).

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
(NPVt-NPVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Aid flows (in billions of U.S. dollars) 7/
Of which: Grants
Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/

Key macroeconomic assumptions

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Noninterest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Of which: official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
Of which: exceptional financing

2007

Actual

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 2. External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007–27 1/

8

9
Table 3. Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008–27
(In percent)
Projections
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2017 2023 2027

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline

33

30

34

37

31

31

27

22

18

33
33

31
32

32
38

31
42

34
37

38
37

50
35

46
33

31
31

33

31

38

41

35

34

30

24

20

33

41

60

62

52

50

40

29

20

33

35

44

48

41

40

35

29

23

33
33
33

33
38
42

44
48
48

46
51
51

39
43
44

38
42
43

32
36
38

25
28
31

19
22
25

56

53

66

75

56

55

57

58

56

56
56

56
57

62
74

65
87

61
66

68
66

104
72

121
88

97
97

56

53

66

75

56

55

57

58

56

56

98

188

206

149

143

136

121

102

56

53

66

75

56

55

57

58

56

56
56
56

59
65
53

85
83
66

95
94
75

70
69
56

68
67
55

67
67
57

65
67
58

59
62
56

3

3

3

3

2

2

5

8

9

3
3

4
3

3
3

3
4

3
3

3
3

6
5

12
8

14
11

3

3

3

3

2

2

5

8

9

3

5

6

8

5

5

13

18

20

3

3

3

3

2

2

5

8

9

3
3
3

3
4
3

3
3
3

4
4
3

3
3
2

3
3
2

6
6
5

9
9
8

10
10
9

22

22

22

22

22

22

22

22

22

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009–28 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009–28 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one
standard deviation in 2009–10 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008–27 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008–27 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one
standard deviation in 2009–10 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2009–28 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2009–28 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10 3/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2009–10
B4. Net nondebt creating flows at historical average minus one
standard deviation in 2009–10 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required
above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and
nondebt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods
are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return
to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in
footnote 2.

10
Figure 1. Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008–27
Debt Accumulation

7
6

45

Grant element (right scale)

5

40
35
30

4
Rate of debt
accumulation

3
2

Grant-equivalent/GDP

20

30

15

0

5
2008

2013

2018

2023

0

Threshold

20

Baseline

10
0
2008

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

250
200

Historical scenario
150

2013

2018

Most extreme shock
Historical scenario

250
200

Threshold

100

150
100

50

Baseline

50

Baseline

Threshold

0

0
2008

2013

2018

20

Most extreme shock
Historical scenario

2013

2018

2023

Debt-service-to-revenue ratio

30
25

20 Threshold

10

2008

2023

Debt-service-to-exports ratio

25

15

2023

NPV of debt-to-revenue ratio

350
300

Most extreme shock

Historical scenario

50
40

10

-1

Most extreme shock
60

25

1

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

70

Historical scenario
Threshold
Most extreme shock

15
Baseline
10

5

Baseline

0

5
0

2008

2013

2018

2023

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

2008

2013

2018

2023

1.9

23.8

-4.2

11.7

3.2
0.2
7.4
12.0
9.8
15.4

26.2

-15.9

4.4
1.0
-4.5
-1.5
8.8
8.4

13.3

Deviation 5/

Average 5/

-1.0

Standard

Historical

5.0
0.7
-11.1
...
17.4
16.3

57.8
26.5
26.5
0.0
8.6
202.5
1.1
33.3

79.6
48.3
-1.5
-31.0
11.2
2.3
28.5
2.9
2.8
30.8
-20.6
-9.0
-3.7
-5.3
-11.6
29.5
0.0
0.0
29.5
0.0
-42.1

2008

6.8
1.5
-2.8
...
6.2
-7.6

51.7
24.1
24.1
0.0
15.8
196.0
2.4
7.6

72.2
44.6
-1.7
-7.4
-1.8
0.3
26.4
2.9
2.7
26.7
-7.0
-6.1
-1.0
-5.1
-0.9
5.0
0.0
0.0
5.0
0.0
-5.6

2009

1/ Central government's gross debt, net of oil fund reserves.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)

Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio
1.0
0.7
5.1
-4.5
0.2
5.8

58.0
32.5
32.5
0.0
6.0
208.4
2.0
-1.9

NPV of public sector debt

Of which: foreign-currency denominated
Of which: external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)

110.6
85.1
-1.3
1.9
-6.1
0.0
27.8
2.2
8.2
27.8
-4.7
-1.0
0.1
-1.1
-3.7
-1.4
0.0
0.0
-1.4
0.0
8.0

Public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated
Of which: foreign-currency denominated oil reserve
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : grants
Of which : oil revenue
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which : contribution from average real interest rate
Of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

2007

Actual

5.7
1.8
3.2
...
0.2
7.4

48.6
22.9
22.9
0.0
16.1
184.6
3.1
-2.4

75.4
49.6
-2.3
3.1
-2.1
0.8
26.3
2.4
3.1
27.1
-2.5
-3.1
0.8
-3.9
0.7
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3
0.0
5.2

2010

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

6.0
1.3
3.0
...
0.5
10.4

36.8
21.5
21.5
0.0
15.4
136.3
2.7
8.0

68.6
53.2
-2.3
-6.8
-2.3
1.2
27.0
3.6
2.6
28.2
-3.1
-3.9
0.4
-4.3
0.7
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3
0.0
-4.5

2011

12.7
1.3
-9.8
...
16.6
-6.9

26.3
16.5
16.5
0.0
1.3
100.4
2.1
12.6

53.1
43.2
-4.2
-15.5
-18.1
-2.9
26.2
2.6
6.3
23.3
-14.9
-9.4
-1.7
-7.8
-5.5
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-0.2
0.0
2.6

2012

0.0

6.2
1.2
-1.0
...
8.1
-5.1

4.5
1.2
0.2
...
7.0
4.6

-2.5
72.7
1.1
3.5

0.0
-1.3
87.8
1.6
2.9

18.4
13.4
13.4

38.2
33.3
-9.8
-7.9
-7.6
-4.4
25.3
0.6
8.1
20.8
-3.1
-2.3
-0.3
-2.0
-0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

2014

21.8
14.7
14.7

46.1
39.0
-6.9
-6.9
-9.0
-4.0
24.9
0.9
7.6
20.8
-5.0
-3.5
-0.4
-3.1
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.1

2013

3.8
1.4
2.5
...
5.1
4.4

-3.8
60.4
0.5
1.8

0.0

15.7
12.5
12.5

31.4
28.2
-13.4
-6.9
-6.6
-5.0
26.0
0.5
8.1
20.9
-1.6
-1.5
-0.1
-1.4
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

2015

Projections

Table 4. Net Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007–27

3.6
1.6
4.5
...
3.8
5.5

-4.7
47.5
-0.4
1.4

0.0

12.7
11.9
11.9

24.6
23.8
-17.0
-6.8
-6.2
-5.4
26.7
0.5
8.4
21.3
-0.8
-1.1
0.0
-1.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

2016

0.0

0.0

...
6.2
2.8

...
3.6
5.3

...
8.2
2.4

-0.5
29.1
-6.5
-1.7
2.5
6.7
4.8

-5.2
44.8
-2.0
0.0

6.9
4.9
4.9

8.8
6.8
-22.3
2.6
0.9
0.9
23.5
0.2
6.4
24.4
0.0
0.1
0.3
-0.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

19.9
19.2
-20.5
-4.7
-5.3
-4.7
26.3
0.4
7.8
21.6
-0.6
-0.8
0.1
-0.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6
11.8
11.1
11.1

2027

2017

3.9
1.9
16.2

7.1
1.3
-3.1

65.8
46.3
-3.2
-10.7
-3.7
-0.4
26.6
2.6
4.2
26.2
-8.9
-5.8
-0.9
-4.9
-3.0
5.6
0.0
0.0
5.6
0.0
-7.0

2008–13
Average

3.8
5.2

...

3.9
6.3
6.3

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

...

10.5
9.1
-25.3
-1.4
-1.6
-1.6
24.8
0.3
7.0
23.2
0.0
-0.1
0.3
-0.5

2017–27
Average

11

12
Table 5. Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Net Public Debt 2008–27
Projections
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2017 2023 2027
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

58

52

49

37

26

22

12

10

7

56
56
59

51
49
53

47
46
51

33
33
40

28
26
30

27
25
26

35
33
23

49
44
40

39
38
51

63

65

64

54

43

40

42

62

68

67
63
77
67

71
65
69
60

68
61
62
57

56
47
47
45

41
35
33
33

36
30
28
28

25
20
22
18

23
19
22
16

19
15
16
12

203

196

185

136

100

88

45

40

29

196
195
205

191
188
201

178
174
193

121
122
147

103
99
114

108
101
106

133
124
89

195
178
161

166
162
217

220

241

241

195

161

161

160

248

287

235
221
271
235

271
244
262
229

257
230
236
217

206
173
174
167

158
130
128
126

144
118
113
113

95
75
84
67

93
76
88
63

80
63
67
52

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2007
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2008
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2008

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2007
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2008
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2008

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

1

2

3

3

2

2

-2

-6

-7

1
1
1

-2
0
3

0
2
4

-1
1
4

-2
0
4

3
4
4

9
9
3

1
6
6

2
8
13

1

5

9

9

9

10

9

15

23

1
1
1
1

14
7
4
14

23
12
5
8

11
6
4
5

7
3
3
4

5
3
3
3

1
0
-1
-1

3
-2
-3
-2

2
-3
-4
-3

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2007
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2008–09
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2008
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2008
Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length
of the projection period).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

13
Figure 2. Indicators of Net Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2008–27 1/
80

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

70
60
50
40

`

Baseline

30

No reform

20

Most extreme stress test

10
0
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

350

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

300
250
200
150

Baseline
100

No reform
Most extreme stress test

50
0
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

25

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
20
Baseline
15

No reform
Most extreme stress test

10
5
0
-5
-10

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2017. In all cases it is the
scenario B1 - Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in
2008–09. (-1.4 percent vs. +5.9 percent on average in the baseline, without any fiscal
adjustment).

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 08/62
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 29, 2008

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2007 Article IV Consultation
with Mauritania
On May 19, 2008, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Mauritania.1
Background
Mauritania’s macroeconomic performance over recent years was satisfactory, despite a
steeper-than-expected decline in oil production reflecting persistent technical problems,
and difficult external environment. The real non-oil GDP growth is estimated to have
increased to 5.9 percent in 2007 driven by a rebound in agriculture and new mining
projects. The current account deficit deteriorated reflecting higher food prices and lower
oil exports. Gross international reserves position, however, strengthened to 1.9 months
of imports of goods and services at end-December 2007.
The authorities adopted fiscal measures in the 2008 budget to alleviate the social impact
of food and petroleum price increases. By end-2007, year-on-year inflation had picked
up from 5.9 percent in September to 7.4 percent in December, but was still lower than
the 8.9 percent realized in 2006.
All end-December 2007 quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks
under the PRGF program were met. In particular, the basic—excluding foreign-financed
spending—non-oil fiscal deficit reached 2.5 percent of non-oil GDP (compared to
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return
to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive
Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board,
summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

2
2.9 percent envisaged under the program), reflecting higher-than-expected tax
revenues. Poverty related spending also exceeded the program target as pro-poor
spending accelerated in the second half of the year. VAT and custom duties exemptions
were eliminated on a list of essential goods; a centralized taxpayer database covering
the main cities, Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, was introduced in December.
Transparency in the oil sector was further enhanced by the finalization of the audit of the
2006 financial statements of the national hydrocarbon company, the Société des mines
et des hydrocarbures (SMH) and the publication of oil production sharing contracts. A
new mining code setting a clear regulatory and fiscal regime that is favorable to
investors was transmitted to parliament.
In the context of limited oil revenue prospects for the next few years, the authorities
have engaged in a comprehensive reform agenda to stimulate non-oil growth and
reduce poverty in the context of the PRGF-supported program. In particular, they intend
to improve infrastructure, enhance competitiveness, promote private sector
development, improve fiscal management, fight corruption, maintain macroeconomic
stability, and increase government’s efficiency in delivering public services. To support
their development plan, the authorities successfully organized a consultative group
meeting in Paris in December 2007, where they received financial pledges amounting to
$2.1 billion.
Mauritania reiterated its strong commitment to the reform program supported by the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). To mitigate the impact of high
international food and petroleum prices and avoid a potential food access crisis, it
adopted a comprehensive emergency program, aimed at ensuring food stock
availability, developing income-generating activities, and avoiding further utility tariff
increases.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for Mauritania’s continued satisfactory
performance under the PRGF-supported program. Despite a difficult external
environment, non-oil GDP growth has been strong, and sound macroeconomic
management has led to a containment of inflation, an improvement in the fiscal stance,
and an enhancement of the country’s foreign exchange reserves. At the same time,
Directors noted that Mauritania’s near-term prospects have become more challenging.
The immediate priority is to address the social and economic impact stemming from
higher food and oil prices. Over the medium term, it will be important to further entrench
macroeconomic stability and reduce the economy’s vulnerability to limited oil revenue
prospects, while accelerating private sector led growth to reduce unemployment and
raise living standards.

3
Directors welcomed the authorities’ timely emergency response plan to the potential
food access crisis, which aims at ensuring food access and mitigating the impact of high
international prices through a set of well-defined measures. They stressed that the oneoff measures should
be well-targeted to ensure their effectiveness and should not become a permanent
burden on the budget. Directors were reassured by the authorities’ intention to monitor
the situation closely, and were encouraged by their efforts to foster domestic agricultural
production and productivity over the longer term.
Directors commended the authorities’ prudent fiscal policy and their intention to contain
the basic non-oil fiscal deficit in 2008 and beyond. Continued fiscal prudence in the
context of a medium-term budget framework will help create the additional fiscal space
and investor confidence needed to address the country’s development challenges,
including by attracting externally-financed investment. Directors welcomed the measures
to improve domestic taxation with a view to broadening the tax base, promoting
investments, and reducing the share of the informal sector. They were encouraged by
the authorities’ intention to continue to increase spending on essential capital and
poverty-reducing projects, while containing current expenditures.
Directors supported the authorities’ prudent monetary policy stance, aimed at controlling
inflation in the context of a flexible exchange rate regime. They called for continued
vigilance in the face of recent inflationary pressures, including from higher international
food prices. Directors noted that the real exchange rate is in line with fundamentals.
Directors emphasized the importance of accelerating structural reforms to foster private
sector development, including in sectors with a potential for high value added and job
creation. The most significant impediments to growth to be tackled include the limited
access to bank financing, the tax regulations burden, poor infrastructure and weak
governance. Directors welcomed plans to further modernize the tax and customs
administrations with Fund technical assistance, and encouraged the government to
sustain efforts to restructure key public enterprises. In particular, they stressed the
importance of restructuring the electricity company.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ ambitious multi-pronged banking sector reform
strategy, in line with the FSAP recommendations, which is critical to creating the
conditions for higher private sector-led growth. They emphasized the importance of
bolstering the weak banks and disposing of the large stock of nonperforming loans. The
increased presence of foreign banks is likely to boost competition, and, along with
improved banking supervision, should strengthen the financial sector.
Directors encouraged the new government to pursue a prudent debt strategy and debt
management framework aimed at further mobilizing concessional support to finance its
poverty reduction strategy, including through the delivery by donors of the December

4
2007 consultative group meeting pledges. In order to strengthen Mauritania’s debt
sustainability, they welcomed the authorities’ efforts to reach an early agreement with
the bilateral creditors that have not yet provided HIPC debt relief.
Directors encouraged the authorities to continue to strengthen their economic statistics,
including debt data, to improve economic decision-making.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote
transparency of the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies.
With the consent of the country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after
Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member countries, of its
surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs
are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless
otherwise decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5

Table 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003–08
2003

2004

2005

2006
Prel.

2007
Proj.
Country
Report
No. 07/375

2008
Prel.

Proj.

Est.

(Percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
Non-oil GDP at constant prices
Non-oil GDP deflator
Consumer price index (period average)
Consumer price index (end of period)
External sector
Exports of goods, f.o.b. (percentage change in US$)
Of which: non-oil
Imports of goods, f.o.b. (percentage change in US$)
Official transfers (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Overall balance (in percent of GDP)
Official reserves
Gross official reserves (in millions of US$, end-period) 1/
In months of following year's imports of goods and services 2/
Money and interest rates
Money and quasi-money
Currency in circulation

5.6
5.6
2.5
5.3
2.9

5.2
5.2
11.5
10.4
16.1

5.4
5.4
18.0
12.1
5.8

11.4
4.1
10.1
6.2
8.9

0.9
5.7
11.0
7.6
7.9

1.0
5.9
13.4
7.3
7.4

5.0
5.7
19.0
12.5
12.0

-4.1
-4.1
25.7
6.9
-13.7
-10.0

38.1
38.1
70.3
4.1
-34.6
-7.3

42.2
42.2
54.7
5.4
-47.2
-4.0

118.6
15.9
-18.3
3.4
-1.3
10.5

-1.8
42.6
2.7
3.8
-6.7
-0.1

6.4
54.0
22.7
2.7
-11.4
0.6

38.0
47.9
25.7
4.4
-6.3
28.6

32
0.7

39
0.6

70
1.1

194
2.6

148
1.8

209
1.9

330.4
2.8

25.5
47.5

13.5
-3.4

14.6
14.8

15.7
35.3

15.5
-1.2

18.9
3.8

18.4
16.0

30.1
27.2
24.8
32.1
-2.0
-7.3
-4.9

30.3
27.4
24.3
34.1
-3.9
-9.8
-6.7

2667.0 2708.9
96.6
96.1

2045.4
56.4

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Consolidated government operations
Revenue and grants
Revenue and grants (excluding oil)
Idem, excluding grants
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance including grants
Overall non-oil balance excluding grants
Overall non-oil balance including grants
External debt
Nominal external debt (in millions of US$) 3/
Nominal external debt (in percent of GDP) 3/
Memorandum items:
Ouguiya/US$ exchange rate (end of period)
Exports, f.o.b. (in millions of US$)
Imports, f.o.b. (in millions of US$) 4/
Nominal GDP (in billions of UM)
Nominal non-oil GDP (in billions of UM)
Nominal GDP (in millions of US$)
Population (in millions)
GDP per capita (in US$)
REER (12-month percentage change; end of period)
Price of oil (US$/barrel): APSP baseline: February 29, 2008
Annual production of oil (in millions of barrels)

35.4
35.4
30.7
47.2
-11.8
-16.5
-11.8

32.9
32.9
29.7
37.7
-4.8
-8.0
-4.8

26.6
26.6
24.5
33.7
-7.1
-9.2
-7.1

82.5
71.8
27.1
36.5
46.0
-9.4
35.3

2869.1 3151.1 3318.4 2540.9
224.9
211.1
178.7
94.1
265.6
318
468
338
338
1,276
2.7
474
-10.6
28.9
...

256.2
440
625
397
397
1,493
2.8
541
9.6
37.8
...

268.6
625
781
493
493
1,857
2.8
658
7.5
53.4
...

268.6
1,367
847
725
565
2,699
2.9
933
-1.3
64.3
11.2

29.1
25.8
23.9
32.1
-3.0
-8.2
-6.3

...
1,343
955
724
667
2,762
3.0
933
...
68.5
5.7

252.0
1,454
1,145
734
679
2,819
3.0
952
-4.0
71.1
5.5

...
2,006.7
1,521
905
853
3,625
3.0
1,196
...
95.5
3.9

Sources: Mauritanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding oil account.
2/ Excluding oil exploration/production and other mining-related activities, and imports financed by FDI and aid.
3/Includes both public and private sector external debt. Revised estimates are based on new debt stock data as of 2007 after
HIPC and MDRI debt relief, include estimates for additional new borrowing in 2008 following pledges made at the consultative group meeting.
4/ Excluding oil, copper and gold -related activities, and imports financed by other FDI.

Press Release No. 08/117
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 19, 2008

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes Third Review Under the PRGF Arrangement with the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania and Approves US$ 3.1 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the third
review of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania's economic performance under a three-year
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement. The completion of the review
enables the release of an amount equivalent to SDR 1.93 million (about US$3.1 million),
bringing total disbursements under the arrangement to SDR 10.31 million (about US$16.6
million).
The three-year PRGF arrangement for Mauritania was approved on December 18, 2006 (see
Press Release No. 06/288) in an amount equivalent to SDR 16.1 million (about US$26
million).
Following the Executive Board discussion on Mauritania, Mr. Murilo Portugal, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Mauritania’s economic performance under its PRGF-supported program remained
satisfactory despite a steeper-than-expected decline in oil production and a difficult external
environment. All quantitative targets and structural benchmarks under the PRGF
arrangement were observed, and fiscal and monetary developments were in line with
program projections. Sound macroeconomic policies helped control inflation, contain the
fiscal deficit, and strengthen foreign exchange reserves.
“Significant progress was achieved in the governance and structural reform areas, including
the submission to parliament of a new mining code, the publication of oil production sharing
contracts and the introduction of a centralized taxpayer database covering the main cities.
“The authorities have engaged in a comprehensive reform agenda to stimulate non-oil growth
and reduce poverty, while remaining committed to macroeconomic stability. They intend to
improve infrastructure, enhance competitiveness, promote private sector development,

2

improve fiscal management, fight corruption, and increase the government’s efficiency in
delivering public services.
“The authorities’ response to the potential food access crisis is timely and adequate, and their
commitment to continue to monitor closely the situation and the impact of the emergency
measures is reassuring. In light of the downward revision of the oil revenue outlook and the
high increases in food and fuel prices, it will be important to maintain a cautious fiscal
stance, based on the mobilization of additional tax revenue, and the acceleration of public
sector reforms. The restructuring of the state-owned enterprises will contribute to improving
their services, ensuring their financial viability, and avoiding any further drain on the budget.
“Monetary policy will continue to be geared towards controlling inflation in the context of a
flexible exchange rate regime. The authorities’ ambitious multi-pronged financial sector
reform strategy, in line with Financial Sector Assessment Program recommendations, will
help create the conditions for higher private-sector led growth. Improving the commercial
banks’ financial situation, facilitating access to banking services, and increasing competition
in the sector, particularly through the presence of foreign banks, should strengthen the
financial sector.
“To ensure Mauritania’s debt sustainability, the authorities will rely on concessional external
financing and seek agreements with the creditors that have not yet provided debt relief under
the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,” Mr. Portugal said.

Statement by Laurean W. Rutayisire
Executive Director for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
May 19, 2008

On behalf of my Mauritanian authorities, I would like to thank the Board, Management, and
Staff for their support to Mauritania. Performance under the PRGF-supported program
continues to be satisfactory. All quantitative and structural performance criteria at end-2007
were met. All quantitative indicative targets –including the poverty reduction expenditure
benchmark– were also met.
Despite Mauritania’s satisfactory performance under the program, the authorities continue to
face significant challenges ahead, both immediate and longer-term. One of the government’s
most important challenge in the short-term, is to rapidly and effectively address the social
impact of the current food crisis that led to violent riots late last year. This crisis, if sustained,
could jeopardize the steady progress made in recent years to reduce poverty and achieve the
MDGs. The authorities have accordingly adopted an emergency plan and price measures
(food and fuel prices represent more than two thirds of the consumer price index) to mitigate
the impact of high international food prices on the local population, especially the poorest
segments. The main objectives of the plan is to ease the distribution of staples in the most
vulnerable areas nationwide, especially rural populations, and promote agriculture while
fostering activities that would provide incomes for the poor in urban areas. Measures have
also been adopted to limit increases in rice and bread prices and to prevent rises in gas,
electricity, and water prices in 2008.
In the longer term the authorities face the daunting challenge of raising the population’s
living standards while promoting job creating activities needed to provide employment
opportunities for a young and rapidly growing population. They are aware that structural
reforms need to be accelerated to further diversify and enhance the competitiveness of the
economy. In this regard, a strategy to promote a private sector-led growth is currently being
undertaken with the assistance of the World Bank and other development partners, especially
in sectors where Mauritania has a comparative advantage (livestock, fishing, mining). The
authorities also acknowledge that improving the business climate is key to accelerating
growth, and are adopting measures to make the tax regime more favorable to investment and
strengthen governance and the effectiveness of the judicial system. Also key in this regard
will be to move ahead rapidly with financial sector reforms with a view to facilitating access
to credit, including by enforcing prudential norms, dealing with weak banks through the
restructuring of nonperforming loans, and the licensing of new banks in order to promote
competition in the financial sector.
Improving the business climate will also contribute to enhancing foreign investors’
confidence, as private foreign investors have signaled important investments in key sectors of
the economy, including the banking sector, tourism, mining, and transport. Efforts are
underway to restructure state-owned enterprises especially in the energy, water, and transport

2
sectors by improving the management and control of these enterprises and adopting
performance contracts. The authorities are also grateful to the international community’s
financial pledges made recently in Paris during the December 2007 consultative group
meeting where more than USD 2 billion were promised to support of the government’s
development plans.
1. Recent Economic Developments
Mauritania’s macroeconomic performance in 2007 was broadly satisfactory despite the
continuous decline in oil production to 15,000 barrels per day in 2007, down from an average
of 36,000 barrels in 2006. Non-oil GDP growth reached 5.9 percent driven mainly by
agriculture and mining. Inflation fell slightly at end-2007 to 7.4 percent compared to 8.9
percent at end-2006. The basic non-oil budget deficit declined to 2.5 percent of GDP.
However, high international oil and food prices along with the decline in oil production
further widened the current account deficit from 1.3 percent of GDP in 2006 to 11.4 percent
of GDP in 2007. Foreign exchange reserves at the central bank also dropped to 1.9 month of
imports cover from 2.6 months in 2006.
The recently adopted emergency plan aims mainly at increasing agricultural production and
protect the livestock threatened by drought while facilitating the distribution of foodstuffs in
the most vulnerable and most remote regions, and to develop income-generating activities in
peri-urban areas. To facilitate imports of food products, the authorities have also announced
the increase of financial resources of the public import company including through additional
lines of credit guaranteed by the central bank for food importers. Furthermore, to alleviate the
impact of food price rises on the population, a 10 percent wage increase will be implemented
at mid-year to limit the decline of wages in real terms, thereby complementing the measures
already taken to limit the effects of food and oil price increases.
A steering committee has been set up to monitor the emergency plan. It will prepare a report
on the implementation and the outcomes of these measures that will be submitted quarterly
by the government to the National Assembly.
2. Medium-Term Outlook
The growth outlook remains favorable in 2008 (except for oil production) thanks to positive
developments in the mining sector and high international prices for the commodities exported
by Mauritania including iron ore, copper, and gold. Beyond 2008, the growth outlook will
further benefit from the large investments expected especially in basic infrastructures for
which financing had been pledged by donors during the consultative group meeting in Paris
in December 2007.
In 2008 real non-oil GDP growth is projected to reach 5.7 percent slightly lower than the
5.9 reached in 2007. Although inflation should rise to 12 percent in 2008, from 7.4 percent in
2007, due to the increases in international prices of oil and food products, the adoption of

3
price support measures for a number of staples should help moderate the effects of increases
in oil and food products. Foreign exchange reserves are projected to strengthen to 2.8 months
of import cover at end-2008 from 1.9 in 2007.
In the fiscal area, the authorities will add to the 2008 budget a supplementary budget law
detailing the financing of the emergency plan. Higher tax and nontax revenues, including
from the mining sector, will contribute to finance the expected increase in the basic non-oil
fiscal deficit for 2008 resulting from the implementation of the emergency plan.
Also in the fiscal area, an important progress in the current civil service reforms is expected
by end-June 2008, when the authorities would have completed the comprehensive census of
civil servants. The completed census will be followed by an assessment of functional staffing
needs in some pilot ministries by end-September 2008.
As regards monetary policy, the central bank will continue to implement a prudent policy
consistent with its objective of containing inflationary pressures. Accordingly, money supply
growth will remain below nominal GDP growth. Also in the monetary area, the central bank
will expedite the implementation of the recommendations of the safeguards assessment
mission, in particular those related to improving accounting procedures, ensuring their
consistency with IFRS standards. Furthermore, based on the FSSAP recommendations, the
central bank has adopted a strategic plan to develop financial markets and system. With
technical assistance from Banque de France, the implementation of Banking Law will be
reinforced by the adoption of instructions on bank licensing conditions, capital, and the
creation of a deposit guarantee fund. These measures, in addition to the increased presence of
foreign banks that contribute to reinforce competition, should further strengthen the financial
sector.
The authorities remain committed to the country’s flexible exchange rate regime that will
help them enhance the competitiveness of the economy while also mitigating the adverse
effects of the fluctuations of the terms of trade on the economy. The authorities welcome the
staff’s findings that Mauritania’s exchange rate is in line with fundamentals.
On the structural front, the authorities will continue to improve the business climate
including by overhauling the tax regime to make it more favorable to investment, facilitate
access to banking credit, and strengthening the effectiveness of the judicial system. More
specifically, the planned reform of the tax regime will benefit businesses and private
investment by reducing the tax rate on investments and on corporate profits. Furthermore, an
investment code will be adopted by end-2008 that will substantially simplify investment
procedures, in particular by introducing a one-stop window. The new investment code will
also contain provisions under which investments deemed as strategic will be exempted from
the ordinary tax system.
The authorities have initiated the restructuring of their portfolio of public enterprises to
improve the quality of their services, ensure their financial sustainability, and introduce more
competition. In this respect, Air Mauritanie was liquidated on January 2008. Operational
audits will be conducted for electricity company SOMELEC, and the national water

4
company SNDE, to conclude performance contracts with these enterprises by end-2008. In
consultation with the World Bank, the authorities will also adopt by end-June 2008 a strategy
for restructuring SOMELEC, notably with the aim of reducing its costs.
The authorities note the conclusions of the Debt Sustainability Analysis which indicate that
the risk of debt distress remains moderate, and reiterate their commitment to prudent
borrowing on concessional terms only.
3. Conclusion
The authorities remain committed to prudent macroeconomic policies1, consistent with the
objectives of the PRGF-supported program –notwithstanding the need to temporarily loosen
fiscal policy in response to the food crisis. They are confident that they will continue to
benefit from the support of the Fund and the international community as they implement their
poverty reduction agenda.

1

Both the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank were maintained following the recent
government change in Mauritania, underscoring the authorities’ commitment to the PRGF-supported program.

