Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/78
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 31, 2002

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Chile
On July 19, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Chile.1
Background
Chile’s economic fundamentals remain sound and have improved through the evolution of the
policy regime in recent years. Yet the country is operating in a difficult environment, for several
years now coping with a sequence of negative shocks, most recently including the world
economic slowdown, a further terms of trade decline, and spillovers from Argentina. Such
developments are largely responsible for the substantial slowdown in Chile’s growth that
has followed the very strong performance of most of the 1990s. Nevertheless, growth has
continued, and recent shocks have been absorbed in an orderly fashion. Reflecting the
economy’s strong fundamentals and the skilled implementation of the new frameworks for
macroeconomic policy, Chile was able to maintain favorable access to global finance even
during last year’s market drought, and the authorities did not need to raise—and in fact have
been able to reduce—interest rates.
Real GDP grew by 2.8 percent in 2001, as weakening domestic demand was offset by a strong
expansion of net export volumes. With a substantial decline in Chile’s terms of trade, however,
the external current account deficit widened moderately, to about 2 percent of GDP.
International reserves remained at comfortable levels, and the banking system sound.
Notwithstanding a substantial depreciation of the Chilean peso in response to external factors,

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.
1

-2inflation kept within the target band of 2 to 4 percent. The unemployment rate remained
elevated in 2001, around 9 percent, compared to 6 percent before the 1998–99 recession.
In 2001, the authorities achieved their new, ongoing target for the structural balance of the
central government (the actual balance held steady, with a deficit of about 1 percent of GDP, as
a firming of the underlying government accounts was offset by the effects on revenue of lower
copper prices and a widening output gap). Early in the year, the central bank began easing
monetary policy in response to weakening domestic demand and reduced inflationary
pressures. After midyear, this process paused, as pressures arising outside Chile induced
substantial currency depreciation and raised concern about the inflation target. Noting
exceptional circumstances, the central bank for a time intervened in the foreign exchange
market, leaning against the wind but not targeting the exchange rate. Subsequently, the Chilean
peso “decoupled” from developments in Argentina, and inflation risks subsided. Thus since
early 2002 the authorities have been able to reduce interest rates in response to further signs of
weak demand and very low inflation, while the peso has been broadly stable.
For 2002, real GDP is expected to grow by 2.6 percent and inflation to remain inside the target
band. The central bank will continue to be ready to adjust the policy interest rate, if needed, in
either direction, to keep inflation in 2003 also in the target band. Fiscal policy will remain geared
to achieving a structural surplus of 1 percent of GDP for the central government. The external
account deficit and other indicators of external vulnerability are envisaged to remain at
comfortable levels. These projections assume that domestic demand will strengthen fairly soon,
in response to the easing of monetary policy, ending of a cycle of inventory decumulation, and
with some push from greater investment expenditures of certain public enterprises, as well as
some further improvement in the external environment.
Several policy initiatives were introduced in 2001, in which remaining restrictions on external
capital flows were eliminated, measures were introduced to develop domestic capital markets,
and tax administration and tax law were changed to reduce tax evasion and tax avoidance.
Regarding labor markets, an unemployment insurance scheme was adopted, and a wideranging package of labor law changes was approved. The problem of unemployment continued
to be addressed mainly through government-supported job programs.
Chile has maintained a very open trade regime and has continued to reduce unilaterally its
uniform external tariff rate, now down to 7 percent. In one area, however, a recent WTO panel
has viewed critically the price-bands system applied to certain agricultural imports. A free trade
agreement with the European Union is expected to be soon ratified by Chile’s congress, and the
authorities expect negotiations on an agreement with the United States to advance as well.
The Chilean authorities are now developing a range of initiatives to enhance growth prospects
over the medium term. These are essentially of a microeconomic nature, and include among
others: encouraging the development of venture capital, strengthening the framework for
resolution of anti-monopoly cases and other economic disputes, and adjusting the regulation
of several sectors.

-3-

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for their adherence to a sound and consistent
policy framework—based on exchange rate flexibility, inflation targeting, and achievement of a
structural fiscal surplus—which in 2001 had helped maintain macroeconomic stability, continued
access to capital markets, and moderate growth. This performance, in the face of an adverse
external environment, is also a reflection of Chile’s political stability, good governance, and
credible institutions, which serve to reinforce the economic agenda of the authorities.
Directors considered that the authorities’ objectives of promoting a recovery of domestic
demand and moderate output growth this year are broadly appropriate, particularly in light of the
still high level of unemployment and associated output gap. They agreed that regional
uncertainties could adversely affect the outturn, but considered that the country continues to be
well-placed to adjust to new adverse shocks in an orderly fashion.
Directors supported the authorities’ fiscal stance of resisting pressures in favor of a stimulus,
and holding steady the central government structural surplus. Adherence to the structural target
would safeguard the public finances over time, while permitting the operation of automatic
stabilizers.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to enhance fiscal transparency through their planned
participation in a fiscal Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC). Directors
considered that a capitalization of the central bank would also add to fiscal transparency, and
some Directors recommended a more comprehensive definition of the fiscal balance—
incorporating the rest of the general government.
Directors noted that the inflation-targeting framework combined with the floating exchange rate
regime continues to serve Chile well. With inflation subdued, and in light of the output gap, they
supported the recent lowering of the policy interest rate. At the same time, Directors observed
that it would be essential for the authorities to adjust the monetary policy stance should
inflationary pressures emerge. Directors welcomed the steps being taken to further enhance
monetary instruments, and a few suggested a cautious approach in the possible use of foreign
exchange swaps recently introduced for liquidity management purposes. Directors considered
that the central bank’s actions had been consistent with its announced policy of intervening in
the foreign exchange market only in exceptional circumstances—as a key plank of the
authorities’ framework—and stressed the importance of continuing to adhere to this strategy in
the difficult and uncertain external environment.
Directors noted that banking system indicators appear sound, as reflected by prudential and
earnings ratios, as well as stress tests recently conducted by the staff. A few Directors
suggested that there was scope for increased bank competition aimed at lowering interest
spreads, particularly on small business loans. They welcomed the progress being made in the
area of consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates, as well as the efforts to strengthen
anti-money laundering legislation, and the authorities’ request for a Financial Sector
Assessment Program in the coming months. Some Directors considered that strengthening the

-4supervisory framework further would also require providing staff of the bank supervisory agency
with proper legal protection.
Directors were of the view that Chile’s medium-term outlook remains favorable, noting that the
slowing of growth in recent years is related in part to temporary factors. However, some
Directors cautioned that global and regional factors, and the still weak domestic demand and
business confidence could continue to complicate the recovery. Directors welcomed the
government’s initiative to work closely with the private sector on the pro-growth agenda, and
observed that growth should be boosted over the medium term by the range of proposals which
the authorities are developing. These proposals aim to foster a deeper venture capital market
for small and innovative firms, strengthen the framework for resolving anti-monopoly and other
economic disputes, and improve regulation. Directors encouraged the authorities to press
ahead with these reforms. A few Directors also recommended consideration of bringing private
capital into state-owned companies.
Directors noted that a faster rate of growth would help tackle the still high rate of unemployment.
They recognized the temporary need for measures such as government-supported job
programs, but also noted that the persistence of high unemployment suggests that labor
markets are not sufficiently flexible, or operating adequately. In this connection, Directors
suggested that greater attention be placed on education and job training for low-skilled workers,
and on other ways of enhancing labor market flexibility more generally. Several Directors
expressed concern over the extent of the cumulative increase in the minimum wage, as well as
over the possible higher labor costs implied by the recent labor reform package. Some Directors
considered that wage and labor market developments, while creating rigidities in the economy,
were adequate in the context of the country’s social and economic objectives.
Directors commended Chile for its open trade regime and for continuing to reduce unilaterally
the country’s uniform external tariff, and welcomed the recent trade agreement with the
European Union as part of initiatives to diversify the economy. Some Directors recommended
that the authorities reevaluate the longstanding practice of using tariffs to hold domestic prices
of certain agricultural goods within bands, and it was also suggested that efforts to phase them
out would be assisted by the elimination of distortions in the agricultural policies of some
industrial countries.
Directors recognized that the data received by the staff are timely and broadly adequate for
surveillance purposes, recalling the positive overall assessment in last year’s ROSC data
module, and noting that since then the authorities have made progress in several areas. They
urged the authorities to persevere in these efforts, and in particular to widen the coverage of
fiscal and external statistics in the context of the forthcoming ROSC on fiscal transparency.

Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. The Staff Report for the 2002
Article IV Consultation with Chile is also available.

-5-

Chile: Selected Economic Indicators

Real economy (annual percentage change) 1/
Real GDP growth
Unemployment (in percent)
Change in consumer prices (end of period)
Money and credit (year-end percentage change) 1/
Broad money (M3)
Bank credit to the private sector
Three-month interest rate 2/
External sector (in percent of GDP) 1/
Trade balance
Current account balance
Capital account balance 3/
Overall balance of payments
Gross official reserves (in percent of short- term
external debt) 4/
External debt 5/
Real effective exchange rate (in percent change) 6/
Terms of trade (annual percentage change)
Copper price (U.S. cents per pound)
Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Central government balance
State-owned enterprise balance
Central bank balance
Memorandum items:
Central government balance (official presentation) 7/
Structural balance (official presentation)

1997

1998

1999

2000

Est.
2001

Proj.
2002

6.6
6.1
6.0

3.2
6.2
4.7

-1.0
9.7
2.3

4.4
9.2
4.5

2.8
9.1
2.6

2.6
…
2.5

13.0
18.0
13.4

8.5
11.2
16.4

5.1
3.0
10.7

5.1
10.7
10.8

5.4
6.7
7.2

5.7
7.9
…

-1.7
-4.4
8.3
3.9

-2.5
-5.1
2.5
-2.6

3.4
-0.4
-0.5
-0.9

2.9
-1.4
1.7
0.3

3.2
-1.9
1.3
-0.6

3.2
-2.1
3.3
1.2

496.4

385.2

367.8

230.3

220.1

206.0

32.3
9.8
1.9
103.2

40.0
-6.1
-4.7
75.0

46.8
-6.2
5.7
71.3

49.2
2.5
5.5
82.3

56.9
-9.5
-7.6
71.7

57.8
…
0.3
73.8

1.9
-1.0
-0.9

-0.1
-1.0
-1.0

-2.2
-0.1
-1.1

-0.9
-0.7
-0.9

-0.9
-0.4
-0.9

-1.5
-0.8
-1.1

1.8
0.9

0.4
0.3

-1.4
-0.8

0.1
0.0

-0.3
1.0

-0.9
0.7

Sources: Central Bank of Chile; Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Yield on 90-day central bank paper, in percent per annum (period average).
3/ Including errors and omissions.
4/ Based on the official figures on short-term debt (which include amortization of medium- and long-term
debt due falling during the following year). These figures exclude direct trade credits.
5/ Figures do not include direct trade credits.
6/ End of period, as reported by the IMF's Information Notice System. A decline indicates a depreciation of
the Chilean peso.
7/ The staff's presentation differs from the official presentation in the treatment of the operations of the
Copper Stabilization Fund and the capital gains from privatizations.

