February 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/33

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

Islamic State of Afghanistan: 2004 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under
the Staff-Monitored Program—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
the Islamic State of Afghanistan
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2004 Article IV
consultation with the Islamic State of Afghanistan and second review under the staff-monitored
program, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation and second review under the staffmonitored program, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
November 3, 2004, with the officials of the Islamic State of Afghanistan on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on January 4, 2005. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

•

a staff statement of January 19, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its January, 19, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Islamic State of Afghanistan.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the Islamic State of Afghanistan*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies—Update*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding—Update*
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
* May also be included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISLAMIC STATE OF AFGHANISTAN
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
and Second Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia
and Policy Development and Review Departments
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Saleh M. Nsouli and Matthew Fisher
January 4, 2005
•
Discussions for the 2004 Article IV consultation and the second review under the Staff-Monitored
Program (SMP) were held in Kabul from October 20–November 3, 2004. The mission met with
Vice-President Arsala, Minister of Finance Ghani, Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdullah, Da Afghanistan
Bank Governor Ahady, and other senior officials, as well as representatives of the diplomatic community,
nongovernmental organizations, the business community, and international organizations. The Afghan
authorities published the concluding statement and have agreed to publish the staff report, the updated
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), and the Letter of Intent after their distribution to
the Executive Board.
•
The 12-month SMP covers the fiscal year 2004/05 (March 20, 2004–March 20, 2005). It aims at
maintaining financial stability and building institutional capacity. If implemented successfully, and assuming
a balance of payments need, it may pave the way for an arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF).
•
In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation (the first such consultation since 1991),
Executive Directors noted that prudent macroeconomic management had, together with sizable aid and the
end of the drought, provided an environment conducive to the resumption of economic growth. They
underscored the need for donors to continue to provide substantial assistance, and noted that revenue-raising
measures would be needed to ensure the independence of the operating budget in due course. They saw merit
in a “lightly managed” float for a country that remains vulnerable to shocks and is undergoing structural
change and reconstruction. They were concerned about the risks posed by the opium economy and urged the
authorities to intensify eradication, while offering alternative livelihoods.
•
The mission members consisted of Messrs. Symansky (head), Bessaha, Martin (all MCD),
Schneider (PDR), and Thomas (FAD). The mission was assisted by the resident representative,
Mr. de Schaetzen. Mr. Farhadi (Advisor to Mr. Mirakhor) participated in some of the policy discussions.
•
The security situation, while stable in the run-up to the presidential election, could deteriorate in the
period preceding the parliamentary elections currently scheduled for April 2005. The United Nations (UN)
continues to rate Afghanistan at Security Phase III.

•
Looking beyond March 2005, the authorities indicated that they would like to continue with the SMP
and, in the absence of any immediate balance of payments need, wait until after the forthcoming elections
before considering a Fund-supported arrangement. In the interim, they have initiated consultations on the
PRSP process.

-2-

Contents

Page

List of Acronyms .......................................................................................................................4
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................5
I.

Background and Overview ...........................................................................................6

II.

Performance Under the Staff-Monitored Program ........................................................8

III.

Macroeconomic Outlook and Policy Framework for the Remainder of 2004/05 .......12
A.
Macroeconomic Framework ............................................................................13
B.
Fiscal Policy.....................................................................................................13
C.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ............................................................13
D.
External Sector.................................................................................................14
E.
Structural reforms ............................................................................................14
F.
Technical Assistance........................................................................................15
G.
Data Issues .......................................................................................................15
H.
Program Monitoring.........................................................................................16

IV.

Medium-Term Outlook and Reform Strategy..............................................................16
A.
Macroeconomic Framework ............................................................................18
B.
Medium-Term Fiscal Policy ............................................................................18
C.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ............................................................18
D.
External Policy and Debt Sustainability Analysis ...........................................20

V.

Fund Relations .............................................................................................................20

VI.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................21

Boxes
1.
Afghanistan’s Trade Regime .........................................................................................9
2.
The Deepening of the Domestic Currency Market or “Afghanization” ......................10
3.
Key Elements and Macroeconomic Impact of a Strategy to Fight the
Drug Economy ........................................................................................................17
4.
The Sources of Growth in Afghanistan .......................................................................19
Figures
1.
Price Developments, 2003–04 .....................................................................................24
2.
Monetary Developments, 2003–05..............................................................................25
3.
Foreign Exchange Reserves and Real Exchange Rate, 2003–04.................................26
4.
Reserve Money to GDP Ratio, 2003–04 .....................................................................27

-3-

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Basic Data, 2001/02–2004/05......................................................................................28
Savings-Investment Balances, 2002/03–2007/08........................................................ 29
Operating Budget, 2002/03–2007/08...........................................................................30
Monetary Program (Da Afghanistan Bank), 2002/03–2004/05...................................31
Balance of Payments, 2001/02–2007/08......................................................................32

Appendices
I.
Relations with the Fund ...............................................................................................33
II.
Relations with the World Bank ...................................................................................36
III.
Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators .....................................................38
Attachments
I.
Letter of Intent.............................................................................................................39
II.
Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies.............................. 41
III.
Amendments to the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.................................56

-4-

List of Acronyms
AML/CFT
ARTF
CIRRs
CPI
DAB
ISAF
MDGs
MEFP
MoF
OECD
PRGF
SMP
SOEs
TCC
TA
TSA
UN
UNODC
WTO

Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
Commercial Interest Reference Rates
Consumer Price Index
Da Afghanistan Bank
International Security Assistance Forces
Millennium Development Goals
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
Ministry of Finance
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Staff-Monitored Program
State-Owned Enterprises
Technical Committee of Coordination
Technical Assistance
Treasury Single Account
United Nations
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes
World Trade Organization

-5-

Executive Summary
•
Economic performance under the SMP has been broadly in line with program
commitments. The quantitative indicators and structural benchmarks in the SMP have
largely been met, despite weak administrative capacity, security concerns, and political
considerations. GDP continues to grow steadily, although slower than expected largely
because of a prolonged drought, while inflation has been moderate. Domestic revenue has
been slightly higher than programmed, while both current and development expenditures
have been below budget. However, further progress could have been made in implementation
of some structural measures.
•
The drug economy continues to increase. The government and the international
community are tackling this issue, but this could lead to social, economic, and political
instability over the near term. Success in this area will depend upon a multi-faceted approach,
including developing alternative livelihoods, while continuing with macroeconomic and
structural reforms conducive to sustained growth.
•
The authorities would like to continue with an SMP, at least until after a
Parliament is elected, to sustain the reform momentum and build capacity. Although the
SMP has been on target, the country faces major economic and social risks.
•
The authorities’ medium-term strategy is articulated around: increased security;
private sector-led growth; strengthened revenue efforts; prudent monetary policy; eliminating
the drug economy; and institution-building. Successful implementation of structural reforms
will be critical.
•
In the context of a managed float, the authorities agreed to continue implementing a
monetary policy anchored by a target for currency in circulation.
•
The authorities are committed to introduce an ambitious structural fiscal reform
agenda to achieve fiscal sustainability over the medium term.

-6-

I. BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW
1.
Afghanistan’s first direct presidential election, which took place on
October 9, 2004, represents an important milestone in rebuilding the nation’s
institutional framework. President Hamid Karzai was elected with 55 percent of the vote.
Following his inauguration on December 7, and after a lengthy consultative process,
President Karzai appointed a new cabinet on December 23, 2004, giving more prominence to
technicians to the detriment of regional factions. The new economic team, who signed the
attached Letter of Intent, is expected to pursue the current agenda of economic reforms.1
Parliamentary elections are currently scheduled for April 2005.
2.
While economic policies have been essentially in line with Fund staff
recommendations and the SMP (Section III), further progress could have been made in
implementation. In many instances, the authorities complied with the program benchmarks,
but follow-through has been weaker than envisaged—often due to weak administrative
capacity, security concerns, or political considerations.
3.
The security situation remains unpredictable but generally calm. The longer-term
implications of the kidnapping (and release) of UN staff members remain a matter of concern
among security experts. Although the situation is expected to remain volatile until the general
elections, the international community remains actively involved in the country.
4.
The foremost challenge facing the authorities is the drug economy. Drug activities
have continued to increase, and there is a substantial risk that Afghanistan will (or already
has) become a narco-state. The latest United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC)
report indicates that poppy production continued to rise in 2004, with cultivation spreading to
new areas of the country and involving an increasing share of the population. Drug revenue is
estimated to have risen to $2.8 billion, equivalent to about 60 percent of nondrug GDP.2
Despite a higher export value, a steep drop in the average farm gate price cut farmers’ gross
drug income by 40 percent to about $600 million, while proceeds to traders and laboratories
rose sharply (more than 70 percent) to $2.2 billion. The government and the international
community are developing a common strategy to abate the drug economy. The manner in
which this strategy is implemented will be critical in maintaining social, economic, and
political stability.

1

Mr. Ahady, formerly Governor of Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB), was appointed Minister of Finance.
Mr. Delawari, formerly president of the Afghanistan Investment Support Agency, was named Governor of
DAB.
2

While poppy cultivation expanded by 64 percent to a record level (2.9 percent of agricultural land), total
production rose by only 17 percent, still below the record level in 1999. The decline in the average yield
resulted from adverse weather, disease, parasites, and the inexperience of new farmers.

-7-

5.
The return of peace and the ensuing resumption of economic growth have led to
some improvement in Afghanistan’s social indicators, which are among the lowest in the
world. Refugees have returned to their lands; school enrollment has increased; vaccination
campaigns against some deadly diseases were conducted; and food security has improved.
Nonetheless, the challenges remain daunting as infant and maternity mortality are still among
the highest in the world. Illiteracy still affects 57 percent of men and 87 percent of women,
and only 40 percent of the population are reported to have access to drinking water.
Electricity is provided to only 17 percent of the rural households. Poverty remains
widespread, especially in rural areas.
6.
While still relatively strong, real GDP growth has slowed over the past
18 months, and was lower than expected (Tables 1 and 2). This slowdown reflects
primarily the negative impact of adverse weather conditions on agricultural production,
which notably led to the 25 percent fall in cereal production during the first half of 2004/05.
This fall was only partially offset by expansion in other sectors. Increased opium activity,
together with the heavy reliance on external support, highlights the fragility of Afghanistan’s
economic recovery. Increases in rent and fuel prices led to a rise in inflation over the last
12 months, but moderated somewhat during the second quarter of 2004/05 (Figure 1).
Year-on-year inflation amounted to 14.1 percent at end-September. Excluding rents and
petroleum products, it amounted to 8.3 percent. Reflecting a strong balance of payments, the
nominal and real exchange rates vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar have appreciated.
7.
The authorities have maintained their commitment to fiscal discipline and have
continued to improve fiscal management. The government continues to observe the
“no-overdraft” financing rule prohibiting borrowing from Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB), as
the operating budget continues to be financed by donor grants and concessional
disbursements (Table 3). Central government control of provincial revenue and expenditure
has sharply improved. Further, the authorities adopted, for the first time in 2004/05, a
‘core budget,’ to improve coordination and control over donor flows.3 Over the last
18 months, domestic revenues have exceeded program projections, while expenditures were
constrained by delays in recruitment and general procurement. All line ministry accounts
have been consolidated into the Treasury Single Account (TSA) and revenue from provincial
accounts are now regularly deposited into the TSA. These measures bolstered the central
government’s ability to monitor and collect revenue, of which 70 percent is collected in the
provinces.

3

See paragraph 7 of MEFP, IMF Country Report No. 04/364, November 9, 2004 and Box 1 of the Selected
Issues Paper, (www.imf.org), for a detailed explanation of the various budget concepts. The operating budget
covers essentially current expenditures; the core budget consolidates the operating budget with development
expenditures channeled through the treasury’s accounts; and the external budget refers to fiscal operations
implemented directly by donors.

-8-

8.
Despite a paucity of monetary instruments, DAB’s flexible approach to
monetary policy, in the context of a “managed float,” has been largely successful in
limiting both inflation and exchange rate volatility. Monetary policy continues to be
implemented almost entirely through foreign currency auctions, the only market-based
instrument until the recent introduction of short-term capital notes. Monetary policy is guided
primarily by indicative targets for currency in circulation (as set out in the SMP). However,
in view of the substantial uncertainties surrounding relationships between key
macroeconomic variables, DAB uses all available indicators to assess changes in the demand
for domestic currency. As illustrated by the recent revision of the monetary program
(paragraph 22), DAB stands ready to adjust its monetary stance when necessary to preserve
macroeconomic stability.
9.
The government introduced a number of important structural reforms.
Following the adoption of commercial banking legislation, the regulatory framework has
been strengthened further through DAB’s adoption of banking regulations. Three
state-owned commercial banks were granted conditional licenses, while eight private
banks—all foreign-owned—were licensed and are now operating. However, only limited
progress has been made in restructuring the relicensed state-owned banks, and in resolving
the three that were not relicensed. Considerable trade regime reforms have been
implemented. As a result, Afghanistan is now one of the most open economies in the region
(Box 1). Other important structural reforms include: the introduction of a computerized
system for expenditure and revenue operations; the simplification of customs clearance
procedures; and the adoption of five-year plans to improve customs and tax administrations.
II. PERFORMANCE UNDER THE STAFF-MONITORED PROGRAM
10.
All end-September 2004 quantitative and structural benchmarks under the SMP
were observed, with the exception of the benchmark related to the Anti-Money
Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) legislation, which was
enacted with a short delay. This strong performance was achieved despite a volatile security
situation and the mobilization of considerable resources for the presidential election.
11.
After consultation with Fund staff, DAB allowed money growth to exceed its
second quarter SMP indicative target (Table 4). Currency in circulation increased by
22 percent during the first half of 2004/05, compared with an objective of 13 percent
(Figure 2). This increase was justified by the sharp appreciation of the Afghani, which, along
with the slowdown in inflation, pointed to an increase in money demand (Box 2). DAB’s
decision to accommodate this increase was instrumental in stabilizing the exchange rate.
After appreciating by 20 percent in the first five months of 2004/05, reaching
Af 42 per dollar in the third week of August, the exchange rate stabilized in the Af 45–
46 per dollar range. Reflecting its foreign exchange activity and a further increase in
government foreign currency deposits, DAB’s accumulation of international reserves
exceeded its indicative floor for the first half of 2004. At end-September, the international
reserves were equivalent to over four months of imports (Figure 3).

-9-

Box 1. Afghanistan’s Trade Regime
Establishment of an open and transparent trade regime has been a consistent priority of the Afghan authorities—
moving in tandem with sweeping reforms to the tariff regime and customs administration. The result has been a
significant improvement in transparency and simplicity, leaving Afghanistan as one of the most open economies
in the region, although significant work remains to eliminate informal barriers and address governance issues.
Under the trade regime inherited by the transitional
Figure 1. South and Central Asia -- Trade Restrictiveness
government, there were 25 tariff bands, with rates
ranging from 7 to 150 percent—with a simple average of
TRI Rating
about 43 percent (although the effective tariff was much
Average Tariff
lower, due to the use of a lower exchange rate in import
valuation). An overhaul of the tariff system brought the
number of rates to six (2.5, 4, 5, 8, 10, and 16 percent),
with a relatively low level of dispersion. By virtue of this
rationalization, the average tariff also declined to
4 percent. Even with the addition of a range of “fees”
(both legitimate and illegitimate), the estimated average
applied tariff is only 5.3 percent—the lowest in the
region. The effective tariff rose considerably, however, given the authorities’ decision to use market exchange
rates in import valuation. Afghanistan maintains bans on only a few products (largely for religious purposes),
and imposes no seasonal restrictions, quotas, or other nontariff barriers. Further, licensing requirements—
reformed effective April 2004—have been drastically simplified. The import license application process, which
previously involved 42 steps, 58 signatures, and several weeks of processing, now involves only three steps, six
signatures, and 48 hours to process.
35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Afghanistan

China

Pakistan

Turkmenistan

Iran

India

Uzbekistan

A number of problems remain, however. Some provincial governments reportedly prohibit the use of foreign
trucks. There are also other ad hoc fees imposed by local governments, warlords, and commanders, but these
appear to be evenly applied to all transport, and not just on imported goods. Customs clearance in some areas
(for example, in some of the more problematic areas on the border with Pakistan) can also be cumbersome.
From a government policy perspective, however, substantial progress is being made to simplify customs
administration—including computerization and the introduction of a customs single administrative document.
With regard to international trade policy, the emphasis thus far has been regional—reflecting the large potential
for immediate gains from facilitating transit trade with such countries as India, Pakistan, and Iran. This process
is expected to continue, with the Afghan authorities seeking to codify relationships with other neighboring
economies. On the multilateral level, Afghanistan has recently requested observer status from the World Trade
Organization (WTO). Accession to the WTO is a future goal, although the authorities have indicated that a
significant number of legal reforms will be required to meet WTO requirements.

- 10 -

Box 2. The Deepening of the Domestic Currency Market or “Afghanization”
Since the introduction of the new Afghani in late 2002, currency in circulation has increased substantially
faster than nominal GDP. Afghanis in circulation rose by 41 percent during 2003/04 and by 22 percent during
the first six months of 2004/05, while nominal GDP growth amounted to 23 percent in 2003/04 and is projected
at 19 percent in 2004/05. Overall, the velocity of currency in circulation is estimated to have declined by
13 percent in 2003/04 and by an additional 10 percent during the first six months of 2004/05 (Figure 2).
This decline in velocity, at a time of moderate inflation and an appreciating currency, points to an
increase in demand for the Afghani. While year-on-year inflation has increased during the first part of
2004/05, from 7 percent at end-December 2003 to 14 percent at end-September 2004, this largely reflects nonmonetary factors. Excluding petroleum products, rents, and education, inflation has remained moderate, at
7 percent at end-September 2004 (compared with 6 percent at end-2003). At the same time, the Afghani has
steadily appreciated since end-2003, gaining 7 percent vis-à-vis the dollar during the first nine months of 2004.
This higher demand for the Afghani seems to result from both a monetization and a dedollarization of
the economy.1/ The use of the local currency as a means of exchange has benefited from: (i) administrative
measures aimed at encouraging its use (DAB has insisted that all goods and services be priced in Afghani);
(ii) its increasing use by the donor community, such as the U.S. Army for the payment of contractors and
Afghan National Army salaries, which has contributed to its diffusion, notably in the rural areas; and (iii) an
increased confidence resulting from its stability over the recent period. There is anecdotal evidence that the
Afghani is now the preponderant currency for transactions. However, the U.S. dollar remains widely used in a
few sectors, such as the telecommunication sector, the trade sector, and the opium economy.2/ Hence,
preliminary data for end-August 2004 indicate that 91 percent of deposits at private commercial banks were in
U.S. dollars, reflecting the preferences of their depositors, mostly traders and large companies.
With a level of monetization similar to that of other least-developed economies, the financial deepening of
the Afghan economy is expected to come from the development of the banking sector (Figure 4). The ratio
of reserve money to GDP, at 13 percent at end-September, is slightly higher than that observed in other
least-developed countries. This is partly explained by the low level of development of the banking sector, which
until recently provided few investment opportunities. Deposits with commercial banks and lending activities
represented 1.8 percent and 0.4 percent of GDP, respectively at end-August (these numbers include foreign
currency deposits and dormant accounts). As a result, Afghanistan’s broad money to GDP ratio was
significantly lower than in similar developing countries. As the banking sector develops, this ratio should
increase substantially, while the ratio of currency on circulation to GDP may decline somewhat.
_____________________
1/ Due to the lack of reliable data on cash holdings in U.S. dollars, it is not possible to estimate the respective
contribution of financial deepening (i.e. increase in the broad currency in circulation, including foreign
currency holdings) and dedollarization (i.e. decline in currency substitution).
2/ The use of the Pakistani rupee and the Iranian rial, which was sizeable in some of the provinces, now appears
marginal.

- 11 -

12.
Domestic fiscal revenue for the first half of 2004/05 reached Af 5.9 billion,
exceeding the program target of Af 5.5 billion. The sharp increase in revenue over the
same period last year was attributed to more timely sweepings of provincial revenue into the
TSA and to the gradual implementation of customs and domestic tax reforms. Operating
budget spending reached Af 12 billion during the first half of 2004/05, compared with the
annual budgeted amount of Af 30.3 billion. The rate of security-related spending,
representing 51 percent of total operating expenditures, was in line with the budget, while
spending on education and social services remained significantly under budget, mainly due to
problems in recruiting qualified staff. Core budget development spending reached
Af 3.5 billion during the first half of 2004/05, compared with the budgeted Af 38.4 billion,
reflecting the late approval of the core budget, the poor security environment, and the limited
implementation capacity of line ministries and other agencies.4 For similar reasons, external
budget spending was also quite low, as donors reported disbursements of $103 million during
the first half of 2004/05, compared with annual commitments of $2.6 billion.
13.
The authorities maintained their “no-overdraft” financing rule but drew down a
significant amount of government deposits to finance the operating budget deficit. As
reimbursement from the multi-donor trust funds were lower than expected during the first
half of 2004/05, the operating budget deficit was partly financed by a draw-down of domestic
deposits, of Af 1.6 billion, and funds from a highly concessional loan, amounting to
$12 million.
14.
Balance of payments data remain of very poor quality. Nevertheless, preliminary
data indicate that the current account deficit narrowed to 12 percent of GDP in the first half
of 2004/05, down from 22 percent a year before, and was primarily financed by external
grants (Table 5).5 The decline in the deficit appears to reflect an improvement in the trade
balance, including an increase in domestic exports but also a slowdown in imports, likely
attributable to delays in project implementation. External borrowing, which is on highly
concessional terms, remained limited, reaching an estimated $104 million during the first
semester. The authorities continue to make progress in verifying external obligations to
bilateral creditors, and a survey of external debt and reconciliation with creditors is expected
to be completed by end-March 2005.
15.
Progress was made in implementing structural reforms under the SMP. Efforts
have focused on implementing tax reforms, extending the consumer price index (CPI)
coverage, ensuring a more timely transfer of provincial revenue to the central government
accounts, restructuring the state-owned enterprises (SOEs), drafting a private investment law,
and establishing a legal framework for extractive industries. In the financial sector, bank
4

The 2004/05 core development budget was not approved until end-June, after the start of the fiscal year
(March 20) and the Berlin donors’ conference.
5

The balance of payments trends reported here do not incorporate developments in the opium economy or
flows associated with U.S. military or activities of the International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF).

- 12 -

regulation was strengthened through enactment of AML/CFT legislation and the adoption of
bank reserves requirements. DAB also successfully introduced a short-term capital note
(end-December benchmark), a significant step toward establishing a benchmark interest rate.
Progress in other areas, however, remained slow. The restructuring of the three relicensed
state-owned banks (a requirement under their relicensing) and the resolution of the other
state-owned banks appear stalled. Moreover, the recent opening of the foreign exchange
auctions to the commercial banks has not been satisfactory as the banks only have access to a
fixed allocation, sold on a noncompetitive basis after each auction.6
16.
The overall process of drafting, adopting, and giving force of law to key reform
legislation has encountered a number of bottlenecks in the intergovernmental process,
including the limited capacity of the Ministry of Justice. As a result, publication in the
official gazette has been delayed for key economic legislation. While a dialogue is underway
to remove these obstacles, the process is far from complete.
III. MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR THE REMAINDER OF
2004/05
17.
Discussions with the authorities on the program for the remainder of 2004/05 focused
on: (i) maintaining macroeconomic stability in a period of political transition and persistent
insecurity; (ii) strengthening capacity; and (iii) stepping up structural reforms to spur private
investment and improve delivery of government services. The macro-framework was
updated and understandings were reached to step up revenue collection, strengthen
expenditure management, and improve the business regulatory framework.
18.
Modifications were made to the structural benchmarks for the rest of the year.
Several end-December 2004 benchmarks were moved to end-March 2005: the benchmark
related to the transfer to other entities of all DAB commercial activities, because of
difficulties in identifying and contacting the owners of commercial accounts opened at DAB;
the benchmark related to the piloting of a system to pay salaries and vendors directly, mainly
resulting from the limited coverage of the banking system; and the benchmarks related to the
publication in the official gazette of the financial management law, to the consolidation of all
recent revenue measures into the revenue code, and to the adoption of a list classifying the
SOEs according to proposed economic restructuring method, due to administrative delays
linked to the lengthy political transition period between the presidential election and the
appointment of a new Cabinet. In addition, the end-March 2005 benchmark for asset
transfers between the DAB and the Ministry of Finance (MoF) now covers only DAB’s
commercial holdings, which will be transferred to MoF, and the gold and silver in the

6

While not affecting significantly the monetary policy implementation, as the size of these transactions are
relatively limited, this fixed allocation creates potential arbitrage opportunities for the commercial banks, as it is
available for up to one week (on a first come first serve basis) at the auction exchange rate.

- 13 -

Presidential palace vaults, which will be transferred to DAB.7 The two institutions will work
together to resolve issues related to remaining liabilities, mostly related to Russian claims,
currently housed at DAB. Finally, an end-March 2005 benchmark related to the publication
of tax amendments in the official gazette was added. The delay in the publication of the
revenue laws should not affect significantly the SMP revenue target.8
A. Macroeconomic Framework
19.
The authorities and staff agreed on a revised short-term outlook, with
substantially lower growth, and unchanged inflation. The downward revision of growth,
from 16 percent to 8 percent, reflected the sharp reduction in agricultural output during the
first half of the year and lingering drought in the southern provinces. At the same time,
growth in other sectors was revised upward, as their better-than-anticipated performance
during the first half is expected to continue.
B. Fiscal Policy
20.
Staff concurred with the authorities that the budget revenue target for the year
remains ambitious but achievable. Meeting the budget target for domestic revenue, which,
at Af 15 billion (5.6 percent of GDP), is higher than the program target (Af 12.8 billion), will
require a significant improvement in revenue collection, including from the provinces, during
the second half of the year and is contingent on the implementation of customs and tax
reforms and the collection of sizeable over flight charges near the end of the fiscal year
(paragraph 16 of MEFP).
21.
Donor funding should be sufficient to finance the core budget in 2004/05.
Budgeted revenue, grants, and program loans for the approved core budget exceed projected
expenditures by $305 million. The government initially planned to allocate this ‘surplus’
funding to specific development projects at the time of the mid-year review. However, due to
the postponement of this review on account of the elections, and given the slow pace of core
budget development spending, this additional funding will likely be carried over to
subsequent years.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
22.
In view of Afghanistan’s vulnerability to external and domestic shocks, it was
agreed that a flexible exchange rate remained appropriate and that monetary policy
should continue to be anchored on targets for currency in circulation. Flexibility remains
key, however, and, given the stronger-than-expected money demand, the monetary targets for
7

The minister of finance has no specific plan (at this juncture) on how to eventually privatize the best assets
transferred from DAB. Recent technical assistance from the U.S. Treasury is intended to help address this issue.

8

While they still have to be published, the revisions to the income tax laws have started to be implemented by
the authorities, in accordance with the Ministry of Justice view that they have currently status of law.

- 14 -

the remainder of the year were revised upward. The revised targets still imply a significant
tightening of monetary policy in the coming months, as year-on-year money growth is
expected to decline from more than 50 percent at end-September 2004 to a maximum of
38 percent at end-March 2005. The revised program should allow DAB to accommodate the
anticipated further increase in demand for Afghanis without feeding inflation. As money
demand is highly uncertain, the program will remain flexible and will be carefully monitored.
In particular, the authorities reiterated their commitment to closely follow price and exchange
rate developments and to tighten the monetary stance, should prices accelerate. Finally, in
light of the foreign exchange accumulation during the first six months, the authorities agreed
to revise upward the indicative floors for international reserve growth for the remainder of
the year, to levels consistent with import coverage of 3.5 months at end-2004/05.9
D. External Sector
23.
While limited data render projections for the balance of payments difficult,
continued reconstruction and relatively strong economic recovery would suggest a
2004/05 outcome similar to that estimated in 2003/04. The current account deficit
including grants (currently projected at 3.4 percent of GDP) would be more than adequately
financed by inward flows, allowing for a continued accumulation of reserves—keeping
coverage in terms of imports constant at about four months. Given the large structural
changes taking place in the economy, however, staff stressed the need to remain vigilant to
emerging pressures on the balance of payments. External borrowing is expected to remain
relatively light, given the authorities’ cautious approach to new obligations and the current
availability of grant financing.
E. Structural reforms
24.
The authorities recognize the continued presence of structural impediments to
private sector activities and investment, and are pursuing reforms to eliminate these
obstacles. In addition to ongoing fiscal and financial reforms, they are pressing ahead with
measures to reform public enterprises, and improve governance and transparency, and the
legal and institutional environment for private sector investment.10
25.
Developing a more robust legal framework is an important component of the
strategy to reestablish the rule of law and promote a market-based economy. A
significant amount of economic legislation is at various stages of preparation, including a
public financial management law and a customs code (both of which should be approved
within the current fiscal year), revisions to the income tax law, and laws to regulate the
mining, oil, and gas sectors.

9

See IMF Country Report No. 04/110, March 26, 2004, paragraph 19 for an explanation why the floor on
international reserves is set at a level lower than the one implied by the monetary projections.
10

The nonfinancial public enterprise sector in Afghanistan is small, thus limiting the fiscal impact of its
restructuring.

- 15 -

26.
Key public expenditure management reforms are being implemented with donor
support. They include: (a) automating the payments system, with electronic funds transfer
and a verified payroll (initially for Kabul-based ministries only); (b) improving general
compliance with financial management procedures; (c) combining operating and
development spending in line with a single new chart of accounts; and (d) reestablishing
internal and external audit functions.
27.
Donors are also funding a number of programs to restructure ministries and
attract appropriately skilled and experienced Afghan professionals to core managerial
and technical positions (see paragraph 27 of MEFP). Recognizing that these programs are
likely to increase the already high share of the operating budget devoted to salaries over the
medium term, the authorities intend to undertake a comprehensive pay and grading review
which should be linked to the goal of achieving sustainable fiscal position within a few years
(see Selected Issues Paper, “Medium-Term Structural Fiscal Reforms,” (www.imf.org)).
28.
The authorities continue to modernize and reform the banking sector. The
transfer of DAB’s commercial activities and noncore assets to the MoF will allow the central
bank to focus on its primary functions. Taken together with an external audit, this will help
clarify DAB’s financial situation and facilitate an assessment of whether it is adequately
capitalized. Also, the commercial banking regulatory framework will be further strengthened.
The authorities are also committed to allowing private banks to play a more prominent role in
the foreign exchange market, and to deepen interest in DAB’s short-term capital notes.
F. Technical Assistance
29.
Afghanistan’s track record of implementing Fund technical assistance (TA)
recommendations is satisfactory. The Fund’s priority has been to provide policy advice and
TA to help Afghanistan establish a sound foundation for economic management and
macroeconomic stability. In many areas, where institution building requires extensive
resources, the Fund approach has been to set the overall framework, leaving other partners to
deliver detailed TA (paragraph 6 of IMF Country Report No. 03/299; September 10, 2003).
Recent TA from the Fund under the SMP helped the authorities pass AML/CFT legislation,
extend CPI coverage, prepare a balance sheet for DAB, and provide training for DAB
officials. However, progress in implementing Fund TA recommendations in customs has thus
far been slow. While the authorities praised Fund’s assistance and reiterated their interest in
continuing to receive TA, they also expressed disappointment that the Fund has not always
been able to deliver, because of security concerns, on TA that was promised in key areas—
delaying implementation of structural reforms.
G. Data Issues
30.
Afghanistan’s statistical framework is improving but substantial weaknesses
remain. The mission welcomed the progress made in compiling basic real sector data,
extending CPI coverage, and improving the reliability and timeliness of fiscal and monetary
data. Although broadly adequate for surveillance and program monitoring, the current

- 16 -

provision of data falls short of international standards in terms of quality, frequency, and
dissemination. Staff welcome the recent adoption of a statistical master plan and encourage
the authorities to establish a clear work program and mobilize the needed resources.
H. Program Monitoring
31.
The Technical Committee of Coordination (TCC) is playing an important role by
improving collaboration between the MoF, DAB, and the Central Statistics Office, which has
enabled close monitoring of the targets and benchmarks. The program will be monitored
through the quantitative indicators and structural benchmarks specified in Tables 1 and 2 of
Attachment II.
IV. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK AND REFORM STRATEGY
32.
Afghanistan’s current economic and institutional environment present a number
of positive features. The institutional and political frameworks are broadly in place and
economic reforms are progressing. Important tax policy measures combined with ambitious
tax and customs administration reforms are helping the central government to regain control
over revenue. A financial management law, soon to be adopted, will provide an adequate
legal framework for fiscal policy. Modernization of the central bank and reform of the
financial system are progressing, although the sector is still in its infancy. The regulatory
framework for private investment is expected to receive a boost from the new private
investment law and the establishment of a legal framework for extractive industries—an area
of potential for new investment and growth. Private investment should also benefit from the
privatization of SOEs.
33.
These achievements notwithstanding, Afghanistan still faces major challenges,
including a volatile security situation, a fragmented political environment, a growing drug
economy, the continued strength of warlords, an ineffective legal system, poor governance,
and widespread poverty. Against this background, staff welcome the government’s
formulation of a broad-based strategy. This strategy is articulated around: (a) increased
security; (b) private sector-led growth; (c) strong revenue efforts to allow funding of
recurrent costs within a medium-term horizon; (d) eliminating the drug economy (Box 3);
and (e) institution-building. If appropriately followed, this strategy should contribute toward
the accomplishment of the 2015 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
34.
Against this background, staff engaged the authorities in discussions on their
medium-term policies only in broad terms as their limited capacity currently precludes a
more in-depth discussion. Generally, however, the authorities concurred that Fund staff
policy advice was consistent with their long-term strategy as envisioned in the Securing
Afghanistan’s Future.

- 17 -

Box 3: Key Elements and Macroeconomic Impact of a Strategy to Fight the Drug Economy
The 2005 campaign
The authorities adopted in early 2003 a multiyear anti-narcotics strategy, which aims at completely eliminating opium
production by 2012. Although current efforts, including the 2004 eradication campaign, have not been very successful, the
expansion of the drug economy would have likely been even more vigorous without them. With the support from donors, the
government intends to focus on five key areas during the 2005 campaign:
• An information campaign that will reemphasize the illegal nature of these activities.
• A broad alternative livelihood strategy, focusing especially on rural rehabilitation and development(see Box 4).
• Centralization and intensification of eradication under the responsibility of a newly created department in the Ministry of
the Interior.
• Intensification of interdiction actions aimed at traffickers and laboratories.
• Strengthening of the laws, courts, and penal systems to work against production and trading.
In addition, counter-narcotics efforts are being mainstreamed in the government’s overall development and reconstruction
program. This takes into account the complexity of the drug issue and aims at limiting the social and economic disruptions
caused by eradication (physical elimination of the poppy fields) and/or interdiction (legal action against the producers,
processors, and traffickers).
Macroeconomic impact
The drug economy, which is excluded from GDP, adds to the demand for domestic products and improves the
balance of payments. It impacts the nondrug economy primarily through the income it generates, and the use of this income
varies according to the economic actor. Farmers, who accounted for less than 25 percent of the estimated $2.8 billion of
drug income in 2004, consume a large part of their earnings, mostly on domestic goods. Processors and traffickers, while
consuming some domestic and imported goods, probably save, or spend, much of their income outside the country. This
group imports raw materials and drug-related capital goods (for transport, processing, and security), and also invests part of
its savings domestically (the current construction boom appears to be partly financed through drug revenue). As opium is
exported, and as long as some income is spent domestically, the drug economy contributes positively to the balance of
payments. However, the drug economy negatively affects the competitiveness of other domestically produced goods through
high wage rates and a higher real exchange rate (similar to “Dutch disease”). The macroeconomic effect of a counternarcotic campaign will depend on the method used. Eradication tends to raise farm gate prices due to lower production,
while interdiction tends to lower farm gate prices due to lower demand by traffickers. Thus, these policies create different
incentives and rates of return for farmers and traffickers.
A successful campaign could adversely affect GDP growth, the balance of payments and government revenue. Due to
a highly inelastic demand, an eradication campaign could result, at least temporarily, in higher incomes for farmers, but also
for the traffickers, which would be able to sell their stocks at higher prices.1/ A multi-pronged strategy, if successful, should
however result in a lower drug income, leading to a slowdown in real growth in the nondrug economy and a deterioration of
the balance of payments, putting downward pressure on the exchange rate. The relative magnitude of this shock to GDP
would be less to the extent that the burden falls on traffickers. On the external side, the high foreign savings and import
content associated with drug revenue suggest that the impact on the balance of payments would be substantially less than the
total decline in drug revenue. However, this impact could be temporarily accentuated by capital flight, as some traders and
traffickers may want to protect their assets from increased scrutiny. The slowdown in growth and the decline in imports will
in turn affect negatively government revenue.
Overtime, the reallocation of resources to the nondrug sector will allow higher recorded growth. Cetibus paribus, the
real depreciation of the exchange rate resulting from lower demand and the deterioration of the balance of payments, will
contribute to the reallocation of resources to the export sector. Depending on monetary policy, this depreciation will come
from a nominal depreciation and/or a relative decline in domestic prices. The current level of international reserves will
allow the central bank, through a tightening of its monetary stance, to avoid unwarranted exchange rate depreciation.
_____________________
1/ While the overall impact on farmers revenue would be positive, the social impact could be substantial, as the farmers directly touched
by the eradication campaign would lose their main source of revenue.

- 18 -

A. Macroeconomic Framework
35.
While recognizing that recent growth rates will be difficult to maintain, the
authorities expect an average annual growth rate of 9 percent over the medium term will be
needed to address poverty and unemployment and meet the MDGs (Box 4). In support of this
target, investment is expected to average about 25 percent of GDP over the next five years,
reflecting: (a) continued donor support averaging about 29 percent of GDP; (b) a gradual rise
in foreign private sector investment (mostly in the form of foreign direct investment); and
(c) higher levels of productivity from accelerated structural reforms. Fiscal policy targets a
level of current spending averaging about 12 percent of GDP, while capital spending would
decline to 17 percent of GDP by 2007/08, facilitating an expansion of private sector
investment. Consumption, reflecting structural changes underway, is projected to fall to
100 percent of GDP over the same period, down from 110 percent of GDP in 2004/05. As
structural reforms take hold, the gray economy shrinks, the banking system develops, and
security improves, income is expected to rise and alter the household’s expenditure and
savings patterns. As a result, private savings are projected to rise to 4.1 percent of GDP in
2007/08, up from -5.3 percent of GDP in 2004/05.
36.
This outcome is predicated on: (a) efficient public spending that supports
development and creates an enabling environment for private investment while maintaining
fiscal stability; (b) public enterprise reform; and (c) accelerating market reform and
promoting the rule of law and greater transparency. But even more important, the
government must overcome deeply rooted problems impeding reform (paragraph 33).
Furthermore, although official statistics are not available, there is evidence that wage rates
have become relatively high for the region, largely driven by the aid and drug economies.
B. Medium-Term Fiscal Policy
37.
The authorities are committed to promote fiscal sustainability over the medium term.
Their fiscal policy is designed to ensure that the government achieves its policy objectives
within the resources available, deliver basic government services efficiently, and facilitate
budget execution and monitoring. The authorities intend to continue implementing a broad
structural fiscal reform agenda centered around (a) continuing to consolidate fiscal
management; (b) rebuilding and broadening the domestic tax base; and (c) developing an
effective public administration and public expenditure management system (see Selected
Issues Paper, “Medium-Term Structural Fiscal Reforms” (www.imf.org)).
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
38.
Monetary policy will be implemented under a managed float. It will continue to
be anchored by a target for currency in circulation but will avoid large and unwarranted
changes in the exchange rate, as long as such policy is consistent with maintaining low
inflation. The central bank will develop its arsenal of market-based instruments to strengthen
its capacity to implement monetary policy. As the banking sector develops and more reliable

- 19 -

Box 4. The Sources of Growth in Afghanistan
Following two years of crisis management, the government adopted in early 2004 a broad-based strategy
called “Securing Afghanistan’s Future”. The strategy aims at building a financially self-sustaining state, with
the capacity to meet basic social needs and address poverty reduction. Central to this strategy is the need to
sustain an annual growth rate in the nondrug economy of at least 9 percent to raise per capita income from $135
by end-2001 to $350 by 2015 and to reduce unemployment.
Over the past three years, growth has rebounded—reflecting sound macroeconomic policies, sizable aid
flows, favorable weather conditions, reconstruction efforts, and essential structural reforms. Non-opium
GDP growth reached 29 percent in 2002/03, and almost 16 percent in 2003/04. Agriculture, which represents
48 percent of GDP, was the main engine of this growth. The strong performance in this sector was due largely
to the return of some 3 million refugees to farmlands, the timely availability of fertilizers and other inputs, and a
temporary end to drought conditions. Other sectors that fueled growth, albeit to a lesser extent, included
construction and services, which represent respectively 5 percent and 30 percent of GDP.
Growth is now expected to slow as various factors that supported the economy in the immediate postconflict period gradually diminish. Agricultural growth will be limited by the lingering drought, which is
expected to continue as a result of a long-term pattern, and the low potential for a further rise in yields under
current techniques (yields are now similar to those in neighboring countries). Value-added in livestock will also
suffer from the drought. The boom in construction and services is expected to continue, but will not be
sufficient to support the economy. Afghanistan will therefore need to exploit the full potential of existing
sectors and identify other leading sources of economic growth.
Assuming the country addresses the structural impediments constraining private sector investment,
including insufficient power and a difficult regulatory environment, economic expansion could be
secured not only from some existing sectors but also from new sectors:
•

In the agricultural sector, expansion could come from: (a) extension of the irrigated areas (presently only
40 percent of the cultivated area is under irrigation) to break the total dependence on erratic winter snows
and spring rains for water; (b) use of machines, chemical fertilizers, and pesticides to improve the yields
and the quality of the grain and other staples; (c) strengthening transportation networks to ensure
distribution of food and other goods; and (d) growing staples with more value added, including cotton and
sugar beet on an industrialized scale.

•

Other sectors with significant scope for growth are trade, construction, and transportation. Trade links are
expected to grow over time with neighbors as the country slowly builds its transportation network. The
highway system requires total reconstruction, and regional road are in total disrepair.

•

New sectors that can contribute to sustained growth include extractive industries. The country is endowed
with natural resources, including extensive deposits of natural gas, petroleum, copper, coal, chromites, talk,
barites, sulfur, lead, zinc, iron, salt, and precious and semiprecious stones.

- 20 -

monetary data become available, DAB will base its monetary policy decisions on a broader
set of indicators, including reserve money and broad money. The authorities will work to
strengthen the financial sector legal framework — which currently hinders bank financing of
the private sector.
D. External Policy and Debt Sustainability Analysis
39.
The external accounts will likely be driven by the pace of reconstruction, the
availability of new trade opportunities and the impact of recent changes to trade policy.
Over the medium term, as the external impact of donor projects lessens and the domestic
supply of goods and services gradually supplants imports, the current account is projected to
improve, reaching a deficit of 2.6 percent of GDP by 2008/09. This should facilitate a
similarly gradual accumulation of foreign exchange reserves—to about five months of
imports. While conservative, these projections are subject to downside risks, stemming
notably from the high share of exports linked to agriculture and animal husbandry products,
and from the positive impact of unrecorded capital inflows.
40.
The current cautious approach to external borrowing will remain a key
component of economic policy for the near term. This reflects Afghanistan’s fragile
economic position, its relatively scarce foreign exchange earnings (excluding donor flows
and drug-related trade), extremely low level of domestic revenue, and lack of clarity
regarding the status of some pre-existing bilateral claims. Staff emphasized the need to adopt
an explicit strategy to guide external debt management over the medium term. A debt
sustainability analysis (see Selected Issues Paper, “Debt Sustainability Analysis,”
(www.imf.org)), conducted as part of the current Article IV consultation, highlighted the
potential risks and vulnerabilities associated with external borrowing under different
scenarios. The results indicate that, assuming a “clean slate” with regard to old bilateral
claims, and reasonably strong economic and revenue performance, there is a comfortable
margin with regard to key sustainability thresholds. Through successive macroeconomic and
other shocks outlined in the various scenarios, however, this margin quickly diminishes,
leading to situations where Afghanistan’s debt and debt service burden would be deemed
unsustainable.
41.
The authorities recognized the need to provide the legal framework that
conforms to their liberal trade and exchange rate regime to pave the way for accepting
the obligations under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. This would send
a positive signal to investors. Staff reiterated the Fund’s willingness to provide TA in this
area.
V. FUND RELATIONS
42.
The authorities view a formal arrangement with the Fund as one possible pillar
in the strategy to fight poverty and unemployment. However, until a new parliament is in
place, and in the absence of any immediate balance of payments needs, they favor continuing

- 21 -

with an SMP to sustain the reform momentum, improve policy formulation, and strengthen
administrative capacity. Staff were encouraged by the decision to initiate, in cooperation with
the donor community, work on an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
43.
Under the current SMP, Afghanistan is making headway in macroeconomic
management and structural reform. Prudent fiscal and monetary policies have helped to
contain inflation and facilitate relatively high levels of growth. Afghanistan’s performance
during the first semester of the SMP is encouraging. Notwithstanding an array of challenges
and demands, the authorities implemented a demanding program, more heavily focused on
structural reforms than on quantitative targets, and have largely met every benchmark.
44.
At the same time, there is a need for a forceful response to the rise in opium
production, which threatens the very fabric of Afghan society. Staff support recent efforts
by the government and its international partners to develop a multi-pronged strategy to deal
with the opium economy. However, staff recognize that eradication cannot be accomplished
in isolation, and could have a significant economic impact—particularly on some of the most
vulnerable segments of the population.
45.
In addition, Afghanistan is still faced with significant challenges in policy
implementation due to serious capacity constraints and weak institutions. The
widespread shortages of skilled civil servants and weaknesses in the public administration
hinder the absorptive capacity. In many cases, these capacity constraints have meant that the
effectiveness of reforms was less than envisaged under the program, particularly with regard
to revenue administration, and restructuring of the banking system. Failure to address these
issues will hinder efforts to attract private investment which is the backbone of Afghanistan’s
future growth prospects. Staff welcome the authorities intention to press ahead with planned
reforms, and urge them to strengthen these efforts. Staff look forward to further progress in
the reform program with the new government. The forthcoming general elections constitute
another step toward broadening ownership of economic reforms.
46.
The thrust of the macroeconomic policies in the current SMP strikes an
appropriate balance between the requirement to support growth during this period of
transition and the crucial need to remain vigilant with regard to potential risks. As the
fiscal program will be a key component, staff urge the authorities to develop a
comprehensive medium-term budget framework that maintains fiscal discipline. The
authorities should continue in their efforts to enhance revenue and strengthen expenditure
management. The high share of wages and security-related outlays might have been
appropriate until now. A gradual shift away from security and reconstruction is the most
desirable avenue for expenditure policy to support more broad-based sustainable
development in the medium term.

- 22 -

47.
Continued donor support is key to ensuring success of the government’s reform
strategy. To enhance ownership and coordination of the reform program, donor funding
should be integrated into one consolidated medium-term budget framework (moving away
from a collection of donor-implemented programs). More direct donor grant support to the
budget would simplify fiscal management and help coordinate donor funds. This will require
continued improvement in fiduciary standards and the mechanisms for promoting
accountability.
48.
The current framework for monetary policy, based on a monetary anchor and
aimed at ensuring low inflation and currency stability, appears appropriate. The
flexibility imbedded in the monetary program has allowed DAB to react promptly to shifts in
money demand, ensuring moderate inflation and limiting exchange rate volatility. DAB
needs to remain vigilant with respect to inflation and exchange rate developments. Looking
beyond 2004/05, staff encourage the monetary authorities to extend their set of market-based
instruments and improve monetary statistics. As the banking sector expands and more
reliable monetary data become available, DAB should base its monetary policy decisions on
a broader set of monetary indicators.
49.
Sustained economic growth, employment opportunities, and export prospects
will require further structural reforms to improve the business climate. The new
investment law is a valuable step forward. Staff advised the authorities to now focus on
introducing property rights, bankruptcy laws, contract enforcement, and a transparent and
effective judicial system. Staff also view the cooperation of all government ministries and
agencies, along with a political commitment at the highest levels in creating a clear and level
playing field for business, as the cornerstone of the government’s strategy of creating private
sector-led growth.
50.
The mission encouraged the authorities to intensify efforts to rationalize the
public enterprise sector. While the state-owned banks may not represent a systemic risk,
staff urge the authorities to take measures to restore the profitability of those which were
relicensed and to resolve those which were not relicensed.
51.
Failure to strengthen the legal system could undermine Afghanistan’s economic
reform program and medium-term outlook. Key economic legislation remains in limbo
due to low capacity at the Ministry of Justice. Staff have urged the government to elicit donor
aid and technical support to the benefit of the Ministry of Justice.
52.
Building on the achievement of the TCC, staff encouraged the authorities to
consolidate program ownership further and enable the TCC in making inroads into policy
and analytical roles.
53.
Notwithstanding progress so far, particularly in the fiscal area, much remains to
be done in the governance area. The perception of widespread corruption, the rise in drug
activities, and the lack of transparency in many areas have undermined the business
environment. Staff welcome the authorities’ determination to address these issues forcefully.

- 23 -

54.
There are a number of risks to the program. The security situation and the limited
control of the government over the provinces constrain reconstruction. Political risks remain
substantial and, especially in the run-up to the parliamentary elections, could complicate
program implementation. The eradication of drug activities, if not handled properly, could
cause major macroeconomic and social disruptions, especially in rural areas already affected
by the lingering drought. All these factors could cloud Afghanistan’s future. However, the
government’s track record so far is testimony of its resolve to move forward in its reform
agenda. The authorities’ program for 2004/05, aimed at strengthening macroeconomic
stability and Afghanistan’s long-term prospects, therefore deserves continued support from
the Fund. Staff recommend completion of the second review and concur with the authorities
strategy to continue within an SMP.
55.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Afghanistan be held on the
standard 12-month cycle.

- 24 -

Figure 1. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Price Developments, 2003–04 1/
Consumer Price Index
(Year-on-year change, in percent)

80
70

Rents
60
50
40

Petroleum products

30
20

Overall index

10

Other items

0
Dec-03

Jan-04

Feb-04

Mar-04

Apr-04

May-04

Jun-04

Jul-04

Aug-04

Sep-04

-10

Rents Index
(100 = March)

180
170

2004/05
160
150
140
130
120

2003/04
110
100
Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Sources: Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Last observation: September 2004.

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

- 25 -

Figure 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Monetary Developments, 2003–05 1/
Currency in Circulation
(Year-to-date change; in percent)

45
40

Level triggering consultation (revised level)
35
30

Revised SMP target

25
20

Actual

Initial SMP target

15
10
5

2003/04
0
Mar-04

Apr-04

May-04

Jun-04

Jul-04

Aug-04

Sep-04

Oct-04

Nov-04

Dec-04

Jan-05

Feb-05

Mar-05

-5

Currency in circulation/GDP
(In percent)

16

Flexible target
15
SMP target
14

13
Projection period
12

11

10
Mar-03

Jun-03

Sep-03

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Dec-04

Sources: Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan, Da Afghanistan Bank; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Last observation: September 2004.

Mar-05

- 26 -

Figure 3. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Foreign Exchange Reserves and Real Exchange Rate,
2003–04 1/
Foreign Exchange Reserves and Government Foreign Currency Deposits
(In millions of dollars)

1,200

Foreign exchange reserves
1,000

800

600

400

Government foreign currency deposits

200

0
Mar-04

Apr-04

May-04

Jun-04

Jul-04

Aug-04

Sep-04

Price and Exchange Rate Indices 2/
(March 2004 = 100)

120

Real exchange rate
115

110

105

Nominal exchange rate

100

95

CPI (Kabul)
90

85
Dec-02

Mar-03

Jun-03

Sep-03

Dec-03

Mar-04

Jun-04

Sep-04

Sources: Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan, Da Afghanistan Bank; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Last observation: September 2004.
2/ An increase in the exchange rate indices corresponds to an appreciation. The real exchange rate is estimated
using the U.S. and Afghan CPIs.

Sources: WEO; Da Afghanistan Bank; Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Latest data: 2003 or latest available; end-September 2004 for Afghanistan.

s
.
y) nin pia
ar ali pal
of aiti tan sau
ie dia
go ne ep car
To Leo n R gas nom bo nom Be hio anm M Ne blic H hu Bis
B aEt M y
ra rica ada eco Cam eco
pu
er
ne
Re
M ed
m
,
Si l Af
ui
u
n
i
p
G
e
p
o
ra
el
.o
nt
em
ev
cl
Y
Ce
x
d
(e
stea
an
t
L
s
ni
ge
ha
ra
fg
ve
A
A

(In percent of GDP)

la
y) ad
er da so
of ea
ep ho wi da
di
sh
ue
p. uin Nig an Fa m.R sot ala gan ngo ade run biq om Ch
e
n
e
l
a
w
A ng
M U
L
R kin De
Bu zam eco
.R lG
a
r
o
's
em toria
B
u
e
l
M i um
D
B p
a
,
o
p
u
o
Pe
.o
ng Eq
cl
o
a
n
Co
L
(i
n
sta
i
n
ha
fg
A

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Figure 4. Islamic State of Afghanistan. Reserve Money to GDP Ratio 2003-04 1/

- 27 -

- 28 -

Table 1. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Basic Data, 2001/02–2004/05 1/
2001/02

2002/03

Est.

Est.

2003/04

2004/05

Prel.
Est. 2/

Revised
Est.

Init.
Proj. 2/

Revised
Proj.

I. Economic and Financial Indicators
Production
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars, excluding opium production)
GDP (in millions of new Afghani)
Real GDP growth rate (in percent)
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Opium production (metric tons)
Opium value (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices
CPI (Kabul, year-on-year change; in percent )
CPI (Kabul, average change; in percent)

2,463
133,987
...
123
200
...

4,084
182,862
28.6
182
3,400
2,540

4,585
225,108
15.7
199
...
...

4,585
225,108
15.7
199
3,600
2,300

5,802
289,180
16.0
246
...
...

5,392
268,738
7.5
228
4,200
2,800

-43.4
...

52.3
5.2

10.3
24.2

10.3
24.2

10.2
12.3

10.2
12.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless specified otherwise)
General government recurrent budget
Revenues
Expenditures
Donor grants and loans
Revenues (in percent of non-opium GDP)
Expenditures (in percent of non-opium GDP)

...
...
...
...
...

132
349
209
3.2
8.6

207
451
205
4.5
9.8

207
451
205
4.5
9.8

256
609
352
4.4
10.5

256
609
300
4.8
11.3

Monetary indicators
Domestic currency in circulation (annual change; in percent)
Gross foreign exchange reserves

...
...

20.1
426.1

40.9
815.5

40.9
815.5

25.7
977.0

38.0
1,105.3

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless specified otherwise)
External sector
Exports of goods (including reexports)
Exports of goods (annual change; in percent)
Imports of goods
Imports of goods (annual change; in percent)
Imports of oil
Current account deficit (excluding grants)
Current account deficit (including grants; in percent of GDP)
Afghani/U.S. dollar (average during fiscal year)
Afghani/U.S. dollar (end-fiscal year)

708.9
1,645.0
...
...
...
54.4
31.0

1,248.3
76.1
2,407.6
46.4
...
-1,305.5
-2.1
44.8
52.6

1,700.8
36.2
3,758.9
56.1
...
-2,578.2
-0.9
49.0
50.3

1,820.0
45.8
3,414.5
41.8
...
-1,944.8
-1.8
49.0
50.3

1,822.5
7.2
4,134.1
10.0
...
-2,838.7
-1.6
...
...

2,030.9
11.6
3,425.9
0.3
...
-1,721.3
-3.4
...
...

43.2
-5.7

21.9
-10.1

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and savings
Gross investment
Domestic savings

...
...

28.3
-3.7

37.6
-18.6

II. Social and Demographic Indicators
Area
Population (2002/03)
Life expectancy at birth (2001)
Infant mortality per 1,000 live births (2003)
Under-five mortality per 1,000 live births (2003)

652,000 square kilometers
21.8 million
42.8 years
115
172

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The fiscal year 2004/05 runs from March 20, 2004 until March 20, 2005.
2/ First review under the staff-monitored program (IMF Country Report No. 04/364; November 9, 2004).

27.2
-15.2

132.0
103.7
7.8
95.9

Domestic expenditures
Consumption
Public
Private

15.7
23.1
48.5
21.3
30.2
199
4.5

49.8
20.1
30.1
182
3.2

-15.2
-4.4
-10.9

-42.4
10.0
-52.4

28.6
33.8

-3.7
-4.6
0.9

-32.0
8.0
-40.0

27.2
25.9
1.3

142.4
115.2
8.9
106.3

4,585

-697
-200
-498

-1,945
459
-2,404

1,248
1,190
58

6,529
5,282
407
4,875

47.0
20.7
29.4
246
4.4

16.0
28.5

-5.7
-5.0
-0.8

-48.9
13.3
-62.3

43.2
37.5
5.7

148.9
105.7
9.4
96.3

5,802

-332
-288
-44

-2,839
774
-3,613

2,507
2,175
332

8,641
6,134
545
5,589

Rev.
Proj.

Init.
Proj.

100.0

39.7
24.3
36.0
228
4.8

7.5
19.4

-10.1
-4.7
-5.3

-31.9
11.6
-43.5

21.9
19.1
2.8

131.9
110.1
9.5
100.6

2,364
1,916
448

9,881
7,517
699
6,818

46.9
20.8
29.5
288
4.9

12.0
20.9

-7.1
-5.1
-2.0

-40.8
14.4
-55.2

33.7
27.3
6.4

140.8
107.1
10.0
97.2

7,016

-501
-357
-144

-2,865
1,011
-3,876

(In percent of GDP)

5,392

-542
-255
-287

-1,721
624
-2,345

1,179
1,029
150

7,113
5,934
512
5,423

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2004/05
Init.
Proj.

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
100.0
100.0
1/ Data originating from the fiscal accounts.
2/ Determined as a residual.
3/ Equivalent to foreign direct investment reported in the balance of payments, and some new private investment.

Memorandum items:
Real GDP growth (annual change; in percent)
Nominal GDP growth (annual change; in percent)
Sectoral shares of GDP (in percent)
Agriculture
Industry
Services
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Domestic government revenue (in percent of GDP)

Domestic savings
Public savings
Private savings

Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services (excluding reexports)
Imports of goods and services (excluding reexports)

28.3
27.0
1.2

4,084

GDP at market prices

Gross fixed capital formation
Public
Private

-151
-187
36

-1,305
328
-1,633

1,154
1,104
50

5,389
4,235
318
3,917

Est.

Est.

Domestic savings
Public savings
Private savings

Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services (excluding reexports)
Imports of goods and services (excluding reexports)

Gross fixed capital formation
Public
Private 3/

Domestic expenditures
Consumption
Public 1/
Private 2/

2003/04

2002/03
2005/06

100.0

37.2
25.6
37.2
266
6.1

11.3
20.1

-7.1
-5.1
-2.1

-35.7
13.3
-49.0

28.6
21.5
7.1

135.7
107.1
10.3
96.8

6,478

-462
-329
-133

-2,314
862
-3,176

1,852
1,390
462

8,792
6,940
670
6,270

Rev.
Proj.

Table 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Savings-Investment Balances, 2002/03–2007/08

100.0

35.5
26.5
37.9
299
6.5

10.0
15.5

-2.3
-4.9
2.6

-30.4
13.4
-43.8

28.0
20.4
7.7

130.4
102.3
10.6
91.7

7,485

-173
-365
192

-2,272
1,006
-3,278

2,099
1,527
573

9,757
7,658
791
6,866

Rev.
Proj.

2006/07

100.0

34.0
22.5
43.5
334
6.7

9.6
15.1

-0.7
-4.8
4.1

-25.5
12.6
-38.1

24.7
16.9
7.8

125.5
100.7
10.8
89.9

8,615

-62
-413
352

-2,193
1,087
-3,279

2,131
1,456
676

10,808
8,677
930
7,746

Rev.
Proj.

2007/08

- 29 -

---------------------

Functional classification
General public services
Defense
Public order and safety
Education
Health
Social protection
Housing and communal services 5/
Recreation and culture
Economic affairs

1,378.5

Other financing 9/

0

0

0

15,750
11,250
4,500

0

-15,750

---------------------

-------------

---------------

24,750

9,000
-----

2003/04
Budget

0.0

2,029.9

0.0

1,326.0
528.4
797.6

-1,204.7

-2,151.3

4,440.8
498.5
984.4
1,121.6
880.8
258.0
153.7
8.0
111.5
424.2

4,440.8
3,098.5
785.5
182.3
132.5
242.0

4,440.8
2,843.7
1,689.0
1,154.8
1,597.1
1,409.5
187.5

4,440.8

2,289.5
334.7
1,954.8

2003/04
Q2

0.0

-103.0

0.0

2,934.3
2,452.9
481.3

692.3

-3,523.5

5,600.3
429.7
1,533.4
1,492.8
1,130.3
326.6
56.6
12.4
132.4
486.0

5,600.3
4,057.2
807.9
169.6
0.0
565.6

5,600.3
2,984.5
1,908.6
1,075.9
2,615.8
2,148.5
467.2

5,600.3

2,076.8
603.2
1,473.6

2003/04
Q3

0.0

-535.4

395.8

3,740.2
2,925.5
418.9

1,335.7

-4,540.5

8,193.6
770.9
2,583.1
1,893.0
1,511.6
342.2
188.1
16.8
197.8
690.1

8,193.6
5,900.1
1,136.7
158.9
44.5
953.3

8,193.6
4,373.3
2,763.9
1,609.4
3,820.4
3,136.2
684.1

8,193.6

2003/04
Prel.

0.0

-179.0

395.8

10,469.7
8,182.3
1,891.6

1,692.8

-11,983.5

22,151.4
2,032.9
6,004.3
5,148.3
3,789.4
1,067.4
416.0
1,327.6
482.6
1,882.9

22,151.4
14,660.0
4,653.4
652.3
177.1
2,008.5

22,151.4
11,933.9
7,460.3
4,473.5
10,217.5
7,199.7
3,017.9

22,151.4

10,167.9
2,959.3
7,208.6

2,596.1

0.0

---

14,952.0
12,574.6
2,377.4

0.0

-17,548.1

30,332.0
3,298.8
5,934.6
6,721.0
6,342.3
1,262.9
1,687.7
62.6
621.0
4,401.1

30,332.0
20,813.3
4,862.4
1,471.3
724.0
2,460.9

30,332.0
17,222.3
11,154.4
6,067.9
13,109.7
9,658.9
3,450.7

30,332 4/

12,783.9
-----

2004/05
Prog. 1/

(In millions of Afghanis)
3,653.1
1,861.6 3/
1,791.5

2003/04
Q4

0.0

990.0

-798.2

2,137.4
2,137.4
0.0

223.8

-2,552.9

5,223.0
471.0
1,288.5
1,493.1
874.6
287.5
112.2
10.6
99.8
585.8

5,223.0
3,409.0
1,051.7
141.1
222.7
398.6

5,223.0
3,405.4
1,334.6
2,070.8
1,817.6
1,292.7
524.9

5,223.0

2,670.1
550.1
2,120.0

2004/05
Q1

0.0

662.9

1,240.6

1,638.5
1,234.4
404.1

-1.0

-3,541.0

6,776.5
585.8
1,520.3
1,849.7
1,435.4
265.5
180.9
16.6
150.6
771.7

6,776.5
4,827.1
1,019.8
154.9
245.9
528.7

6,776.5
3,979.4
1,740.9
2,238.5
2,797.1
1,988.1
809.0

6,776.5

3,235.5
615.0
2,620.5

2004/05
Q2

0.0

1,652.9

442.3

3,775.9
3,371.8
404.1

222.9

-6,094.0

11,999.5
1,056.7
2,808.8
3,342.8
2,310.0
552.9
293.1
27.2
250.4
1,357.5

11,999.5
8,236.1
2,071.6
296.0
468.6
927.3

11,999.5
7,384.8
3,075.4
4,309.4
4,614.7
3,280.8
1,334.0

11,999.5

5,905.6
1,165.1
4,740.5

2004/05
YTD est.

0

0

---

18,462
-----

-18,462

---------------------

-----------

---------------

37,128

18,667
-----

2005/06
Proj.

0

0

---

21,121
-----

-21,121

---------------------

-----------

---------------

43,832

22,711
-----

2006/07
Proj.

0

0

---

24,252
-----

-24,252

---------------------

-----------

-----------

-----

51,524

27,271
-----

2007/08
Proj.

1/ Staff estimates. The budget adopted by the government projects revenue of about Af 15 billion.
2/ The first half of 2003/04 includes a $18 million lump-sum transfer from Herat province. Revenue in the fourth quarter of 2003/04 were affected by the disruptions in collection that accompanied the aborted introduction of the customs reform in January 2004.
3/ The sharp increase in revenue from the center reflects transfers of overflight revenue from IATA (Af 800 million) and of passport fees from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Af 300 million).
4/ The functional, economic and center/provinces classifications of expenditures reported in 2004/05 reflects IMF staff projections and do not reflect Government Finance Statistics (GFS). These projections are based on assumptions regarding unallocated
expenditures amounting to Af 5.3 billion.
5/ The first quarter of 2003/04 includes $25.2 million paid by the Ministry of Reconstruction in Herat province for the purchase of services .
6/ Variation between the fiscal position recorded at MOF and DAB. This discrepancy is due to the difference (''float") between checks issued and checks cashed and the fact that the provinces' accounts in DAB branches are not consolidated into the
government's central accounts.
7/ This financing is assumed to be temporary and bridges temporary shortfalls in financing due to delays in securing the reimbursement of submitted expenditures from the ARTF. A positive sign corresponds to a decline in balances and a negative sign to an
increase in balances.
8/ Refers to changes in the domestic government accounts with DAB.
9/ In 2002/03, includes one-off transfers of overflight revenue and customs valuation fees accumulated over several years and the sale of telecommunication licenses.

0.0

-1,570.5

0.0

2,469.2
2,275.5
193.8

869.5

-1,768.2

3,916.7
333.7
903.3
640.9
266.8
140.5
17.6
1,290.3
40.9
282.7

3,916.7
1,604.3
1,923.3
141.5
0.0
247.7

3,916.7
1,732.3
1,098.9
633.5
2,184.4
505.4
1,678.9

3,916.7

2,148.5
159.8
1,988.6

2003/04
Q1

Sources: Ministry of Finance and Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB); and Fund staff estimates.

-502.2

Domestic banking financing 8/

---

9,430.4
-----

Donor assistance grants and loans
ARTF
LOTFA and Army Trust Fund

Net transfers from foreign currency deposits 7/

-657.3

Float and adjustment 6/

-9,649.5

-------------

Economic classification
Wages and Salaries
Purchase of goods and services
Transfers and subsidies
Pensions
Capital expenditure

Balance MOF

---------------

15,514.0

5,864.5
1,036.7
4,827.8

Center-Provinces
Central government
Of which: wages
Others
Provinces 5/
Of which: wages
Others

Expenditure

Domestic revenue 2/
Center
Provinces

2002/03
Est.

Table 3. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Operating Budget (in millions of Afghanis), 2002/03–2007/08

- 30 -

1,074
14,361
14,361
14,951
-590
-344
-245
0
-13,287
20,676
20,676
21,302
626
0

...
...
...
20.1
426.1
-4.0
52.3

Net domestic assets
Domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Net claims on government before 2002/03
Net claims on government in 2002/3-2004/05
Domestic currency deposits 3/
Foreign currency deposits 3/
Other claims
Other items net

Reserve money
Currency in circulation 4/ 5/
Banknotes and coins issued
less cash holdings 5/
Bank deposits with DAB and capital note holdings 6/

Memorandum items:
Currency in circulation (SMP first review targets; in millions of Afghanis)
Currency in circulation (level triggering discussions; revised levels; in millions of Afghanis)
Currency in circulation (year-to-date change)
Currency in circulation (year-on-year change)
Gross international reserves (end-of-period level; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices in Kabul (quarterly change)
Consumer prices in Kabul (annual change)
...
...
-1.6
...
522.4
2.0
52.9

20,340
20,340
21,302
962
0

-3,691
10,433
10,433
14,951
-4,518
-975
-3,543
0
-14,124

24,031
24,031
24,031
9,030
15,001
0
0

Est.
Jun. 21

...
...
11.7
...
568.7
2.6
32.6

23,102
23,102
23,302
200
0

-3,056
11,344
11,344
14,951
-3,606
-1,364
-2,243
0
-14,401

26,158
26,158
26,158
9,030
17,128
0
0

2003/04
Est. 1/
Mar. 19

29,140
29,140
29,726
586
0

-4,466
7,138
7,138
14,951
-7,813
-1,924
-5,889
0
-11,604

33,607
33,607
33,607
9,030
24,577
0
0

31,124
28,801
29,726
925
2,323

-10,023
6,796
6,796
14,951
-8,155
-1,984
-6,171
0
-16,818

41,147
41,147
40,644
14,015
26,628
503
0

(In millions of Afghanis)

Est. 1/
Mar. 19

31,759
30,172
31,226
1,054
1,587

-16,117
3,308
3,308
14,951
-11,643
-1,069
-10,574
0
-19,425

47,876
47,876
47,343
14,015
33,328
533
0

Est.
Jun. 20

(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
...
...
...
30,628
...
...
...
...
27.5
40.9
40.9
4.8
37.7
40.9
40.9
710.0
730.6
815.5
949.9
6.0
-0.6
-0.6
6.8
6.5
10.3
10.3
15.5

26,367
26,367
27,392
1,025
0

-6,292
8,300
8,300
14,951
-6,650
-1,140
-5,510
0
-14,592

32,659
32,659
32,659
9,030
23,629
0
0

2003/04
Est.
Est.
Sep. 22 Dec. 21

-17,179
1,676
1,676
14,951
-13,274
-733
-12,541
0
-18,856

56,245
56,245
55,445
14,015
41,430
800
0

32,575
...
21.7
...
1,093.2
1.3
14.1

34,649
39,503
32.2
...
1,112.5
...
...

36,015
39,066
35,054 38,066 4/
36,226
39,316
1,172
1,250
962
1,000

-19,252
-598
-598
14,951
-15,549
-466
-15,083
0
-18,653

55,267
55,267
54,483
14,015
40,468
784
0

36,185
41,193
38.0
38.0
1,105.3
...
10.2

40,755
39,755 4/
41,105
1,350
1,000

-15,133
3,951
3,951
14,951
-11,000
-1,000
-10,000
0
-19,084

55,888
55,888
55,088
14,015
41,073
800
0

2004/05
Est.
Rev. Proj. Rev. Proj.
Sep. 21 Dec. 20
Mar. 20

1/ The first column reports the March 19 outcome using the 2003/04 program exchange rate for estimating foreign assets and liabilities; the second reports the same outcome using the 2004/05 program exchange rate.
The difference in currency in circulation, government deposits and banks' claims on DAB correspond to changes in definitions (see footnotes 3, 5, 6), as new data have become available. The difference in Other items net
between the two columns reflects the capital gains implied by using a higher value of the dollar vis-à-vis the Afghanis in 2004/05 than in 2003/04 and these changes in definitions.
2/ Foreign currency amounts converted into Afghani at the program exchange rate (Af 46 per dollar in 2003/04 and Af 49.84 per dollar in 2004/05); gold valued at $279 per ounce in 2003/04 and $400 per ounce in 2004/05.
3/ In 2003/04, includes only Ministry of Finance deposits.
4/ The revised projections are consistent with the revised indicative ceilings on the changes in currency in circulation (Table 1 of the MEFP).
5/ In 2002/03–03/04, cash holdings only include cash in DAB Treasury vaults. In 2004/05, they also include cash in DAB's six major branches.
`
6 /The differences as compared to the first review (IMF Country Report No. 04/364; November 9, 2004) corresponds to the fact that reliable data on bank deposits and capital note holdings have become available and are now reported.

Sources: Da Afghanistan Bank and Central Statistics Office of Afghanistan; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

19,602
19,602
19,602
9,030
10,572
0
0

Net foreign assets 2/
Foreign assets
Foreign exchange reserves
Gold
Other
Other foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

2002/03
Est.
Mar. 20

Table 4. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Monetary Program (Da Afghanistan Bank), 2002/03–2004/05

- 31 -

- 32 -

Table 5. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Balance of Payments, 2001/02–2007/08 1/
Est.
2002/03

2001/02

Est.
2003/04

Proj.
2004/05

Proj.
2005/06

Proj.
2006/07

Proj.
2007/08

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Trade balance
Exports of goods 1/
Domestic exports
Re-exports

-936.1
708.9
85.2
623.7

-1,159.3
1,248.3
276.8
971.5

-1,594.5
1,820.0
376.8
1,443.2

-1,395.0
2,030.9
541.8
1,489.1

-1,940.5
2,005.5
758.3
1,247.2

-1,935.6
1,844.1
891.5
952.6

-1,930.0
1,705.5
981.2
724.3

1,645.0
1,696.0
71.1
764.0

2,407.6
1,089.4
94.0
1,224.2

3,414.5
1,596.2
40.9
1,777.4

3,425.9
1,871.9
23.6
1,530.4

3,946.0
1,914.6
0.0
2,031.4

3,779.7
1,837.7
0.0
1,942.0

3,635.5
1,871.2
0.0
1,764.2

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

-145.1
50.8
45.9
4.9
195.9
195.9
131.3
64.6

-346.9
82.4
71.1
11.3
429.3
429.3
355.4
73.9

-329.3
81.8
67.3
14.6
411.1
411.1
336.3
74.8

-391.9
103.6
83.9
19.7
495.5
495.5
419.3
76.2

-362.3
114.4
79.8
34.6
476.7
476.7
399.1
77.6

-288.8
105.4
63.0
42.4
394.1
394.1
315.0
79.1

-1.1
0.0
1.1

-3.4
4.9
8.3

2.9
12.6
9.7

18.6
30.5
11.9

25.6
39.1
13.5

26.0
41.1
15.1

...
...
71.1
...
...
...

1,221.7
1,170.1
94.0
1,076.2
51.6
0.0

1,863.8
1,808.8
40.9
1,767.9
55.0
0.0

1,536.5
1,434.0
23.6
1,410.4
102.5
0.0

2,082.7
2,016.0
0.0
2,016.0
66.7
0.0

2,029.8
2,006.0
0.0
2,006.0
23.8
0.0

1,947.5
1,911.1
0.0
1,911.1
36.4
0.0

Current account balance (including grants)
(before grants)

...
...

-83.8
-1,305.5

-81.0
-1,944.8

-184.8
-1,721.3

-231.1
-2,313.8

-242.5
-2,272.3

-245.3
-2,192.8

Capital financial account
Public loans
Disbursements
Amortization paid 2/
Direct investment
Other capital flows

...
...
...
...
...

144.0
94.0
100.2
6.2
50.0
0.0

147.7
89.9
96.1
6.2
57.8
0.0

241.7
141.4
147.6
6.2
100.3
0.0

270.4
158.8
165.0
6.2
111.6
0.0

291.6
168.8
175.0
6.2
122.8
0.0

294.3
168.8
175.0
6.2
125.5
0.0

Net errors and ommisions

...

95.1

312.2

222.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

...

155.3

379.0

279.2

39.3

49.1

49.0

Financing
Change in net foreign assets of DAB

...
...

-155.3
-101.0

-379.0
-389.4

-279.2
-289.8

-39.3
-50.0

-49.1
-60.0

-49.0
-60.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
-54.3
-54.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
10.4
10.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
10.6
10.6
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
10.7
10.7
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
10.9
10.9
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
11.0
11.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

426
2.1

816
4.2

1,105
4.2

1,155
4.2

1,215
4.4

1,275
4.8

-2.1
-32.0
4,084

-1.8
-42.4
4,585

-3.4
-31.9
5,392

-3.6
-35.7
6,478

-3.2
-30.4
7,485

-2.8
-25.5
8,615

Imports of goods
Recorded imports
Commodity food aid
Unrecorded
Services
Receipts
Donor-related
Other
Payments
Donor related
Wages of expatriates
Other
Income (Net)
Receipts
Payments (Interest) 2/
Current transfers
Public
Commodity food aid
Other
Private
Other

Fund credit (net)
Purchases
Repurchases
Exceptional Financing
Arrears
Debt Rescheduling
Debt Forgiveness
Financing gap
Memorandum items
Official foreign exchange reserves
In millions of U. S. dollars
In months of prospective imports 3/
Current account balance (In percent of GDP)
Including grants
Excluding grants
GDP (In millions of U. S. dollars)

...

Source: Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes opium exports and, because information is unavailable, flows associated with U.S. Army
and most ISAF activities.
2/ Debt service projections are based on recognized obligations, reconciled with creditors. Arrears shown here represent
an estimate by IMF staff, on the basis of loans which have been verified with creditors, but are not being serviced.
3/ In months of prospective imports of goods and services, excluding imports for re-export.

- 33 -

APPENDIX I

Islamic State of Afghanistan: Relations with the Fund
(As of November 30, 2004)
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 14, 1955; Article XIV.

II.

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Holdings Exchange Rate

SDR Million
161.90
161.92
0.00

% Quota
100.00
100.01
0.00

III.

SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
26.70
0.04

% Allocation
100.00
0.14

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans

None

V.

Financial Arrangements

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2005
0.00
0.59
0.59

Forthcoming
2006
2007
0.00
0.00
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.59

2008
0.00
0.59
0.59

Nonfinancial Relations
VII. Exchange Arrangement
Afghanistan is an Article XIV member country. The authorities are implementing a liberal
exchange system. Based on information currently available to the staff, no exchange
restrictions and multiple currency practices are currently in place. The authorities intend to
formalize the current liberal regime through the adoption of new laws and regulations, for
which they have asked for technical assistance from the Fund. At least since end-2001, the
Afghani has been floating, and more recently the authorities have been implementing a
managed float with no predetermined path for the exchange rate. As of December 1, 2004,
the average exchange rate on the Kabul money exchange market was Af 47.26 per $1.
To conduct monetary policy, the authorities rely on foreign exchange auctions since
May 2002. Auctions are open to all licensed money changers. To ensure transparency, DAB
has progressively introduced measures, including public announcements of the auctions in

- 34 -

APPENDIX I

advance in local media outlets, and clear instructions on how the auctions are conducted.
Over the years, DAB has also improved the mechanics of the auctions to ensure that
settlements are made after successful bids. Auctions are linked to the overall monetary
program and are held on a fairly regular basis at 1–2 week intervals.
VIII. Article IV Consultation
The last Article IV consultation with Afghanistan was discussed by the Executive Board on
November 21, 2003. Consultations with Afghanistan are on the standard 12-month cycle.
IX.

Technical Assistance, 2002–04

Department
Date
Interdepartmental January 27–31, 2002
FAD
February 10–21, 2002
May 13–26, 2002
January 5–18, 2003
October 22–November 4, 2003
March 2004 until today
March 22–April 3, 2004
April 18–May 2, 2004
MFD
February 27–March 7, 2002
May 19–June 2, July 10–27,
2002
December 11–16, 2002
September 7–16, 2003
February 2–6, 2004
March 21–30, 2004
LEG

STA

February 27–March 7, 2002
December 11–16, 2002
February 2–6, 2004
March 3–21, 2004
April 15–21, 2002
November 18–30, 2002
January 26–February 8, 2003
March 1–11, 2003
June 9–20, 2003
January 29–March 15, 2004
April 19–May 3, 2004
May 13–June 30, 2004
May 17–29, 2004

Purpose
Initial assessment of TA needs
Fiscal management
Tax policy and administration
Fiscal management
Expenditure management
Resident Treasury Expert
Tax policy and administration
Customs administration
Financial sector reform
Financial sector reform
Financial sector legislation workshop
DAB restructuring program and
creation of a central bank short-term
debt instrument.
Anti-money laundering legislation
DAB capital adequacy and balance
sheet structure
Financial sector legislation
Financial sector legislation workshop
Anti-money laundering legislation
Fiscal revenue legislation
Multisector statistics
Consumer Price Index
Government finance statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
Consumer Price Index
Multisector statistics
Balance of Payments Statistics
Multisector statistics
Consumer Price Index

- 35 -

APPENDIX I

A resident treasury expert for the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Platais, was appointed in
March 2004.
A resident multisector statistical advisor, Mr. Soulatha, was stationed in Kabul on
July 17, 2002. STA has provided technical assistance through a series of missions under a
peripatetic multisector statistics assignment which began in January 2004. These missions
were suspended in July 2004 due to the security situation. A new series of peripatetic
missions will commence during January/February 2005. They are expected to resume in
late-2004/early-2005.
A resident MFD expert was posted during July–October 2002 at DAB as an accounting
adviser. In addition, from April 2002 to February 2003, several experts visited Kabul to
provide advice on payment systems, restructuring of DAB, and bank supervision. A mission
to provide advice on foreign exchange and short-term capital note auctions is scheduled for
the first half of 2005.
During 2004, with the financial support provided by the Sweden Technical Assistance
SubAccount, the Fund has sponsored a number of training activities aimed at DAB officials
and is now engaged in preparing a full-scale training program for DAB. A long-term advisor
has been appointed in Kabul since mid-October, 2004. The training coordinator will be
responsible for all practical matters related to the delivery of formal training to DAB staff in
Kabul, as well as the coordination of training for DAB staff outside Afghanistan. Finally,
Sweden has agreed to finance during the period December 2004 to December 2005 a
monetary policy peripatetic advisor to assist DAB in developing the strategy and the
instruments for the implementation of the next stage of monetary policy—setting and
advising on options to replace the existing exchange rate auctions.
X.

Resident Representatives

During the first half of 2002, the Fund’s resident representative in Pakistan, Mr. Ghesquière,
assisted in maintaining relations with the Afghan authorities. A resident representative,
Mr. de Schaetzen, took up his post in Kabul on August 24, 2002.

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

Islamic State of Afghanistan: Relations with the World Bank
(As of November 30, 2004)
1.
A second Transitional Support Strategy (TSS) was presented to the World Bank
Board of Executive Directors in March 2003. The TSS outlines a strategy for World Bank
operations over the subsequent 18 months to 2 years until the establishment of a stable,
representative government. The strategy focuses on four strategic areas: improving
livelihoods, fiscal strategy, institutions and management, governance and public
administration reform, and enabling private sector development. In collaboration with the
new government and other stakeholders, the World Bank intends to update its country
strategy for Afghanistan in 2005. Based on the preparatory work toward the I-PRSP, a
country assistance strategy, covering a three-year period, could be finalized in FY 2006.
2.
In FY 2002, World Bank staff prepared and negotiated four projects to utilize IDA
grant funds to a total of $100 million. Following the clearance of Afghanistan’s arrears to the
World Bank and Fund, through donor contributions, the first IDA credit for $108 million for
the Emergency Transport Project was approved by the Board in March 2003. By the end
of FY 2003 an additional three projects—Emergency Health Sector Rehabilitation
($59.6 million), Emergency Public Administration II ($8.4 million), and National
Emergency Employment II ($39.2 million) were approved bringing to $215 million the
total allocation for the year.
3.
Five IDA credits/grants have been negotiated for FY 2004, for a total of $293 million.
These programs include the Emergency Communications Project ($22 million), the
Emergency Customs Modernization and Trade Facilitation ($31 million), the National
Solidarity Program II ($95 million), the Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation
($40 million), and the Emergency Power Rehabilitation ($105 million).
4.
For FY 2005, four projects have been approved in July 2004, for a total of
$145 million: the first budget-support operation, Programmatic Support for Institution
Building ($80 million), the Kabul Urban Reconstruction Project ($25 million), the
Investment Guarantee Facility ($5 million), together with MIGA, and the Education
Quality Improvement Program ($35 million). Four other projects are planned, for an
additional commitment of $140 million, including the Emergency Public Administration III,
a supplemental financing for the Emergency Transport, the Programmatic Support for
Institution Building II, and the Strengthening Higher Education project.
5.
The World Bank also administers the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
(ARTF), which became effective in May 2002 and plays a critical role in funding the
recurrent costs of government. In its first year of operation (SY 1381—March 21, 2002 to
March 20, 2003) the ARTF mobilized $185 million and disbursed $65 million. Paid-in
contributions for SY 1382 (March 21, 2003 to March 20, 2004) amounted to $286 million,
while disbursements reached $254 million. Pledges for SY 1383 (March 20, 2004 to

- 37 -

APPENDIX II

March 20, 2005) amount to $426 million. ARTF is increasing its financing of investments
and has the potential to support tighter donor coordination, simplified processes, and fast
results.
6.
The World Bank is also actively engaged in advisory services to government and
continues to respond quickly to a range of requests. In September 2004, the World Bank has
released a country economic report “State Building, Sustaining Growth, and Reducing
Poverty.” Current analytical work includes work on the civil service reform, urban
development and land management, education policy reform, labor market and pensions, a
gender assessment and oil/gas infrastructure development, as well as broader regional trade
work encompassing issues with Afghanistan’s neighbors. The World Banks has notably
initiated a major Public Expenditure Review (PER), which incorporates fiduciary aspects,
including procurement and financial management. Fund staff are contributing to the PER,
including through providing an analysis of domestic revenue prospects. The World Bank has
also actively utilized Post Conflict Fund and continues to use the Japan Social
Development Fund resources to provide on-the-ground support to the government and
communities.
7.
The World Bank’s program is growing quickly and has an IDA portfolio of
17 projects as of December 2004. Total commitments add up to $753 million, of which
44 percent has been disbursed. The World Bank’s office in Kabul is fully functional and
growing rapidly to take on increasing demands. A country manager, as well as several other
international staff, and a growing number of national staff are now in place.

D

DAB

M

M

M

Confidential

Mission/
e-mail

1/ Q=quarterly; M=monthly; and D=daily.

Frequency of publication 1/

Unrestricted

E-mail

Mode of reporting

Confidentiality

DAB

D

Frequency of reporting 1/

Source of data

D

Frequency of data 1/

Q

Unrestricted

E-mail

DAB

M

M

Nov. 30, 2004 Nov. 30, 2004 Dec. 5, 2004

Date received

...

Unrestricted

E-mail

DAB

M

M

Dec. 5, 2004

Nov. 2004

Reserve/
Central Bank
Base Money Balance Sheet

Nov. 30, 2004 Nov. 30, 2004 Nov. 30, 2004

International
Reserves

Date of latest
observation

Exchange
Rates

...

...

...

DAB

...

...

...

...

Broad
Money

...

...

...

DAB

...

...

...

...

Interest
Rates

(As of November 30, 2004)

M

Unrestricted

E-mail

CSO

M

M

Dec. 5, 2004

Nov. 2004

Consumer
Price Index

...

...

...

CSO

...

...

...

...

Exports/
Imports

Islamic State of Afghanistan: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators

...

...

...

DAB

...

...

...

...

Current
Account
Balance

M

Unrestricted

Mission

MoF

M

M

Nov. 2004

Oct. 2004

Overall
Government
Balance

...

Unrestricted

Mission

CSO

Mission

Mission

Jul. 2004

2003/04

GDP/GNP

- 38 APPENDIX III

- 39 -

ATTACHMENT I

Kabul, December 29, 2004
Mr. Rodrigo de Rato
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. de Rato,
The government of Afghanistan has held discussions with Fund staff in the context of the
second review of the staff-monitored program (SMP) agreed to in March 2004 and is very
pleased with the progress under the program. Based on these discussions, the attached
memorandum of economic and financial policies (MEFP) reviews macroeconomic
developments and implementation of structural policies during the first two quarters of fiscal
year 2004/05 and describes the objectives and policies that the government intends to pursue
during the remainder of the fiscal year 2004/05. The government’s program will continue to
be guided by the macroeconomic and structural reform policies described in the MEFP of
March 24, 2004, and modified by the updated MEFP of September 6, 2004. The attached
technical memorandum of understanding (TMU) was also updated to reflect the adjustments
introduced to some terms and conditions of the program.
With the support of your staff, we have met all of the end-September 2004 quantitative
indicators and structural benchmarks, except the benchmark on the adoption of anti-money
laundering/combating the financing of terrorism legislation, due to a slight delay in issuing
the presidential decree. The government of Afghanistan appreciates the technical support
provided by the Fund and intends to continue its reform efforts as envisaged under the SMP.
Reacting to the changing circumstances, the government reached an understanding with the
mission on a revised macroeconomic framework for 2004/05, and on the deferment to
end-March 2005 of several of the structural benchmarks because of technical difficulties and
capacity issues related to the long political transition that followed the Presidential election.
We have also strengthened our program by including an additional structural benchmark for
end-March 2005 on the publication in the Official Gazette of the amendments related to
(i) the tax reform package; and (ii) ensuring that the revenue laws supersede all other
legislation in revenue-related matters.
The government believes that the policies and measures set forth in the attached MEFP are
adequate to achieve the objectives of its program, but we stand ready to take any further
measures that may become appropriate for this purpose. Afghanistan will consult with the
Fund on the adoption of any measure that may be deemed necessary and will provide
information that Fund staff request to assess the implementation of the SMP, as updated. The
government of Afghanistan authorizes the publication and distribution of this letter, the
attached MEFP and TMU, and all reports prepared by Fund staff regarding the SMP.

- 40 -

ATTACHMENT I

Very truly yours,

/s/

/s/

Anwar Ul-Haq Ahady
Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance

Noorullah Delawari
Governor
Da Afghanistan Bank

Attachments:
Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
Amendments to the Technical Memorandum of Understanding

- 41 -

ATTACHMENT II

Update to the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies of the Government of
Afghanistan
Second Review Under the Staff-Monitored Program, 2004/05
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The positive outcome of Afghanistan’s first direct presidential election was an
important step in rebuilding the nation’s institutional framework and broadening ownership
of the government’s reform agenda. In this context, we will continue to pursue prudent
macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, while simultaneously rebuilding
administrative capacity. The government’s program for the rest of 2004/05 will continue to
be guided by the policies described in the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
(MEFP) of March 24, 2004, and modified by the updated Memorandum of September 6,
2004.
2.
This MEFP reviews performance during the second quarter of 2004/05, updates the
government’s macroeconomic objectives in the context of a medium-term framework, and
describes the policies and targets for FY 2004/05. Two of the quantitative indicators have
been changed in accordance with an earlier agreement with Fund staff and management and
consistent with the flexibility clause in the program. In addition, some minor changes to the
end-December 2004 and end-March 2005 structural benchmarks are incorporated in the
program to reflect circumstances that were not fully known at the time that they were
originally developed, including the long political transition that followed the Presidential
election.
II. DEVELOPMENTS UNDER THE SMP
3.
Overall economic performance during the first semester of 2004/05 was
broadly satisfactory despite some adverse shocks, including a more fragile security situation
in the run-up to the election. The resurgence of drought conditions in some southern
provinces led to lower-than-projected growth in the agricultural sector, with both cereal and
livestock output declining during the main harvest season (April–July). However, output was
sustained by stronger than expected growth in construction and services. After a rise of
6.9 percent in the first quarter, consumer price inflation declined to 1.3 percent during the
second quarter.1 Inflation continued to be led by rents and petroleum product prices, which
increased by 26 percent and 17 percent, respectively. Rental prices increases were
attributable to the imposition of the rental tax, and increased demand from donors and
returning refugees. Excluding rents and petroleum products, consumer prices declined by
1

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) has recently been extended to include five additional large cities
(end-September benchmark) and that CPI indicates that inflation amounted to 3.1 percent in the first quarter and
2.3 percent in the second quarter.

- 42 -

ATTACHMENT II

1.7 percent during the second quarter, reflecting a decline in bread and cereal prices. Overall,
year-on-year inflation amounted to 14.1 percent at end-September (8.3 percent excluding
rents and petroleum products), compared to 15.5 percent at end-June.
4.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC) has just released its
official findings for the 2004 harvest. The report indicates that opium cultivation has
covered 206,700 hectares during the 2004 crop season as poppy farming continued to spread
to new areas of the country. However, opium production does not appear to have increased
significantly, due mainly to crop diseases and adverse climatic conditions. Indications are
also that farm gate prices have declined markedly and are expected to average below
$100 per kilogram (compared to $283 in 2003). The market appears to be segmented as the
price decline is reportedly much larger in the southern part of the country, due to intensified
interdiction. As the decline in farm gate price was not reflected in export prices, it is likely
that the aggregate share of opium revenues taken by traders and laboratories has again
markedly risen. Overall, total export revenues from opium are tentatively estimated at
$2.2 billion, of which only about $600 million went to farmers. Consistent with the increase
in cultivation, it is also estimated that the number of people deriving income directly from
opium has also risen to 2.3 billion.
5.
Fiscal revenue for the first half of 2004/05 was Af 5,886 million, exceeding the
SMP indicative target of Af 5,506 million. Revenue mobilization over the first half of the
year represents a significant increase (about 33 percent) over the same period last year. This
positive outcome was attributed to administrative reforms, which have yielded sharp
increases in administrative fees, and taxes on goods and services (including rent), and on
companies. The more timely sweeping of provincial accounts into the central government
account (end-December 2004 benchmark) has also helped in regularizing revenue collection.
Following some initial delays, the rate of spending for operating expenditures increased,
reaching Af 12 billion by the end of the first half of the year, compared with an annual
budgeted amount of Af 30.3 billion (11.3 percent of GDP). In light of the election and
continuing security concerns, 51 percent of operating expenditures were directed towards
security-related spending.
6.
We continue to respect the no-overdraft policy and operating expenditures
continued to be financed through revenue, foreign assistance and the draw down of
government deposits. However, the level of reimbursements from the two multi-donor grant
funds—the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) and the Law and Order Trust
Fund for Afghanistan (LOTFA)— was less than expected and the domestic deficit during the
first half of the year was covered by a draw down of both domestic deposits of Af 1.6 billion
from a highly concessional loan from the Asian Development Bank (ASDB) amounting to
$12 million. The resources from the ASDB loan are expected to provide only temporary
financing during the year as the rate of reimbursement from the ARTF gradually picks up,
compliance with financial management rules improves, and as LOTFA receives and
disburses additional funds. Direct payments to vendors’ bank accounts were recently
introduced and should help reduce corruption and speed up payments.

- 43 -

ATTACHMENT II

7.
Core budget development spending reached Af 3.5 billion during the first half
of 2004/05, compared to the annual budget estimate of Af 38.4 billion for FY 2004/05
(equivalent to 14.3 percent of GDP).2 The low rate of development spending was attributed
to several factors, including (i) the late approval of the core development budget;3 (ii) the
poor security environment, which has hampered implementation; and (iii) the limited
capacity of line ministries and other agencies to implement programs. During the first half of
the year, development spending was concentrated in just a few of the National Priority
Programs.
8.
In consultation with Fund staff, and to accommodate the perceived increase in
money demand, Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) allowed the growth of money in
circulation to exceed the second-quarter SMP indicative target. Money in circulation
increased by 21.7 percent during the first half of 2004/05, exceeding by 7.6 percent the SMP
indicative target. This higher-than-targeted money increase was justified by the strong
appreciation of the Afghani, which along with the recent slowdown in inflation, pointed to an
increase in money demand. DAB’s decision to accommodate this increase in money demand
was successful in stabilizing the exchange rate. After appreciating by 20 percent in the first
five months of 2004/05, including by 9 percent in the third week of August (when it reached
Af 42 per dollar), the exchange rate has stabilized in the Af 45–46 per dollar range.
9.
We continued to modernize the DAB and create a sound financial system. The
banking regulatory framework was strengthened through enactment of the Anti-Money
Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) legislation, and the adoption
of bank reserves requirements. The Export Promotion Bank, whose licensing had been
delayed due to the cancellation of its merger with 3 other state-owned banks, was granted a
conditional banking license. DAB also granted a preliminary license to Arian Bank, raising
to eight the number of private commercial banks operating in Afghanistan. DAB introduced
short-term capital note auctions. Reflecting the high level of liquidity in the banking system,
overnight auctions were overbid and the interest rates on these notes declined steadily to less
than 2 percent. At this early stage, demand for longer maturities remains limited. Finally,
DAB started implementing the transfer of its commercial activities and the Supreme Council
agreed to develop a modern payments system (electronic funds transfer).
10.
Data for the external accounts are limited, but steadily improving. Based on
preliminary data, the external current account balance (before grants) narrowed to a deficit
equivalent to 12 percent of GDP, down from a deficit of about 22 percent during the first half
of 2003/04. This decline in the deficit appears to have stemmed largely from an improvement
2

The core budget concept was introduced for this financial year. It incorporates operating and development
spending that passes through the Treasury’s accounts. A considerable amount of development spending, which
is fully financed by external assistance, is undertaken directly by donors and is not included in the core budget.
3

The FY 2004/05 core development budget was approved at the end of June, after the start of the fiscal year
(March 20) and the Berlin Donors’ Conference that took place in March 2004. The core development budget is
organized around a number of “National Programs” (NP) and “National Priority Programs” (NPP).

- 44 -

ATTACHMENT II

in the trade balance, including a substantial increase in domestic exports. Donor inflows,
predominantly in the form of grants, continued to finance the deficit, along with some private
inflows in the form of foreign direct investment. Disbursements of external loans remained
limited, and on highly concessional terms. The large and positive errors and omissions in the
balance of payments suggest the continued presence of unrecorded inflows (perhaps from
opium exports, unrecorded foreign investments and capital flows, or remittances).
11.
In terms of the SMP, all quantitative indicators for end-September were
observed, with the exception of the ceiling on currency on circulation. However the failure
to observe this target was in accordance with the flexibility established in the program.
12.
On the structural front, progress has been made, and all the structural
benchmarks were met, except for the benchmark related to the issuance of a presidential
decree enacting the AML/CFT legislation.4
III. THE PROGRAM FOR THE REMAINDER OF 2004/05
A. Macroeconomic Objectives
13.
With climatic conditions adversely affecting the short-term potential for further
gains in agriculture, overall economic growth now depends more heavily on such activities as
construction, transport, and other services, led by the private sector. Notwithstanding weaker
prospects for agricultural production, which is likely to fall by 20 percent for the year as a
whole, we expect growth to continue in 2004/05 and beyond. While somewhat slower than
the brisk pace of the two previous years, real GDP growth is projected to reach about
7.5 percent for 2004/05. Downside risks include the lingering drought, volatile oil prices, and
security. Inflation is expected to remain moderate during the remainder of the year as the rent
prices appear to be stabilizing. Some pickup in import demand is expected to materialize in
the second half of the year, associated with a post-election resumption of donor activities.
Nevertheless, we expect an improvement in the overall external current account relative to
2003/04.
14.
Against this backdrop, we will continue to adhere to sound fiscal and monetary
policies. Strengthening our administrative capacity, accelerating structural reforms, and
providing an enabling environment for private sector activity, while being mindful of poverty
and social concerns, are also key priorities. At the same time, we are working very closely
with our international partners to develop a five-pronged strategy to deal with the issue of
opium, focused on education, alternative livelihoods, interdiction, eradication, and legal
reform. We are also keenly aware that eradication of opium production cannot be
accomplished in isolation, and that the economic consequences of any program will have to
be carefully managed.
4

The decree was not issued until early October due to several issues raised by ministers during the initial
Cabinet discussion of the law.

- 45 -

ATTACHMENT II

B. Fiscal Policy
15.
The increase in revenue over the first half of the year is encouraging and we
are confident that we will achieve the SMP target. However, we recognize that the
budgetary revenue target for the whole year (Af 15 billion) is ambitious but achievable.5
Meeting this objective will require a significant improvement in revenue collection during
the second half of the year—by about 55 percent over the first half of 2004/05.
16.
Achievement of the core budget target will require a redoubling of our
collection efforts. Customs and tax administration both have a comprehensive five-year
reform plan to rebuild capacity in the Afghanistan Customs Department (ACD) and Revenue
Presidency, within the Ministry of Finance. The central office of both organizations have
recently been restructured under the Priority Reform and Restructuring (PRR) process. Key
measures in the customs area include stronger management and coordination of domestic and
donor-financed projects, and the construction of modern customs houses at key border posts.
On the revenue side, the Large Taxpayer Office (LTO) is now operational and reform of the
Kabul provincial revenue office (Model Office) is now underway. Parts of the tax reform
package have also been implemented in Kabul, including: (i) the rental services tax; (ii) a
10 percent business receipts tax on service providers in restaurants, telecommunications, and
hotels; and (iii) corporate tax rates have been harmonized at a rate of 20 percent. A simplified
fixed tax on money changers and a withholding tax on wages will be gradually introduced,
while legislation is pending to increase the airport departure tax. Finally, before the end of
March 2005, we will publish in the Official Gazette the amendments to: (i) the income tax
law relating to the tax reform package; and (ii) ensure that the revenue laws supersede all
other legislation in revenue-related matters. By that time, we also intend to consolidate all
recent revenue measures into the existing revenue code and to publish it as a single
document.6 In addition, we will receive some large non-tax revenue in the fourth quarter.
17.
Operating expenditures are expected to pick up significantly during the
remainder of the year. Additional training is being provided to line ministries and
moustoufiats in financial and procurement procedures. This should improve compliance with
current expenditure controls, which should translate into better rates of non-salary spending
and the associated financing from the ARTF. The government is considering paying a bonus
of Af 1,000 after Ramadan to most civilian employees, at a total cost of around
Af 300 million, which can be accommodated within the current budget appropriations.
18.
We will continue to consolidate government operations and upgrade our public
expenditure management systems. While it had, for administrative reasons related to the
political transition process, to be postponed from end-December 2004 to end-March 2005,
5
6

The annual revenue indicative target (floor) for the SMP is Af 12.8 billion ($256 million).

Due to administrative reasons related to the political transition process, the benchmark covering this measure
had to be moved from end-December 2004 to end-March 2005.

- 46 -

ATTACHMENT II

the Cabinet approval and publication in the Official Gazette of the Financial Management
Law will provide the legal framework for fiscal policy. Significant progress has been made
with the development of the core budget and the consolidation of government accounts into
the Treasury Single Account (TSA). These reforms need to be deepened with additional
efforts to: (i) further harmonize the operating and development budgets, initially by agreeing
to a single Chart of Accounts; (ii) improve the payment and payroll systems and expenditure
controls; (iii) strengthen macro-fiscal analysis and cash management capabilities;
(iv) enhance quarterly budget reporting and budget classification; and (v) reintroduce internal
and external audit functions.
19.
Expenditure policy will gradually shift from security and reconstruction
toward more broad-based sustainable development as improvements in the security
situation allow. The budget is currently dominated by the wage bill (58 percent of the
operating budget) with spending on security comprising more than 40 percent of the total.
Given the limited scope for increasing domestic revenue, we envisage the medium-term role
of the public service as restricted to providing only the most essential services in the most
cost-efficient manner. We are just beginning more fundamental sector-based planning in the
form of a Public Expenditure Review (PER), which will initially assist with the preparation
of the 2005/06 budget but is also expected to become a key component in developing
government priorities and monitoring performance.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
20.
The revised monetary framework will continue to be geared toward
maintaining low inflation and currency stability. The revision of the monetary program
was warranted given the emergence of stronger-than-anticipated money demand, the sharp
appreciation of the Afghani, and the slowdown in inflation. The increase in money demand
may partly reflect seasonal factors, such as the impact of the poppy harvest and the return of
expatriate Afghans. However, we believe that the root cause of the increase, which coincided
with weaker economic growth, is a greater acceptance of the local currency. This faster-thanexpected “Afghanization” of the economy appears to have been spurred by efforts to promote
the use of the Afghani by the public in daily transactions, the relative stability of the
exchange rate, and the greater use of the Afghani by the donor community. We expect this
process to continue, albeit at a slower rate. We therefore believe that the new monetary
indicative targets, which imply a monetary tightening as compared to the current stance, will
ensure a further decline in inflation.7 In any case, DAB will continue to closely monitor
exchange rate and price developments, and stands ready to tighten its monetary policy would
inflation not abate.

7

The revised monetary program implies a decline in money growth from more than 50 percent at
end-September 2004 to a maximum of 38 percent in March 2005.

- 47 -

ATTACHMENT II

21.
We will continue our reform of the financial system. Difficulties in identifying
the owners of current and savings accounts will prevent DAB from finalizing the transfer of
its commercial activities by the target date of end-December 2004. We are committed to
finalize the transfer of all commercial activities from the DAB’s main office, and to start
implementing the transfer in the provincial branches, by end-March 2005. As first steps, by
end-December we intend to (i) complete a campaign asking customers to transfer their
accounts; (ii) classify all accounts into three categories (voluntary transfer; involuntary
transfer; and incapables of transfer); and (iii) initiate transfers. This, together with the
transfer of DAB’s non-core assets to the Ministry of Finance, will help lay the foundations of
a modern central bank. Reflecting difficulties in assigning some potential liabilities currently
housed at DAB, this transfer will be initially limited to the transfer of DAB’s commercial
holdings (end-March 2005 benchmark). At the same time, the findings of DAB's external
audit will provide a comprehensive assessment of its financial situation and set, if needed, a
framework for its recapitalization. DAB will also work toward a more market-oriented
foreign exchange market, with a view to giving a more prominent role to the commercial
banks and will try to deepen interest in the short-term capital note. Finally, we will decide the
time frame and restructuring strategy for the three licensed state-owned banks, and the
specific resolution methods of the three unlicensed ones.
D. External Policy and Debt Management
22.
The government remains committed to an open trade and exchange system.
The introduction of a new tariff system and the use of market exchange rates for import
valuation were significant steps forward in this regard. Afghanistan is now one of the most
open economies in the region, with a simple average applied tariff of only 4 percent, and very
few nontariff barriers. To enhance the prospects for regional trade, the government will also
continue to pursue or improve upon trade and transit agreements with neighboring countries.
Consideration is also being given to membership in the World Trade Organization. On
current trends, the current account balance (excluding grants) is projected to narrow to
32 percent of GDP, a 10 percentage points decline compared with the 2003/04 estimate. Such
an outcome would enable us to further increase our foreign exchange reserves to about
$1.1 billion, equivalent to roughly 4 months of prospective goods and services imports. In
any event, we are raising our floor for international reserves to 3.5 months of imports, a
sufficient level of reserves to help us face a possible external shock.
23.
We remain committed to prudent management of external debt. Regarding the
stock of debt, we have made further progress in identifying debts undertaken by previous
administrations, and reconciling their amounts with external creditors. More remains to be
done in this area, however, as there are still a number of outstanding claims which have yet
to be verified. In seeking international cooperation in this area, we will also continue to look
for generous debt relief from bilateral creditors. We see such relief as essential to external
and fiscal sustainability over the medium- and long-term. During the first two quarters of
2004/05, and consistent with the SMP, we have contracted external loans only on highly
concessional terms. Disbursements have also been limited. To ensure that this prudent

- 48 -

ATTACHMENT II

strategy remains a central pillar of Afghanistan’s reconstruction and stabilization, we will
seek to design and implement a comprehensive external debt management strategy in the
near future.
E. Structural Reforms
24.
We recognize the need to undertake reforms to unlock the potential of new growthgenerating economic activities. One avenue is to press ahead with our structural reform
agenda, with a particular focus on making improvements to the business and regulatory
environment, as well as the public sector.
25.
Notwithstanding the limited availability of detailed financial data, we have
recently completed a survey of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), including a preliminary
assessment of their financial situation. On the basis of this survey, we have established a
preliminary classification of SOEs according to how they might be best restructured.
Accordingly, we intend to maintain 10 SOEs in public ownership and at least 20 for
liquidation. Currently, as many as 41 are slated for privatization, and the larger firms will be
subject to an international tendering process. Further work on the financial state of these
SOEs is ongoing, which will likely lead to some adjustment of the current classification. Due
to delays related to the formation of new government, however, we do not expect this
classification, and the related restructuring plan, to be adopted by the Cabinet by endDecember 2004, as initially envisaged under the SMP. We are fully committed though to
have the classification adopted by end-March 2005. In the meantime, we have already
initiated the privatization process of a limited number of small SOEs, including the sale of a
cotton company and a sugar beet company. In undertaking this process of privatization and
reform, we remain keenly aware of the need to alleviate the social impact of the restructuring
and efficiently manage the implications for current employees. Toward this end, we have
compiled a comprehensive list of all employees of SOEs, which will help the government
retrain or reassign workers displaced by the restructuring process.
26.
With a view toward boosting nonagricultural private sector investment, we are
finalizing a new private investment law and anticipate its publication in the Official
Gazette before end-December. We are also making headway in putting in place a legal
framework for the extractive industries—an area where we see considerable scope for new
investment and growth.
27.
Reform of public administration must balance the need to improve
productivity with the availability of resources. To enhance control over the payroll and
reduce a source of corruption, we are developing a “verified payroll plan” for ministries to
normalize the payroll process and improve employee verification. 8 Over the medium-term,
8

The structural benchmark to initiate: (i) direct electronic payments to vendor bank accounts; and (ii) a pilot for
direct salary deposits to bank accounts for the employees of three ministries has been deferred from
December 2004 to March 2005 due to technical difficulties.

- 49 -

ATTACHMENT II

this will enable us to develop a more comprehensive personnel database and computerized
payroll. Over the next few years, we will aim at maintaining the size of the civil service
while enhancing its productivity with major investments in capacity building and salary
increases to retain and recruit professional staff. The PRR process has been the essential
component in civil service reform and it has gained wide acceptance within the government.
28.
We remain concerned about poverty. We have begun a dialogue with our
various social counterparts both within government, including the provinces, as well as
civil society and our international partners to develop a poverty reduction strategy. We
expect that an interim strategy should be finalized before end-March 2006.
F. Safeguard Assessment and Statistical Issues
29.
DAB has hired an international consulting firm to conduct an external audit based
on internationally recognized standards. This audit will serve as a basis for the introduction,
in consultation with the Fund, of a safeguard assessment—which should begin after the
external audit is completed.
30.
Notwithstanding the progress made so far, the statistical database remains
weak. We remain committed to improving the quality, coverage, and timeliness of our
macroeconomic statistics. In this context, we have adopted a statistical master plan, aimed at
establishing clear work program priorities, including the introduction of institutional and
legal reforms to underpin statistical capacity, promote interagency coordination, and enable
the resources and technical assistance needed for the development of a comprehensive
statistical database.
G. Technical Assistance
31.
Technical assistance (TA) received from various donors has been instrumental
in reconstructing an institutional infrastructure and achieving significant
improvements in various areas. While TA needs will remain significant in some areas, they
are expected to diminish in others. Consequently, TA needs must be redefined, focused,
coordinated and efficiently delivered. For that purpose, we intend to conduct a
comprehensive review of technical assistance, and establish a comprehensive TA action plan.
H. Program Monitoring
32.
The program will continue to be monitored using the definitions, data sources,
and frequency of monitoring set out in the attached Technical Memorandum of
Understanding (TMU). The quantitative indicators for the third and fourth quarters of
2004/05 are included in Table 1. The structural benchmarks are detailed in Table 2. The
government will make available to Fund staff all core data, appropriately reconciled and on a
timely basis, as specified in the TMU.

- 50 -

ATTACHMENT II

33.
The Technical Committee of Coordination (TCC) is gradually emerging as the
key unit in monitoring the implementation of the SMP and in providing core data to the
Fund. It is now the main body through which coordination of technical work is conducted.
Notwithstanding this progress, there is still room for improvement. In particular, the
government will encourage the TCC to step up its capacity-building efforts, develop a much
needed analytical function, and reach out to other government agencies.
34.
The third review of the program is scheduled to take place around
mid-January 2005, based on performance at end-2004. At the time of that review, the
quantitative indicators and structural benchmarks for end-March 2005 may be revised in light
of developments.
35.
The presidential election has just been completed and the composition and
form of both the Cabinet and economic policy oversight is expected soon. We believe it
would be premature to discuss any future Fund program until the new government is in place.
However, given the need to further build administrative capacity, and given the absence of an
immediate balance of payments need, we believe a follow-on SMP (either a new program or
an extension of the current SMP) might be an appropriate step.

5,506

Fiscal revenue of the central government (floor)

...

0

0

5,886

277.7

0

6,253

Preliminary
Estimate

Sep. 21

1/ At end-2003/04, currency in circulation amounted to Afs 28.8 billion.
2/ Excluding rescheduling arrangements, but including debt with maturities of more than one year.
3/ Concessional debt is defined as debt with a grant element of at least 60 percent calculated on the basis of currency-specific discount rates,
based on the OECD commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs).
4/ On a contracting or guaranteed basis. Excluding debt related to normal import transactions.
5/ This benchmark will be evaluated on a continuous basis.

Source: Data provided by the Afghan authorities; and Fund estimates and projections.

4,475

0

b) New nonconcessional debt with an original maturity of less than one year (ceiling) 3/ 4/ 5/

Memorandum item:
Currency in circulation (level triggering consultation)

0

a) New medium- and long-term nonconcessional external debt (with original
maturities of one year or more) contracted or guaranteed by the government (ceiling) 2/ 5/

External debt

29.1

0

3,774

Gross international reserves of the central bank (floor) (in millions of dollars)

Claims of the banking system on the central government (ceiling)

Currency in circulation (ceiling) 1/

Sep. 21
Initial
Indicative
Target

6,899

0

0

8,649

47.6

0

5,848

Dec. 20
Initial
Indicative
Target

(In millions of Afghanis, unless otherwise indicated; cumulative changes from March 19, 2004)

Table 1. Afghanistan: Quantitative Indicators, 2004/05

10,702

0

0

8,649

115.0

0

9,265

Dec. 20
Revised
Indicative
Target

2004/05

8,785

0

0

12,784

55.4

0

7,384

Mar. 20
Initial
Indicative
Target

12,392

0

0

12,784

115.0

0

10,954

Mar. 20
Revised
Indicative
Target

- 51 ATTACHMENT II

- 52 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Prior Actions and Structural Benchmarks
Under the Staff-Monitored Program
Policy Actions

Target Date

Status

I. Prior Actions for Management Approval of the SMP
Adopt the 2004/05 operating budget (by the Cabinet).

Implemented on March 18, 2004

Establish procedures and a timetable for regular sweeping
provincial balances into TSA at DAB headquarters and a
plan to transfer all 2002/03 year-end balances in the
provincial accounts and ministerial accounts to the treasury
account at DAB.

Implemented on March 13, 2004

Initiate the closure and resolution process for all banks that
have not applied for licenses.

Implemented by DAB on March 16, 2004

Set up a Technical Committee to coordinate the
implementation of the SMP.

Implemented on March 15, 2004

Sign a presidential decree enacting the tax policy package
(see paragraph 11 of MEFP).

Implemented on March 18, 2004

Adopt a ministerial order to implement the customs policy
package (see paragraph 11 of MEFP).

Implemented on March 18, 2004

Adopt a Cabinet resolution to draft legislation that
eliminates tax exemptions and concessions except those
contained in revenue legislation.

Implemented on March 18, 2004

II. Structural Benchmarks
Consolidate all line ministry accounts into TSA.

End-June 2004

Implemented

Transfer regularly provincial moustoufiat balances into
TSA at DAB headquarters, from at least 70 percent of
provinces.

End-June 2004

Implemented

Adopt the 2004/05 development budget (by the Cabinet).

End-June 2004

Implemented

Establish a timetable for (a) a verified payroll of
government employees; (b) a wage decompression
compatible with medium-term fiscal sustainability; and
(c) the closure or corporatization of public enterprises.

End-June 2004

Implemented

Transfer all 2002/03 year-end balances in the provincial
accounts and ministerial accounts to the treasury account at
DAB.

End-June 2004

Implemented

- 53 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Prior Actions and Structural Benchmarks
Under the Staff-Monitored Program (continued)
Policy Actions

Target Date

Status

Develop a balance sheet for DAB.

End-June 2004

Implemented

Develop a monetary survey, including balance sheets of
commercial banks.

End-June 2004

Implemented

Complete (by DAB) the relicensing operation of the
commercial banks and begin the resolution proceedings for
those whose licenses applications have been rejected.

End-June 2004

Largely implemented 1/

Develop consolidated fiscal accounts including provinces
and operating and development budgets (see paragraph 14
of the TMU).

End-June 2004

Implemented

Adopt a presidential decree enacting amendments to the tax
and customs laws to preclude the use of tax exemptions or
concessions, except those contained in revenue legislation
and the existing statutory exemptions, grandfathered until
March 20, 2005 (see paragraph 14 of the TMU).

End-June 2004

Adopted

Issue (a) presidential decree enacting Anti-Money
Laundering/Combating Financial Terrorism (AML/CFT)
legislation; and (b) a decision by the Supreme Council of
DAB for a modern payment system.

End-September 2004

Largely implemented 2/

Extend the consumer price index survey to main cities
beyond Kabul.

End-September 2004

Implemented

Adopt (by the Cabinet) the 2003/04 final accounts
(operating budget).

End-September 2004

Implemented

Transfer regularly within 30 days all provincial moustoufiat
balances into TSA at DAB headquarters.

End-September 2004

Implemented

Complete the relicensing operation of, or begin the
resolution proceeding for Export Promotion Bank of
Afghanistan.

End-September 2004

Implemented

Adopt new chart of accounts compatible with IMF
GFS 2001 (cash basis) requirements for classifying revenue
and expenditure transactions.

End-December 2004

Prepare (by MoF) monthly cash flow projections to
improve cash management and for coordination with DAB.

End-December 2004

- 54 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Prior Actions and Structural Benchmarks
Under the Staff-Monitored Program (continued)
Policy Actions

Target Date

Publish in the official gazette the central bank and
commercial banks laws.

End-December 2004

Introduce the auction process for a short-term DAB capital
note.

End-December 2004

Initiate an external audit of the DAB based on
internationally recognized accounting standards.

End-December 2004

Adopt (by the Cabinet) and publish in the official gazette
the financial management law.

End-March 2005

Publish in the Official Gazette the amendments to the
revenue laws: (i) enacting the income tax reform package;
and (ii) ensuring that the revenue laws supersede all other
legislation in revenue-related matters.

End- March 2005

Complete an assessment of the financial position of the
SOEs. Adopt (by Cabinet) (a) the list classifying SOEs
according to proposed economic restructuring method; and
(b) the Economic Restructuring Plan.

End-March 2005

Consolidate all recent revenue measures into the existing
revenue code and publish as a single document.

End-March 2005

Complete the survey of external debt, including
reconciliation with creditors.

End-March 2005

Transfer of DAB’s commercial holdings to the MoF, and
transfer marketable gold and silver in the palace vaults to
the DAB.

End-March 2005

Transfer to other entities all DAB commercial activities that
are inconsistent with the central bank and commercial
banking laws.

End-March 2005

Implement a program to monitor and record duty exempt
imports.

End-March 2005

Adopt the consolidated budget for FY 2005/06 according to
the structure of the new chart of accounts before the start of
the fiscal year.

End-March 2005

Status

Implemented

- 55 -

ATTACHMENT II

Table 2. Islamic State of Afghanistan: Prior Actions and Structural Benchmarks
Under the Staff-Monitored Program (concluded)
Policy Actions

Target Date

Improve government payments by initiating (i) direct
electronic payments to vendor bank accounts; and (ii) a
pilot for direct salary deposits to bank accounts for the
employees of three ministries.

End-March 2005

Approve (by the cabinet) the Customs Code.

End-March 2005

Implement verified payroll plan by: (a) establishing through
decree or regulation that provide legal basis for a single
general employee database; and (b) ensuring that budget
allotments and authorized staff positions are entered into
AFMIS for all line ministries and their subordinated units in
the center and provinces before the start of the fiscal year.

End-March 2005

Publish (by the MoF) on a quarterly basis fiscal data.

End-March 2005

Publication of an official estimate of the annual revenue
forgone as a result of tax holidays, exemptions or
concessions and a time-bound plan, approved by the MoF,
to address all existing tax exemptions or concessions.

End-March 2005

Status

1/ Due to shareholder opposition to its merger with three other state-owned commercial banks, the Export Promotion
Bank of Afghanistan had to resubmit an application for relicensing. It was granted a new license in September.
2/ At end-September, the decree had been approved by Cabinet. It was signed by the President in early October.

- 56 -

ATTACHMENT III

Amendments to the Technical Memorandum of Understanding
1.

The following bullet points will be inserted at the end of paragraph 14:

•
Complete an assessment of the financial position of the SOE. Adopt (by Cabinet)
(i) the list classifying SOEs according to proposed economic restructuring method; and
(ii) the Economic Restructuring Plan. For those nonfinancial SOEs with poor record
keeping and scarce financial information, instead of an assessment of the financial position,
the experts will make, at a minimum, an informed judgment of the state of the enterprise
through in-site visits and thorough discussions with management and staff. If sufficient
financial information becomes available, then a full-fledged assessment of the financial
position of the SOE will be conducted prior to its restructuring. The Economic Restructuring
Plan will reflect the various steps and tasks entailed by the restructuring process, and will be
adopted by the Ministries in charge of the SOEs and presented to the Cabinet.
•
Transfer to other entities all DAB commercial activities that are inconsistent
with the central bank and commercial banking laws. At a minimum, this will include all
commercial activities performed by DAB’s main office. Notwithstanding the transfer of other
commercial activities, the transfer of commercial accounts will, at least, comprise all
accounts which are not: frozen; non-cash; or requiring audit or/and legal determination.
2.

The following bullet point will be inserted at the end of paragraph 15:

•
Core development budget operations and their financing should be reported on
a quarterly basis no more than six weeks after the end of the quarter. The data should be
at least quarterly, but whenever possible, should include monthly expenditures covered under
the core budget, as well as financing. The structure of the financing (grants and loans) and
expenditure data should be on the same classification as the operating budget in addition to
the program classification used by the budget. The data should also compare outturns against
the budget.

Statement by the Staff Representative
January 19, 2005
1.
This statement summarizes information that has become available since the staff
report for the 2004 Article IV consultation and second review under Afghanistan’s
staff-monitored program was circulated to the Board on January 4, 2005. It does not change
the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
Consumer prices in Kabul increased by 4.0 percent during the third quarter of
2004/05, reflecting a seasonal increase in food prices. Rents and petroleum prices, which had
increased sharply over the first half of 2004, declined somewhat. Year-on-year inflation
declined to 12.0 percent in December (6.6 percent excluding rents and petroleum).
3.
Preliminary data indicate that revenues dropped to less than Af 0.9 billion in each of
the seventh and eighth months of the fiscal year, compared with an average of around
Af 1.0 billion per month in the preceding months. This decline appears to have resulted from
a slowdown in the implementation of customs and tax administration reforms, largely due to
capacity constraints and disruptions from the presidential election. It could also be attributed
in part to seasonal factors as a similar pattern was observed in 2003/04. Meeting the third
quarter cumulative SMP target for domestic revenue (Af 8.6 billon) will require a rebound in
revenue during the last month of the quarter, to around Af 1.0 billion.
4.
Operating budget spending amounted to Af 16 billion during the first eight months of
2004/05, compared with the annual budgeted amount of Af 30 billion. This underspending is
mainly due to the slower-than-expected pace of public administration reform, particularly
delays in the recruitment of additional teachers and in the main civil service restructuring
program. The government also introduced measures to improve expenditure controls during
the year, which may have slowed the pace of non-salary spending, particularly in the
provinces.
5.
Preliminary data indicate that currency in circulation amounted to Af 37 billion at the
end of the third quarter of 2004/05, slightly below the SMP indicative ceiling (Af 38 billion).
After increasing by a total of 6 percent in October–November, currency in circulation
remained broadly unchanged in December. The slowdown in monetary expansion appears
linked to the conversion of Afghanis into dollars for the Hajj, and to a slowdown in
donor-related spending in the period leading up to the formation of the new government.
Foreign exchange reserves continued to increase during the third quarter, to $1.3 billion at
end-November (equivalent to 4.8 months of 2005/06 imports). The nominal exchange rate
depreciated during the last three months of 2004, to about Af 50 per dollar at mid-January—
roughly the same level as at the beginning of the fiscal year.
6.
All end-December 2004 benchmarks appear to have been met, with the exception of
the benchmark related to the publication in the official gazette of the central bank and
commercial banking laws. While the central bank law was published, the publication of the
commercial banking law was delayed, essentially as a result of the limited translation
capacity of the ministry of justice.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/9
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 27, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the
Islamic State of Afghanistan
On January 19, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the Islamic State of Afghanistan.1
Background
During 2001–03, after more than 20 years of conflict, interspersed with earthquakes and
drought, the authorities of Afghanistan focused on crisis management by establishing or
rebuilding fundamental institutions, providing basic government services, and restoring
economic stability. In 2004, with most of these tasks largely achieved, the authorities
articulated, and started implementing, a long-term strategy aimed at building a financially
self-sustaining state with the capacity to meet basic social needs and address poverty through:
increasing security; promoting private sector-led growth; increasing revenue efforts to allow
funding of recurrent costs within a medium-term horizon; eliminating the drug economy;
and strengthening further the institutions. This strategy, entitled “Securing Afghanistan’s
Future”, was endorsed by the donor community at the Berlin conference in March 2004. A oneyear staff-monitored program (SMP) was adopted in March 2004 that focuses on capacity
building and establishing a track record, providing the basic economic underpinnings for many
of the government reforms. Overall, the authorities have successfully implemented this
program.
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.
1

-2The authorities have made further progress in rebuilding institutions and implementing sound
economic policies. They have maintained their commitment to fiscal discipline, evidenced by
their observance of a “no-overdraft” financing rule prohibiting government borrowing from
Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB), and have continued to improve fiscal management. Important tax
policy measures, combined with ambitious tax and customs administration reforms, are helping
the central government to regain control over revenue collection. Further, for the first time, the
authorities adopted in 2004/05 a ‘core budget,’ to improve coordination and control over donor
flows. Expenditure management has improved, although, as in many post-crisis countries, the
level of expenditures have significantly lagged behind budget projections because of weak
implementation capacity.
Despite a paucity of monetary instruments, DAB’s flexible approach to monetary policy, in the
context of a “managed float,” has been largely successful in limiting both inflation and exchange
rate volatility. While monetary policy is guided primarily by indicative targets for currency in
circulation, DAB, uses all available indicators to assess changes in the demand for domestic
currency given the substantial uncertainties surrounding relationships between key
macroeconomic variables, and stands ready to adjust its monetary stance when necessary to
preserve macroeconomic stability. Modernization of the central bank and reform of the financial
system are progressing, although the banking sector is still in its infancy.
Real GDP growth has been relatively strong, albeit from a very low base, and has slowed over
the past 18 months, due primarily to the negative impact of adverse weather conditions on
agricultural production. Growth remained strong in the other sectors, especially in construction
and services, which continued to benefit from a buoyant aid-related, and possibly opium-related,
demand. Real GDP growth is now projected at 8 percent in 2004/05, compared with 16 percent
in 2003/04 and 29 percent in 2002/03. While there was some improvement in social indicators,
including in school enrollment and food security, the social challenges remain daunting. After
increasing during the first half of 2004 as a result of sharp increases in rents and petroleum
products prices, inflation has moderated somewhat. Reflecting a strong balance of payments,
the nominal and real exchange rates vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar appreciated through
September 2004, but have recently depreciated.
Current efforts by the authorities and the donor community in addressing the opium economy
have not been very successful so far. The latest report of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crimes indicates that poppy production continued to rise in 2004, with cultivation spreading
to new areas of the country and involving an increasing share of the population. Illicit drug
revenue is estimated to have risen to US$2.8 billion, equivalent to about 60 percent of nondrug
GDP. The government and the international community are developing a common medium-term
strategy to abate the drug economy. The manner in which this strategy is implemented will be
critical in maintaining social, economic, and political stability.

-3Executive Board Assessment
Directors commended the Afghan authorities for their continued pursuit of sound
macroeconomic and structural reforms despite a challenging security environment.
Directors noted that prudent fiscal and monetary policies have helped to contain inflation and
facilitate relatively high levels of growth, and were encouraged by the continued successful
implementation of the staff-monitored program. Although budget execution has not met
expectations, a core budget has been introduced that consolidates all the government
operations channeled through the Treasury, revenue collection has continued to improve, and
significant progress has been made in the implementation of structural reforms. Directors noted,
however, that notwithstanding these achievements, daunting economic and social challenges
remain, and poverty is widespread, calling for continued skilful economic management and
strong implementation of further structural reforms, with continued donor support.
Directors commended the authorities for the successful conduct of Afghanistan’s first direct
presidential election, and viewed the forthcoming legislative elections as an opportunity to
broaden the ownership of economic reforms. Directors encouraged the new government to
continue to pursue the economic reforms, capacity building, and rehabilitation of physical
infrastructure. Directors stressed the importance of improving security conditions, including
through a vigorous disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration process.
Directors expressed concern about the continuing rise in opium-related activities, which they
saw as jeopardizing security as well as macroeconomic stability. Agreeing that eradication by
itself will be insufficient to address the issue, Directors supported recent efforts by the
government and its international partners to develop a multi-pronged strategy to deal with the
opium economy. Directors advised establishing safeguards to alleviate any significant adverse
economic impact of opium eradication, particularly for the most vulnerable segments of the
population. In this connection, they stressed the need to create broader economic opportunities
and alternative livelihoods for farmers, expand the formal economy, and promote pro-poor
growth.
Looking ahead, Directors supported the continued implementation of the SMP, which they saw
as providing a framework for maintaining the reform momentum and building a solid foundation
for a possible transition to a Fund program that could be supported by the Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility. In this regard, Directors were encouraged by the authorities’ decision to
initiate work on an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to frame their policy agenda.
Directors observed that widespread shortages of skilled civil servants and very low
administrative capacity continue to pose significant challenges for policy implementation.
They considered that, in many instances, these capacity constraints have lessened the
effectiveness of reforms envisaged under the program. They called on the authorities to tackle
these issues, so as to support macroeconomic stability and promote private investment.
Directors welcomed the intention to press ahead with planned public administration reforms.
Directors considered that the thrust of macroeconomic policies in the current staff-monitored
program strikes an appropriate balance between supporting growth during this period of

-4transition and the need to remain vigilant with regard to potential risks. Looking ahead, they
encouraged the authorities to continue to develop a comprehensive medium-term budget
framework that lays the ground for fiscal sustainability. This will require redoubled efforts to
enhance revenue and strengthen expenditure management. Directors attached particular
importance to stepping up the implementation of the planned reform of tax and customs
administration, including at the level of the provinces. Directors expressed some concern about
under spending on social programs, and encouraged the implementation of an expenditure
framework that would increasingly support more broad-based and sustainable development,
especially as progress is made in meeting the immediate security and reconstruction needs.
They also cautioned the authorities to undertake only those public investments that generate an
adequate rate of return.
Directors agreed that the success of the government’s reform strategy is predicated on
continued donor support and well coordinated technical assistance, and urged the donor
community to do its part in fulfilling their financial commitments and pledges. They urged the
authorities to work with donors to integrate progressively their spending into the government’s
medium-term budget framework, which would in turn enhance ownership and coordination of
the reform program. In this context, Directors noted that direct donor support to the budget
would simplify fiscal management and help coordinate donor funds. This will require continued
improvement in fiduciary standards and the mechanisms for promoting accountability.
Directors noted the results of the debt sustainability analysis and the need for the authorities to
maintain a cautious approach toward new external obligations. In this context, Directors
supported the authorities’ efforts to obtain external financing on only the most concessional
terms, but also emphasized the need for the authorities as well as creditors to resolve the
issues of outstanding bilateral claims. It was recognized that mobilization of grant financing has
helped meet pressing social and development needs. Directors also recommended that the
authorities adopt an explicit strategy to guide external debt management over the medium term.
Directors viewed the current framework for monetary policy, based on a monetary anchor, as
adequate to ensure low inflation while avoiding unwarranted exchange rate fluctuations.
They agreed that the flexibility embedded in the monetary program has allowed DAB to react
promptly to shifts in money demand, while keeping inflation in check and limiting exchange rate
volatility. Directors encouraged the authorities to remain vigilant to price developments and to
stand ready to tighten monetary policy if warranted. They encouraged the authorities to work
toward improving their monetary and banking data so as to better inform their monetary policy
decisions, and gradually expanding the range of instruments for liquidity management.
Directors considered that further structural reforms will be crucial in improving the business
climate, and in helping to sustain economic growth, employment opportunities, and export
prospects. In this regard, they welcomed the new investment law. Directors also highlighted
several other key elements of the reform agenda that should be pursued, including property
rights, bankruptcy laws, contract enforcement, and a transparent and effective judicial system.
Directors emphasized that the cooperation of all government ministries and agencies, along

-5with political commitment at the highest levels, will also be required to create a clear and level
playing field for business, and spur private sector-led growth.
Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to rationalize the public enterprise sector.
While agreeing that the state-owned banks may not represent a systemic risk, Directors urged
the authorities to take measures to restore the profitability of those which were relicensed, and
to resolve those which were not relicensed.
Directors emphasized the need for a strengthened legal system as key to the success of
Afghanistan’s economic reform program and medium-term outlook. They observed that the
status of key economic legislation remains uncertain owing to low capacity at the Ministry of
Justice. Directors urged the authorities to seek external support to address this issue.
They welcomed the enactment of a legislative framework for anti-money laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism actions, while underscoring the critical importance of
effective implementation.
Directors noted that the creation of a technical committee of coordination for the Staff Monitored
Program has facilitated program implementation and ownership. They advised the authorities to
take steps to enable the committee to develop and strengthen much needed analytical and
policy capacities.
Directors emphasized that, notwithstanding progress made so far, much remains to be done
with respect to improving governance. They regretted indications that widespread corruption,
the rise in drug activities, and the lack of transparency in many areas may have undermined the
business environment.
Directors welcomed the steady progress in trade liberalization, and the authorities’ commitment
to a liberal foreign exchange regime. They looked forward to further advances, including
through development of a supporting legal framework that will pave the way for accepting the
obligations under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ continuing efforts to improve the statistical framework.
At the same time, they noted that the current provision of data falls short of international
standards in terms of quality, frequency, and dissemination. They were encouraged by the
recent adoption of a statistical master plan and urged the authorities to put in place a realistic
work program and mobilize the resources needed for implementation.
Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the
public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member
countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii) following
policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board.

-6-

Islamic State of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–05
2001/02
Estimate

2002/03
Estimate

2003/04
Estimate

2004/05
Projection

Output
Real GDP growth (percent, excluding opium)

...

29

16

8

134

183

225

269

GDP (millions of U.S. dollars, excluding opium)

2,463

4,084

4,585

5,392

GDP per capita (U.S. dollars, excluding opium)

123

182

199

228

-43.4

52.3

10.3

10.2

...

5.2

24.2

12.3

Afghani/US$ (annual average)

54.4

44.8

49.0

...

Afghani/US$ (end of period)

31.0

52.6

50.3

...

Revenues (millions of U.S. dollars)

...

132

207

256

Expenditures (millions of U.S. dollars)

...

349

451

609

Grants (millions of U.S. dollars)

...

209

205

300

Domestic currency in circulation (percent change)

...

20.1

40.9

38.0

Gross international reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)

...

426

815

1,105

Current account (excluding grants; in million of dollars)

...

-1,305

-1,945

-1,721

Current account (including grants; in percentage of GDP)

...

-2.1

-1.8

-3.4

GDP (billions of Afghani)

Prices
CPI (Kabul, year-on-year change, in percent)
CPI (Kabul, average change, in percent)

Exchange rates

General government operating budget

Monetary indicators

External indicators

Sources: Afghan authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

Statement by Abbas Mirakhor, Executive Director for Islamic State of Afghanistan
January 19, 2005
1.
My authorities highly appreciate the continuous dialogue with staff that has been
instrumental in the successful implementation of their Staff-Monitored Program (SMP). They
are also grateful for the assistance from the donor community in support of Afghanistan’s
security and reconstruction needs. Against the background of a difficult security and political
environment, the authorities have persevered with prudent financial policies and structural
reforms. All quantitative and structural benchmarks of the SMP for end-September were
observed on time, with the exception of the benchmark relating to the AML/CFT legislation,
which was implemented with a slight delay.
2.
The recent direct presidential election—with large voter participation and a strong
mandate to President Karzai—was a milestone in rebuilding the institutional framework and
broadening policy ownership. The new cabinet is dominated by technocrats and the
economic team is expected to continue the current successful policies. The authorities
recognize the challenges ahead, including maintaining security, stemming the growing drug
economy, sustaining non-inflationary growth, and reducing poverty. In addressing these
challenges, they count on continued strong financial and technical support from the
international community as they strive toward mobilizing domestic resources and building
institutional capacity.
3.
Despite the adverse effect of the persistent drought on the agricultural sector, real
GDP growth remained strong, bolstered by robust activity in construction and services.
Inflation, which had been fueled by sharp increases in rents and petroleum products prices,
has slowed recently. Reflecting an improved trade balance, driven by a marked increase in
domestic exports, the current account deficit is expected to narrow significantly and to be
financed mainly from grants, highly concessional loans, and foreign direct investment.
4.
The authorities have demonstrated strong commitment to fiscal discipline and to
improving budget management. In the first half of FY 2004/05, revenue exceeded the SMP
indicative target and registered a significant increase over the same period last year,
reflecting administrative reforms and improved transfer of provincial collections into the
central government account. The rate of current spending, most of it security-related,
increased after initial delays, while core development budget spending fell substantially short
of expectations due to combination of late budget approval, the security situation, and
capacity constraints. The no-overdraft policy, a strong signal of fiscal discipline, was
maintained, with operating expenditures financed through revenue, foreign assistance, and
the temporary draw down of government deposits in the face of lower-than-expected
reimbursements from the two multi-donor grant funds. A system of direct payment to
vendors’ bank accounts has been recently initiated and is expected to accelerate payments
and to improve fiscal discipline.
5.
While remaining anchored on targets for currency in circulation and carried out
through foreign currency auctions, monetary policy continued to be implemented flexibly.

-2Hence, the higher-than-expected increase in money demand, reflected in the strong
appreciation of the Afghani and the growing “Afghanization,” a testimony to rising
confidence in the economy, has been accommodated. Monetary policy flexibility, buttressed
by the managed float, has contributed to the containment of inflation, reduction of exchange
rate volatility, and building of reserves. The Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) successfully
introduced a short-term note and will work toward developing additional monetary policy
instruments.
6.
Despite capacity constraints, significant progress has been made in structural reforms,
including introduction of major initiatives in the banking and fiscal areas. Bank legislation
and regulatory framework have been reinforced along with the licensing of several state- and
foreign-owned banks. Further reform of the state banks will be undertaken in the period
ahead to bolster competition and efficiency. Computerization of expenditure and revenue
operations, and the adoption of five-year plans to improve customs and tax administrations,
are expected to significantly improve budget management.
7.
For the second half of 2004/05 and over the medium term, the program will focus on
maintaining fiscal and monetary discipline, accelerating structural reforms, improving the
environment for private sector activity, strengthening administrative capacity, and addressing
poverty and social concerns. The goal is to foster broad-based growth as well as a more
efficient and resilient economy.
8.
The short-term outlook is overshadowed by a weaker prospect for the agricultural
production due to persisting adverse weather conditions that threaten food security for up to
3.5 million people (15 percent of the population). Growth in other sectors is expected to
continue, perhaps at a slower pace, spearheaded by private sector-led activities in
construction, transport, and other services. Downside risks to this outlook, aside from the
effects of prolonged drought, include volatile oil prices, the spread of opium activities, and
the uncertain security situation. Inflation is expected to remain moderate as rents stabilize.
The external current account is also expected to improve, notwithstanding a projected pickup
in import demand, reflecting post-election resumption of donor activities and, as the staff
suggest in BUFF/05/3, reserves increased to about US$1.3 billion, equivalent to 4.8 months
of imports at end-November.
9.
In the fiscal area, the strong revenue collection for the first half of 2004/05 bodes well
for performance over the year. While the pace of revenue collection slowed down somewhat
in October and November, this reflected a reasonable pattern, and possibly the effect of the
elections, and revenue performance is expected to strengthen thereafter. The tax system is
being simplified, and its base broadened, along with efforts to consolidate revenue laws into
a single code. On the expenditure side, government operations are to be consolidated and
expenditure management systems upgraded. Operating expenditures are projected to pick up
significantly, and compliance with expenditure regulations is expected to improve as
additional training of personnel is provided in financial and procurement procedures.
Reforms aimed at developing the core budget and consolidating the government accounts
into the Single Treasury Account will be strengthened. As improvements in the security
situation allow, the expenditure policy will shift gradually from security and reconstruction

-3to more broad-based development objectives. The outcome of a public expenditure review,
currently being undertaken by the World Bank and other donors, should help in establishing
priorities for next year’s budget.
10.
Low inflation and currency stability remain the primary goals of monetary policy.
The DAB will closely monitor price and exchange rate developments and will take prompt
action in adjusting policy as necessary, in close consultation with Fund staff. A more marketdetermined exchange rate policy will be fostered, with an increased role for commercial
banks, which should bolster the nascent export sector. Financial sector reform will continue
to be geared to restructuring the state-owned banks and DAB operations. The restructuring
strategy for the three licensed state-owned banks will be finalized, as will the resolution plan
for the three unlicensed banks. The process of transferring DAB’s commercial activities and
its non-core assets, a challenging task, will continue, as it is aimed at laying the foundations
for a modern central bank. DAB’s recapitalization needs are expected to be determined by its
external audit, which will also form the basis for a safeguards assessment.
11.
In the structural area, reforms will be accelerated to unlock the potential of new
growth-generating activities and to expand employment opportunities. A recently undertaken
survey of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) will form the basis for their privatization,
restructuring, or liquidation. The SOEs classification and reform plan is expected to be
adopted by Cabinet by end-March 2005. In the meantime, privatization of a number of small
SOEs, including a cotton company and a sugar beet company, has already been initiated. The
adverse employment impact of SOEs reform will be alleviated through retraining and
reassignment of displaced workers. Public administration reform will seek to balance the
need to improve service delivery with resource availability. In this connection, an employee
and payroll verification system is being developed to ensure effective expenditure control
and will be transformed into a more comprehensive personnel database and computerized
payroll over the medium term. Civil service capacity will be strengthened and remuneration
improved to assist recruitment and retention of skilled staff. The government attaches high
importance to private sector investment and is finalizing the requisite legal and regulatory
framework. In this regard, the importance of clarifying property rights, contract enforcement,
and bankruptcy laws is duly recognized. Moreover, governance concerns, including those
relating to perception of corruption, are to be forcefully addressed to enhance business
confidence.
12.
The authorities recognize, and are committed to, the benefits of an open and
transparent trade and exchange system. The introduction of a new tariff system with just a
few rates and estimated average tariff of 4 percent as well as the use of market exchange
rates for import valuation are important steps in this regard. Due emphasis is being placed on
promoting regional trade, where the potential is significant, including through agreements on
trade and transit with neighboring countries. At the multilateral level, WTO membership is a
future goal once the requisite legal reforms are introduced. Long-term debt sustainability is a
priority for the authorities who are committed to prudent debt management and intend to
design and implement a comprehensive strategy to that end. Furthermore, steps are being
taken to reconcile and verify existing debts, while limiting borrowing to highly concessional
terms. The staff report duly emphasizes the need for very generous treatment of pre-war

-4claims to ensure long-term fiscal and debt sustainability. Consequently, the authorities will
continue to seek generous debt relief from bilateral creditors.
13.
The growing drug-related activities pose a daunting challenge. The authorities
recognize that relying solely on eradication without considering potential economic
consequences, especially for the poor, will not be successful. While the government is
determined to reduce opium production markedly in the years ahead, sustained donor
financial and technical assistance is needed to create, in particular, alternative livelihoods for
rural population. The authorities are working with international partners to develop a fivepronged strategy involving education, alternative livelihoods, interdiction, eradication, and
legal reform. The “Securing Afghanistan’s Future” strategy seeks, inter alia, to sustain high
growth in the nondrug economy, exploiting alternative sources of growth, including in
agriculture, extractive industries, construction, and transportation. Alleviating poverty
exacerbated by the war and meeting basic social needs are central to the strategy. In
furtherance of this goal, a dialogue with social and development partners is underway to
develop an interim poverty reduction strategy that is expected to be finalized by end-March
2006.
14.
Considerable scope exists for improving the quality, coverage, and timeliness of the
statistical database. In this regard, a statistical master plan to prioritize a work program and
coordinate resources and TA for the development of a comprehensive database has been
adopted. To maximize the benefits of TA, redefinition, focus, and coordination are critical,
and, for that purpose, a comprehensive review and the establishment of an action plan are
contemplated.
15.
The authorities are resolved to forge ahead with their reform agenda. They recognize
the risks associated with the security and the political situation, which should to be handled
cautiously to maintain the necessary social stability and cohesion. Afghanistan will need
significant donor assistance, including substantial debt relief, to support its reconstruction
and development efforts. Until a new national assembly is in place, and given the need for
more time to build a solid administrative capacity and for the new government to become
fully functional, the authorities have expressed their preference for a follow-on SMP before
embarking on a formal program relationship with the Fund. The SMP should continue to
focus on maintaining macroeconomic stability and building a track record of policy
implementation while supporting the authorities’ capacity building efforts. They are grateful
to staff, management, and the Board for their advice and support.

