November 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/418

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

April 13, 2004
February 24, 2004

May 5, 2004
2004

January 29, 2001
January 29, 2001

Morocco: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Morocco
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Morocco, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 10, 2005, with the officials of Morocco on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 14, 2005. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its August 29, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Morocco.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

-1-

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
MOROCCO
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Morocco
Approved by Amor Tahari and Matthew Fisher
July 14, 2005

•

Discussions for the 2005 Article IV consultation were held in Rabat during April 25–
May 10, 2005. The staff team comprised Ms. Eken (head), and Messrs. Sarr, BouhgaHagbe, Vandenbussche (all MCD), and Mulder (MFD).

•

The mission met with Prime Minister Jettou, Ministers Oualalou (Finance and
Privatization), Mansouri (Labor), Mechahouri (Foreign Trade), Boussaid (Public sector
modernization), Mezouar (Industry and Commerce), Central Bank Governor Jouahri,
Advisor to the King Azoulay, other senior government officials, and representatives of
the private sector and labor unions. Mr. Daïri (Alternate Executive Director for
Morocco) attended most of the meetings.

•

At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on May 5, 2004, Executive
Directors commended the Moroccan authorities for maintaining macroeconomic
stability. They agreed that the key challenge facing Morocco is to achieve sustainable
high rates of economic growth to reduce unemployment and poverty. They stressed the
importance of supportive macroeconomic policies and accelerated structural reforms to
foster private investment and enhance productivity. In these regards, Directors
encouraged the authorities to further liberalize and simplify the trade regime and to
improve the business environment, and stressed that fiscal consolidation was an
essential part of the higher growth strategy. Directors noted that the current fixed
exchange rate regime has served Morocco well. They welcomed the authorities’
willingness to review the desirability and operational modalities of alternative
exchange rate regimes to accompany Morocco’s integration into the world economy.

•

Morocco accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 in 1993. The
capital account is open for nonresidents. Morocco’s exchange rate is officially pegged
to a basket of currencies dominated by the Euro. Morocco maintains an exchange
system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers on current
international transactions.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary..................................................................................................................4
I.

Background...................................................................................................................5

II.

Recent Developments and Short-Term Outlook ..........................................................7

III.

Report on Policy Discussions.....................................................................................10
A. The Economic Environment and Key Challenges................................................10
B. Fiscal Policy .........................................................................................................12
C. Structural Reforms ................................................................................................15
D. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies .................................................................17
E. Medium-Term Framework and Risks ..................................................................20
F. Other Issues ..........................................................................................................21

IV.

Staff Appraisal............................................................................................................21

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000–05..............................................24
Balance of Payments, 2001–05 ..................................................................................25
Central Government Finance, 2001–05......................................................................26
Selected Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–05 ...............................................................28
Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10 ...........................................29
Central Government Finance, 2004–10......................................................................30
Revenue Structure and International Comparisons ....................................................32
Financial Soundness Indicators, 1998–2004 ..............................................................33
Monetary Survey, 2001–05 ........................................................................................34
Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2001–10...........................................................35
Balance of Payments, 2004–10 ..................................................................................36
External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10 ...................................................37

Figures
1.
Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1995–2005...........................................6
2.
Emerging Markets Bond Index Spread, 1998–2005 ....................................................6
3.
Real GDP Growth.......................................................................................................10
4.
Debt-to-GDP Ratio.....................................................................................................12
5.
Fiscal Developments and Medium-Term Projections ................................................13
6.
Monetary Developments ............................................................................................18
7.
REER vs. Balance of Payments Equilibrium Exchange Rate (BPEER) ....................19
Box
1.
2.

Past Fund Surveillance .................................................................................................8
Recent Developments in the Textiles and Clothing Sector ..........................................9

Appendices
1.
Fund Relations............................................................................................................38

-3-

2.
3.

Financial Relations with the World Bank ..................................................................40
Statistical Issues..........................................................................................................43

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•

Morocco has achieved macroeconomic stability since the early 1990s, with low inflation and a
strong external position. However, growth has been volatile and insufficient to significantly reduce
unemployment and poverty.

•

Macroeconomic and financial conditions remain stable. In 2004, inflation remained low, the current
account continued to register a surplus, and external reserves increased further. The budget deficit
declined on account of a good revenue performance and the debt-to-GDP ratio declined because
privatization receipts helped finance the deficit. Overall GDP growth slowed down reflecting the
performance in the primary sector, but nonagricultural GDP growth picked up because of a dynamic
tertiary sector and a recovery in mining and energy. In 2005, a decline in agricultural output,
petroleum price increases, and the abolition of textile quotas will affect economic developments. In
particular, the overall GDP growth is projected to decline to about 1 percent and nonagricultural
GDP growth is expected to slow down. With the current policies, the budget deficit is projected to
widen.

•

The key challenge is to achieve sustained high rates of growth to reduce unemployment and
poverty. To meet their high-growth objectives, the authorities intend to gradually reduce the budget
deficit and move expeditiously with their remaining structural reform agenda in a context of
continued macroeconomic stability and increasing integration into the world economy.

•

Although the current fiscal stance and debt level do not pose a risk to macroeconomic stability in
the short term, current policies, if maintained, could lead to a higher debt-to-GDP ratio, reduce the
authorities’ ability to absorb unfavorable shocks and raise expectations of higher taxes and interest
rates. Achieving the authorities’ high-growth and fiscal consolidation objectives would require a
reform of the tax system that will widen the tax base and allow a cut in tax rates, a reduction in the
wage-bill-to-GDP ratio that will enhance the flexibility of the budget, an overhaul of the food
subsidy system and its replacement by targeted support to vulnerable groups which could lead to a
diversification of agricultural production, and the implementation of the petroleum price adjustment
mechanism. The authorities are already making efforts in these areas. Fiscal consolidation would
also release resources for productive investments in rural areas where poverty is pervasive, which
could generate a steadier income stream in those areas.

•

The authorities have made significant progress in implementing their structural reform agenda,
particularly in aspects related to trade liberalization, the financial sector, public enterprises, and the
labor market. However, much remains to be done to strengthen private sector activity and enhance
efficiency and productivity. Priority areas are further trade liberalization, improvements in the
business environment, and financial sector reforms.

•

The current fixed exchange rate regime has served Morocco well and there are no signs of a
misalignment of the dirham. However, forward-looking considerations, in particular the increasing
opening up of the Moroccan economy and the envisaged structural reforms to increase efficiency
and productivity favor a gradual transition to a more flexible exchange rate regime. The authorities
are reviewing pros and cons of alternative regimes. At their request, the staff prepared a paper on
the exchange rate regime. The authorities intend to take the conclusions of the paper into
consideration in their internal deliberations.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND
1.
Morocco’s political situation remains stable. The current coalition government took
power after the September 2002 parliamentary elections and the next parliamentary elections
are scheduled for September 2007. The authorities believe that poverty, unemployment, and
social exclusion are the root causes of Islamic extremism, which is a major political concern.
Achieving social development is therefore at the top of the government’s agenda. To this end,
the authorities are putting more emphasis on access to education, health care, housing, and
basic infrastructure, and on rural development. New family and labor codes were recently
passed reflecting their commitment to promote social cohesion and stability.
2.
As noted in previous staff reports,1 Morocco has achieved macroeconomic stability
since the early 1990s, but growth has been volatile and insufficient to reduce significantly
unemployment and poverty. Real growth averaged 3 percent over the last decade, and urban
unemployment was 18 percent in 2004. Poverty,2 which is particularly pervasive in rural areas,
is estimated at 15 percent of the population, and the economically vulnerable reaches
40 percent. Overall real GDP growth has been volatile because cereal production, which
accounts for a large share of Moroccan agriculture, is highly sensitive to droughts. Growth
improved during 2001–04 because agriculture benefited from good weather conditions, while
nonagricultural output growth accelerated (Table 1).3
3.
The balance of payments remains strong despite low export growth. After rising
steadily between 1993 and 2001, export growth slowed since 2001 even though the dirham was
devalued by 5 percent in 2001 (Figure 1). However, because of a surge in workers’ remittances
and tourism receipts, the current account deficit turned into a surplus and national savings
increased significantly. Balances on services, income, and transfers more than covered the trade
deficit. The overall balance of payments remained in surplus, and international reserves
increased to about 10 months of imports. As a result, Morocco’s foreign currency debt rating,
although below investment grade, saw its outlook upgraded from stable to positive and
secondary market spreads declined significantly (Figure 2).

1
2

3

See SM/04/121 and SM/03/119.
The national poverty line was at about US$350 per year per person in 1999.
See SM/05/277, Supplement 1 for more detailed analysis of Morocco’s growth performance.

-6-

Figure 1. Morocco: Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1995–2005
(1990=100)
135

135

130

130

Nominal effective exchange rate
125

125

120

120

Real effective exchange rate

115

115

110

110

105

105

100
100
1995M1 1995M9 1996M5 1997M1 1997M9 1998M5 1999M1 1999M9 2000M5 2001M1 2001M9 2002M5 2003M1 2003M9 2004M5 2005M1
Source: Internaional Monetary Fund, Information Notice System.

Figure 2. Morocco: Emerging Markets Bond Index Spread (EMBI), 1998–2005
(Basis points)
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200

Source: JP Morgan (EMBI).

17-Feb-05

2-Sep-04

25-Nov-04

10-Jun-04

25-Dec-03

18-Mar-04

2-Oct-03

10-Jul-03

17-Apr-03

23-Jan-03

31-Oct-02

8-Aug-02

21-Feb-02

16-May-02

6-Sep-01

29-Nov-01

14-Jun-01

22-Mar-01

5-Oct-00

28-Dec-00

13-Jul-00

27-Jan-00

20-Apr-00

4-Nov-99

12-Aug-99

20-May-99

3-Dec-98

25-Feb-99

18-Jun-98

10-Sep-98

26-Mar-98

1-Jan-98

0

-7-

4.
In an attempt to spur growth in the late 1990s, the authorities ran an expansionary
fiscal policy with increases in wage expenditures and tax and import tariff exemptions, which
eventually triggered more wage increases and exemption demands. The fiscal deficits
(including Fond Hassan II expenditures and excluding privatization receipts) increased from an
annual average of 3.6 percent of GDP in 1996–99 to 5.5 percent in 2000–04, putting the fiscal
position on a potentially unsustainable path.4 However, the debt-to-GDP ratio declined by
about 15 percentage points during 2000–04 mainly because privatization receipts helped
finance fiscal deficits and the authorities reduced debt through debt/equity swaps. In the
absence of these operations, the debt-to-GDP ratio would have increased by about 6 percentage
points.
5.
In recent years, the authorities have taken measures in line with Fund policy
recommendations (see Box 1 for details). Although progress has been slow in some areas, the
authorities accelerated their reform agenda starting from 2002.
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND SHORT-TERM OUTLOOK
6.
In 2004, macroeconomic and financial conditions remained stable and
nonagricultural GDP growth picked up. While overall GDP growth slowed down to
4.2 percent on account of a decline in growth in the primary sector, nonagricultural GDP
growth picked up because of a dynamic tertiary sector and a recovery in mining and energy. On
the external side, the trade deficit widened with the decline in agricultural exports due to supply
constraints, the stagnation in textiles exports, and the increase in the petroleum import bill
(Table 2). Nevertheless, the current account remained in surplus reflecting strong tourism and
remittance inflows. With increased foreign direct investment and privatization receipts, gross
official reserves increased further. The balance of payments surplus in the context of the
pegged exchange rate continued to result in abundant liquidity in the banking system and led to
a decline in interbank interest rates. The central bank allowed interest rates to decline given the
very low inflation rate and moderate domestic demand.
7.
The fiscal deficit declined in 2004, but some budgetary policies did not support
fiscal consolidation. The fiscal deficit declined by 0.4 percentage point to 4.9 percent of GDP
and was much lower than envisaged in the 2004 budget (Table 3). This development mainly
reflected good revenue performance. Expenditures were higher than envisaged because of
increases in: (a) investment following an acceleration in project executions; (b) the wage bill
following new salary increases; and (c) subsidies because the food subsidy reform was
postponed and the petroleum price adjustment mechanism was not fully implemented. The
authorities were able to prevent further expenditure increases related to the El-Hoceima
earthquake and a locust invasion by reallocating budgetary appropriations. Public debt declined
to 66 percent of GDP because privatization receipts helped finance the deficit.
4

A commonly accepted approach to assessing debt sustainability is to view fiscal policy as sustainable if it
delivers a ratio of public debt-to-GDP that is stable, and then calculate the primary balance that would be required
to achieve that. During 2000–04, the primary deficit averaged 1 percent of GDP, while the differential between
growth and the implicit interest rate on public debt averaged a negative 1 percent, implying that a primary surplus
would have been required to at least stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio before privatization.

-8-

Box 1. Past Fund Surveillance
Over the past five years, Fund surveillance has focused on policies aimed at maintaining
macroeconomic stability, achieving fiscal consolidation, and accelerating growth to
reduce unemployment and poverty. The staff recommended (a) tax and expenditure reforms
to lower the fiscal deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios, dispel the risk of future tax increases and
higher interest rates, and create fiscal space; (b) an exchange rate policy that would reverse the
real effective exchange rate appreciation that took place in the 1990s; and (c) structural reforms
to foster private investment, productivity, and the efficient allocation of resources.
The authorities have taken steps along the lines of the Fund’s recommendations but
progress has been slow in some areas.
Macroeconomic stability has been preserved but fiscal consolidation has not yet been
achieved. The authorities have implemented a no net new hiring policy, but the wage bill ratio
increased further because of ad hoc salary increases and promotions. The authorities eliminated
edible oil subsidies, but flour and sugar continue to be subsidized and the automatic petroleum
price adjustment mechanism has not been fully operating. On the revenue side, the authorities
made progress in modernizing tax administration, but the provision of tax exemptions rendered
the tax system more complex and its administration more difficult.
The authorities devalued the dirham by 5 percent in 2001, partly reversing its real
appreciation during the 1990s, and the real effective exchange rate has depreciated
further since then. Fund surveillance has recently focused on the desirability of moving
gradually to a more flexible exchange rate regime. The authorities have entered into a dialogue
with the staff on this issue.
The authorities accelerated structural reform. Trade liberalization is proceeding both at
multilateral and bilateral levels. The authorities reduced the number and level of tariff rates,
eliminated reference import prices, implemented customs reform, and have signed trade
agreements with their major trading partners. Financial sector reform is proceeding in line with
the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) recommendations. Major public enterprises
have been privatized, the remaining ones are being reformed, and steps have been taken to put
pension funds on a sounder footing. A new labor code has been promulgated. Progress in
reforming the judicial system, improving contract enforcement, and rendering the public
services more efficient are needed to further improve the business environment.
8.
A decline in agricultural output, petroleum price increases, and the abolition of
textile quotas will affect economic developments in 2005. The primary sector will contract
sharply and some agro industries will be adversely affected because of bad weather earlier this
year. Growth in the manufacturing sector is expected to slow down, reflecting the difficulties in
the textile sector (see Box 2). Strong performance in tourism and construction sectors and
remittance inflows are expected to continue. Consequently, overall GDP growth is projected to
decline to about 1 percent and non agricultural GDP growth is expected to slow down. The
external current account is projected to register a small deficit because of higher oil prices and
food imports, and weak textile exports. The overall balance of payments position is expected to

-9-

continue to register a surplus, even if the effects of privatization are excluded. With delayed
implementation of domestic petroleum price adjustments, the impact of higher international
petroleum prices on growth and inflation will be limited, and the budget will bear the subsidy
cost (estimated at 0.8 percent of GDP). A recently announced policy package, which will
reallocate budget appropriations, should help alleviate the impact of the poor harvest on rural
areas.
Box 2. Recent Developments in the Textiles and Clothing Sector
In 2004, the textiles and clothing sector accounted for 17 percent of manufacturing
value added, 50 percent of manufacturing employment and 32.5 percent of
merchandise exports. Therefore, the worldwide abolition of quantitative restrictions on
exports of textile and clothing that came into effect on January 1, 2005 will have
important consequences for Morocco.
During the first four months of 2005, Moroccan exports of clothing declined by
16.1 percent and exports of hosiery by 21 percent in local currency value compared
with the first four months of 2004. These two product categories together accounted for
30.6 percent of Moroccan merchandise exports in 2004.
It is not clear yet to what extent the early adjustments following the abolition of the
quota system are indicative of longer term trends. However, a study by the United
Nations using the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) computable general
equilibrium model suggests that Morocco could experience a long-term reduction in
textiles and clothing exports of respectively 11 and 18 percent as a result of the quota
phase-out.1 This would correspond to a loss of 0.22 percent of GDP. Using an
alternative GTAP specification, a recent World Bank study2 obtains similar results. In
addition, it estimates the labor market impact of the quota removal. The findings
suggest that 15 to 16 percent of unskilled workers in Morocco’s textiles and clothing
sector could lose their job.
To avert these looming losses of employment and income, Moroccan policy makers
have taken measures to accelerate the current transition of the sector towards higher
value-added production and increased vertical integration. The recently concluded free
trade agreement with Turkey—a large and diversified producer of textiles—is an
important component of that strategy, since it will enable Moroccan firms to source
textiles production in Turkey while respecting the rules of origin requirements of the
European Union. The free-trade agreement with the US could also benefit the sector,
since the US is currently a virtually untapped market.
_________________________________
1

See UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa), “Comment Sauver le Textile
Maghrebin?”, 2005, paper presented at the UMA/CEA conference in Tunis (February 14–15, 2005).

2

See Manole, V., “Winner or Loser? Effects of Quota Abolition in World Markets for Textile and
Apparel,” 2005, World Bank Working Paper.

- 10 -

9.
Current policies are expected to lead to a deterioration in the fiscal deficit to about
5.5 percent of GDP in 2005, despite a continued favorable revenue performance. Expenditures
would significantly increase taking into account the repercussions on wage payments of the
2004 wage negotiations, the voluntary retirement program, the new universal health insurance
program, the delay of the food (wheat and sugar) subsidy reform, and the partial adjustment in
mid-May of domestic petroleum prices. Excluding the cost of the early retirement program and
other one-off wage related payments, the 2005 fiscal deficit is projected at 4.5 percent of GDP.
The authorities intend to eliminate outstanding arrears (0.7 percent of GDP), which have been
used to partly finance subsidies in 2004 and early 2005. Large privatization receipts from the
sale of government shares in Maroc Telecom will again help finance the deficit. At end-2005,
the debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase to 70 percent of GDP, taking into account the
issuance of debt to cover old pension fund arrears (2.4 percent of GDP).
III. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS
10.
Policy discussions focused on gaining a common understanding of the economic
environment and drawing an integrated strategy to address the growth and unemployment
challenges. Meeting these challenges will require putting conditions in place to foster
investment and productivity growth.
A. The Economic Environment and Key Challenges
11.
The Moroccan economy remains characterized by three key features: (a) output
growth has been volatile and insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment and poverty
(Figure 3); (b) the country is facing increased competition from abroad; and (c) the
macroeconomic environment has been stable despite relatively high fiscal deficits.
Figure 3. Real GDP Growth
(In percent)

20

100

18

GDP (left axis)

90

16

Nonagricultural GDP (left axis)

80

14

Agricultural GDP (right axis)

70

12

60

10

50

8

40

6

30

4

20

2

10

0
-2

0
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-10

-4

-20

-6

-30

-8

-40

-10

-50
Source: Moroccan authorities and IMF Staff estimates.

- 11 -

12.
Morocco’s growth performance reflects extreme volatility of the agricultural
sector and low nonagricultural growth. The share of the agricultural sector has fluctuated
around 15 percent since 1991, but its growth has been extremely volatile. Indeed, the standard
deviation of the agricultural sector growth rate for the period 1991–2004 has been 35 percent,
while that of the nonagricultural sector has been only 1.3 percent. During the same period,
growth of the nonagricultural sector has been low, averaging 3.2 percent per annum. An
acceleration of growth in the nonagricultural sector, by increasing its share in total GDP, would
therefore help reduce overall volatility over the medium term. Moreover, cross-country
empirical evidence suggests that a reduction in output volatility could have growth-enhancing
effects.5 To these ends, increases in investment and total factor productivity in the
nonagricultural sector are needed.6 In addition, measures to attack some structural causes of
agricultural output volatility, such as the plan announced by the authorities in May 2005 to
encourage crop diversification over the next five years, would also help improve economic
performance over the medium term.
13.
In the context of ongoing trade liberalization, the nonagricultural sector is
subjected to increasing international competition. To maximize exports opportunities and
better withstand competition from abroad in the domestic market, efforts to improve Morocco’s
competitiveness will need to be accelerated. Such an environment would also foster investment.
In the past few years, nongovernment investment has shown signs of revival, contributing
significantly to domestic demand growth. However, domestic demand remains sluggish despite
the abundance of national savings and low monetary policy interest rates, suggesting the
existence of structural constraints to its dynamism.
14.
Abundant liquidity, supported by a surge in remittance flows, has facilitated the
financing of high fiscal deficits at low costs without crowding out private credit or
undermining macroeconomic stability. Indeed, interest rates have been on a declining trend
along the maturity spectrum. In the circumstances, the authorities did not accelerate fiscal
consolidation. However, they took advantage of the situation to substitute domestic for external
debt, develop a domestic debt market, and reduce external vulnerability.7 Nevertheless, if
economic activity picked up, the balance of payments surplus disappeared, and/or the capital
account opened up to resident outflows, the current fiscal policies could spur an increase in
interest rates and become a binding constraint on growth.
15.
In the above described context, policy discussions focused on two areas that could
help achieve sustained growth to significantly reduce unemployment and poverty:
(a) maintaining macroeconomic stability and reducing the fiscal deficit while creating fiscal
flexibility for demand management and room for productive expenditures; and (b) accelerating
5
6
7

For details, see World Economic Outlook, April 2005, Chapter II.
For developments in total factor productivity, see SM/05/277, Supplement 1.

Indeed, high public debt has favorable maturity and currency composition (see Table 4 and SM/04/124,
Supplement 1) with low exposure to exchange rate and interest rate risks. The maturity of domestic debt was
further increased in 2004 and short-term debt represents only 20 percent of government debt.

- 12 -

structural reforms, including trade liberalization. Discussions were also held on the pros and
cons of alternative exchange rate regimes as the economy undergoes structural transformation
and faces greater international competition.
B. Fiscal Policy
16.
The fiscal stance and the debt level do not pose a risk to macroeconomic stability
in the short term in the present macroeconomic environment, but current policies would
not put public finances on a sustainable path. If current policies continue, the debt-to-GDP
ratio would be increasing, with no cushion to absorb shocks, especially output shocks (Table 5
and Figure 4). Standard debt dynamics suggest that a primary surplus of 0.8 percent of GDP
would be required to stabilize the current debt-to-GDP level given Morocco’s growth
experience and the average implicit interest rate on public debt, compared to the projected
primary deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2005, excluding exceptional expenditures. The debt ratio
is sensitive not only to slower fiscal consolidation but also to slower growth. The fiscal deficit
should therefore be reduced to at least 3 percent of GDP over the medium term (corresponding
to a primary surplus of 1 percent of GDP) to lower the debt ratio on a sustained basis, and
enhance fiscal flexibility and resilience to output shocks.

Figure 4. Debt-to-GDP Ratio (in percent)
80

75

70

65

60

Baseline

55

Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005–10
No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005–10
50
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Moroccan authorities; and IMF Staff estimates.

17.
The authorities agree with the staff that fiscal consolidation is an essential part of
the high growth strategy. They do not consider the current fiscal stance as unsustainable.
However, they remain committed to reducing the fiscal deficit to 3 percent of GDP by 2009
(Table 6). The achievement of this objective and its compatibility with a high growth scenario
will require actions on both the revenue and expenditure sides (Figure 5).

- 13 -

Figure 5. Fiscal Developments and Medium-Term Projections
(In percent of GDP)
Tax reform, in particular of the VAT,
would help stabilize revenue as import
taxes decline with trade liberalization...

Expenditures would be reduced in the medium
term through containment of noninterest current
expenditure...
35

25

Revenue

Expenditure
30
Noninterest
expenditure

25

20

20

15
Indirect Taxes

Wages

15

10
10

Direct Taxes
5

Trade Taxes

Capital
expenditure

5

Nontax
0

Interest

0
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2002

Fiscal balances would improve over
the medium term...

2006

2008

2010

The debt to GDP ratio would decline.

3

85

2

80

1

2004

Primary Balance

75

0
-1

70

-2

65

-3

Debt to
GDP ratio

60

-4
Overall Balance

-5

55

50

-6
2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2002

2004

Source: Moroccan Authorities and IMF staff estimates and projections.

2006

2008

2010

- 14 -

18.
The authorities and the staff agreed that a reform of the tax system, in line with
the recommendations of recent FAD technical assistance missions, would widen the tax
base, eliminate tax induced distortions, and ultimately allow a reduction in tax rates that
would release resources to the private sector for their efficient allocation. Morocco’s tax
revenue-to-GDP ratio and its distribution between direct and indirect taxes compare well with
other countries (Table 7). However, the proliferation of tax exemptions over the years and a
growing direct tax revenue-to-GDP ratio, suggest an increasing tax burden on a narrow tax
base. The marginal personal income tax rate, at 44 percent, is high and the private sector
blames it for higher wage demands of skilled workers. The VAT system with 5 tax rates and
widespread exemptions is complex and difficult to administer. The corporate tax base is also
eroded by exemptions and special tax treatments. In this context, the authorities intend to
initiate tax reform, particularly of the VAT in 2006 and to present a tax expenditure report with
the 2006 budget to raise awareness about the inefficiency of the tax system.
19.
On the expenditure side, the authorities plan to reduce the wage bill ratio and
improve the quality of expenditures. To reduce the wage bill ratio, they plan to contain the
wage drift to 2–3 percent, continue their no net new hiring policy, and implement a modern
human resource management and remuneration system. The voluntary departure/early
retirement program8 will eliminate some 30,000 positions and will result in significant wage
savings. The staff and the authorities agree that the implementation of these measures should
allow a reduction of the wage bill ratio by 2 percent of GDP by 2009. The authorities also
intend to eliminate gradually general food subsidies over three years, enhance targeted support
to vulnerable groups, and privatize sugar companies, as well as reflect gradually international
price developments on domestic petroleum product prices (except for butane gas). In addition,
they intend to continue to reform pension funds to dispel the contingent risks to the budget.9
20.
The staff agreed with the authorities that their planned expenditure policies are in
line with their medium-term macroeconomic objectives. Staff noted that a lower wage bill
ratio would enhance budget flexibility, including to dampen income and consumption
volatilities, without compromising debt sustainability. Containment of salary increases would
also limit increases in private sector wages. An overhaul of the food subsidy system and the
elimination of petroleum price subsidies, which do not mainly benefit vulnerable groups, could
release resources for more productive expenditures, including for rural infrastructure. The
elimination of food subsidies and their replacement with targeted support to vulnerable groups
should lead in the medium-to-long run to a diversification of agricultural production that is less
dependent on weather vagaries. In addition, the planned implementation, in collaboration with
the World Bank, of a medium-term budget framework and the continuation of the
decentralization and performance budgeting program should render the public administration
more efficient and transparent.

8

The authorities estimate that the budgetary cost of the voluntary departure/early retirement program would
amount to about 0.7 percent of GDP in 2005.

9

See SM/04/121, Box 1 on the financial situation of the main pension funds.

- 15 -

C. Structural Reforms
21.
The authorities have a broad based structural reform agenda to increase
productivity and promote private sector activity, and facilitate Morocco’s increasing integration
into the world economy. Discussions focused on the following priority areas: (a) continued
trade liberalization; (b) the promotion of an internationally competitive business environment;
and (c) financial sector reforms.
Trade liberalization
22.
The authorities view trade liberalization and integration into the world economy
as essential to enhance export opportunities and foster the efficiency of the economy. In
2004, MFN tariffs were reduced to a maximum of 10 percent for goods freely traded with the
European Union. Also, trade agreements were signed with the United States, Turkey and
regional partners (Tunisia, Jordan, and Egypt) to complement the association agreement with
the European Union. The trade agreement with the United States is expected to play a catalytic
role in attracting foreign direct investment and in transforming Morocco into an export
platform to Europe and the United States taking advantage of its geographical position and the
soon to be completed Tanger-Med port complex. In addition, the authorities are keen to achieve
trade liberalization at the regional level in order to establish a large regional market and attract
foreign investment.
23.
Staff noted that the proliferation of bilateral accords made the trade system
complex and underscored the need to reduce the number, dispersion, and average level of
tariffs.10 More specifically, the staff recommended an acceleration of tariff reduction and the
elimination of variable import tariffs together with the elimination of food subsidies. The
smaller than previously expected negative impact of trade liberalization on tax revenues
provides room for an acceleration. The authorities noted that, if confirmed, the good import tax
revenue performance would be a welcome development that could support faster trade
liberalization.
Business environment
24.
The authorities intend to keep improving the business environment to increase the
economy’s growth potential. They have made significant progress in certain areas, notably
with the liberalization of air transport that positively impacted tourism and of the
telecommunications sector that is flourishing. Morocco’s business community feels that critical
reforms aimed at improving the business environment in other areas have been initiated in
recent years, but many of them remain to be effectively implemented. The new labor code, if
fully implemented, should contribute to clarifying employer/employee relationships. The
reform of the judicial system, which the authorities have been discussing with the World Bank,
should also proceed faster. Access to land is difficult and the law on domestic competition
remains to be effectively implemented. The authorities intend to continue reforming the
10

The average tariff rate was 26 percent in 2004. There are eight multilateral tariff lines, which vary from 0 to
50 percent for nonagricultural and nonfood products.

- 16 -

transport sectors and the logistics chain, in particular port services, to improve the
competitiveness of Moroccan enterprises and their logistical support. Privatization and public
enterprise restructuring programs will also continue.
25.
The authorities are reviewing their industrial policy strategy and have sponsored a
study by an international consulting firm to help them identify sectors with growth
potential. The staff encouraged the authorities to promote a neutral and internationally
competitive business environment and resist pressures for the provision of exemptions or
special incentives in favor of specific sectors.
Financial sector reforms
26.
The authorities intend to further strengthen the financial sector. Provisioning and
capital adequacy ratios have recently improved. Nonperforming loans have stabilized but
remain high (Table 8). High NPLs increase the cost of intermediation. Because of high costs of
intermediation, the reduction in monetary policy interest rates, discussed below, has not led to
significantly lower real lending interest rates, especially for SMEs. The cost of intermediation
may also constrain other potentially desirable policies. Progress in reducing nonperforming
loans and increasing the efficiency of domestic banks more generally will need to be achieved
before significant capital account liberalization can be allowed for residents. On the other hand,
gradual capital account liberalization could put competition pressures on banks and help the
transfer of risk management technologies.
27.
Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM) has made significant progress in the implementation of
FSAP recommendations to strengthen banking supervision and improve banks’ risk
management practices. The imminent promulgation of the new central bank and banking laws
will further enhance the supervisory power and autonomy of BAM. To this end, steps have
been taken to strengthen banking supervision capacity in BAM and it started to withdraw from
both the capital and management of credit institutions. Progress was also made in the
restructuring of specialized banks. The Crédit Immobilier et Hotelier is currently seeking an
international partner and the Crédit Agricole du Maroc will no longer finance quasi-fiscal
operations. The authorities indicated that they will not extend their exemptions from prudential
regulations beyond June 2007. The staff recommended that all banks be brought to compliance
with prudential regulations as early as possible, if necessary by new capital injections. The
authorities intend to continue their efforts to implement FSAP recommendations. The World
Bank is preparing a financial sector adjustment loan to accompany those efforts.
28.
Limited access to and high cost of credit for small- and medium-size enterprises
(SMEs), which represent the core of Morocco’s enterprise sector, is of major concern to
the authorities. A World Bank survey found that problems related to the information system
on enterprises, property rights, contract enforcement, and the lack of financial management
skills in the enterprise sector were the main structural constraints. The staff underscored the
importance of removing the above structural constraints to enhance the availability and reduce
the cost of credit to SMEs. Moroccan banks are receiving assistance from the IFC to better
assess credit to SMEs. The authorities intend to support SME financing through a guarantee
fund that will have its own capital and be supported by donors to dispel contingent budget

- 17 -

risks. Beneficiaries would need to adhere to minimum corporate governance and transparency
requirements to access the guarantee fund.
D. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
29.
Monetary policy is being implemented in a context of abundant liquidity and
relatively weak domestic demand. BAM, while keeping its announced main policy rate at
3.25 percent, effectively reduced interbank interest rates to about 2.50 percent since 2004
(Figure 6) by limiting the volume of liquidity mopped up from the market. Banks deposit most
of their remaining excess liquidity at the money market floor deposit facility rate of
2.25 percent because of the absence of unsatisfied credit demand. The authorities explained that
they considered inappropriate to formally reduce their announced main policy rate to the
observed interbank rate in a context characterized, in their view, by uncertainty on inflation, the
absence of unsatisfied credit demand, and in view of the level of interest rates abroad. They
also indicated that a further reduction in interest rates would mainly be reflected in deposit
rather than lending rates, particularly SME lending rates (Table 9).
30.
In view of the very low inflation, the staff considered BAM’s effective reduction of
monetary policy interest rates appropriate. The staff noted, however, that the differential
between the announced policy rate and the effective money market rate affects the transparency
of monetary policy, which has been enhanced by BAM’s recent simplification of its monetary
policy instruments. Staff argued that a formal reduction of BAM’s main policy rate would be
desirable, and pointed out that the use of the deposit facility, normally available at banks’
initiative on an exceptional basis to effectively reduce interest rates, does not foster interbank
activity. Staff also noted that BAM’s directive to banks to provide information on loans granted
at interest rates below reference rates could constrain competition, as some banks pointed out to
the mission.
31.
The authorities consider that the current fixed exchange rate regime has served
Morocco well. The balance of payments is strong, inflation is low, the real effective exchange
rate has depreciated since 2001, and equilibrium exchange rate estimates do not point to a
misalignment (Figure 7). The staff shared the authorities’ views and noted that the current
regime could be appropriate if Morocco’s historical characteristics (heavy reliance on trade
with the Euro area, the low impact of terms of trade shocks on economic activity, and the
relatively low level of capital flows) remained the same.11 However, staff argued that forward
looking considerations favor a gradual transition to a flexible exchange rate regime. As the
economy opens up and is potentially more vulnerable to external shocks, a flexible exchange
rate regime would facilitate adjustment to those shocks. Structural reforms, by increasing
productivity and efficiency, could justify a strong currency, but these may take time to
materialize. Exchange rate uncertainty would be amplified by an opening of the capital
account. A flexible exchange rate would also be necessary to maintain monetary independence
if the capital account were opened up, and would be desirable to avoid providing implicit
exchange rate guarantees.
11

For more details, see Section C of the exchange rate regime paper (SM/05/277, Supplement 1).

- 18 -

Figure 6. Morocco: Monetary Developments

Bank Reserves Compared to Required Reserves
(in billions of dirhams)

Interest Rates, 2003-2004
(in percent)

34

34

32

32

5

5

5 day advances

Reserves

4

30

30

28

28

26

26

24

24

4
Overnight Rate
7 day advances

3

3

Liquidity Repurchase
Rate
2

Required Reserves

22

20
Sep-03

Jan-04

May-04

2

22

20
May-03

24-hour deposit facility

1

Sep-04

1

May-03

Sep-03

Jan-04

May-04

Sep-04

Contribution of Net Foreign Assets
to Reserve Money
(12-month change in percent of reserve money)

Velocity of Money, 1999-2004
(in percent)
1.50

50

30

45
1.40

25

40
1.30

35
GDP/M3

1.20

Reserve money
(right scale)

30

15

25
1.10

20

20
10

15

1.00
Non-agr
GDP/M3

0.90

10

5

5
0.80

Net Foreign Assets (left scale)
0

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Source: Moroccan authorities
1/ Interest rate for BAM's 7-day advances.

2004

Jan-02

Aug-02

Mar-03

Oct-03

May-04

Dec-04

- 19 -

Figure 7. REER vs. Balance of Payments Equilibrium Exchange Rate (BPEER) 1/
(

= appreciation, in logarithm)
Using 1989–91 trade weights

4.9
BPEER (Fully Modified OLS)

4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.3

BPEER (Johansen)

REER

4.2
4.1
1980Q4

1983Q4

1986Q4

1989Q4

1992Q4

1995Q4

1998Q4

2001Q4

2004Q4

1998Q4

2001Q4

2004Q4

Using 1999–2001 trade weights
5
4.9

BPEER (Fully Modified OLS)

4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4

BPEER (Johansen)
REER

4.3
4.2
1980Q4

1983Q4

1986Q4

1989Q4

1992Q4

1995Q4

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ The model of the balance of payments equilibrium exchange rate (BPEER) was used to estimate Morocco’s
equilibrium exchange rate. See SM/05/277, Supplement 1 for details.

- 20 -

32.
The authorities noted the possibility of an appreciation of the dirham if the
exchange rate regime became flexible in the context of balance of payments surpluses,
which could hurt exports and investment. The staff argued that an appreciation of the dirham
under a flexible exchange rate regime was possible but would lead to higher imports of
consumption and investment goods, which would dampen the appreciation. Over time,
however, it is difficult to know what the dynamics of a move to a more flexible exchange rate
would look like.
33.
The authorities intend to review the pros and cons of alternative exchange rate
regimes, taking into account the characteristics of the Moroccan economy and their future
policy intentions. They are open to the idea of a possible gradual move to a flexible exchange
rate regime. At the request of the authorities, the staff prepared a paper on the exchange rate
regime.12 The staff also discussed at the technical level operational and institutional issues that
would be involved in a transition to a flexible regime, including a new monetary policy
framework to provide a nominal anchor, the development of foreign exchange markets and risk
management capacities in the financial sector, and the design of intervention policies. The
authorities indicated that they would take the conclusions and recommendations of staff into
consideration in their internal deliberations.
E. Medium-Term Framework and Risks
34.
The staff, in consultation with the authorities, prepared a medium-term
framework aimed at achieving the high growth objective. The framework assumes that, in
the context of moderate export growth in an increasingly competitive international
environment, the domestic market would continue to be the main source of growth. Structural
reforms, public investment in infrastructure, and reduced output volatility would foster private
investment. As the economy grows and tax burdens are reduced and shared among a widened
tax base, a more stable and steadily increasing private consumption growth pattern would
enhance private investor confidence. Also tied to fiscal consolidation and ongoing structural
reforms, private investment and productivity are forecast to steadily increase and
unemployment to steadily decline (Table 10). In this context, the staff noted that a gradual
transition to a flexible exchange rate would ensure a proper balance between all sources of
growth. Growth is expected to significantly rebound in 2006 following the negative agriculture
shock in 2005, with a gradual increase in nonagricultural growth thereafter. The increase in
nonagricultural growth is expected to come from higher private investment and productivity
increase with the envisaged structural reforms.
35.
The macroeconomic framework forecasts a widening of the current account deficit
as investment picks up (Table 11). The projected deficits would not pose a problem to the
balance of payments since they would be financed by the private sector and existing national
savings. Foreign exchange reserve accumulation would slow down over the medium term but
reserves coverage would remain comfortable. Standard external debt sustainability analysis
shows that Morocco’s external debt will remain sustainable over the medium term (Table 12).
12

See SM/05/277, Supplement 1.

- 21 -

Moreover, the authorities believe that the deterioration in the trade balance would be less
because of their optimism about petroleum prices and textile exports.
36.
There are risks to the medium-term framework. It is difficult to forecast the exact
magnitude of the impact the envisaged policies will have on the growth performance as well as
the lags that will be experienced in the process. Thus, higher nonagricultural growth may take
longer to materialize and growth may be lower than projected in the near future. In addition,
there are risks to the balance of payments outlook with the increased competition in textile
exports. Studies by OECD and World Bank staff indicate that Maghreb countries are becoming
more specialized in textile market segments that require quick product delivery, making their
vertical integration and geographical proximity to Europe key comparative advantages. New
investments are being made by international textile firms confirming this view. Nevertheless,
difficulties are ahead for textiles in Morocco, but the strong external position can withstand
shocks to the textile industry.
F. Other Issues
37.
A fiscal ROSC was conducted in May 2004 and found that the authorities
complied with most fiscal transparency requirements. Main recommendations to improve
transparency, which the authorities are already implementing, were to: (a) put in place a
medium-term budget framework and performance budgeting system; (b) evaluate government
contingent liabilities; (c) extend budget coverage to local governments and nonmarket public
enterprises, including Fonds Hassan II; and (d) increase accountability through timely
reporting and audit of budget execution. The authorities plan to publish the fiscal ROSC.
38.
Morocco’s statistical database is appropriate for surveillance. A STA mission
overlapped with the Article IV consultations to review the authorities’ progress towards
meeting SDDS subscription. The STA mission concluded that Morocco could subscribe to the
SDDS by October 2005 if the agreed action plan is fully implemented, which the mission
determined was within reach.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
39.
Macroeconomic conditions remain stable in Morocco. In recent years, the external
current account has remained in surplus and gross official reserves have increased. The balance
of payments surpluses have contributed to abundant liquidity in the financial system and a
decline in interest rates, which were appropriately accommodated given the low inflation rate.
This has facilitated the financing of high fiscal deficits at low costs without constraining private
credit and undermining macroeconomic stability. With additional privatization receipts and
debt/equity swaps, the public debt-to-GDP ratio continued to decline.
40.
Growth continues to be volatile and insufficient to reduce unemployment and
poverty. Overall growth has been volatile because agriculture is dominated by cereal
production which is highly vulnerable to droughts. In recent years, private domestic demand
supported by strong remittances flows and declining interest rates has been the primary source
of growth.

- 22 -

41.
Shifting the Moroccan economy to a sustainable higher growth path remains the
key challenge. A set of mutually reinforcing policies could help meet this challenge in the
context of Morocco’s increasing integration into the world economy. First, macroeconomic
stability should be maintained and the fiscal position should be put on a sustainable path.
Second, structural reforms should be accelerated to render the business environment
internationally competitive and foster productivity and private investment. Finally, a gradual
transition to a flexible exchange rate regime would be desirable to support the economy as it
goes through structural transformation, faces greater international competition, and integrates
financially. However, it is difficult to forecast precisely the magnitude and the timing of the
impact of these policies on the growth performance. Thus, sustained high rates of growth may
not be achieved for some time.
42.
Fiscal consolidation is essential in the medium term. Although the current fiscal
stance and public debt level do not pose a risk to macroeconomic stability in the short term,
current policies would not place public finances on a sustainable path. Therefore, the staff
welcomes the authorities’ objective of reducing the deficit to 3 percent of GDP by 2009. The
achievement of this objective and its compatibility with a high growth scenario will require:
(a) a reform of the tax system that will widen the tax base and allow a reduction in tax rates;
(b) a containment of public salary increases, which affect private sector wages and the
competitivity of Moroccan producers, and a reduction in the wage bill-to-GDP ratio, which will
enhance the flexibility of the budget including to dampen income and consumption volatilities;
(c) an overhaul of the food subsidy system and its replacement by targeted support to
vulnerable groups, which should lead to a diversification of agricultural production and more
stable income and consumption levels in rural areas; and (d) the implementation of the
petroleum price adjustment mechanism, which will release resources to be channeled to more
productive investments. In order to buttress private sector confidence in the maintenance of
macroeconomic stability, it is important to avoid slippages in fiscal consolidation.
43.
The authorities have recently made commendable progress in implementing
structural reforms, most importantly related to trade liberalization, the financial sector, public
enterprises, and the labor market. However, much remains to be done to strengthen private
activity and enhance productivity. Therefore, it is encouraging that the authorities are
determined to move expeditiously with a broad-based structural reform agenda.
44.
The authorities intend to fully exploit the benefits of trade integration. To this end,
the staff encourages the authorities to simplify the tariff structure, reduce tariffs, and eliminate
variable tariff rates in parallel with the reform of the food subsidy system. The authorities’
efforts to liberalize trade at the regional level should help establish a large regional market and
attract foreign investment.
45.
Improving the business environment should increase the growth potential. To this
end, the authorities have initiated important reforms. The staff encourages effective
implementation of the new labor code and the law on domestic competition, and speedy
progress with reform of the judicial system. In an effort to improve the business environment,
provision of exemptions or special incentives in favor of specific sectors should be avoided.
46.
The financial system remains sound, but needs to be further strengthened. Non
performing loans, although stabilized, remain high. Progress was made in the restructuring of

- 23 -

specialized banks, but it is imperative that all banks be brought to comply with prudential
regulations as early as possible. Significant progress was made in the implementation of FSAP
recommendations to strengthen banking supervision. The promulgation of the new central bank
and banking laws will further enhance the supervisory power of BAM. The authorities’
intentions to implement the remaining FSAP recommendations and further reform the financial
sector with an adjustment loan from the World Bank are welcomed. It is also essential to
remove the structural constraints to enhance the availability and reduce the cost of credit to
SMEs, which represent the core of Morocco’s enterprise sector.
47.
The current fixed exchange rate regime has served Morocco well and there are no
signs of misalignment of the dirham. However, forward-looking considerations, in particular
the increasing opening of the Moroccan economy and the envisaged structural reforms to
increase efficiency and productivity, favor a gradual transition to a flexible exchange rate. The
review the authorities are undertaking of the pros and cons of alternative regimes is very
timely. The staff welcomes the openness of the authorities to the idea of a possible gradual
move to a flexible exchange rate regime.
48.
Morocco’s economic data base is sufficient for conducting effective surveillance.
Authorities have made important progress toward meeting SDDS standards. The staff
encourages the authorities to implement the agreed action plan expeditiously to enable
Morocco to subscribe to the SDDS by October 2005.
49.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be conducted on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 24 -

Corrected: 07/21/05

Table 1. Morocco: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000–05
Quota: SDR 588.20 million
Population: 29.8 million
Per capita income: US$ 1,677 (2004)
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel.

2005
Proj.

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated)
Production and income
Nominal GDP
Real GDP
Real nonagricultural GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (CPI), average

2.5
1.0
3.6
1.5
1.9

8.2
6.3
3.6
1.8
0.6

3.8
3.2
2.8
0.6
2.8

5.5
5.5
3.5
-0.1
1.2

5.8
4.2
4.7
1.5
1.5

2.8
1.0
4.0
1.8
2.0

(In billions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports of goods, f.o.b.
Exports of goods, f.o.b. ( percent change)
Imports of goods, f.o.b.
Imports of goods, f.o.b. (percent change)
Oil imports f.o.b.
Net services and income
Net transfers
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Overall balance (deficit -)

7.4
-1.2
10.7
7.0
1.4
0.3
2.5
-1.4
-0.4

7.1
-3.7
10.2
-4.6
1.3
1.1
3.6
4.8
3.8

7.8
9.8
10.9
7.2
1.2
1.2
3.3
4.1
0.6

8.8
11.8
13.1
20.1
1.0
1.8
4.1
3.6
1.6

9.7
11.2
16.2
23.9
1.6
2.7
4.9
2.2
1.8

10.2
4.6
18.7
15.2
2.2
3.0
5.1
-0.9
0.2

25.1
30.9
-4.9
2.3
-2.6

26.4
32.4
-5.5
2.6
-2.9

(In percent of GDP)
Central government
Revenue, excluding grants and privatization
Total expenditure (including Fonds Hassan II )
Overall balance 1/
Privatization and GSM receipts
Overall balance, incl. privatization 1/

26.2
32.4
-6.4
0.0
-6.4

25.0
31.1
-5.7
6.1
0.4

24.7
29.9
-4.7
0.2
-4.5

24.5
30.3
-5.3
2.9
-2.5

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated)
Money and credit
Broad money
Interest rate (Avg, money market rate, in percent)

8.4
5.4

14.2
4.4

6.3
3.0

8.6
3.2

7.5
2.4

5.8
...

Official reserves
Gross official reserves (in billions of US$, end-period)
In months of imports of goods and services

4.8
4.6

8.4
8.2

10.1
9.1

13.9
10.4

16.3
10.0

16.0
8.6

18.0
55.0
47.3
81.5

15.9
47.8
45.8
74.7

15.7
40.9
48.1
71.4

16.8
35.1
50.1
68.5

16.6
30.8
49.9
65.8

16.0
30.2
55.2
69.9

354.2
33.3
10.63
2.8
-7.7
-2.4
13.7
21.5
5.2

383.2
33.9
11.30
-4.1
7.6
7.9
12.8
20.3
4.2

397.8
36.1
11.02
-0.3
-7.3
-8.6
12.5
18.0
6.2

419.5
43.8
9.57
-1.3
5.7
8.5
11.4
19.3
3.4

443.7
50.0
8.87
-0.6
-10.8
-10.3
10.8
18.4
3.1

456.0
...
...
...
-3.1
-0.5
...
...
...

Debt (short, medium and long term)
Total external debt (in billions of US$)
Total external debt (in percent of GDP)
Domestic government debt (in percent of GDP) 2/
Total government debt (in percent of GDP) 2/
Memorandum items:
GDP at current prices (in billions of DH)
GDP at current prices (in billions of US$)
Exchange rate: dirham/US$ (average period)
Real effective exchange rate (appreciation +)
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Excluding oil
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Urban
Rural

Sources: Data provided by the Moroccan authorities; and Fund staff projections.
1/ Commitment basis including Fonds Hassan II.
2/ Gross debt including net central bank credit.

- 25 -

Table 2. Morocco: Balance of Payments, 2001–05
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Est.

Proj.

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

1,611
-3,022
7,142
1,477
1,171
-10,164
1,282
2,042
1,363
1,910
2,583
-832
3,555
3,535
3,261
20

1,477
-3,061
7,839
1,648
1,160
-10,900
1,167
2,378
1,374
1,946
2,646
-738
3,330
3,223
2,877
107

1,591
-4,334
8,762
1,825
1,241
-13,095
963
3,131
1,194
2,617
3,225
-790
4,098
4,017
3,612
81

1,109
-6,489
9,739
1,532
1,625
-16,228
1,639
3,881
1,534
3,388
3,920
-651
4,861
4,729
4,218
132

-455
-8,505
10,191
1,633
1,819
-18,696
2,157
4,189
2,461
3,724
4,267
-740
5,066
4,957
4,459
109

91

84

-10

-8

-6

Financial account
Direct investment 1/
Privatization
Portfolio investment 2/
Other
private 3/
Public medium- and long-term loans (net)
Disbursements
Amortization

2,011
2,727
2,068
-7
-709
370
-1,079
628
-1,707

-644
452
0
-8
-1,089
205
-1,294
661
-1,956

374
2,302
1,471
8
-1,936
-798
-1,139
1,409
-2,548

982
822
0
529
-370
781
-1,151
925
-2,076

680
1,316
1,442
9
-645
-220
-425
1,338
-1,763

Reserve asset accumulation (-increase)
Errors and omissions

-3,848
131

-638
-297

-1,643
-341

-1,835
-268

-220
0

5.7
11.6
-8.9
4.8
4.7
7.6
7.9
52.7
8,431

11.1
1.0
-8.5
4.1
3.8
-7.3
-8.6
46.8
10,107

-6.9
5.9
-9.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
8.5
33.3
13,858

5.7
5.7
-13.0
2.2
2.0
-10.8
-10.3
43.4
16,346

2.1
9.2
-16.0
-0.9
-1.1
-3.1
-0.5
45.5
16,021

8.2

9.1

10.4

10.0

8.6

16.3

16.4

18.0

12.8

10.6

14.1
42.2
11.30
11.51
24.3

13.9
36.3
11.02
10.38
25.0

14.4
30.1
9.57
8.75
28.9

14.0
26.0
8.87
8.22
37.8

13.6
25.7
...
...
47.4

Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Agriculture
Phosphates and derived products
Imports, f.o.b.
Petroleum
Capital goods
Food products
Services
Tourism receipts
Income
Transfers
Private transfers (net)
Workers' remittances
Official grants (net)
Capital account

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods' volume (percentage change)
Imports of goods' volume (percentage change)
Trade balance (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official grants (in percent of GDP)
Terms of trade (percentage change)
Excluding oil
Impact of US$1 increase in oil prices (US$, mlns)
Gross official reserves 4/
(In months of imports of goods
and nonfactor services)
Debt service as percentage of export of goods,
nonfactor services and MRE 5/
External public and publicly guaranteed
debt (US$, blns)
In percent of GDP
DHs per US$, period average
DHs per US$, period end
Oil price (US$/barrel)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Office des Changes; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ In 2005, a nonresident company (Vivendi) sold part of its shares in Maroc Télécom to a resident company.
2/ The increase in 2004 is due to a sale of government shares of Maroc Télécom in the Casablanca and Paris stock exchange.
3/ Includes the loans that Moroccan banks gave in 2003 and will give in 2005 to the company (Vivendi) that bought part of Maroc
Télécom in 2003 and additional shares in 2005.
4/ Excluding the reserve position in the Fund.
5/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt.

- 26 -

Table 3. Morocco: Central Government Finance, 2001–05 1/
Budget
2004

Budget
2005

Proj.
2005

111.3
100.8
36.5
43.9
13.3
7.1
10.6

110.9
101.7
37.2
44.9
11.9
7.7
9.2

120.6
110.4
39.5
47.8
16.1
7.0
10.2

128.8
100.4
55.4
3.4
17.5
24.1
18.2
2.1
8.2
0.0

135.5
105.0
56.6
7.8
17.4
23.2
20.5
1.6
8.7
-0.3

136.0
107.0
60.8
3.4
17.3
25.5
17.9
2.2
9.0
0.0

144.2
115.0
61.5
8.8
17.2
27.5
17.9
1.5
9.8
0.0

1.9

0.0

3.6

0.0

2.0

-17.8

-20.6

-25.4

-20.6

-25.1

-21.6

0.9

1.8

4.4

1.2

2.0

3.6

-22.0

-18.6

-22.4

-29.8

-21.9

-27.1

-25.2

0.3
23.4
-11.0

0.3
0.6
-0.2

0.4
12.0
-2.1

1.4
12.0
0.0

1.3
10.4
2.0

0.7
12.0
-13.8

0.7
12.0
-14.1

2001

2002

2003

95.8
87.4
28.4
39.2
14.0
5.8
8.4

98.3
91.0
30.4
40.1
14.2
6.4
7.2

102.9
94.2
33.1
41.9
12.6
6.6
8.6

103.4
95.3
33.2
42.6
12.1
7.4
8.1

119.3
90.4
48.0
5.1
18.8
18.5
20.4
0.9
7.0
0.6

117.9
90.7
48.6
4.0
17.6
20.5
19.3
1.0
7.2
-0.3

125.4
97.5
53.2
4.9
17.4
22.1
18.6
1.1
7.8
0.2

2.1

1.8

-21.4
0.6

Overall balance (commitment basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II )
Grants
Privatization and GSM revenues
Change in arrears

Est.
2004

(In billions of dirhams)
Revenue 2/
Tax revenue 2/
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Import taxes
Other tax revenues
Nontax revenue (excl. privatization)

``
Expenditures and net lending (excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Current expenditures
Wages
Food and petroleum subsidies 3/
Interest
Other current spending
Capital expenditures (budget) 4/
Road fund
Transfers to local governments 5/
Net lending
Balance of other special treasury accounts
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Fonds Hassan II expenditures

Overall balance (cash basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II , grants &
privatization)
Financing
Domestic financing
External financing 5/

-9.3

-18.0

-12.1

-16.3

-8.2

-28.2

-26.6

9.3
19.4
-10.1

18.0
29.7
-11.7

12.1
21.3
-9.2

16.3
22.8
-6.4

8.2
15.9
-7.7

28.2
31.6
-3.4

26.6
30.1
-3.4

Memorandum items:
Current balance
Primary balance
Primary balance (incl. grants and privatization)
Total central government debt (end period) 6/
Domestic 6/
External

5.4
-3.2
20.4
286.2
175.6
110.6

7.6
-1.0
-0.1
284.0
191.2
92.8

5.3
-5.1
7.3
287.3
210.3
77.0

3.1
-12.3
1.2
303.6
233.1
70.6

6.3
-4.5
7.2
292.1
221.6
70.5

3.9
-9.8
2.9
331.3
0.0
0.0

5.6
-8.0
4.7
318.7
...
...

383.2

397.8

419.5

443.7

443.7

456.0

456.0

GDP in billions of dirhams

- 27 -

Table 3. Morocco: Central Government Finance, 2001–05 (concluded) 1/

2001

2002

Est.
2003

Budget
2004

Revenue 2/
Tax revenue 2/
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Import taxes
Other tax revenues
Nontax revenue (excl. privatization)

25.0
22.8
7.4
10.2
3.7
1.5
2.2

24.7
22.9
7.6
10.1
3.6
1.6
1.8

24.5
22.5
7.9
10.0
3.0
1.6
2.1

23.3
21.5
7.5
9.6
2.7
1.7
1.8

Expenditures and net lending (excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Current expenditures
Wages
Food and petroleum subsidies 3/
Interest
Other current spending
Capital expenditures (budget) 4/
Road fund
Transfers to local governments 5/
Net lending

31.1
23.6
12.5
1.3
4.9
4.8
5.3
0.2
1.8
0.2

29.6
22.8
12.2
1.0
4.4
5.1
4.8
0.2
1.8
-0.1

29.9
23.3
12.7
1.2
4.1
5.3
4.4
0.3
1.9
0.1

29.0
22.6
12.5
0.8
3.9
5.4
4.1
0.5
1.8
0.0

Est.
2004

Budget
2005

Proj.
2005

25.1
22.7
8.2
9.9
3.0
1.6
2.4

24.3
22.3
8.2
9.9
2.6
1.7
2.0

26.4
24.2
8.7
10.5
3.5
1.5
2.2

30.5
23.7
12.8
1.8
3.9
5.2
4.6
0.4
2.0
-0.1

29.8
23.5
13.3
0.7
3.8
5.6
3.9
0.5
2.0
0.0

31.6
25.2
13.5
1.9
3.8
6.0
3.9
0.3
2.2
0.0

(In percent of GDP)

Balance of other special treasury accounts
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Fonds Hassan II expenditures

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.4

-5.6

-4.5

-4.9

-5.7

-4.6

-5.5

-4.7

0.2

0.2

0.4

1.0

0.3

0.4

0.8

Overall balance (commitment basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II )

-5.7

-4.7

-5.3

-6.7

-4.9

-5.9

-5.5

Grants
Privatization and GSM revenues
Change in arrears

0.1
6.1
-2.9

0.1
0.2
-0.1

0.1
2.9
-0.5

0.3
2.7
0.0

0.3
2.3
0.4

0.2
2.6
-3.0

0.2
2.6
-3.1

Overall balance (cash basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II , grants &
privatization)
Financing
Domestic financing
External financing

-2.4

-4.5

-2.9

-3.7

-1.8

-6.2

-5.8

2.4
5.1
-2.6

4.5
7.5
-2.9

2.9
5.1
-2.2

3.7
5.1
-1.5

1.8
3.6
-1.7

6.2
6.9
-0.8

5.8
6.6
-0.8

1.4
-0.8
5.3
74.7
45.8
28.9

1.9
-0.3
0.0
71.4
48.1
23.3

1.3
-1.2
1.7
68.5
50.1
18.4

0.7
-2.8
0.3
68.4
52.5
15.9

1.4
-1.0
1.6
65.8
49.9
15.9

0.9
-2.1
0.6
72.7
...
...

1.2
-1.8
1.0
69.9
...
...

Memorandum items
Current balance
Primary balance
Primary balance (incl. grants and privatization)
Total Central Government debt (end period) 6/
Domestic 6/
External

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including Fonds Hassan II.
2/ Includes tariffs earmarked for food subsidies (équivalents tarifaires) and revenues of the road fund (Fonds Routier).
3/ Includes food subsidies financed from earmarked tariffs (équivalents tarifaires).
4/ Budgetary capital expenditures excluding Fonds Routier and investment spending by the Fonds Hassan II .
5/ Corresponds to 30 percent of VAT revenue.
6/ Gross debt including net central bank credit.

- 28 -

Table 4. Morocco: Selected Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–05

Key economic and market indicators
Real GDP growth (in percent)
CPI inflation (period average, in percent)
Short-term (ST) interest rate (in percent)
EMBI secondary market spread (bps, end of period)
Exchange rate NC/US$ (end of period)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005 1/

Latest
observation

1.0
1.9
5.4
584
10.8

6.3
0.6
4.6
518
11.5

3.2
2.8
3.0
390
10.4

5.5
1.2

4.2
1.5

1.0
2.0
...
159
...

Proj
Proj
31-Dec-04
30-May-05
31-Dec-04

3.2

2.4

160
8.7

170
8.2

External sector
Exchange rate regime
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Net FDI inflows (percent of GDP)
Exports (percentage change of US$ value, GNFS)
Real effective exchange rate (1995= 100)
Gross international reserves (GIR) in US$ billion
GIR in percent of ST debt at remaining maturity (RM)
GIR in percent of ST debt at RM and banks' FX deposits
Net international reserves (NIR) in US$ billion
Total gross external debt (ED) in percent of GDP
o/w ST external debt (original maturity, in percent of total ED)
o/w ED of domestic private sector (in percent of total ED)
ED to foreign official sector (in percent of total ED)
Total gross external debt in percent of exports of GNFS
Gross external financing requirement (in US$ billion) 2/

-1.4
1.1
-1.6
108.2
4.8
177.3
174.7
4.6
55.0
5.3
10.7
71.1
171.9
2.9

4.8
8.0
6.9
103.7
8.4
291.6
286.1
8.3
47.8
5.8
11.6
71.1
142.5
0.1

4.1
1.3
9.2
103.4
10.1
360.0
353.5
9.9
41.0
5.6
11.3
72.8
128.8
0.5

3.6
5.3
16.7
102.0
13.9
626.8
599.6
13.6
35.1
0.8
14.2
70.0
118.1
1.0

2.2
1.6
16.4
101.4
16.3
533.8
521.4
16.1
30.8
7.8
15.6
70.0
100.3
1.0

-0.9
2.5
5.8
101.3
16.0
512.5
500.4
15.8
30.2
7.4
14.9
70.0
91.1
2.2

Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj

Public Sector (PS) 3/
Overall balance (percent of GDP)
Primary balance (percent of GDP)
Debt-stabilizing primary balance (percent of GDP) 4/
Gross PS financing requirement (in percent of GDP) 5/
Public sector gross debt (PSGD, in percent of GDP)
o/w Exposed to rollover risk (in percent of total PSGD) 6/
o/w Exposed to exchange rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 7/
o/w Exposed to interest rate risk (in percent of total PSGD) 8/
Public sector net debt (in percent of GDP) 11/

-6.4
-1.1
3.2
17.4
76.4
9.4
44.8
13.6
81.5

-5.7
-0.8
-1.3
22.6
74.8
18.0
38.6
22.6
74.7

-4.7
-0.3
1.8
18.4
71.5
13.7
32.6
19.2
71.4

-5.3
-1.2
0.4
24.0
68.8
21.3
26.7
27.3
68.5

-4.9
-1.0
0.1
20.2
66.4
19.1
23.6
22.9
65.8

-5.5
-1.8
1.9
21.9
69.9
19.9
20.4
23.1
69.9

Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj
Proj

Financial Sector (FS) 9/
Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)
NPLs in percent of total loans
Provisions in percent of NPLs
Return on average assets (in percent)
Return on equity (in percent)
FX deposits held by residents (in percent of total deposits)
FX loans to residents (in percent of total loans)
Net open forex position (in percent of capital) 10/
Government debt held by FS ( percent of total FS assets)
Credit to private sector (percent change)

12.8
17.5
47.8
0.7
8.1
0.2
1.0
5.8
21.4
7.9

12.6
16.8
52.9
0.9
10.2
0.3
1.1
4.4
23.0
4.0

12.2
17.2
54.7
0.3
1.9
0.2
1.4
3.3
23.2
3.8

9.3
18.1
54.9
-0.2
-2.1
0.3
1.5
4.0
21.4
8.3

10.2
19.4
59.3
0.8
10.9 ...
0.2
2.2
9.2
18.7
7.2

...
...
...
...

Dec-04
Dec-04
Dec-04
Dec-04
Dec-04
Dec-04
Dec-04

33.3

33.9

36.1

43.8

50.0

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP in billions of U.S. dollars

(Peg to a basket of currencies dominated by the Euro)

Sources: Moroccan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Staff estimates, projections, or latest available observations as indicated in the last column.
2/ Current account deficit plus amortization of external debt.
3/ Public sector covers: central government.
4/ Based on averages for the last five years for the relevant variables (i.e., growth, interest rates).
5/ Overall balance plus debt amortization.
6/ ST debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt, domestic and external, excluding external debt to official creditors.
7/ Debt in foreign currency or linked to the exchange rate, domestic and external, excluding external debt on concessional terms.
8/ ST debt and maturing medium- and long-term debt at variable interest rates, domestic and external.
9/ Financial sector includes banks.
10/ Sum of on- and off-balance sheet exposure.
11/ Gross debt including net central bank credit to government.

...
...
9.1

Dec-04
Proj.

...

Dec-04

1.0
6.7
5.1
-7.3
1.5
13.4
1.1

22.6
7.5

6.3
6.5
4.7
-5.8
1.8
0.6
0.8

21.6
7.3

297.8

-6.8
-4.6
0.8
25.1
25.8
0.8
-1.3
3.5
-4.7
2.0
-6.1
-6.1
0.0
0.0
-2.2

74.7
28.9

2001

3.2
6.2
5.6
10.9
0.6
-0.4
0.2

21.0
7.6

288.3

-3.3
-1.1
0.2
24.8
25.0
-1.1
1.7
4.0
-2.3
-2.8
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-2.2

71.4
23.3

Actual
2002

5.5
6.1
6.2
18.6
-0.1
8.8
1.1

22.5
9.9

278.1

-2.9
-4.9
1.1
24.6
25.7
-3.1
0.4
4.2
-3.7
-3.6
-2.9
-2.9
0.0
0.0
2.0

68.5
18.8

2003

4.2
6.1
4.6
6.5
1.5
5.7
0.7

20.5
10.2

259.4

-2.7
-2.6
0.7
25.4
26.1
-0.9
0.2
2.9
-2.7
-1.1
-2.4
-2.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

65.8
16.1

2004

5.4
0.3
2.2
9.4
2.3
6.7
1.6

Standard
Deviation

Historical
Average

3.1
6.5
4.7
1.3
1.7
4.7
-0.5

10-Year

10-Year

69.9
69.9
69.9
69.9
69.9
69.9

69.9
69.9

1.0
5.9
4.1
...
1.8
9.2
1.6

21.2
11.2

262.7

4.1
0.3
1.6
26.6
28.2
1.3
2.0
2.6
-0.6
-0.7
-2.6
-2.6
0.0
0.0
3.8

69.9
14.9

2005

Projections
2007
2008

4.5
6.4
4.4
...
2.0
4.0
-0.5

19.7
12.0

255.4

-1.0
-1.0
-0.5
26.2
25.6
-0.1
-0.1
2.7
-2.8
0.0
-0.4
-0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

66.8
11.2

5.0
6.4
4.4
...
2.0
2.6
-1.2

19.0
12.3

247.2

-2.0
-2.0
-1.2
26.2
25.0
-0.4
-0.4
2.7
-3.1
0.0
-0.4
-0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0

64.8
9.6

5.1
6.5
4.5
...
2.0
4.1
-1.5

18.4
12.8

237.8

-2.3
-2.3
-1.5
26.3
24.8
-0.5
-0.5
2.6
-3.1
0.0
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

62.5
8.2

2009

70.9
81.5
70.9
76.8
74.5
77.8

69.8
70.0

73.0
98.5
73.2
84.5
73.5
76.8

69.9
71.2

71.0
103.6
71.2
82.4
71.5
74.8

70.0
72.0

68.6
108.2
68.8
79.9
69.1
72.4

70.2
72.7

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

5.9
6.3
4.3
...
2.0
-3.4
-0.4

19.8
11.3

259.9

-2.0
-2.0
-0.4
26.1
25.7
-1.1
-1.1
2.7
-3.8
0.0
-0.6
-0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0

67.8
12.8

I. Baseline Projections

2006

1/ Public sector debt refers to central government gross debt including net debt to the central bank (excludes arrears on which reliable data is not available ).
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
9/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
10/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 9/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005–09 7/
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005–09

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

Gross financing need 5/
in billions of U.S. dollars

310.7

0.2
7.3
1.1
26.2
27.3
6.2
3.3
4.1
-0.8
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-7.1

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) and arrears flows

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

81.5
34.2

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2000

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)

Table 5. Morocco: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10

66.0
112.4
66.2
77.1
66.5
69.7

70.4
73.5

5.3
6.5
4.5
...
2.0
4.3
-1.8

17.6
13.3

227.3

-2.6
-2.6
-1.8
26.4
24.6
-0.5
-0.5
2.6
-3.1
0.0
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

59.9
6.9

2010

4.4
6.3
4.4
...
2.0
3.4
-0.6

-0.8
-1.3
-0.8
-1.0
-0.8
-0.9

0.7
-0.9

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/
-0.8

- 29 -

- 30 -

Table 6. Morocco: Central Government Finance, 2004–10 1/
Budget
2004

Est.
2004

Budget
2005

Projections
2007 2008

2009

2010

Revenue 2/
Tax revenue 2/
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Import taxes
Other tax revenues
Nontax revenue (excl. privatization)

103.4
95.3
33.2
42.6
12.1
7.4
8.1

111.3
100.8
36.5
43.9
13.3
7.1
10.6

110.9
101.7
37.2
44.9
11.9
7.7
9.2

120.6
110.4
39.5
47.8
16.1
7.0
10.2

127.6
117.7
42.7
51.2
16.3
7.6
9.8

136.3
125.8
45.5
55.1
17.1
8.1
10.5

146.4
135.2
48.7
59.7
18.1
8.7
11.2

157.5
145.5
52.2
64.7
19.3
9.3
12.0

169.6
156.7
56.1
70.1
20.5
10.0
12.9

Expenditures and net lending (excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Current expenditures
Wages
Food and petroleum subsidies 3/
Interest
Other current spending
Capital expenditures (budget) 4/
Road fund
Transfers to local governments 5/
Net lending

128.8
100.4
55.4
3.4
17.5
24.1
18.2
2.1
8.2
0.0

135.5
105.0
56.6
7.8
17.4
23.2
20.5
1.6
8.7
-0.3

136.0
107.0
60.8
3.4
17.3
25.5
17.9
2.2
9.0
0.0

144.2
115.0
61.5
8.8
17.2
27.5
17.9
1.5
9.8
0.0

146.3
112.4
61.8
2.0
20.1
28.6
21.7
1.7
10.5
0.0

155.2
116.3
62.6
1.0
21.2
31.5
25.8
1.8
11.3
0.0

162.8
119.4
63.1
0.0
22.5
33.7
29.3
1.9
12.3
0.0

172.7
124.2
64.4
0.0
23.6
36.1
33.2
2.1
13.3
0.0

183.4
129.2
65.7
0.0
24.6
38.8
37.6
2.2
14.4
0.0

0.0

3.6

0.0

2.0

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

-25.4
4.4

-20.6

-25.1

-21.6

-17.2

-17.4

-14.7

-13.4

-11.8

1.2

2.0

3.6

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

-29.8

-21.9

-27.1

-25.2

-19.2

-19.4

-16.7

-15.4

-13.8

1.4
12.0
0.0

1.3
10.4
2.0

0.7
12.0
-13.8

0.7
12.0
-14.1

1.0
3.0
0.0

1.0
2.0
0.0

1.0
2.0
0.0

1.0
2.0
0.0

1.0
2.0
0.0

-16.3

-8.2

-28.2

-26.6

-15.2

-16.4

-13.7

-12.4

-10.8

16.3
22.8
-6.4

8.2
15.9
-7.7

28.2
31.6
-3.4

26.6
30.1
-3.4

15.2
19.9
-4.6

16.4
21.0
-4.6

13.7
18.3
-4.6

12.4
17.0
-4.6

10.8
15.4
-4.6

3.1
-12.3
1.2
303.6
233.1
70.6

6.3
-4.5
7.2
292.1
221.6
70.5

3.9
-9.8
2.9
331.3
...
...

5.6
-8.0
4.7
318.7
...
...

15.2
0.8
4.8
333.9
...
...

19.9
1.9
4.9
350.3
...
...

27.1
5.8
8.8
364.0
...
...

33.3
8.2
11.2
376.4
...
...

40.5
10.8
13.8
387.2
...
...

443.7

443.7

456.0

456.0

492.3

524.6

561.8

602.5

646.8

2005

2006

(In billions of dirhams)

Balance of other special treasury accounts
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Fonds Hassan II expenditures
Overall balance (commitment basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II )
Grants
Privatization and GSM revenues
Change in arrears
Overall balance (cash basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II , grants &
privatization)
Financing
Domestic financing
External financing 5/
Memorandum items:
Current balance
Primary balance
Primary balance (incl. grants and privatization)
Total Central Government debt (end period) 6/
Domestic 6/
External
GDP in billions of dirhams

- 31 -

Table 6. Morocco: Central Government Finance, 2004–10 (concluded) 1/
Budget
2004

Est.
2004

Budget
2005

Revenue 2/
Tax revenue 2/
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Import taxes
Other tax revenues
Nontax revenue (excl. privatization)

23.3
21.5
7.5
9.6
2.7
1.7
1.8

25.1
22.7
8.2
9.9
3.0
1.6
2.4

24.3
22.3
8.2
9.9
2.6
1.7
2.0

26.4
24.2
8.7
10.5
3.5
1.5
2.2

Expenditures and net lending (excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Current expenditures
Wages
Food and petroleum subsidies 3/
Interest
Other current spending
Capital expenditures (budget) 4/
Road fund
Transfers to local governments 5/
Net lending

29.0
22.6
12.5
0.8
3.9
5.4
4.1
0.5
1.8
0.0

30.5
23.7
12.8
1.8
3.9
5.2
4.6
0.4
2.0
-0.1

29.8
23.5
13.3
0.7
3.8
5.6
3.9
0.5
2.0
0.0

31.6
25.2
13.5
1.9
3.8
6.0
3.9
0.3
2.2
0.0

2005

Projections
2007 2008

2009

2010

25.9
23.9
8.7
10.4
3.3
1.5
2.0

26.0
24.0
8.7
10.5
3.3
1.5
2.0

26.1
24.1
8.7
10.6
3.2
1.5
2.0

26.1
24.1
8.7
10.7
3.2
1.5
2.0

26.2
24.2
8.7
10.8
3.2
1.5
2.0

29.7
22.8
12.5
0.4
4.1
5.8
4.4
0.3
2.1
0.0

29.6
22.2
11.9
0.2
4.1
6.0
4.9
0.3
2.2
0.0

29.0
21.2
11.2
0.0
4.0
6.0
5.2
0.3
2.2
0.0

28.7
20.6
10.7
0.0
3.9
6.0
5.5
0.3
2.2
0.0

28.3
20.0
10.2
0.0
3.8
6.0
5.8
0.3
2.2
0.0

2006

(In percent of GDP)

Balance of other special treasury accounts
Overall balance (commitment basis, excl. Fonds Hassan II )
Fonds Hassan II expenditures
Overall balance (commitment basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II )
Grants
Privatization and GSM revenues
Change in arrears
Overall balance (cash basis, incl. Fonds Hassan II , grants &
privatization)
Financing
Domestic financing
External financing
Memorandum items:
Current balance
Primary balance
Primary balance (incl. grants and privatization)
Total Central Government debt (end period) 6/
Domestic 6/
External

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

-5.7

-4.6

-5.5

-4.7

-3.5

-3.3

-2.6

-2.2

-1.8

1.0

0.3

0.4

0.8

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

-6.7

-4.9

-5.9

-5.5

-3.9

-3.7

-3.0

-2.6

-2.1

0.3
2.7
0.0

0.3
2.3
0.4

0.2
2.6
-3.0

0.2
2.6
-3.1

0.2
0.6
0.0

0.2
0.4
0.0

0.2
0.4
0.0

0.2
0.3
0.0

0.2
0.3
0.0

-3.7

-1.8

-6.2

-5.8

-3.1

-3.1

-2.4

-2.1

-1.7

3.7
5.1
-1.5

1.8
3.6
-1.7

6.2
6.9
-0.8

5.8
6.6
-0.8

3.1
4.0
-0.9

3.1
4.0
-0.9

2.4
3.3
-0.8

2.1
2.8
-0.8

1.7
2.4
-0.7

0.7
-2.8
0.3
68.4
52.5
15.9

1.4
-1.0
1.6
65.8
49.9
15.9

0.9
-2.1
0.6
72.7
...
...

1.2
-1.8
1.0
69.9
...
...

3.1
0.2
1.0
67.8
...
...

3.8
0.4
0.9
66.8
...
...

4.8
1.0
1.6
64.8
...
...

5.5
1.4
1.9
62.5
...
...

6.3
1.7
2.1
59.9
...
...

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including Fonds Hassan II.
2/ Includes tariffs earmarked for food subsidies (équivalents tarifaires) and revenues of the road fund (Fonds Routier).
3/ Includes food subsidies financed from earmarked tariffs (équivalents tarifaires).
4/ Budgetary capital expenditures excluding Fonds Routier and investment spending by the Fonds Hassan II .
5/ Corresponds to 30 percent of VAT revenue.
6/ Gross debt including net central bank credit.

- 32 -

Table 7. Morocco: Revenue Structure and International Comparisons
1990

1995

2000

2004

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Customs duties
Other taxes
Nontax revenue

24.0
21.8
5.5
9.4
4.7
2.1
2.1

23.9
22.0
5.7
10.7
4.2
1.4
1.9

26.2
24.1
7.6
10.3
4.7
1.5
2.1

25.1
22.7
8.2
9.9
3.0
1.6
2.4

(In percent of total revenue)
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Import taxes
Other taxes
Nontax revenue

100.0
91.1
23.2
39.3
19.7
8.9
8.9

100.0
92.1
24.0
44.7
17.6
5.8
7.9

100.0
92.0
28.9
39.5
17.9
5.7
8.0

100.0
90.5
32.8
39.4
11.9
6.4
9.5

(Tax revenue comparisons in percent of GDP) 1/
Average 1997–2001

OECD

Tax Revenue:
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Customs duties
Other

29.4
9.8
10.0
0.6

28.4
5.5
11.8
1.2

9.0

Egypt
Tax Revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes

1990
16.7
4.4
3.1

2000
16.0
6.0
6.0

Central Europe Russia and CIS

Africa

Latin America

Asia

Middle East

16.8
2.1
8.2
1.3

17.4
4.8
4.8
6.8

17.2
3.8
7.2
3.1

13.7
4.4
5.3
3.1

13.8
4.9
3.9
3.1

9.9

5.2

1.0

3.1

0.9

1.9

Iran

Jordan

Lebanon

Tunisia

Morocco

1990
6.2
2.4
0.7

2000
11.6
3.8
3.8

1990
14.4
4.3
2.7

2000
15.9
4.5
8.1

1990
9.2
1.3
0.8

2000
16.6
2.9
9.3

1990
19.5
3.3
6.6

2000
26.0
5.6
11.1

1990 2000
21.8 24.1
5.5
7.6
9.4 10.3

Sources: Moroccan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Crandall, W., and J-P Bodin, draft IMF Working Paper, "Revenue Administration in the Middle East."

- 33 -

Table 8. Morocco: Financial Soundness Indicators, 1998–2004

Number of banks

( In percent; unless otherwise indicated )
1998
1999
2000
Dec.
Dec.
Dec.
21
21
21

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets*
Commercial banks 1/
Regulatory Tier I capital to risk-weighted assets*
Capital (net worth) to assets

2001
Dec.
19

2002
Dec.
18

2003
Dec.
18

2004
Dec
17

12.6
13.1
12.6
10.3

12.1
13.0
12.1
10.0

12.8
14.7
12.8
9.8

12.6
15.3
12.6
8.7

12.2
15.3
12.2
8.5

9.3
13.0
9.3
7.6

10.2
13.5
13.4
7.6

Asset composition and quality
Sectoral distribution of loans to total loans*
Agriculture
Housing and Public Works
Industry
Public administration
Commerce
Tourism
Other
Geographical distribution of loans to total loans
Casablanca
Marrakech
Rabat
NPLs to gross loans*
Commercial banks 1/
NPLs net of provisions to capital*
Commercial banks
Provisioning ratio
Commercial banks
Large exposures to capital*

13.4
19.3
17.6
4.9
9.6
3.5
31.7

12.7
19.5
15.5
4.3
9.9
3.2
34.9

11.7
19.2
15.6
3.8
9.9
2.8
37.0

10.7
18.9
15.8
3.5
9.4
3.6
38.1

9.9
20.1
17.7
4.1
8.4
4.5
35.4

10.5
22.4
19.6
3.5
8.3
4.8
30.9

9.2
25.2
18.8
3.9
7.7
3.7
31.5

62.9
3.5
9.9
14.6
8.9
44.9
11.9
61.6
67.6
159.0

64.8
3.2
8.9
15.3
9.1
49.3
12.8
51.9
68.7
196.0

56.7
3.9
16.0
17.5
9.1
70.5
15.0
47.8
68.5
212.0

56.7
3.6
15.9
16.8
10.7
55.5
19.9
52.9
69.8
194.0

56.3
3.9
15.8
17.2
11.2
57.1
18.7
54.7
71.5
149.4

54.1
4.3
15.9
18.1
12.3
66.5
23.3
54.9
71.5
175.3

57.9
4.0
14.9
19.4
12.4
61.9
20.5
59.3
72.2
...

Earnings and profitability
ROA*
Commercial banks
ROE*
Commercial banks
Interest margin to gross income*
Noninterest expenses to gross income*
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Trading and fee income to total income
Spread between reference loan and deposit rates

0.9
1.1
9.5
12.4
15.0
46.8
29.0
13.6
5.5

0.7
1.1
8.2
12.5
73.4
47.4
27.5
14.5
5.3

0.7
1.1
8.1
13.0
80.0
49.1
26.0
18.1
5.1

0.9
1.1
10.2
12.7
77.8
46.2
26.8
20.6
4.8

0.3
0.6
1.9
6.4
82.0
53.4
22.5
17.7
4.5

-0.2
0.5
-2.1
6.4
82.4
53.4
19.8
18.2
4.2

0.8
0.9
10.9
10.7
80.7
51.2
20.0
20.7
...

Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets*
Liquid assets to total short-term liabilities*
Customer deposits to total (non-interbank) loans
FX liabilities to total liabilities
Average bid-ask spread in the securities market
Average daily turnover in the securities market

62.7
24.1
113.5
7.1
3.8
6.8

58.5
22.9
112.0
7.4
6.0
5.6

...
20.4
113.4
5.6
4.6
5.4

...
22.7
120.3
4.9
6.6
4.8

123.1
26.9
125.9
4.3
...
...

122.3
30.5
127.8
3.8
...
...

120.8
28.9
131.7
3.1
...
...

...

2.1

5.8

4.4

3.3

4.0

9.2

Sensitivity to market risk
Net position in FX to capital*
Source: Moroccan authorities.
* Included in the "core set" of Financial Soundness Indicators.
1/ Excludes specialized government banks.

- 34 -

Table 9. Morocco: Monetary Survey, 2001–05
Proj.
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

(In millions of dirhams)
Net foreign assets
Monetary authorities
Of which:
Gross reserves
Net Fund position
Deposit money banks

102,605
99,920

111,269
104,979

128,266
123,156

146,163
137,123

149,791
140,751

96,640
1,023
2,685

101,760
974
6,290

120,012
916
5,110

134,001
899
9,040

137,629
899
9,040

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Banking system
Bank Al-Maghrib
o/w deposits 1/
Deposit money banks
Treasury-IMF
Credit to the economy
Other liabilities, net

224,806
294,257
85,610
78,348
5,187
-10,806
73,161
-1,023
208,647
69,451

236,931
305,944
89,470
82,086
5,163
-11,322
76,923
-974
216,474
69,013

249,878
323,629
89,098
81,415
4,292
-13,801
77,123
-916
234,531
73,751

260,448
334,166
82,725
75,015
2,982
-15,484
72,033
-899
251,441
73,718

280,261
352,240
77,799
70,015
-2,018
-20,484
72,033
-899
274,441
71,979

Money and quasi money
Money
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits
Quasi money

327,411
243,117
66,025
177,092
84,294

348,200
264,863
69,556
195,307
83,337

378,144
290,784
74,890
215,894
87,360

406,611
318,870
79,439
239,431
87,741

430,052
337,253
84,019
253,234
92,799

(Annual percentage change)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Credit to the economy
Money and quasi money

85.7
-2.8
0.4
-7.4
4.0
14.2

8.4
5.4
4.0
4.5
3.8
6.3

15.3
5.5
5.8
-0.4
8.3
8.6

14.0
4.2
3.3
-7.2
7.2
7.5

2.5
7.6
5.4
-6.0
9.1
5.8

Net foreign assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Credit to the economy
Other assets net

16.5
0.4
-2.4
2.8
-2.7

2.6
3.6
1.2
2.4
0.1

4.9
5.1
-0.1
5.2
-1.4

4.7
2.8
-1.7
4.5
0.0

0.9
4.4
-1.2
5.7
0.4

1.17
0.99
54.5
64.5
16.8
10.7
55.5
19.9
12.6
15.3
...
26.1
48.8
8.9
5.0
4.4
11.51

1.14
0.96
54.4
64.9
17.2
11.2
57.1
18.7
12.2
15.3
123.1
31.7
46.8
8.5
4.5
3.0
10.38

1.11
0.92
55.9
67.1
18.1
12.3
66.5
23.3
9.3
13.0
122.3
35.3
42.4
8.1
3.8
3.2
8.75

1.09
0.92
56.7
67.4
19.4
12.4
61.9
20.5
10.2
13.5
120.8
38.1
36.6
7.8
3.6
2.4
8.22

1.06
0.91
60.2
70.1
...

(In percent of broad money)

Memorandum items:
Velocity (GDP/M3)
Velocity (nonagr. GDP/M3)
Credit to economy/GDP (in percent)
Credit to economy/nonagr. GDP (in percent)
NPLs/Gross loans (in percent) 2/
o/w commercial banks
NPLs net of provisions/capital (in percent)
o/w commercial banks
Capital adequacy ratio (in percent)
o/w commercial banks
Liquid assets to total assets (in percent)
Domestic nonbank debt/GDP (in percent)
Credit to gov/dom debt (in percent)
Lending interest rate (in percent)
Deposit interest rate (in percent)
Money market rates (in percent)
DHs per US$, period end

Sources: Bank Al-Maghrib; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes Fonds Hassan II.
2/ This ratio was 19.6 at end-June 2004.

...
...
...
...
...
41.9
30.4
...
...
...
...

- 35 -

Table 10. Morocco: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2001–10
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

5.9
4.3
2.0
6.7
4.9
4.5

4.5
4.7
2.0
6.7
4.5
3.1

5.0
5.3
2.0
7.2
4.2
3.3

5.1
5.5
2.0
7.4
4.2
3.4

5.3
5.6
2.0
7.6
4.1
3.4

(Percentage change)
Real GDP growth
Real nonagricultural GDP growth
Inflation (CPI)
Export growth in US$
ICOR 1/
Employment growth

1.0
3.6
1.9
-1.6
6.5
0.3

6.3
3.6
0.6
6.9
4.4
0.9

3.2
2.8
2.8
9.2
8.6
2.5

5.5
3.5
1.2
16.7
6.1
4.6

4.2
4.7
1.5
16.4
4.4
3.6

1.0
4.0
2.0
5.8
5.9
1.0

(In percent of GDP)
Gross investment
Government
Private 2/
of which: Stockbuilding

23.7
3.0
20.7

22.9
2.9
20.0
0.6

22.7
2.8
19.9
-0.2

24.1
2.6
21.4
0.1

25.0
2.7
22.4
0.5

24.6
2.6
22.0
-0.2

25.4
2.6
22.8
0.1

25.8
2.9
22.9
0.1

26.2
3.0
23.2
0.1

26.5
3.2
23.4
0.1

26.8
3.3
23.5
0.1

National saving
Government
Private 2/

22.3
0.7
21.6

27.6
0.9
26.7

26.8
1.9
24.9

27.7
1.3
26.5

27.3
1.4
25.8

23.7
1.2
22.5

25.3
3.1
22.2

25.2
3.8
21.5

25.1
4.8
20.3

24.7
5.5
19.2

24.3
6.2
18.0

External saving
(=current account balance)

-1.4

4.8

4.1

3.6

2.2

-0.9

-0.2

-0.6

-1.2

-1.8

-2.6

Total External debt 3/

55.0

47.8

41.0

35.1

30.8

30.2

27.7

25.8

23.9

22.2

20.7

GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)

33.3

33.9

36.1

43.8

50.0

53.0

57.0

60.8

65.1

69.9

75.1

Fiscal balance 4/
Primary balance
Borrowing requirement
Government debt ratio 5/
Privatization receipts
Arrears

-6.4
-1.1
2.5
81.5
0.0
3.9

-5.7
-0.8
2.4
74.7
6.1
-2.9

-4.7
-0.3
4.5
71.4
0.2
-0.1

-5.3
-1.2
2.9
68.5
2.9
-0.5

-4.9
-1.0
1.8
65.8
2.3
0.4

-5.5
-1.8
5.8
69.9
2.6
-3.1

-3.9
0.2
3.1
67.8
0.6
0.0

-3.7
0.3
3.1
66.8
0.4
0.0

-3.0
1.0
2.5
64.8
0.4
0.0

-2.6
1.3
2.1
62.5
0.3
0.0

-2.1
1.7
1.7
59.9
0.3
0.0

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Bank Al-Maghrib; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Ratio of nonagricultural fixed capital formation to change in nonagricultural GDP.
2/ Includes public enterprises.
3/ Including private debt.
4/ Overall balance, excluding privatization and GSM revenues but including expenditures by the Hassan II Fund.
5/ Gross domestic and external central government debt, net of central bank credit, end of calendar year.

- 36 -

Table 11. Morocco: Balance of Payments, 2004–10
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Projections

Est.
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1,109
-6,489
9,739
1,532
1,625
-16,228
1,639
3,881
1,534
3,388
3,920
-651
4861
4,729
4,218
132

-455
-8,505
10,191
1,633
1,819
-18,696
2,157
4,189
2,461
3,724
4,267
-740
5066
4,957
4,459
109

-92
-8,521
10,870
1,753
1,912
-19,391
2,301
4,445
2,024
4,097
4,567
-841
5172
5,064
4,551
109

-352
-9,306
11,536
1,851
1,992
-20,842
2,399
4,888
2,097
4,425
4,946
-806
5335
5,226
4,695
109

-761
-10,234
12,319
1,954
2,118
-22,553
2,520
5,381
2,205
4,772
5,354
-783
5484
5,375
4,828
109

-1,293
-11,300
13,180
2,064
2,267
-24,480
2,666
5,934
2,322
5,143
5,796
-764
5629
5,520
4,958
109

-1,932
-12,490
14,131
2,204
2,428
-26,621
2,857
6,531
2,446
5,550
6,283
-767
5776
5,667
5,090
109

-8

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

-6

Financial account
Direct investment 1/
Privatization
Portfolio investment 2/
Other
Private 3/
Public medium-and long-term loans (net)
Disbursements
Amortization

982
822
0
529
-370
781
-1,151
925
-2,076

680
1,316
1,442
9
-645
-220
-425
1,338
-1,763

1,942
1,219
347
8
714
873
-159
1,621
-1,780

2,036
1,221
232
8
807
931
-125
1,634
-1,758

2,268
1,357
232
8
903
998
-95
1,646
-1,741

2,518
1,509
232
8
1,000
1,070
-70
1,659
-1,729

2,790
1,679
232
9
1,102
1,151
-48
1,672
-1,720

Reserve asset accumulation (-increase)
Errors and omissions

-1835
-268

-220
0

-1844
0

-1679
0

-1501
0

-1219
0

-853
0

5.7
5.7
-13.0
2.2
2.0
-10.8
-10.3
43.4
16,346

2.1
9.2
-16.0
-0.9
-1.1
-3.1
-0.5
45.5
16,021

5.8
3.6
-14.9
-0.2
-0.4
0.8
0.8

5.5
7.2
-15.3
-0.6
-0.8
0.4
-0.1

5.7
7.6
-15.7
-1.2
-1.3
0.4
-0.1

5.8
7.8
-16.2
-1.9
-2.0
0.4
0.0

5.9
7.8
-16.6
-2.6
-2.7
0.3
0.0

17,878

19,568

21,082

22,317

23,188

10.0

8.6

9.3

9.5

9.4

9.2

8.8

12.8

10.6

10.9

10.4

9.7

9.1

8.5

14.0
26.0
8.87
8.22
37.8

13.6
25.7
...
...
47.4

13.4
23.5
...
...
47.5

13.3
21.9
...
...
46.3

13.2
20.3
...
...
45.0

13.1
18.8
...
...
44.0

13.1
17.5
...
...
43.5

Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Agriculture
Phosphates and derived products
Imports, f.o.b.
Petroleum
Capital goods
Food products
Services
Tourism receipts
Income
Transfers
Private transfers (net)
Workers' remittances
Official grants (net)
Capital account

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods' volume (percentage change)
Imports of goods' volume (percentage change)
Trade balance (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official grants (in percent of GDP)
Terms of trade (percentage change)
Excluding oil
Impact of US$1 increase in oil prices (US$, mlns)
Gross official reserves 4/
(In months of imports of goods
and nonfactor services)
Debt service as percentage of export of goods,
nonfactor services and MRE 5/
External public and publicly guaranteed
debt (US$, blns)
In percent of GDP
DHs per US$, period average
DHs per US$, period end
Oil price (US$/barrel)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Office des Changes; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ In 2005, a nonresident company (Vivendi) sold part of its shares in Maroc Télécom to a resident company.
2/ The increase in 2004 is due to a sale of government shares of Maroc Télécom in the Casablanca and Paris stock exchange.
3/ Includes the loans that Moroccan banks gave in 2003 and will give in 2005 to the company (Vivendi) that bought part of Maroc Télécom in
2003 and additional shares in 2005.
4/ Excluding the reserve position in the Fund.
5/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt.

171.9

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

1.0
-7.7
-6.3
4.9
-1.6
4.9
1.5
1.1

6.3
-6.0
-4.3
4.9
6.9
-2.1
7.3
8.0

1.1
3.2

142.5

-7.0
-13.7
-7.3
3.3
32.9
36.2
-8.0
1.7
2.6
-3.3
2.4
6.7

46.9

2001

3.2
2.6
3.2
4.7
9.2
8.4
6.2
1.3

1.4
3.9

128.8

-3.4
-8.2
-6.2
3.1
33.8
36.9
-1.3
-0.8
2.1
-1.4
-1.4
4.8

43.5

Actual
2002

5.5
15.1
15.0
4.6
16.7
19.8
5.3
5.3

1.8
4.2

118.1

-5.1
-16.6
-5.3
3.9
32.5
36.4
-5.3
-6.0
1.7
-2.0
-5.7
11.4

38.4

2003

4.2
8.0
9.5
3.8
16.4
23.3
3.5
1.6

1.1
2.2

100.3

-5.2
-8.6
-3.5
6.2
33.1
39.3
-1.6
-3.5
1.3
-1.4
-3.3
3.5

33.2

2004

3.1
0.6
2.4
5.1
8.2
8.1
3.7
2.6

10-Year
Historical
Average
5.4
7.7
8.5
0.8
7.0
9.8
2.1
2.4

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

2007

5.9
-0.5
1.5
3.8
6.7
3.7
0.9
2.1

3.2
5.6

84.4

-2.4
-4.1
-0.9
7.8
32.8
40.6
-2.1
-1.0
1.1
-1.6
-0.5
1.7

27.7

4.5
0.1
2.1
4.0
6.7
7.4
0.5
2.0

3.5
5.7

78.6

-1.9
-3.2
-0.5
8.0
32.8
40.9
-2.0
-0.7
1.1
-1.2
-0.6
1.3

25.8

5.0
0.1
2.1
4.2
7.2
8.1
-0.2
2.1

3.9
5.9

72.9

-1.8
-2.6
0.2
8.4
32.9
41.2
-2.1
-0.7
1.0
-1.2
-0.5
0.8

24.0

5.1
0.1
2.1
4.2
7.4
8.4
-0.9
2.2

4.4
6.3

67.7

-1.7
-1.9
0.9
8.8
32.9
41.7
-2.2
-0.7
0.9
-1.1
-0.5
0.2

22.3

Projections
2008
2009

I. Baseline Projections

2006

30.1
30.1
30.1
30.1
30.1
30.1

30.1
30.1
30.1

28.5
31.9
33.1
29.1
32.6
39.8

25.5
27.7
27.7

27.3
33.7
37.0
28.1
35.0
37.3

20.4
25.8
25.8

25.4
31.3
34.3
26.2
32.5
34.6

14.9
24.0
24.0

23.7
28.8
31.5
24.4
30.2
31.7

8.9
22.3
22.3

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio

1.0
3.2
5.0
3.4
5.8
13.4
0.2
2.5

3.5
6.6

91.1

-3.1
-3.5
-0.2
9.0
33.0
42.1
-2.5
-0.8
1.1
-0.3
-1.6
0.4

30.1

2005

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
4/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both noninterest current account and nondebt inflows in percent of GDP.
5/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and nondebt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.

B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Change in US dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Noninterest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005–10 4/
A2. Country-specific shock in 2005, with reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation 5/
A3. Selected variables are consistent with market forecast in 2005–10

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Exchange rate appreciation (US dollar value of local currency, change in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions

3.3
9.8

-2.2
3.5
-1.5
6.3
31.4
37.6
-1.1
6.1
2.9
-0.6
3.8
-5.7

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net nondebt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3)

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 3/
In percent of GDP

53.9

External debt

2000

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)

Table 12. Morocco: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–10

22.0
26.2
28.6
22.8
28.0
28.8

3.7
20.7
20.7

5.3
0.1
2.1
4.3
7.6
8.6
-1.7
3.6

5.0
6.7

62.8

-1.6
-2.5
1.7
9.2
32.9
42.1
-3.6
-0.7
0.9
-1.1
-0.5
0.9

20.7

2010

-4.2
-5.4
-5.9
-4.2
-5.7
-5.9

-2.6
-4.2
-4.2

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest
current account 6/

4.4
0.5
2.5
4.0
6.9
8.3
-0.2
2.4

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest
current account 6/
-4.2

- 37 -

- 38 -

APPENDIX I

MOROCCO—FUND RELATIONS
As of April 30, 2005
I.

Membership Status: Joined: April 25, 1958; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR Million

%Quota

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Holdings exchange rate

588.20
517.76
70.44

100.00
88.02
11.98

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
85.69
67.75

%Allocation
100.00
79.07

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:

Type
Stand-by
Stand-by
Stand-by

Approval
Date
Jan 31, 1992
Jul 20, 1990
Aug 30, 1988

None

Expiration Amount Approved
Date
(SDR Million)
Mar 31, 1993
91.98
Mar 31, 1991
100.00
Dec 31, 1989
210.00

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
18.40
48.00
210.00

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2006
2007
2008
2009
2005
Principal
Charges/Interest
0.31
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.45
0.31
Total

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

Not Applicable

- 39 -

APPENDIX I

Exchange System
Morocco maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments
and transfers on current international transactions. However, Morocco maintains restrictions
for security reasons against Iraq and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro), pursuant to relevant UN Security Council resolutions. The exchange rate is
freely determined in the interbank foreign exchange market which was created in 1996. Bank
Al-Maghrib (BAM) intervenes in the market to maintain the exchange rate within its target
range, defined around a fixed central rate. Morocco has a conventional peg arrangement. The
central exchange rate of the Moroccan dirham is pegged to a basket of currencies
representing Morocco’s principal trading partners. During 2001, the authorities changed the
basket of currencies by increasing the weight of the Euro to better reflect the weight of
external trade with EU countries. BAM fixes daily rates for the rated currencies on the basis
of variations in the value of the basket. Rates for most currencies quoted in Morocco are
established on the basis of the daily dirham-euro rate and the cross rates for those currencies
in relation to the euro in the international exchange markets. In January 2005, the
SDR/dirham exchange rate was SDR 1 = DH 13.09.
Article IV consultation
Morocco is on the 12-month cycle. The last consultation discussions took place in Rabat
during February 12–23, 2004, and were concluded by the Executive Board on May 5, 2004.
Technical assistance
February 16–29, 2000: STA—following up on government finance statistics improvement
November 7–22, 2000: FAD—advising on improving the design of the tax system and its
administration
January 16-30, 2002: STA—ROSC Data Module Mission
February 9–20, 2004: MFD—Monetary Framework
May 17–24, 2004: FAD—Modernizing the tax system and its administration.
June 28–July 7, 2004: FAD—ROSC Fiscal Module.
2004: MFD—Peripatetic visits—internal credit rating system.
Resident representative: None

- 40 -

APPENDIX II

MOROCCO: FINANCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK
(As of March 31, 2005)
The Bank FY05 portfolio in Morocco (measured in number of active Loans and TFs and in
commitment value as of today) consist of 16 operations (10 IBRD loans and 6 Trust Funds)
with total commitments of US$325 million approximately. Disbursements for investment
projects amounted to US$26.3 million in FY04 compared to US$34.2 million (projected) in
FY05. Key indicators of disbursement compared with Bank averages leave room for
improvement. Indeed, the Disbursement Ratio for the Morocco portfolio fell from 15.5% in
FY02 to 10.3% in FY04 and currently stands at 8.1 % in FY05, well below the Bank wide
and the region average.
Despite the fact that the quality of the portfolio has improved over the last five years,
institutional capacity for project implementation needs to be further strengthened. A
participatory Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) took place in June 2002 and a
follow-up CPPR in February 2003. A new CPPR is scheduled for May 2005 to tackle this
issue through ongoing participatory monitoring and capacity building activities. It will be
followed by periodic reviews in order to address the issue of low disbursement and to
reassess progress made on key actions agreed upon to improve project and portfolio
management.
From FY99 to FY01, the Bank has provided extensive technical assistance through its
various lending operations for projects, as well as through its sectoral adjustment loans
(SAD). Three SAD were approved, amounting to US$416 million, to support the
Government in establishing a sound macroeconomic framework and in implementing a broad
reform program covering public sector reform, private sector development, poverty reduction
and human resource development and telecommunications regulatory framework. This FY,
the Bank has approved an innovative operation in the education sector amounting US$80
million, adopting a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp), to be implemented as a pooled-financed
investment operation. This operation is the first SWAp project in the MENA region. This
approach uses the Borrower’s fiduciary and technical systems and procedures.
In addition, investment and learning and innovative loans (LIL) were approved during FY9903, amounting respectively to US$89 million, US$7.5 million, US$32.6 million, US$5
million and US$30.9 million. They include assistance to: legal and judicial development
(US$5.3 million), Sustainable Coastal Tourism Development project (US$2.2 million),
Irrigation Based Community Development (US$32.6 million), Support to Social
Development Agency project (US$5 million), Adult Literacy (US$4.1 million) and Rainfed
Agriculture Development (US$26.8 million) and are mostly designed with participatory and
community driven approaches.
Also, to move the reform agenda forward in areas where agreement was reached with
Government, we have developed intermediary products such as narrowly targeted, small

- 41 -

APPENDIX II

budget support operations. To that extent, the Board approved last June an operation to
improve Government’s management of real assets held by social sector ministries (Asset
Management Reform Loan, US$45 million).
As prospects for lending have been reduced, due to large privatization receipts (telecom
license and privatization) and a deterioration of the fiscal stance, our program has
increasingly turned toward knowledge transfer through participatory approaches. After a
number of policy notes on sectoral issues such as education, administration and the financial
sector, and related long-term prospects were prepared, the Bank has provided strong
analytical and institutional support to budget and public administration reform to the
Moroccan Government. Participatory approaches (Programmatic Economic and Sector
Work-PESW) have been developed in the area of public sector and price policy reforms.
Continued support through PESW is foreseen in the budgetary and public administration
reform, agriculture reform, tertiary education and decentralization and municipal
development areas.
Due to improved economic performance in 2002 and 2003, and plans to reduce the fiscal
deficit to 3% by 2007, the country economic management appears to be on a fiscally
sustainable path. As a result of this, Morocco is now in a position to engage in structural
reform loans, as envisioned in the enhanced base case scenario of the CAS. Such Bank’s
support (adjustment lending) has been requested by the Moroccan authorities for reform
formulation and implementation in the areas of public reform, financial, education,
agriculture and housing sectors.
Two projects are scheduled to be negotiated shortly and be presented to the Board of
Directors before the end of this FY: a Financial Sector Development Policy Loan (tentatively
US$200 million) and a Housing Sector Development Policy Loan (tentatively US$100
million).

- 42 -

APPENDIX II

Morocco: Financial Relations with the World Bank
(As of March 31, 2005)
Total Net
Commitments

Undisbursed
Balance

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
IBRD lending operations
128 loans closed 1/
10 active loans
- Sewerage & Water Reuse II
- Fès Medina Rehabilitation
- Health Management
- Irrigation Based Community
Devt.
- Social Devt. Agency
- Adult Literacy
- Asset Management
- Rainfed Agriculture Devt.
- Rural Roads
- Basic Education Reform
Support
Total active loans

7,268

Repayments 2/
Debt outstanding 2/

28.0
9.6
45.7
32.6

7.5
5.1
44.0
31.1

5.0
4.1
45.0
26.8
36.9
80.0

6.2
4.6
26.6
31.2
37.6
78.3

313.7

272.2

5,714.5
2,442.9
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

440
411.4
514.6
298.6
216
-103.2

7.5
106.8
533.9
333.3
200.6
-426.5

97.6
115.8
425.5
246.3
179.2
-309.7

5
52.7
427.5
270.2
157.3
-374.8

75.9
58.7
420.5
283.9
136.6
-361.8

2004

2005 2/

Net lending by the World
Bank (by fiscal year) 3/
Commitments
Disbursements
Debt service
Principal
Interest 4/
Net transfer 5/

1/ Less cancellations, includes adjustment lending, does not include guarantees.
2/ As of February 28, 2005.
3/ Fiscal years start July 1 and end June 30.
4/ Includes charges.
5/ Equal to disbursement minus debt service.

36.9
112.3
443.8
328.4
115.4
-331.5

180
119.1
444.6
381.3
63.3
-321.8

- 43 -

APPENDIX III

MOROCCO: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Available economic and financial data have been provided to the staff on a regular basis and
most of these data are also published or made available on publicly accessible web sites. Data
provision is adequate for surveillance purposes.
A data ROSC mission, which took place in January 2002, carried out a review of Morocco's
data dissemination practices according to the GDDS, as well as an in-depth assessment of the
compilation of national accounts, CPI, PPI, government finance, monetary, and balance of
payments statistics. As the authorities maintain a strong interest in subscribing to the SDDS,
the mission also identified areas to be strengthened to meet the SDDS requirements. A
subsequent mission (April-May 2005) noted that the authorities have made important
progress toward meeting SDDS requirements. Morocco meets most of the SDDS
requirements in terms of coverage, periodicity, and timeliness. The mission proposed an
action plan to address the remaining issues. If implemented, it would enable Morocco to
subscribe to the SDDS by October 2005.
Real sector
The Statistical Office is working on rebasing national accounts from 1980 to 1998 and on
bringing it in conformity with the System of National Accounts 1993. This reform program
has made good progress and the first series of accounts for 1998 -2000 has been finalized.
The new series of accounts covering the period 1998 – 2004 will be released during 2005
once the work on the years 2001 – 2004 is completed. The revision of the consumer price
index is also planned to be completed during 2005, with the update of weights based on the
results of the 2001 household budget survey. A consistent monthly time series for the
producer price index based on the 1995 industrial register’s weights has been released since
1997. With respect to SDDS subscription, the authorities need to produce an index of
wages/earnings, and improve the timeliness of gross domestic product statistics. They intend
to avail themselves of a flexibility option for the industrial production index.
Government finance
Central government finance data are generally available to MED with a few months lag. GFS
data reported by Morocco for publication in the GFS Yearbook are not timely (no data have
been submitted for the past three years), and their coverage is limited to the budgetary central
government, the Moroccan pension fund, and the National Social Security Fund. No data for
the central government on a monthly or quarterly basis are reported to STA for publication in
IFS. A technical assistance STA mission in February 1999 and a follow-up mission in
February 2000 advised on further improvements in the compilation of both central and local
government statistics and assisted the government in establishing appropriate consolidation
procedures for a presentation of general government data. Substantial progress has been
made by the Accounting Office for the compilation of local government data and their

- 44 -

APPENDIX III

consolidation with central government budgetary data. The actual use of those new rich
source data for general government compilation may require further clarification of
responsibilities between various directorates. Regarding the monthly Treasury’s expenditure
and revenue table, the ROSC data module recommended some reclassifications (transfers,
privatization), to maintain the Fonds Hassan II within the coverage of the table, and, for
dissemination purposes, to complement the table with more details and data on financing and
improve the format of dissemination. The ROSC mission generally recommended various
actions to improve dissemination formats and practices towards meeting the SDDS GFS
standards. The recent SDDS mission prepared an action plan for the production of data on the
consolidated general government operations, envisaging completion by October 2005.
Monetary and financial statistics
Bank Al-Maghrib disseminates monetary and financial and other macroeconomic statistics to
the general public primarily through its website (bkam.ma). The statistical part of the site
includes web-based versions of the Bank’s weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual
publications. The timeliness of reporting of the accounts of the central bank and those of the
banks (35–37 days lag) has improved recently, but remains lower than that prescribed under
the SDDS (two-week lag). The degree of detail in the breakdown of financial assets and
liabilities by resident institutional sector could be more extensive; at present, this problem is
reflected in the lack of precision in some of the monetary aggregates, including credit
indicators.
Balance of payments
The ROSC mission found that in general Morocco’s balance of payments statistics are in line
with the concepts and definitions set out in the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments
Manual (BPM5). However, further work is needed to implement certain recommendations on
scope, classification, and basis for recording. Thus, recent measures to exclude the effects of
changes in exchange rates from the valuation of transactions in reserve assets should be
continued, and transactions in foreign currency assets and liabilities of intermediary banks at
their correspondent banks should be excluded from transactions in reserve assets. Also, the
Office des Changes (OC) is planning to treat operators in free trade zones as residents.
Offshore banks located in Morocco should also be considered residents. The OC lacks a firm
legal basis for compiling and disseminating balance of payments statistics, relying for the
time being exclusively on customs and exchange control data. These data are gradually to
become less available and too limited as liberalization proceeds and as participation of
foreign investors in the Moroccan economy increases. The OC has initiated legislative
measures that would give it access to statistical data collected directly from economic
operators as needed among other things to record private foreign debt, and more generally of
the international investment position. Furthermore, the ROSC mission recommended the
introduction of quarterly surveys of enterprises and other agencies to improve the scope,
classification, and valuation of balance of payments transactions, in particular for goods for
processing, transportation services, and financial transactions. Since May 1998, the OC has
been publishing, in its new internet site, monthly statistics on trade, tourism, private transfers,

- 45 -

APPENDIX III

and incoming foreign direct investment in accordance with the BPM5. The quality of balance
of payments statistics will significantly improve with the planned inclusion of free trade
zones and offshore banks located in Morocco in its economic territory.
The authorities are compiling the Data Template for International Reserves and Foreign
Currency Liquidity (Reserves Template) in broad conformity with SDDS requirements. The
SDDS mission suggested minor adjustment to the data available and the regular
dissemination of the Reserves Template. The authorities also need to compile quarterly
external debt data in order to subscribe to the SDDS; source data are available and this
information should be regularly disseminated by the Ministry of Finance and Privatization
starting October 2005. The international investment position data are disseminated annually
with a timeliness within SDDS requirements.
Morocco meets or exceeds the GDDS recommendations in the external sector, except for the
twice a year publication of the external debt service schedule and the quarterly publication of
public and publicly-guaranteed external debt statistics. The quarterly publication of balance
of payments statistics is in line with the SDDS recommendations, but the timelines exceeds
the SDDS requirements with three months. To further comply with the SDDS requirements,
the data template on international reserves and foreign currency liquidity should be used and
disseminated.
The latest BOP and IIP information received from Morocco, and published in the IFS, relates
to quarterly BOP data for 2003 and annual IIP data for 2002 and 2003 (which was reported
for the first time in 2004). Furthermore, Morocco reports on a regular basis international
liquidity data to STA for publication in the IFS.

4

3

03/31/05
03/31/05
12/31/04
03/31/05

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

GDP/GNP

Gross External Debt

03/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

03/31/05

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

5

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government

05/31/05

05/31/05

03/31/05

03/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

05/31/05

Date
received

Q

Q

M

M

A

M

...

M

D

M

M

M

M

W

D

Frequency
of
6
Data

Q

Q

M

M

A

M

...

M

D

M

M

M

M

W

D

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).

1

3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General Government

Consumer Price Index

05/31/05

04/30/05

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

2

04/30/05

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Interest Rates

04/30/05

Broad Money

04/30/05

05/31/05

04/30/05

1

Date of
latest
observation

Reserve/Base Money

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange Rates

AS OF JUNE 8, 2005

MOROCCO: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE

Q

Q

M

M

A

M

...

M

D

M

M

M

M

W

D

Frequency
of
6
publication

- 46 APPENDIX III

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/125
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Morocco
On August 29, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Morocco.1
Background
Morocco has achieved macroeconomic stability since the early 1990s. Inflation has remained
low anchored by the exchange rate peg and thanks to a prudent monetary policy. The external
current account has been in surplus since 2001 and external reserves increased to a
comfortable level. However, fiscal deficits have remained large and the authorities have used
part of the privatization receipts to finance increased expenditures.
Growth has been volatile and insufficient to significantly reduce poverty and unemployment.
Growth averaged three percent over the last decade. It has been volatile because of the
dependency of agriculture to rainfalls, and recurrent droughts contribute to increasing poverty in
rural areas. The unemployment rate remains high, particularly in urban areas. Although the
growth of the nonagricultural sector has become more resilient to agricultural output shocks, it is
insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during the August 29, 2005 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.

-2Morocco continues to implement its broad based structural reform agenda. Large state-owned
enterprises have been privatized and remaining public enterprises are being restructured or
prepared for privatization. In the area of trade liberalization, the implementation of the
association agreement with the European Union, Morocco’s main trading partner, is proceeding
as scheduled. Trade agreements were signed with the United States, Turkey, Tunisia, Jordan
and Egypt to complement the association agreement with the European Union. Most Favored
Nation tariffs were reduced to a maximum of 10 percent for goods freely traded with the
European Union. The financial sector is being strengthened. The imminent promulgation of a
new central bank and banking laws will further enhance the autonomy of the central bank and
its supervisory power. A new labor code has been approved and is expected to improve labor
relations and flexibility in the labor market. The government is pursuing its efforts to fight
poverty, improve social conditions, and enhance the rights of the female population. The impact
of these reforms on Morocco’s growth rates should be observed in the medium term.
In 2004, macroeconomic and financial conditions remained stable. While the overall GDP
growth slowed down to 4.2 percent on account of a decline in growth in the primary sector,
nonagricultural GDP growth picked up because of a dynamic tertiary sector and a recovery in
mining and energy. Inflation remained below 2 percent. The current account was in surplus, and
external reserves increased further and covered about ten months imports of goods and
services as well as the public and publicly guaranteed external debt.
The fiscal deficit (including Hassan II Fund and excluding privatization receipts) declined by
0.4 percentage points to 4.9 percent of GDP, reflecting good revenue performance. However,
some budgetary policies did not support fiscal consolidation. Expenditures were higher than
envisaged because of increases in: (i) investment following acceleration in project execution;
(ii) the wage bill following new salary increases; and (iii) subsidies because the food subsidy
reform was postponed and the petroleum price adjustment was not fully implemented. The
authorities were able to prevent further expenditure increases related to the El-Hoceima
earthquake and a locust invasion by reallocating budgetary appropriations. Public debt declined
to 66 percent of GDP because privatization receipts helped finance the deficit.
The unfavorable agricultural campaign is expected to affect macroeconomic conditions in 2005.
The overall GDP growth rate is projected at about 1 percent. The current account is likely to
register a small deficit partly because of a high level of imports of food products and higher oil
bill. Nonetheless, the overall balance of payments is expected to remain in surplus. The fiscal
deficit (excluding privatization revenue but including spending by Hassan II Fund) is expected to
increase to about 5.5 percent of GDP (but to decline to 4.5 percent of GDP, excluding one-off
factors) despite continued favorable revenue performance. Expenditures will increase reflecting
the repercussions on wage payments of the 2004 wage negotiations, the voluntary retirement
program, the new universal health insurance program, the delay of the food subsidy reform, and
the partial adjustment in May and August of domestic petroleum prices. Large privatization
receipts will help contain the debt to GDP ratio at about 70 percent, despite the issuance of debt
to cover old pension fund arrears (2.4 percent of GDP).

-3-

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Moroccan authorities for maintaining macroeconomic
stability and for continuing to implement their structural reform agenda in 2004. Inflation
remained low, nonagricultural output growth accelerated, and foreign exchange reserves
increased further. Good revenue performance contributed to the narrowing of the fiscal deficit
and the debt-to-GDP ratio declined. Considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of structural reforms, most importantly, those related to trade liberalization, the
financial sector, public enterprises, and the labor market.
Despite these achievements, Directors noted that growth continues to be volatile and
insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment and poverty. To these ends, they agreed that
Morocco needs to achieve sustained high rates of growth in non agricultural output. In the
context of Morocco’s increasing integration into the world economy, they considered
accelerated structural reforms and fiscal consolidation essential elements of a high growth
strategy. They, therefore, welcomed the authorities’ resolve to move expeditiously with their
remaining structural reform agenda in a context of continued macroeconomic stability and fiscal
consolidation.
Although the current fiscal stance and debt level do not pose a risk to macroeconomic stability
in the short term, Directors considered that current policies, if maintained, could reduce the
authorities’ ability to absorb unfavorable shocks, which could constrain growth. They, therefore,
welcomed the authorities’ targeted reduction of the fiscal deficit to 3 percent of GDP over the
medium term. They agreed that the achievement of this objective and its compatibility with a
high-growth strategy would require a reform of the tax system that would widen the tax base
and allow a reduction in tax rates, a decline in the wage-bill-to-GDP ratio, an overhaul of the
food subsidy program, and the implementation of the petroleum price adjustment mechanism.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ plan to implement a medium term budget framework to
enhance the efficiency of fiscal policies. They supported the authorities’ efforts to initiate a tax
reform, particularly of the VAT, and to present a tax expenditure report with the 2006 budget to
raise awareness about the need to improve the efficiency of the tax system. They encouraged
the authorities to move expeditiously on a broad-based tax policy and tax administration reform.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ decision to continue their no net new hiring policy,
implement a modern human resource management and remuneration system and a voluntary
retirement/departure program, and pointed to the importance of controlling salary adjustments
and bonuses. Directors welcomed the increased emphasis on social development, including
through improved access to education, healthcare, housing and basic infrastructure and rural
development, to be financed within the medium-term budget objectives. They also greeted the
recent recognition of old pension fund arrears, and supported the authorities’ efforts at adopting
and implementing a comprehensive plan to put the pension system on a sound footing.
Directors agreed that the Moroccan authorities have made commendable progress in
liberalizing the economy. The recently signed free trade agreements with the United States,

-4Turkey and regional partners will help attract foreign direct investment and boost Morocco’s
growth and export performances. However, to fully exploit the benefits of trade integration,
Directors urged the authorities to simplify the tariff structure, further reduce tariffs, and eliminate
variable tariff rates in parallel with the reform of the food subsidy system while providing
targeted support to vulnerable groups. They noted that liberalization measures in the area of
telecommunications contributed to the current dynamism of the sector and those related to air
transportation have positively impacted tourism. They encouraged the authorities in their efforts
to liberalize other sectors of the economy.
Directors urged the authorities to fully implement the new labor code, which should help clarify
employer/employee relationships, and to accelerate judicial reforms, which should enhance
investors’ confidence. Directors encouraged the authorities to accelerate the implementation of
the remaining measures needed to improve the business environment. In particular, they noted
the need to improve governance and transparency. Directors called for caution in the provision
of exemptions or special incentives in favor of specific sectors as a measure to foster
investment.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ continued efforts to strengthen the financial sector and
implement the recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program. The
promulgation of the new central bank and banking laws will further enhance the autonomy and
supervisory power of the central bank. Directors noted the progress made in the restructuring of
the three weak state-owned banks. They urged the authorities to accelerate the implementation
of the measures required to bring these banks to compliance with prudential regulations as
soon as possible. Directors encouraged the authorities to continue addressing the remaining
vulnerabilities in the financial system, including the high level of non performing loans, and to
remove the structural constraints in order to enhance the availability and reduce the cost of
credit to small-and-medium-size enterprises, which represent the core of Morocco’s enterprise
sector. They commended the adoption of a bill to combat the financing of terrorism, and looked
forward to action on anti-money laundering legislation.
Directors noted that the current peg of the dirham has served the economy well and contributed
to keeping inflation low, and that there are no signs of an exchange rate misalignment. Given
the increasing integration of the Moroccan economy into the rest of the world, they noted that a
gradual transition to a flexible exchange rate regime would be advisable. They welcomed the
authorities’ openness to consider the desirability of alternative exchange rate regimes taking
into account the characteristics of the Moroccan economy.
Directors commended the authorities’ efforts to improve the statistical database. In particular,
they noted the progress made toward meeting the Special Data Dissemination Standards, and
encouraged the authorities to implement the agreed action plan to enable Morocco to subscribe
to the SDDS in the coming months.

-5-

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-6-

Table 1. Morocco: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000–05
Quota: SDR 588.20 million
Population: 29.8 million
Per capita income: US$ 1,677 (2004)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel

2005
Proj.

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated)
Production and income
Nominal GDP
Real GDP
Real nonagricultural GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (CPI), average

2.5
1.0
3.6
1.5
1.9

8.2
6.3
3.6
1.8
0.6

3.8
3.2
2.8
0.6
2.8

5.5
5.5
3.5
-0.1
1.2

5.8
4.2
4.7
1.5
1.5

2.8
1.0
4.0
1.8
2.0

(In billions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports of goods, f.o.b.
Exports of goods, f.o.b. ( percent change)
Imports of goods, f.o.b.
Imports of goods, f.o.b. (percent change)
Oil imports f.o.b.
Net services and income
Net transfers
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Overall balance (deficit -)

7.4
-1.2
10.7
7.0
1.4
0.3
2.5
-1.4
-0.4

7.1
-3.7
10.2
-4.6
1.3
1.1
3.6
4.8
3.8

7.8
9.8
10.9
7.2
1.2
1.2
3.3
4.1
0.6

8.8
11.8
13.1
20.1
1.0
1.8
4.1
3.6
1.6

9.7
11.2
16.2
23.9
1.6
2.7
4.9
2.2
1.8

10.2
4.6
18.7
15.2
2.2
3.0
5.1
-0.9
0.2

25.1
30.9
-4.9
2.3
-2.6

26.4
32.4
-5.5
2.6
-2.9

(In percent of GDP)
Central government
Revenue, excluding grants and privatization
Total expenditure (including Fonds Hassan II)
Overall balance 1/
Privatization and GSM receipts
Overall balance, incl. privatization 1/

26.2
32.4
-6.4
0.0
-6.4

25.0
31.1
-5.7
6.1
0.4

24.7
29.9
-4.7
0.2
-4.5

24.5
30.3
-5.3
2.9
-2.5

(Annual percent change; unless otherwise indicated)
Money and credit
Broad money
Interest rate (Avg, money market rate, in percent)

8.4
5.4

14.2
4.4

6.3
3.0

8.6
3.2

7.5
2.4

5.8
...

Official reserves
Gross official reserves (in billions of US$, end-period)
In months of imports of goods and services

4.8
4.6

8.4
8.2

10.1
9.1

13.9
10.4

16.3
10.0

16.0
8.6

-7Debt (short-, medium-, and long-term)
Total external debt (in billions of US$)
Total external debt (in percent of GDP)
Domestic government debt (in percent of GDP) 2/
Total government debt (in percent of GDP) 2/
Memorandum items:
GDP at current prices (in billions of DH)
GDP at current prices (in billions of US$)
Exchange rate: dirham/US$ (average period)
Real effective exchange rate (appreciation +)
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Excluding oil
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Urban
Rural

18.0
55.0
47.3
81.5

15.9
47.8
45.8
74.7

15.7
40.9
48.1
71.4

16.8
35.1
50.1
68.5

16.6
30.8
49.9
65.8

16.0
30.2
55.2
69.9

354.2
33.3
10.63
2.8
-7.7
-2.4
13.7
21.5
5.2

383.2
33.9
11.30
-4.1
7.6
7.9
12.8
20.3
4.2

397.8
36.1
11.02
-0.3
-7.3
-8.6
12.5
18.0
6.2

419.5
43.8
9.57
-1.3
5.7
8.5
11.4
19.3
3.4

443.7
50.0
8.87
-0.6
-10.8
-10.3
10.8
18.4
3.1

456.0
...
...
...
-3.1
-0.5
...
...
...

Sources: Data provided by the Moroccan authorities; and Fund staff projections.
1/ Commitment basis including Fonds Hassan II.
2/ Gross debt including net central bank credit.

-1Statement by Mohammed Daïri, Alternate Executive Director for Morocco
August 29, 2005
Morocco continues to enjoy macroeconomic stability and to take strides toward achieving
high growth, strengthening the economy’s resilience to shocks, and improving social
conditions. In 2004, GDP growth reached 4.2 percent despite the effects of the locust
invasion and Al Huceïma earthquake, reflecting stronger performance of the non-agricultural
sector. Inflation remained subdued and the external position robust, notwithstanding the
increase in oil prices and the slow growth in the EU, Morocco’s main trading partner.
Unemployment declined by 2 percentage points in the past two years, but remains high. The
fiscal position improved as a result of stronger revenue performance. Progress was made in
key structural reforms, aimed at raising growth potential by enhancing efficiency and
improving the business environment. The economy’s resilience to weather vagaries has
increased significantly over the past few years as a result of improved performance in the
non-agricultural sector. As indicated in Figure 3 of the staff report, there has been a
significant increase in non-agricultural GDP’s resilience to agricultural GDP fluctuations.
However, the exceptional drought of 2004/05 led to a fall in cereal production of close to
two-thirds, bringing projected GDP growth to 1-1½ percent in 2005, despite an increase in
non-agricultural GDP of 4 percent. The authorities intend to build on their good track record,
in order to achieve higher and more sustainable growth and further reduce unemployment,
and are committed to continued prudent policies supported by acceleration of structural
reforms.
Fiscal policies
While progress has been made in fiscal consolidation, leading to a decline in the debt-toGDP ratio, the authorities believe that further consolidation, through structural revenue and
expenditure measures, will be necessary to put fiscal sustainability on a firmer trajectory and
to bring about an environment more conducive to private sector development. They also
attach high importance to greater fiscal transparency and adequate treatment of contingent
liabilities, including in the pension system, in order to reduce fiscal vulnerabilities.
The authorities do not believe that, under present circumstances, the current fiscal stance is
unsustainable. Indeed, there are no pressures on inflation, the external current account, or
interest rates, and the fiscal deficit is being financed at market rates, while the debt to GDP
ratio continues to decline. Staff indicate in paragraph 4 that the debt-to-GDP ratio declined
mainly because privatization helped finance fiscal deficits and as a result of debt/equity
swaps. In 2000-04, the debt to GDP ratio declined by 15.7 percentage points, whereas
privatization revenue amounted to a cumulative 11.6 percent of GDP, and debt/equity swaps
and early repayment of expensive debt amounted to some 4 percent of GDP each, which
indicates that privatization revenue was used for debt reduction and not for financing the
deficit. Moreover, the authorities have reservation regarding staff measure of the fiscal
deficit, which excludes privatization revenues, in view of their exceptional nature, whereas
exceptional expenditure carried out by the Fonds Hassan II and financed by privatization
revenue are included. These expenditures are not of a recurring nature, nor do they generate
recurring expenditures for the government; they contribute as seed money to the financing of

-2investment carried out by non-government agencies in the areas of road construction, social
housing, other key economic and social infrastructure, and in restructuring of priority sectors
facing temporary shocks.
The fiscal position in 2004 turned out better than budgeted and much stronger than
anticipated during the last consultations. The overall deficit, according to staff definition,
declined by 0.4 percent of GDP, reflecting stronger tax revenue collection. Moreover,
unexpected spending following the locust invasion and the earthquake, as well as part of the
subsidy cost of domestic petroleum prices, which were not increased in the aftermath of the
significant increase in world prices, were accommodated through redeployment of spending.
While the fiscal deficit is expected to increase in 2005, a number of exceptional factors
should be highlighted. First, the decline in cereals production reduces GDP growth
significantly, while generating new spending in view of the need to offset, partly through
expenditure redeployment, some of the losses incurred by the agricultural sector. Second,
some wage increases, expected to be implemented in 2004 were carried over to 2005 since
relevant regulatory requirements were not met, whereas their effect will start from 2004.
Third, expenditures by Fonds Hassan II, which are of exceptional nature, are projected by
staff to increase by 0.5 percent of GDP in 2005, whereas the authorities believe that their
increase in 2005 would be smaller than projected by staff, as was the case in recent years.
Finally, the projection includes exceptional expenditure to the tune of 0.7 percent of GDP
related to the voluntary early retirement scheme (see below).
Consistent with the planned reform of the civil service and the objective of reducing its size,
the authorities are implementing an ambitious program of voluntary early retirement, which
would reduce the size of the civil service by about 5-6 percent. While the one-off cost of the
program for 2005 may be high and could reach some 1.5 percent of GDP, the net savings,
taking full account of the effect on the public pension fund, would lead to a decline in the
wage bill of 1 percent of GDP per year over the medium term.
The authorities remain committed to further reducing food subsidies; however, an
appropriate timing and the establishment of a well-targeted social safety net are key to
successful progress in this area. Petroleum prices were raised twice in 2005, except for
butane, which is mainly used by low-income households. This, however, did not allow for
full recovery of the large increase in international prices. It should be noted that Morocco’s
domestic petroleum products prices remain well above international prices as a result of the
high excises amounting to about 2 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, the authorities will seize
future opportunities to raise prices in light of market developments and intend to return as
soon as possible to automatic implementation of the price indexation formula. They have also
indicated their intention to use a more realistic price assumption in preparing the 2006
Budget and to include appropriations to clear remaining arrears on petroleum subsidies.
The authorities aim at increasing revenue through broadening of the tax base, enhancing
efficiency, and simplifying administration. Tax reforms implemented recently include the
establishment of Large Taxpayer Units, consolidation of VAT audit and collection, and
substitution of VAT to some distortionary excises, consistent with FAD recommendations.

-3The authorities intend to deepen tax reform by overhauling and simplifying the VAT,
reviewing the income tax, and reducing exemptions. An FAD mission is expected in
Morocco early October to discuss options for tax reform and TA needs.
A major reform of the pension system is being carried out in close cooperation with the
World Bank, with the objective of ensuring its sustainability, reducing contingent liabilities,
and strengthening savings mobilization. The internal pension funds of some public
enterprises have been put on a sound footing, and other public enterprises will follow,
whereas contribution rates have been increased for major pension funds. In conformity with
the authorities’ rehabilitation program for the major civil service pension fund, arrears
accumulated over the past decade have been recognized and settled through debt issuance
equivalent to some 2.2 percent of GDP.
The authorities thank the staff team that has conducted the fiscal transparency ROSC which
was indeed a useful exercise in reviewing Morocco’s practices in this area. They broadly
concur with staff assessment that Morocco’s fiscal management system is reliable and
supported by legal safeguards and adequate for steering budget performance. They take note
of the report’s recommendations to improve the system and will take them into consideration
in future budget reform. They agreed to publication of the report.
Monetary policy and financial sector reform
Monetary policy under the pegged exchange rate regime has been successful in bringing
inflation to industrial country level and achieving a high degree of credibility. While the task
of monetary management has been complicated by the large foreign inflows from workers’
remittances, tourism receipts, and privatization, Bank Al Maghrib (BAM) has been able to
limit the effect of excess liquidity on the economy. The monetary framework and BAM’s
organization are being modernized, with assistance from MFD, in order to further improve
monetary management under the new central bank charter, which increases its independence
and sets price stability as the main objective of monetary policy.
BAM’s directive referred to in paragraph 30 of the staff report does not introduce a minimum
lending rate. It has been issued at the request of the banking association (GPBM) to address
practices in lending rates that reflect unhealthy competition. The directive requests banks to
provide information on loans granted at interest rates below Treasury paper, in order to allow
the central bank to identify instances where the rate is below costs.
Financial sector regulation and supervision are being strengthened, drawing on FSAP
recommendations, and the new banking law, under discussion in Parliament, will increase
BAM’s regulatory powers. Following an increase linked to tighter classification rules,
commercial banks NPLs have stabilized, and their financial soundness indicators have
improved. The authorities have also made significant progress in restructuring of the public
specialized banks (OFSs). While these banks do not pose risks to the financial stability in
view of their limited links to the rest of the banking sector, it was the authorities’ view that
their restructuring should be completed as soon as possible in order to avoid moral hazard
and to demonstrate the authorities’ resolve in dealing with troubled banks. It is the

-4authorities’ firm intention to ensure that all OFSs are in full compliance with prudential
regulations by mid-2007, including through equity injections where necessary, and no
extension of this deadline can be granted according to the new banking law. The authorities
are concerned about low access of credit by SMEs and the insufficient transmission of
reductions in policy rates to conditions applied to these enterprises. They have taken a
number of measures to improve transparency and risk assessment of SMEs and are
examining how to identify and alleviate remaining impediments to their financing in
consultation with GPBM.
Exchange rate policy and external developments and policies
The authorities appreciate the staff’s Selected Issues paper prepared at their request on the
exchange rate regime. The paper confirms the authorities’ long lasting view that the present
exchange rate regime has served Morocco well and concludes that there is no sign of
misalignment of the dirham. It also suggests that a gradual move to a more flexible exchange
rate regime is advisable if the authorities decided to open the capital account to residents. The
authorities remain open to considering a more flexible exchange rate regime and will take
staff analysis into consideration in their internal deliberations.
The strength of the external position has enabled a large build-up of reserves and, together
with active debt management, has led to a significant improvement in external debt
indicators. External debt to GDP ratio declined from 42 percent in 2001 to 26 percent in
2004, and the debt service ratio from 16 percent to below 13 percent. Progress in
macroeconomic stabilization and structural reforms, as well as a stronger external position,
have led Standard & Poor’s to upgrade the sovereign debt rating twice in 2005, from BB
stable to BB positive and further to BB+, bringing it just one notch below investment grade.
Reflecting investors’ appetite for Morocco’s paper, secondary market spreads have declined
significantly.
Tourism has recently strengthened its performance as a major source of growth, foreign
exchange, and employment. Indeed, since 2001, tourism receipts, together with workers
remittances, accounted for most of the strengthening of the current account. Significant
progress has been achieved under the authorities’ plan, developed in partnership with
professionals, to reach 10 million tourists in 2010, and investment is increasing significantly
following elimination of land bottlenecks and liberalization of air transport.
The dismantling of the MFA quotas has had a significant toll on Morocco’s exports.
Although the net effect on the balance of payments has been limited, since most of the inputs
are imported, the employment effect has been larger, especially on the unskilled workers.
The authorities are developing a strategy to deal with the situation, taking advantage of
proximity to Europe, and of FTAs with the EU, US, and Turkey, and concentrating on the
upper end of the garment market. Improving managerial and technical skills is a key element
of this strategy. They have also succeeded in attracting upstream investment by major textile
groups. Trade liberalization continues to be pursued both at the multilateral and the regional
level, including with Arab countries, and is expected to boost growth and exports.

-5Growth strategy and structural reforms
The authorities are fully aware of the need to accelerate growth performance which, despite
recent gains, remains insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment. In addition to
current strategies regarding tourism and textiles, they have commissioned a comprehensive
study, conducted by McKinsey, in order to assess the present situation of the Moroccan
industry and to identify the major sources of growth. Among the key sectors with high
potential for growth in view of Morocco’s comparative advantages are: fisheries, agroindustry, construction, car equipment, electronics and electrical equipment, and off-shoring.
The conclusions of the study are under evaluation and would be used to develop a coherent
strategy. The successful liberalization of the Telecom and transport sectors and on-going
efforts aimed at strengthening transparency and governance, reforming the judiciary, and
alleviating investment bottlenecks will go a long way in improving the business climate and
increasing growth potential.
The authorities wish to thank staff for the Selected Issues paper on growth performance.
They agree that there is a significant potential for improvement in productivity, for which
acceleration of structural reforms will be key as evidenced by recent trends in total factor
productivity in the non-agricultural sector. The attention given in the paper to trade
opportunities from recently concluded FTAs and to the need to monitor labor market
conditions is also well placed.
Social policies
The authorities’ efforts at addressing poverty and improving social conditions have been
significantly strengthened following the announcement by King Mohammed VI of the
National Initiative for Human Development (INDH). This initiative aims at reducing social
and geographic disparities, developing sources of income and employment, and assisting
vulnerable population through a transparent and participatory process. The initiative will ‘be
financed from the central government, within the medium-term budget envelope, and local
governments, with contributions from donors. The total cost of the initiative for the period
2006-2010 is estimated at 10 billion dirhams, equivalent to 2 percent of GDP. The INDH will
complement on-going social programs aimed at improving social service delivery, especially
in the rural areas, reducing the large deficit in social housing, and improving social
conditions. Moreover, the new health care system will expand protection to the work force
outside government, financed by employer/employee contributions, and to the needy
segments of the population, to be financed by the budget.
A recent STA mission found that Morocco would be able to subscribe to SDDS by October
this year. The authorities have announced their intention in this regard to the public. They
are committed to addressing the few remaining issues in order to meet this timeframe.
The authorities wish to express their appreciation to the staff for their hard work and
dedication, and to management and the Board for their continued support. They remain
firmly committed to staying the course of prudent macroeconomic policies and to create a
propitious environment for private sector-led growth to achieve their objectives of improved

-6incomes and living conditions and higher employment. They look forward to the Board’s
assessment and advice.

