July 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/275

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Japan: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; and Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion

Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Japan, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 24, 2006, with the officials of Japan on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on June 30, 2006. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

•

a staff supplement of July 18, 2006 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 21, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
JAPAN
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2006 Consultation with Japan
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Carlo Cottarelli
June 30, 2006

•

This report is based on discussions held by the Japan team in Tokyo during
May 15–24 as well as policy discussions held by Ms. Krueger on June 5–6. The team
comprised Messrs. Citrin (Head), Zanello, Kramer, Faulkner-MacDonagh, Iizuka,
N’Diaye, and Ms. Edison (all APD), and Mr. Nakagawa (ICM). Mr. Khatri (OAP) also
participated; Messrs. Kashiwagi and Kitahara (OED) took part in discussions. A
companion Selected Issues paper provides supporting analysis.

•

Counterparts: Discussions were held with Bank of Japan (BoJ) Governor Fukui;
Minister of Finance Tanigaki, Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy and
Financial Services Yosano, Minister of Internal Affairs and Communications and
Minister of State for Privatization of the Postal Services Takenaka, Vice Minister of
Finance for International Affairs Watanabe, BoJ Deputy Governor Iwata, Member of the
BoJ Policy Board Suda, and other senior officials, academics, and private sector
representatives.

•

Context of past surveillance: In recent years, the Fund and the authorities have
generally agreed on the broad policy priorities—tackling deflation through monetary
accommodation and moving to an appropriate post-deflation monetary framework,
undertaking medium-term fiscal consolidation, revitalizing the corporate and financial
sectors, and pursuing productivity-boosting reforms. However, the authorities have
generally favored more moderate steps in some areas than the Fund, partly out of concern
for the risks that stronger actions might pose.

•

Japan’s exchange rate is market determined. Japan has accepted the obligations of
Article VIII. The exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of current
international transactions, with the exceptions of those notified to the Fund in accordance
with Executive Board Decision 144-(52/51) (Annex IV).

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I.

Introduction .........................................................................................................................4

II. Economic and Financial Backdrop .....................................................................................4
III. Three Macroeconomic Policy Challenges ..........................................................................7
IV. Financial Sector Policy Challenges ..................................................................................21
V. International Implications of Japan’s Recovery and Policies ...........................................26
VI. Staff Appraisal ..................................................................................................................29
Boxes
1. The New Monetary Framework for the Bank of Japan .....................................................8
2. Fiscal Adjustment: Lessons from Selected OECD Countries .........................................14
3. Strategies for Fiscal Consolidation in Japan Economic and Financial Backdrop ...........15
4. Social Security Expenditure in Japan ..............................................................................17
5. Reform of Government Financial Institutions .................................................................23
6. Overseas Activities of Japanese Banks............................................................................24
Figures
1. Output, Inflation, Corporations and Banks......................................................................32
2. External Sector, Monetary and Fiscal Policy...................................................................33
3. Financial Markets ............................................................................................................34
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–2007......................................................................35
2. General Government Operations, 2000–2006 .................................................................36
3. External and Financial Indicators, 1998–2006 ................................................................37
Annexes
I.
Structural Reform Agenda ..............................................................................................38
II. Debt Sustainability Analysis ...........................................................................................45
III. Statistical Issues..............................................................................................................47
IV. Fund Relations ................................................................................................................48

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•

The post-bubble adjustment is essentially complete. Economic activity is expanding
robustly, driven by domestic demand. There are downside risks stemming from external
factors, but there are also upside risks to private consumption and investment.

•

The financial and corporate sectors are strengthening further. Nonperforming loans
continue to fall and bank lending is reviving, but core profits remain low; policy is focused
on continuing revitalization while promoting growth of securities markets. Corporate
restructuring is spurring productivity gains and yielding record profits.

•

Monetary policy is normalizing. With core CPI positive y/y for a few months and expected
to remain so, in March the Bank of Japan shifted from targeting reserves to targeting the
overnight policy interest rate (which remains at zero). It also introduced a new framework for
its post-deflation policy approach.

•

Fiscal consolidation is proceeding apace, but imbalances remain large. The authorities
now project achieving a primary balance excluding social security in 2011. The
corresponding (estimated) deficit fell 1 percent of GDP in FY2005. However, the net debt
ratio is high by advanced-country standards, and rising.

•

The external surplus is narrowing. The trade balance fell in 2005, notwithstanding a yen
depreciation. Recently, the yen has strengthened, but in effective terms remains relatively
weak compared with the past. The risks posed by a disruptive adjustment of external
imbalances remain a concern, particularly for the medium term.

•

Reforms underway will strengthen the supply side. Steps include deregulation as well as
product and labor market liberalization, with an aim to lift productivity and improve mediumterm growth prospects.

Key Issues and Policy Discussions
•

The end of deflation and the smooth transition out of quantitative easing are milestones
for monetary policy. In the near term, policy should remain accommodative, allowing
inflation expectations to drift up. The new policy framework improves transparency, and
continued effective communication about how it will be implemented will ensure that
markets clearly understand the BoJ’s intentions.

•

The commitment to fiscal consolidation is welcome. With the expansion strong and the
task large, a more front-loaded and ambitious adjustment would stabilize the debt in the
medium term and buy insurance against fiscal or economic shocks. Also, by bolstering policy
credibility, it would limit the risk of an undue rise in real interest rates.

•

Accelerated structural reforms would pay additional dividends to Japan and the world.
Stronger underlying growth would facilitate fiscal consolidation and support living standards
in the face of population aging. It would also bolster world growth and support a more
balanced pattern of global demand, which along with actions in other countries could
promote a smooth adjustment of global imbalances.

4
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Japan’s post-bubble adjustment is essentially complete. Corporate and bank
balance sheets are strong; employment and wages are rising; and—emblematically—the
seven-year decline in core CPI has ended. The expansion is halfway into its fourth year and
is close to becoming the longest on record.
2.
Nonetheless, major policy challenges remain. The 2006 Article IV discussions
focused on: the post-deflation monetary framework; the strategy to tackle large fiscal
imbalances as demographic pressures mount; and the reform agenda to boost productivity
and long-term growth. The discussions also examined the international dimensions of
economic developments in Japan and policies that could best contribute to reducing the risk
of a disorderly adjustment of global imbalances. The key challenges are similar to those
flagged in the 2005 consultation, but the further waning of deflation pressures and continued
improvement in the economic outlook, as well as the increased focus on global imbalances,
strengthen the case for bold action.
3.
Japan has entered a busy electoral year. Prime Minister Koizumi’s tenure as the
leader of the ruling party expires in September. The party will then elect a new leader/Prime
Minister. A new cabinet will be nominated soon after. Elections for the Upper House of the
Parliament are set to occur by July 2007.
II. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL BACKDROP
Background
4.

Japan’s expansion has been strong.

•

Recent growth has been driven by domestic demand: 2005 GDP growth was over
2½ percent, with most impetus from private consumption and business investment. GDP
grew at a (seasonally adjusted) annual rate of about 3 percent in the first quarter of 2006
(Figure 1).

•

Deflation has ended: Core inflation (CPI excluding fresh food) has been positive since
November 2005 (year-on-year core inflation was ½ percent in April). The GDP deflator
continues to decline, mainly reflecting a rise in import prices, but the implicit deflator for
domestic demand is rising marginally. Land prices in major cities are rebounding after a
fifteen-year slide.

•

Labor markets are tightening: Labor shortages are emerging and the unemployment rate
remains around an eight-year low, at 4.1 percent. Wages and bonuses have risen,
although unit labor costs are still falling. Employment has picked up as well,
notwithstanding a dwindling working age population.

5
•

The financial and corporate sectors are in their best shape in over a decade: Under
tougher regulation, major banks’ nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios fell to below 2 percent
in March 2006. Progress at regional banks has been more modest; NPLs nevertheless
have fallen to 4½ percent of total loans. Intense corporate restructuring has helped to
reduce debt-to-sales ratios across a broad range of sectors. Indeed, for all firms taken
together, the ratio is at the lowest level since the bubble, and for manufacturers, at the
lowest level in 25 years. Corporate restructuring has also buoyed profits to record highs
and unlocked productivity gains. With credit supply constraints eased and loan demand
revived, bank lending (adjusted for provisions and write-offs) has been trending up since
around mid-2005, after about eight years of contraction.

•

The external surplus is narrowing: The trade balance fell in 2005 by ¾ percent of GDP,
in spite of a real effective yen depreciation. The current account declined more modestly
as factor income surged (Figure 2). Heavy purchases of foreign bonds and repatriation of
funds by nonresidents led to large net capital outflows, notwithstanding record foreign
purchases of domestic equities.

•

The yen has started to strengthen: After depreciating against the U.S. dollar by nearly
15 percent during 2005 as interest rate differentials widened, the yen has appreciated
modestly this year, as markets focused on global imbalances and reassessed the likely
pace of monetary tightening in major economies. In this context, some market
participants have unwound “yen carry trades” that took place during the quantitative
easing period.1 Despite the recent strengthening, in nominal and real effective terms the
yen remains about 6¼ percent weaker than a year ago; the real effective yen is now about
as weak as at the time of the 1985 Plaza Accord. No foreign exchange market
intervention has occurred since March 2004.

Outlook and Risks
5.

The near-term outlook is favorable and risks are balanced.

•

Baseline: GDP growth is projected at nearly 3 percent in 2006 (when the output gap is
expected to turn positive for the first time since 1992) and just above 2 percent in 2007.
With offsetting trends in the trade balance and factor income, the current account surplus
would hover around 3½ percent of GDP.

•

Risks: Downside risks are mostly external—volatile oil prices, rising long-term interest
rates, or a global slowdown. Low inflation raises the possibility of renewed deflation,

1

For example, during most of the quantitative easing period, Japanese banks acquired about $4–5 billion in
short-term foreign assets each month.

6
particularly if a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances occurs, but private
consumption and investment are subject to upside risks.
6.
Over the medium term, GDP growth is projected to revert to potential and the
current account to narrow. Staff has raised its estimate of potential growth to
1¾–2 percent, largely because of a rising capital contribution, but it could be higher with
stepped-up reforms, increased labor-force participation, and a recovery in R&D.2 Faster
productivity growth in a broad range of sectors would also decrease the current account
surplus over time (by reducing private saving and boosting investment as permanent income
rises), countering the effects of fiscal consolidation.3
Japan: Medium-Term Projections, 2005-11
(Percentage change from the previous period, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Real GDP 1/
Total domestic demand
Net exports (contribution)
Unemployment rate (percent)
CPI inflation
Savings-investment balances 2/
Private
Public

2.6
2.5
0.2
4.4
-0.3

2.9
2.6
0.4
4.1
0.6

2.1
2.2
0.0
4.0
0.6

1.9
2.0
0.0
4.0
1.3

1.9
1.9
0.0
4.0
1.5

1.8
1.8
0.0
4.0
1.9

1.7
1.7
0.0
4.0
2.0

6.1
-2.5

6.0
-2.2

5.5
-2.0

5.2
-1.8

4.8
-1.5

4.4
-1.3

4.3
-1.2

Current Account Balance 2/
Trade Balance 2/
Exports
Imports
Non-factor Services Balance 2/
Income and Transfers Balance 2/

3.6
2.1
12.4
10.4
-0.5
2.1

3.7
1.8
13.1
11.4
-0.4
2.3

3.5
1.6
13.3
11.7
-0.5
2.3

3.4
1.6
13.8
12.2
-0.5
2.3

3.3
1.5
14.1
12.7
-0.6
2.4

3.1
1.4
14.5
13.2
-0.7
2.5

3.0
1.2
14.9
13.7
-0.8
2.5

Sources: Global Insight, Nomura database; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Annual growth rates and contributions are calculated from seasonally adjusted data.
2/ In percent of GDP.

The Authorities’ Views
7.
•

The authorities broadly agreed with this outlook.
On risks, they noted that the possibility of a deflationary spiral is remote, given the
stronger financial and corporate balance sheets and the closing output gap.

2

Returns to R&D have probably been depressed by Japan’s decade-long stagnation. The Selected Issues paper
presents an econometric analysis of the factors driving potential GDP and the possible gains from reforms.

3

Country Report No. 05/272 analyzes the potential contribution of faster productivity growth in Japan to an
orderly resolution of global imbalances.

7
•

On price developments, the authorities welcomed the waning of deflationary pressures,
but some officials remain concerned that selected price indicators are still declining
slightly.

•

On potential growth (currently estimated at 1½–2 percent by the BoJ and Cabinet
Office), the authorities considered that more competition, efficiency gains in public
services, and further IT diffusion and R&D could boost longer-term real growth to about
2¼ percent, in spite of population aging.
III. THREE MACROECONOMIC POLICY CHALLENGES

The mission and the authorities agreed that an appropriate post-deflation monetary
framework, a well-designed fiscal consolidation, and productivity-boosting reforms are
complementary elements of a strategy for sustained non-inflationary growth. There was also
agreement that these policies would contribute to global financial stability, as part of
concerted efforts to promote an orderly resolution of global imbalances. The discussions
focused mainly on areas where the mission considered that policy implementation might be
accelerated or strengthened.
A. Toward a Post-Deflation Monetary Framework
Background
8.
The BoJ has shifted its strategy from targeting banks’ excess reserves
(quantitative easing) to targeting the overnight interest rate.
•

The pre-announced conditions for ending quantitative easing (in place since 2001) were
met in early 2006, and the BoJ announced an exit on March 9, indicating that it would
gradually drain liquidity while keeping overnight interest rates effectively at zero.

•

Since March, excess reserves have declined from over ¥30 trillion to around ¥10 trillion,
with short rates stable. The money market, which withered under quantitative easing, is
coming back to life, as institutions rely less on the BoJ for funding and the opportunity
cost of idle balances rises.

9.
•

The new monetary framework introduces some novel features (Box 1):
An anchor for inflation expectations. The guidepost is the BoJ’s Policy Board’s
“understanding of price stability” as annual CPI inflation of zero to two percent. This
range captures the current views of Board members about the level of inflation consistent
with price stability over the “medium and longer term.” It is not a target to achieve over a
preset horizon, and it will be reviewed annually, as the Board’s views on the economy
evolve.

8

Box 1. The New Monetary Policy Framework for the Bank of Japan
On March 9, 2006, the BoJ ended quantitative easing (QE) and now operates under a framework
that strikes a balance between policy pre-commitment (adopted under QE) and flexibility by:
•

Disclosing an understanding based on views of Policy Board members of price stability in current
circumstances as headline CPI inflation of 0–2 percent over the medium to long term;

•

Deciding the conduct of monetary policy by analyzing the risks to price stability from two
perspectives: (i) near-term (1–2 year) forecast of economic activity and prices; and (ii) longer-term
threats including those arising from low probability—but high cost—risks.

•

Outlining the BoJ’s analysis from the two perspectives and disclosing it periodically (as a rule, it
would appear in the Bank’s semi-annual report). This analysis would expand the current practice of
disclosing (in the semi-annual report) the Policy Board members’ forecasts of activity and prices.

The new framework offers a more detailed evaluation of risks, providing further elaboration on the BoJ’s
forecasts. In this manner, markets benefit from a structured discussion of the Bank’s views on
conjunctural conditions and the policy outlook. At the same time, the BoJ still retains the flexibility to
respond to economic developments not directly reflected in CPI data.
The BoJ describes price stability using the headline CPI, because of its advantages over other
indices. The CPI is well-understood, timely, and covers items used by the public in forming price
expectations. Other indices are either specific to a sector (such as wholesale or service price indices) or
not timely (such as the GDP deflator, which is also subject to substantial revisions). Core inflation is not
used because price stability is a medium to long-term concept, when core and headline inflation should
agree.
The inflation range in the understanding may appear low, but the BoJ has considered various
biases and frictions in the Japanese context.1 Conceptually, price stability occurs at zero inflation,
although statistical biases mean that in practice inflation must be positive. Central banks have also noted
that deflation can be costly and have built in a small safety margin. Against this backdrop, the BoJ has
explained that the current range reflects that:
•

The statistical bias of the CPI index is low, thanks to recent methodological improvements.

•

Japanese wages exhibit more downward flexibility than in other countries, because bi-annual bonus
payments represent around 20 percent of compensation and are routinely adjusted by firms with due
regard to business conditions.

More generally, the BoJ has assessed the need for a safety margin against five factors: (i) degree of
rigidity in nominal wages; (ii) level of potential growth; (iii) robustness of the financial system;
(iv) availability of fiscal policy; and (v) effectiveness of monetary policy transmission mechanism.
More fundamentally, the BoJ is not adopting an inflation target of 0 to 2 percent, but rather is
analyzing developments from two perspectives to ensure that the economy is on a sustainable path
with price stability. This means that, in deciding monetary policy, they would examine current, nearterm forecasts (1–2 years forward) and adjust monetary policy accordingly. At the same time, the BoJ
has learned the lesson of the bubble years: the economy can overheat—and overinvestment can build
rapidly—while inflation remains low. Hence, the BoJ wants to preserve the flexibility to act, regardless
of the central forecast for inflation.
1

See “The Bank’s Thinking on Price Stability,” March 10, 2006, available as a background note to the
March 9 announcement.

9
•

An emphasis on the forward-looking orientation of policy. Monetary settings will reflect
an assessment of economic conditions from two perspectives focused on: (i) the outlook
for growth and prices one to two years ahead; and (ii) the risks of imbalances—such as
asset bubbles or overinvestment—that could undermine price and output prospects over a
longer horizon.

•

Broad parameters for communicating policy. Monetary policy decisions will be
explained in terms of the two perspectives. The underlying analysis will be discussed
from time to time and, as a rule, in the BoJ’s semi-annual Outlook for Economic Activity
and Prices.

Policy Issues and Staff’s Views
10.
The exit from quantitative easing has been orderly and monetary operations
have finally normalized. The limited volatility in money markets suggests skillful liquidity
management and effective communication. Both have worked to ease concerns in some
quarters about a premature tightening.
11.
The new framework is broadly in line with past staff advice and improves
transparency in the post-deflation environment. Quantitative easing provided an
unusually high degree of policy certainty through a commitment to maintain excess liquidity
until core CPI showed durable increases. The new framework is appropriately more flexible,
given that inflation risks have become two-sided, but also necessarily more complex.
12.
The authorities should continue to communicate how the new policy framework
will be implemented to ensure markets clearly understand the BoJ’s policy intentions.
•

Understanding of price stability: The range reflects differences of view among Policy
Board members about the extent to which structural changes, statistical bias, and
conjunctural developments are influencing the CPI, as well as Japan’s historically low
inflation. Nevertheless, from a medium-term perspective, a lower bound of zero seems
too low to prevent unforeseen events from pushing the economy back into deflation.
Accordingly, it would be desirable for the range (or its floor) to rise over time, as
inflation becomes better entrenched. Meanwhile, more explicit communication on the
risks associated with inflation at the lower end of the range would guide market
expectations and provide insights on the policy strategy.

•

Policy stance: With little danger of an inflation surge at present, policy should remain
accommodative, allowing inflation expectations to drift up. Taylor-like rules suggest that
a near-zero rate is appropriate for the time being. When tightening begins, it should
proceed gradually. That said, policy should also take account of longer-term risks to
sustained noninflationary growth, such as those associated with emergent asset price
bubbles or other imbalances, especially against the backdrop of a combination of robust

10
growth and limited inflation pressures.4 Such imbalances do not seem to exist at present,
but it would be appropriate, as per the authorities’ intention, to be attuned to incoming
data and respond flexibly.
13.
With no room for fiscal maneuver, monetary policy would need to take the lead
in offsetting adverse shocks. If abrupt movements in foreign exchange markets or other
shocks were to threaten price stability, the BoJ could communicate clearly that such
developments would be taken into account—together with other data—in setting monetary
policy.
The Authorities’ Views and Policy Intentions
14.

BoJ officials welcomed the normalization of monetary operations.

•

End to pre-commitment: They noted that ending the explicit pre-commitment of
quantitative easing has increased flexibility, but also raised policy uncertainty for market
participants.

•

Reinvigoration of the money markets: The shift is encouraging a better allocation of
funds and improvements in risk management, as financial institutions reestablish credit
lines and reassess counterparty risks.

15.
BoJ officials see the new framework as different from that of other central
banks. On its specific elements:
•

Understanding of price stability: The authorities stress that the range is not an inflation
target, nor a commitment to achieve a certain inflation rate over any timeframe. Instead,
it is a guide to the public that Board members consider 0–2 percent CPI inflation as
consistent with price stability at present. While this range can adjust over time, as views
on inflation evolve along with the economy and the composition of the Policy Board, toofrequent changes should be avoided, since they could destabilize inflation expectations.

•

Lower bound of the “understanding” range: Officials point out that inflation has
historically been at least 1 percent lower in Japan than in other advanced economies—
even abstracting from the deflation period. This has colored the public’s perception of
price stability (as reported in surveys). However, in accordance with the role of the
“understanding” as a summary of prevailing views at the Board and not as a target, the
BoJ is not aiming to achieve zero percent inflation.

4

World Economic Outlook, April 2006, Chapter III suggests that globalization has restrained inflation pressures.

11
•

Policy stance: The authorities agreed that monetary policy should remain accommodative
for now, but also aim to engineer a soft landing for the economy. While the BoJ is in no
hurry to remove accommodation, markets have priced in gradual future rate increases,
which are consistent with the BoJ’s outlook for a soft landing.
o Going forward, monetary settings will be data-dependent. The BoJ will examine
incoming data closely to see if a soft landing is likely. Officials recognize that the
situation can change rapidly, especially as the strengthening monetary transmission
mechanism amplifies the effects of existing accommodation.
o In the unlikely event that deflation reappears, the BoJ will respond appropriately. One
option could be announcing a policy pre-commitment, if necessary.

•

Evaluation of longer-term risks: Bank officials view the “second perspective” as unique
and important. Monetary policy must respond to low probability—but high cost—risks,
such as large investment swings. For example, communication about longer-term
imbalances might have prevented the events at the root of the late 1980s bubble. They
agreed that further elaboration of the “second perspective” will be helpful.

•

Implementation of the framework: The authorities noted that markets will need to learn to
adjust to greater policy uncertainty. This is unavoidable, given the end of deflation and
the concomitant change in monetary policy objectives. While the new framework
involves some ambiguity (for the sake of flexibility), the BoJ will continue to explain
clearly its decisions and views, in the context of the “two perspectives.”
B. Tackling Fiscal Imbalances

Background
16.

Fiscal imbalances remain worrisome, but consolidation is proceeding apace.

•

Imbalances are large: Deficits for 13 consecutive years have propelled gross and net
general government debt to about 180 percent and 85 percent of GDP, and both continue
to rise. Population aging will heighten already strong spending pressures (Annex II
presents a debt sustainability analysis).

•

A consolidation plan is in place: The plan revolves around a reference path for the
primary account of the general government excluding social security, which aims first at
achieving balance and later at reducing the debt ratio. Balance is to be achieved through
an average yearly adjustment of ½ percent of GDP. However, the underlying measures
have not been spelled out yet, and a balance would not be sufficient to stabilize the debt
ratio. The plan has undergone revisions over time: in January 2006, the indicative target
date for a balance was brought forward to FY2011, reflecting better-than-anticipated

12
budgetary outcomes (thanks to cyclical buoyancy and one-off factors). More recent
updates have reflected a debate on the appropriate interest rate/growth rate differential
assumed in the debt projections. A prudent approach that envisages a positive differential
over the medium term seems to have carried the day but future elaboration of the
reference path for consolidation will likely provide alternative scenarios.
•

Consolidation is ahead of the authorities’ schedule: For the reasons mentioned above,
the outturn for FY2005 (ended in
Central Government: General Account
March) was likely better than
FY2006
FY2004
FY2005
projected a year ago, with a decline in
Revised 1/
Initial
Revised 1/ Initial 2/
the primary deficit excluding social
(In percent of GDP)
security of perhaps 1 percent of GDP. Central Government/General Account
Revenue
10.1
9.5
10.5
9.5
The FY2006 budget, which rolls back
General expenditure
10.5
9.7
10.1
9.0
Other expenditures 3/
7.0
6.5
7.0
6.2
past income tax cuts, envisages a fall
Bond issuance
7.4
6.8
6.6
5.7
of some ¾ percent of GDP in the
General Government (Fund staff estimates)
Balance
-5.6
-5.3
-5.0
general expenditure of the general
Primary balance excluding social security
-3.9
-3.0
-2.3
account of the central government,
Sources: Ministry of Finance and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Post-supplementary budget/estimated outturn.
compared to the FY2005 initial
2/ Approved budget for central government general account.
5
3/ Debt service and transfers to local governments.
budget. The general government
primary balance (excluding social security) would fall by a similar amount.

•

The authorities are now fleshing out tax and expenditure reforms for the medium term.
Detailed options will be announced in the June-July releases of a “Roadmap for IncomeExpenditure Reform” and the Basic Policies for FY2006—the annual broad guidelines
for fiscal policy and reform initiatives. A variety of reforms is under consideration and
some, described below, are already underway.

Japan: Baseline Fiscal Outlook
(In percent of GDP, fiscal year basis)

General government
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance
Primary Balance excluding social security

5

2004

Est.
2005

Proj.
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

28.7
34.3
-5.6
-3.9

29.1
34.5
-5.3
-3.0

29.7
34.6
-5.0
-2.3

30.4
35.2
-4.8
-1.8

31.0
35.6
-4.6
-1.2

31.7
36.0
-4.3
-0.6

32.3
36.4
-4.1
-0.2

32.9
37.0
-4.2
0.0

The general account of the central government provides the main framework for the budget. Information on
local governments is available with lags.

13
Policy Issues and Staff Views
17.
The key fiscal challenge is to put public finances on a more sustainable footing.
The main issues are: the desirable pace of consolidation, the appropriate mix of expenditure
and revenue measures, and their timing.
•

On the pace: The FY2006 budget is passed, but savings should be sought and an
expansionary supplementary budget should be avoided. More broadly, there remains a
case for a more ambitious medium-term adjustment than in the authorities’ plan.
o An adjustment of ¾ percent per year on average over six years, or an additional
¼ percent per year compared with the authorities’ projection, would buy “policy
insurance” and boost the plan’s
Primary Balance Needed to Stabilize Debt
credibility. Such an adjustment—
General
Government
cumulatively about 4½ percent of
excl. Social
General
Social
Security
Government
Security
GDP—would achieve the primary
FY2006
-3.4
-1.1
-2.3
surplus excluding social security
FY2012
0.9
-1.1
2.0
needed to stabilize the debt ratio.
Change
4.3
0.0
4.3
Source: Staff estimate.
Experience with large
consolidations in selected OECD countries suggests that consolidation at such a pace
need not have a significant negative impact on output (Box 2).
o Barring a deterioration of the conjuncture, there is a strong case for front-loading the
adjustment, with initial annual adjustments above ¾ percent of GDP. Above-potential
growth and an accommodative monetary stance provide a good environment in which
to bring forward deficit reduction, and thereby contain risk premia and prepare for the
fiscal impact of population aging.6

•

On composition and timing: Model-based simulations of alternative adjustment strategies
suggest that a package of expenditure and tax measures will be needed to regain
sustainable debt dynamics (Box 3).7 In light of the prospective evolution of social security
outlays, and the sizeable reduction in spending so far, expenditure cuts alone do not seem

6

Given the relatively small fiscal multipliers and a weak relationship between output and prices, a more
ambitious fiscal plan on the order of the staff’s recommendation is unlikely to markedly dampen growth or
rekindle deflation pressures.

7

The Selected Issues paper analyzes consolidation strategies using the IMF’s Global Fiscal Model.

14

Box 2. Fiscal Adjustment: Lessons from Selected OECD Countries
A number of OECD countries have undergone large fiscal adjustments in recent decades. This
box draws lessons from these experiences, focusing on Japan’s previous consolidation of
1980–1988, Australia (1993–1999), Canada (1992–1999) and the United Kingdom
(1993–1999).
Each of these countries experienced large improvements in their primary balances, ranging
between 5.1 percent of GDP (Australia) and 9.7 percent of GDP (Canada). These
consolidations took, on
Table. Fiscal consolidation episodes in selected OECD countries
average, 7 years to be
Period of Fiscal
Change in Primary
Yearly Average
Consolidation
Balance
Adjustment
Country
completed. Moreover, the
Japan
1980
88
5.7
0.7
average pace of consolidation
Australia
1993
99
5.1
0.8
was 1.1 percent of GDP,
Canada
1992 - 99
9.7
1.4
considerably higher than the
United Kingdom
1993 -99
9.3
1.6
pace of ½ percent per year
currently envisaged by the Japanese authorities. The pace of adjustment in Japan during the
1980s was about ¾ percent of GDP per year, which is the same pace the staff is recommending
for the current consolidation.
Fiscal Adjustment: Change in Revenue and Outlay
The composition of fiscal adjustment
(General Government)
10.0
has varied across countries. Adjustments
have tended to rely on spending cuts,
5.0
with these cuts representing more than
half of the total adjustment effort. In the
0.0
case of Canada, almost the entire
adjustment was a result of expenditure
-5.0
reductions, while in Australia the
adjustment occurred almost entirely
-10.0
Revenue
Outlay
through revenue increases. Expenditure
-15.0
measures tended to be spread across
Japan
Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
multiple categories, with the United
Kingdom and Canada making sizeable
cuts to the government wage bill and transfers. Revenue increases tended to emphasize hikes in
direct rather than indirect taxes.

Large adjustments have generally had a positive macroeconomic impact. Average growth rates,
during consolidations varied across countries, but were at or near potential growth in each
episode. Unemployment rates fell in three of the four cases, rising only slightly in Japan from
an initial low level. The change in the current account balance was mixed, improving in Japan
and Canada while declining in Australia and the United Kingdom.
In sum, the experience with fiscal consolidation has been encouraging. Successful fiscal
adjustments have been diverse in their design and have not tended to be accompanied by
economic downturns.

15

Box 3: Strategies for Fiscal Consolidation in Japan
A key issue in the current fiscal debate is fiscal design—the expenditure-tax mix in fiscal
adjustment. In order to contribute to this debate, staff have evaluated the macroeconomic
effects of various strategies for fiscal consolidation, using the IMF’s Global Fiscal Model
(GFM). The GFM is a dynamic general equilibrium model that incorporates both the traditional
demand side effects as well as the supply side and spillover effects, which permits an
assessment of Japanese fiscal policy from a multilateral perspective. The simulations focus on
two main issues: the composition of adjustment and its timing.
Preliminary results show that:
Reducing social security transfers has a moderately smaller negative short-run impact
compared with raising taxes or
Effects of Alternative Adjustment Strategies on Real GDP Growth
(Deviation from baseline)
cutting other government
expenditure (the figure shows
0.2
expenditures other than transfers
0.1
and interest payments). Among
0.0
the revenue measures, a VAT
-0.1
increase has the least negative
-0.2
effect on output. Overall, the
Transfer cuts
fiscal multipliers in the model
Spending cuts
-0.3
Consumption tax increase
appear consistent with those
-0.4
reported in the literature (around
-0.5
unity or less in the short run, and
1
2
3
4
5
6-10
11-15
16-45
Years
Source: GFM simulations.
smaller in the long run).
Percentage point

•

•

Given the difficulty of relying only on expenditure cuts in light of the large needed
medium-term fiscal adjustment in Japan, a package of measures involving lower
government spending, lower government transfers, and a higher VAT rate was
investigated. This package compares favorably to only increasing the VAT rate or only
reducing government spending in terms of output effects.

•

A modestly more ambitious consolidation than the authorities’ plans (an additional
¼ percent of GDP per year as recommended by staff) would, if sustained, stabilize the
debt to GDP ratio and increase long-term output by promoting capital accumulation.

0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6

As regards spillovers to global output from fiscal adjustment in Japan, the long-run effects are
estimated to be modest but positive, reflecting higher output in Japan and lower world interest
rates as a result of Japan’s fiscal adjustment. This result is largely invariant to the fiscal design.

16

a realistic strategy to balance the primary account, much less to achieve a surplus.8 The
empirical analysis indicates that, on the revenue side, an increase in the consumption tax
is preferable to other tax revenue-enhancing measures, with respect to the impact on
output. An early adoption of the package also dominates a strategy of a more protracted
fiscal adjustment.
•

On specific measures: In the mission’s view, options for medium-term consolidation
would include:9 (i) reducing investment (despite drastic cuts, public investment remains,
at 3½ percent of GDP, much higher that in other advanced economies); (ii) seeking
economies through civil service reform (although the civil service in Japan is small by
industrial countries’ standards); (iii) broadening corporate and personal income tax bases
(about 50 percent of personal income is taxable, compared to almost 80 percent in the
United States and over 90 percent in the United Kingdom); (iv) raising the consumption
tax (now very low by international standards); (iv) reforming the budget framework to
consolidate the host of earmarked Special Accounts, which limit the scope for
expenditure control;10 and (vi) further reforms of the social security system, to address
growing demographic pressures (Box 4).

The Authorities’ Views and Policy Intentions
18.
The authorities give fiscal consolidation top priority. They noted the progress
made in the last 2 fiscal years when the primary balance (excluding social security) declined
by nearly 2¾ percent of GDP. Their views on the issues raised by the mission are:
•

On the pace: Fiscal consolidation should be paced flexibly, with due account of
economic conditions. Numerical consolidation targets carry risks of excessive rigidity
and policy pro-cyclicality, as was the case in the late 1990s when a rule-based approach
was tried. Nonetheless, consolidation will proceed as fast as possible and
overperformance relative to initial budget targets is likely.

8

Achieving balance entails an adjustment equivalent to around one quarter of the general government’s FY2005
primary spending (excluding social security benefits). Spending cuts have fallen particularly heavily on public
investment, which has been reduced by over 2½ percent of GDP over the past 10 years.

9

These include some measures where progress has already been made or is in train.

10

Streamlining special accounts would also increase fiscal transparency. As a related issue, the compilation and
dissemination of fiscal data (as highlighted in the 2005 data ROSC) remains inadequate, complicating policy
evaluation and design.

17

Box 4. Social Security Expenditure in Japan
Official estimates indicate that that government expenditure on social security would rise to
about 22 percent of GDP by 2025, up from about 18 percent of GDP in 2006, under a noreform scenario. However, recent and planned reforms may keep this trend in check.
The 2004 public pension reform envisages an increase in contribution rate from 13.6 percent
to 18.3 percent of salary by 2017 for the Employee Pension Insurance (EPI) scheme, which
covers all private employees. The flat contribution to the universal National Pension scheme
will also increase by 27 percent in real terms by 2017. The EPI replacement ratio will gradually
be reduced from 59 percent to 50 percent through “macro-indexation” (an index will be defined
every year reflecting any decline in pension contributions and any increase in life expectancy;
indexation of benefits would then be to CPI inflation minus this index). Finally, under the 2004
reform, the government contribution to the National Pension will increase from ⅓ to ½ of total
benefits by 2009.
Medical care reform was voted into law in June 2006. The key elements are:
•

Cost containment. In the short run, measures will be introduced to trim medical
expenditure by revising medical fees and drug tariffs downward by about 3 percent and by
raising out-of-pocket payments for the well-to-do elderly to 30 percent (from 20 percent).
In the medium term, measures will be introduced to increase the role of preventive
medicine and reduce the length of hospital stays. Furthermore, five-year reviews of the
expenditure trends will identify further possible areas for cost containment.

•

Medical insurance scheme. A new system for the elderly will be introduced in FY2008,
to which the elderly are expected to contribute directly.

•

Reorganization of insurers. Small insurers are to be consolidated at the prefectural level,
which should improve risk sharing.

These reforms are officially projected to
180
180
produce savings of about ¥21 trillion
Social Security Expenditures
(In
trillions
of
Yen
)
160
160
(about 3 percent of GDP) by 2025. The
With reforms
140
140
savings would be broad based, but
Without reforms
120
120
pension reform would yield the largest
economies. However, there are risks that 100
100
the government’s projections are overly
80
80
optimistic. Specifically, it has been
60
60
argued that the lower-than-expected
40
40
birth rate may create a revenue shortfall
20
20
for the pension system. In addition,
0
0
measures (equivalent to about 1 percent
FY2006
FY2011
FY2015
FY2025
of GDP) still need to be identified to
finance the increased share of the government’s contribution to the national pension scheme.

18
•

On composition and timing: A mixture of expenditure and revenue measures will be
considered, but spending cuts will probably account for at least half of the adjustment.
This would be consistent with the objective of paring back the government’s role in the
economy—a plank of the administration’s reform program. The government is expected
also to introduce separate consolidation targets for the central and local governments in
the forthcoming Basic Policies, as well as a second phase in the fiscal adjustment
process—to steadily reduce the debt to GDP ratio over 2012–2015.11

•

On specific measures: Current efforts have focused on spending control and
administrative reform. Planned cuts will affect: personnel expenses, defense, agricultural
subsidies, public investment, and social security transfers. Tax reform is also in the
pipeline. As regarded issues raised by the mission:
o Civil service reform will reduce the number of government employees by more than
5 percent over the next five years and could halve the central government’s wage bill
(including Japan Post) as a share of GDP in ten years. Efficiency gains are expected
to safeguard the quality of public services.
o Public investment of the general government is still large, although public works
spending in the general account is back at its 1990 level. Overall, there is scope for
further cuts in local jurisdictions.
o A comprehensive review of the tax system is in train. It will focus, inter alia, on the
consumption tax, the income tax, the corporate tax, and the inheritance tax, with the
aim of fairer and more efficient taxation. Conclusions about comprehensive tax
changes (including an increase in the consumption tax) will be reached in FY2006.
Other measures to boost non-tax revenues, such as sales of public assets, are being
discussed.
o On social security reforms, legislation to rationalize the healthcare system has been
enacted. The law increases co-payments by the affluent elderly and puts in place a
framework for periodic expenditure reviews (with a view to identifying pressure
points and remedial action).
o Special accounts would be rationalized under a proposed new law.12 The aim is to
increase the transparency and accountability of the budgetary process as well as to
identify potential savings.

11

Inter-governmental relationships were redefined in the context of the 2003–2006 “trinity reform” which, for
the most part, traded off subsidies from the center for taxing powers at the periphery. An unresolved issue
concerns a possible reform of the Local Allocation Tax—a block grant of about 3 percent of GDP.
12

In outline, the central government’s accounting framework consists of the general account and 31 special
accounts (e.g., for transfers to local administration or the social security system, or for dedicated expenditures

(continued…)

19
C. Boosting Productivity
Background
19.

Ongoing initiatives aim to strengthen the supply side of the economy:

•

Downsizing the government: A recent law outlines inter alia the strategy for reforming
government financial institutions (GFIs) as part of a broader plan (which includes the
pending privatization of Japan Post) to reduce the government’s role in financial
intermediation and level the playing field. In addition, a “market-testing” law recently
enacted opens up to private competitors the provision of some public services (job
placement and some revenue collection).

•

Product and labor market reforms: A strengthened antitrust law came into force in
January 2006; steps to facilitate inward foreign direct investment (FDI) were approved in
2005; and a bill on shifting from price to income support in agriculture is under
deliberation. Initiatives to exploit economies of scale in agricultural land use are also
ongoing. Finally, measures to increase labor market attachment are in the works,
including some to address high marginal tax rates for secondary wage earners.13

•

More broadly, a host of regulatory reforms have been introduced in “Special Zones for
Structural Reform” on a pilot basis, and some have been rolled out nation-wide.

Policy Issues and Staff Views
20.
Deeper and broader structural reforms would lift growth prospects. Much has
been accomplished in the government’s agenda, especially in the corporate and financial
sectors, but efforts could be redoubled in key areas.14 The payoff from a comprehensive
approach could be substantial (Annex I).
•

On labor markets, steps are needed to: encourage participation of women, marginalized
youth, and older workers; clarify dismissal conditions; make corporate pensions more

such as on roads). Total outlays of special accounts, including inter-account transactions (e.g. with doublecounting), are about ¥460 trillion compared to about ¥80 trillion in the general account.
13

Special deductions for spouses earning less than the primary wage earner have been reduced since 2006.

14

See Going for Growth, OECD, 2006.

20
portable (to enhance labor mobility); and balance employment conditions for regular and
temporary workers.15
•

On product markets, there is scope for further deregulating sheltered sectors (e.g., retail,
network services); cutting agricultural protection; enhancing flexibility in zoning; and
establishing independent regulators for network industries.

•

On promoting Japan’s integration with the world economy (which by the metrics of
import penetration, inward FDI, and share of foreign workers is low) Japan could show
ambition in the Doha Round—particularly in areas, such as agriculture, which could spur
productivity.16 Participation in Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), designed with
liberal rules of origin and complemented by reduced trade barriers for all partners, could
also play a part in unlocking productivity gains.

21.
The reform momentum should be maintained. The electoral cycle or reform
fatigue may cause slow implementation or backsliding. However, the favorable conjuncture
and the potential boost to fiscal consolidation from higher growth put a premium on
sustained efforts.
The Authorities’ Views and Policy Intentions
22.
The authorities agreed that further structural reforms are needed. With regard to
the areas highlighted by the mission, their plans include:
•

On labor markets, the authorities are considering clarifying the terms of employment,
and liberalizing dismissals, including compensated layoffs. More broadly, steps to
encourage labor force participation of women and marginalized workers by (for example)
improving the availability of childcare and training are under consideration, as are
measures to reduce the benefit disparities between regular and temporary workers.

•

On product markets, the authorities noted that a new law imposing zoning restrictions on
large-scale retailers is intended to preserve the vitality of city centers rather than roll back
past deregulation of the distribution sector. Liberalization of the energy sector also
continues. As regarded the role of independent regulators, the authorities saw the current
arrangement as working well, particularly in the telecommunications sector.

15

Current regulations favor employment of some non-regular workers, for example by excluding them from
social insurance coverage. Limited job tenure reduces firms’ incentives to train them, depressing aggregate
productivity.

16

Japan’s commitment to move to duty- and quota-free access for LDCs on at least 97 percent of tariff lines by
2008 (as agreed at the 2005 WTO Hong Kong Ministerial) would be most beneficial with broad agricultural
access.

21
•

On promoting Japan’s integration with the world economy, the authorities stressed that
Japan remains fully committed to a successful conclusion of the Doha Round. While
acknowledging risks from the proliferation of EPAs, Japan seeks to ensure that its
regional trade strategy complements the multilateral system. Some agricultural products
were included in the Mexico EPA, and inclusion could be more extensive in the ASEANwide agreements. (The authorities noted that Japan is the largest importer of agricultural
products and food security is a concern.) At least two EPAs under negotiation consider
freer movement of workers. To promote inward FDI, provisions that will facilitate
foreign acquisition of domestic companies (so-called “out-in” M&A) are scheduled to
take effect in 2007.

23.
At the same time, their near-term priorities relate to education,
broadcasting/communications, and immigration. Steps under consideration include: in
education, allocating school funds more closely in relation to the number of students; in
broadcasting/communications, facilitating the use of digital technology and liberalizing entry
to the broadband internet market; and in immigration, relaxing visa requirements for skilled
workers and the intra-company transfer of foreign personnel.
IV. FINANCIAL SECTOR POLICY CHALLENGES
With monetary normalization, improved balance sheets, and GFIs downsizing, important
shifts are afoot in financial markets. Investors are becoming less defensive, while abundant
corporate liquidity points to robust physical and financial investment ahead. At the same
time, banks and nonbank financial institutions are entering new business lines, expanding
overseas and into newer markets like credit derivatives. In this evolving landscape, key
financial sector issues relate to the impact of rising interest rates, the adequacy of risk
management systems, and the implications of GFI reform.
Background
24.
With a favorable outlook and stronger balance sheets, financial institutions are
set to play a more vigorous role in financial intermediation.
•

Financial markets are normalizing: Short- and long-term interest rates have edged up
since quantitative easing ended, and will rise further as inflation expectations take hold
and the BoJ shifts to a more neutral stance (Figure 2). Equity markets have been on an
upward trend since 2003, notwithstanding recent retrenchment. At the same time, credit
spreads have remained tight for higher-rated corporations. Resumed bank lending implies
a strengthening monetary transmission mechanism.

•

Defensive post-bubble financial postures are changing: Retail and institutional investors
are gradually shifting toward risk assets (including foreign assets). Banks and nonbank
financial institutions are diversifying, expanding overseas and into new markets (such as

22
those for syndicated loans and credit derivatives), spurred by deregulation and cleaner
balance sheets.17 Going forward, banks are well positioned to provide “growth capital” to
the economy.
•

GFI reform is underway: Following passage of bills to privatize Japan Post in October
2005, the government announced plans to consolidate GFIs and reduce the ratio of their
loans to GDP by half in three years, to create further space for private banks to expand
(Box 5).

•

Regulation is adapting:
o The official framework to deal with these changes is the December 2004 Program for
Further Financial Reform (PFFR). This program shifted the focus of policy from
stabilization to revitalization, although remaining balance-sheet problems are not
being neglected (in particular, the impact of deferred tax assets on the capital of
major banks; NPLs at regional banks; and bloated GFI balance sheets). The PFFR
aims to promote competition in the financial system, as well as to support
improvements in risk management and core profitability at banks.
o More recently, the authorities have taken steps to foster the development of capital
markets. A new Financial Instruments and Exchange Law (enacted in June 2006)
enhances investor protection, improves disclosure of listed companies, and
strengthens the independence of self-regulatory bodies at financial exchanges.

Policy Issues and Staff Views
25.
Unfolding changes in financial markets hold out the promise of more efficient
financial intermediation (domestically, regionally, and globally) but call for regulatory
vigilance. Issues relate to banks’ efforts to boost core profits, balance sheet exposures to
market risk, the adequacy of risk management systems, and the implications of GFI reform.
•

New financial activities present challenges for regulation and risk management. For
example, major banks’ fee income from new financial services quadrupled in FY2001–
2004 and credits to the Asian and Pacific region have expanded rapidly (Box 6).18 Both

17

Banks have been allowed to broker equity sales since December 2004 and to offer a wide range of financial
products through their branches since April 2006.

18

The Selected Issues paper examines the re-emergence of Japanese banks’ activities in Asia.

23

Box 5. Reform of Government Financial Institutions (GFIs)
Following the passage of legislation to privatize Japan Post, the government designed its basic plan
scale back remaining GFIs in late 2005 as a part of a broad reform program towards a small and efficien
government.1 Subsequently, the government
has tailored legislation that includes:
Loans by GFIs (excluding HLC) and the Japan Housing Loan
•

•

•

Trillion Yen

Corporation (HLC)

Percent

A quantitative target to reduce the ratio
25
120
Ratio of Loans to
of GFI lending to GDP by one-half in
GDP by GFIs (right
scale)
three years, and restricting GFIs to
20
100
financing small- and medium-sized
Loans by GFIs (left
80
scale)
enterprises (SME) and international
15
Loans by HLC (left
scale)
operations deemed crucial to the national
60
interest. The plan also calls for a move
10
40
Government Target in the Basic Plan (right scale)
from direct lending to partial guarantees,
securitization, and indirect loans.
5
20
Privatization of the SCB and the DBJ
0
0
within 5–7 years. The abolishment of the
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
JFCME and a merger of four GFIs (SME,
agricultural, and international financing) will take place in FY 2008, with the other one being
consolidated later.
Steps to contain possible adverse effects on agents currently receiving GFI financing and transitional
measures during the shift to financial self-reliance of the privatized GFIs, as well as continued
“market testing” to identify and rationalize redundant GFI functions.

The reform of Japan’s GFIs is a welcome step to downsizing public involvement in financial
intermediation. Indeed, growth in private housing loans following the downsizing of the public Housing
Loans Corporation as well as major progress in the basic plan—privatizing two institutions overlapping
with private institutions—suggest that the benefits from the GFI restructuring could be sizable if the plan
is successfully carried out. Key issues are to enhance transparency of costs incurred by the new GFI
while leveling its playing field with private intuitions, and to elaborate a transitional plan toward
privatizing some additional GFIs. More specifically;
•

New GFI: Sound corporate governance (including independence from government intervention on
specific lending activities) and enhanced disclosure for the new GFI is a necessary element of the
reform plan to constantly check its activities through “market testing” as envisaged in the basic plan;
undue financial support and regulatory forbearance would obscure the fiscal cost and should be
avoided; and, budgetary and operational firewalls between business and agriculture finance are
desirable to insulate small-business and other borrowers from shocks from agricultural sector.

•

Privatized Institutions: The profitability of the privatized institutions needs to be ensured before
privatization to avoid continued loss making and related fiscal costs; government equity in these
GFIs should be eventually fully divested to private shareholders and any windfall gain should be
saved to reduce the government deficit. Meanwhile, operational independence from the government
should be guaranteed.

_______________________
1

The government initiated its reforms to reduce the scope and improve efficiency of GFI activity in 2001
when it decided to limit activities of the Japan Housing Loan Corporation to securitize housing loans
originated in the private sectors. The basic plan focuses on the remaining eight GFIs, namely, the
National Life Finance Corporation, Japan Finance Corporation for Small and Medium Enterprise, the
Shoko Chukin Bank (SCB), the Development Bank of Japan (DBJ), the Okinawa Development Finance
Corporation, the Japan Agriculture, Forestry’s and Fisheries Finance Corporation, the Japan Bank for
International Cooperation, and the Japan Finance Corporation for Municipal Enterprises (JFCME).

24

Box 6. Overseas Activities of Japanese Banks
Japanese banks have renewed their efforts
to expand overseas, particularly in Asia, in
recent years, as nonperforming loans have
been significantly reduced. In the last three
years, Japanese banks’ outstanding external
credits have, on average, grown annually at a
14 percent pace. Except for offshore centers,
the Asia/Pacific region (excluding Hong Kong
SAR and Singapore) is the most rapidly
growing credit destination.1 Although the
Asia/Pacific share is still small—about onesixth of the U.S., Canada and Europe shares—
it has increased steadily since 2002, while
others (notably shares of the U.S. and Canada)
have decreased.

Japanese Banks' External Credits 1/
(Average annual growth in 2002-05, in percent)
-5

0

5

10

15

20

25

All countries
U.S./Canada (36.1)
Europe (36.0)
Asia/Pacific (5.8) 2/
Africa/Middle East (0.7)
Latin America/Caribbean
(0.6)
(Ref.) Offshore centers
(20.8) 2/
Source: Bank of Japan.
1/ Figures in parenthesis are the regional shares at the end of 2005.
2/ Asia / Pacific includes Australia and New Zealand, and offshore centers include Hong Kong SAR
and Singapore.

Recent expansion plans by Japanese banks appear to be focused on providing loans, derivatives,
and cash management services to Japanese companies operating in Asia. China, South Korea, and
major South East Asian countries, and more recently, India and Vietnam are the main countries of focus.
The strategy is similar to the business model employed by German and other industrial-country banks to
service their corporate clients worldwide. In addition, there is growing interest among Japanese banks in
expanding their presence in specific domestic markets, such as banking services to non-Japanese clients,
syndicated loan arrangements, and structured finance products for local investors.
Enhancing the ability of Japanese banks to
provide services to Japanese and nonJapanese clients in Asia would improve
their still-low profitability at home, as well
as diversify credit risk. In fact, the
Asia/Pacific region has recently been a source
of relatively stable and high profits for
Japanese banks, along with North and Latin
America, where their main focus is on
investment banking (e.g., securities
investment and fee-related businesses). The
Asia/Pacific region accounts for about
30 percent of total overseas profits in 2005 but
a much smaller share of outstanding overseas
credit.

Japanese Major Banks' Return on Assets by Region 1/
(In percent)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Japan

-0.5

Asia/Pacific
North/Latin Americas

-1.0

Europe/Middle East
Total

-1.5
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: Individual Banks'Annual Reports.
1/ Current profits divided by total assets of Mitsubishi-UFJ FG, Mizuho FG, and Sumitomo-Mitsui
FG. 2005 figures are the staff estimates based on fiscal half data.

A continuation of this trend of allocating more assets to Asia would improve profit levels and
diversify both profit sources and credit risks, but could also involve risks. Diversification is
consistent with Japanese banks’ current overseas strategy, as well as with Japanese supervisory policies
and the Basel II principle. At the same time, the risks in these exposures may not be fully understood, and
bear watching.
__________________________
1
Cayman Islands represents 72.7 percent of these credits to offshore centers, where such credits are
largely related to special purpose vehicles and hedge funds, benefiting from tax haven treatment,
followed by Singapore (5.7 percent), Panama (5.5 percent), and Hong Kong SAR (5.2 percent).

25
developments could raise profits, but also introduce new risks. The expansion of credit
derivatives (which allow transfer of credit risks to non-bank entities) and structured
finance products (e.g., collateralized debt obligations) is helping to diversify risks, but
may have systemic implications as the market grows.
•

The impact of rising interest rates and asset repricing on financial institutions and
corporates bears watching. Though higher rates and a steeper yield curve support bank
profits over a longer horizon, lending rates usually lag increases in bond rates. Rising
long-term rates may cause capital losses, although they should be manageable.19

•

GFI reform plans would go some way to level the playing field in banking, but much
depends on the details of implementation. Planned reforms would need to ensure
profitability and stability of the institutions affected, and would need to avoid undue
financial support or regulatory forbearance.

The Authorities’ Views and Policy Intentions
26.
The authorities agreed that the priority is to continue revitalizing the financial
system.
•

On the banking sector, the authorities acknowledge that major banks’ core profits remain
low despite high net income, and agree that the priorities are improving banks’
profitability and risk management. They noted that, in the search of new business models,
banks are expanding into fee-earning activities, but the effects of recent deregulation are
yet to be seen.

•

The authorities agree that risks from rising interest rates are manageable, both because
of improved bank capital and reduced duration of banks’ exposures.

•

The authorities are preparing to strengthen oversight of risk management as well as risk
management systems at banks, in the context of Basel II (Japan is represented in the
Basel Committee). The Basel II framework is to be introduced by end-March 2007;
corresponding revisions to capital adequacy regulations and supervision guidelines were
made in March 2006, with other revisions to be finalized soon. Regarding credit
derivatives, the domestic market is relatively small and risks are limited.

•

The authorities are making efforts to promote the development of securities markets,
particularly through the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law. Effective enforcement
of the law will also enhance investor protection. The Tokyo Stock Exchange is expanding

19

A BoJ report shows that losses that would result from a yield curve steepening with a 100-basis point rise in
long-term yields amount to only about 5 percent of Tier 1 capital for major banks as of end-March 2005.

26
its trading capacity this year, and will introduce a new system by 2009. In addition, the
new law allows the stock exchange to set up an independent self-regulatory body.
•

As for the GFIs, implementation details for the reform plans will be fleshed out later this
year. In principle, the reform opens up business opportunities for private institutions.
V. INTERNATIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF JAPAN’S RECOVERY AND POLICIES

Japan’s economic resurgence has yielded significant benefits for the region and the rest of
the world economy. Underlying fundamentals suggest that the yen should appreciate over the
medium term and the external surplus should shrink. Fiscal consolidation may slow these
adjustments, but this is a reasonable price to pay: fiscal stability is in Japan’s and the
world’s long-term interests. More broadly, Japan has a well-recognized role to play in a
cooperative effort to mitigate the risk of a disruptive adjustment of global imbalances.
Background
27.

Japan’s expansion is having positive effects regionally and globally:

•

Supporting growth: Since 2002, Japan’s real GDP has risen at a 2¼ percent annual rate,
adding on average about ¼ percent points to global growth each year.

•

Expanding trade: Since 2002, Japan’s imports of goods and services have increased by
some $150 billion—an increase of nearly 35 percent in dollar terms. Exports have grown
briskly as well, with the expanding international supply chain contributing to rising trade
integration between Japan and other Asian countries.

•

Narrowing global imbalances: After rising in 2004, the current account imbalance shrank
modestly in 2005, notwithstanding a jump in income flows from Japan’s large creditor
position as overseas FDI matured.

•

Swelling FDI outflows: Since 2002, net direct investment outflows rose by over
40 percent in dollar terms.

•

Limited adverse regional spillovers from yen weakening: Asian countries (except Korea)
compete with Japan in third markets to only a limited extent. In addition, the weaker yen
cheapens capital imports for other Asian countries.

28.
•

Derivatives prices imply only moderate risk of large near-term yen moves.
Implied volatility—a measure of market uncertainty—on yen/dollar option contracts
remains below past peaks at short maturities, suggesting limited concerns that unwinding

27
of carry trades could prompt appreciation.20
•

That said, the term structure of implied volatilities slopes upward, suggesting slightly
greater uncertainty about exchange-rate moves over longer horizons.

•

The risk of a rapid unwinding of carry trades as monetary policy normalizes seems
moderate. Forward yen interest rates remain low, compared (for example) to U.S. dollar
forward rates, and market participants see limited leverage in carry trades.

29.
Over the medium term, however, underlying macroeconomic fundamentals
imply that the yen should appreciate. The cyclical recovery, as well as longer-term trends
in population aging and broad-based productivity gains, would be associated with a higher
real exchange rate and a narrowing of the current account. Consistent with this scenario—
and subject to large margins of statistical uncertainty—estimates by the IMF’s Consultative
Group on Exchange Rates suggest that the yen could appreciate in real effective terms over
the medium term; this would likely take place in the context of multilateral adjustment in
partner-country currencies. Such exchange rate and current account adjustments are apt to
occur notwithstanding the headwinds from fiscal consolidation—crucial for long-term
sustainability—and further reductions in home-bias by Japanese investors, which may slow
the medium-term appreciation.
Policy Issues and Staff Views
30.
Japan, along with other countries, has a key role to play in contributing to a
smooth resolution of global imbalances. In this context, accelerated structural reforms to
boost domestic demand are a key ingredient in a multilateral strategy. For example, a
combination of an additional ¼ percent per year in productivity growth, along with a
moderate rise in female labor force participation, could raise potential GDP growth by
½ percent per year—a figure within the range of estimated gains from product and labor
market reforms. Simulations using the Global Economic Model suggest that under this
scenario, the current account would fall over the near term by some ⅓ percent of GDP
relative to the baseline.21 Under a scenario that incorporates both stronger productivity
20

Implied volatility is an estimate of market uncertainty about future asset-price moves extracted from option
prices. If investors were risk-neutral, implied volatility would be equal to the market estimate of the standard
deviation of asset price changes.

21

The baseline and “structural reform” scenarios assume the authorities’ program of ½ percent of GDP
consolidation per year. The “structural and fiscal reforms” scenario assumes the staff’s recommendation of
¾ percent of GDP consolidation per year. These simulations are reported in the background paper for last year’s
Article IV consultation (IMF Country Report No. 05/272 at www.imf.org). The assumed annual payoff of
¼ percent is at the conservative end of the range of estimates in the literature. If the payoff were larger—or if
the rise in prospective income reduced precautionary savings (which is not accounted for in the model)—the fall
in the current account balance could be larger and more sustained.

28
growth and the staff’s recommended path of fiscal consolidation (an additional ¼ percent of
GDP per year), higher growth partly offsets the effects of fiscal consolidation on the external
surplus.22 These results do not assume implementation of the “agreed strategy” outside
Japan—notably, fiscal consolidation in the United States, greater exchange rate flexibility in
emerging Asia, and pro-growth reforms in Europe. As part of a concerted policy effort, a
vigorous reform program in Japan would help reduce the risk of a disorderly adjustment of
global imbalances that could entail slower world growth and sharp exchange rate
movements.
Effects of Structural and Fiscal Reforms
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
2006

Structural Reforms
2008
2011

2016

2006

Structural and Fiscal Reforms
2008
2011

2016

Japan
Real GDP (level)
Current account (percent of GDP)
Government debt (percent of GDP)

0.0
-0.3
0.0

0.3
-0.3
-1.1

1.5
0.0
-1.9

3.6
0.1
-4.9

-0.2
-0.1
0.3

-0.2
0.5
-0.7

0.7
0.8
-5.8

2.5
0.7
-17.8

United States
Real GDP (level)
Current account (percent of GDP)

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.1
-0.1

0.0
-0.2

0.0
-0.2

Euro Area
Real GDP (level)
Current account (percent of GDP)

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Emerging Asia
Real GDP (level)
Current account (percent of GDP)

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

-0.1
0.0

-0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.3

0.5

0.5

0.3

0.5

0.5

0.2
0.1
1.0

0.3
0.2
2.8

0.3
0.2
5.1

0.2
0.1
1.0

0.3
0.2
2.8

0.3
0.2
5.1

Memorandum Items
Change in Potential Growth in Japan
0.4
Of Which:
TFP
0.4
Labor Input 1/
0.1
Change in female participation rate in Japan

1/ Female participation rate rises gradually from around 61 percent to 66 percent by 2016 (the UK and U.S. average female participation rate is currently around 69 percent).

31.
A return to a more neutral monetary stance is likely to have had some effect on
global liquidity conditions. The unwinding of yen carry trades has had an impact on
selected markets outside Japan, although factors specific to those markets were at play. More
generally, heightened expectations that BoJ accommodation will be reduced during 2006
have had limited effects in international markets. This may reflect clear communication of
the intent to maintain accommodative conditions, which has smoothed ripples in financial
markets.
32.
The policy of a market-determined exchange rate remains appropriate. Under
the likely scenario of a gradual adjustment in the exchange rate, intervention would not be
22

This second scenario does not show any additional positive effect of further fiscal consolidation on potential
growth, because it entails only a modestly more ambitious schedule of deficit reduction compared with both the
first alternative scenario and the baseline—an additional ¼ percentage point of GDP per year over five years.

29
needed in a setting where deflation pressures have lifted, the monetary policy transmission
mechanism has strengthened, and corporations are in robust shape.
The Authorities’ Views and Policy Intentions
33.
The authorities agreed that a strategy involving a number of countries is needed
to promote a smooth rebalancing of world demand. While the near-term risks of
disorderly adjustment seem limited—and interest differentials would probably lend support
to the U.S. dollar in the short run—imbalances add uncertainty to the global economy in the
medium run.
34.
However, undue emphasis should not be put on adjustments in exchange rates.
Heavy emphasis on exchange rate adjustments could trigger disruptive movements in major
currencies. Instead, the focus should be on rebalancing world demand through fiscal
consolidation in the United States complemented by structural reforms to boost domestic
demand in Europe and Japan. In addition, a renewed push at the WTO to liberalize trade in
services may pave the way for greater U.S. exports.
35.
There are also questions about the size of the needed adjustment. The authorities
considered the sustainable current account deficit for the U.S. may have risen in tandem with
global savings and productivity growth, to perhaps as high as 4½–5 percent of GDP. Thus,
the needed adjustment might be moderate.
36.
The authorities also saw limited risks in a disorderly unwinding of yen carry
trades. Data remain scant, but to the extent that carry trades are defined narrowly as
speculative positions of hedge funds (for example, proxied by IMM contracts), the fact that
these institutions have recently been able to build up and wind down such exposures
smoothly suggests that there are limited risks of a systemic problem.
37.
Japan’s exchange rate policy remains unchanged. As stated in a recent G-7
communiqué, the yen exchange rate should reflect economic fundamentals, and the
authorities will take appropriate action as necessary to counter disorderly movements.
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
Japan’s post-bubble legacies have essentially been resolved and deflation has
ended. Fragilities in the corporate and financial sector have been dealt with, supporting a
rebound in investment. Improving labor markets and disposable incomes have helped
broaden the expansion to the household sector. These developments have resulted in a
prolonged upswing at a rate above potential—and growth now grounded on private domestic
demand. In addition, consumer prices now seem likely to continue rising, and the risk of a
deflationary relapse has receded.

30
39.
The post-deflation era brings new challenges. Monetary policymakers are adapting
to the operational and communication trials of an environment with two-way inflation risks.
Fiscal policy is beginning to rein in budgetary imbalances and make room for the demands of
population aging. Structural reforms aim at boosting productivity and preserve living
standards in the context of a shrinking labor force. Financial sector reforms are laying the
groundwork for improving the efficiency of intermediation while safeguarding financial
stability. Progress is being made on all these fronts, but more remains to be done to secure
strong non-inflationary growth over the medium term.
40.
The end of deflation and the smooth transition out of quantitative easing
represent milestones for monetary policy. The sizeable reduction in excess reserves
without undue volatility in financial markets reflects deft operations and communications by
the BoJ. Clear communication has also helped to defuse market concerns that the end of
quantitative easing portends a sharp withdrawal of stimulus. In the near term, the policy
stance should remain accommodative, allowing inflation expectations to drift up.
41.
The new monetary framework is well suited to the new environment. The
framework clarifies how the BoJ will approach monetary policy in the post-deflation
environment and, as such, is a welcome improvement in transparency. At the same time, it
allows appropriate flexibility for the BoJ to respond to a range of short and long-term risks.
42.
That said, steps to elaborate further various aspects of the monetary framework
could help to guide market expectations and bolster policy credibility. In particular, as
regards the zero lower bound on the “understanding of price stability,” clearly explaining the
risks associated with near-zero inflation could help markets to form appropriate expectations
about the conduct of policy. In addition, the range (or its floor) could adjust upwards over
time, in the context of the periodic reviews. A higher floor would signal the desirability of a
buffer against deflationary shocks.
43.
Considerable progress has been made in fiscal consolidation without holding
back the expansion. The long cyclical upswing has contributed to revenue buoyancy and
made it easier to restrain spending, but discretionary measures—curbing public works,
reforming social security, and rolling back past tax cuts—have played an important role as
well. The fact that consolidation has occurred without noticeably dampening economic
momentum or worsening deflationary pressures suggests that an ambitious approach to
stabilizing public finances need not derail the expansion.
44.
As is well recognized, the task ahead remains large. In this connection, the
authorities’ commitment to continue with fiscal consolidation is welcome. So are recent steps
to strengthen their plan and make it more concrete. Given the strength of the expansion, a
somewhat more front-loaded and ambitious adjustment than envisioned by authorities would
be appropriate, as it would stabilize the debt and buy insurance against unanticipated fiscal or

31
economic shocks. It would also bolster the credibility of the authorities’ fiscal adjustment
program, helping to limit the risk of rising real interest rates as the expansion matures.
45.
Progress has also been made in structural reforms. Indeed, the strong expansion
may in part reflect the payoff from vigorous financial and corporate sector restructuring in
the past. Going forward, steps to downsize government, rationalize labor and product market
regulation, and liberalize trade should over time lift productivity further.
46.
Accelerating structural reform would pay additional dividends to Japan and the
world. Stronger underlying growth would facilitate fiscal consolidation while helping to
support living standards in the face of population aging. It would also bolster world growth
and support a more balanced pattern of global demand, which along with actions in other
countries would help to promote an orderly resolution of global imbalances. For all these
reasons, it would be crucial to maintain an ambitious reform program.
47.
Further financial sector reforms will also help to sustain non-inflationary
growth over the medium term. Steps underway to reduce the government’s role in
intermediation, streamline and clarify securities regulation, and bolster financial risk
management will help to safeguard the stability of the financial system while improving its
efficiency. They will also help to promote the further development of securities markets,
providing an additional source of financing to reduce the risk of a credit crunch in the event
of banking system stress.
48.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12month cycle.

32

Figure 1. Japan: Output, Inflation, Corporations and Banks
4

4

1.0

2

2

0.5

1.0

CPI Inflation (year-on-year
growth)
Headline

0
Private domestic
demand (contr. to
growth)
Net exports (contr. to
growth)

-2

0.5

Core
ex. temp.
factors

0

0.0

-2

-0.5

-4

-1.0
2003

0.0

-0.5

Real GDP growth

-4
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005
160

6.0

10

Unemployment

5.5

140

5.0

-1.0
2004

Unemployment rate, LH

4.0

2006
10

NPL
(Ratio to total loans)

8

8

Major Banks
Regional Banks

120

4.5

2005

6

6

4

4

2

2

100

3.5
Ratio of job offers to
applicants, RH

3.0

80

2.5

60

2.0
1.5
1996
4.5

40
1998

2000

2002

2004

4.0

4.0

Manufacturing
Non-manufacturing
All industry

3.5

FY2001
4.5

Debt/Sales Ratio
(Four-quarter moving average)

0

0

2006

FY2004

FY2005
4

4
Bank lending
(adjusted)

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0
1980

2.0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

-6
-8
1994

Sources: CEIC; Nomura; FSA; Ministry of Finance.

-6

Bank
lending

-8
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

33

Figure 2. Japan: External Sector, Monetary and Fiscal Policy
5.5

5.5
External Balances
(In percent of GDP)

4.5

Effective Exchange Rates
100

100

95

95

90

90

85

85

80

80

4.5

Trade balance
Invisibles
Current balance

3.5

105

105

3.5

2.5

2.5

1.5

1.5

0.5

75

Nominal

75

70

Real (CPI-based)

70

0.5

Real (ULC-based)

65
-0.5

-0.5

60

60
2000

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
40

1.5

Monetary Policy: Current Stance
vs. Taylor-like Rule 1/

65

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
6

6
General Government Balance
(In percent of GDP; fiscal years)

4

Proj.

4

30

1.0

BoJ Policy rate
(in percent, LH)

Current account
balances
(in trillions of
yen, RH)

0.5

20

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

10
0.0
0

-8

-0.5
Taylor-like rule
(in percent, LH)

-10

Overall balance

-8

Overall balance excl. social
security

-10
-12

-12

-1.0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

1980

2006

240

240
General Government Debt
(In percent of GDP; fiscal years)
Gross debt

200

1986

1992

1998

2004

2010

120

120
Net Public Debt
(In percent of GDP)

Proj.
200

100

100

160

80

80

120

120

60

1/2 percent adjustment per year

60

80

80

40

3/4 percent adjustment per year

40

40

40

20

0

0

Net debt

160

Net debt excl.
social security

0
1980

1986

1992

1998

2004

2010

1 percent adjustment per year

20

0
2003

2008

2013

2018

Sources: CEIC; Nomura; INS, Information Notice System; Ministry of Finance; Bank of Japan; and staff
calculations.
1/ The Taylor-like rule ignores the zero bound on interest rates. Based on staff estimates, it assumes a dynamic
neutral real rate and weights for inflation and the output gap in a 2¼ to 1 ratio. A 1 percent inflation reference
value is also assumed.

34
Figure 3. Japan: Financial Markets
2

2
Yield Curve of Government Bonds
(In percent)

1.8
1.6

1.6

1.4

1-Mar-06

1.4

1.2

27-Jun-06

1.2
1

1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

110

2Y

3Y

4Y 5Y

6Y

7Y

8Y

9Y 10Y
110

Land Prices : Six Largest Cities
(1997=100)

100

100
90

90

120

Stock Market Indices
(Jan 2000=100)

1.8

1-Jan-06

3M 6M 1Y

120

100

100
S&P 500
80

80

60

60

40

Eurofirst 300

Nikkei 225

40

20

20

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

3000

90
Yen/US$
(reversed, RH)

2500

100

2000

110

1500
80

80

70

70

60

60

500

Average
Commercial area

50

40

Residential area
Industrial area

40

30
30
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
7

0

6
5
USD 3x6
FRA 1/
3-month Options Risk Reversal
(negative implies premium on
yen appreciation vs dollar)

2
1

140

-1500
-2000
1997

-1
-2
-3
2004

2005

2006

160
170

1999

2001

2003

2005

6

15

5

14

4

13

3

12

2

11

11

1

10

10

0

9

-1

8

15
Option-implied Volatility for Yen-Dollar Exchange Rate at
Various Maturities
14
(Annual percentage change)
13
12

12/15/2005

Yen 3x6 FRA

0

150

Banks' ST overseas
securities investment
(12-mma, LH)

-1000

Forward Interest Rates and Risk Reversals

3

130

-500

50

4

120

1000

-2

7

-3

6

6/27/2006

9
8

6/15/2005

7
6

O/N

1W

Sources: Tullet Prebon; Bloomberg; CEIC; Nomura database; Reuters.
1/ 3x6 FRA=3-month maturity forward rate agreement, beginning in 3 months.

1M

2M

3M

6M

1Y

35
Table 1. Japan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2002–2007
Nominal GDP: US$4,571 billion (2005)
Main exports (percent of total, 2005): electrical machinery (22), manufacturing (11)
Unemployment rate (2005): 4.4 percent
FDI (2005): $3.3 billion
Public debt, gross (2005): 175.4 percent of GDP
Foreign public debt (2005): 4.9 percent of total public debt
Population: 127.7 million (2005)
GDP per capita: US$35,795 (2005)
Quota: SDR 13,312.8 million
Proj.
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Growth (percent change) 1/
Real GDP
Domestic demand
Private consumption
Residential investment
Business investment
Government consumption
Public investment
Stockbuilding 2/
Net exports 2/
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

0.1
-0.6
1.1
-4.1
-5.2
2.4
-4.9
-0.4
0.7
7.5
0.8

1.8
1.2
0.6
-0.9
6.2
2.3
-10.8
0.3
0.6
9.0
4.0

2.3
1.5
1.9
2.0
4.7
2.0
-8.8
-0.2
0.8
13.9
8.5

2.6
2.5
2.1
-0.7
7.8
1.7
-5.9
0.1
0.2
7.0
6.3

2.9
2.6
2.1
4.9
7.3
0.9
-2.5
0.0
0.4
11.2
10.3

2.1
2.2
2.0
4.1
4.8
1.0
-3.0
0.0
0.0
6.5
8.0

Inflation (annual average)
CPI (SA) 3/
GDP deflator

-0.9
-1.6

-0.3
-1.6

0.0
-1.2

-0.3
-1.3

0.6
0.0

0.6
0.4

Unemployment rate (annual average)

5.4

5.3

4.7

4.4

4.1

4.0

Government (percent of GDP, fiscal year basis)
General government
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance
Primary Balance
Primary Balance excluding social security
Primary Balance excluding Daiko

28.7
37.2
-8.5
-7.0
-5.6
-7.0

28.0
35.8
-7.8
-6.3
-5.6
-7.1

28.7
34.3
-5.6
-4.3
-3.9
-5.4

29.1
34.5
-5.3
-4.1
-3.0
-4.4

29.7
34.6
-5.0
-3.4
-2.3
-3.4

30.4
35.2
-4.8
-3.0
-1.8
-3.0

Money and credit (percent change, end-period)
Base money
M2 plus CDs (period average)
Domestic credit
Bank lending (after adjustment)

19.5
3.3
-1.6
-2.5

13.2
1.7
3.9
-2.0

4.2
1.9
-1.2
-1.2

1.0
1.9
-0.3
1.1

-16.2
1.2
0.4
2.6

Interest rate
Three-month CD rate (annual average)
Official discount rate (end-period)

0.07
0.10

0.09
0.10

0.06
0.10

0.06
0.10

Balance of payments (in billions of US$)
Current account balance
Percent of GDP
Trade balance
Percent of GDP
Exports of goods, f.o.b.
Imports of goods, f.o.b.
Oil imports (trade basis)
Terms of trade (percent change)
Change in reserves

112.6
2.9
93.9
2.4
395.7
301.8
47.0
1.0
46.7

136.2
3.2
106.4
2.5
449.2
342.8
59.2
1.7
188.1

172.1
3.8
132.1
2.9
539.1
407.0
72.4
-2.2
161.0

165.7
3.6
93.8
2.1
567.4
473.6
99.2
-5.2
22.3

169.6
3.7
81.6
1.8
601.5
519.9
124.4
-5.6
...

Total reserves minus gold (in billions of US$)

461.2

663.3

833.8

834.3

849.8 5/

...

Exchange rates (annual average)
Yen/dollar rate
Real effective exchange rate 4/

125.4
83.9

115.9
80.2

108.2
79.9

110.2
74.8

114.5 5/
71.3 8/

115.4 7/
...

5/
5/
6/
5/

0.20 5/
0.10 5/

...
...
...
...
0.28 7/
...
165.0
3.5
78.5
1.6
637.6
559.1
137.9
-1.3
...

Sources: Global Insight, Nomura database; IMF, Competitiveness Indicators System; and Fund staff estimates and
projections as of June 19, 2006.
1/ Annual growth rates and contributions are calculated from seasonally adjusted data.
2/ Contribution to GDP growth.
3/ Annual growth rates are calculated from annual averages of monthly data.
4/ Based on normalized unit labor costs; 2000=100.
5/ June 2006.
6/ April 2006.
7/ July 13, 2006.
8/ May 2006.

36

Table 2. Japan: General Government Operations, 2000–2006 1/
(In percent of GDP)
2000

2001

2002

Total revenue
Taxes and fines
Social security premiums
Property income
Total expenditure
Current
Consumption
(less) Depreciation
Social security benefits
Other current
Interest paid
Capital
Investment
Land acquisition
Capital transfers
Of which : Bank support
Balance
Primary balance
Excluding social security
Structural balance (excluding bank support)

30.0
17.7
10.1
2.0
36.8
29.9
11.5
-2.6
14.3
3.3
3.3
7.0
5.2
0.8
1.0
0.7
-6.9
-5.4
-4.5
-5.8

30.3
17.5
10.5
1.9
37.1
31.0
11.9
-2.8
15.2
3.5
3.2
6.2
5.0
0.7
0.5
0.1
-6.9
-5.5
-4.2
-5.7

Total revenue
Taxes and fines
Social security premiums
Property income
Total expenditure
Current
Consumption
(less) Depreciation
Social security benefits
Other current
Interest paid
Capital
Investment
Land acquisition
Capital transfers
Of which : Bank support
Balance
Primary balance
Excluding social security
Structural balance (excluding bank support)
Debt (In percent of GDP, calendar year)
Gross
Net
Memorandum items :
Nominal GDP (FY, trillion yen)
Nominal GDP (CY, trillion yen)

29.7
17.4
10.0
2.0
37.4
29.9
11.5
-2.6
14.2
3.5
3.4
7.5
5.2
0.8
1.5
1.2
-7.7
-6.2
-5.5
-6.0

30.6
18.0
10.4
1.9
36.9
30.5
11.7
-2.7
14.9
3.4
3.2
6.4
5.1
0.8
0.6
0.3
-6.4
-4.9
-3.9
-5.4

142.4
60.4

151.8
66.1

161.3
72.7

502.9
501.3

492.6
496.9

488.8
489.7

2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

(Fiscal year)
28.7
28.0
16.2
15.7
10.6
10.5
1.7
1.5
37.2
35.8
31.2
31.0
11.9
11.9
-2.8
-2.9
15.6
15.7
3.5
3.6
3.0
2.8
6.0
4.8
4.7
4.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
-0.1
0.3
0.0
-8.5
-7.8
-7.0
-6.3
-5.6
-5.6
-6.9
-6.9

28.7
16.4
10.5
1.5
34.3
30.9
11.8
-3.0
16.0
3.5
2.7
3.3
3.7
0.4
-0.8
0.0
-5.6
-4.3
-3.9
-4.7

29.1
16.7
10.7
1.6
34.5
30.8
11.7
-3.3
16.1
3.5
2.8
3.7
3.6
0.4
-0.3
0.0
-5.3
-4.1
-3.0
-5.0

29.7
17.1
10.8
1.5
34.6
31.0
11.5
-3.3
16.2
3.5
3.1
3.6
3.4
0.4
-0.1
0.0
-5.0
-3.4
-2.3
-5.0

(Calendar year)
29.2
28.7
16.5
16.0
10.6
10.9
1.8
1.5
37.3
36.8
31.4
31.2
12.0
12.0
-2.8
-2.9
15.6
15.7
3.5
3.6
3.1
2.8
5.9
5.6
4.8
4.3
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.1
-8.2
-8.1
-6.7
-6.7
-5.5
-5.9
-6.7
-6.9

28.2
16.0
10.5
1.5
34.4
30.9
11.8
-3.0
15.9
3.5
2.7
3.5
3.9
0.5
-0.9
0.0
-6.3
-4.9
-4.6
-5.5

29.1
16.6
10.6
1.6
34.7
31.1
11.7
-3.0
16.1
3.5
2.7
3.6
3.6
0.4
-0.4
0.0
-5.6
-4.4
-3.5
-5.1

29.5
17.0
10.8
1.5
34.9
31.2
11.6
-3.0
16.2
3.5
3.0
3.7
3.4
0.4
-0.2
0.0
-5.4
-3.9
-2.8
-5.3

167.6
77.3

178.6
82.2

181.6
86.7

181.4
89.6

493.6
490.8

496.1
496.1

505.3
502.6

522.2
517.6

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Estimated from the National Income Accounts data. The fiscal year is April through March.

37
Table 3. Japan: External and Financial Indicators, 1998–2006
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Latest

External indicators
Real exports of goods and services (percent change)

-2.3

1.5

12.2

-6.7

7.5

9.0

13.9

7.0

…

Real imports of goods and services (percent change)

-6.7

3.6

8.5

1.0

0.8

4.0

8.5

6.3

…

Terms of trade (percent change)

6.7

4.6

-5.0

-1.0

1.0

1.7

-2.2

-5.2

…

Current account balance

3.1

2.6

2.6

2.1

2.9

3.2

3.8

3.6

…

-3.1

-1.2

-1.9

-1.4

-1.7

1.5

0.4

-2.6

…

Capital and financial account balance
Of which :
Inward portfolio investment

1.4

2.9

1.0

1.5

-0.5

1.9

4.3

4.0

…

Inward direct investment

0.1

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.2

0.1

…

Other investment liabilities (net)
Total reserves minus gold (US$ billion)
In months of imports of goods and services
Broad money (M2 + CDs) to reserves ratio

-1.4

0.1

-0.3

0.7

1.6

4.4

0.4

-1.4

…

214.8

286.9

354.9

395.2

461.2

663.3

833.8

834.3

848.0

7.4

9.1

9.6

11.7

14.0

18.1

19.1

17.0

…

2.1

1.9

1.6

1.3

1.1

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

Foreign assets of deposit money banks (US$ billion)

833.2

682.5

787.8

768.4

724.2

689.2

795.2

961.1

…

Foreign liabilities of deposit money banks (US$ billion)

612.5

478.8

568.7

565.5

536.7

505.0

576.3

588.4

…

1,153.6

829.1

1,157.9

1,249.1

1,598.5

1,721.9

1,852.8

1,986.3

…

External loan liabilities

717.7

676.8

707.2

654.5

668.0

721.7

839.0

860.2

…

External public sector debt (gross) 1/

244.0

208.7

271.7

232.8

189.1

205.6

319.0

383.2

…
…

External loan liabilities to exports ratio

1.7

1.5

1.4

1.5

1.5

1.4

1.4

1.3

…

External interest payments to exports (in percent) 2/

7.2

4.5

3.9

4.1

2.3

1.7

1.4

1.7

…

Nominal effective exchange rate (percent change)

2.4

13.5

8.7

-8.1

-4.5

3.1

3.9

-3.2

-5.4

120.7

134.5

142.5

151.9

161.4

167.6

178.6

181.7

…
0.003

Net international investment position (US$ billion)
Of which :

Financial market indicators
General government gross debt
Interest rates (percent, end-year)
3-month Gensaki rate

0.14

0.07

0.32

0.01

0.003

0.001

0.001

0.001

3-month Gensaki rate, real

-0.45

1.15

0.72

1.21

0.31

0.41

-0.20

0.10

0.00

3-month interest rate spread vis-à-vis U.S.

-4.28

-5.16

-5.51

-1.71

-1.19

-0.89

-2.20

-3.89

-4.51

-7.5

58.4

-25.5

-19.6

-18.3

23.8

10.2

43.5

38.1

…

Stock market index (TOPIX, percent change, end-year) 3/
Banking sector risk indicators
Total loans to assets (in percent)
Total loans to deposits (in percent)
Share of real estate sector in total lending (in percent)

49.9

47.3

44.3

39.6

38.2

34.6

32.6

31.0

105.1

98.9

97.8

93.4

87.3

81.9

78.8

78.4

…

14.2

14.5

14.9

14.9

14.6

13.8

14.5

14.9

…

Share of nonperforming loans in total loans
(In percent, end-fiscal year) 4/
Risk-weighted capital ratio (in percent, end-fiscal year) 4/

6.1

5.4

5.3

8.4

7.2

5.2

2.9

…

…

11.6

11.8

11.7

10.8

9.4

11.2

11.6

…

…

Sources: Global Insight, Nomura Database; IMF, International Financial Statistics; Fitch IBCA; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Public sector debt securities and other loan liabilities.
2/ Other investment income, debit.
3/ Twelve-month percent change for the latest figure.
4/ Major banks. Capital ratio is on a nonconsolidated basis.

38
ANNEX I. JAPAN—STRUCTURAL REFORM AGENDA
1.
Steady progress has been made in structural reforms but more remains to be
done. Mark-ups and prices remain relatively high (OECD, 2004), while productivity—
particularly in sectors such as food and retail—has been low. A recent report by the Ministry
of the Economy, Trade and Industry (2006) shows that labor productivity of these sectors is
about 40 percent lower in Japan than in the United States. These facts suggest limited
competition, resource misallocation, and impediments to factor mobility.
2.
Structural reforms have potentially large payoffs in terms of output and growth.
Static gains could be as large as 8 percent of GDP, and dynamic gains could be in a range of
0.3 to 2.4 percent. With this as backdrop, this annex discusses structural reform priorities and
potential benefits in the areas of labor markets, deregulation and product markets, and trade
and agriculture.
Estimates of Gains from Structural Reform in GDP Terms
Bradford
Year published
Static gain
1-year gain (5-year horizon)
Overall gain (5-year horizon)
Main reform measure(s) or assumption:

Year published

2002
2.2
0.4
2.2
Eliminate tariffs
and non-tariff
barriers
TFP Growth
Reversion
(Prescott-Hayashi)
2002

Economic Planning
Agency
1994
(In percent)
8.0
1.6
8.0

OECD
2004
5.2
1.0
5.2

General
Deregulation

Regulatory reform

Japan Center for
Economic Research

MITI/Sanwa

2003
2000
(In percent)
Dynamic gain
2.2
0.3
2.4
1-year gain (5-year horizon)
2.2
0.3
2.4
Overall gain (5-year horizon)
12.4
1.6
12.6
Reversion of TFP
Regulatory reform
Deregulation and rapid
Main reform measure(s) or assumption:
growth to 1980’s
mainly in public
diffusion of IT
rate
services
Sources: IMF Country Report No. 04/247 drawing from the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI),
Sanwa Research Institute (2000); Japan Center for Economic Research (2003); Shimpo and Nishizaki (1997);
Bradford (2003); OECD (2004); and Hayashi and Prescott (2002).

39
A. Labor Market
3.
With the working-age population shrinking, further efforts to boost regular
employment and broaden participation are needed. The historically-high share of parttime workers, while adding labor market flexibility, may limit accumulation of human capital
because of short job tenure. In addition, the increase in structural unemployment since the
early 1990s points to a possible increase in skill mismatches. Meanwhile, participation rates
for women are relatively low, (and are declining for the younger generations), reflecting a
lack of family-friendly policies (e.g., affordable good-quality childcare and long working
hours), as well as unequal job opportunities and wage discrimination. Priorities could
include:
•

Establishing more flexible labor hours (including by implementing the Childcare and
Family Care Leave Act), as well as providing focused financial support for parents in
need of childcare, and encouraging the supply of high-quality childcare; avoiding
discrete jumps in social security contributions for families when spouses return to
work; and providing job search support through government and private agencies.

•

Clarifying conditions for dismissing workers (including whether compensated layoffs are legal).

•

Providing appropriate job training to equip young people with career development
plans and the necessary skills to achieve them. A review of the system of personal
deductions for adult children living with their parents and social security
contributions could also strengthen incentive to participate in labor markets.

•

Improving the portability of corporate pensions (to enhance labor mobility). In
particular, participation in defined contribution plans could be broadened (for
example, employees of companies with corporate defined benefit pension plans
cannot join these plans), and upper limits on contributions could be raised further.

•

Facilitating further development of employment agencies.

Such steps could have significant payoffs. For example, a 1 percentage point rise in the
female participation rate would raise output by about ½ percentage point. (The female
participation ratio is 9 percentage points higher in the United States and United Kingdom
than in Japan.)
B. Deregulation and Product Markets
4.
High mark-ups and prices reflect weak competition and barriers to entry, as
well as inefficiencies in retail distribution and network industries (especially energy, as
shown in OECD (2004, 2005)). In addition, inward FDI is low owing to regulatory factors

40
and limited market contestability, hampering international knowledge transfer. However,
steps have recently been taken to promote competition: the new Antimonopoly Act enhances
powers and resources for the Fair Trade Commission, with stiffer surcharges and penalties
for anticompetitive behavior.
5.
Retail distribution: Certain trading practices imposed by producers, such as standard
prices and rebates, may restrict competition. In this connection, regular assessments of the
effectiveness of competition policy by the Fair Trade Commission (through ex-post
indicators such as margins) would be desirable. As the retail sector accounts for over
10 percent of aggregate output, potential gains of comprehensive reforms are large—
estimated by the OECD (2004) as exceeding 2 percent of GDP.
6.
Network industries: Deregulation has begun, but network industries remain less
open to competition than in many countries, and need appropriate regulatory frameworks.
(a) Post and Telecommunications: thanks to past deregulation, the price of internet access
and cellular phone interconnection rates have fallen to among the lowest in the OECD. Key
next steps could include: (i) establishing an independent telecoms regulator (as in most
OECD countries), to separate the government’s roles as shareholder and regulator1;
(ii) leveling the playing field by removing ownership restrictions in telecoms; and
(iii) enhancing competition in the postal sector, for example by abolishing strict service
obligations for general correspondence delivery business operators.2 The OECD (2004)
estimates the potential payoff from reforms in these sectors to be about ½ percent of GDP.
(b) Energy: retail choice of electricity has been expanded to 63 percent of the market in
electricity as of 2005. In natural gas, following passage of the amended Gas Industry Law in
2005, retail choice is expected to grow over time to 59 percent of the market. However,
prices remain high, as shown in OECD (2004, 2005). Priorities could include: (i) setting up
effective, independent sectoral regulators; and (ii) enhancing incentives for infrastructure
investment, including by bringing together networks in electricity into a separate firm.
OECD (2004) estimates that the economic gains from achieving fully competitive energy
markets would exceed ½ percent of GDP.
7.
Health Services: Priorities in this sector include opening up the medical sector to
commercial providers. For example, by allowing a broader scope for the operation of medical
1

In Japan, different ministries act as shareholder and regulator. Nevertheless, the OECD (2005) suggests that
there may be gains from establishing independent sectoral regulators.

2

There is free entry to the general correspondence delivery business and parcel delivery, but because new
entrants into the general correspondence delivery business are subject to some of the same universal service
obligations as the incumbent, free entry in that segment exists only in principle.

41
joint stock companies (JSCs), and rolling out medical JSCs nation-wide. Other priorities
include better information disclosure, improving the functioning of the insurance system, and
reviewing drug prices. Cabinet Office studies estimate that private enterprises in the fields of
medical care, home nursing, and daycare centers are more efficient than their public sector
counterparts by margins of 11–38 percent. If private participation in healthcare could
increase overall efficiency in the sector by 10–20 percent, with that sector accounting for
about 8 percent of expenditure (and that share set to rise), potential benefits could be ¾–1½
percent of GDP or higher.
8.
Inward FDI. FDI into Japan has picked up since the late 1990s but remains low, with
the stock relative to GDP less than one-tenth the average in other G-7 countries. This may
partly reflect limitations on inward
Inward FDI Stock (Liabilities)
(“out-in”) M&A, which is the main
(In percent of GDP)
vehicle for inward FDI in developed
Country
1998
2004
countries. In particular, foreign firms
0.7
2.1
Japan
United
States
24.9
22.9
have been unable to use their stock in
24.9
34.8
United Kingdom
“triangular” mergers to acquire
11.6
24.7
Germany
Japanese companies. Under the new
France
37.3
45.8
8.7
13.2
Italy
Corporate Code, triangular mergers will
Canada
23.2
30.6
be allowed from May 2007. However,
Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.
the new Code also increases the range
of possible takeover defenses for Japanese firms, while leaving unclear key issues
surrounding the use of foreign shares in M&A. Priorities to raise inward FDI could include:
•

Giving out-in M&A the same tax deferrals as in-in M&A;

•

Ensuring that foreign shares are effectively usable in M&A (if normal foreign listed
shares are at some point included under the definition of shares with “limited
transferability”, this would effectively preclude their use of triangular mergers);

•

Allowing greater foreign participation in sheltered sectors (such as health care).

9.
Murakami and Fukao (2006) find that target firms of out-in M&A tend to become
more productive and thus a pickup in overall out-in M&A might be expected to boost overall
productivity. Ito and Fukao (2003) estimate that if Japan’s inward FDI stock (relative to
GDP) moved towards the average OECD level, then overall benefits could be around
1½ percent of GDP.
C. Agriculture and Trade
10.
High protection in agriculture boosts domestic food prices while stifling sectoral
productivity. The recent move from price toward direct support in agriculture has begun to
address this problem, but would achieve maximum benefits if taken further, particularly with

42
the liberalization of trade in agricultural products and reductions in the high level of overall
support to farmers.
•

The move to allow nation-wide entry of JSCs in agriculture could be supported by
reforms of agricultural cooperatives, which are major players in agricultural business,
(e.g., by promoting more efficient and transparent management, and enhanced disclosure
on cost-revenue structure and subsidies); steps could also be taken to promote economies
of scale in land use.

•

On trade, ambition would be desirable in the Doha Round, and in the commitment to
offering duty and quota free access on at least 97 percent of tariff lines for products from
LDCs under the WTO Hong Kong Ministerial in December 2005 (particularly in areas
such as agriculture that could spur productivity gains). Preferential trade agreements,
known as “Economic Partnership Agreements” in Japan, could emphasize
complementary liberalization on a most favored nation (MFN) basis (to mitigate trade
diversion) and be implemented with transparent, consistent, and liberal rules of origin.

11.
The potential benefits of complementary agricultural and trade reforms are
sizable (see Japan: Selected Issues, 2005). Bradford (2003) estimates the gains from the
elimination of tariffs and non-tariff barriers to be 2.2 percent of GDP. Tokarick (2005)
estimates that a full multilateral agricultural policy reform would yield a welfare gain for
Japan of ½ percent of GDP. Francois and others (2005), suggest that agricultural policy
reform that results in a flow of the factors of production out of agriculture and into sectors
such as manufacturing could more than double the estimated welfare benefits of agricultural
reforms.

43

References
Bradford, Scott, 2003, “Paying the Price: Final Goods Protection in OECD Countries,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2003.
Francois, Joseph, Hans van Meijl, and Frank van Tongeren, 2005, “Gauging the WTO
Negotiation’s Potential Gains,” Economic Policy, April.
Fukao, Kyoji, and Ito, Keiko, 2003, "Foreign Direct Investment in Japan: Empirical Analysis
Based on Establishment and Enterprise Census for 1996," Japan's Economic
Recovery (R. M. Stern ed.) Edward Elgar, pp. 163-219.
Fukao, Kyoji, and Murakami, Yukako, 2006, Inward Foreign Direct Investments and
Productivity Growth in Japan, Hi-Stat DP Series, No.143, the Institute of Economic
Research, Hitotsubashi University.
Hayashi, Fumio, and Prescott, Edward, 2002, “The 1990’s in Japan: A Lost Decade,” Review
of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 5 (Special Issue, January)
Imai, Yutaka, and Kawagoe, Masaaki, 2000, “Business Startups in Japan: Problems and
Policies,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 16, No. 2.
Japan Center for Economic Research, 2003, “Regulatory Reform and Demand Creation,”
December 2003.
McDonald, Brad, 2005, “Agricultural Policies in Japan: Domestic and Spillover Effects”
Japan: Selected Issues, IMF Country Report No. 05/272, August 2005.
Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry, 2003 “Naigai kakaku chousa houkoku sho,” July
2003.
————, 2006 “New Economic Growth Strategy, Interim Report,” March 2006.
Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Sanwa Research Institute, 2000, “Keizai
kouzou kaikaku no kouka shisan ni tsuite,” December 2000.
Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications, 2002,
“Denki tsushin sabisu ni kakaru naigai kakakusa ni kansuru chousa (Survey on Price
Variances between Domestic and Overseas Telecommunications Services).”

44
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2004, OECD Economic Surveys:
Japan, Volume 2003/18.
————, 2005, OECD Economic Surveys: Japan, Volume 2005/3.
Shimpo, Seiji, and Nishizaki, Fumihara, 1997, “Measuring the Effects of Regulatory Reform
in Japan: A Review,” Economic Planning Agency.
Tokarick, Stephen, 2005, “Who Bears the Cost of Agricultural Support in OECD Countries?”
World Economy.
Walker, Christopher, 2004, “Structural Reforms and Productivity Growth” Japan: Selected
Issues, IMF Country Report No. 04/247, August 2004.

2.9
2.8
4.5
-1.7
4.2
6.2

26.2

6.6
9.1
6.7
29.2
35.9
2.4
2.4
2.5
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.5

72.7
0.0

2002

Actual

0.4
2.3
3.6
-1.3
-0.8
4.9

27.1

0.1
2.2
3.8
-1.6
1.1
6.7

31.0

1.8
2.0
3.6
-1.6
0.5
6.7

32.7

269.1

4.5
8.0
6.7
28.7
35.4
1.3
1.3
2.6
-1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-3.5

77.3
0.0

2003

2.3
1.7
2.9
-1.2
-4.3
4.9

32.2

291.8

4.9
5.4
4.9
28.2
33.1
0.5
0.5
2.2
-1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

82.2
0.0

2004

1.1
3.5
4.4
-0.9
1.5
5.0

Historical
Average

10-Year

1.5
1.6
1.2
0.7
3.2
1.4

Standard
Deviation

10-Year

1/ Derived as [(r - p(1+g) - g]/(1+g+p+gp)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; p = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate.
2/ The real interest rate and real GDP growth contributions are derived from the numerator in footnote 1/.
3/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
4/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.

Sources: Data from the Japanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2006 and 2007
B4. Combination of 1-3 using one standard deviation shocks

B. Bound tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-11 5/

A. Alternative scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 4/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions

Gross financing need 3/

5.7
6.9
4.9
30.6
35.5
2.0
2.0
2.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.2

66.1
0.0

2001

203.0 216.2 249.3

6.3
7.1
6.2
29.7
35.9
0.9
0.9
2.4
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 2/
Of which: Contribution from real interest rate
Of which: Contribution from real GDP growth
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

Net general government debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

60.4
0.0

Net general government debt
Of which : Foreign currency-denominated

2000

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated; calendar year basis)

86.7
86.7
86.7
86.7

86.7

2.6
1.4
2.7
-1.3
3.8
4.4

33.1

298.4

4.5
4.5
4.4
29.1
33.5
0.1
0.1
2.2
-2.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

86.7
0.0

2005

Japan: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2000–2011

93.9
95.4
93.5
93.7

94.5

2.9
1.8
1.7
0.0
2.6
3.9

33.8

303.5

2.8
2.9
3.9
29.5
33.4
-1.0
-1.0
1.5
-2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

89.6
0.0

2006

101.5
105.2
100.8
105.7

102.5

2.1
2.0
1.7
0.4
2.7
3.4

34.7

306.6

3.0
3.0
3.4
30.2
33.6
-0.4
-0.4
1.5
-1.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

92.5
0.0

2007

104.0
110.7
103.3
110.1

110.8

1.9
2.4
1.6
0.8
2.2
2.8

35.3

307.7

2.5
2.5
2.8
30.9
33.7
-0.3
-0.3
1.4
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

95.0
0.0

2008

105.8
115.6
105.1
113.9

119.4

1.9
2.8
1.6
1.2
1.9
2.2

35.7

307.7

1.9
1.9
2.2
31.5
33.7
-0.3
-0.3
1.4
-1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

96.9
0.0

2009

107.4
120.2
106.7
117.4

128.2

1.8
3.0
1.7
1.3
2.1
1.6

36.1

306.3

1.6
1.6
1.6
32.1
33.8
-0.1
-0.1
1.6
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

98.5
0.0

2010

108.8
124.8
108.1
120.9

137.4

1.7
3.3
1.8
1.5
2.5
1.3

36.5

305.2

1.4
1.4
1.3
32.7
34.1
0.1
0.1
1.7
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

99.9
0.0

2011

45

ANNEX II. JAPAN—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS

46
ANNEX II. JAPAN—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS – CONCLUDED

Debt-to-GDP Ratio, 2005–11
160
Debt-to-GDP Ratio (in percent)
140
120
100
80
60
Baseline
40

Second most extreme stress test (B2)
Most extreme stress test (A1)

20
2005

2006

Source: IMF staff calculations.

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

47
ANNEX III. JAPAN—STATISTICAL ISSUES
Statistical Issues: Economic and financial data provided to the Fund are considered adequate for
surveillance purposes. Japan subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and
meets the SDDS specifications for the coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of data. The Japanese
authorities hosted a data module mission for a Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(data ROSC) in September 12–28, 2005. The Report on Observance of Standards and Codes Data Module, Response by the Authorities, and Detailed Assessments Using the Data Quality
Assessment Framework (DQAF) were published March 17, 2006 and are available
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2006/cr06115.pdf.
Japan: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of June 27, 2006)
Date of
Latest
Observation
Exchange Rates

Date
Received

Frequency
of
5
Data

Frequency
of
Reporting5

Frequency
of
Publication5

6/27/06

6/27/06

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of
the Monetary Authorities1

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

Broad Money

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

6/20/06

6/22/06

Every 10
days

Every 10
days

Every 10
days

4/06

5/06

M

M

M

6/27/06

6/27/06

D

D

D

Consumer Price Index

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing1 – General Government3

2004

4/06

A

A

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing1– Central Government

2005

12/05

A

A

A

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt4

3/06

5/06

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

4/06

6/06

M

M

M

2006 Q1

6/06

Q

Q

Q

3/06

5/06

Q

Q

Q

Central Bank Balance Sheet
Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System
2

Interest Rates

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
2
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
4
Including currency and maturity composition.
5
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).

48
ANNEX IV. JAPAN—FUND RELATIONS
(As of May 31, 2006)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 8/13/52; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
13,312.80
11,844.73
1,469.23

% Quota
100.00
88.97
11.04

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
891.69
1,827.47

% Allocation
100.00
204.94

IV.
V.
VI.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Financial Arrangements:
Projected Obligations to Fund:

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

None
None
None

Japan maintains a floating exchange rate regime. The exchange system is free of restrictions
on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, with the
exceptions of restrictions maintained against (1) the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, the former Iraqi
regime, and others, pursuant to UN Security Council Resolutions and (2) Former
Yugoslavia’s President Milosevic and affiliated persons. These restrictions were notified to
the Fund in accordance with Executive Board Decision No. 144–(52/51).
VIII.

Article IV Consultation:

The 2005 Article IV consultation discussions were held during May 16–26 2005; the
Executive Board discussed the Staff Report (IMF Country Report No. 05/273) and concluded
the consultation on July 29, 2005. Executive Directors welcomed the further signs of
progress in resolving the legacies of the bubble years in Japan. Directors noted that the
financial system had been stabilized, the corporate sector made more resilient, labor markets
had become more dynamic, and fiscal consolidation is under way. As a result, the economy
appeared better positioned to sustain an expansion. Against this background, Directors
considered that policies should build on the existing reform program in order to resolve
remaining weaknesses promptly, boost Japan’s economic potential, and thereby sustain the
expansion over the longer term. The staff report, staff supplement, selected issues paper, and
PIN were all published.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
JAPAN
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Supplementary Information
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Carlo Cottarelli
July 18, 2006
1.
This supplement provides an update of economic and policy developments since
the release of the staff report (6/30/06). The thrust of the staff appraisal remains unchanged.
2.

Data released in the past three weeks confirm a solid economic expansion.

•

The Bank of Japan’s June Tankan short-term corporate survey shows strong business
sentiment and positive outlooks for sales, profits, and capital spending.

•

Bank lending is growing at its fastest rate in over a decade—just under 2¾ percent
(y/y) in June (after adjustments for write-offs and other special factors).

•

Labor markets continue to improve. The unemployment rate fell to 4 percent in May,
employment rose ¼ percent (y/y), and summer bonuses hit a record high.

•

The core CPI (which excludes fresh food) rose 0.6 percent (y/y) in May, marking the
seventh month of positive inflation.

•

Notwithstanding further moderation in import growth, the trade surplus continues to
shrink. For the first five months of 2006, the surplus was US$27.5 billion (1½ percent
of GDP), down from US$40.5 billion (or just over 2 percent of GDP) in the same
period last year.

The staff will review its growth projections following the release of second quarter GDP data
in August. At this stage, recent developments are consistent with our latest WEO forecasts
(shown in the staff report).
3.
On July 14, the Bank of Japan increased its overnight policy rate to 25 basis
points, ending over five years of effectively zero rates. In announcing the policy shift, the

-2-

Bank of Japan noted that “an accommodative monetary environment ensuing from very low
interest rates will probably be maintained for some time.” The move was widely anticipated
in financial markets. Staff considers that the modest removal of accommodation is an
appropriate step toward a more neutral monetary stance and is consistent with sustained
noninflationary growth.
4.
On July 7, the Cabinet issued its Basic Policies 2006, which contains—in broad
outline—a revised fiscal plan. In this document (not yet in official translation), the
authorities reiterate their intention to achieve a primary balance excluding social security in
2011 and their goal of starting to reduce the debt ratio by the mid-2010s. Basic Policies
offers a “Roadmap for Income and Expenditure Reform” to balance the primary account
excluding social security. This calls for savings of ¥16.5 trillion (about 2¾ percent of GDP).
The report suggests that the bulk of the adjustment (up to ¥14.3 trillion) would be borne by
expenditure measures. Savings would be achieved by steps such as reducing the government
payroll, social welfare outlays, and public works spending. Additional revenue will also be
needed (up to ¥5 trillion), but no specific measures have been identified, pending the results
of a re-evaluation of Japan’s tax system. In the staff’s view, the envisaged fiscal adjustment
should be achievable, particularly in light of the favorable conjuncture, but it could be more
ambitious, as discussed in the staff report.
5.
Basic Policies 2006 also outlines the reform program for the medium term. The
authorities provide a comprehensive description of initiatives underway and areas for further
action. However, there is no explicit prioritization in the strategy, and a clearer focus on
those reforms that promise the largest payoffs (along the lines of the staff report) would have
been helpful to speed up implementation, going forward.
6.
In the last three weeks, Japan’s financial markets have by and large reflected
geopolitical events. North Korea’s July 4 missile tests sparked a short-lived sell-off of
equities. More recently, oil price spikes related to conflict in the Middle East have weighed
on the stock market. On balance, however, the turbulence has so far been limited, and asset
prices (including the exchange rate) are only modestly below end-June levels.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/81
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 28, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with Japan
On July 21, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Japan.1
Background
Deflation has ended and the economy is on a strong recovery path. GDP growth in 2005 was
around 2¾ percent, led mainly by private consumption and investment. Labor markets are
tightening and the unemployment rate remains around an eight-year low. The pace of activity
in the first quarter of 2006 continued briskly at about 3 percent (seasonally adjusted at an
annual rate), following an exceptionally strong fourth quarter. Core inflation (CPI excluding
fresh food) has been clearly positive since November 2005 (year-on-year core inflation was
0.6 percent in May). The GDP deflator continues to decline, but the deflator for domestic
demand is rising marginally. However, other measures confirm the upward trend in price
pressures; land prices in urban areas have halted a fifteen year slide and are beginning to
rebound.
The yen, in real effective terms, is currently about 6¾ percent weaker than a year ago. After
depreciating nearly 15 percent in 2005 against the U.S. dollar as interest rate differentials
widened, the yen has appreciated modestly this year (mainly against the dollar), reflecting the
markets’ reassessment of the likely pace of monetary tightening in major economies.
No intervention has occurred since March 2004.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
The external surplus is narrowing. The trade balance fell in 2005 by ¾ percent of GDP, in spite
of yen depreciation. The current account declined more modestly as factor income surged.
Heavy purchases of foreign bonds and repatriation of funds by foreign banks strengthened the
financial account, notwithstanding record foreign purchases of domestic equities.
The financial and corporate sectors are in their best shape in over a decade. Under tougher
regulation, major banks’ nonperforming loans fell to below 2 percent of loans in March 2006.
Progress at regional banks has been more uneven. Intense corporate restructuring has
buoyed profits to record highs and unlocked productivity gains. With credit supply constraints
eased and loan demand revived, bank lending (adjusted for provisions and write-offs) has
been trending up since mid-2005, after eight years of contraction.
Monetary policy remains appropriately accommodative. On March 9, the Bank of Japan shifted
its strategy from targeting banks’ excess reserves (quantitative easing) to targeting the
overnight interest rate. The exit from quantitative easing was smooth, with limited volatility in
short-term interest rates and private money market activity picking up.
Fiscal consolidation is ahead of the authorities’ schedule, but imbalances remain large, with
net general government debt about 90 percent of GDP, among the highest in advanced
countries. In FY2005, the general government primary deficit excluding social security is
estimated to have narrowed by 1 percent of GDP to around 3 percent of GDP. The FY2006
budget, which rolls back past income tax cuts and curbs some discretionary spending,
envisages a further fall of some ½ percent of GDP.
The near-term macroeconomic outlook is favorable. GDP growth is projected at nearly
3 percent in 2006 and slightly above 2 percent in 2007. CPI inflation will pick up slowly as
capacity utilization rises. Risks are balanced, with downside risks mostly external (volatile oil
prices, rising long-term interest rates, or a sharp global slowdown). Low inflation raises the
possibility of renewed deflation, particularly if a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances
occurs. On the upside, private consumption and investment could show further strength.
For the medium term, growth is anticipated to slow to potential, estimated at 1.7 percent, and
the current account to narrow. Potential growth could be higher with stepped-up reforms, a
recovery in R&D and greater business restructuring. Faster productivity growth in a broad
range of sectors would also decrease the current account surplus over time, countering the
effects of fiscal consolidation.
Executive Board Assessment
Directors welcomed the continued strong forward momentum in Japan’s expansion.
Remaining fragilities in the corporate and financial sector have been largely dealt with, and
improvements in labor markets and disposable incomes have strengthened the underpinnings
for durable growth driven by domestic demand, with an associated decline in the trade surplus.
Directors welcomed the end of deflation as measured by several indices—a watershed for

3
Japan. In this connection, they underscored that consumer prices are likely to continue rising
and that the risk of a deflationary relapse has receded.
Directors noted, however, that—notwithstanding the prospect of above-potential growth for the
near term—major policy challenges remain. They stressed that adopting an appropriate postdeflation monetary framework, undertaking a well-designed fiscal consolidation, and boosting
productivity through structural reforms are complementary elements of a strategy for sustained
non-inflationary growth. Directors thus urged the authorities to take advantage of the favorable
conjuncture to make further progress on all these fronts.
Directors welcomed the smooth transition out of quantitative easing and a return to more
normal monetary operations. They commended the Bank of Japan for skillfully managing the
policy shift while avoiding undue volatility in financial markets. Directors agreed that, in the
near term, the policy stance should remain accommodative—allowing inflation expectations to
take a firmer hold and drift up.
Directors agreed that the Bank of Japan’s monetary framework is well suited to the postdeflation environment and welcomed the improvement in transparency. They acknowledged
that the framework also allows appropriate flexibility for the Bank of Japan to respond to a
range of short- and long-term risks to price stability.
Directors suggested that further steps to elaborate various aspects of the new monetary
framework could help guide market expectations and may bolster policy credibility. In
particular, the clarification of the risks associated with near-zero inflation would help markets to
form appropriate expectations about the conduct of policy, including with regard to the zero
floor on the “understanding of price stability.” Most Directors recommended introducing a
higher floor over time, to signal the desirability of a buffer against deflationary shocks. A few
Directors, however, noted that periodic reviews of the “understanding of price stability” could
weaken the establishment of an anchor for inflation expectations.
Directors noted that the authorities’ exchange rate policy remains grounded in the belief that
the exchange rate should reflect economic fundamentals. They supported the policy of a
market-determined exchange rate, and agreed that official foreign exchange intervention
should be limited to counter disorderly movements in the external value of the yen. In that
connection, several Directors noted the economy’s ability to handle a stronger currency in view
of its favorable outlook and improved underpinnings.
Directors welcomed the progress made in fiscal consolidation and noted that recent deficit
reductions have not held back the expansion. They observed that the long cyclical upswing
has contributed to revenue buoyancy and has made it easier to restrain spending. For the
current fiscal year, they encouraged the authorities to save any tax windfall and avoid
expansionary measures in the supplementary budget.
Looking forward, Directors observed that fiscal policy faces significant challenges if the public
finances are to gain a sounder footing. They welcomed the authorities’ commitment to
medium-term fiscal consolidation and the recent proposals for achieving it. However, most

4
Directors thought that, given the strength of the expansion, a somewhat more front-loaded and
ambitious adjustment than envisioned by the authorities would be appropriate. Such an
adjustment would stabilize the debt ratio, buy insurance against unanticipated fiscal or
economic shocks, and bolster the credibility of the authorities’ plan. Some Directors argued,
however, that fiscal consolidation needs to be implemented as planned to minimize the risk of
weakening the expansion as the global monetary tightening cycle advances.
Directors emphasized that further financial sector reforms will accelerate development of
securities markets, improve the financial system’s resilience to shocks, and help to sustain
non-inflationary growth over the medium term. They welcomed the steps under way to reduce
the government’s role in intermediation, streamline and clarify securities regulation, and bolster
financial risk management, which will help safeguard the stability of the financial system while
improving its efficiency.
Directors welcomed Japan’s progress in structural reforms. They noted that the current strong
expansion reflects in part the payoff from vigorous financial and corporate sector restructuring
in the past. Looking ahead, Directors observed that steps to downsize the public sector, make
labor and product markets more flexible, and liberalize trade could lift productivity further.
Directors stressed that accelerating structural reform would pay additional dividends to Japan
and the world. The stronger underlying growth these reforms would engender would facilitate
fiscal consolidation, while helping to support living standards in the face of rapid population
aging. Directors noted that, as part of a package of policy measures involving a number of
countries, reforms would also support a more balanced pattern of global growth and an orderly
resolution of global current account imbalances. For all these reasons, they encouraged the
authorities to maintain an ambitious reform program.
Directors expressed appreciation for Japan’s generous official development assistance, as
well as for its financial and other support for the Fund’s technical assistance activities.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued
after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive
Board in a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation with Japan is also
available.

5

Japan: Selected Economic Indicators

Real GDP 1/
Private consumption
Nonresidential investment
Residential investment
Public investment
Public consumption
Stockbuilding (contribution to growth)
Foreign balance (contribution to growth)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Inflation
GDP deflator
CPI
Unemployment rate (period average, percent)
Current account balance
Billions of U.S. dollars
Percent of GDP
General government balances (percent of GDP, FY)
Balance including social security
Balance excluding social security
Structural balance 2/
Money and credit (12-month growth rate; end period)
Base money
M2 + CDs (period average) 4/
Bank lending 4/
Exchange and interest rates (period average)
Yen/dollar rate
Real effective exchange rate 6/
3-month CD rate
10-year government bond yield

2003

2004

2005

Proj.
2006

1.8
0.6
6.2
-0.9
-10.8
2.3
0.3
0.6
9.0
4.0

2.3
1.9
4.7
2.0
-8.8
2.0
-0.2
0.8
13.9
8.5

2.6
2.1
7.8
-0.7
-5.9
1.7
0.1
0.3
7.0
6.3

2.9
2.1
7.3
4.9
-2.5
0.9
0.0
0.4
11.2
10.3

-1.6
-0.3
5.3

-1.2
0.0
4.7

-1.3
-0.3
4.4

0.0
0.6
4.1

136.2
3.2

172.1
3.8

165.7
3.6

169.6
3.7

-7.8
-8.0
-6.9

-5.6
-6.0
-4.7

-5.3
-4.9
-5.0

-5.0
-4.7
-5.0

13.2
1.7
-5.2

4.2
1.9
-3.2

1.0
1.9
-0.3

-16.2 3/
1.2 3/
1.8 3/

115.9
80.2
0.09
1.00

108.2
79.9
0.06
1.51

110.2
74.8
0.06
1.39

113.2 5/
71.3 6/
0.28 5/
1.87 5/

Sources: Global Insight, Nomura database and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Annual growth rates and contributions are calculated from seasonally adjusted data. The official
outturn based on annual data for GDP growth in 2004 was 2.7 percent.
2/ Including social security, excluding bank support.
3/ June 2006.
4/ From April 1998 onward, data reflect the inclusion of foreign banks, foreign trust banks and
Shinkin banks in the monetary survey.
5/ July 26, 2006.
6/ Based on normalized unit labor costs; 2000 = 100. Figure for 2006 is as of May.

