August 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/266

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

Augst 2, 2001

January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Czech Republic: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for the Czech Republic
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the
Czech Republic, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 25, 2004, with the officials of the Czech Republic
on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 22, 2004. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of August 6, 2004 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its August 6, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Czech Republic.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes––Fiscal Transparency
Module––Update
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
CZECH REPUBLIC
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the
2004 Consultation with the Czech Republic
Approved by Susan Schadler and G. Russell Kincaid
July 22, 2004
The 2004 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Prague during May 12–25. The team, headed
by Mr. Fernández-Ansola, included Mmes. Krajnyák and van Elkan, and Mr. Sommer (all EUR).
Mr. Kiekens (Executive Director) and Mr. Jonas (Advisor to the Executive Director) attended several
meetings. The mission met with Governor Tuma of the Czech National Bank (CNB); Minister of
Finance Sobotka; other senior officials; and representatives of trade unions, financial institutions, and
foreign investors.
The Czech Republic acceded to the European Union (EU) on May 1, 2004. The three-party governing
coalition—dominated by the center-left Social Democrats (CSSD)—that came to power in mid-2002
collapsed in June 2004 following a weak showing in the recent European Parliament elections. The next
regularly scheduled general election is due in mid-2006. The authorities have announced their intention
to adopt the euro in 2009–10.
In concluding the last Article IV consultation on August 22, 2003, Directors commended the economy’s
solid performance and welcomed plans to correct the regrettable deterioration of public finances in the
past few years. Directors welcomed the proactive interest rate cuts since early 2002, which had
contributed to halting and then reversing much of the koruna’s appreciation. The Czech authorities have
responded to some of the policy challenges identified in past Article IV consultations (notably the
formulation of a fiscal adjustment plan), but political will to tackle some of the more contentious issues
has been lacking.
The mission conducted an update of the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC)
module on fiscal transparency. The Czech Republic meets the Special Data Dissemination Standard
(SDDS) specifications. Data in this report reflect information available on July 21, 2004.
The Czech Republic’s economic data are adequate for surveillance.
The Czech Republic has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, and maintains no restrictions on current
transactions.
The authorities released the mission’s concluding statement and have expressed their intention to publish
the staff report.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary.....................................................................................................................3
I.

Background ......................................................................................................................4

II

Report on the Discussions................................................................................................8
A.
Economic Outlook ...............................................................................................9
B.
Monetary Policy.................................................................................................10
C.
Fiscal Policy.......................................................................................................13
D.
Fiscal Sector Issues ............................................................................................17
E.
Structural Issues .................................................................................................18

III.

Staff Appraisal ...............................................................................................................20

Text Boxes
1.
The Czech Growth-Investment Puzzle ............................................................................5
2.
Short-Term Inflation Outlook ........................................................................................11
3.
Revenue Measures in 2004 ............................................................................................15
Figures
1.
Czech Republic and Other CECs: Economic Indicators, 1993–2003............................23
2.
Indicators of External Competitiveness, 2000–04 .........................................................24
3.
Monetary Policy Indicators, 2001–04............................................................................25
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–04 .................................................26
Balance of Payments, 2000–04......................................................................................27
Consolidated General Government Budget, 2000–04 ...................................................28
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenario, 2001–09 ......................................................29
Vulnerability Indicators, 1997–2004 .............................................................................30

Appendices
I.
External and Fiscal Sustainability..................................................................................31
II.
Fund Relations ...............................................................................................................34
III.
Statistical Issues .............................................................................................................36

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background. Growth rebounded to 3.1 percent in 2003, fueled by strong consumption and
investment. Inflation has risen gradually after recovering in late 2003 from negative levels,
but remains in the lower half of the target range. Unemployment—particularly long-term
unemployment—has risen and stands at about 8 percent. Although the trade balance
improved, the current account deficit widened marginally to 6¼ percent of GDP primarily
due to a secular decrease in the services surplus. Against these mostly favorable
developments, the fiscal deficit continued to drift in 2003 and widens further in 2004.
Outlook. Growth is projected to firm modestly in 2004–05, led by rising exports and related
investment. Temporary factors should push up inflation to 4 percent (near the top of the
CNB’s target range) by year’s end, before dropping toward the midpoint of the band during
the first half of 2005. Thereafter, strengthening demand will lead to rising inflation. The
current account deficit should narrow to 5–6 percent of GDP.
Policy Issues and Discussions: Authorities and staff broadly agreed on both the issues and
the requisite policies, albeit with nuances on fiscal policy. Namely:
With inflation forecasted to pick up, a tightening cycle has been initiated. As economic
growth picks up and the output gap closes, policies will need to be tightened to avoid an
increase in underlying inflation. Staff therefore agreed with the CNB’s intention to begin to
raise interest rates. The ¼ point increase in the repo rate in late June was an appropriate first
step, and all agreed that further rate increases should be conditioned on the robustness of
growth and exchange rate developments.
Putting a stop to fiscal drift is a priority. Rising deficits and high-risk guarantees will
compound fiscal unsustainability brought on by population aging. Staff considers it essential
to reverse the widening of the fiscal deficit and implement the 2004–06 fiscal plan. Bringing
the deficit close to target in 2004, strictly observing expenditure ceilings, fully identifying
measures for 2005–06, and accelerating adjustment to avoid back-loading it to 2006 (a
scheduled election year) is key to restoring the plan’s credibility. The authorities did not
intend additional measures for 2004, but thought that tight budget execution and lower-thanplanned spending by extrabudgetary funds would suffice. They saw little scope for
accelerating adjustment, but agreed that pension and health reforms were needed for longterm sustainability.
The implementation of a broad structural reform agenda needs to be accelerated. EU
accession marks an important milestone for the Czech Republic. But all saw the need to
continue and deepen structural reforms to preserve the Czech Republic’s position as an
attractive destination for FDI and to ensure income convergence. Improving the businesslegal environment, keeping the labor market flexible and completing privatization are key,
and the authorities were making progress in most areas—albeit at a measured pace.

-4-

I. BACKGROUND
1.
EU accession marks an important milestone for the Czech Republic, allowing
attention to shift to the challenges of completing integration with Europe. Economic
performance was solid in recent years, with moderate growth, low inflation, moderate public
and external debt, and one of the highest per capita incomes among the new EU members
(63 percent of the EU-15 average on a PPP basis). However, problems cloud the outlook:
growth remains sluggish—particularly compared with the other central European countries
(CECs)—despite relatively high investment (Box 1); government deficits continue to drift
upward, led by rising expenditures; adverse demographic trends portend unsustainable
pressures on the budget through higher pension and health spending; and long-term
unemployment continues to rise and risks becoming entrenched. These trends are shared with
many advanced economies. But with its lower per capita income, the Czech Republic cannot
afford to delay remedial measures. The authorities’ intention to adopt the euro around 2009–
10 provides a benchmark against which to judge efforts to meet these challenges.
2.
Rising growth, low inflation, and a
narrowing trade deficit characterized recent
performance (Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2).

Contributions to GDP Growth
7

5
•
GDP expanded by 3.1 percent in 2003
and the first quarter of 2004. Underpinning
3
the increase in growth—an acceleration from
an annual average of less than 2 percent in
1
1998–2002—was a strong pickup in household
consumption reflecting rapid real wage growth
-1
(due to unexpectedly low inflation) and robust
Consumption
consumer credit expansion. Investment was
-3
Investment
also strong in 2003—driven by spending on
Net exports
public infrastructure—and swelled in early
-5
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004q1
2004 due to one-off influences on private
1
Sources: CSO; and IMF staff calculations.
investment associated with EU accession.
Rapid investment growth spilled over into
imports, leading to a deterioration in the external sector’s contribution to growth and the
current account balance in early 2004 relative to a year earlier.

1

The acceleration in investment in early 2004 was due to: (i) a surge in nonhousing
construction in advance of a jump in indirect taxes in May; and (ii) stockpiling of imported
goods prior to EU accession to avoid possible delays at the border from the switch to a new
customs regime and a last opportunity to take advantage of lower tariffs on some non-EU
imports.

-5-

Box 1. The Czech Growth-Investment Puzzle
The Czech Republic’s GDP growth rate lagged the other
CECs by about 2 percentage points during 1995–2003. At
the same time, the fixed investment-GDP ratio averaged
about 4 percentage points higher. This implies that the
growth payoff from investment (marginal efficiency of
investment) is considerably lower in the Czech Republic
than in other CECs (see table).

Relative Marginal Efficiency of Investment
1998-2003 1/ 2/
(In percent)
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Slovenia
Slovak Republic

77
188
138
171
108

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
Several explanations may help to account for the Czech
Republic’s comparatively weak growth performance: (i) a 1/ Annual growth in real GDP during 1998-2003
smaller drop in output at the beginning of transition and a divided by average gross-fixed capital formation
during 1993-98.
correspondingly shallower subsequent recovery; (ii) a
2/ Relative to EU-15.
relatively poor business-legal environment;
(iii) steeper real appreciation; and (iv) stagnant bank lending to domestic firms since the late 1990s.
However, these factors would explain slow growth through lower—not higher—investment.

Explanations for the growth-investment “puzzle” must therefore lie elsewhere. Possibilities include:
•
With industry’s share in GDP early in transition the highest among the CECs, the production
and physical capital structure inherited at the beginning of transition was likely heavily misallocated into
nonviable sectors in the Czech Republic. Lax bank lending through the mid-late 1990s—brought about
by the delayed restructuring and privatization of the banking sector—probably reinforced this initial
structure. Low value added from the unrestructured sectors were a drag on growth; and with a stillincomplete restructuring in some sectors and a high share of industry, this effect may continue.
•
The higher share of industry suggests that the Czech capital stock was relatively large
compared with more agrarian or service-based economies in the region. Replacement of depreciated
capital to maintain the net capital stock would therefore absorb a larger amount of investment, but with
little net increase in productive capacity.
•
Gross fixed investment by the public sector has been relatively high (some 4½ percent of GDP).
A significant part (1−2 percent of GDP per year) has been devoted to the environment and does not
directly contribute to growth potential. Installation of new electricity-generating capacity has absorbed
about 8 percent of GDP, but the plant operates infrequently.
•
FDI-financed fixed investment in new machinery has in recent years been associated with hightech activities, but the domestic component has tended to be of a low value-added, assembly-type nature.
•
Measurement issues associated with foreign firms may, in view of the large volume of FDI,
play a role. Internal pricing practices of multinationals could understate value added from Czech sources
through realization of profits at the point of final sale. Moreover, it may be difficult for multinationals to
define value added from support services provided in the Czech Republic in connection with a final
product (e.g., logistical services and call centers).

-6-

•
Despite solid growth, unemployment—
particularly long-term unemployment—has risen
and stands at about 8 percent (Figure 1). While some
unemployment is likely to be cyclical and may help
contain wage pressures, the sustained increase may
signal emerging structural problems.

Inflation Developments
(In percent, year-on-year change)
7
6 CPI
5
4
CNB target
3

•
Competitiveness has been improving. Falling
unit labor costs in manufacturing, koruna depreciation,
and recovering export prices suggest increases in profit
margins and strengthened competitiveness in the
manufacturing sector (Figure 2). As a result, the Czech
Republic made further inroads into EU-15 markets in
2003—though by less than some other CECs.

HICP-core
2
1
0
-1

HICP

May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

Jan-03

May-03

Sep-02

Jan-02

May-02

Sep-01

May-01

-2
Jan-01

•
Inflation has risen gradually after recovering
in late 2003 from negative levels. Intense competition
in the retail sector (due to growing penetration by large
foreign retailers) combined with an earlier appreciation
of the koruna generated price declines in most
consumption categories during the first half of 2003.
But rising consumer demand and more recent
depreciation of the koruna brought a small upturn in
inflation late in the year. Indirect tax increases in
January and May 2004—driven in part by EU
harmonization—pushed headline inflation above the
bottom of the target band beginning early in the year.
However, excluding the effects of administrative
measures, underlying inflation has risen only modestly,
and remains below the target band.

Sources: Czech National Bank; Czech Statistical
Office; and Eurostat.

Headline CPI and Contributions of Regulated Prices
and Indirect Tax Changes to Inflation
(In percent, year-on-year change)
7
CPI

6
5
4
3
2

Contribution of
Administrative
Measures

1

Jan-04

Aug-

Mar-

May-

Oct-02

Dec-

Jul-01

Feb-01

Sep-00

Apr-00

Nov-

Jun-99

Jan-99

•
Notwithstanding a narrowing trade deficit,
-1
the current account deficit widened marginally to
Sources: Czech National Bank; Czech Statistical Office;
6¼ percent of GDP in 2003. Healthy export volume
and IMF staff calculations.
growth and favorable terms of trade narrowed the trade
deficit relative to GDP. But a secular decrease in the
services surplus and a one-off drop in current transfers contributed to a widening of the
current account deficit in 2003. Reflecting the large stock of FDI and its high profitability,
dividends and reinvested earnings accounted for nearly two-thirds of the current account
deficit. But with privatization slowing and one-off FDI outflows on account of a change in
ownership structure at two large foreign-owned companies, non-FDI flows were the major
source of financing for the current account deficit in 2003 (Table 2). However, FDI
recovered in early 2004.

Jun-04

0

-7-

3.
With inflation picking up, the CNB has recently raised interest rates to prevent a
further decline in real interest rates. Inflation and inflation expectations fell to very low
levels in 2003, and the inflation targeting (IT) CNB cut interest rates sharply through
August 2003. This action helped elicit a modest nominal depreciation of the koruna and
together resulted in a significant relaxation of monetary conditions (Figure 3). Unchanged
policy interest rates combined with the gradual increase in inflation further eased monetary
conditions in the first half of 2004. Subsequent to the discussions, the CNB raised the repo
rate—which had previously tracked the ECB rate—by ¼ percentage point to 2¼ percent in
late June 2004. The CNB has announced that its post-2005 IT framework will shift to a
3 percent point target with a tolerance band of ±1 percent, thereby ensuring continuity with
the existing end-2005 target (2–4 percent).
Indicators of Banking Sector Size and Soundness, 2001-04
4.
Indicators of banking sector health
continue to improve and bank lending to
2001 2002 2003 2004
households is dynamic. The cleanup and
March
privatization of banks (some 95 percent of
assets are foreign owned) in the late 1990s
Number of banks
38
37
35
35
reduced nonperforming loans, injected new
Of which : foreign controlled
26
26
26
26
Banking sector assets (in percent of GDP)
106.9 102.8 99.8 109.3
capital, and raised profitability, but for
Bank credit outstanding (in percent of GDP)
41.4 38.6 40.4
38.1
several years banks remained cautious about Capital adequacy (in percent)
15.4 14.34 14.48 15.17
Classified credits (in percent of total credits)
20.8 15.8 11.2
11.2
lending (text table and Figure 3). However
Nonperforming loans (in percent of total loans 13.4
8.1
4.9
4.8
with the retail credit market largely untapped Profit from banking activities
(in percent of average assets)
3.8
3.7
3.6
3.7
and the perceived lower credit risk of
households, banks introduced new mortgage
Sources: CNB; and IMF staff calculations.
and consumer loan facilities. These new
credit instruments combined with low interest rates caused bank lending to households to
expand at an annual rate of more than 30 percent during the past two years, while lending to
corporates remains stagnant.

5.
Foreign investment has made an
impressive contribution to the Czech economy.
Among CECs, the Czech Republic has attracted
the largest amount of FDI on a per capita basis.
Some 20 percent of the FDI stock represented
privatization (mostly of banks and network
utilities), with the remainder aimed at greenfield
and brownfield activities. About half of
cumulative FDI has been channeled into services
(mainly banking, retailing, transport, and
communication), and the rest into industry.
Foreign-owned firms account for more than onethird of industrial employment, nearly half of
industrial output and value added, and over
70 percent of industrial exports. Foreign industrial
firms are also considerably more profitable than

4000

3500

Stock of inward FDI per capita
(euros , thous ands )
Czech
Hungary
P oland
Slovak
Slovenia

3000

2500

2000
1500

1000

500

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Sources: National Central Banks; and WEO.

-8-

their domestic counterparts, with an annual return on equity of about 20 percent (compared
with 8½ percent for domestic firms).
6.
In contrast to the favorable conjunctural developments, the fiscal deficit
continued to drift in 2003. The general government deficit—excluding privatization
receipts and transfers to the Czech
Recent Fiscal Developments, 2001-03 1/
Consolidation Agency (CKA) to cover
2001
2002
2003
2001-03
the costs of managing bad assets—
Change
increased in most of the past five years
Revenues 2/
36.7
37.5
38.9
2.3
to reach 5 percent of GDP in 2003
Expenditures, total 3/
41.7
44.2
45.1
3.5
2
Adjusted
expenditures
4/
39.5
41.6
43.9
4.4
(Table 3). Deficit increases occurred in
Goods and services
7.9
8.6
8.1
0.2
Interest
0.9
0.7
0.8
-0.1
years of both weak and strong economic
Subsidies 4/
6.8
7.3
8.6
1.7
Of which : to semibudgetary organizations
2.3
2.4
2.7
0.4
growth, came despite a significant
Transfers 5/
18.9
19.4
19.9
1.0
Capital expenditure
4.8
5.3
5.5
0.6
increase in revenue as a share of GDP,
Net lending 3/
0.1
0.3
1.0
0.9
-2.8
-4.0
-4.9
-2.2
and therefore cannot be explained away Adjusted deficit
as a cyclical phenomenon. That the
Memorandum item:
Transfers to transformation institutions
2.2
2.7
1.2
problem is of a structural nature is also
General government deficit, ESA95 basis
-6.5
-6.5
-12.9
illustrated by the gradual upward creep 1/ In percent of GDP.
2/ Excluding privatization receipts.
of government expenditure. The
3/ Excluding receipts from privatization by the NPF, CLL, and local governments and the
sale of Russian debt.
expenditure drift is partly explained by
4/ Adjusted for transfers to transformation institutions to cover the costs of managing bad
high and rising entitlements, but during assets.
5/ In 2003, includes one-off transfers abroad of 0.4 percent of GDP.
2001–03 expenditures in most other
categories also rose. In 2003, in particular, there was higher spending on subsidies, net
lending, and investment.
7.
Fiscal policy drift has now been compounded by political uncertainty. Public
support for the coalition government gradually eroded, in part due to the unpopularity of their
medium-term fiscal plan with the electorate (¶19). Following a poor showing of his party in
the June European Parliament elections, Prime Minister Spidla resigned, and the President
asked Interior Minister Gross to form a new government. Prospects for implementing the
previous government’s fiscal reform plans are uncertain.
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
8.
Discussions focused on policies to entrench macroeconomic stability and
accelerate income convergence, while minimizing fiscal and financial sector risks. On
the fiscal side, strengthening the credibility of fiscal policy plans was the main issue. For
2

On an ESA95 basis, the inclusion of some high-risk guarantees pushed the 2003 deficit to
nearly 13 percent of GDP. The difference mostly reflects accounting for a large guarantee
extended earlier, part of which was called. Staff continues to use the cash-based concept
when discussing fiscal policy as the calling of guarantees does not affect conjunctural
aggregate demand or the fiscal stance, and ESA-based fiscal reporting remains much less
timely and frequent than cash-based reporting.

-9-

monetary policy, keeping inflation close to the middle of the target range in the face of
several one-off influences and the diminishing slack in the economy was seen as the main
challenge, while discussions about longer–term issues centered on how to improve the
business-legal system, enhance financial sector supervision, and make labor markets more
responsive to the changing needs of the economy.
9.
The authorities believed that a gradual strengthening of activity provided an
appropriate setting for fiscal adjustment envisaged under the 2004–06 plan. They
considered that meeting the 2004–05 targets was within reach, owing in part to up-front tax
measures. Staff cautioned on the vulnerability to policy slippages—particularly giving in to
wage and pension demands—and noted that expenditure adjustment envisaged under the plan
is back-loaded to a scheduled election year, and requires large spending cuts which would
need to be fully identified soon. On monetary policy, staff supported the central bank’s
intention to enter a tightening cycle, the first step of which has already been taken.
10.
To maintain the edge the Czech Republic has had so far in attracting FDI, the
authorities recognized the need for structural reforms. Therefore they intend to continue
improving the efficiency and predictability of the business-legal environment, as well as
enhancing labor market flexibility. Further reducing state involvement in the enterprise
sector, including by restarting privatization, were seen as important by all for improving
resource allocation and for shoring up the fiscal accounts.
A. Economic Outlook
11.
Growth is expected to firm modestly in 2004–05, led by rising exports and
related activities (Table 4). Staff and the authorities agreed that demand would likely shift
from household consumption (due to slower growth of real incomes) toward exports and
export-related investment on account to stronger global demand and improved external
competitiveness. The CNB ‘s April 2004 Inflation Report projected growth in 2004 under the
baseline scenario at about 4 percent. However, CNB Board members considered risks to the
Inflation Report’s growth forecast to be weighted on the downside on account of a somewhat
stronger koruna than assumed in the baseline. Staff also projects a more modest 3¼ percent
growth rate owing to a faster expected deceleration of consumer demand. For 2005, staff
expects the pace of expansion to increase further to about 3½ percent on the back of stronger
growth of EU demand. An improving trade balance is expected to contribute to narrowing
the current account deficit in 2004–05. Slack in the economy is projected to decrease but
fiscal and monetary policy actions should help contain demand pressures. The moderate
increase in growth is not expected to yield significant employment gains in the short term as
firms continue to focus on improving productivity, and industrial restructuring at remaining
state enterprises continues.
12.
Downside risks to near-term growth dominate. The growth forecast relies heavily
on the timing and pace of recovery in EU demand. Should the expected recovery be
undermined by continued reluctance of EU households to step up their spending or by
renewed euro appreciation against the U.S. dollar emanating from global current account
imbalances, Czech growth would be weaker in 2004–05. Moreover, faster improvements in

- 10 -

external competitiveness elsewhere in the region could limit Czech gains in market share.
Protracted uncertainty regarding the course of fiscal policy could also slow growth. On the
upside, however, bank lending to households remains strong and could moderate the decline
in consumer spending growth, and EU recovery may prove to be more dynamic than
currently projected.
Decomposition of Growth, 1995-2009 1/
13.
FDI inflows, especially in skill-intensive
activities, will be pivotal to achieving faster longActual
Potential
term growth while containing the buildup in
1995-2003
2004-05
2006-09
external debt. Continuing to draw in FDI—albeit at
lower levels than previously—and moving both
GDP growth
2.1
3.1
3.6
Labor
-0.4
0.0
0.1
domestic and foreign firms up the technology ladder
Capital 2/
1.2
1.5
1.4
is the most likely conduit for accelerating total factor
TFP
1.4
1.6
2.1
productivity (TFP) improvements and maintaining
strong capital accumulation. Already a number of
1/ Decomposition is based on spliced GDP and
investment data, as these are only available for 2000-03
technology leaders (including Accenture, IBM, Sun
on the new methodology.
Microsystems, DHL, Honeywell, Olympus, and Dell) 2/ Capital stock data are not available.
The calculations assume a capital-output ratio of 4 and
have established or committed to operations in the
a 35 percent depreciation in 1994.
Czech Republic. If TFP were to grow at rates similar
In the following years, the rate of depreciation is assumed
to remain constant at 5.5 percent.
to those in the EU-15 catching-up countries (Greece,
Ireland, Portugal, and Spain) in the second half of the 1990s, and labor and capital inputs
were to rise at rates broadly similar to those recently observed, Czech potential growth would
increase to 3¾ percent. Domestic and foreign investment in high-tech machinery would be
the impetus to faster TFP growth, and would raise the growth payoff to investment. A sizable
fiscal consolidation would help accommodate stronger fixed investment while permitting
some narrowing of the current account deficit—and hence the need for foreign saving.

B. Monetary Policy
14.
Expecting temporary factors to drive a rapid rebound in inflation during 2004–
mid-2005 while underlying price pressures remained subdued, the CNB decided to keep
interest rates on hold through mid-2004. The authorities and staff agreed that strong retailsector competition and unused economic capacity would limit the first-round inflationary
effect of changes in indirect taxes, regulated prices, and EU-related import duties to about
1½ percentage points in 2004 and early 2005. Owing to low inflation expectations, the CNB
saw little risk of significant second-round effects. Staff concurred, and added that a soft labor
market could also moderate demands for real wage catch-up. However, staff saw additional
sources of pent-up inflationary pressure in previous koruna depreciation, faster growth in
wages relative to productivity in the nontraded sector, and rising world prices of oil and raw
materials. Staff projections indicate that the realization of these price pressures later this year,
combined with the effects of the administrative measures, would temporarily push up
inflation to 4 percent (near the top of the CNB’s target band) by year’s end, before dropping
during the first half of 2005 (Box 2). The authorities felt that the prevailing negative output
gap would dampen somewhat the inflationary effect of these factors, but agreed that with the
gradual closing of the output gap, inflation would begin to pick up again in the second half of
2005.

- 11 -

Box 2. Short-Term Inflation Outlook
Staff estimated a model of Czech inflation that relates consumer prices to exchange rates, commodity prices,
productivity-adjusted wages, and economic activity.1 The model also takes into account the impact of
regulated prices and indirect tax changes on inflation.
The forecast of the model under the no policy change scenario, which includes the latest WEO oil-price
projections and assumes constant nominal interest rates, sees year-on-year inflation peaking at around
4 percent in late 2004. Inflation is then expected to moderate as the impact of administrative price and indirect
tax changes dissipates. Declining slack in the economy, together with growth in wages and commodity prices,
will however exert upward pressure on inflation beginning in mid-2005. If monetary conditions are not
tightened, year-on-year inflation is projected to lie well above the CNB’s point target in 2006.
6

6

Headline Inflation Under No Policy Change Scenario, 2001-05

(In percent; year-on-year)

5

4

5

4

CNB target

3

3

2

2
Headline
inflation

1

1

0

0

-1

-1
2001q1

2001q3

2002q1

2002q3

2003q1

2003q3

2004q1

2004q3

2005q1

2005q3

Sources: Czech Statistical Office; and IMF staff calculations.

_______________
1

A background paper discusses the model in more detail.

15.
The authorities thought that current loose monetary conditions and a gradual
closing of the output gap called for a measured policy tightening to keep inflation on
target over the medium term. In view of the expected closing of the output gap over the
coming year and growing demand-pull inflation pressures, the CNB foresaw the need to
initiate a tightening cycle to gradually return real interest rates to levels significantly above
zero, with the size and timing of interest rate increases conditioned on exchange rate
developments and the robustness of growth. Staff agreed that, with growth expected to rise
gradually, monetary conditions were probably too loose to support the inflation target over
the next one–two years. Indeed, even after the ¼ percent increase in late June, policy interest

- 12 -

rates remain near historical lows while the depreciation of the koruna also contributes to
easier monetary conditions. But staff cautioned that the speed at which the output gap closes
would depend on additions to productive capacity, which may have been substantial with the
near completion of several large manufacturing investments. A rising pace of potential
growth would therefore moderate the size of needed future interest rate increases. Staff also
cautioned that the exchange rate—while a key determinant of growth and inflation—had
recently been quite volatile and the pace of equilibrium real appreciation uncertain. This
suggested that less emphasis be given to short-term exchange rate movements in decision
making.
16.
Notwithstanding a modest reopening
250
Dollar Wages in Transition Countries, 2003
of the euro-area interest rate gap, the CNB
(In percent of Czech Wages)
expected exchange rate pressures to remain
200
relatively balanced. The CNB considered that
Bulgaria
Romania
its ongoing agreement to convert government
Latvia
foreign currency receipts off market and
Serbia
Lithuania
150
completion of the large initial wave of
Slovakia
nonprivatization FDI—while associated
Estonia
Poland
dividend outflows were continuing—would
Czech Republic
100
help contain the risk of future excessive
Hungary
appreciations. They emphasized that their
Croatia
Slovenia
recent decision to begin selling interest on
50
reserves to limit further accumulation of
reserves, although implying an appreciation
bias, was not intended to influence the level of
0
the exchange rate.3 The CNB viewed
Source: IMF staff estimates.
competitiveness as adequate, pointing to the
rise in export growth and the improving trade
balance. The staff, however, cautioned that
Czech unit labor costs (ULCs)—although declining in recent years—had continued to run
ahead of ULCs in several other new EU members, and Czech wages were considerably
higher than those of second wave enlargement and other emerging-market countries
(Figure 2 and text chart). The authorities expected competitiveness in low-productivity,
labor-intensive activities to erode with time, as these activities were gradually supplanted by
higher productivity ones. They felt that some slowdown in FDI was to be anticipated even
with strong competitiveness, owing to the low capital intensity of higher-tech R&D and
strategic services that were expected to comprise the next wave of FDI.
3

The CNB sold its first installment of interest on reserves in April 2004 in the amount of
US$42 million. On reserves of more than US$26 billion—which provide a high level of
coverage of short-term debt and base money (Table 5)—the CNB earned some
US$725 million in interest in 2003. Sales will be capped by the volume of current interest
income, but to avoid movements in the exchange rate, actual sales may be smaller.

- 13 -

17.
The post-2005 inflation targeting framework provides continuity and a sound
anchor for monetary policy during the pre-euro period. The CNB considered the
medium-term inflation target of 3 percent as balancing the goals of inflation convergence and
trend productivity catch-up. To capitalize on its acquired credibility, and to avoid a
potentially disruptive regime shift, the CNB intends to target inflation through ERM2. CNB
officials noted that no regime could resolve the inherent over-determinacy of the Maastricht
inflation and exchange rate-stability criteria, and considered it wasteful of reserves to attempt
to stabilize the koruna in the event of fluctuations unrelated to fundamentals. Staff supported
this pragmatic approach to monetary policy during ERM2, and agreed that the chances of
meeting simultaneously the inflation and exchange rate-stability criteria would be enhanced
by realizing strong preconditions for ERM2—including credibly reducing the fiscal deficit,
improving wage and price flexibility, and strengthening financial sector supervision to reduce
risks of financial instability.
C. Fiscal Policy
18.
The consequences of fiscal drift have so far remained manageable but the
tolerance margin for policy inaction is steadily shrinking. Public debt is still moderate
(28 percent of GDP) and its financing costs low.4 However, debt will increase rapidly if
significant deficits continue, especially as privatization revenues will soon run out (¶30). It
may also jump suddenly if a large amount of guarantees (their total nominal stock is about
20 percent of GDP)5 were to be called—in fact, public debt is already substantially higher on
an ESA95 basis, mostly due to accounting for a large guarantee extended earlier that was
partially called. These effects would be compounded by a rapidly aging population, which
will sharply increase demands on the public purse. Large financing needs could ratchet up
interest rates and crowd out private sector credit. High deficits could also derail plans to
adopt the euro over the medium term by moving the Czech Republic farther away from being
able to fulfill the Maastricht fiscal criteria. And finally, fiscal inaction would preclude easing
the Czech Republic’s high tax burden.
19.
The authorities believed that their three-year adjustment plan begins to address
these fiscal problems. The plan aims to achieve a deficit of 4 percent of GDP by 2006
(4.4 percent of GDP on staff’s “adjusted deficit” definition that includes nonprivatization net

4

The government successfully launched an inaugural euro-denominated bond in June 2004.
The € 1.5 billion issue had a spread of 22.5 basis points over a comparable 10-year German
bond.
5

About one-third of the total nominal stock of guarantees (without guarantees for the
liabilities to CKA, which are included in public debt) is considered very low risk.

- 14 -

Deficit Targets of the 2004-06 Adjustment Plan 1/
lending; text table), underpinned by annual
expenditure ceilings and a rolling three-year
2004
2005
2006
fiscal framework.6 This plan is broadly
consistent with the Czech Republic’s 2004
Authorities' targeted definition 2/ 3/
5.5
4.8
4.0
Adjusted deficit 2/ 4/
5.8
5.2
4.4
Convergence Programme.7 It combines upESA95 deficit 5/
5.3
4.7
3.8
front indirect tax increases with gradual
Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections.
expenditure reductions—focused on public
1/ In percent of GDP.
sector wages, discretionary spending, and
2/ Plans formulated based on unrevised GDP.
3/ Excluding privatization receipts, net lending, and transfers
social expenditures. Despite several tax
to CKA.
4/ Excluding privatization receipts, and transfers to CKA
changes (mostly tax relief) not included in
but including nonprivatization net lending.
the budget (Box 3), measures so far in 2004
5/ Based on the Czech Republic's 2004 Convergence Programme,
which adjusts the ratios for the effects of GDP revisions.
are broadly in line with the plan, but staff
noted that post-budget spending decisions breach the expenditure ceiling (¶20). It is unclear
whether a new government would follow the fiscal plan.

20.
Staff saw the 2004–06 fiscal plan as a first step in halting––then reversing—the
rise in the deficit, but expressed serious concerns regarding implementation. Under
staff’s projections—which were slightly more optimistic on growth and revenues than the
authorities’—the general government adjusted deficit would widen by over 1 percent of GDP
to 6.1 percent of GDP in 2004 (Table 3). Without the help of GDP revisions, it would be
even larger, exceeding the target by a significant margin. A drop in nontax revenues played a
role in the deficit widening, but loopholes in the coverage and breaches of the expenditure
ceilings also contributed. For example, expenditure ceilings exclude subsidies provided by
the privatization agency (National Property Fund or NPF) and capital injections through net
lending, while some extrabudgetary funds are permitted to exceed their annual expenditure
ceiling by the amount of approved spending not undertaken in previous years. In addition,
post-budget approval of additional transfers of ⅓ percent of GDP to compensate families and
pensioners for the indirect tax hikes appeared to breach the expenditure ceiling.
21.
Staff argued for bolstering the plan’s credibility by keeping this year’s general
government deficit close to its original target and adjusting downward deficit targets
relative to GDP in all years to account for the GDP revision. On current projections, the
deficit target would be missed in the first year of the plan. Credibility would require
narrowing the headline deficit to meet the original 5.8 percent of GDP target, which becomes

6

Recent GDP revisions to further harmonize Czech statistics with EU requirements resulted
in a 5 percent increase in the level of nominal GDP. This revision lowers the deficit to GDP
ratio by about ⅓ percentage point of GDP in 2004–06, but it is yet unclear whether the fiscal
targets relative to GDP would be revised downward.
7

The Convergence Programme’s targets relative to GDP have recently been revised, to
reflect higher nominal GDP. The Programme envisages reducing the ESA95 deficit to about
3¾ percent of GDP in 2006 and 3¼ percent of GDP by 2007.

- 15 -

5½ percent of GDP after the effect of the GDP revisions (text table). This would call for
additional savings of ½ percent of GDP—a cyclically well-timed tightening that should come
from reining in expenditures. While the authorities did not plan additional measures, they
thought that tight execution of the state budget, and lower-than-planned spending by
extrabudgetary funds would make a better-than-projected fiscal outcome likely. Staff also
called for adhering to the initial nominal deficit targets for 2005–06, which implies some
downward revision of the targets relative to GDP on account of the changes to GDP.

Box 3. Revenue Measures in 2004
The 2004 budget includes:
•

•

EU-mandated increases in excises and shifts of
many goods and services (over one-fourth of
the consumption basket) from the preferential
to the standard VAT category;
a 3 percentage-point cut in the CIT—the first
step in gradually reducing it from 31 to
24 percent.

Subsequent to the budget, several tax measures were
legislated or proposed:
•

•

Effects of Revenue Measures, 2004-06
(In percent of GDP)

VAT 1/
Excises 2/
Corporate income taxes
Rate decrease 3/
Shorter depreciation period
Personal income taxes
Total 4/

2004

2005

2006

1.1
0.5
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0

1.5
0.6
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
-0.1

1.4
0.6
-0.9
-0.5
-0.4
-0.2

1.4

1.6

0.9

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Net effect of shifting goods and services from the preferential
to the standard VAT category; and reducing the standard VAT
rate from 22 to 19 percent.
2/ Increases in excises required by EU harmonization.
3/ Phased decline in the corporate income tax rate from 31 to
24 percent.
4/ The increase in the 2004 tax ratio is smaller than the effects of
the revenue measures, due mostly to revenue losses from longer
collection lags for VAT on imports.

lowering the standard VAT rate from 22 to
19 percent while shifting more goods and
services to the standard rate (in effect from
May 2004);
shortening depreciation periods and easing the
income tax burden on married couples and
families with children with effect from 2005 (with parliament).

The indirect tax changes would raise revenues already in 2004, but revenue reductions from the proposed
direct tax amendments would appear only in later years.

- 16 -

Fiscal Recommendations, 2004-06
(In percent of GDP)

Adjusted balance based on old GDP 1/
Effect of GDP revision 2/
Adjusted balance 3/
Change
Of which :
Net impact of EU accession 4/
Tax measures 5/
One-offs (net) 6/
Required other adjustment 7/

2003

2004

2005

2006

-5.2
0.3
-4.9

-5.8
0.3
-5.5
-0.6

-5.2
0.3
-4.9
0.6

-4.4
0.2
-4.2
0.8

-1.7
1.4
-0.7
0.4

0.1
0.1

0.2
-0.6

0.3

1.2

1/ Corresponds to the deficit path targeted by the authorities' 2004-06 fiscal plan.
2/ Due to methodological changes, nominal GDP increased by about 5 percent.
3/ Path assumes no change in the targeted nominal deficit compared with the plan.
4/ Includes contributions to the EU budget; losses on customs duties and indirect
taxes; direct payments and top-off to farmers; and compensation payments.
Staff estimates.
5/ Includes the effects of higher excises; a lower standard VAT rate; shifting
items from the preferential to the standard VAT rate; reducing the corporate
income tax rate; accelerating depreciation for certain assets; and changes to PIT.
6/ One-offs include spending on compensation to a foreign investor in 2003 (+); shifting
infrastructure investment spending from 2003 to 2004 (-); and one-off high
dividend income in 2003 (-).
7/ Residual to reach the recommended adjusted balance. Measures not yet fully identified.

22.
Reducing the deficit in 2005–06 in line with the plan will require significant
additional measures. The authorities thought that scope for revenue increases had largely
been exhausted and further adjustment needed to rely on expenditure reductions. However,
the measures underpinning cumulative savings of 1½ percent of GDP in 2005–06 were not
yet fully identified. Most of the required expenditure adjustment could be back–loaded to
2006 as only modest savings were needed to meet the 2005 deficit target.8 The authorities
thought these 2005 savings feasible, assuming pressures for increases in wages and pensions
were resisted. Delivering the 2006 target appeared more difficult, as it required finding and
implementing significant additional savings measures in a scheduled election year. The
mission urged the authorities to specify their plans for permanent savings. Identifying the
measures early would also make it possible to spread the expenditure cuts more evenly and
bring some of the adjustment forward to 2005. Although the authorities agreed that these
steps would strengthen the credibility of their deficit reduction plan, and thought that
entitlements and social spending had scope for savings, work on systemic reforms was not
sufficiently advanced (see below) to allow implementing measures already in 2005.
23.
A stronger fiscal framework could be a useful commitment device to help future
policy implementation. Staff advocated: (i) broadening the coverage of the expenditure
ceilings to the widest possible range of spending items and general government units;
(ii) strictly adhering to the expenditure targets even when higher revenues would finance a
8

The back-loading of needed expenditure measures derives from the phased-in reduction in
direct taxes that affects the budget in 2006 on a cash basis, but in 2005 on an accrual basis.

- 17 -

spending increase without endangering the deficit target; and (iii) avoiding post-budget
spending measures. In response, the authorities explained that although they did not intend to
formally broaden the expenditure ceilings, some loopholes would be sealed. Notably, the
NPF would be closed by end-2005 and its spending obligations assumed by the state budget,
bringing these expenditures under the coverage of the ceiling. The finance minister intended
to propose a state budget for 2005 that observed the approved expenditure ceiling, and
committed to standing firm against pressures to spend additional revenues.
24.
The authorities recognized that fiscal reforms would need to continue beyond
2006 and that long-term sustainability required pension and health care reform. Staff
recommended targeting a structural deficit of less than 2 percent of GDP by 2008–09.
Although by itself this would not be sufficient to deal with long-term fiscal pressures from
population aging, it would help keep public debt at a moderate level over the medium term.
This target and policy horizon would also support the authorities’ euro adoption plans. The
authorities intended to continue reducing the deficit beyond 2006, while making room to
cofinance EU funds. But they recognized that a restructuring of mandatory expenditures
would be necessary to sustainably reduce the deficit. In particular, health care reform could
yield near-term payoffs, by reducing excess capacity and raising the financial burden on final
users. A reform proposal was expected in the next few months. However, the authorities did
not see the urgency regarding pension reform as they expected pension expenditures to
remain stable at their current level of about 9 percent of GDP for the next 10–15 years owing
to recent measures (including a gradual increase in the statutory retirement age to 63 years
and tighter conditions for early retirement). But they agreed that with a projected
6 percentage point increase in pension spending relative to GDP by 2050, long-term
sustainability required pension reform, and an expert group was expected to set out the main
options by early 2005. Staff argued that the long lags from reforms to their impact on public
spending necessitated early action. In addition, there was a risk that labor force participation
by older workers may not increase as strongly as envisaged and pension spending would start
rising sooner and more steeply than projected, eroding the results of previous fiscal
adjustment.
D. Financial Sector Issues
25.
With dynamic growth in bank lending to households, the authorities
acknowledged the need for building capacity to monitor new sources of risk. The
authorities recognized the importance of broadening the focus of supervision to systemic
sources of risk. However, they considered vulnerabilities from lending to households to be
limited owing to banks’ fairly low exposure to households (9 percent of assets), low average
household indebtedness (18 percent of disposable income), and small share of classified
household loans (3 percent of mortgage loans and about 10 percent of consumer loans). Staff
countered that bank loans could be highly concentrated, and low average debt burdens and
loan carrying costs could conceal pockets of high indebtedness and financial distress.
Moreover, while the pace of consumer lending had recently slowed sharply, mortgages
continued to grow very strongly (55 percent) in part due to prevailing low interest rates in
fixed-then-variable rate contracts. In the event of higher interest rates, banks would be
exposed to dual risks of rising loan defaults and declining collateral prices. To better gauge
financial conditions of households and implications for the banking sector, staff

- 18 -

recommended collecting data on household debt concentrations, households’ nonbank debt,
indicators of debt servicing capacity (including disposable income of indebted households),
and prices of housing transactions. Staff welcomed progress in developing a stress-testing
framework to assess macroeconomic and financial linkages, but urged the authorities to
consider credit risk scenarios where the impact of adverse macroeconomic shocks on
household loan quality could differ from that on corporate loans.
26.
The planned reorganization of financial supervision should aim to promote a
more comprehensive oversight of the sector in the medium term. To enhance supervision
of financial conglomerates, the authorities intend to establish a unified financial market
supervisor by 2010. The first stage—to be completed by end-2005—will shift supervision of
credit unions to the CNB, and responsibility for insurance and pension funds will move to the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Subsequently, a single supervisor will be created,
either within the CNB or as a separate public entity. The CNB is also reorganizing its
banking oversight functions, and setting up a unit devoted to macrofinancial issues, with
responsibility for preparing financial stability reports. Staff welcomed these initiatives as
promoting better information flows, but cautioned that organizational changes should not
distract from effective oversight. The authorities acknowledged this risk, which had
prompted their decision to proceed gradually with the merger of supervisors.
E. Structural Issues
27.
To minimize risks of resource misallocation, staff called for accelerating
privatization and reducing state support to public companies and semi-budgetary
organizations. The authorities reported that privatization had been restarted, with the recent
sale of the petrochemical company (Unipetrol) and initiation of the process for Czech
Telecom. However, the electricity company (CEZ) was likely to remain unsold by the time
the NPF was closed. The authorities confirmed their intention to divest all assets of the Czech
Consolidation Agency (CKA) and to terminate its activities by end-2007 in order to limit
opportunities for future nontransparent bailouts. They also planned to require, with effect
from 2006, parliamentary approval for transfers to CKA of bad assets. To limit future drains
on the budget and improve allocative efficiency, staff urged that stabilizing the finances of
remaining state enterprises—including the railways—be expedited, with state support
granted only in the context of restructuring plans aimed at improving long-term viability.
28.
Legal and bureaucratic hurdles risk discouraging future investment by
engendering uncertainty and costly delays. The Czech Republic scores very highly in
global surveys as an attractive destination for offshoring, and hosts many large multinational
investors.9 Nonetheless, investor representatives continued to express frustration with the
9

The A.T. Kearney 2004 Offshore Location Attractiveness Index ranks the Czech Republic
fourth in the world (well behind India, but closely trailing China and Malaysia) as a
destination for outsourcing based on people skills and availability, business environment, and
financial structure. Poland and Hungary rank tenth and eleventh, respectively, in the survey.

- 19 -

business-legal environment, which they considered to fall short of the high standards
expected of EU members. In particular, they pointed to weak creditors’ rights, excessive
discretion of bankruptcy judges, cumbersome and lengthy legal procedures, and
unpredictable and time-consuming steps for processing entries into commercial registries.
The authorities outlined efforts to enhance the efficiency and predictability of the legal
environment, notably progress in drafting comprehensive new legislation on bankruptcy and
commercial registers and in preparing standardized forms for expediting entries into the
commercial registers. Staff welcomed these steps—crucial for attracting and nurturing small
and medium-sized firms and for facilitating bank lending to these firms—but noted the
substantial delays until enactment. Staff therefore recommended that, in the interim,
amendments to existing legislation proposed by a broad cross-section of parliament, and with
support from the business and banking community, be adopted.
29.
Continuing structural shifts in labor
demand, an aging workforce, and a larger role
for labor markets in cushioning economic
shocks after euro adoption will increase the
premium on labor market flexibility. However,
declining employment despite solid GDP growth
and significant creation of new jobs in the FDI
sector, and rising long-term unemployment with
persistent regional differences suggest that labor
market flexibility may in fact be eroding.10 The
authorities saw the roots of these trends in
Employment and Harmonized Unemployment
Rate
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

17

4700
CEC4 1/

15

4680

13

4660

11

4640
Euro area
4620

Employment, thousands
(right axis)

Czech R.

5
1999q11999q42000q32001q22002q12002q42003q3

Source: Eurostat.
1/ Weighted by PPP-GDP.

10

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

1993

4720

7

Short-t erm
Long-term
Unemployment rate

9

0

19

9

Unemployment by Duration
(In percent)

10

4600

4580

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Sources : Czech Statistical Office; Eurostat;
and IMF staff calculations.

inappropriate incentives generated by the benefit
system, skill mismatches, and high nonwage labor
costs, and have begun to address some of these
issues. Tightening unemployment benefit
eligibility for school–leavers and plans to reduce
benefit withdrawal rates for those leaving
unemployment targeted improving work
incentives. Staff welcomed these measures but
argued for a more comprehensive strategy to create
an environment conducive to job-rich growth. In
addition to better incentives, avoiding persistent
skill-mismatch was also key. The authorities
agreed that policies to ensure that school-leavers
enter the labor market with sufficient and

A background paper discusses labor market issues in more detail.

- 20 -

marketable skills, and to create adequate possibilities for life-long learning were particularly
important and would help preserve the Czech Republic’s attractiveness for FDI. Staff noted
that other measures—reducing impediments to labor mobility, including through easing rent
control, upgrading transport infrastructure, reducing nonwage labor costs, and keeping labor
market regulations flexible—could also help.
30.
Stalled structural reforms could prevent a pickup in growth potential and lead
to a rapid buildup in public and external debt. If a less attractive investment climate and
reduced FDI inflows cap potential growth at around 2½ percent, risks associated with public
and external debt accumulation would increase (Appendix I). On the fiscal side, not only
would slower growth make keeping to the planned adjustment path more difficult, it would
also complicate bearing the fiscal costs of called guarantees. Moreover, demands for
additional bailouts—including of the railways and hospitals—may arise. By pushing up
interest rates, wider deficits could further slow growth. In these circumstances, public debt
could increase rapidly, to over 50 percent of GDP and its servicing costs could also rise. On
the external side, lower FDI would widen the current account deficit through smaller export
capacity, notwithstanding a somewhat weaker koruna and slower import growth. Higher
external deficits, less nondebt financing and weaker GDP growth would increase the external
debt to GDP ratio to some 55 percent of GDP over the medium term.
31.
With EU accession, the Czech Republic adopted the common trade policy.
Bilateral trade agreements were terminated or modified to ensure EU-conformity. Most
recent changes occurred in trade relations with third countries, and were expected to be
neutral, with relaxation of protection in some sectors (e.g., motor vehicles) and higher tariffs
and quantitative restrictions in others, especially for some food items from outside the EU.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
32.
The performance of the Czech economy has been broadly satisfactory over the
past few years and there is reason for optimism on the near-term outlook. Substantial
foreign direct investment has helped raise GDP growth and improve the trade balance.
Inflation—after declining sharply in recent years—is expected to stabilize at low levels over
the medium term. Public and external debt have so far stayed moderate, and interest rate
spreads have been low. Banking sector profitability and capital adequacy are strong, and
bank lending has resumed. The upturn in the global economic environment should entrench
these favorable developments in the near term.
33.
Although economic fundamentals generally remain strong, continued inaction in
key areas could prevent the economy from realizing its full potential. Looming fiscal
unsustainability risks ratcheting up interest rates; structural reforms are needed to maintain
the Czech Republic’s attractiveness to domestic and foreign investment; and labor markets
and the education system should become more flexible. Implementing policies to address
these problems would contribute to raising economic growth and furthering income catch-up
with new EU partners, and lay the foundation for a successful experience in ERM2 and the
euro zone. The Czech Republic’s position as one of the most advanced new EU members and

- 21 -

attractions as a platform for FDI may quickly slip if its reforms do not keep pace with those
of other countries.
34.
The authorities’ multi-year fiscal plan provides a basis for reversing the
widening of the deficit, but firm commitment to the spirit as well as the letter of the
plan is needed. The credibility of the plan has been weakened by allowing the general
government deficit to expand again in 2004—the first year of the plan. Measures on the
spending side are needed to return the deficit to its original nominal target (which implies a
small downward adjustment relative to GDP on account of the GDP revision), and the fiscal
framework for future years should be strengthened by strictly adhering to the expenditure
ceilings and by closing loopholes in their coverage. The government’s intention to close the
National Property Fund by end-2005 will help in this regard. Deficit targets relative to GDP
for 2005–06 should also be revised downward on account of the changes to GDP. Credibility
of the plan would also be enhanced by choosing as the targeted fiscal concept the broadest
possible and most commonly used measure of the deficit, and by projecting and discussing
fiscal performance on this basis. A full shift to standardized European fiscal indicators should
be expedited.
35.
To demonstrate commitment to achieving the 2006 deficit target, required
expenditure cuts should be identified expeditiously and spread more evenly, resulting in
an over-performance of the deficit in 2005. Yielding to pressures for permanent
expenditure increases in 2005 could not only put the 2005 deficit target out of reach, but
would add to large required savings in 2006 needed to further reduce the deficit while
offsetting the drop–off in tax revenues. The authorities therefore should save any fiscal
windfall—whether from higher-than-expected revenues or upward revision of GDP—to
reduce the deficit-to-GDP ratio. But this would not eliminate the back-loading of needed
expenditure adjustment. To alleviate concerns regarding the feasibility of the 2006 target,
shifting forward to 2005 part of the expenditure adjustment is necessary. Nonetheless, the
cumulative amount of savings that will need to be found in 2005–06 is substantial; and
credible and successful adjustment requires the full and early identification of the necessary
measures.
36.
Recognition by the authorities that deficit reduction should continue beyond
2006 is welcome, but reforms of the pension and health systems to sustain the
adjustment should be expedited. A structural deficit below 2 percent of GDP later in the
decade is needed to help keep debt moderate and shore up the fiscal position ahead of
intensifying budget pressures from population aging. But without pension and health care
reforms, population aging will erode the adjustment effort. Significant changes in pension
system parameters will be needed, including further raising retirement ages. On health care,
greater cost-sharing with final users is required to reduce demand. Long lags from the
introduction of these reforms to their impact on public spending warrant early action, and
policy measures should be formulated quickly and implemented promptly.
37.
Completing the backlog of structural reforms is crucial for improving the
efficiency of resource allocation. The initial misallocation of capital at the beginning of
transition was reinforced through the late 1990s by lax bank lending decisions. This

- 22 -

misallocation is likely to have been a major cause of relatively slow growth during the past
decade. Restructuring and privatizing banks and some large state companies has helped
ensure that future investment decisions will be made on a market basis. The authorities’
intention to reduce the role of the state in the economy by resuming privatization and closing
the NPF and CKA will improve the efficiency of resource allocation. Pressures for additional
bailouts should be resisted to prevent further increases in public debt and allocation of
resources to low value-added uses. In addition, improving the business-legal environment
should remain an important priority. Enacting expeditiously a bankruptcy law that enhances
creditors’ rights and streamlining procedures for entries into commercial registers are long
overdue.
38.
With underlying inflation expected to rise gradually, monetary policy will need
to tighten in the period ahead. Keeping policy interest rates on hold through mid-2004 was
appropriate given expectations of subdued underlying inflation. The recent ¼ percentage
point increase in the policy rate was needed to prevent any further decline in real interest
rates in the context of gradually rising underlying inflation. However, with the expected
narrowing of the output gap and pickup in inflation from mid 2005, future interest rate
increases will need to outpace inflation in order to tighten monetary conditions. The size and
timing of future interest rate increases should be conditioned on evidence of emerging
demand-pull pressures which—despite the expected continuing rise in growth—may well be
delayed by a faster expansion of potential output.
39.
The Czech inflation targeting framework has provided a transparent foundation
for monetary policy and offers continuity through ERM2. By relying primarily on the
interest rate instrument, rather than foreign exchange intervention, the CNB has provided
coherent signals to the market about monetary policy intentions. The CNB should continue to
pursue a nonintervention strategy during the forthcoming tightening cycle to avoid resisting
koruna appreciation driven by rising domestic interest rates. Measured in terms of unit labor
costs, competitiveness against several CECs has eroded, but other factors that are more
difficult to quantify—including labor quality—are likely to partially compensate.
40.
Bank supervision should adapt to the new risks from rapid growth in lending to
households. The CNB’s efforts at improving the analysis of risks from macrofinancial
linkages is commendable. But enhancement of supervisory capacity is needed in the area of
household credit, and will require data on household indebtedness, debt-servicing ability, and
housing transactions. Establishing a single financial sector supervisor should improve
information flow, but organizational changes should not distract from effective oversight.
41.
The next Article IV consultation with the Czech Republic is expected to be
conducted under the standard 12-month cycle.

- 23 -

Figure 1. Czech Republic and Other CECs: Economic Indicators, 1993-2003
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
8

67

Real GDP growth

Per capita PPP GDP, relative to EU-15

6

Hungary

62

4

57

2

52

Czech R.

Poland
0

CEC4 1/

47
Czech R.

-2

42
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

40
35
30

2000

2001

2002

2003

21

CPI inflation

Unemployment rate

Poland

Poland

25

14

20
15
Hungary

10
5

7

Czech R.

Hungary

0

Czech R.

-5

0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

4
2

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
50

Fiscal balance (ratio to GDP)
40

0
30

-2
-4
-6
-8

Saving (line)
Investment (bar)
(ratio to GDP)

Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland

20
Czech Republic
Hungary

10

Poland

-10

0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

Sources: Eurostat; IMF World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Unweighted average of Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia.

- 24 -

Figure 2. Czech Republic: Indicators of External Competitiveness, 2000-04
0

125

Real effective exchange rate 1/
120

-3
CEC4 2/

115

-6

110

-9

105

-12

100

Czech R.
-15
May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

Jan-02

May-02

Sep-01

May-01

Jan-01

Sep-00

May-00

Jan-00

95

Current account, trade
balance, and FDI
(percent of GDP)

Current account
FDI coverage
Trade balance

-18
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004q1

3.4

130

Relative unit labor costs 1/

Market share in total EU imports
(in percent)

3.0

120

CEC4 2/

2.6

Czech R.
110

2.2
1.8

100

1.4
90

CEC4 2/

Czech R.

1.0
0.6
May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

Jan-02

May-02

Sep-01

May-01

Jan-01

Sep-00

May-00

Jan-00

80

10

2000

2001

2002

2003

34

Unit labor cost and export prices,
12-month growth rates

8
6

Exchange rate, koruna/euro, 2002-04
33

Export prices

4

32

2
0

31

-2
30

-4
ULC

-6

29

-8
-10

Sources: Czech Statistical Office; Czech National Bank; International Financial Statistics Direction of Trade Statistics; and
IMF staff calculations.
1/ Relative to industrial country partners, January 2000=100.
2/ Trade-weighted average of four Central European countries (Hungary, Poland, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia).

Jun-04

Apr-04

Mar-04

Oct-03

Dec-03

Jun-03

Aug-03

Feb-03

Apr-03

Oct-02

Dec-02

Jul-02

Aug-02

May-02

Jan-02

Mar-02

May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

May-02

Jan-02

Sep-01

May-01

Jan-01

Sep-00

Jan-00

May-00

28

- 25 -

Figure 3. Czech Republic: Monetary Policy Indicators, 2001-04
107

5.5

Monetary conditions index 1/

Policy interest rates
(in percent)

5.0

105
4.5

CNB
Ex post
basis 2/

4.0

103

3.5
101

ECB

3.0

Ex ante
basis 2/

2.5
99
2.0
"net" basis 3/
1.5

May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

May-02

Jan-02

Sep-01

May-01

Jan-01

Jul-04

Jan-04

Apr-04

Nov-03

Jun-03

Aug-03

Dec-02

Mar-03

Jun-02

Oct-02

Dec-01

Mar-02

Aug-01

Jan-01

Apr-01

97

40

Credit to the private sector 5/
(year-on-year growth rate)

Real interest rates 4/
(in percent)

3.0

30
Households

2.0
Ex ante
20
1.0

Total

10
0.0

Ex post
0

-1.0

Businesses

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

May-02

Jan-02

Sep-01

May-01

May-04

Jan-04

Sep-03

May-03

Jan-03

Sep-02

May-02

Jan-02

Sep-01

May-01

Jan-01

Jan-01

-10

-2.0

Sources: Czech National Bank; European Central Bank; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Weighted average of real short-term interest rate and real effective exchange rate (weights: 2/3 and 1/3,
respectively).
2/ Based on 1-year PRIBOR deflated by 12-month backward- and forward-looking CPI inflation, respectively.
3/ Based on real interest rate deflated by 12-month backward-looking inflation excluding effects of indirect tax and
administered price changes.
4/ Ex post real interest rates are 1-year PRIBOR, deflated by 12-month CPI inflation; ex ante real interest rates are
deflated by 12-month inflation expected in a survey conducted by the Czech National Bank Statistical Survey.
5/ Business and total adjusted for loan write-offs and changes in classification of financial institutions.

- 26 -

Table 1. Czech Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-04
2001

2002

2003

2004 1/

2.6
3.9
4.7
2.9

1.5
3.4
1.8
-0.5

3.1
4.5
0.1
-0.3

3.3
3.1
3.2
…

8.1
8.5
23.5
28.9

7.3
9.2
22.3
27.9

7.8
9.9
21.4
27.6

7.5
9.6
22.3
27.8

36.7
41.7
-5.0

37.5
44.2
-6.7

38.9
45.1
-6.2

38.3
45.3
-7.0

-2.8
-2.7
17.5
22.9

-4.0
-3.7
18.4
25.5

-4.9
-3.9
21.9
27.9

-6.1
-5.9
26.5
31.3

Money and credit (end of year, percent change)
Broad money 5/
Private sector credit (percent change, eop) 6/

13.0
2.1

3.5
4.5

6.9
8.5

9.0
8.3

Interest rates (in percent)
Three-month interbank rate (end-of-period) 7/
10-year government bond 7/

4.7
6.3

2.6
4.9

2.1
4.1

2.3
5.0

-5.0
-5.4
14.5
4.1

-3.0
-5.6
23.7
6.1

-2.7
-6.2
27.0
5.5

-2.6
-5.5
28.9
5.1

Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP
Domestic demand
CPI (year average)
PPI (year average)
Unemployment rate (year average in percent)
Survey based 2/
Registered 2/
Gross national savings (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investments (percent of GDP)
Public finance (percent of GDP)
General government revenue
General government expenditure 3/
General government balance 3/
Adjusted to exclude grants to transformation institutions
to cover costs related to management of bad assets
Adjusted balance excluding net lending 4/
General government debt
Including debt of the Czech Consolidation Agency

Balance of payments (percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Current account
Gross international reserves (US$ billion)
Reserve cover (in months of imports of goods and services)
Fund position (as of May 31, 2004)
Holdings of currency (percent of quota)
Holdings of SDRs (percent of allocation)
Quota (millions of SDRs)
Exchange rate
Exchange rate regime
Koruna per U.S. dollar (July 19, 2004)
Nominal effective exchange rate (2000=100) 7/
Real effective exchange rate (CPI-based; 2000=100) 5/

61.9
n.a.
819.3

104.4
105.5

116.1
116.7

Managed float
CZK 25.12 =US$1
115.6
112.6

Sources: Czech Statistical Office; Czech National Bank; Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Staff estimates and projections.
2/ In percent of total labor force.
3/ Excluding privatization revenues of the National Property Fund and the Czech Land Fund, the sale of shares
and voting rights by local governments, and the sale of Russian debt.
4/ General government deficit excluding transfer to transformation institutions and net lending. Concept targeted by the authorities.
5/ For 2004, data refer to May.
6/ For 2004, data refer to growth rate from March 2003 to March 2004.
7/ For 2004, data refer to June.

116.2
111.7

- 27 -

Table 2. Czech Republic: Balance of Payments, 2000-04
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 1/

Current account balance

-2,718

-3,273

-4,166

-5,570

-5,642

Trade balance
Exports
Imports

-3,131
29,052
32,183

-3,068
33,378
36,446

-2,179
38,319
40,497

-2,458
48,599
51,058

-2,651
56,928
59,579

Nonfactor services
Receipts
Payments

1,414
6,862
5,448

1,524
7,090
5,566

668
7,061
6,393

469
7,764
7,295

501
9,266
8,765

Factor income (net)

-1,373

-2,197

-3,532

-4,132

-4,631

372

467

877

552

1,138

-5

-9

-4

-3

-3

Financial account balance

3,836

4,544

10,625

5,805

6,138

Direct investment, net

4,943

5,476

8,276

2,351

3,143

Portfolio investment, net

-1,767

916

-1,428

-1,336

-1,336

Financial derivatives, net

-36

-85

-131

137

0

Other investment, net

696

-1,764

3,908

4,654

4,331

Errors and omissions, net

-295

502

172

225

0

Change in reserves

-819

-1,765

-6,627

-457

-493

-4.9
-5.6
8.9

-5.4
-5.0
9.0

-5.6
-3.0
11.2

-6.2
-2.7
2.6

-5.5
-2.6
3.1

4.2
-2.5

4.1
2.3

6.1
3.0

5.5
1.7

5.1
-0.7

Transfers
Capital account

Memorandum items:
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Trade balance (in percent of GDP)
Net foreign direct investment (in percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves
(in months of imports of goods and services)
Terms of trade (percentage change) 2/

Sources: Czech National Bank; and IMF staff projections.
1/ IMF staff projections.
2/ Goods and services.

- 28 -

Table 3. Czech Republic: Consolidated General Government Budget, 2000-04 1/
2000

2001

2002

2003 2/

2004 3/

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants 4/
Total revenue
Current revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
Capital revenue
Grants, incl. EU compensation

36.3
36.3
35.8
33.5
2.3
0.4
0.1

36.7
36.6
36.2
33.8
2.4
0.4
0.1

37.5
37.4
37.0
34.5
2.5
0.5
0.1

38.9
38.5
38.0
35.3
2.7
0.4
0.5

38.3
37.2
36.8
35.6
1.3
0.4
1.0

Total expenditure and net lending 5/
excl. grants to transformation institutions
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Goods and services
Interest payments
Subsidies and other current transfers
excluding grants to transformation institutions
Transfers to households and nonfinancial enterprises
Transfers abroad, incl. EU
Subsidies
excluding grants to transformation institutions 6/
excluding semibudgetary organizations
Capital expenditure
Net lending (excl. privatization and the sale of Russian debt)

40.5
39.6
40.4
35.4
8.4
1.0
26.0
25.1
18.6
0.1
7.3
6.4
2.3
5.0
0.1

41.7
39.5
41.6
36.7
7.9
0.9
27.9
25.7
18.7
0.1
9.0
6.8
2.3
4.8
0.1

44.2
41.6
43.9
38.6
8.6
0.7
29.3
26.6
19.2
0.1
9.9
7.3
2.4
5.3
0.3

45.1
43.9
44.1
38.6
8.1
0.8
29.7
28.5
19.4
0.5
9.8
8.6
2.7
5.5
1.0

45.3
44.4
45.0
38.7
7.9
1.1
29.7
28.8
18.9
0.8
10.0
9.1
3.2
6.3
0.3

Overall balance 5/
Adjusted to exclude grants to transformation institutions
to cover costs related to management of bad assets
Adjusted balance excluding net lending 6/

-4.2

-5.0

-6.7

-6.2

-7.0

-3.2
-3.1

-2.8
-2.7

-4.0
-3.7

-4.9
-3.9

-6.1
-5.9

1.3
0.0
0.0
2.9

2.7
0.1
0.0
2.2

5.3
0.0
0.8
0.5

1.0
0.0
0.0
5.1

1.0
0.0
0.0
6.0

0.9
15.5
21.2
-4.6

2.2
17.5
22.9
-6.5

2.7
18.4
25.5
-6.5

1.2
21.9
27.9
-12.9

0.9
26.5
31.3
-5.3

Financing 7/
Privatization receipts 8/
Proceeds from the sale of UMTS licenses
Proceeds from the sale of Russian debt
Net increase in financial liabilities
Memorandum items:
Grants to transformation institutions to cover
costs related to management of bad assets
General government debt 9/
Including debt of the Czech Consolidation Agency
General government balance, ESA95-based

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes the state budget, Czech Consolidation Agency, State Financial Assets, National Property Fund, extrabudgetary funds,
social security funds, and local governments.
2/ Preliminary estimates.
3/ Staff estimates consistent with the 2004 state budget. Revenue estimates are based on staff's GDP projections.
Expenditure estimates include the effects of post-budget spending measures.
4/ Excluding revenues from UMTS license sales.
5/ Excluding privatization revenues of the National Property Fund, the Czech Land Fund, and the sale of shares and voting
rights by the local governments.
6/ Concept targeted by the authorities.
7/ IMF staff estimates.
8/ Includes privatization receipts of the National Property Fund, the Czech Land Fund, and the sale of shares and voting
rights by local governments.
9/ Includes liabilities of the state budget, extrabudgetary funds, social security funds, and local governments. Staff estimates
for 2004.

- 29 -

Table 4. Czech Republic: Medium-term Macroeconomic Scenario, 2001-09

Real sector
Real GDP
Consumption
Investment
Of which : fixed investment
Exports, goods and services
Imports, goods and services
CPI inflation
GDP deflator
Gross domestic savings 1/
Public
Private

2001

2002

2003

2.6
3.0
6.3
5.4
11.5
13.0

1.5
3.3
3.5
3.4
2.3
4.9

3.1
4.1
5.7
7.4
5.9
7.9

4.7
4.9

1.8
2.8

23.5
0.3
23.3

2006

2007

2008

2009

(Percent growth)
3.3
3.4
2.9
3.0
3.7
3.1
4.7
3.2
8.5
7.9
7.5
7.1

3.5
3.1
2.8
3.5
7.9
7.0

3.6
3.2
3.4
4.1
7.6
6.9

3.7
3.2
3.7
4.1
7.5
6.8

3.8
3.2
4.0
4.2
7.6
7.0

0.1
1.7

3.2
3.6

3.0
2.9

3.0
2.9

3.0
3.0

3.0
3.0

3.0
2.8

22.3
-0.5
22.8

21.4
-1.4
22.8

22.3
-0.3
22.6

22.3
-1.4
23.7

22.2
-0.3
22.6

22.0
0.4
21.6

22.0
1.4
20.6

21.5
2.0
19.5

(In percent of GDP)
38.3
38.6
45.3
44.5
-7.0
-5.9
-6.1
-5.2
-5.9
-5.1
-5.9
-4.8
26.5
29.7
31.3
33.5

38.0
43.0
-5.0
-4.4
-4.4
-4.0
32.9
35.9

37.9
41.8
-3.9
-3.9
-3.9
-3.5
34.8
37.6

37.9
41.1
-3.2
-3.2
-3.2
-2.8
38.4
38.4

37.8
40.2
-2.4
-2.4
-2.4
-2.0
38.4
38.4

(In percent of GDP)
-5.5
-4.9
-2.6
-2.1
0.5
0.5
-4.5
-4.4
1.1
1.1
6.0
5.9
3.1
3.6
0.5
1.0
-1.3
-1.2
0.0
0.0
4.2
3.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
-1.0

-4.4
-1.6
0.7
-4.6
1.1
4.4
2.6
0.0
-1.1
0.0
2.9
0.0
0.0

-4.2
-1.4
0.9
-4.8
1.2
4.2
2.6
0.0
-1.1
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.0

-4.1
-1.4
1.2
-5.0
1.2
4.1
2.6
0.0
-1.0
0.0
2.4
0.0
0.0

-4.3
-1.4
1.5
-5.5
1.2
4.3
2.7
0.0
-0.9
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.0

Public finances
Revenues
Expenditures
Overall balance
Adjusted balance
Cyclically adjusted
Targeted balance (adjusted balance excl. net lending)
General government debt
Including debt of the Czech Consolidation Agency

36.8
41.7
-5.0
-2.8
-2.7

37.5
44.2
-6.7
-4.0
-3.5

17.5
22.9

18.4
25.5

38.9
45.1
-6.2
-4.9
-4.5
-3.9
21.9
27.9

Balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Services balance
Net factor income
Current transfers
Financial account balance
Direct investment, net
Of which : privatization revenue
Portfolio investment, net
Financial derivatives, net
Other investment, net
Errors and omissions, net
Change in reserves (- increase)

-5.4
-5.0
2.5
-3.6
0.8
7.5
9.0
2.7
1.5
-0.1
-2.9
0.8
-2.9

-5.6
-3.0
0.9
-4.8
1.2
14.4
11.2
5.3
-1.9
-0.2
5.3
0.2
-9.0

-6.2
-2.7
0.5
-4.6
0.6
6.5
2.6
1.0
-1.5
0.2
5.2
0.3
-0.5

Sources: Czech Statistical Office, Czech National Bank; Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ In percent of GDP.

2004

2005

- 30 -

Table 5. Czech Republic: Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-2004 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Latest Data

1997

Financial indicators
Public sector debt 2/
State government guarantees 3/
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis) 4/
Domestic credit
One-year PRIBOR (end of period, in percent)
One-year PRIBOR, real (in percent) 5/
Classified credits (percent of total credits)
Of which : loss credits

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Date

20.0
17.0
10.8
9.4
66.7
17.0
7.0
26.4
15.0

18.0
17.0
5.4
0.7
58.7
8.9
2.1
26.0
13.4

21.0
15.3
7.7
-4.7
55.6
5.8
3.3
31.9
13.3

21.2
11.4
5.6
-4.3
49.7
5.9
2.0
28.9
12.9

22.9
13.0
13.0
2.1
43.7
4.6
0.3
20.8
7.0

25.5
15.0
3.5
4.5
37.7
2.6
2.0
15.8
3.9

27.9
18.1
6.9
8.5
42.7
2.3
1.3
11.2
2.3

...
...
9.0
8.3
41.6
3.0
0.3
11.2
2.2

December-03
December-03
May-04
March-04
March-04
June-04
May-04
March-04
March-04

External indicators
Exports G&NFS (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Imports G&NFS (percent change, 12-month basis in US$)
Terms of trade (percent change, 12-month basis)
Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance
Of which : inward portfolio investment (debt securities etc.)
other investment, net (loans, trade credits etc.)
inward foreign direct investment
Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of commercial banks (in US$ billions)
Gross official reserves (in US$ billions)
Net International Reserves (NIR) (in US$ billions)
Central bank short-term foreign liabilities (in US$ billions)
Central bank foreign currency exposure (in US$ billions)
Short-term foreign assets of commercial banks (in US$ billions)
Short-term foreign liabilities of commercial banks (in US$ billions)
Foreign currency exposure of commercial banks (in US$ billions)
Official reserves in months of imports G&NFS
Reserve money to (gross official) reserves (percentage)
Broad money to (gross official) reserves (percentage)
Total short-term external debt to gross official reserves (percentage) 6/
Total external debt
Of which : public sector debt 7/
Of which : public and publicly guaranteed debt 7/
Total external debt to exports G&NFS (in percent)
Total external debt service payments to exports G&NFS
External interest payments to exports G&NFS
External amortization payments to exports G&NFS
Exchange rate (per US$, period average)
REER appreciation (+) (12-month change; CPI-based)

-1.2
-3.5
1.2
-6.7
2.0
2.4
-2.4
2.5
2.6
9.8
9.8
0.0
9.7
7.2
4.9
2.6
3.6
67.2
348.3
111.4
37.7
3.6
11.7
73.2
15.9
3.0
13.0
31.71
-0.4

13.5
4.7
5.0
-2.2
5.1
1.9
-3.0
6.5
4.2
12.6
12.6
0.0
12.6
9.1
6.5
4.2
4.4
61.0
326.9
104.4
39.4
2.9
13.1
72.7
15.3
3.1
12.2
32.27
9.5

-0.6
-0.5
-0.7
-2.7
5.6
0.9
-3.2
11.5
6.3
12.8
12.8
0.0
12.8
9.3
6.4
6.3
4.5
46.0
291.0
93.4
38.4
2.5
11.9
68.6
12.7
3.1
9.6
34.60
-0.2

7.8
10.6
-2.6
-4.9
6.9
0.9
1.2
8.9
8.4
13.1
13.1
0.0
13.1
8.3
6.0
8.4
4.2
45.2
288.1
96.4
38.8
1.9
11.6
60.2
12.3
2.4
9.9
38.59
1.2

12.7
11.6
2.5
-5.4
7.5
1.3
-2.9
9.3
11.1
14.5
14.5
0.0
14.5
9.9
5.3
11.1
4.1
45.9
310.5
83.8
36.8
1.4
9.2
55.3
8.6
2.2
6.4
38.04
5.5

12.1
11.6
1.7
-5.6
14.4
1.2
5.3
11.5
10.3
23.7
23.7
0.0
23.7
7.1
5.8
10.3
6.1
35.4
230.9
57.1
36.6
2.2
9.3
59.5
9.1
2.2
6.9
32.74
10.6

24.2
24.4
0.9
-6.2
6.5
1.9
5.2
2.9
5.3
27.0
27.0
0.0
27.0
6.3
8.1
5.3
5.5
39.7
254.6
62.6
38.9
3.0
9.7
61.9
6.4
0.3
5.3
28.23
-3.5

25.6
25.0
1.6
-2.6
0.6
3.5
-8.1
4.9
7.1
27.0
27.0
0.0
27.0
5.3
5.4
7.1
5.0
38.5
244.4
52.6
32.9
2.9
8.3
49.6
4.7
0.8
3.9
26.05
-2.8

March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
April-04
April-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
March-04
June-04
May-04

Financial market indicators (end of period)
Stock market index (PX-50)
Foreign currency debt rating (Moody's)
Domestic currency debt rating (Standard & Poor's)

495
Baa1
AA

394
Baa1
AA-

490
Baa1
AA-

479
Baa1
AA-

395
Baa1
AA-

461
A1
A+

659
A1
A+

807
A1
A+

June-04
June-04
June-04

Sources: Czech Statistical Office; Czech National Bank; Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Starting 2000, GDP data are revised.
2/ Debt of general government and liabilities of transformation institutions.
3/ Includes guarantees provided to CSOB on IPB balance sheet.
4/ Adjusted to account for removal of KoB's banking license in September 2001, exchange rate effects on foreign-currency-denominated loans, loan
write-offs, and transfer of IPB loans to CKA (CNB calculations).
5/ Deflated by CPI inflation.
6/ Includes amortization of medium- and long-term debt on a remaining maturity basis. Based on medium- and long-term debt outstanding at the end of the
preceding year.
7/ General government and Czech National Bank.

- 31 -

APPENDIX I

Czech Republic: External and Fiscal Sustainability
Table A1 shows the results of the external debt sustainability framework for the Czech
Republic. Under the baseline macroeconomic scenario, the Czech Republic’s external debt
stock is projected to remain relatively stable at near 40 percent of GDP. The current account
deficit is expected to narrow, driven largely by a further reduction in the trade deficit and an
increase in the surplus on the services account (reversing its earlier trend). FDI—though
slowing from very high levels seen early in the decade—is expected to continue to finance a
significant part of the current account deficit. While these factors will mitigate the need for
new borrowing, external indebtedness (expressed in U.S. dollar terms) is set to increase
significantly. However, the automatic effect of GDP growth and gradual koruna appreciation
against the U.S. dollar should stabilize the debt-GDP ratio. While the annual gross external
financing need (defined as the sum of the current account deficit, amortization of mediumand long-term debt, and the outstanding stock of short-term debt) is expected to increase in
U.S. dollar terms, relative to GDP this ratio is expected to decline due to favorable growth
and exchange rate developments.
These conclusions were subjected to several stress test scenarios, including negative shocks
to the current account, GDP growth, external interest rates, and a large depreciation of the
koruna against the U.S. dollar. In addition, a Czech-specific shock in which FDI falls each
year relative to baseline by US$1 billion combined with stagnant GDP growth of 2½ percent
was considered (alternative scenario 2 in Table A1). The results indicate that the Czech
Republic’s debt dynamics remain manageable, with the external debt-GDP ratio remaining
under 55 percent in 2009 in all cases.
Turning to fiscal sustainability (Table A2), under the baseline scenario—which assumes that
the general government deficit is reduced in line with current plans until 2007, deficit
reduction continues at a similar pace in 2008–09, and all of CKA’s debt is fully assumed by
the government by 2008—the stock of government debt is projected to increase to about
38 percent of GDP. Under the standard adverse shock scenarios, public debt should be
sustainable in the medium term, remaining below the Maastricht ceiling of 60 percent of
GDP. However, significant risks are associated with contingent liabilities (government
guarantees stood at nearly 20 percent of GDP at end-2003).11 In addition, the possibility of
bailouts through CKA remains prior to its planned closure in 2007—recent examples include
taking over debt of the railways and of some municipalities. In the country specific risk
scenario (consistent with scenario A2 in the external debt sustainability exercise), a
substantial share of the currently outstanding contingent liabilities is assumed to fall due in
2006, triggered by weaker growth brought by a drop-off in FDI. Higher fiscal financing
needs lead to an increase in domestic interest rates, further slowing annual GDP growth to
11

About one-third of the total nominal stock of guarantees (without guarantees for the
liabilities to CKA, which are included in public debt) is considered very low risk.

- 32 -

APPENDIX I

about 2½ percent. Slower growth, in turn, impedes public expenditure adjustment. Under this
scenario, the stock of public debt is projected to increase to above 50 percent of GDP and
could exceed the Maastricht limit in the case of adverse shocks (e.g., higher interest rates).

Table A1. Czech Republic: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 1999-2009
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

1999

2000

Actual
2001

2002

2003

2004

Projections
2006
2007

2005

2008

2009

I. Baseline Projections
1 External debt

38.4

38.8

36.8

36.6

38.9

38.4

39.6

39.7

39.8

39.5

39.3

-1.1
-3.1
0.7
1.2
55.9
57.1
-7.0
3.1
1.7
-0.2
1.6
2.1

0.4
1.6
3.3
3.1
64.5
67.5
-5.9
4.2
1.5
-1.3
4.0
-1.2

-2.0
-6.4
3.9
2.5
66.5
69.0
-8.4
-1.8
1.4
-0.9
-2.4
4.3

-0.2
-10.9
4.3
2.0
61.5
63.6
-10.1
-5.1
1.4
-0.5
-6.0
10.7

2.3
-2.8
5.1
2.2
62.9
65.1
-2.5
-5.4
1.1
-0.9
-5.6
5.1

-0.5
0.8
4.3
2.1
64.4
66.5
-3.6
0.1
1.2
-1.1
...
-1.3

1.2
0.0
3.3
1.6
66.2
67.8
-3.7
0.3
1.6
-1.2
...
1.2

0.2
0.5
2.7
1.0
68.0
69.0
-2.6
0.4
1.7
-1.3
...
-0.3

0.1
0.3
2.4
0.5
69.5
70.0
-2.6
0.5
1.9
-1.3
...
-0.2

-0.3
0.1
2.1
0.2
70.9
71.1
-2.6
0.6
2.0
-1.4
...
-0.4

-0.2
0.3
2.3
-0.1
72.3
72.2
-2.7
0.6
2.0
-1.4
...
-0.4

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

68.6

60.2

55.3

59.5

61.8

59.6

59.7

58.4

57.2

55.7

54.3

Gross external financing need (in billions of U.S. dollars) 4/
In percent of GDP

13.8
23.1

14.8
26.6

15.0
24.6

16.3
22.0

19.6
21.8

23.9
23.2

24.9
22.8

25.4
21.7

25.8
20.6

26.5
19.7

27.5
19.1

2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net nondebt creating capital inflows (negative)
9
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions
0.5
-3.9
4.3
-0.6
-0.5
-0.7
7.0

3.3
-9.5
3.8
7.8
10.6
-3.3
5.9

2.6
6.5
4.1
12.7
11.6
-3.9
8.4

1.5
19.4
4.5
12.1
11.6
-4.3
10.1

3.1
18.0
3.7
24.3
24.5
-5.1
2.5

2.2
6.4
4.5
12.0
12.0
-3.2
5.7

10-Year
Standard
Deviation
2.3
11.4
0.7
11.3
12.3
1.9
2.6

Projected
Average
3.3
10.8
3.6
17.4
17.0
-4.3
3.6

3.4
3.0
4.3
9.5
8.6
-3.3
3.7

3.5
3.4
4.7
9.9
8.9
-2.7
2.6

3.6
3.4
5.0
9.5
8.7
-2.4
2.6

3.7
3.4
5.4
9.2
8.8
-2.1
2.6

3.8
3.3
5.5
9.4
8.9
-2.3
2.7

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest
current account

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 5/
A2. Country-specific shock from 2005, with reduction in GDP growth and FDI (relative to baseline)6/

3.5
4.6
4.7
10.8
10.1
-2.8
3.0

38.4
38.4

37.6
42.2

35.6
44.4

33.8
46.7

32.0
49.2

30.2
52.2

-5.5
-5.3

38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4

40.1
41.7
47.9
43.2
46.0
56.8

40.7
44.2
58.1
47.5
52.3
58.3

40.8
44.0
57.0
47.4
52.4
57.4

40.4
43.4
55.5
47.0
51.9
56.0

40.3
42.9
54.1
46.7
51.7
54.8

-3.3
-3.7
-4.9
-3.4
-4.2
-4.6

- 33 -

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

10-Year
Historical
Average

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest
current account 7/
-3.3

B. Bound Tests
B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Change in U.S. dollar GDP deflator is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Noninterest current account is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B5. Combination of 2-5 using one standard deviation shocks
B6. One time 30 percent nominal depreciation in 2005

APPENDIX I

1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + εα(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (ε > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both noninterest current account and nondebt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Relative to baseline, FDI declines by US$1 billion and GDP growth stabilizes at 2.5 percent. Consistent with the alternative scenario in Table A2.
7/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and both noninterest current account and nondebt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.

3.2
7.6
6.5
-4.9
1.1
6.4
3.2

11.0
6.1

42.6

2.1
2.4
3.2
36.3
39.5
0.5
0.4
0.8
-0.4
0.1
-1.3
-1.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3

15.5
1.5

2000

2.6
6.0
1.1
4.3
4.9
5.9
4.1

20.7
12.6

47.6

2.0
1.2
4.1
36.7
40.8
-0.3
-0.2
0.1
-0.4
-0.1
-2.7
-2.7
0.0
0.0
0.8

17.5
1.4

Actual
2001

1.5
3.9
1.1
20.3
2.8
8.4
6.0

15.8
11.7

49.1

0.9
0.5
6.0
37.5
43.6
-0.3
-0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-5.3
-5.3
0.0
0.0
0.5

18.4
2.0

2002

3.1
4.8
3.1
17.5
1.7
4.8
5.3

13.7
12.3

56.2

3.5
4.0
5.3
38.9
44.3
-0.3
0.0
0.5
-0.5
-0.3
-1.0
-1.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

21.9
2.8

2003

2.3
2.1
2.9
14.8
3.8
3.2
2.3

Standard
Deviation

Historical
Average

2.2
7.3
1.7
2.0
5.7
4.1
2.6

10-Year

10-Year

26.5
26.5
26.5
26.5
26.5
26.5

26.5
26.5
26.5

3.3
5.4
1.9
...
3.6
3.1
5.9

16.1
16.6

69.3

4.6
4.7
5.9
38.3
44.2
-0.3
-0.3
0.4
-0.7
...
-1.0
-1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

26.5
4.3

2004

Projections
2006
2007

3.5
5.9
3.0
...
2.9
-1.1
3.4

16.9
19.8

86.8

3.2
3.2
3.4
38.0
41.3
-0.2
-0.2
0.8
-1.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

32.9
6.4

3.6
6.0
3.0
...
3.0
0.1
2.0

15.7
19.7

91.7

1.8
1.8
2.0
37.9
40.0
-0.2
-0.2
0.9
-1.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

34.8
7.2

3.7
6.3
3.4
...
3.0
1.2
1.1

16.0
21.5

101.3

3.6
1.0
1.1
37.9
39.0
-0.1
-0.1
1.1
-1.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.6

38.4
7.8

2008

31.1
33.9
32.2
31.5
31.8
39.7

27.9
30.7
29.8

35.6
44.3
39.1
37.8
35.0
42.9

30.3
36.1
45.7

37.4
51.1
40.9
39.6
36.8
44.7

32.7
40.7
48.7

41.0
59.9
44.5
43.4
40.4
48.2

37.9
48.1
54.1

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

3.4
5.0
2.1
...
2.9
1.2
4.6

15.7
17.2

77.0

3.2
3.2
4.6
38.6
43.3
-0.3
-0.3
0.5
-0.8
...
-1.0
-1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

29.7
5.4

I. Baseline Projections

2005

1/ General government gross debt.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ The 2008 jump in government debt is associated with closing CKA and taking over its remaining obligations. For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium- and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
8/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
9/ Assumes that 90 percent of public guarantees are called in 2006 and GDP growth stabilizes at 2.5 percent. Consistent with the alternative scenario in Table A1.
10/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
11/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and primary balance) remain at the level in percent of GDP/growth rate of the last projection year.
12/ Assumes that the primary general government balance (excluding CKA transfers) remains at its 2004 level as a share of GDP.

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B4. Combination of 2-4 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 10/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 8/
A2. Primary balance under no policy change in 2005-09 12/
A3. Country-specific shock in 2006, with reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation 9/

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

0.5
8.1
5.2
-17.0
3.0
4.9
2.6

9.7
5.8

Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

37.3

1.3
0.8
2.6
35.8
38.3
0.9
0.5
0.6
-0.1
0.4
-2.6
-2.6
0.0
0.0
0.5

2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

13.4
1.6

1 Public sector debt 1/
Of which foreign-currency denominated

1999

Table A2. Czech Republic: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 1999-2009
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

41.0
64.5
44.5
43.3
40.4
48.1

40.2
52.7
56.4

3.8
6.2
3.3
...
2.8
1.1
0.2

15.5
22.3

101.4

0.0
0.0
0.2
37.8
38.0
-0.2
-0.2
1.2
-1.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

38.4
8.4

2009

3.5
5.8
2.8
...
3.0
0.9
2.9

-0.2
-0.4
-0.3
-0.3
-0.2
-0.3

-0.3
-0.2
0.2

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 11/

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 11/
-0.2

- 34 APPENDIX I

- 35 -

APPENDIX II

Czech Republic: Fund Relations
(As of May 31, 2004)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 1/01/1993; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
819.30
506.91
312.40

% Quota
100.00
61.87
38.13

III.

SDR Department:
Holdings

SDR Million
0.00

% Allocation
N/A

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Type
Stand-by

Approval
Date
3/17/1993

Expiration
Date
3/16/1994

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)
177.00

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)
0.00

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund: None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:
The currency of the Czech Republic is the Czech koruna, created on
February 8, 1993 upon the dissolution of the currency union with the
Slovak Republic, which had used the Czechoslovak koruna as its currency.
From May 3, 1993 to May 27, 1997, the exchange rate was pegged to a
basket of two currencies: the deutsche mark (65 percent) and the
U.S. dollar (35 percent). On February 28, 1996, the Czech National Bank
widened the exchange rate band from ±0.5 percent to ±7.5 percent around
the central rate. On May 27, 1997, managed floating was introduced. In
the 2003 edition of the Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions, the exchange rate regime of the Czech Republic
was classified as managed floating with no pre-announced path for the
exchange rate. On July 19, 2004, the exchange rate of the Czech koruna
stood at CZK 25.12 per U.S. dollar.

VIII.

Last Article IV Consultation:
The last Article IV consultation with the Czech Republic was concluded on
August 22, 2003. The staff report and PIN were published on January 9, 2004.

IX.

Technical Assistance: See attached table.

X.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not Applicable

XI.

Safeguards Assessments: Not Applicable

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

Czech Republic: Technical Assistance, 1991–2004
Department

Timing

Purpose

FAD

Dec. 1991–Sept. 1993
March 1993
September 1993
November 1993
January 1994
July 1994
May 1995
June 1995
June–July 1999

Regular visits by FAD consultant on VAT
administration
Public financial management
Follow-up visit on public financial management
Follow-up visit on public financial management
Follow-up visit on public financial management
Follow-up visit by FAD consultant on VAT
administration
Follow-up visit on public financial management
Follow-up visit by FAD consultant on VAT
administration
Medium-term fiscal framework

MFD

February 1992

Monetary management and research, foreign exchange
operations, and banking supervision
Monetary research
Long-term resident expert assignment in the area of
banking supervision (financed by EC-PHARE;
supervised by the Fund)
Bond issuance and monetary management

June 1992
July 1992
December 1992 and
February 1993
November 1993

May 1995
May 1995
May 1996
April 1997
February–June 1999
June 1999

Follow-up visit on bond issuance and monetary
management and management of cash balances
Data management and monetary research
Foreign exchange laws (jointly with LEG) and external
liberalization
Monetary operations
Banking system reform
Economic research
Banking legislation
Monetary research––inflation targeting
Integrated financial sector supervision (with WB)

RES

September 1999
June–August 2000

Inflation targeting (financed by MFD)
Inflation targeting (financed by MFD)

STA

May 1993
February 1994
April 1994
November 1994
January–February 1999
May 2002
February 2003

Money and banking statistics
Balance of payments
Government finance
Money and banking statistics
Money and banking statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
Implementing GFSM 2001

April 1994
January 1995

- 37 -

APPENDIX III

Czech Republic: Statistical Issues
1.
Data on core surveillance variables are available to the Fund regularly and with
minimal lags (reporting to STA is less current, especially for foreign trade and the national
accounts). Exchange rates and interest rates set by the Czech National Bank (CNB) are
published daily with no lag. Gross and net international reserves are reported on a monthly
basis with a one-week lag, as well as on a 10-day basis (with the CNB’s balance sheet) with a
one-week lag. Consumer prices, reserve money, broad money, borrowing and lending
interest rates, central government fiscal accounts, and foreign trade are reported monthly with
a lag of one–four weeks. Final monetary survey data are available with a lag of about
one month. GDP and balance of payments data are made available on a quarterly basis with a
lag of two to three months. Since 2003, the main balance of payment components are also
available on a monthly basis. Annual data published in the Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook cover all operations of the general government, including the extrabudgetary funds
excluded from the monthly data. These annual data are available on a timely basis. Monthly
fiscal data published in International Financial Statistics (IFS) cover central and local budget
accounts and are available with a two- to three-month lag.
2.
Data quality is generally adequate, and the authorities are taking steps to eliminate
deficiencies. EU accession has brought some further changes in data collection
methodologies, particularly for trade data.
•

National accounts data were revised in the second quarter of 2004, to bring them into
line with Eurostat requirements. As a result, nominal GDP was revised up by 5–
8 percent in 2000–03. The most significant adjustments were undertaken to:
(i) estimate the stock and consumption of fixed capital at replacement cost;
(ii) calculate imputed rent on the basis of user cost; and (iii) estimate the effect of
business units not included in the business register. Both real and nominal data at the
annual and quarterly frequencies have been revised.

•

With entry to the EU, data on intra-EU trade (which accounts for about 80 percent of
the total) will be derived from surveys, not customs information. Large firms and
some small- and medium-sized companies will be surveyed monthly. Some
nonresponse is expected and, with no overlapping period where both methodologies
are used, a break in the trade data is expected. Moreover, significantly longer lags in
release of data (25 days compared with 16 days earlier) will occur. A continued
weakness of foreign trade statistics is the unavailability of price indices for exports
and imports with a fixed base; these indices are currently presented on the basis of the
same month of the previous year.

•

Although there are some differences with the IFS presentation, monetary survey data
provided to the European Department are generally adequate for policy purposes.
However, large variations in the interbank clearing account float, especially at the end
of the year, require caution in interpreting monetary developments. The CNB has
made a major effort to identify the causes of these variations and adjust the data. In
2002, the CNB implemented the European Central Bank (ECB) framework for

- 38 -

APPENDIX III

monetary data. It also initiated reporting of monetary accounts that meet the IFS as
well as the ECB requirements. The same set of accounts also forms the basis of
monetary statistics published in the CNB’s bulletins and on the website, which are
thereby effectively harmonized with the monetary statistics published in IFS.
3.
The Czech Republic is in observance of the Special Data Dissemination Standard
(SDDS) and meets the SDDS specifications. Statistical metadata are posted on the Fund’s
Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board on the internet.
4.

Czech economic data can be obtained from the following websites:

Czech Statistical Office
Czech National Bank
Czech Ministry of Finance

http://www.czso.cz/eng/redakce.nsf/i/home
http://www.cnb.cz/en/index.php
http://www.mfcr.cz/vlfinsta_en.php

Information and documentation on economic statistics can also be found at the Special Data
Dissemination Standard website of the IMF’s SDDS
http://dsbb.imf.org/Applications/web/sddscountrycategorylist/?strcode=CZE

Czech Republic: Core Statistical Indicators
(As of July 21, 2004)
International
Reserves

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

Reserve/
Base
Money

Broad
Money

Interest
Rates

Consumer
Price
Index

Exports/
Imports

Current
Account
Balance

External
Debt/
Debt
Service

Central
Government
Balance

GDP

Date of latest
observation

7/21/04

6/30/04

7/10/04

7/10/04

5/31/04

7/21/04

6/04

5/04

Q1 2004

Q1 2004

5/04

Q1 2004

Date received

7/21/04

7/7/04

7/21/04

7/21/04

6/30/04

7/21/04

7/8/04

6/24/04

6/4/04

6/30/04

6/25/04

6/10/04

Frequency of
data

Daily

Daily

10 days

10 days

Monthly

Daily

Monthly

Monthly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Monthly

Quarterly

Frequency of
reporting

Daily

Monthly

10 days

10 days

Monthly

Daily

Monthly

Monthly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Monthly

Quarterly

Source of
update

CNB 1/

CNB

CNB

CNB

CNB

CNB

CSO 2/

CSO

CNB

CNB

MoF 3/

CSO

Mode of
reporting

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Internet

Confidentiality

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Frequency of
publication

Daily

Monthly

10 days

10 days

Monthly

Daily

Monthly

Monthly

Quarterly

Quarterly

Monthly

Quarterly

APPENDIX III

1/ CNB = Czech National Bank.
2/ CSO = Czech Statistical Office.
3/ MoF = Ministry of Finance.

- 39 -

Exchange
Rates

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
August 6, 2004
1.
This statement contains factual information that has become available since the Staff
Report was circulated to the Executive Board on July 23, 2004. This information does not
materially alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
A new government—identical in composition to the previous coalition—was formed
in early August 2004, and is headed by former Interior Minister Gross. The government
holds 101 of the 200 parliamentary seats. A coalition agreement, which sets out the priorities
of the government until the 2006 elections, includes in the economic sphere gradually
reducing the fiscal deficit to below 3 percent of GDP by 2008, adopting the euro by no later
than 2010, preparing reforms of the pension and health care systems, reducing work
disincentives in social benefits, and supporting families and the establishment of small- and
medium-sized enterprises.
3.
The Czech National Bank (CNB), in its July inflation report, forecasts economic
growth for 2004 at 3.6–4.0 percent (down marginally from its April prediction) and
3.5–4.9 percent for 2005 (up by ¼ percentage point from its previous forecast). The CNB
sees current inflation rising more slowly than previously forecast, and accordingly left
interest rates unchanged at its most recent monetary policy meeting.
4.
The Ministry of Finance (MoF) revised its fiscal projections for 2004. The updated
forecast shows an adjusted general government deficit of about 5¾ percent of GDP, about
¼ percentage points narrower than MoF estimates at the time of the discussions, mostly on
account of higher projected nontax revenues. This is still some ¼ percentage points higher
than the authorities’ original target (based on revised GDP). For 2005, the MoF prepared a
draft budget that is consistent with the deficit target of the medium-term fiscal plan.
Discussions on the budget will resume when the new government is fully installed.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No.04/93
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 17, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the Czech Republic
On August 6, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the Czech Republic.1
Background
EU accession marks the formal completion of the Czech Republic’s transition to a market
economy. Despite a solid performance in recent years—moderate growth, low inflation,
moderate public and external debt, and one of the highest per capita incomes among the
accession countries—stubborn problems cloud the outlook. Growth remains sluggish compared
with the other accession countries; fiscal deficits continue to drift upward, led by rising
expenditures; adverse demographic trends portend unsustainable pressures on the budget; and
long-term unemployment continues to rise. These trends are shared with many advanced
economies. But with its lower per capita income, the Czech Republic cannot afford to delay
remedial measures.
Rising growth, low inflation, and a narrowing trade deficit characterized recent performance.
GDP expanded by 3.1 percent in 2003 and the first quarter of 2004, mainly supported by
household consumption (reflecting rapid real wage growth and robust consumer credit
expansion). Investment was also strong in 2003—driven by spending on public infrastructure—
and swelled in early 2004 due to one-off influences associated with EU accession. But
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities and this PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board.

-2unemployment—particularly long-term unemployment—has risen and stands at about
8 percent. Despite strong import growth, favorable terms of trade helped narrow the trade
deficit; competitiveness remains strong and the Czech Republic’s share in EU markets
continued to increase.
Since late 2003, inflation has been recovering from negative levels. Intense competition in the
retail sector and an earlier appreciation of the koruna generated price declines during the first
half of 2003. But rising consumer demand and a more recent depreciation brought a small
upturn in inflation late in the year, and indirect tax increases in January and May 2004—driven
in part by EU harmonization—pushed headline inflation above the bottom of the Czech National
Bank’s (CNB) inflation target band. However, excluding the effects of administrative measures,
underlying inflation has risen only modestly, and remains below the target band.
Notwithstanding an improving trade balance, the current account deficit widened marginally to
6¼ percent of GDP in 2003. A secular decrease in the services surplus and a one-off drop in
current transfers contributed. With privatization slowing and one-off Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) outflows on account of a change in ownership structure at two large foreign-owned
companies, non-FDI flows were the major source of financing for the current account deficit in
2003. In early 2004, however, FDI rebounded.
Monetary conditions eased throughout 2003 owing to a cumulative 75 basis point cut in policy
interest rates and a 5½ percent nominal depreciation of the koruna against the euro through
January 2004. But with inflation forecasted to pick up, the inflation targeting (IT) CNB raised the
repo rate by 25 basis points to 2.25 percent in late June 2004 to prevent a further decline in real
interest rates. The CNB recently announced the parameters of its post-2005 IT framework,
which shifts to a 3 percent point target with a tolerance band of ±1 percent, thereby ensuring
continuity with the existing end-2005 target (2-4 percent).
The fiscal deficit continued to drift upward in 2003. The general government deficit—excluding
privatization receipts and transfers to the Czech Consolidation Agency to cover the costs of
managing bad assets—widened relative to GDP by about 1 percentage point to near 5 percent
of GDP in 2003. The increase reflected mainly higher spending on subsidies, net lending, and
investment. Nonetheless, public debt is still a moderate 28 percent of GDP and can be financed
with ease, as the success of the recent inaugural eurobond issue illustrates.
Foreign investment has made an impressive contribution to the Czech economy. Among central
European countries, the Czech Republic has attracted the largest amount of FDI on a per capita
basis. Some 20 percent of the FDI stock represented privatization (mostly of banks and network
utilities), with the remainder aimed at greenfield and brownfield activities. Foreign-owned firms
account for more than one-third of industrial employment, nearly half of industrial output and
value added, and over 70 percent of industrial exports. Foreign industrial firms are also
considerably more profitable than their domestic counterparts.
Indicators of banking sector health continue to improve and bank lending—led by credit to
households—is rebounding. The cleanup and privatization of banks in the late 1990s reduced

-3nonperforming loans, injected new capital, and raised profitability, but for several years banks
remained cautious about lending. Following the introduction of new mortgage and customer
loan facilities into a largely untapped market, bank lending to households has risen at an annual
rate of more than 30 percent for about two years, while lending to corporates remains stagnant.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the Czech Republic’s accession to the European Union on
May 1, which marks the symbolic end of the full transformation of the Czech economy into a
market economy, and sets the stage for further convergence to EU income levels. They also
commended the authorities for the solid economic performance over the past few years.
The near-term outlook remains favorable, with growth expected to firm, based on robust exports
and export-related investment.
While economic fundamentals generally remain strong, Directors emphasized the need for
decisive action by the new government in key policy areas to enable the Czech economy to
realize its full potential, and strengthen the foundation for a successful experience in ERM2 and
the euro zone. In particular, fiscal policy implementation will need to be strengthened decisively
to resist spending pressures, prepare for population aging, and cope with potential calls on
government guarantees. Moreover, structural reforms need to be reinvigorated to sustain the
Czech Republic’s attractiveness as an investment destination, increase the flexibility of labor
markets, and better tailor the education system to evolving skills demands.
Directors called for a strengthened commitment to the full implementation of the multi-year fiscal
plan, the credibility of which has been weakened already in its first year. They urged the
authorities to make strong efforts toward adhering to the expenditure ceilings, closing loopholes,
and returning to the original nominal deficit target. To strengthen the credibility of the fiscal plan,
Directors recommended a shift to a comprehensive fiscal measure—preferably the standardized
European Union definition. Credibility would also be enhanced by building public support for the
measures contemplated under the plan.
Looking ahead, Directors noted that considerable expenditure savings will be needed to fulfill
the medium-term objective of the fiscal plan, and they urged the authorities to identify and
implement the measures expeditiously. Directors cautioned against yielding to pressures for
permanent expenditure increases in 2005, and urged bringing forward part of the expenditure
savings needed to achieve the 2006 target. Any fiscal windfall from higher-than-expected
revenues should be saved to support deficit reduction.
With the effects of population aging expected to impact public finances within 10-15 years,
Directors considered that ambitious expenditure reforms will be needed to ensure long-term
fiscal sustainability. They urged the authorities to expedite the reforms of the pension and health
systems given the lags between the introduction of these reforms and their impact on public
spending. They agreed that the reforms will need to encompass significant changes in pension
system parameters, including a further rise in the retirement age and greater cost-sharing with
final users of health care in order to contain demand. Timely implementation of these measures

-4would help lower the deficit to well below Maastricht norms later in the decade in the run-up to
joining the euro.
Directors underscored that reforms to strengthen the private sector and the attractiveness for
foreign direct investment inflows will be key to raising longer-term growth. They welcomed the
authorities’ plans to resume privatization, through transparent and open procedures, and to
close the National Property Fund and the Czech Consolidation Agency, and they urged them to
resist pressures for additional bailouts. It will also be important to improve the business-legal
environment, including through enactment of a bankruptcy law that enhances creditors’ rights.
Directors noted that external competitiveness measured by relative unit labor costs had
improved during the past year, although by less than in several other central European
countries. While the high quality of Czech labor may have helped support competitiveness,
efforts should also be made to improve labor market flexibility. In this regard, Directors saw the
need to further reduce non-wage labor costs and welcomed intentions to tighten the rules
governing the eligibility for unemployment benefits. Efforts to improve the quality of education
and training, as well as research and development activities, will also be important.
Directors saw the recent move to tighten monetary policy as an appropriate response to the
changing economic circumstances. With the output gap projected to narrow, and in view of the
negative real interest rates, Directors expected that monetary conditions will need to tighten
further to keep inflation close to target, with decisions on the size and timing of rate increases
carefully taking into account demand and cost push developments. Directors agreed that the
flexible exchange rate regime has served the Czech Republic well. They commended the
authorities’ continued policy of nonintervention in the foreign exchange market, with the interest
rate instrument providing markets with coherent and transparent signals about monetary policy
intentions. Looking ahead, Directors generally saw continued implementation of inflation
targeting as a sound anchor for monetary policy during the pre-euro period. They welcomed the
authorities’ gradual approach toward monetary integration, with emphasis on the need for
further up-front progress on fiscal consolidation and structural reform.
Directors welcomed the continued improvement in the broad indicators of banking sector health.
They commended the authorities’ improved risk analysis, but stressed the need for enhanced
supervisory capacity in the area of household credit, including through the collection of relevant
data and enhanced stress-testing. Directors welcomed the planned consolidation of financial
sector supervision within a single institution, but cautioned that organizational changes should
not distract them from effective oversight.
Directors commended the Czech Republic's commitment to transparency and standards, as
evident most recently from its participation in an update of the fiscal transparency module. They
also welcomed the progress made by the authorities in aligning their national accounts and
financial sector statistics with European standards.

-5-

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued
after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive
Board in a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation with the Czech Republic
is also available.

-6Czech Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001-03

Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP
Domestic demand
CPI (year average)
PPI (year average)
Unemployment rate (year average in percent)
Survey based 1/
Registered 1/
Gross national savings (percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investments (percent of GDP)
Public finance (percent of GDP)
General government revenue
General government expenditure 2/
General government balance 2/
Adjusted to exclude grants to transformation institutions
to cover costs related to management of bad assets
Adjusted balance excluding net lending 3/
General government debt
Including debt of the Czech Consolidation Agency
Money and credit (end of year, percent change)
Broad money
Private sector credit (percent change, eop)
Interest rates (in percent)
Three-month interbank rate (end-of-period)
10-year government bond
Balance of payments (percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Current account
Gross international reserves (US$ billion)
Reserve cover (in months of imports of goods and services)

2001

2002

2003

2.6
3.9
4.7
2.9

1.5
3.4
1.8
-0.5

3.1
4.5
0.1
-0.3

8.1
8.5
23.5
28.9

7.3
9.2
22.3
27.9

7.8
9.9
21.4
27.6

36.7
41.7
-5.0

37.5
44.2
-6.7

38.9
45.1
-6.2

-2.8
-2.7
17.5
22.9

-4.0
-3.7
18.4
25.5

-4.9
-3.9
21.9
27.9

13.0
2.1

3.5
4.5

6.9
8.5

4.7
6.3

2.6
4.9

2.1
4.1

-5.0
-5.4
14.5
4.1

-3.0
-5.6
23.7
6.1

-2.7
-6.2
27.0
5.5

Fund position (as of May 31, 2004)
Holdings of currency (percent of quota)
Holdings of SDRs (percent of allocation)
Quota (millions of SDRs)
Exchange rate
Exchange rate regime
Koruna per U.S. dollar (July 19, 2004)
Nominal effective exchange rate (2000=100)
Real effective exchange rate (CPI-based; 2000=100)

61.9
n.a.
819.3

104.4
105.5

Sources: Czech Statistical Office; Czech National Bank; Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections.
1/ In percent of total labor force.
2/ Excluding privatization revenues of the National Property Fund and the Czech Land Fund, the sale of shares
and voting rights by local governments, and the sale of Russian debt.
3/ General government deficit excluding transfer to transformation institutions and net lending. Concept targeted by the authorities.

116.1
116.7

Managed float
CZK 25.12 =US$1
115.6
112.6

Statement by Willy Kiekens, Executive Director for the Czech Republic
and Jiri Jonas, Senior Advisor to Executive Director
August 6, 2004
On behalf of our authorities, we would like to thank the staff for the valuable policy
discussions. The EU accession on May 1 marks the symbolic end of transition of the
Czech Republic from a centrally planned to a market economy. The Czech economy is now
officially recognized as a well-functioning market economy. However, this does not mean
that the task of bringing the economy on a path of increasing prosperity is done. Far from it.
But the nature of challenges that need to be addressed to ensure solid economic growth over
the long run has changed. As the staff note, Czech policy makers now face similar challenges
as policy makers in the more advanced economies.
The staff report notes that the resignation of the government of Prime Minister Spidla
and the formation of new government led by the former Interior Minister Gross has increased
political uncertainty and the risk of further fiscal drift. It also observes that the unpopularity
of the medium-term fiscal plan with the electorate has contributed to the erosion of public
support for the previous coalition government.
We would add two observations. First, it is too early to say how the previous
government’s fiscal plans will be implemented under the new government. As the staff’s
supplemental statement informs us, the coalition agreement includes a gradual reduction of
fiscal deficit below 3 percent of GDP by 2008, supported by structural reforms, including
pension and health care reform. The new government is expected to present its program to
Parliament in late August. Second, voters’ opposition to fiscal reforms may have contributed
to the fall of the previous government, but we would argue that this was not the most
important reason. As the staff note, fiscal consolidation has not yet begun in earnest. It would
not augur well for future fiscal developments if even a plan of a relatively moderate fiscal
adjustment would bring down the government.
Recent developments
The latest economic data broadly confirm the picture of a moderate recovery outlined
in the staff report, driven by robust domestic demand, particularly private investment
demand.
Real GDP grew by 3.1 percent in the first quarter of 2004, with fixed capital
formation growing by 9.5 percent and household consumption by 3.9 percent. To a large
extent, the rapid growth of investment demand reflected a sharp increase in building
investment prior to the May change in the VAT. The solid growth of consumer demand was
supported by growth of incomes and continued widespread use of consumer and mortgage
credit. Net exports and government consumption contributed negatively to real GDP growth.
In the period January-May 2004, industrial production and sales both grew by about
10 percent, driven mainly by strong export sales. However, it is interesting to note that the
gap between the growth of direct export sales and domestic sales is gradually diminishing,

-2suggesting the growing role of domestic demand in supporting output growth. It is
encouraging to note that despite the relatively fast growth of domestic demand, January-May
2004 trade deficit remained broadly unchanged from the same period last year. Both export
and import growth accelerated, and it is expected that the EU entry will contribute to the
continuation of this trend.
Inflation continues to rise gradually. In June consumer prices rose 2.9 percent y/y,
while producer prices increased by 6.2 percent. While increase in consumer prices was
affected mainly by changes in indirect taxes, and rise in food and oil prices, the increase in
commodity prices was the main driving force of the increase in producer prices.
The latest Ministry of Finance macroeconomic forecast projects a somewhat faster
real GDP growth in 2004 and 2005, by 3.1 and 3.2 percent respectively (compared to the
previous forecast of 2.8 and 3.1 percent). In contrast, the CNB has revised downwards its
earlier growth projection for 2004 (made last April) from 3.8-4.2 percent to 3.6-4 percent. In
2005, it projects an acceleration of real GDP growth to 3.5-4.9 percent, driven mainly by a
more robust demand in the European Union. The CNB has also revised the projected
consumer price inflation somewhat downward compared to its April 2004 forecast. Inflation
is now projected to be 2.2-3.6 percent in June 2005 and 2.3-3.7 percent in December 2005.
Monetary and exchange rate policy
In response to the accelerating inflation, the CNB has increased interest rates from 2
to 2.25 percent. Markets expected that further interest rate increases will follow. However,
there is some uncertainty how fast and how far this increase will go. Markets are pricing a
further increase of 75 basis points by the end of 2004, even though some market analysts
point to muted underlying inflation and suggest that the increase could be more gradual.
In considering the arguments for a further interest rate increase, the CNB will, inter
alia, take into account the fact that real interest rates are presently negative. In the absence of
a large negative output gap, a prolonged period of negative interest rates may not be optimal
in an economy where actual growth exceeds potential growth. Moreover, continued elevated
oil prices suggest that the risk of secondary effects of these developments on inflation
expectations and inflation cannot be underestimated.
On October 13, 2003, the government approved a document prepared jointly with the
CNB called “Czech Republic’s euro adoption strategy.” This document stipulates that under
the assumption of successful observation of the Maastricht criteria, particularly the
consolidation of public budgets, and under the assumption of a sufficient degree of real
convergence and progress in structural reforms, the adoption of euro could be expected in
2009-10.
Regarding the successful functioning within the ERM2 framework, the document
emphasizes the need for a sufficient alignment of the Czech economy with the euro area in
real and financial sectors, as well as further progress in structural reforms and increased
flexibility of labor market. However, even if these conditions are met, the CNB does not

-3consider participation in the ERM2 as risk-free. In order to minimize there risks, it has
recommended the shortest possible stay.
As part of the strategy of the euro adoption, the CNB has clarified the monetary
policy framework for the period 2005-2010. The CNB has decided that in the period after
2005 when the present policy strategy expires, it will continue to implement an inflation
targeting framework. Specifically, the CNB will aim at keeping inflation at 3 percent
plus/minus 1 percentage point. The CNB thinks that this objective is sufficiently ambitious to
allow stabilization of inflation at a level that would allow it to meet the Maastricht inflation
criterion, but at the same time, it takes into account the specific needs of the converging
economy.
Fiscal policy
Fiscal policy remains the most difficult challenge. While some progress has been
achieved in addressing the deterioration in public finance, it is clear that the measures
implemented thus far are not sufficient to ensure a long-term sustainability of public finance.
In recent years, there has been a continued increase in general government deficits.
This deterioration has continued even as real GDP growth doubled in 2003 compared with
2002. This clearly suggests that the budget deficits are mainly of a structural and not cyclical
nature. To a large extent, increasing budget deficits reflect the rapid growth of mandatory
spending. However, the deterioration of public finance also reflects transformation-related
costs and the costs related to the EU accession. In recognition of the unsustainable trends in
public finance, the government has approved in June 2003 a reform of public finance.
Expenditure and revenue measures are supposed to reduce the general government deficit to
below 4 percent of GDP in 2006.
It is encouraging to note that the reform measures adopted thus far have already
brought some positive -though limited- results. Tightening of eligibility for sickness benefits
contributed to a decline of these benefits in January-May 2004 by CZK 2.7 billion relative to
the same period of the previous year. In contrast, other categories of social spending where
no reform has been implemented continued to grow in 2004. The number of public sector
employees has been reduced by over 9000, and total wage spending has remained largely
unchanged, despite the increase in average salary by 9 percent.
The staff welcomed the adopted measures, but at the same time, have raised valid
concerns. First, the staff note the insufficient coverage and enforcement of expenditure
ceiling. Second, the upward revision of the GDP level means that budget deficit targets in
terms of GDP could be met with higher nominal deficits. The staff call for adhering to
original nominal targets. Third, the staff note that significant additional measures – mainly
expenditure reduction - will be required to reduce the deficits in 2005-06 as originally
planned. However, delivering spending cuts as the election scheduled for 2006 approaches
could be difficult.

-4The Minister of Finance remains committed to keep the public finance reform on
track, enforce the spending ceilings, and avoid using any potential excess revenues to
increase budget spending, as prescribed by the budgetary rules. Moreover, it should be noted
that fiscal policy of the new government will have to be guided by the May 2004
convergence program.
From the longer-term perspective, it is now widely recognized by the political
representatives and the public that a more fundamental reform of public finance will be
needed to ensure their long-term sustainability. New demographic projections released by the
Czech Statistical Office at the end of 2003 point to significant medium- and long-term
pension and health care spending pressures. To address this problem, all parliamentary
parties have established a commission of experts to formulate alternative proposals for
pension reforms. Similarly, work is underway on a comprehensive reform of the health care
system. However, legislative steps are unlikely before the next election.
Structural issues
The staff has correctly identified high unemployment as another serious problem that
needs to be tackled urgently. Not only does unemployment remain high, but also the share of
the long-term unemployed is increasing, suggesting serious problems hampering the efficient
functioning of the labor market. Reform of the labor market is desirable for several reasons:
(1) to stimulate employment and increase economic growth that would also support faster
reduction of fiscal deficit; (2) to prevent the creation of a large number of difficult-to-employ
persons; and (3) to increase the flexibility of the economy and to prepare it better for euro
adoption.
It is encouraging that recently, the growth of unemployment has stopped and the
unemployment rate has even declined from 10.2 to 9.9 percent. Nevertheless, the main
problems of the Czech labor market –skill and regional mismatch exacerbated by
disincentives for some categories of unemployed to search more actively for jobs– are
structural and cannot be addressed by higher growth.
These mismatches and disincentives require different policy responses and can bring
positive results with different time lags. Reducing disincentives to search for jobs can bring
the fastest results. In autumn, tighter rules for unemployment support should come into force.
Persons unemployed for more than one year will be required to participate in public works to
remain eligible for social benefits. Reducing regional mismatches would require a
deregulation of rents, thus stimulating the housing market. This, too, can bring relatively
quick results. As for skills mismatches, this could take more time to address, because it
requires far-reaching changes in the education system.

