© 2009 International Monetary Fund

February 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/74

Republic of Congo: 2008 Article IV Consultation, Requests for a Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Interim
Assistance Under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
Financing Assurances Review—Staff Report; Staff Statement and Supplement; Public
Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Congo
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2008 Article IV
consultation, requests for a three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
and interim assistance under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
financing assurances review, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2008 Article IV consultation, Requests for a Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Interim Assistance
Under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Financing
Assurances Review, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
August 27, 2008, with the officials of the Republic of Congo on economic developments and
policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on November 21, 2008. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the
staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A staff supplement on the joint IMF/World Bank debt sustainability analysis.

•

A staff statement of December 8, 2008, updating information on recent developments.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its December 8, 2008, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Congo.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of the Republic of Congo*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of the
Republic of Congo*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF CONGO
Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation, Requests for a Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Interim
Assistance Under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
Financing Assurances Review
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and David Marston
November 21, 2008
•

Discussions for the 2008 Article IV consultation, the second and final staff assessment of the
Staff-Monitored Program, and negotiations for a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement were held in Brazzaville May 21-30 and August 21-27, 2008. The mission
met with Prime Minister Mvouba; Mr. Moussa, Senior Minister and Minister of Planning; Mr.
Issoïbeka, Minister of Finance; Mr. Dzon, National Director of BEAC; other senior officials,
representatives from the National Assembly and the donor community, NGOs, and the private
sector. The missions comprised Mr. York (head), Mr. Bessaha, Ms. Karpowicz (all AFR), Mr.
Martin (FAD), and Mr. Maseda (BLS). Mr. Moussa, the Fund’s resident representative in
Brazzaville assisted both missions. Mr. Kudiwu (OED) participated in May and Mr. Alle (OED)
in August.

•

The 2008 Article IV discussions focused on several medium-term challenges facing Congo: the
need to (i) reverse the decline in competitiveness; (ii) broaden economic activity beyond the oil
sector, and (iii) consolidate the fiscal stance as oil production declines. The 2007 Article IV
discussions were concluded on April 25, 2007.

•

Satisfactory policy implementation in a six-month SMP has paved the way for the authorities’
request for a three-year PRGF arrangement covering 2008-11. Proposed access is SDR 8.46
million (10 percent of quota). The authorities regard a Fund-supported program as being
important for helping them achieve macroeconomic stability and external sustainability,
particularly through debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

•

The Republic of Congo is a member of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) and its regional central bank, BEAC. The common currency, the CFA
franc, is pegged to the euro at CFAF 656. With its CEMAC partners, Congo has accepted the
obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.

•

The authorities consent to the publication of this report and the Letter of Intent and
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies supporting their request for a new
arrangement.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Introduction ..........................................................................................................................5
II. Recent Economic Developments and Prospects ..................................................................6
III. Enhancing External Viability.............................................................................................10
A. International Competitiveness in the Non-Oil Sector.............................................10
B. Diversification of the Non-oil Economy.................................................................13
C. Fiscal Sustainability ................................................................................................15
D. External Debt Sustainability ...................................................................................17
E. Capacity Building....................................................................................................17
IV. The Medium-Term Economic Program.............................................................................17
A. Economic Policies for 2008-09...............................................................................19
B. Program Financing and Capacity to Repay the Fund..............................................21
C. Program Risks .........................................................................................................22
V. Staff Appraisal ..................................................................................................................22
Boxes
1. Performance on the 2008 SMP ...........................................................................................9
2. Real Effective Exchange Rate Assessment.......................................................................13
3. Structural Conditionality for the Proposed PRGF Arrangement ......................................19
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–11 ....................................................25
Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 2006–12 ................................................................26
Central Government Operations, 2006–11 .................................................................27–28
Quantitative Indicative Targets, Jan. 1-June 30, 2008......................................................29
Structural Benchmarks Under the SMP............................................................................30
Monetary Survey, 2006–09...............................................................................................31
Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators, 2004–07...............................................32
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2006–15 ........................................................33
Proposed Access and Phasing Under the Proposed 3-year PRGF Arrangement..............34
Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015...................................................................35

3

Appendices
I. Letter of Intent ....................................................................................................................37
Attachment I. Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies, 2008–11 ...............39
Attachment II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding ...........................................49

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Recent Economic Developments and Program Performance
•

•
•
•

Economic indicators in the first semester of 2008 were encouraging. Growth has been strong,
as oil production resumed and activity in telecommunications, construction, and transport
remained buoyant. Inflation rose 5.7 percent (y-o-y) through June 2008, reflecting higher
energy and food prices, but expectations are for some moderation in the period ahead.
The external sector has strengthened considerably recently, as a result of debt restructuring
and the impact of relatively high world oil prices and strong oil production.
Performance under a Staff Monitored Program was broadly satisfactory through end-June
2008 and the fiscal targets were comfortably met.
Progress was made on structural reform; but some measures proved difficult to implement
without further technical assistance. Earlier this year, the authorities were also reluctant to
adjust fuel prices to maintain the budgeted level of subsidies, in an environment of high fuel
and food prices and social unrest; however, a price adjustment that will reduce subsidies
significantly was taken in early October.

Medium-Term Challenges
•
•

To enhance external viability, the authorities recognize the need to improve competitiveness,
raise output growth through diversification, and consolidate the fiscal position.
In this regard, the authorities are making a concerted effort to improve the business climate,
liberalize trade, deepen financial intermediation, continue reform of public enterprises,
improve governance and transparency, and put in place development strategies in key sectors.

Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement
•

•

•

The authorities are requesting a three-year PRGF arrangement (covering 2008-11) to support
strong growth, low and stable inflation, fiscal and external sustainability, and structural
reform in priority areas. The proposed arrangement is in line with the authorities’ Poverty
Reduction Strategy, which was completed earlier this year.
There are two main risks to the program, stemming from a potential for ownership to weaken
and senatorial and presidential elections next year, which will create pressures to spend and
could cause a lapse in fiscal discipline.
Given the strength of the authorities’ medium-term economic and financial program and the
prior action that was already implemented (fuel price adjustment), the staff supports their
request for a three-year arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 8.46 million (10 percent
of quota), interim-HIPC assistance, and completion of the financing assurances review.

5
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Beginning in 2003, building upon renewed peace and political stability, the
Congolese authorities turned their attention to improving economic management. A
comprehensive reform program supported by an arrangement under the Poverty Reduction
and Growth Facility (PRGF) in 2004 was to be anchored on fiscal consolidation, notably
strict control of current non-priority spending, and ambitious structural reforms to boost nonoil growth. However, program implementation was uneven; with only two program reviews
being completed through 2006. Chief among the factors that may have contributed to this
performance were (l) the government’s inability to resist spending pressures as world oil
prices rose and weak ownership; and (2) weaknesses in institutional and administrative
capacity─especially in public financial management and in the oil sector. A Staff-Monitored
Program (SMP) was introduced in 2007 in an effort to establish a satisfactory track record of
performance.
2.
Macroeconomic and structural policies have been more actively implemented
recently because program ownership was solidified. Recognizing past failures, late in
2007 the authorities established a new reporting and monitoring structure to guide economic
policies and relations with the Bretton Woods Institutions. A policy committee, headed by
the President of the Republic, now oversees the economic program. It is supported by a
technical committee headed by a special advisor to the President. This new structure is
proving effective; during the first half of this year, the authorities satisfactorily completed a
six-month SMP that has paved the way for a request for a new PRGF arrangement.
3.
The political environment is stable but there are lingering social tensions. High
world oil prices for the past year or so have heightened the public’s expectations and sense of
urgency for improving public service delivery, the economic infrastructure, and public sector
wages and salaries. The rapid increase in food and fuel prices earlier this year also created
tensions, leading to a temporary reversal in some policies. Senatorial and presidential
elections are slated for 2009.
4.
The authorities have been receptive to the Fund’s policy advice in the context of
both programs and surveillance. In line with this advice, the authorities have been making
efforts to achieve macroeconomic stability, improve the conditions for private sector
development, including through reforms to public financial management, and strengthening
governance and transparency over the use of public resources. However, capacity constraints
and weaknesses in ownership have adversely affected the smooth implementation of the
authorities’ economic reform efforts.

6
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS
5.
Recent economic indicators point to continuing strong growth, higher inflation,
and a significant improvement in the external sector.
•

Economic growth has been robust in 2008, reflecting a resumption of oil
production after an oil-platform accident and solid non-oil activity, driven by
the telecommunications, construction, and transport sectors. Real GDP growth is
projected to be about 7.6 percent this year, which should contribute to the trend
increase in real gross domestic income (per capita) that has occurred during the past
few years as real
Real Income and Real Oil Prices, 1995-2007
world oil prices rose
(Table 1).
300

1000

900

•

800

700

250

Real gross domesitc income
(GDI) per capita
(US dollars, left scale)

Higher food and
energy costs have
pushed up inflation,
which rose to
5.7 percent in the
twelve months
through June 2008.
Moreover, non-food
prices rose by 6.7
percent during the
same period. Recent
data point to a further
small rise in prices, before moderating in the period ahead.
Real gross domestic product
(GDP) per capita
(US dollars, left scale)

200

600

500

150

400

300

100
Real oil price
(Index, 2000=100, right scale)

200

50

100

0

1995

1996

1997

Source: Fund staff estimates.

•

Driven by high oil
exports, the
current account is
projected to swing
from a deficit of
26 percent of GDP
last year to a
surplus of
0.6 percent of GDP
in 2008 (Table 2).
Non-oil exports,
which have
increased only
modestly in recent

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

7
years, account for less than 6 percent of GDP, reflecting Congo’s narrow export base.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) continues to expand in the oil sector, partly as a
result of investments in newly discovered fields, and could reach more than 23
percent of GDP this year. The real effective exchange rate has appreciated sharply
since 2007, mainly reflecting Congo’s higher rate of inflation relative to its trading
partners.
Oil Production, Prices, and Exports, and Real GDP Growth, 2002-08
120

Oil production
(Millions of barrels, left scale)

100

Exports of crude Oil
(Thousands of tons, right scale)

3500
3000
2500

80

2000

60

1500

40

1000

20

500

0
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0
2008 Proj.

15
Overall real GDP growth

Nonoil GDP

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

Oil GDP

-20
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008 Proj.

Sources: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

•

1

Congo’s external public debt has declined sharply in the past several years,
partly as a result of Paris Club debt rescheduling and debt relief from London
Club creditors under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
Initiative. Recently, arrears with some Paris Club creditors have accumulated (see
Box 1 below), but these are being addressed in the discussions to reschedule Congo’s
external debt.1 The authorities are continuing their negotiations with litigating
creditors, with a view to reaching a settlement that is─to the extent possible─fair to
all creditors. Under the June 2006 framework agreement with China, the authorities
are also discussing new concessional loans amounting to about US$ 1 billion to
finance infrastructure projects over the medium term. The financial terms under

Under the 2004 rescheduling, Congo has concluded bilateral agreements with all but one of the Paris Club
creditors.

8
negotiation for all these loans involve 20-year maturity, 5-year grace period, an
interest rate of 0.25 percent, and biannual repayments (with an estimated grant
element of about 52.7 percent).
6.
Implementation of economic policies improved recently, after a period of fiscal
slippages and delays with structural reform.
•

Although the basic non-oil primary deficit dipped to 55.7 percent of non-oil GDP
in 2007, on present policies it should improve significantly this year. Through
June 2008, the authorities’ fiscal targets, in line with the objectives of the SMP, were
comfortably achieved (Box 1 and Tables 3a and 3b). The shift in the fiscal stance is
attributable to better control and monitoring of expenditures, especially for public
investment, and unexpectedly high non-oil revenue from a pick-up in corporate
income tax revenue from oil company subcontractors. The quarterly certification of
oil receipts has helped ensure the satisfactory repatriation of oil revenue, although
there continue to be delays, which the authorities attribute to technical difficulties and
problems in dealing with litigating creditors. A supplementary budget—in line with
the program’s objectives—was adopted recently to account for the higher-thanprojected oil revenue, some tariff and tax reductions to help mitigate the recent
increase in food and energy costs, and additional pro-poor (generic drugs) and capital
spending, financed through interim HIPC assistance.

Fiscal Developments, 2002-08
(Percent of non-oil GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
160

40

140

35
Oil revenue
(left scale)

120
100
80

Capital expenditure
(right scale)

30
25
20

60

15

40

10

20

5

0
2002

50

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0
Proj.

-20

Non-oil basic primary balance (right scale)

-25

30

-30

10

-35
-40

-10

-45

-30
-50 Overall balance, cash basis
(Percent of GDP, left scale)
-70
2002
2003
2004

2008

-50
-55
2005

2006

2007

Source: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

-60
2008 Proj.

9

Box 1. Performance on the 2008 SMP
Earlier this year, Fund management approved an SMP for Congo covering the six-month period
January-June 2008. The SMP was designed to support the authorities’ efforts to stabilize the economy,
consolidate the fiscal stance and reverse previous expenditure slippages, and to continue structural reform in
such areas as public financial management, public enterprises (mainly in the oil sector), and governance and
transparency.
Performance on the SMP was broadly satisfactory. At the end of June 2008, the indicative target for the nonoil basic primary deficit was met comfortably, demonstrating the government’s ability to control and monitor
public spending, although healthy non-oil tax collections certainly provided room to maneuver (Table 4). All of
the other quantitative targets were observed, but external arrears to some Paris Club creditors accumulated
(CFAF 10.1 billion, about US$ 23.8 million). The authorities have been servicing their external debt on the
basis of the 2004 Paris Club rescheduling agreement which provided for lower payments and was predicated on
being on track with the Fund program. When the program went off track, some creditors reverted to the original
debt service schedule, resulting in some arrears accumulation. Paris Club creditors have provided financing
assurances for the program, including with regard to the regularization of the arrears situation.
Progress was made on structural reform during the SMP (Table 5), but several structural benchmarks proved
difficult to implement without further technical assistance (adoption of a comprehensive action plan with a
timetable to address institutional and procedural deficiencies in the commercialization of Congolese oil, and a
three-year action plan to strengthen public investment management). Also, the authorities were reluctant to
adjust petroleum product prices to adhere to the budgeted level of subsidies, in an environment of high fuel and
food prices earlier this year; and they did not provide timely information on petroleum product prices. The
program’s other structural benchmarks were observed, including adoption of a plan and timetable for reforming
the state-owned oil refinery (CORAF); completion of a technical and financial audit of current transfers and a
representative sample of capital expenditures executed in 2006; quarterly certification of oil revenue by an
international audit firm (KPMG); and publication on the internet of all invitations to bid and the bids themselves
for government procurement contracts above CFAF 200 million.

•

Monetary developments have been heavily influenced by external developments.
Broad money growth was 16 percent through mid-year, net foreign assets rose to
US$3.5 billion, and credit to the economy has expanded (Table 6). In an effort to
better manage liquidity, the government repaid a large proportion of its statutory
advances from BEAC, and stepped up its effort to coordinate treasury operations
more effectively with the regional central bank. The banking system remained solid:
all four commercial banks are in compliance with the prudential ratios, except the one
related to risk concentration (in which banks lend mainly to a few big enterprises
operating in only a few sectors, notably telecommunications, construction, and public
sector subcontractors, Table 7). Nonperforming loans have increased slightly but so
has provisioning. Commercial banks have seen a rise in domestic deposits as non-oil
activity continues to be robust.

•

The pace of structural reform picked up during the past several months of the
SMP (Box 1); there was progress on a number of important fronts, including

10
with the floating completion point triggers for the enhanced HIPC Initiative.2 To
enhance public financial management (PFM), the authorities adopted and began
implementing a PFM action plan (drafted with assistance from Congo’s development
partners); produced a draft plan for managing public investment; became a candidate
country to join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) in February
2008 and initiated work on the first EITI report, which is expected to be completed by
the end of this year; and consolidated all the government’s accounts with the BEAC.
In the oil sector, the authorities adopted and began to apply a reform program for the
state-owned refinery (CORAF); prepared an initial draft of actions to bring the
commercialization of Congolese oil up to international standards; and continued to
certify oil receipts on a quarterly basis to ensure transparency and accountability.
III. ENHANCING EXTERNAL VIABILITY
7.
The authorities recognize that, as a member of CEMAC, Congo can enhance the
external viability of the currency union through policies to improve competitiveness,
raise output growth through diversification, and consolidate the fiscal position. In a
number of important ways Congo is lagging behind its CEMAC partners, even though it has
the financial resources from oil wealth to finance development needs to meet the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). With this in mind, the 2008 Article IV discussions focussed on
several medium-term challenges:
•

How best to diversify the economy and to broaden economic activity beyond the oil
sector; and

•

How to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability to ensure that Congo’s oil wealth is
preserved for future generations.
A. International Competitiveness in the Non-Oil Sector

8.
After two decades of relatively poor performance, Congo’s exports have picked
up (in nominal terms) over the past several years. The expansion was twice as fast as the
average of its CEMAC partners, and four times faster than the average for sub-Saharan
Africa as a whole. However, export volume growth was still tepid, especially in the non-oil
sector where export growth slowed in real terms from about 5 percent in the 1990s to about
2 percent in this decade. The share of non-oil exports in total exports plunged to about
7 percent in 2007 from nearly 20 percent in 2003.

2

Details on implementation of the HIPC triggers are outlined in the Second Annual Report on Progress Toward
Meeting the Floating Completion Point Triggers Under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative.

11
Export growth and shares, 1990-2007
(Percent)

9.
Several factors have
probably contributed to
Congo’s problems with nonoil exports, among them
real effective exchange rate
appreciation, institutional
constraints, and inadequate
infrastructure.
•

40

40

35

35

30

30
25

25
Non-oil exports as a share of total
exports

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

The prominence of
the oil sector and
more recently high
world oil prices, have
diverted productive resources from traditional exports (including timber), toward
extraction and oil-related activities. In this transformation, the non-oil sector lost its
weight in total exports and in value added.
-10

Growth in export volumes

-15
-20

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

-10
-15
-20

2007

Source: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

•

•

Appreciation of
the real effective
exchange rate
since 2003 has
contributed to the
erosion of Congo’s
competitiveness
(Box 2).

Non-oil GDP and Non-oil Exports as a share of Total GDP and Total Exports, 1989-2007
(Percent)
100

100
90

90
Non-oil GDP as a share of total GDP

80

80

70

70

60

Non-oil exports as a share of total exports

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

Congo’s
institutions are not
strong; many
elements that
could facilitate
FDI and private
sector
development are inadequate. In particular, until quite recently the effort to enhance
transparency and governance of natural resources has been at best tentative—a
significant constraint in a country with abundant resources but little development.3
The financial sector is underdeveloped; the legal framework needs firming up, and
the business climate could be improved substantially. The World Bank’s 2008 Doing
0

1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

Source: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

3

60

Transparency International places Congo 142 out of 163 countries on its transparency and governance scale.

0

12
Business survey ranks Congo near the bottom (178 out of 181 economies) in terms of
ease of doing business. Procedures to start and to close an activity, hire and fire, get
credit or pay taxes are so costly and cumbersome as to deter entrepreneurship.
•

The inadequacy of the economic infrastructure also holds back the non-oil export
sector. The World Bank indicators show limited access to technology for Congo.
Internet costs are high (as in the other CEMAC countries) compared with subSaharan Africa as a whole. Only 5 percent of roads are paved (compared with 15
percent for the region). And rail transportation between the two main cities,
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, suffers from frequent disruptions.

10.
During the discussions, the authorities and the staff agreed that enhancing
Congo’s competitiveness in the non-oil sector must therefore be a priority. A primary
objective is to implement a broad-based economic program to diversify the economy,
achieve fiscal sustainability, and qualify for debt relief to free more resources for pro-poor
and pro-growth expenditures. Such a program could boost employment prospects and reduce
income disparities between the oil and non-oil sectors; in the latter, poverty is most
prevalent.

13
Box 2. Real Effective Exchange Rate
Assessment
Congo’s nominal effective exchange rate
appreciated by about 6.2 percent in the period
from end-December 2007 through June 2008,
primarily on account of the appreciation of the
euro to which the CFAF franc is pegged. Over
the same period, the real effective exchange
rate (REER) was 6.7 percent higher, reflecting
higher inflation relative to Congo’s trading
partners.
Recent analysis at the regional level suggests
that the CFA franc was in line with fundamentals at
the end of 2007. Estimates for Congo, however,
suggests that its REER was moderately above the
long-run equilibrium value in 2007. One estimate
of the equilibrium REER, based on such
fundamental variables as government consumption,
relative productivity, terms of trade, openness, and
money supply, suggests an overvaluation of about
7 percent in 2007, with the overvaluation for 200307 driven by relatively high government
consumption. This estimate, should, however, be
treated with caution since it is not robust to the
specification of alternative variables and variations
in the estimation period. An alternative estimate
using panel data for oil exporters suggested that Congo’s REER was overvalued by about 14 percent.
The envisaged fiscal consolidation would help reduce the overvaluation over time (details can be
found in the accompanying Selected Issues paper).

B. Diversification of the Non-oil Economy
11.
The authorities are well attuned to the need to accelerate private-sector-led
growth to alleviate poverty as specified in their Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS).4 But
since the base of economic activity outside the oil sector is narrow and dominated by
subsistence agriculture, diversification is critical. The authorities are moving on a broad
front, but recognize that policies tailored to a few specific activities or sectors are also
needed.
•

4

Business climate: To create more favorable conditions for private sector
development, the authorities are moving to improve the business environment and
reduce the cost of doing business. They are simplifying administrative procedures;
working to enable application of OHADA business laws, which are common to

The Poverty Reduction Strategy paper was submitted to the Executive Board in August 2008, along with the
Joint Staff Advisory Note on the PRS.

14
Francophone African countries; creating a “one-stop” window for establishing a
business; and making a determined effort to enhance governance and combat
corruption.
•

Trade liberalization: As a small open economy Congo would benefit from closer
integration with the regional and global economy; presently, trade and investment
linkages are concentrated in the oil sector. Integration is to be achieved through
CEMAC trade reforms, including reduction of the maximum common external tariff
(from 30 to 20 percent) and tariff rates, trade facilitation, and harmonization of rules
of origin. Domestically the authorities are working to bring the customs code into line
with international standards, fully implement the ASYCUDA system to facilitate
customs clearance, and remove nuisance taxes and surcharges that inhibit trade.

•

Financial intermediation: Financial intermediation is relatively low in Congo
compared with its neighbors. For example, the ratio of private sector credit to GDP is
a mere 2.1 percent (sub-Saharan African average: 17.4 percent), and the share of the
population with a formal bank account is less than 3 percent (CEMAC average:
26.8 percent). The loan/deposit ratio is about 22 percent in Congo, compared with
80 percent for WAEMU countries, and 48 percent for the CEMAC. The authorities
are thus giving high priority in the early stages of the reform program to deepening
intermediation. A financial sector strategy, drafted with Fund staff assistance, is to be
adopted and implemented over the medium term, supported by the proposed PRGF
arrangement (see below). Expanding public access to banking services, lowering the
cost of credit, better information on the cost of credit and credit history are priorities
for action.
Selected Financial Sector Indicators, 2006

Republic of Congo
Averages for:
Sub-Saharan African countries
Middle income
Low income
Oil-exporting countries
Oil-importing countries
CFA countries
Non-CFA countries

Number of
comm.
1
banks
4
30
30
30
53
23
9
34

Population
Central
Bank
Private sector government with a formal
assets/GDP credit/GDP
M2/GDP
credit/GDP bank account
1
1
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
14.6
8.9
2.1
-6.5
2.7
33.6
50.4
24.9
14.9
38.3
19.9
41.8

67.4
96.0
38.3
33.6
77.5
16.1
72.5

17.4
28.7
11.8
6.3
20.1
10.8
21.2

3.8
3.5
4.0
-4.8
5.8
-1.8
6.9

26.8
41.2
7.6
7.1
33.9
3.9
29.2

Sources: International Financial Statistics, and Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Outlook, May 2006.
1
Data refer to 2004.

•

Public enterprises. Though few in number, Congo’s parastatals tend to have a
disproportionately large influence on economic performance and business conditions
because of the narrow economic base. Consequently, raising their financial and
operating performance is crucial to achieving Congo’s development goals. The

15
authorities are making a concerted effort to rationalize the operations of enterprises in
the oil sector, but more could be done to address deficiencies in other public
enterprises, especially those in transportation (CFCO, the railway company), ports,
and utilities (electricity, water, and sanitation).
•

Key sectors. While the authorities believe a broad-based approach is necessary to
support diversification, they also feel targeted interventions are necessary to jumpstart activity in key sectors, particularly agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and
forestry. The focus on the oil sector in the past several decades has slowed
development in other areas, where the economic infrastructure and human and
physical capital have deteriorated. For example, coffee and cocoa were historically
important cash crops, but at present production is negligible; timber is the primary
export after oil, but its output growth is relatively stagnant. The government is now
directing its efforts, with the help of development partners, to reviving agriculture
through investment and technological transfer (in cooperation with the governments
of China, Israel, and South Africa, among others); encouraging exploration and
development and FDI in minerals; and laying the foundations for manufacturing,
including by rehabilitating the war-ravaged and dilapidated infrastructure (energy,
roads, telecommunications) and improving the skills of the labor force.
C. Fiscal Sustainability

12.
The authorities agreed on the need to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability to
ensure that future generations benefit from Congo’s current oil wealth. Staff elaborated
various models and fiscal rules of thumb used by oil-exporting countries to guide fiscal
policies. One such model is based on the permanent-income hypothesis (PIH), which protects
future generations by ensuring that all economic agents are treated equally over time,
allowing only the permanent (annual) income from oil wealth to be spent each year.5 The
authorities were attracted by the benefits of using the model and the discipline it provided;
and although they recognized the caveats that such models entail, their medium-term fiscal
strategy for the proposed PRGF arrangement is guided by it.
13.
Consistent with the PIH model, the authorities intend to target for the long-term
an annual reduction in the basic non-oil primary deficit—the program’s nominal fiscal
anchor—of 3-4 percent over the next several years. This would move the fiscal stance

5

Concerning the management of unspent reserves, the staff encouraged the authorities to discuss with the
regional monetary authority ways to diversify and increase the rate of return on their portfolio.

16
toward sustainability, which the staff estimates would occur when the basic non-oil primary
deficit is in the range of 3-5 percent of non-oil GDP.6
14.
The authorities expressed concern, however, that the pace of fiscal adjustment
may not allow for the flexibility needed to address immediate needs, especially for
investment in infrastructure. While sympathetic to this concern and the authorities’ desire
to front-load public investment in an effort to meet the MDGs, staff urged them to pursue the
indicated fiscal path, since the current fiscal position is a long way from sustainability and
capacity constraints limit the efficient investment of public resources. Staff also indicated
that there would be room to accommodate a scaling–up of investment if concerted efforts
were made to (i) re-orient spending by reducing or eliminating poorly targeted spending,
such as for fuel subsidies; (ii) rationalize low-priority programs and spending initiatives; (iii)
improve public financial management; and (iv) mobilize more domestic resources. As a share
of non-oil GDP, non-oil revenue is relatively large at about 21 percent, but it has been
stagnant in recent years and could be increased by strengthening tax and customs
administration by, e.g., use of a single taxpayer identification number, computerization, and
fully implementing the ASYCUDA system; reducing tax exemptions; and more aggressive
collection of tax arrears to combat fraud and evasion. A broadening of economic activity
would also help boost non-oil tax collections.
15.
As additional fiscal space emerges, making it possible to scale up domesticallyfinanced capital spending even further, the authorities must address the current
administrative and institutional constraints. The government is pressing ahead with its
efforts to complete by year-end, with technical assistance from development partners, a
three-year action plan to manage public investment, which should help provide a strategic
focus both in geographic and sectoral terms. This plan will take into account the findings of
the recent technical and financial audit of a sample of 2006 capital expenditures and
transfers, as well as input from upcoming work by the World Bank on infrastructure
priorities and a public expenditure review.7 The authorities are working actively with World
Bank staff to put in place modern procurement procedures and train staff accordingly.

6

The PIH model is underpinned by assumptions that affect estimates of the long-term non-oil primary deficit.
These assumptions include the projected oil resources, which in the case of Congo is assumed to be about
1.6 billion barrels (proven); international oil prices; the growth of non-oil GDP; and the real rate of return on
government (financial) assets, which is assumed to increase to 3½ percent over the medium term.
7

The financial and technical audit of capital expenditures and transfers highlighted a number of problems that
could be addressed by the timely and comprehensive implementation of the PFM action plan, including
weaknesses in budget preparation, excessive centralization of the budget commitment process, lack of reliable
expenditure control procedures, weak procurement policies, and the absence of a medium-term public
investment program.

17
D. External Debt Sustainability
16.
The authorities concurred with the findings of the joint IMF and World Bank
debt sustainability analysis and the view that Congo is at a high risk of debt distress.
Owing mainly to debt relief from London Club creditors in November 2007, Congo’s net
debt ratios have improved significantly and are projected to decline further over the long
term, reflecting strong oil revenue and projected fiscal consolidation. However, the country
is still vulnerable to movements in world oil prices, so a prudent fiscal stance will be
essential to achieving debt sustainability (details can be found in the supplement
accompanying this staff report).
E. Capacity Building
17.
The authorities stressed the need to build institutional and administrative
capacity so that their economic program can be implemented smoothly. Staff and
authorities took stock of the technical assistance being provided by the Fund (much of it
through the central AFRITAC), World Bank, and other donors to identify overlaps, gaps, and
areas where effective use could be made of Congo’s own resources to accelerate progress. It
was agreed that additional assistance is needed to successfully implement the ambitious PFM
reform, particularly drafting a medium-term expenditure framework, a public procurement
code in line with international best practice, and a comprehensive investment management
program. Also, assistance in reforming the oil sector is urgently required given the sector’s
importance and conditionality for the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
18.
Provision of data to the Fund is broadly adequate for surveillance purposes, with
timeliness and regularity of basic macroeconomic data being priorities. Recently, efforts
have been made to strengthen national accounts, balance of payments, and fiscal data, with
the help of Fund technical assistance.
IV. THE MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC PROGRAM
19.
The authorities’ PRGF arrangement is designed to support balanced growth,
low and stable inflation, and fiscal and external sustainability. The medium-term
macroeconomic framework (2008-11) is consistent with the PRS and aims to achieve:
•

8

Annual real GDP growth in the non-oil sector of about 8 percent, which the
authorities believe is the minimum necessary to reduce poverty durably and to make
meaningful progress toward the income and other MDGs.8
A discussion of recent poverty trends can be found in the authorities’ PRS paper.

18
•

Low and stable inflation of about 3 percent a year, in line with the CEMAC
convergence criteria, which will help preserve Congo’s competitiveness given the
fixed exchange rate regime.

•

An improvement in the external position with the current account moving into surplus
this year, with the surplus rising into the medium term. This will make it possible to
further build up net foreign assets and provide more than adequate savings to finance
development. The external position will be strengthened further when Congo reaches
the HIPC completion point.

20.

Medium-term policies to achieve these macroeconomic objectives include:

•

Gradual but continued fiscal consolidation to ensure steady progress toward longterm sustainability, recognizing the finite horizon for oil production—which could be
as soon as 2028 without further exploration and development—and the need for
intergenerational equity. The authorities agreed that an annual decline in the basic
non-oil primary deficit of 3-4 percent of non-oil GDP would be adequate to balance
the short-term desire to scale up public investment to address urgent needs (rebuild
infrastructure, improve physical and human capital, and support key sectors) and put
the fiscal stance on a credible path to preserve oil wealth. The reduction in the basic
non-oil primary fiscal deficit from a projected 43.2 percent of non-oil GDP this year
to 33½ percent in 2011 is projected to come from cuts in non-priority spending,
essentially through the elimination of fuel subsidies and restraint on wages and goods
and services, and domestic revenue mobilization.

•

The regional central bank’s focus on keeping inflation low and allowing foreign
reserves accumulation, to help support the region’s fixed exchange rate regime.

•

Further opening of the economy through trade liberalization.

•

Structural reform in areas critical to the success of the program (see Box 3): timely
and full implementation of the authorities’ action plan to strengthen public financial
management and enhance tax and customs administration; improvement in the
financial and operating performance of state-owned enterprises, notably in the oil
sector, given implications for the budget and governance generally; and adoption and
implementation of the financial sector strategy.

19
Box 3. Structural Conditionality for the Proposed PRGF Arrangement
Structural conditionality for the proposed PRGF arrangement is focused on areas that are critical for
achieving the program’s macroeconomic objectives. Consequently, it covers PFM, reform of the oil
sector, and financial stability and deepening intermediation.
•

Public financial management: To support the authorities’ efforts to tighten control over budget
execution and monitoring, and to achieve consistency with the PRS, the program gives priority to
enhancing PFM. Reforms in this area are important to strengthen governance and transparency in
the use of public resources. Program conditionality will support a new economic, functional, and
administrative classification for the budget; development of a medium-term expenditure
framework; and better public investment management, which is critical given the magnitude of
these expenditures.

•

Oil sector: Performance of the sector is critical to the macroeconomic outlook. To safeguard oil
revenue and ensure that state-owned enterprises in the sector are financially sound and efficient, the
program will support the government’s efforts to repatriate oil revenue in a timely manner and
certify those receipts every quarter; adopt a comprehensive plan with a timetable to address
procedural deficiencies in the commercialization of Congolese oil; and finalize a strategic study of
the sector. The program will also support the authorities’ efforts to establish a new petroleumproduct pricing regime that would help eliminate subsidies and depoliticize pricing decisions.

•

Financial sector: The authorities recognize that financial stability and deeper intermediation are
needed to support private sector development and broaden economic activity beyond the oil
industry. Accordingly, the program will support adoption by the government of a financial sector
strategy drawn up in consultation with Fund staff and Congo’s development partners.
Implementation of the strategy could be supported through conditionality on key elements.

A. Economic Policies for 2008-09
21.
In the first year (2008-09), the program targets real GDP growth of 8½ percent
in the non-oil sector and a moderation of inflation to 3 percent by year-end. The pickup
in non-oil activity is largely attributed to strong public investment, a further broadening of
growth, and spillovers from high oil production and projected investment in this sector. The
near-term policies to support these targets are outlined below.
Fiscal policies
22.
For the rest of 2008 the fiscal stance will remain consistent with targets
established earlier this year in the SMP, including a reduction of the basic non-oil
primary deficit to 43.2 percent of non-oil GDP. This target can be achieved by strong nonoil tax collections, firm control of public spending, and a projected decline in fuel subsidies
by about 1.6 percent of non-oil GDP, as a result of the across-the-board increase in fuel
prices by an average of 13 percent at the beginning of October (this increase was a prior
action for Executive Board consideration of the authorities’ request for a new PRGF
arrangement).

20
23.
For 2009 the program envisages a decline in the basic non-oil primary deficit to
40.2 percent of non-oil GDP, based primarily on nominal cuts in non-priority spending,
including a further decline in fuel subsidies. Pro-poor and domestically-financed capital
spending would rise as a share of non-oil GDP, consistent with the authorities’ PRS. Non-oil
tax revenue would increase only slightly as a share of non-oil GDP (to about 21.1 percent)
because improvements in tax and customs administration would be mostly offset by the fullyear impact of recent tax and tariff reductions aimed at mitigating the adverse impact of food
and fuel price inflation through most of 2008.9 To execute and monitor the budget better, the
authorities intend to undertake a number of PFM measures, such as preparing and submitting
to parliament, next year’s budget consistent with the targets under the proposed PRGF
arrangement and using economic, functional, and administrative classifications, and to
finalize and adopt a three-year action plan to improve public investment management (both
structural performance criteria for December 2008). They will also prepare a medium-term
expenditure framework (structural performance criterion for June 2009). To ensure the
transparency and accountability of oil revenue, they will continue with quarterly certification
of it by a reputable international auditor and lodge the proceeds in the Treasury within 45
days of oil sales (both continuous structural performance criteria).
Monetary and financial sector policies
24.
BEAC projects broad money growth for Congo of about 13 percent for 2009,
consistent with the projected expansion of nominal growth in the non-oil sector. Credit
to the private sector should continue to increase strongly as private sector development
speeds up and financial intermediation deepens. To facilitate implementation of monetary
policy, the authorities intend to continue to reduce the stock of statutory advances, with a
view to repaying them fully by the end of 2008, and to work closely with its CEMAC
partners to develop the regional securities market.
25.
To initiate reforms, the government will adopt by the end of this year the
financial sector strategy established in collaboration with Fund staff. It is expected that
this strategy will contribute to expand credit to the private sector, strengthen the legal
framework, improve information on the cost of credit and credit history, diversify financial
instruments, and ensure that the country’s pension system is placed on a sound footing.
External sector policies
26.
The authorities have reaffirmed their commitment to finance development
mainly through their own resources and to seek foreign financing only on highly
9

Details on the authorities’ policy response to food and fuel price inflation can be found in the Staff Report for
the First Assessment Under the Staff Monitored Program (Country Report No. 08/173).

21
concessional terms (with a minimum grant element of not less than 50 percent). They
also intend to accelerate efforts to regularize relations with all creditors, including nonLondon Club and litigating creditors. In the coming year a priority will be to complete
implementation of a new debt management strategy in line with CEMAC regional guidelines.
Over the next year, the government will continue to urge its CEMAC partners to liberalize
regional trade by reducing the maximum external tariff; removing remaining exemptions,
surcharges and export taxes; harmonizing the rules of origin; and otherwise facilitating trade.
Structural policies
27.
As well as continuing to strengthen PFM and initiate financial sector reform, the
authorities intend to accelerate progress in rationalizing the oil sector. The focus in the
first year of the program will be to establish a new fuel pricing mechanism (structural
performance criterion for March 2009), which would help phase out fuel subsidies by
moving prices toward import parity and depoliticize pricing decisions; continue to implement
the action plan to improve the operations and financial performance of CORAF; adopt a plan
(with the assistance of Congo’s development partners) to address institutional and procedural
deficiencies in the commercialization of Congolese oil (structural performance criterion for
March 2009); and prepare a strategic study on how the oil sector can make the greatest
contribution to economic development.
B. Program Financing and Capacity to Repay the Fund
28. Congo has not achieved debt sustainability, although because of rising oil
production and exports it has the capacity to service external debt, including that owed
the Fund (Table 8). External public debt service (before debt relief) has recently declined
significantly as a result of debt rescheduling with Paris and London Club creditors on
favorable terms. The authorities are making a good faith effort to reach a collaborative
agreement with other commercial and litigating creditors, on terms comparable to those of
the London Club. Debt service is projected to decline to about 4.2 percent of exports in 2009
and to 1.9 percent over the medium term. Consequently, proposed access for the PRGF
arrangement is low, amounting to SDR 8.46 million (10 percent of quota), to be disbursed in
seven equal tranches (Table 9).
29. At the end of September 2008 the Congo’s credit outstanding to the Fund was
SDR 23.58 million (27.87 percent of quota). No principal payments are due to the Fund in
2008-09. With the proposed PRGF arrangement Congo’s obligations will peak in 2014 at
SDR 5.4 million, representing about 0.1 percent of exports.
30.
Financing assurances have now been received from external creditors,
accounting for 80 percent of the total HIPC assistance. Consequently, the authorities are
now eligible to receive interim HIPC assistance from the Fund. This assistance would
amount to SDR 77,000 and would be used to cover 98 percent of PRGF interest payments

22
falling due during a twelve-month period following Executive Board approval of the
proposed PRGF arrangement.
31.
HIPC debt release would improve external debt indicators and facilitate the
achievement of external sustainability. Satisfactory progress on the PRGF arrangement is
required, as is satisfactory implementation of the other floating completion point triggers for
the enhanced HIPC Initiative, to secure debt relief.
C. Program Risks
32.
The authorities have expressed their firm commitment to the program and to
enhancing governance and transparency over the use of public resources. Nonetheless,
there are risks on two fronts:
•

Performance on previous programs was uneven mainly because of the lack of
ownership, perhaps stemming from the narrow constituency for reform. The new
political and technical apparatus that has been established should help to ensure
broad-based support across ministries, departments, and agencies, but the potential
for ownership to weaken cannot be ruled out.

•

The presidential and senatorial elections looming next year will create spending
pressures that could cause a lapse of fiscal discipline and could slow reform in
politically sensitive areas (oil in particular).
V. STAFF APPRAISAL

33.
Growth in the non-oil sector has been relatively buoyant in recent years, but it is
narrowly based and not high enough to reduce poverty significantly. Economic reform
across the board, including fiscal consolidation, is needed to confront this challenge over the
medium term if Congo is to make progress toward the MDGs.
34.
Recent developments should encourage the authorities to stay the course of
economic reform. Relatively high world oil prices, increased oil production, and relative
political and social stability should give Congo momentum for accelerating growth and
reducing poverty in the next few years. The satisfactory policy implementation during the
SMP in the first half of 2008 is encouraging.
35.
To support reform momentum, the authorities must make concerted efforts to
improve the business environment, reduce the cost of doing business, raise the quality
of government services, and make more effective use of public resources. This would lay
a solid foundation for diversification of the economy and enhance the competitiveness of the
non-oil sector, both of which are critical to promoting employment and reducing disparities
in the distribution of income.

23
36.
The real effective exchange rate has appreciated recently, driven mainly by
relatively high inflation compared with Congo’s trading partners. This has affected the
performance of non-oil exports, but factors like weak institutions and inadequate
infrastructure probably have had more effect. Staff’s assessment is that Congo’s envisaged
fiscal consolidation will be important in reducing the overvaluation of the real effective
exchange rate over time.
37.
The authorities’ medium-term economic and financial program should provide
a strong basis for moving forward. Fiscal consolidation to achieve long-term sustainability
would ensure inter-generational equity by preserving the country’s oil wealth; it would
encourage policy makers to prioritize spending programs and decisions, which in turn would
enhance the quality of public spending. Timely and comprehensive implementation of the
new PFM action plan would promote smooth execution and careful monitoring of the budget.
To help widen the spending envelope, the authorities must make concerted efforts to
mobilize more domestic non-oil revenue.
38.
The structural reform agenda is well designed to support broadening of the
economic base, bolster Congo’s competitiveness, growth prospects, as well as fiscal
sustainability:
•
•
•
•
•

Simplification of business regulations and the application of OHADA business laws
would improve the business climate.
Trade liberalization on a wide front would enlarge Congo’s potential market.
Better financial intermediation would ensure that national savings are available for
private sector development.
Improved performance of state-owned enterprises would generate economic activity
and remove a burden on the budget.
Targeted interventions in key sectors could lead to further FDI.

39.
More transparent and better governance, particularly in the oil sector, would
help achieve program objectives and improve Congo’s prospects for broad-based
growth and poverty reduction. The authorities should again make special efforts to
enhance the monitoring and reporting of oil resources, and address fraud and combat
corruption over the use of public resources.
40.
Despite the recent improvements in the external sector, Congo is still at a high
risk of debt distress. Consequently, prudent debt management and debt relief is essential to
achieve external sustainability. In this context, the authorities’ intention to pursue fiscal
consolidation and foreign borrowing only on highly concessional terms is welcome.
41.
Although challenging, the obstacles to growth and poverty reduction in the
Congo are not insurmountable, but risks remain. Weaknesses in ownership have led to
uneven policy implementation in the past, and pressures to spend─especially with elections

24
looming─could prove difficult to resist in the period ahead. Nonetheless, recent performance
provides encouraging signs of the authorities’ commitment to widen the domestic
constituency for reform, and to follow through on their program commitments.
42.
Taking into consideration the strength of the authorities’ program and the balance of
risks, staff supports their request for a three-year PRGF arrangement in an amount equivalent
to SDR 8.460 million, a first disbursement in an amount equivalent to SDR 1.209 million,
and interim-HIPC assistance in an amount of SDR 77,000. Also, the staff supports
completion of the financing assurances review.
43.
Consistent with the practice for program countries, it is proposed that the next Article
IV consultation with the Republic of Congo be held in accordance with the decision on
consultation cycles approved on July 15, 2002.

25
Table 1. Republic of Congo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2006–11
2007
Est.

2006

Production and prices
GDP at constant prices
Oil
Non-oil
GDP at current prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end of period)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b. (CFA francs)
Imports, f.o.b. (CFA francs)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade (deterioration - )
Nominal effective exchange rate (end of period)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period)
Money and credit
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Central government
Credit to the economy
Broad money
Velocity of broad money (Non-oil)

2008

2009
2010
Projection

2011

(Annual percentage change)
6.2
6.8
5.9
25.9
18.5
4.7
8.1

-1.6
-17.2
6.6
-9.4
-7.9
2.6
-1.7

7.6
9.0
7.0
35.2
25.6
4.5
6.0

12.7
23.1
8.5
-5.1
-15.8
4.2
3.0

12.3
21.6
8.0
27.1
13.2
3.0
3.0

1.3
-10.2
7.4
0.1
-1.2
3.0
3.0

26.7
52.1
7.8
40.0
0.8
-0.4
1.6

-13.3
20.8
-18.8
20.0
0.6
5.1
3.1

34.7
1.5
8.7
-10.1
13.7
...
...

0.9
12.1
33.3
12.5
-22.2
...
...

35.2
17.5
21.3
13.8
5.7
...
...

-4.0
6.3
-9.8
4.1
-2.4
...
...

(Percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
-80.3
-82.6
-84.4
1.9
47.9
1.9

-5.4
-3.2
-3.9
1.1
7.4
1.9

-139.7
-139.7
-149.5
9.9
20.0
1.8

-72.9
-72.9
-78.8
6.0
13.3
1.8

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

(Percent of GDP)
Investment and saving
Gross national saving
Public
Private
Gross investment
Public
Private

24.5
27.1
-2.5
22.9
9.0
13.9

0.1
22.8
-22.7
26.2
10.6
15.6

10.6
35.5
-24.9
20.8
8.6
12.1

28.9
31.8
-2.9
27.7
12.9
14.8

35.0
36.9
-1.9
24.1
11.5
12.6

33.7
38.4
-4.7
25.0
12.4
12.6

Current account balance3
External public debt (end of period)

1.6
81.5

-26.1
72.9

0.6
51.9

1.2
54.7

10.9
43.3

8.7
44.6

142.4
116.4
26.0
69.1
34.4
34.7
73.3
79.5
-36.9

132.6
103.9
28.7
65.5
31.5
34.0
67.1
70.5
-33.5

(Percent of non-oil GDP)

Central government finances
Revenue and grants
Oil revenue
Nonoil revenue and grants
Total expenditure
Current
Capital (and net lending)
1
Overall balance (deficit -, commitment basis)
2
Primary balance (deficit -)
Nonoil primary balance ( - = deficit)

141.5
120.6
20.9
87.2
58.5
28.7
54.3
68.6
-51.3

External public debt service (before debt relief)
External public debt

13.7
99.1

113.5
92.3
21.2
84.2
56.3
27.9
29.3
36.6
-55.7

155.5
133.2
22.3
72.4
45.1
27.4
83.1
90.1
-43.2

121.1
97.0
24.1
73.3
39.1
34.2
47.8
56.9
-40.2

(Percent of exports of goods and services)
10.7
88.8

4.5
64.8

4.2
63.1

3.0
46.6

1.9
49.7

(Percent of total government revenue excluding grants)
External public debt service (before debt relief)
External public debt

25.3
183.9

20.6
170.8

7.4
106.8

8.1
121.2

6.0
93.3

3.6
93.5

(Billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)
Gross official foreign reserves
(Months of imports, f.o.b.)
(Percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP
World oil price (U.S. dollars per barrel)
Oil production (Millions of barrels)
Nominal effective exchange rate (end of period, percent change)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period, percent change)

920.4
10.6
22.8
4,042.6
64.3
98.7
-0.4
1.6

983.1
9.3
26.8
3,664.4
71.1
81.7
5.1
3.1

2,078.3
19.4
42.0
4,952.7
99.8
89.0
...
...

2,801.6
23.4
59.6
4,701.8
68.0
109.6
...
...

4,231.9 5,755.5
30.1
38.5
70.8
96.2
5,976.5 5,984.1
75.0
79.3
133.2 119.6
...
...
...
...

Sources: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1
Including grants.
2
Primary revenue (excluding grants) minus non-interest current expenditure minus domestically financed capital expenditure and net
lending.
3
Including public transfers.

26
Table 2. Republic of Congo: Medium Term Balance of Payments, 2006–12
(Billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)
2006

2007
Est.

2008

2009

2010
Projection

2011

2012

Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Oil sector
Non-oil sector
Imports, f.o.b.
Oil sector
Government
Non-oil private sector

65
2,125
3,172
2,976
196
-1,047
-338
-220
-489

-958
1,486
2,749
2,500
250
-1,264
-459
-229
-576

28
2,420
3,703
3,433
270
-1,283
-399
-265
-618

56
2,299
3,737
3,415
322
-1,438
-396
-374
-668

650
3,363
5,052
4,705
348
-1,689
-507
-437
-744

521
3,056
4,850
4,471
380
-1,795
-470
-484
-841

630
2,726
4,551
4,139
413
-1,826
-397
-515
-913

Balance of services
Income
Labor income
Investment income

-1,129
-916
-31
-885

-1,590
-835
-33
-802

-1,380
-991
-51
-940

-1,422
-820
-50
-770

-1,674
-1,052
-68
-984

-1,622
-934
-64
-869

-1,348
-769
-59
-709

Current transfers (net)

-13

-19

-22

-1

13

20

21

6

16

20

22

37

45

47

5
1
-66

15
1
540

20
0
996

22
0
645

37
0
743

45
0
959

47
0
804

522
426

1,007
906

1,174
965

1,054
855

1,126
906

1,065
821

1,030
760

-1

-1

-1

0

0

0

0

-587
-477
-300
2
2
0
-302
-177
-167
-10

-466
-387
-237
1
1
0
-238
-149
-140
-9

-178
-220
-118
10
10
0
-128
-102
-93
-9

-409
-220
-42
114
114
0
-156
-178
-167
-10

-383
-216
24
123
123
0
-99
-240
-230
-9

-106
-203
26
128
128
0
-102
-229
-219
-10

-226
-196
16
132
132
0
-115
-213
-203
-10
-29

Capital account
Official grants
Other
Financial account
Direct investment (net)
Of which: oil sector
Portfolio investment
Other investment
Medium and long term
Public sector
Drawings
Project
Program
Amortization
Private sector
Oil
Non-oil
Short term

-110

-79

42

-190

-167

97

-350

136

50

0

0

0

0

6

-266

1,093

722

1,431

1,525

1,481

-356
-522
4
6
-2
-526

266
-61
0
0
0
-61

-1,093
-1,093
1
1
0
-1,094

-722
-722
2
2
0
-723

-1,430
-1,430
1
2
-1
-1,430

-1,524
-1,524
-1
2
-2
-1,524

-1,481
-1,481
-3
0
-3
-1,478

Exceptional financing
Net change in arrears
Debt cancellation
Debt rescheduling

166
28
78
61

327
-1,578
925
981

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

Financing gap (- = surplus)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Errors and omissions
Overall balance of payments
Financing
Reserve financing
IMF (net) 1
Purchases / Disbursments
Repurchases / Repayments
Other reserves
2

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
3
Current account balance
Export volume
Import volume
Export price
Import price
Terms of trade

1.6
7.8
40.0
17.5
8.6
0.8

-26.1
-18.8
20.0
6.7
0.7
0.6

Sources: BEAC; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Includes assumed disbursements under the new PRGF.
Includes debt relief from Paris Club and London Club.
3
Percent of GDP; including public transfers.
2

0.6
8.7
-10.1
23.9
12.9
13.7

1.2
33.3
12.5
-24.3
-0.4
-22.2

10.9
21.3
13.8
11.5
3.2
5.7

8.7
-9.8
4.1
6.4
2.1
-2.4

10.6
-9.6
0.4
3.8
1.4
1.5

27
Table 3a. Republic of Congo: Central Government Operations, 2006–11
2007

2006

2008
Mar

Est.

Jun

2009

Sep
Proj.

2010

Dec
Prog.

2011

Projection

(Billions of CFA francs)
Revenue and grants
Primary Revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Investment income
Grants

1,796
1,791
1,531
261
... .
5

1,579
1,564
1,284
280
...
15

428
428
343
86
...
0

1,121
1,115
931
184
...
6

1,957
1,942
1,691
251
...
15

2,427
2,407
2,079
328
...
20

2,142
2,089
1,716
373
32
22

2,808
2,715
2,296
419
56
37

2,897
2,742
2,271
471
111
45

Expenditure and net lending
of which primary expenditure

1,106
916

1,171
1,055

302
281

595
555

858
791

1,130
1,026

1,296
1,102

1,363
1,147

1,430
1,202

175
39
109
38
11
0
60
7
19
33
6
21
2
19
127
127
...
0
0

342
83
214
78
15
0
121
9
35
77
12
33
4
29
252
246
...
6
0

522
125
327
126
23
5
174
20
60
94
17
53
5
47
336
321
10
15
0

703
167
439
170
30
15
225
25
75
125
23
74
7
67
427
397
25
30
0

692
180
428
181
20
14
213
20
45
148
25
59
0
59
604
469
19
135
0

678
194
401
197
20
20
165
10
20
135
26
56
1
56
685
525
0
160
0

688
210
396
212
20
20
143
0
0
143
27
56
0
55
743
570
0
173
0

Current expenditure
Wages
Other current expenditure
Material and supplies
Common charges
Budgetary reserves
Transfers
Refined petroleum products
National refinery (CORAF)
Other transfers
Local authorities
Interest
Domestic
External
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
o.w. HIPC financed
Externally financed
Net lending
1

742
135
402
85
96
0
220
18
67
136
27
179
29
150
360
353
... .
7
5

784
142
518
135
81
0
302
26
115
161
23
101
17
84
388
372
... ..
16
0

Basic primary balance
Of which: Basic non-oil primary balance

871
-651

509
-775

148
-195

560
-371

1,162
-530

1,406
-673

1,006
-710

1,568
-727

1,540
-731

Balance, commitment basis
Excluding grants
Including grants
Of which: Non-oil balance

685
690
-831

393
408
-876

127
127
-216

520
526
-405

1,084
1,099
-592

1,277
1,297
-782

824
846
-870

1,409
1,446
-850

1,422
1,467
-804

Change in arrears
External
Domestic

-76
12
-88

-270
-180
-90

-37
-23
-14

-80
-21
-59

-95
-21
-74

-139
-35
-104

-125
0
-125

-68
0
-68

-26
0
-26

Balance, cash basis

614

138

90

447

1,004

1,158

721

1,377

1,441

-614
-165
2
-302
60
75
0
-449
-407
-42

-138
-105
1
-238
85
48
0
-34
-23
-11

-90
-5
0
-13
8
0
0
-85
-48
-37

-447
-59
0
-59
0
0
0
-388
-347
-41

-1,004
-71
0
-71
0
0
0
-933
-918
-15

-1,158
-101
10
-111
0
0
0
-1,056
-1,068
12

-721
-42
114
-156
0
0
0
-679
-676
-3

-1,377
24
123
-99
0
0
0
-1,401
-1,397
-4

-1,441
26
128
-102
0
0
0
-1,467
-1,466
-1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

4,043
1,269
200

3,664
1,392
297

4953
1561
101

4953
1561
120

4953
1561
224

4,953
1,561
328

4702
1769
389

5977
1972
427

5984
2185
473

Financing
Foreign (net)
Drawings
Amortization due
Rescheduling obtained (arrears)
Debt cancellation (arrears)
Exceptional assistance
Domestic (net)
Banking system (net)
Nonbank financing
Financing gap (- = surplus)
Memorandum items:
GDP at current market prices
Non-oil GDP at market prices
Pro poor spending

Sources: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Primary revenue (excluding investment income and grants) minus noninterest current expenditure minus domestically financed capital expenditure (excluding HIPC-finance
capital expenditure) and net lending.

28
Table 3b. Republic of Congo: Central Government Operations, 2006–11
2006

2007
Est.

2008
Mar

Jun

2009
Sep

Dec

2010

2011

Projection

(Percent of non-oil GDP)
Revenue and grants
Primary Revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Investment income
Grants

141.5
141.1
120.6
20.5
...
0.4

113.5
112.4
92.3
20.1
...
1.1

27.4
27.4
22.0
5.5
...
0.0

71.8
71.4
59.6
11.8
...
0.4

125.4
124.4
108.4
16.1
...
1.0

155.5
154.2
133.2
21.0
...
1.3

121.1
118.1
97.0
21.1
1.8
1.2

142.4
137.7
116.4
21.2
2.9
1.9

132.6
125.5
103.9
21.6
5.1
2.1

Expenditure and net lending
of which primary expenditure

87.2
72.2

84.2
75.8

19.3
18.0

38.1
35.6

55.0
50.7

72.4
65.8

73.3
62.3

69.1
58.1

65.5
55.0

Current expenditure
Wages
Other current expenditure
Material and supplies
Common charges
Budgetary reserves
Transfers
Refined petroleum products
National refinery (CORAF)
Other transfers
Local authorities
Interest
Domestic
External
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
o.w. HIPC financed
Externally financed
Net lending

58.5
10.6
31.7
6.7
7.6
0.0
17.4
1.4
5.3
10.7
2.1
14.1
2.3
11.8
28.4
27.8
0.0
0.5
0.4

56.3
10.2
37.2
9.7
5.8
0.0
21.7
1.9
8.3
11.6
1.7
7.2
1.2
6.0
27.9
26.7
0.0
1.1
0.0

11.2
2.5
7.0
2.4
0.7
0.0
3.8
0.5
1.2
2.1
0.4
1.3
0.1
1.2
8.1
8.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

21.9
5.3
13.7
5.0
1.0
0.0
7.8
0.6
2.3
5.0
0.8
2.1
0.2
1.9
16.2
15.8
0.0
0.4
0.0

33.5
8.0
21.0
8.1
1.4
0.3
11.1
1.3
3.8
6.0
1.1
3.4
0.4
3.0
21.5
20.6
0.6
1.0
0.0

45.1
10.7
28.2
10.9
1.9
1.0
14.4
1.6
4.8
8.0
1.5
4.7
0.5
4.3
27.4
25.4
1.6
1.9
0.0

39.1
10.2
24.2
10.2
1.1
0.8
12.1
1.1
2.5
8.4
1.4
3.3
0.0
3.3
34.2
26.5
1.1
7.7
0.0

34.4
9.9
20.4
10.0
1.0
1.0
8.4
0.5
1.0
6.8
1.3
2.8
0.0
2.8
34.7
26.6
0.0
8.1
0.0

31.5
9.6
18.1
9.7
0.9
0.9
6.6
0.0
0.0
6.6
1.2
2.5
0.0
2.5
34.0
26.1
0.0
7.9
0.0

Basic primary balance
Of which: Basic non-oil primary balance

68.6
-51.3

36.6
-55.7

9.5
-12.5

35.8
-23.8

74.4
-33.9

90.1
-43.2

56.9
-40.2

79.5
-36.9

70.5
-33.5

Balance, commitment basis
Excluding grants
Including grants
Of which: Non-oil balance

54.0
54.3
-65.5

28.2
29.3
-63.0

8.1
8.1
-13.8

33.3
33.7
-25.9

69.4
70.4
-38.0

81.8
83.1
-50.1

46.6
47.8
-49.2

71.4
73.3
-43.1

65.1
67.1
-36.8

Change in arrears
External
Domestic

-5.9
0.9
-6.9

-19.4
-13.0
-6.4

-2.4
-1.5
-0.9

-5.1
-1.3
-3.8

-6.1
-1.3
-4.8

-8.9
-2.2
-6.7

-7.1
0.0
-7.1

-3.5
0.0
-3.5

-1.2
0.0
-1.2

Balance, cash basis

48.4

9.9

5.8

28.6

64.3

74.2

40.7

69.8

66.0

-48.4
-13.0
0.1
-23.8
4.7
5.9
0.0
-35.4
-32.1
-3.3

-9.9
-7.5
0.0
-17.1
6.1
3.4
0.0
-2.4
-1.6
-0.8

-5.8
-0.3
0.0
-0.9
0.5
0.0
0.0
-5.4
-3.1
-2.3

-28.6
-3.8
0.0
-3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
-24.9
-22.2
-2.6

-64.3
-4.6
0.0
-4.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
-59.8
-58.8
-1.0

-74.2
-6.5
0.6
-7.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
-67.7
-68.4
0.8

-40.7
-2.4
6.4
-8.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
-38.4
-38.2
-0.2

-69.8
1.2
6.2
-5.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-71.1
-70.8
-0.2

-66.0
1.2
5.8
-4.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
-67.2
-67.1
-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1

Financing
Foreign (net)
Drawings
Amortization due
Rescheduling obtained (arrears)
Debt cancellation (arrears)
Exceptional assistance
Domestic (net)
Banking system (net)
Nonbank financing
Financing gap (- = surplus)

Sources: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Primary revenue (excluding investment income and grants) minus noninterest current expenditure minus domestically financed capital expenditure
(excluding HIPC-financed capital expenditure) and net lending.

29
Table 4. Republic of Congo: Quantitative Indicative Targets, Jan 1 - June 30, 2008
(Billions of CFA francs, unless otherewise indicated; cumulative from January)
End-Mar. 08
Benchmark
Actual

End-Jun. 08
Benchmark
Actual

Quantitative targets
Nonoil primary fiscal balance (floor)

-198.5

-194.8

-398.6

-371.2

New medium or long-term nonconcessional external
debt (including leasing) contracted or
guaranteed by the government (ceiling) 1, 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New external debt (including leasing) with an
original maturity of less than one year
(ceiling)

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New oil-collateralized external debt contracted by
or on behalf of the central government (ceiling) 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New nonconcessional external debt contracted by SNPC (ceiling) 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New external arrears on nonreschedulable debt 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

10.1

New domestic arrears 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

338.5
77.0

342.7
85.7

1,081.1
153.9

930.7
184.0

Memorandum items
Oil revenue (in billions of CFA francs)
Non-oil revenue
1
2

Excluding rescheduling arrangements and disbursements from the IMF; the minimum grant element is set to 50 percent.
Continuous.

30

Table 5. Republic of Congo: Structural Benchmarks Under the SMP, January 1–June 30, 2008
Measures

Date

Status of Implementation

The government will adopt a comprehensive action plan with a
timetable to address institutional and procedural deficiencies in the
commercialization of Congolese oil, to bring them in line with best
international practice.

March 31, 2008

Not observed

The government will adopt a comprehensive action plan with a
timetable for reforming CORAF, taking on board the
recommendations of the diagnostic study of its operations by an
international consultant.

March 31, 2008

Observed

Completion of a technical and financial audit, by an independent,
internationally recognized firm, of current transfers and a
representative sample of capital expenditures executed during the
period from January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2006, based on terms
of reference satisfactory to IMF and World Bank staff. Publication of
the audit report on the website of the Ministry of Economy, Finance,
and Budget (www.mefb-cg.org)

June 30, 2008

Observed

Adoption of a three-year action plan to strengthen public investment
management, with assistance from the French Cooperation agency,
World Bank, and other development partners.

June 30, 2008

Not observed

Quarterly adjustment in petroleum entry distribution and/or retail
prices to ensure that oil subsidies for 2008 remain within budget limits
(CFAF 35 billion for the full year). The price adjustments should not
pass-through any decline in world oil prices.

Four weeks after the end
of each quarter

Not observed

Quarterly certification of oil revenue by an internationally recognized
audit firm, using the same specifications as for the 2003 certification
and with no restrictions on access to information; certification reports
to be published on the website of the Ministry of Economy, Finance,
and Budget (www.mefb-cg.org).

Continuous, with a onequarter lag

Observed

Publication of all invitations to bid and the bids themselves for
government procurement contracts above CFAF200 million on the
government’s website (www.mefb-cg.org)

Continuous

Observed

No granting of new tax and customs exemptions (except those under
international conventions).

Continuous

Observed

Centralization of all public revenues and execution of all public
payments by the Treasury.

Continuous

Observed

No recourse to emergency payment and cash advance procedures,
except in situations stated in the organic budget law.

Continuous

Observed

Provision to Fund staff information and projections concerning (i) the
price structure of domestic petroleum products and (ii) the income
statement and cash flow of CORAF.

Monthly, with a one-month Not observed
lag

31
Table 6. Republic of Congo: Monetary Survey, 2006–09
(Billions of CFA francs, unless otherwise indicated)
2006

2007
Est.

2008

2009
Projection

Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
Central bank
Deposit money banks

1042.6
901.4
141.2

1128.0
962.7
165.3

2269.0
2056.1
212.9

3008.5
2777.7
230.9

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the public sector
Net credit to the Government
Central bank
Claims
Staturory advances
Use of IMF credit
Deposits
Deposit money banks
Claims on public agencies, net
Credit to the economy
Other items, net

-377.6
-355.6
-449.4
-450.3
-446.7
149.1
131.4
17.7
595.8
-3.6
1.0
93.7
-22.0

-413.7
-377.1
-478.0
-476.4
-465.8
170.5
153.9
16.6
636.3
-10.6
-1.6
100.9
-36.6

-1411.8
-1375.2
-1546.7
-1544.4
-1533.8
18.4
0.0
18.4
1552.3
-10.6
-2.3
171.5
-36.6

-2037.1
-2000.5
-2223.4
-2220.1
-2209.5
20.2
0.0
20.2
2229.7
-10.6
-3.3
223.0
-36.6

665.0
271.2
310.8
82.9

714.3
239.2
384.1
91.0

857.1
314.8
433.1
109.2

971.5
321.1
526.6
123.8

Broad money
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits
Time deposits

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to the government
Credit to the private sector

128.2
-80.3
-82.6
-84.4
1.9

12.8
-5.4
-3.2
-3.9
1.1

159.7
-139.7
-139.7
-149.5
9.9

86.3
-72.9
-72.9
-78.8
6.0

(Annual percent changes, unless otherwise indicated)
Broad money
Reserve money

47.9
36.5

7.4
-11.8

20.0
31.6

13.3
2.0

1.9
1.9

2.0
1.9

1.9
1.8

2.0
1.8

35.2
12.1
11.0

-5.1
13.3
12.6

Memorandum items:
Velocity
Non-oil GDP/Average M2
Non-oil GDP/End period M2

(Percent)
Total GDP growth
Non-oil GDP growth
Credit to the private sector/Non-oil GDP

25.9
10.2
7.4

Source: BEAC; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

-9.4
9.7
7.2

32
Table 7. Banking Sector Financial Soundness Indicators, 2004–07
(Percent, at year's end, unless otherwise indicated)
Capital Adequacy
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Percentage of banks greater or equal to 10 percent
Percentage of banks below 10 and above 6 percent
Percentage of banks below 6 percent minimum
Capital (net worth) to assets
Asset quality
Nonperforming loans
Provision as percent of past-due loans
Earnings and profitability
Net profit (before tax)/net income
Return on assets
Return on equity
Expense/income
Interest rate spread (deposit money banks)
Lending rate minus demand deposit rates
Liquidity
Liquid assets/total assets
Liquid assets/short term liabilities
Loan/deposits
Liquid assets/total deposits
Excess reserves/Broad money
Source: COBAC and Fund staff estimates.

2004

2005

2006

2007

4
25
25
50
3

12
75
25
0
4

14
100
0
0
4

16
75
25
0
4

7
28

3
84

2
67

3
81

8
1
13
71

23
3
33
58

42
3
76
73

...
...
...
...

9

11

12

...

39
164
57
42
16

64
273
34
68
18

61
294
27
71
11

72
338
26
85
16

33
Table 8. Republic of Congo: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2006-15

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

1

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
Fund obligations based on existing credit
(Millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

2.8
0.4

0.0
0.5

0.0
0.4

0.0
0.4

1.6
0.4

3.1
0.4

4.7
0.4

4.7
0.4

4.7
0.3

3.1
0.3

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit
(Millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

2.8
0.4

0.0
0.5

0.0
0.4

0.0
0.4

1.6
0.4

3.1
0.4

4.7
0.4

4.7
0.4

5.1
0.4

4.0
0.3

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
Millions of SDRs
Billions of CFAF
Percent of government revenue
Percent of exports of goods and services
2
Percent of debt service
Percent of GDP
Percent of quota

3.2
2.5
0.1
0.1
1.4
0.1
3.8

0.5
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.6

0.4
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.5

0.4
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5

2.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
2.4
0.0
2.4

3.6
2.4
0.1
0.0
4.4
0.0
4.2

5.1
3.5
0.1
0.1
5.6
0.1
6.1

5.1
3.5
0.1
0.1
5.6
0.1
6.0

5.4
3.7
0.1
0.1
6.0
0.1
6.4

4.3
2.9
0.1
0.1
4.8
0.0
5.1

23.6
18.1
1.0
0.5
10.1
0.4
27.9

23.6
17.3
1.1
0.6
17.1
0.5
27.9

24.8
17.1
0.7
0.4
23.0
0.3
29.3

27.2
18.6
0.9
0.5
31.6
0.4
32.2

28.1
19.2
0.7
0.3
34.2
0.3
33.2

27.3
18.6
0.7
0.3
33.6
0.3
32.3

22.6
15.4
0.5
0.3
24.7
0.3
26.7

17.9
12.2
0.4
0.3
19.6
0.2
21.1

12.8
8.7
0.3
0.2
14.1
0.1
15.1

8.8
6.0
0.2
0.1
9.8
0.1
10.4

5.1
7.9
2.8

0.0
0.0
0.0

1.2
1.2
0.0

2.4
2.4
0.0

0.8
2.4
1.6

-0.7
2.4
3.1

-4.7
0.0
4.7

-4.7
0.0
4.7

-5.1
0.0
5.1

-4.0
0.0
4.0

2

Outstanding Fund credit
Millions of SDRs
Billions of CFAF
Percent of government revenue
Percent of exports of goods and services
2
Percent of debt service
Percent of GDP
Percent of quota
Net use of Fund credit (millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments and Repurchases
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of CFAF)
Exports of goods and services (Billions of CFAF)
Government revenue (Billions of CFAF)
2
Debt service (Billions of CFAF)
CFAF/SDR (period average)

4,043
3,402
1,791
179
769

3,664
3,007
1,564
101
733

Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1

Assumes a new PRGF arrangement of SDR 8.46 million (10 percent of quota).

2

Total debt service includes IMF repurchases and repayments.

4,953
3,967
2,407
74
688

4,702
4,076
2,121
59
684

5,977
5,552
2,771
56
683

5,984
5,368
2,852
56
682

5,945
5,085
2,838
62
681

5,788
4,646
2,832
62
679

5,822
4,464
2,856
62
678

5,895
4,331
2,858
61
678

34
Table 9: Republic of Congo: Proposed Access and Phasing Under
the Proposed 3-Year PRGF Arrangement (2008-11) 1
Timing

Disbursement
Amount
Percent
in SDRs
of quota

December 2008
April 2009
October 2009
April 2010
October 2010
April 2011
June 2011

1,208,570
1,208,570
1,208,570
1,208,570
1,208,570
1,208,570
1,208,580

1.43
1.43
1.43
1.43
1.43
1.43
1.43

Total

8,460,000

10.00

1

Conditions

Approval of the arrangement
Completion of the first review (end-December 2008 test date)
Completion of the second review (end-June 2009 test date)
Completion of the third review (end-December 2009 test date)
Completion of the fourth review (end-June 2010 test date)
Completion of the fifth review (end-December 2010 test date)
2
Completion of the sixth (final) review (end-March 2011 test date)

The Republic of Congo's quota is SDR 84.6 million.
A test date of end-March 2011 is set to allow the final disbursement to take place before
the end of the arrangement period.

2

35
Table 10. Republic of Congo: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015
1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2015
Target

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
54.0

...
59.0

13.0
...

...
33.0

11.8
…

...
[18.5]

79.0
60.0
93.0

...
...
...

...
66.0
...

44.0
...
...

54.0
73.0
…

...
...
[100.0]

83.0
95.0
26.1
14.0

...
...
...
2.0

83.0
...
...
12.0

89.0
...
...
9.0

90.0
…
…
7.0

...
...
...
...

110.0
83.0
75.0

108.0
81.0
38.0

108.0
81.0
34.0

108.0
81.0
56.0

126.0
79.0
66.0

[73.3]
...
...

...
...

...
...

510.0
...

...
86.0

740.0
86.0

...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

3.7
44.0
...

2.3
36.0
…

...
...
...

...
...
137.0
...

...
...
240.0
67.0

...
...
328.0
87.0

...
...
367.0
57.0

…
…
403.0
51.0

...
...
...
...

Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, number of people earning
less than US$ 1 a day.
1. Population below US$1 a day (in percent)
2. Poverty gap ratio at US$1 a day (in percent)
3. Share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent (in percent)
Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people suffering from hunger.
4. Prevalence of child malnutrition (in percent of children under 5)
5. Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)
Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a full course of
primary schooling.
6. Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
7. Cohort reaching grade 5 (in percent)
8. Youth literacy rate (in percent, ages 15-24)
Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably
by 2005, and all levels of education by 2015.
9. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
10. Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent, ages 15-24)
11. Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)
12. Proportion of seats held by women in the national parliament (in percent)
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality
Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate.
13. Under-5 mortarlity rate (per 1,000)
14. Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
15. Immunization against measles (percent of children under 12 months)
Goal 5. Improve maternal death
Target 6: Reduce by three-fourths, between 1990 and 2015, maternal mortality.
16. Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
17. Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (% of total)
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Target 7: Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS.
18. HIV prevalence among females (in percent, ages 15-24)
19. Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
20. Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Target 8: Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other
major diseases.
21. Prevalence of death associated with malaria
22. Share of population in malaria risk areas using effective prevention and treatment
23. Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
24. Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)

36
Table 10. Republic of Congo: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2015 (concluded)
1990

1995

2000

2005

2007

2015
Target

67.0
...
2.3
0.5
...

...
...
4.5
0.5
...

66.0
...
3.9
0.3
...

66.0
18.0
3.3
0.4
...

66.0
…
…
…
…

...
...
...
...
...

...

...

...

58.0

71.0

...

...
...

...
...

...
...

27.0
...

20.0
…

...
...

...

...

...

...

…

...

...

...

...

...

…

...

…
35.3

…
13.1

2.9
1.6

…
2.4

35.8
…

...
...

Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into policies and
programs. Reverse the loss of environmental resources.
25. Forest area (percent of total land area)
26. Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
27. GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
28. CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
29. Proportion of population using solid fuels
Target 10: Halve by 2015 proportion of people without access to safe drinking water.
30. Access to improved water source (percent of population)
Target 11: Achieve by 2020 significant improvement for at least 100 million slum
dwellers.
31. Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
32. Access to secure tenure (percent of population)
Goal 8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Target 16. Develop and implement strategies for productive work for youth.
45. Unemployment rate of population ages 15-24 (total)
Target 17: Provide access to affordable essential drugs.
46. Population with access to affordable essential drugs (in percent)
Target 18: Make available new technologies, especially information and
communications.
47. Fixed-line and mobile telephones (per 100 people)
48. Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

Sources: World Bank Millenium Development Goals Database, April 2007; and Fund staff estimates.
Note: Targets 12-15 and indicators 22-44 are excluded because they cannot be measured on a country-specific basis. These are
related to official development assistance, market access, and the HIPC Initiative.

37
APPENDIX I—LETTER OF INTENT
Brazzaville, November 19, 2008
The Minister of Economy,
Finance and Budget
To:
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
USA
Dear Mr. Managing Director:
The Republic of Congo is pursuing a medium-term economic and financial program
aimed at accelerating growth, alleviating poverty, and achieving external debt sustainability,
in particular, through debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Initiative.
In support of this program, the government of the Republic of Congo hereby requests
a three-year arrangement covering the period 2008-11 under the Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF), with access equivalent to SDR 8.46 million (10 percent of quota).
A disbursement equivalent to SDR 1.21 million would be available upon Executive Board
approval of this arrangement. Also, we are requesting interim-HIPC assistance from the
Fund, which Congo is eligible to receive having reached the decision point in March 2006,
and since financing assurances from external creditors accounting for 80 percent of the total
HIPC assistance have now been received. This assistance, in the amount of SDR 77,000, will
be used to cover 98 percent of PRGF interest payments falling due during a twelve-month
period from the time the Executive Board approves our proposed program.
In support of our request for a new arrangement, we observed the prior action on
raising fuel prices, which we undertook on October 1, 2008. Disbursements during the first
year of the program will be linked to program reviews based on biannual quantitative
performance criteria for end-December 2008 and end-June 2009 (Table 1). Also, our
structural reform efforts will be supported by the performance criteria and benchmarks
outlined in Table 2 of the MEFP.
We believe that the policies and measures set forth in the attached MEFP are
adequate to achieve the objectives of the program. During the implementation of the

38
arrangement, we will consult with Fund staff on the adoption of any measures that may be
appropriate and on any revisions to the policies contained in the MEFP, at the initiative of
the government or whenever the Fund staff requests such a consultation.
The government intends to make the contents of this letter and those of the attached
MEFP, as well as the staff report accompanying its request for a three-year PRGF
arrangement, available to the public and authorizes the Fund to arrange for them to be posted
on the Fund’s website, subsequent to Executive Board approval of its request.
We can assure you, Mr. Managing Director that the government of the Republic of
Congo is determined to fully implement the program supported by the PRGF arrangement,
and to move to the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative as soon as possible.
Sincerely yours,
/s/
Pacifique Issoïbeka
Minister of Economy, Finance, and Budget

Attachment: Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies, 2008-11

39
APPENDIX I—ATTACHMENT I
Memorandum of Economic and Financial
Policies, 2008–11
Brazzaville, November 19, 2008
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
During the first semester of this year, we implemented a Staff-Monitored Program
(SMP), as a means of demonstrating our commitment and capacity to pursue an economic
and financial program that could be supported by financial resources from the Fund. This
SMP has led to an improvement in public finances, strengthened governance and
transparency over the use of public resources, and supported progress toward implementing
the floating completion point triggers under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Initiative.
2.
Under the proposed PRGF arrangement, we intend to continue to implement the
medium-term economic and financial strategy that was outlined in the SMP. This mediumterm strategy, which is aligned with the government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) that
was adopted in May 2008, aims at supporting continued robust growth in the non-oil sector,
low inflation, and gradual fiscal consolidation to preserve the nation’s oil wealth, enhanced
public financial management, financial sector development, and reforms in the oil sector.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
3.
Macroeconomic performance has been generally strong during the past several years,
although overall economic growth has been affected by disruptions in oil production. Per
capita income has increased and we have made progress toward achieving the Millennium
Development Goals; however, higher output and employment will be needed in the period
ahead to reduce poverty durably.
•

An accident at the Nkossa oil platform led to a decline in overall real GDP last year,
but we expect growth to reach 7.6 percent this year. Economic activity in the non-oil
sector continues to be strong, which is being supported by the recovery in oil
production, and growth in the telecommunication, construction, and transport sectors.

•

Inflation has picked up recently, mainly reflecting high food and energy prices. In the
twelve months through June 2008, consumer prices rose by 5.7 percent and the
expectation is for a further small rise in prices through the rest of this year, before
moderating in 2009.

40
•

Supported by favorable world oil prices, debt rescheduling under the Paris Club and
debt relief from most London Club creditors in the context of the enhanced HIPC
Initiative, our external position has strengthened considerably. We project a current
account surplus of about 0.6 percent of GDP in 2008, compared with a deficit of
nearly 26 percent of GDP last year, and the outstanding stock of external public debt
should decline to about 52 percent of GDP, compared with 81½ percent two years
earlier. Regrettably, we have accumulated external arrears with some Paris Club
creditors (about CFAF 10 billion). This has arisen because we have been servicing
our external debt according to the 2004 rescheduling, which was not fully
implemented as our previous PRGF arrangement went off track. We are in contact
with these creditors and will address these arrears ahead of our request for a new
PRGF arrangement. We are continuing to negotiate with litigating creditors with the
intention of reaching a settlement soon, and we are cognizant of the need for
comparability of treatment with other creditors. Also, in the context of the June 2006
framework agreement, we are discussing with the Chinese authorities the prospects
for concessional financing (grant element of 52.7 percent, according to Fund staff
estimates), amounting to about US$ 1 billion to accelerate infrastructure investment.

•

Relatively high world oil prices, together with expenditure discipline and strong nonoil tax collections, has led to an improvement in the fiscal position. Fiscal
developments through June 2008 suggest that we are on track to achieve the targeted
reduction in the non-oil basic primary balance, bringing it to about 43 percent of nonoil GDP this year.

4.
Recently, we have made progress in structural reform, particularly in the areas of
public financial management and addressing problems in the oil sector. With the help of our
development partners, we adopted and began implementing a public financial management
action plan, in February 2008 we became a candidate country to the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) and we are working toward completing the first EITI report
before the end of this year, and we completed the requirements to disburse interim HIPC
assistance resources. We have nearly completed the necessary measures to better control and
manage public investment, including an audit of past investments, the creation of an interministerial committee and an advisory body (with membership of Fund and World Bank
staff) to provide guidance and project appraisal, and we prepared a draft three-year action
plan, which should be finalized by the end of this year. In the oil sector, we have begun to
implement an action plan to improve the operating and financial performance of the stateowned oil refinery, CORAF, prepared a draft strategy to address institutional and procedural
deficiencies in the commercialization of Congolese oil by SNPC, and continued to certify oil
revenue, to safeguard our oil resources.

41
III. MEDIUM-TERM OBJECTIVES AND POLICY FRAMEWORK
5.
The PRS provides the foundation for the government’s medium-term policy
framework. The PRS seeks to diversify the economy and reduce our dependency on oil,
enhance governance and transparency in the use of public resources, build human and
physical capital to raise potential output growth, and consolidate macroeconomic stability.
6.

To support these objectives, economic policies over the medium term will be set to:

•

Achieve more robust growth in the non-oil sector─about 8 percent per year─to lift
per capita income and generate employment, especially in rural areas, where poverty
is high. In this regard, rebuilding the country’s infrastructure is critical and we place
high priority on investment projects in transportation (railway, roads, and ports),
energy and water, agriculture, and the social sector (schools, hospitals).

•

Maintain low and stable inflation of about 3 percent per year, in line with the
CEMAC convergence criterion, which should help preserve Congo’s international
competitiveness under the fixed exchange rate regime.

•

Consolidate the fiscal position to preserve the nation’s oil wealth. In this context, the
fiscal adjustment will be kept consistent with long-term fiscal sustainability, based on
an annual decline in the non-oil basic primary deficit of about 3-4 percent of non-oil
GDP per year. To reduce this deficit from the projected 43.2 percent of non-oil GDP
in 2008 to 33½ percent in 2011, we will continue to maintain tight control of
spending, while ensuring sufficient resources to support growth-enhancing and
poverty reducing social policies and much needed infrastructure investment; further
improve public financial management; continue to enhance tax and customs
administration.

•

Secure external sustainability through prudent debt management, including pursuing
grant financing and limiting borrowing to only highly concessional loans, and
achieving HIPC debt relief.

•

Regularize relations with domestic creditors by continuing to implement the plan to
clear domestic arrears, which will enhance the credibility of fiscal policy.

•

Ensure that our finite oil resources contribute fully to the development of our
economy. In this regard, we intend to develop a sector strategy (with the assistance of
our development partners) and rationalize the operations of the state-owned
enterprises in this area.

•

Develop the financial sector, since financial deepening and more efficient
intermediation are needed for the private sector to flourish.

42
IV. THE PROGRAM FOR 2008-09
7.
The short-term economic outlook continues to appear favorable, with relatively high
world oil prices, the full resumption of oil production from the Nkossa field, and the start of
production in the new Moho Bilondo field. The recovery of oil production will help generate
economic activity in the non-oil sector, and, combined with increased public investment and
strong domestic demand, should help to lift overall real GDP growth to 7.6 percent this year
and to nearly 13 percent in 2009. Although inflation is likely to remain relatively high this
year, at about 4½ percent on average, it should moderate somewhat in 2009 as the impact of
recent high food and energy costs dissipate. To support our broad macroeconomic objectives,
the fiscal stance will remain firm and the regional monetary authority will target the growth
of the money aggregates in line with the expansion of non-oil GDP. Structural policies will
aim at continuing to strengthen public financial management, enhance governance and
transparency over the use of public resources, and financial and oil sector reforms. At the
same time, we intend to make a concerted effort to implement the triggers under the
enhanced HIPC Initiative.
A. Fiscal Policy
8.
Fiscal policy will continue to be an important instrument for implementing the
economic policy framework defined in the PRS, and in preserving the country’s oil wealth.
It will be supported by the implementation of the public financial management action plan as
well as of the action plan to improve public investment management (see below). In this
regard, we have maintained the broad fiscal targets established under the Staff-Monitored
Program for 2008, including a reduction in the non-oil basic primary balance to about
43.2 percent of non-oil GDP, from 55¾ percent last year. In response to the rise in food and
energy prices earlier this year and to take account of higher-than-initially projected oil and
non-oil revenue, we have adopted a supplementary budget for this year─consistent with
achieving the envisaged fiscal consolidation─which includes a temporary reduction of valueadded taxes and tariffs on some food stuffs and other staples consumed predominately by the
poor, and additional spending on agriculture, transportation, and generic drugs. The
supplementary budget also includes CFAF 25 billion (about 1.6 percent of non-oil GDP) in
capital spending financed from interim HIPC assistance resources. These resources can be
utilized now that the conditions for their use have been fully met. Also, from now on, the
budget will bear the full cost of oil subsidies (estimated at CFAF 75 billion this year).
9.
For 2009, the budget will target a further reduction of the non-oil basic primary
balance to about 40¼ percent of non-oil GDP. This adjustment would be achieved through a
modest (nominal) cut in expenditures and higher non-oil revenue. On the spending side, we
envisage lower outlays on goods and services, and fuel subsidies owing to the envisaged
increase in prices (see below), while allowing for an increase in pro-poor spending (in health
and education), and higher domestically-financed public investment (including through the

43
use of interim HIPC assistance resources). Domestically-financed investment is projected to
rise from 25.4 percent of non-oil GDP in 2008 to 26½ percent next year, reflecting the urgent
need to rehabilitate the economic infrastructure and the putting in place of the necessary
measures to ensure effective use of these resources. We expect to finalize and adopt the
three-year public investment management action plan being prepared with assistance from
our development partners, by end-December of this year (structural performance criterion).
10.
On the revenue side, we anticipate higher oil production but lower world oil prices,
which will lead to a decline in oil revenue to about 97 percent of non-oil GDP in 2009 (from
133 percent of non-oil GDP this year) At the same time, ongoing tax and custom
administration reform should more than offset the full-year impact of the recent tax and tariff
reductions to alleviate the adverse impact of higher food prices, resulting in a slight increase
in the non-oil revenue ratio to about 21.1 percent of non-oil GDP next year. To support the
monitoring of oil revenue, the program will include a continuous structural performance
criterion requiring the repatriation of the proceeds by the Treasury of oil shipments
commercialized by private oil companies and SNPC, within 45 days of their lifting
(according to the actual schedule of quantities and prices). Also, we will continue to certify
oil revenue on a quarterly basis through a reputable international auditor and post the results
of these audits and reply to any questions the auditor raises, on the government’s website
(continuous structural performance criterion).
11.
An important policy measure to free up budgetary resources for high priority
programs is our intention to adopt by end-March 2009 a new petroleum-product pricing
regime that will ensure fuel price subsidies are phased out by mid-2011 (structural
performance criterion). This new regime will ensure that prices are adjusted at regular
intervals, and will be free from political intervention. To prepare the public for this change in
policy, we adjusted fuel prices across-the-board on October 1, 2008 by an average of
13 percent (a prior action for Executive Board consideration of our request for a new threeyear PRGF arrangement). These price increases should lead to a decline in subsidies to no
more than CFAF 75 billion this year (about 4.8 percent of non-oil GDP). The full-year
impact of these price increases should bring subsidies down to CFAF 45 billion, or 2.5
percent of non-oil GDP next year.
B. Public Financial Management and Revenue Mobilization
12.
We will continue our efforts to strengthen public financial management (PFM)
through the implementation of the recently adopted PFM action plan. This action plan
involves reforms to procedures, monitoring, reporting, training, and computerization. Several
important aspects of the plan include: improvements in expenditure control through the
consolidation of government’s bank accounts into a single Treasury account with the central
bank; the preparation and submission to parliament a 2009 budget consistent with the targets
under the proposed PRGF arrangement, using economic, functional and administrative

44
classifications (structural performance criterion); the preparation of a medium-term
expenditure framework in consultation with development partners (structural performance
criterion); the simplification of the expenditure chain; and a unified payroll file for the civil
service. To maintain tight control over spending, the government will continue to prohibit the
recourse to emergency payment and cash advance procedures, except in situations called for
in the organic budget law. With assistance from the World Bank, we are reforming the
procurement code and will continue to publish on the government’s website all invitations to
bid and the bids themselves for contracts above CFAF 200 million. And as noted above, we
are also making a concerted effort to strengthen public investment management.
13.
To increase non-oil revenue, the government is pursuing a number of measures to
improve tax and customs administration. These measures involve better monitoring through
the use of a single-taxpayer identification number, computerization, the use of the
ASYCUDA software for customs, extending the tax services to the regions, and reducing tax
exemptions and refraining from new exemptions (except where permitted under international
treaties).
C. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies
14.
Monetary policy is conducted at the regional level by BEAC, in a manner consistent
with the fixed exchange rate regime, and keeping inflation low. Net foreign assets are
expected to increase significantly, primarily due to high oil production, and broad money is
expected to expand by about 13 percent next year, in line with the nominal growth of the
non-oil sector. To facilitate the implementation of monetary policy, the government has
steadily reduced the amount of statutory advances from the central bank, and should repay
them in full by year’s end. In the period ahead, it will work with the central bank and its
CEMAC partners to develop the regional securities market, in an effort to improve the
efficacy of monetary policy.
15.
We are also committed to strengthen the financial sector and deepen financial
intermediation. In this context, by the end of this year, we will adopt the financial sector
strategy established in collaboration with Fund staff, and that has benefited from input from
regional institutions (COBAC, BEAC, CIMA and CIPRES). This strategy aims to: (i) create
conditions for an expansion of private sector credit; (ii) strengthen the legal framework; (iii)
improve the information on the cost of credit and default; (iv) diversify the financial
instruments; (v) reform the pension funds based on the results of recent audits; and (vi)
implement the recommendations of the audit of the insurance sector and of ARC. In this
context, we intend to finalize the corporate financial statement registry and the central credit
bureau by early next year.
16.
Earlier, we undertook to reform the payment system and put in place the electronic
transfer of balances between banks. We will strengthen the supervisory mechanisms of the
microfinance institutions in cooperation with COBAC. Finally, the accounting framework

45
and the software that will allow the supervision of microfinance institutions by the COBAC
are expected to be in place during 2009.
D. External Sector Policies
17.
The program places important emphasis on trade liberalization as a means to improve
Congo’s international competitiveness, increase market size, and integrate it further in the
regional and global market. In this context, the government will continue to encourage its
CEMAC partners to reduce the maximum tariff rate under the common external tariff (to
20 percent), remove the remaining exemptions, surcharges and export taxes, harmonize rules
of origin, and enhance trade facilitation.
18.
The government will hold to the position that development should be financed mainly
with its own resources, and it will seek grants and assistance only on highly concessional
terms (with a minimum grant element of 50 percent). It will continue to use its best efforts to
obtain comparable treatment from suppliers, non-London Club creditors, and litigating
creditors. Likewise, we will seek to complete negotiations with the last remaining Paris Club
creditor as soon as possible. Finally, we will continue to enhance our debt management
capacity and will implement a new strategy, in line with CEMAC guidelines.
E. Oil Sector Reform
19.
The government places high priority to ensuring the oil sector makes a positive longterm contribution to Congo’s economic development. In this regard, we will undertake a
strategic study of the sector─assisted by our development partners─which we expect to
finalize in mid-2009. Among other things, this study will make a critical assessment of the
institutions and enterprises operating in the sector.
20.
Notwithstanding this study, the government will continue to take efforts to improve
the operating and financial performance of the national oil refinery (CORAF) and improve
the returns from the commercialization of government oil (through SNPC); these remain
important aspects of the governance agenda. In the coming months, the government will
implement the action plan adopted earlier this year to reform CORAF; as for the
commercialization of Congolese oil, the government will refine the draft strategy presented
to development partners earlier this year, with a view to putting in place a comprehensive
action plan with a timetable to address institutional and procedural deficiencies in this
activity, to bring them in line with best international practice by end-March 2009 (structural
performance criterion). International best practice would imply prices, marketing
mechanisms, and fees that are comparable to those in other small oil-producing countries.

46
F. Program Monitoring for 2008-09
21.
The first year of the program will be monitored through reviews based on biannual
quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2008 and end-June 2009 (Table 1) and
structural performance criteria and benchmarks (Table 2). Detailed definitions and reporting
requirements for all quantitative performance criteria and structural conditions are contained
in the accompanying Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU). The authorities will
make available to Fund staff all core data, appropriately reconciled and on a regular and
timely basis, as specified in the TMU.
22.
The government’s request for a three-year PRGF arrangement was made conditional
upon the satisfactory implementation of one prior action. This prior action (Table 2) related
to across-the-board increases in fuel prices by an average of 13 percent, leading to a
projected decline in subsidies to no more than CFAF 75 billion in 2008. The required price
adjustments were implemented on October 1, 2008.
23.
The first review under the PRGF arrangement is expected to be completed by April
30, 2009, with the second review by October 31, 2009.

47
Table 1. Republic of Congo: Quantitative Targets, 2008-09
(Billions of CFA francs, unless otherewise indicated; cumulative from January)
End-Dec. 08
Perf. Criteria

End-Mar. 09
Indicative Target

End-Jun. 09
Perf. Criteria

End-Sep. 09
Indicative Target

End-Dec. 09
Indicative Target

Quantitative targets
Nonoil primary fiscal balance (floor)

-673

-211

-412

-560

-710

New medium or long-term nonconcessional external
debt (including leasing) contracted or
guaranteed by the government (ceiling) 1, 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New external debt (including leasing) with an
original maturity of less than one year (ceiling) 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New oil-collateralized external debt contracted by
or on behalf of the central government (ceiling) 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New nonconcessional external debt with a maturity of more than 1 year
contracted or guaranteed by SNPC (ceiling) 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New external arrears on nonreschedulable debt 2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2,079
328

402
93

820
186

1,259
280

1,716
373

New domestic arrears

2

Memorandum items
Oil revenue
Non-oil primary revenue
1
2

Excluding rescheduling arrangements and disbursements from the IMF; the minimum grant element is set to 50 percent.
Continuous.

48
Table 2. Prior Action, Structural Performance Criteria, and Benchmarks Under the PRGF Arrangement, 2008-09
Measures
Prior action

Timing

Increase domestic petroleum prices across all products, by an average
of 13 percent, which should lead to a decline in subsidies to no more
than CFAF 75 billion in 2008.

Observed

Performance Criteria
Prepare the 2009 budget consistent with the PRGF program, and using
the economic, functional, and administrative classifications.

End- Dec. 2008

Finalize and adopt the three-year action plan to improve public
investment management prepared with assistance from the IMF, World
Bank, and the French Cooperation; and publish the plan on the
government website.

End-Dec. 2008

Adopt a new petroleum-pricing regime that will ensure fuel price
subsidies are phased out by mid-2011.

End-Mar. 2009

Adopt a comprehensive action plan with a timetable to address
institutional and procedural deficiencies in the commercialization of
Congolese oil, in line with best international practice.

End-Mar. 2009

Prepare a medium-term expenditure framework (in consultation with
development partners) consistent with the Poverty Reduction Strategy
(PRS).

June 2009

Quarterly certification of oil revenue by an internationally reputable audit
firm, using the same specifications as for the 2003 certification and with
no restrictions on access to information; certification reports to be
published on the website of the Ministry of Economy, Finance, and
Budget (www.mefb-cg.org). Also, the government will post the audit
report on the website, and for each report, a note addressing the
comments by the auditors.

Continuous, with a one-quarter lag

Repatriation of the oil proceeds (to the Treasury) of oil shipments
commercialized by private companies and SNPC on behalf of the
government within 45 days after the actual shipment date (according to
actual quantities, prices, and shipment dates).

Continuous

Benchmarks
Adoption by the government of the financial sector strategy developed
in consultation with Fund staff.

Dec. 2008

Finalize the strategic study of the oil sector─assisted by Congo’s
development partners─which will include a critical assessment of the
institutions and enterprises, including CORAF.

End-June 2009

Publication of all invitations to bid and the bids themselves for
government procurement contracts above CFAF200 million on the
government’s website (www.mefb-cg.org).

Continuous

No recourse to emergency payment and cash advance procedures,
except in situations stated in the organic budget law.

Continuous

49

APPENDIX I—ATTACHMENT II
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
Brazzaville, November 19, 2008

1.
This technical memorandum of understanding (TMU) describes the definitions that
are intended to clarify the measurement of the quantitative performance criteria and
indicators in Table 1 of the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP)
covering 2008-11, attached to the Letter of Intent. For end-December 2008, all quantitative
performance criteria and indicators will be evaluated in terms of cumulative flows from
December 31, 2007; after this period, all quantitative performance criteria and indicators will
be evaluated in terms of cumulative flows from December 31, 2008. Also, the TMU specifies
the periodicity and deadlines for transmission of data to the staff of the IMF for program
monitoring purposes.
I. DEFINITIONS AND COMPUTATION
A. Government
2.
Unless otherwise indicated, government is defined as the central government of the
Republic of Congo and does not include local governments, the central bank, and any public
entity with autonomous legal personality (i.e., wholly- or partially-owned state enterprises)
not currently covered by the government’s consolidated financial operations table (tableau
des opérations financières de l’Etat—TOFE).
B. Basic Primary Fiscal Balance
3.
The scope of the government’s financial operations table (TOFE) includes the
general budget and the special accounts of the Treasury (including the forestry and road
funds) and the government debt management agency (Caisse Congolaise d’Amortissement,
CCA).
4.
The government’s non-oil basic primary fiscal balance is defined as total non-oil
revenue excluding grants, minus total expenditure (including net credit), which is to exclude
interest payments on debt, foreign-financed capital expenditure, and expenditure financed by
interim assistance under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. It
is calculated from the budget execution outturn reported every month in the TOFE prepared
by the Ministry in charge of finance.

50

5.
The government’s total revenue is reported in the TOFE on a cash basis. It includes
all revenue collected by the Treasury (from tax and customs receipts, oil, services and
forestry), whether they result from past, current, or future obligations. Receipts also include
those recorded on a gross basis, in special accounts.
6.
Oil revenue is defined as the government’s net proceeds from the sale of oil,
including the provision for diversified investments, royalties paid by oil companies, and the
government’s share of excess and profit oil. It excludes all forms of prepayment and
prefinancing. The oil revenue projections take account of the 45 day lag between the date of
shipment and the date of receipt of the sale proceeds by the Treasury.
7.
Expenditures are recorded on a payment order basis. They include current
expenditure, domestically-financed capital expenditure, foreign-financed capital expenditure,
and net lending. Current expenditures include expenditures on wages, goods and services,
common charges, interests on debt (domestic and external), transfers and subsidies, and other
current expenditures. Subsidies to the state-owned oil refinery, CORAF, are estimated on the
basis of the enterprises income statement.
C. Foreign Debt and External Arrears
8.
The definition of government used for the various external debt indicators includes
government, as defined in paragraph 2, public institutions of an administrative nature
(Etablissements Publics Administratifs), public institutions of a scientific and/or technical
nature, public institutions of a professional nature, public institutions of an industrial and/or
commercial nature (Entreprises Publiques d’Intérêt Commercial), and local governments,
with the sole exception of the national oil company (SNPC)—see paragraph 12 below.
9.
For the purposes of this memorandum, debt and concessional loans are defined as
follows:
•

As specified in the guidelines adopted by the Executive Board of the IMF, debt will
be understood to mean a current, i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a
contractual arrangement through the provision of value in the form of assets
(including currency) or services, and which requires the obligor to make one or more
payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future
point(s) in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities
incurred under the contract. Debts can take a number of forms, the primary ones
being as follows: (i) loans, i.e., advances of money to the obligor by the lender made
on the basis of an undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the future
(including deposits, bonds, debentures, commercial loans and buyers’ credits) and
temporary exchanges of assets that are equivalent to fully collateralized loans under

51

which the obligor is required to repay the funds, and usually pay interest, by
repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future (such as repurchase
agreements and official swap arrangements); (ii) suppliers’ credits, i.e., contracts
where the supplier permits the obligor to defer payments until some time after the
date on which the goods are delivered or services are provided; and (iii) leases, i.e.,
arrangements under which property is provided which the lessee has the right to use
for one or more specified period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total
expected service life of the property, while the lessor retains the title to the property.
The debt is the present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments
expected to be made during the period of the agreement, excluding those payments
that cover the operation, repair, or maintenance of the property. Under the definition
of debt set out above, arrears, penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from
the failure to make payment under a contractual obligation that constitutes debt are
debt. Failure to make payment on an obligation that is not considered debt under this
definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will not give rise to debt.
•

Loan concessionality is assessed on the basis of the commercial interest reference
rates (CIRRs) established by the OECD. A loan is said to be on concessional terms if,
on the date of conclusion of the contract, the ratio of the net present value of the loan,
calculated on the basis of the reference interest rates, to its nominal value is less than
50 percent (i.e., a grant element of at least 50 percent). For debts with a maturity
exceeding 15 years, the ten-year reference interest rate published by the OECD is
used to calculate the grant element. For shorter maturities, the six-month market
reference rate is used.

•

The concessionality requirement applies not only to the central government, but also
covers debt incurred by public enterprises.

10.
The quantitative indicative target with respect to external debt apply not only to debt
as defined in the above-mentioned guidelines, but also to commitments incurred or
guaranteed for which no value has yet been received or on which only partial drawings have
been made. However, this does not apply to financing from the IMF or to Treasury bills and
bonds issued by the Congolese Treasury in CFA francs on the CEMAC regional market.
11.
For external debt with an initial maturity of less than one year (a continuous
quantitative performance criterion), normal short-term import and export credit are excluded
from the scope of the indicator, including the prepayments.
12.
The ceiling on any new nonconcessional external debt with a maturity of more
than one year contracted or guaranteed by the SNPC, with or without government
guarantee, will be observed continuously. The SNPC may borrow only to finance

52

investments related to its core activities (research, exploration, production, refining and
distribution of oil, construction of a Brazzaville headquarters, creation and strengthening of
its database, etc.). In addition, these investments must be included in the SNPC’s investment
budget approved by its board of directors. The ceiling on debt does not apply to changes in
loan accounts with oilfield partners or to loans with maturities of less than one year.
13.
The accumulation by the government of external payment arrears is the difference
between (i) the gross amount of external debt service payments due (principal and interest,
including penalty and/or late interest, as appropriate) and (ii) the amount actually paid during
the period under consideration. Under the program, the government commits itself to not
accumulate external payment arrears on non-reschedulable debt (that is, debt to Paris Club
creditors contracted after the cutoff date and debt to multilateral creditors). Nonaccumulation of external payment arrears is an indicator to be continuously observed.
D. Oil-Collateralized External Debt and Oil Prepayments
14.
Oil-collateralized external debt is external debt which is contracted by giving an
interest in oil. Prefinancing is defined as an oil-collateralized loan which is repaid by the sale
of the oil in a different calendar year. New prefinancing by or on behalf of the government is
strictly prohibited under the program. The refinancing and/or deferral of the existing stock
and/or due dates are permitted but should not give rise to an augmentation of the existing
stock of oil-collateralized debt.
15.
A prepayment is defined as an advance payment by the purchaser of oil on a specific
oil shipment. Prepayment-related operations must be repaid within 6 months but in any case
within the calendar year in which they were contracted.
E. Payment Arrears and Domestic Debt
16.
Domestic payment arrears of the government are equivalent to the difference over the
period under review between the amount of payments authorized and the actual payments
made (within 90 days).
II. INFORMATION FOR PROGRAM MONITORING
17.
The government will submit the following information to the staff of the IMF through
its Resident Representative, and within the time period specified below.

53

A. Oil Sector
18.
Regarding the oil sector, the government will submit the following information to
IMF staff within four weeks after the end of the month:
•

the monthly data on oil production by oil field, production costs, volume exported,
export prices, and the operations of the national oil company (SNPC);

•

the breakdown concerning the share of crude oil that accrues to the government, by
oil field, distinguishing the type of resource to which this share relates (royalties,
profit oil, etc.);

•

any change in the tax parameters;

•

a breakdown of oil prices;

•

a monthly detailed list of shipments commercialized by SNPC on behalf of the
government, including information on the type of product, the date of loading, the
recipient, the number of barrels and the selling price (in US dollars and CFAF) as
well as the date of receipt of the sale proceeds by the Treasury; and

•

actual and projected quarterly data to determine the required subsidies in the fuel
sector, including prices, quantities, and costs.
B. Government Finance

19.
Regarding government finance, the government will submit the following
information to IMF staff:
•

A table on government fiscal operations (TOFE) and its annexes. The annexed tables
include (i) the breakdown of oil revenue in value terms with the corresponding notes
on computation, (ii) excess oil trends and any bonus payments, (iii) the breakdown of
tax and non-tax revenue, and central government expenditure, particularly transfers
and common charges; and (iv) a report on the amounts of and rationales for
emergency payment and cash advance procedures. The provisional TOFE and its
annexes will be reported monthly within four weeks from the end of the month,
whereas the final TOFE and its annexes will be reported within six weeks from the
end of each month.

•

Monthly data on the prices and taxation of petroleum products. These data will
include: (i) the price structure in effect during the month; (ii) the details of

54

computation of the price structure, (f.o.b. Mediterranean price) at retail prices,
including the border impact prices, taxes, transit costs, economic adjustments, exrefinery prices (for CORAF and imports), entry distribution prices, margins and fees,
transport costs and losses, financing expenses, and insurance ; (iii) amounts released
for sale; and (iv) a breakdown of the tax revenue from oil products—customs duties
and value-added tax—and direct/indirect subsidies incurred by the budget. These data
will be reported within four weeks from the end of the month.
•

The Treasury balance to monitor expenditures. It will include the amount of
commitments, payment orders, and payments, for both current and capital
expenditure. It will be produced on a quarterly basis, and submitted to Fund staff no
later than four weeks after the end of each quarter.

•

Data on implementation of the public investment program, including the breakdown
relating to financing sources. If the data on the execution of investments financed
with foreign grants and loans are not available on schedule, a linear estimate of
execution in comparison with annual forecasts will be used. These data will be
reported on a quarterly basis within four weeks from the end of the quarter.

•

Complete monthly data on domestic financing of the budget (net bank credit to, and
net non-bank credit to the government). These data will be reported monthly within
four weeks from the end of the month.

•

The table used to monitor the expenditure process will list the amount of
commitments, payment orders, and payments, for both operating and capital
expenditures. It will be produced on a quarterly basis, and submitted to Fund staff no
later than four weeks after the end of the quarter.

•

A quarterly table for monitoring poverty reduction expenditures, based on the propoor sectors defined in the poverty reduction strategy paper—basic health care and
education; infrastructure and rural integration; water and electricity; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; social protection, and agriculture). The quarterly
tables will be submitted within four weeks of the end of the quarter.

•

A monthly table of prepayments, which will also indicate the nature of the
expenditures (current transfers, investment, etc.) and the justification for the need to
use the prepayment option.

55

C. Monetary Sector
20.
The government will submit on a monthly basis, within four weeks of the end of the
month, the following preliminary information:
•

data on net bank credit to the government;

•

the consolidated balance sheet of the monetary institutions, the central bank survey,
and the commercial banks survey;

•

the integrated monetary survey;

•

the table of lending and deposit rates; and

•

the usual banking supervision indicators for banks and non-bank financial
institutions, where necessary.

21.
The final data for the integrated monetary survey will be transmitted within six weeks
of the end of the month.
D. Balance of Payments
22.

The government will submit the following information to IMF staff:

•

any revised balance of payments data (including services, private transfers, official
transfers, and transactions for the capital and financial account) as soon as the data
are revised; and

•

foreign trade statistics (volume and price) prepared by the national statistics agency
within three months of the end of the reporting month.
E. Debt

23.
The government will submit the following to the staff of the IMF within four weeks
of the end of the month:
•

data on the stock, accumulation, and payment of domestic arrears;

•

data on the stock, accumulation, and payment of external payment arrears;

•

a breakdown of estimated domestic and external public debt service, service due, and
actual payments, including breakdowns of principal and interest and by creditor;

56

•

the list and amounts of new external debt incurred or guaranteed by the government,
including detailed information on the terms and conditions (currency, interest rate,
grace period, and maturity) stated in the original agreement; and

•

actual disbursements of foreign financial assistance (project and non-project),
including new borrowing and any external debt relief granted by foreign creditors
(CCA tables).
F. Real Sector

24.

The government will submit the following to the staff of the IMF:

•

monthly itemized consumer price indices, within four weeks of the end of the month;

•

any revision of the national accounts; and

•

any other indicators and statistical data used to track overall economic developments,
including information on activity in the forestry sector and wood-processing industry,
as well as the short-term economic bulletins prepared monthly.
G. Structural Reforms and Other Data

25.

The government will submit the following information to the IMF staff:

•

a monthly detailed table concerning the implementation of structural measures under
the program;

•

any study or official report on the economy of the Republic of Congo, within two
weeks of its publication; and

•

any decision, order, law, decree, ordinance, or circular having economic or financial
implications for the program, within two weeks from the time it is published, or,
at the latest, from its entry into force.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
REPUBLIC OF CONGO
Joint IMF and World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by staffs of the International Monetary Fund and
the International Development Association
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and David Marston (IMF)
and Carlos Braga and Sudhir Shetty (World Bank)
November 19, 2008

Based on the joint IMF-World Bank Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income
Countries, Congo’s gross external debt is assessed at high risk of distress.1 Owing mainly to
the debt relief from London Club creditors in November 2007, Congo’s debt ratios have
improved significantly over the past year. Debt ratios are projected to decline further over
the long term, reflecting buoyant oil revenue and continued fiscal consolidation. However,
an alternative scenario demonstrates that Congo is vulnerable to movements in oil prices;
consequently, pursuing a prudent fiscal stance is critical to achieving debt sustainability.
VI. INTRODUCTION
1.
The previous DSA was carried out during the 2007 Article IV consultation, based on
the outstanding stock of debt at end-June 2006.2 The analysis concluded that, under the longterm scenario that assumes the continuation of policies prevailing in 2006, the risk of debt
distress in Congo was high, even after accounting for the full unconditional delivery of HIPC
and MDRI assistance.
2.
Congo’s net public debt has declined significantly during the past several years.3
Three developments have contributed to this decline: (i) debt restructuring from the Paris
1

This takes into account the classification of Congo as a weak performer, with an average CPIA rating for the
past three years of 2.74.
2

This analysis can be found in Appendix I of Country Report No. 07/205.

3

Public debt includes central government debt only. Net debt is defined as external and domestic debt less
liquid financial assets. Liquid financial assets are government deposits at the central bank, which, apart from the
funds in the operations account, are allocated into one of three accounts to help manage the large oil savings: (i)

(continued…)

2
Club; (ii) debt relief from London Club commercial creditors in 2007, which significantly
lowered the stock of external arrears; and (iii) favorable world oil prices, which strengthened
the external position and public finances.4
3.
In 2007, total external debt is estimated at US$ 6.3 billion or 73 percent of GDP
(down from 255 percent in 2004) and its net present value is slightly above US$ 5 billion
(Table 1). The bulk of this debt is owed to bilateral official creditors and commercial
creditors, whose shares represent 65 and 27 percent of outstanding debt, respectively;
multilateral creditors only account for 8 percent. More than two thirds of domestic payment
arrears (which accounted for about 99 percent of the total domestic debt) were repaid over
the last two years. At end-2007, domestic debt stood at 8 percent of GDP.
Table 1. Republic of Congo: Net Present Value of Disbursed Debt Outstanding, 2007-13
(Millions of U.S. dollars)

2007
Actual

2008

2009

2010
2011
Projected

Total

5282.6

5090.4

4841.8

Multilateral
IDA
IMF
Others

323.4

317.2

311.1

300.0

282.5

260.8

239.3

162.3
33.4

166.6
34.4

171.0
35.4

174.0
33.9

174.7
29.9

174.4
23.2

173.3
16.2

127.6

116.2

104.7

92.0

77.9

63.1

49.9

Official bilateral
Paris Club
Non-Paris Club

3213.3
2896.9
316.4

3059.2
2740.7
318.5

2902.1
2597.9
304.2

2878.3
2592.7
285.7

2849.9
2592.4
257.5

2780.9
2552.3
228.6

2711.6
2513.1
198.5

Commercial

1745.9

1714.1

1628.6

1540.0

1447.9

1343.8

1232.8

4718.3

4580.4

2012

2013

4385.5

4183.7

Sources: Congolese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

4.
Since the previous DSA, there have been important developments on Congo’s
creditor relations. The authorities concluded agreements with the London Club and all but
one of its bilateral Paris Club creditors, and are negotiating in good faith with the remaining
commercial and litigating creditors. The authorities have reportedly paid the equivalent of
5.2 percent of non-oil GDP to the litigating creditors to keep the discussions moving forward.
short-term deposits (1-month minimum maturity), (ii) stabilization account (6-month minimum maturity), and
(iii) a fund for future generations (5-year minimum maturity).
4

The agreement involved the swap of US$2.1 billion in outstanding commercial debt and arrears of
US$0.5 billion in new Eurobonds maturing in 2029, implying relief of over US$1.6 billion. The participation
rate was over 92 percent. The agreement was broadly consistent with the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

3
The authorities are cognizant of the need for comparability of treatment of creditors; and for
reaching agreements that are─to the extent possible─fair to all of them.
5.
The authorities are making significant progress in strengthening debt
management. Although not regularly, Congo is already publishing quarterly debt service
projections on the government’s website and is preparing a new external debt management
strategy, in line with CEMAC regional guidelines. The strategy will benefit from technical
assistance, such as the debt management performance assessment recently conducted by the
government, from the regional central bank and the World Bank, following the DeMPA
methodology.
VII. KEY MACROECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS IN THE BASELINE SCENARIO
6.
The main assumptions underlying the DSA are based on a macroeconomic
framework consistent with the proposed Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
arrangement and the authorities’ Poverty Reduction Strategy paper. In broad terms, the
baseline scenario assumes (Table 2):
•

Real GDP growth of 3.4 percent over the long term, largely reflecting declining oil
production. The baseline takes account of proven oil reserves only, which amounted
to about 1.6 billion barrels at end-2006.

•

Inflation averaging 3 percent per year, in line with the CEMAC convergence
criterion.

•

A trend decline in exports and a worsening external current account balance, due to a
decline in oil production.

•

A strong fiscal position, mainly on account of a build up of financial assets as the
counterpart to continued fiscal consolidation (see below).

•

Medium-term world oil price projections are based on the most recent WEO
assumptions until 2013 (which imply prices rising from US$ 68 per barrel in 2009 to
US$ 83 per barrel in 2013) and constant in real terms thereafter.

4

Table 2. Republic of Congo: Macroeconomic Baseline Assumptions, 2008-28

Historical
Average
(1998-2007)

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Average
(2014-28)

Real GDP growth (percent)

3.4

7.6

12.7

12.3

1.3

1.8

1.4

3.4

Inflation (percent)
Exports of G&S (U.S. dollars terms, percent change)

2.5
18.5

4.5
42.0

4.2
-6.7

3.0
36.8

3.0
-2.9

3.0
-4.9

3.0
-8.2

3.0
0.4

Imports of G&S (U.S. dollars terms, percent change)

14.7

19.6

-16.0

21.2

2.3

-5.4

-1.8

3.0

Current account balance (percent of GDP)

3.7

0.6

1.2

10.9

8.7

10.6

8.1

0.9

Foreign direct investment (percent of GDP)

9.9

23.7

21.3

22.7

21.5

20.8

17.7

12.2

Gross public debt (billions of US dollars)

...

5.6

5.8

5.7

5.7

5.8

5.8

5.6

Assets (government deposits, billions of US dollars)

0.3

3.2

4.6

7.5

10.5

13.5

16.3

18.7

50.1
489.7
45.6

51.5
487.5
47.0

43.9
485.4
48.4

42.4
483.3
48.5

31.8
481.1
48.9

Grant element of new external borrowing (percent)
Exchange rate (national currency per U.S. dollar, p.a.)
Government revenue and grants (percent of GDP)

...
598.2
32.1

50.9
444.7
49.0

24.9
412.6
42.0
derived from
-26.6
PIH

Non-oil balance (percent of non-oil GDP)

-34.6

-43.2

-40.2

-36.9

-33.5

-29.5

Oil production (millions of barrels)

89.7

89.0

109.6

133.2

119.6

107.4

94.2

46.4

WEO Oil prices

36.4

99.8

68.0

75.0

79.3

82.0

83.0

const. in real
terms

7.
The fiscal stance is set to achieve long-term sustainability. In this regard, the
baseline assumes a gradual reduction of the non-oil primary deficit─the program’s fiscal
anchor─and a consolidation path consistent with a permanent-income hypothesis model
(PIH)5. Based on this model, the sustainable non-oil primary deficit is estimated at about 35 percent of non-oil GDP, compared with more than 40 percent of non-oil GDP currently.
Specific fiscal assumptions include: (i) a peak in oil production of 133.2 million barrels in
2010, before declining gradually; (ii) world oil prices based on the latest WEO projections
until 2013 and constant in real terms thereafter; (iii) a quality discount on Congolese oil,6
which is assumed to remain constant over the long term; and (iv) a real rate of return on
government (financial) assets increasing gradually to about 3½ percent per year.
8.
The profile of new external borrowing is consistent with the concessionality
requirement under the proposed PRGF arrangement. Given that Congo has passed the
IDA-only income threshold in 2007, it is assumed to receive World Bank financing on
“hardened” terms from FY11 onwards, and to graduate to IBRD status in 2018.7 Anticipated
5

The permanent income hypothesis helps determine the level of the non-oil primary deficit that can be financed
over the long term from government oil revenue, including investment income from its accumulated financial
assets.

6

The discount on Congolese oil was between US$1 and US$ 25 per barrel in 2008, depending on the quality.
The discount on gas is somewhat larger, between US$ 35 and US$ 55 dollars per barrel.

7

If a country maintains its Gross National Income per capita above the annual IDA operational income cutoff
for two consecutive years, it receives IDA financing on “hardened” terms from the third year onwards. The
concessionality of hardened terms is lower than that of regular IDA credits as the maturity is reduced to 20

(continued…)

5
borrowing under the June 2006 framework agreement with China is included in the analysis.8
Domestic debt is assumed to be fully amortized over the next three years.
A. External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis
9.
In the baseline DSA, Congo’s external debt burden ratios indicate a high risk of
debt distress, although these ratios show a declining trend (Figure 1 and Table 3).
Despite the gradual reduction in the concessionality of new loans and the decline in oil
revenue, total external debt falls over time as income from financial assets offsets the
revenue loss caused by the decline in oil production.
•

The NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio breaches the indicative threshold during 2008-17, then
drops below the threshold in 2018 and remains there through the rest of the projection
period.9

•

The debt service-to-exports and debt service-to-revenue ratios are projected to be
below their respective thresholds throughout the projection period.

years, compared with 40 years for regular IDA credits. Other conditions remain the same. Graduation to IBRD
requires a country to be judged as creditworthy by the World Bank, a process that normally takes several years.
8

The authorities have provided the staffs with information on a number of infrastructure projects, which are to
be financed through concessional Chinese loans amounting to about US$1 billion. No loans have been signed
yet. The DSA assumes these loans are disbursed over 5 years, beginning in 2009. The authorities are negotiating
financial terms for all these loans of 20-year maturity, 5-year grace period, an interest rate of 0.25 percent, with
biannual repayments. The staffs estimate the grant element of these loans at about 52.7 percent. The impact of
these loans on the DSA is limited (they contribute to a temporary 5-percent increase in the NPV of debt-to-GDP
ratio) because (i) they account for a relatively small share of GDP (about 8 percent) and a fraction of the
financial assets the government is projected to accumulate over the medium-term and (ii) are concessional.
9

In judging Congo to be at high risk of debt distress currently, the staffs have taken account of the breach of the
NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio above the indicative threshold and the highly uncertain global economic environment
(volatile world oil prices, and global financial crisis and slowing growth), which suggests a cautious approach,
even though the long-term scenario indicates an adequate capacity to service external debt.

6
Table 3. Republic of Congo: External Debt Burden Indicators, 2008-28
Indicators
Thresholds

2008

2018

2028

40
50
82

29
45
65

19
38
54

30
100
200

5
8

6
8

5
7

15
25

1

NPV of debt in percent of:
GDP
Exports
Revenues (including grants)
Debt service in percent of:
Exports
Revenues (including grants)
1

Based on Congo's 2008 classification as a weak performer

10.
Standardized stress tests seem to point to Congo’s vulnerability to various
shocks. Under the most extreme stress test, net non-debt creating flows are lower than the
historical average (by one half standard deviation). Under this scenario, the NPV of external
debt-to-GDP rises to 66 percent in 2013. It should be noted, however, that this shock does
not constitute a particularly relevant benchmark for Congo as its economic performance
during the period used to perform these tests is affected by a structural break (the civil war),
and a temporary fall in oil production caused by an oil accident at the Nkossa oil platform.
11.
The historical scenario displays an unfavorable evolution of Congo’s debt ratios
over the medium term. Most ratios show a worsening trend and the NPV of debt-to-GDP
breaches the indicative thresholds early in the projection period, before improving markedly
thereafter. In the case of Congo, however, this scenario presents the same limitations as the
standardized stress tests.10
12.
Over the long term, total public debt evolves in a similar manner to external
debt. Given the projected repayment of the remaining domestic debt obligations over the
next several years, the evolution of total debt coincides with that of external debt.11 On a net
basis, both stock and flow indicators display a declining trend over time.
10

It should also be noted, more fundamentally, that the historical scenario introduced in the LIC DSA template
is not well suited to oil-producing countries like Congo, which can accumulate net foreign assets well beyond
prudential needs (i.e., more than the equivalent of a few months of imports). De facto, while this scenario
replaces the non-interest current account deficits and FDI by their historical averages, it also assumes that the
government accumulates the same level of reserves as under the baseline scenario. This latter assumption is
unrealistic for a country with ample reserves: in the event the authorities were facing less favorable external
developments (as assumed in the historical scenario), they would likely prefer to accumulate less reserves, rather
then undertake external borrowing (and higher gross debt) to maintain the level of reserves.
11

This assumes that there is no development of a domestic bond market in the future, which is contrary to
BEAC plans. This development would not, however, change the net debt and the sustainability of total public
debt.

7
•

The NPV of debt-to GDP becomes negative, because financial assets accumulate as a
result of fiscal consolidation under the baseline scenario;

•

The debt service-to-revenue falls to 7 percent by 2028, compared with 13 percent
currently.

13.
Congo’s net public debt does not appear to be vulnerable to the standardized
DSA stress tests (Figure 2). This is because the buildup of financial assets stemming from
fiscal consolidation provides a significant cushion against shocks. However, Congo’s public
debt appears vulnerable to oil price shocks and alternative assumptions on the conduct of
fiscal policy (elaborated in the alternative scenario B below).
VIII. ALTERNATIVE MACROECONOMIC SCENARIOS
14.
Two alternative scenarios are elaborated to highlight the impact of (i) the full delivery
of HIPC and MDRI relief at the completion point, which is assumed to take place in June
2010 and (ii) a combination of lower world oil prices and no fiscal adjustment.
A. Alternative scenario: HIPC and MDRI relief
15.
The first alternative scenario simulates full delivery of enhanced HIPC and
MDRI assistance to illustrate the importance of this debt relief for sustainability. Owing
to earlier relief granted by London Club creditors, the remaining debt relief due at the
completion point is relatively small compared to the savings from fiscal consolidation and,
consequently, has only a limited impact on sustainability:
•
•

The NPV of debt-to-GDP is on average about 4 percentage points lower than under
the baseline;
The NPV of debt service-to-exports is about ½ percentage point lower compared with
the baseline.
B. Alternative scenario: Lower World Oil Prices and No Fiscal Adjustment

16.
The second alternative scenario simulates a two-pronged shock: lower world oil
prices combined with no fiscal adjustment. Oil prices are 1 standard deviation lower over
the simulation period compared with the baseline, and the non-oil basic primary deficit in
percent of non-oil GDP is kept at the level recorded in 2007 (55 percent).12 Under these
assumptions, the rate of debt accumulation increases; it reaches 32 percent by 2028 as oil

12

The oil price shock is calibrated as one standard deviation of Brent crude prices over the period 1970-2006.
This reduces future oil prices by US$19 per barrel, corresponding to average prices of around US$49 per barrel
in 2009.

8
revenue declines and income from financial assets is not sufficient to offset the combined oil
shock and the lack of fiscal adjustment.
•

•

The NPV of debt-to-GDP breaches the indicative threshold in 2008 and remains
above this level throughout the projection period, rising sharply to 290 percent in
2028.
The debt service indicators also deteriorate, especially during the latter part of the
simulation period.
IX. CONCLUSION

17.
Under the baseline scenario, Congo’s external debt ratios indicate a high risk of
debt distress. This baseline is predicated on world oil prices at around US$ 77 over the
medium term, and a path of fiscal consolidation consistent with long-term sustainability.
Standardized stress tests and alternative scenarios, however, point to Congo’s vulnerability to
prolonged oil price shocks and slow fiscal adjustment.

9
Figure 1. Republic of Congo: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt under the
1
Baseline Scenario and Stress Tests, 2008-28
a. Debt Accumulation

3.0

60

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

80
70

2.0

50

1.0

40

0.0

30

-1.0

20

30

-2.0

10

20

60
50

-3.0

0
2008

2013

2018

Rate of Debt Accumulation

2023

2028

40

10
0
2008

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

2013

2018

2023

2028

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

140

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

250

120

200

100
150

80
60

100

40
50

20
0

0
2008

2013

2018

2023

2028

2008

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio
16

2018

2023

2028

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

30

14

2013

25

12
20

10

15

8
6

10

4
5

2

0

0
2008

2013
Baseline

2018

2023
2028
Historical scenario

2008

2013

Most extreme shock 1/

2018

2023
Threshold

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1

The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018. In figure b. it corresponds to a Combination shock; in
c. to a Exports shock; in d. to a Combination shock; in e. to a Exports shock and in picture f. to a Combination shock

2028

10

Republic of Congo: Indicators of Public Debt Under the Baseline Scenario and
Stress Tests, 2008-28 1
Baseline
50

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

0
-50
-100
-150
-200
-250
-300
-350
2008

2010

2012

200

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2022

2024

2026

2028

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

0
-200
-400
-600
-800
-1000
2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

20

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2018.

2

Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

11
Table 1a.: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2005-2028
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2005

2006

Estimate
2007

2008

Projections
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2018

2028

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

112.3
103.5

80.8
85.7

69.0
78.1

23.9
51.3

13.3
58.6

-14.0
46.3

-38.7
46.4

-62.8
46.7

-87.0
48.1

-168.8
36.8

-174.3
23.7

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

-124.3
-52.4
-19.1
38.8
0.2
19.7
-30.3
-23.0
-6.0
-17.0
-7.3
-3.0
0.0
0.0
-3.0
0.0
-71.9

-31.5
-52.7
-21.5
44.4
0.1
23.0
-27.8
-6.2
0.3
-6.6
-21.6
-3.4
0.0
0.0
-3.4
0.0
21.2

-11.8
-64.4
-13.9
43.1
0.4
29.2
1.5
0.6
-0.7
1.3
0.9
-52.1
-0.1
0.0
-52.0
0.0
52.6

-45.1
-38.9
-27.8
49.0
0.4
21.2
-11.1
-2.9
2.0
-4.9
-8.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-6.2

-10.6
-17.1
-19.2
45.6
0.5
26.3
2.1
-7.1
-4.4
-2.7
9.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.5

-27.3
-27.5
-25.1
47.0
0.6
21.8
-2.3
3.3
4.8
-1.5
-5.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-24.7
-24.8
-25.4
48.4
0.8
23.0
0.6
-0.6
-0.8
0.2
1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-24.1
-21.8
-24.7
48.5
0.8
23.8
2.9
1.1
0.4
0.7
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.3

-24.2
-22.3
-23.3
48.9
0.9
25.6
1.0
-1.6
-2.5
0.9
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.9

-11.5
-10.2
-17.1
45.4
1.0
28.3
6.9
6.6
1.1
5.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.2

4.8
5.5
-4.6
35.1
1.0
30.5
10.1
10.6
5.6
5.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7

Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

8.8
0.0
...
...
6.3
22.6
22.7
…
9.2
9.2
105.2

-4.9
0.0
...
...
-5.6
-11.1
-11.1
…
9.9
9.9
10.0

47.7
56.8
56.8
...
-7.4
110.8
111.9
133.1
6.4
6.5
-2.1

16.6
43.9
43.9
...
-2.1
33.8
34.1
90.4
3.3
3.4
17.3

-0.1
45.3
45.3
...
-19.6
-0.1
-0.1
100.3
2.7
2.8
-8.6

-24.5
35.8
35.8
...
-12.7
-52.1
-52.8
77.2
2.0
2.1
2.1

-49.2
35.9
35.9
...
-21.4
-101.5
-103.1
75.4
1.9
2.0
-0.7

-73.5
36.1
36.1
...
-22.4
-151.3
-153.9
75.5
2.2
2.2
-0.6

-98.0
37.1
37.1
...
-21.7
-200.3
-203.9
77.1
2.2
2.2
0.9

-177.0
28.7
28.7
...
-14.8
-389.7
-398.5
64.5
2.1
2.2
-5.6

-179.5
18.5
18.5
...
-3.0
-511.5
-526.9
54.4
1.8
1.9
-9.4

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

7.8
1.6
-13.5
-3.9
21.6
0.0
...

6.2
4.5
-11.4
-22.5
19.5
0.2
...

-1.6
2.7
3.6
-7.4
0.5
0.3
...

7.6
2.8
-24.2
-17.5
35.2
-0.2
50.5

12.7
2.1
30.9
...
-23.5
0.4
41.1

12.3
2.1
-11.5
...
13.7
-0.1
43.2

1.3
2.0
1.0
...
-0.7
0.1
41.6

1.8
2.3
...
...
-2.0
0.1
41.2

1.4
2.2
...
...
-3.6
0.1
37.4

3.6
2.5
...

2.9
2.8
...

Other Sustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ The central government net debt is used in the analysis.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

...

...

-0.5
0.0
26.5

2.2
0.0
19.3

12
Table 1b.: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2008-2028

2008

2009

2010

Projections
2011 2012

2013

2018

2028

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

17

0

-24

-49

-73

-98

-177

-179

17
17
17

9
-5
1

-7
-30
-24

-23
-56
-48

-42
-84
-75

-59
-114
-102

-112
-223
-189

-127
-320
-188

17
17
17
17
17

4
13
12
18
0

-19
2
-2
-10
-14

-42
-25
-28
-35
-39

-69
-51
-54
-62
-65

-94
-77
-78
-88
-91

-165
-159
-150
-174
-177

-131
-171
-125
-183
-187

34

0

-52

-102

-151

-200

-390

-511

34
34
34

19
-12
1

-16
-64
-50

-48
-115
-100

-86
-173
-155

-121
-232
-209

-247
-490
-417

-360
-910
-533

34
34
34
34
34

9
29
26
39
1

-40
4
-5
-22
-30

-87
-51
-57
-72
-80

-141
-106
-110
-127
-134

-191
-156
-160
-180
-186

-361
-351
-329
-383
-391

-369
-488
-356
-523
-532

13

14

8

6

6

6

8

7

13
13
13

16
14
15

18
3
8

24
3
7

26
3
7

27
3
8

27
-2
12

27
-34
19

13
13
13
13
13

16
14
16
17
14

14
19
21
11
8

17
26
29
10
6

19
13
22
10
6

21
10
21
10
6

26
10
25
14
8

39
13
38
13
7

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2008
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2009-2010
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2009

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

13
Table 2a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2005-2028 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Projections

Actual

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing
PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2018

2028

103.5
103.5
-110.7
-63.4
-6.9
-29.7
84.2
54.5
-0.5
-1.0
23.3
-8.4
-48.1
2.6
-12.7
-38.0
-47.4
-3.3

85.7
85.7
-17.8
-36.7
0.8
-18.5
84.2
65.6
0.3
-0.2
19.0
-19.2
-18.3
3.7
-5.1
-16.9
18.9
-4.1

78.1
78.1
-7.6
-0.4
23.8
2.8
82.1
84.9
0.5
-0.2
20.5
-27.5
3.2
2.3
1.4
-0.5
-7.2
-8.9

51.3
51.3
-26.8
-28.3
-2.0
-10.3
80.1
69.8
0.4
-0.1
7.8
-23.7
-2.6
1.5
-4.1
…
1.6
0.0

58.6
58.6
7.3
-31.2
-2.4
-18.6
86.7
68.0
0.0
-0.5
16.2
-22.4
-6.3
1.2
-7.6
…
38.5
0.0

46.3
46.3
-12.3
-35.4
-11.8
-28.3
92.9
64.6
-0.2
-0.6
16.7
-18.8
-4.7
0.9
-5.7
…
23.1
0.0

46.4
46.4
0.1
-27.1
-9.6
-24.0
89.7
65.7
-0.3
-0.8
14.7
-17.8
0.3
0.9
-0.6
…
27.2
0.0

46.7
46.7
0.3
-28.8
-11.7
-23.2
85.5
62.4
-0.4
-0.8
11.9
-17.3
0.2
1.1
-0.8
…
29.1
0.0

48.1
48.1
1.4
-24.0
-9.2
-17.7
80.3
62.6
-0.4
-0.9
8.9
-15.1
0.4
1.1
-0.7
…
25.3
0.0

36.8
36.8
-2.7
-16.4
-3.2
-1.9
64.3
62.5
-0.6
-1.0
-0.7
-12.8
-0.4
1.0
-1.4
…
13.6
0.0

23.7
23.7
-0.6
-9.3
2.7
10.8
48.9
59.7
-0.9
-1.1
-7.3
-12.0
0.0
0.6
-0.7
…
8.7
0.0

...
...
...
...
...
11.9
11.9
25.8
-0.3
103.9

...
...
...
...
...
13.3
13.3
25.3
-0.6
18.6

60.4
73.6
60.4
73.6
141.6
10.7
10.7
20.6
0.4
31.5

39.8
49.7
39.8
49.7
81.9
5.1
5.1
8.4
-2.4
24.8

45.3
52.3
45.3
52.3
100.5
5.3
5.3
10.1
-1.9
-9.7

35.8
38.6
35.8
38.6
77.3
2.8
2.8
5.7
-3.4
0.5

36.0
40.1
36.0
40.1
75.5
3.0
3.0
5.6
-3.1
-9.8

36.1
42.3
36.1
42.3
75.7
3.6
3.6
6.4
-3.2
-12.0

37.2
46.3
37.2
46.3
77.3
3.9
3.9
6.5
-2.6
-10.6

28.7
44.6
28.7
44.6
64.5
5.8
5.8
8.4
-1.6
-0.5

18.5
37.8
18.5
37.8
54.4
5.1
5.1
7.3
-1.4
3.3

7.8
21.6
1.6
36.9
40.4
...
38.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
...
...

6.2
19.5
4.5
26.9
52.8
...
44.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
...
...

-1.6
0.5
2.7
-3.5
28.0
...
42.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
...
...

7.6
35.2
2.8
42.0
19.6
50.5
48.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
75.3

12.7
-23.5
2.1
-6.7
-16.0
41.1
45.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.7
-104.0

12.3
13.7
2.1
36.8
21.2
43.2
46.4
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.3
53.4

1.3
-0.7
2.0
-2.9
2.3
41.6
47.7
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.6
55.5

1.8
-2.0
2.3
-4.9
-5.4
41.2
47.7
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.6
55.6

1.4
-3.6
2.2
-8.2
-1.8
37.4
48.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.7
52.9

3.6
-0.5
2.5
-1.4
0.8
26.5
44.4
0.1
0.1
0.0
1.2
57.0

2.9
2.2
2.8
4.5
5.9
19.3
34.1
0.2
0.2
0.0
1.2
39.0

6.1

7.7

7.7

11.1
-2.5

9.6
-0.7

12.3
0.4

12.3
0.4

12.3
0.1

12.0
0.2

13.2
-1.4

20.9
0.4

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Source: Staff simulations.
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S.D. terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes
contribution from price and exchange rate changes. The high residuals in this case, reflects the accumulation of reserves (from oil production).
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

14
Table 2b.: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028
(In percent)
Projections
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2018

2028

40

45

36

36

36

37

29

19

40
40

45
46

55
36

61
36

69
36

72
36

56
28

12
20

40
40
40
40
40
40

51
45
37
60
40
75

46
58
36
61
59
59

46
59
36
62
60
59

46
60
36
63
61
59

47
63
37
66
64
61

36
52
29
54
53
47

24
25
19
25
26
30

50

52

39

40

42

46

45

38

50
50

51
53

59
39

68
40

80
42

90
45

88
43

24
40

50
50
50
50
50
50

52
52
52
70
50
52

39
92
39
65
72
39

40
96
40
69
76
40

42
103
42
74
81
42

46
115
46
82
91
46

45
118
45
83
93
45

38
76
38
52
60
38

82

101

77

76

76

77

65

54

82
82

99
102

118
78

129
75

144
75

150
75

127
63

35
58

82
82
82
82
82
82

114
101
83
134
89
165

98
125
78
131
128
127

96
123
76
129
126
124

96
126
76
132
129
125

98
130
78
137
133
127

82
116
65
121
119
106

69
74
55
74
76
89

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

15
Table 2b.: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2008-2028 (continued)
(In percent)
Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline

5

5

3

3

4

4

6

5

5
5

4
5

3
3

3
3

3
4

4
4

6
5

4
4

5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5

3
4
3
3
3
3

3
5
3
4
4
3

4
6
4
4
5
4

4
7
4
5
6
4

6
14
6
10
11
6

5
12
5
9
10
5

8

10

6

6

6

6

8

7

8
8

8
10

5
6

6
6

6
7

6
7

9
8

6
6

8
8
8
8
8
8

11
10
8
10
8
17

7
6
6
6
6
9

7
7
6
7
7
9

8
8
6
8
8
11

8
8
7
8
8
11

11
14
8
15
14
14

9
12
7
12
12
12

26

26

26

26

26

26

26

26

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2008-2028 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2008-2028 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2009-2010 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2009 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly
assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF CONGO
Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation, Requests for a Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Interim
Assistance Under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
Financing Assurances Review─Informational Annex
Prepared by the African Department
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and David Marston
November 19, 2008

Contents
Annexes
I. Relations with the Fund .....................................................................................................2
II. JMAP Implementation Matrix ...........................................................................................5
III. Statistical Issues.................................................................................................................6

2
Annex I—Republic of Congo: Relations with the Fund
(As of September 30, 2008)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 07/10/1963; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
SDR Million

Percent Quota

84.60
84.03
0.58

100.00
99.33
0.68

SDR Million

Percent Allocation

9.72
0.16

100.00
1.67

SDR Million

Percent Quota

23.58

27.87

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve tranche position
III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
PRGF arrangements

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type
PRGF
PRGF
Stand-by arrangement

VI.

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

12/06/2004
06/28/1996
05/27/1994

06/05/2008
06/27/1999
05/26/1995

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)

54.99
69.48
23.16

23.58
13.90
12.50

Projected Payments to Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/interest
Total

2008

2009

0.00
0.13
0.13

0.00
0.36
0.360

Forthcoming
2010
2011
1.57
0.36
1.93

3.14
0.35
3.49

2012
4.72
0.33
5.04

3

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
The Republic of Congo reached the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in
March 2006.
I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed
by all creditors (US$ million) 1
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date

Enhanced Framework
March 2006
1,679.00
8.08
5.64
Floating

II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income 2

-----

VIII. Safeguards Assessments:
The Bank of the Central African States (BEAC) is the regional central bank of the
Central African States. The most recent safeguards assessment of the BEAC was
completed on August 30, 2004. The assessment found that the Bank has implemented a
number of measures to strengthen its safeguards framework since the 2001 safeguards
assessment, and recommended further enhancements in the areas of external and internal
audits, and financial reporting. Latest monitoring results indicate the existence of certain
vulnerabilities including in the system of internal controls. These and other aspects of the
BEAC safeguards framework will be reviewed in the context of the 2008 update
safeguards assessment of BEAC that is underway.

1

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the
decision point. Hence these two amounts can not be added.

2

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim
period.

4
IX. Exchange Rate Arrangement:
Congo’s currency is the CFA franc, which is pegged to the Euro at a fixed rate of
CFAF 655.957 = Euro 1. On September 30, 2008, the rate of the CFA franc was
CFAF 776.39 per SDR. Congo does not impose any restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions.
X. Article IV Consultations:
Consultations with Congo are on a 24-month cycle, based on the Board decision on
consultation cycles in program countries. The 2007 consultation discussions took place in
Brazzaville in October 2006. The staff report (www.imf.org) was considered by the
Executive Board on April 25, 2007.
XI. FSAP Participation : N/A.
XII. Technical Assistance :
Subject
Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis
Budget functional classification

Department
FAD

Staff Member
Mr. Gillingham, Ms.
Lacoche, Mr. Manning
MMrs Lokpe and
Nguenang
Mr. Penanje

Date
November 2007

Processing and monitoring of
fiscal information
Public expenditure management
Resident advisor on real sector
Modernization of tax and
customs administrations
Follow-up mission

AFRITAC C

August 2006
Since February 2006
February 2004

FAD
FAD
FAD

Mr. Bouley
Mr. Gbossa
Messrs. MontagnatRentier, Lesprit and Boilil
Mr. Lepage
Messrs. Bouley,
Helis, and Lepage
Mr. Dessart
Messrs. Marie, Maiga,
and Mmes. Fisher, Matei,
Razin, and Balvani
Mr. Metreau
Mr. Fiévet
Messrs. Bouley, Moussa,
Brik, and Mrs. Tricoire
Mr. Laurent
Mr. Grandcolas

FAD
FAD

Budget functional classification
Balance of payments statistics
Multisector statistics

FAD
STA
STA

Resident expert on statistics
Balance of payments

STA
STA

Budget, tax, and customs
Resident tax expert
Tax administration
Tax administration

FAD

Messrs. Grandcolas and
Castro

AFRITAC C

FAD
STA

XIII. Resident Representative:
The resident representative, Mr. Yaya Moussa, took up his assignment in
September 2005.

July 2007
August 2008

November 2003
October 2003
February 2007
May 2002
Since October 2001
June 2001
April–May 2001
1995–97
Nov. 1995–Apr.
1996
November 1994

5
Annex II—Republic of Congo: JMAP Implementation Matrix
Title
Bank work program
in next 12 months

Products
Mission timing
A. Mutual information on relevant work programs
FY09
Full CAS
PRSP/JSAN
June 2008
AAA
Policy advice on
infrastructure development
Governance/HIPC

September
2008
September
2008
December 2008
November 2008
December 2008

New Lending:
Additional Financing
Education
Urban Development

Fund request to
Bank (with summary
justification)
Bank request to
Fund (with summary
justification)
Joint products in next
12 months

Washington, D.C. 20431

FY 09
October 2008

December 2008
December 2008

Investment Climate Analysis
Public Expenditure Review

IMF work program in
next 12 months

Expected delivery

February 2009
August 2009

June 2009
FY 2010
October 2008
Mid-May 2008

First assessment under the
Staff Monitored Program
(SMP), Article IV
consultation, and initiate
discussions on the
prospective PRGF
arrangement
End-August
Second assessment under
2008
the SMP, Article IV
consultation, and finalize
discussions on the
prospective PRGF
arrangement
B. Requests for work program inputs
Collaborate on the LIC-DSA September
2008

July 2008

Progress on implementation
of HIPC Triggers

October 2008
(Board on
Progress Report)

September
2008

C. Agreement on joint products and missions
LIC-DSA
September
2008
PRSP Progress
Report/JSAN

●

Telephone 202-623-7100

●

Fax 202-623-6772

October 2008

October 2008

October 2008
October 2008

●

www.imf.org

6
Annex III—Statistical Issues
18.
Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance
purposes. In the context of surveillance, long delays in the provision of national accounts,
balance of payments and government finance statistics are particularly problematic. The
statistical infrastructure is being slowly rebuilt after the civil strife of the late 90’s, during
which administrative infrastructure suffered severe damage and many records were lost.
Since October 2001, an STA multisector statistics advisor (MSA) has been assisting the
authorities with the macroeconomic statistics.
19.
A STA multi-sector mission in May 2002 conducted an assessment of the statistical
system. The mission’s general finding was that macroeconomic statistics are weak and suffer
from the absence of a national statistical program and shortages of financial, physical, and
human resources. It recommended measures for improvement, which are being followed up
by the statistical advisor.
20.
The Republic of Congo participates in the General Data Dissemination System
(GDDS) since November 5, 2003. However, the metadata posted on the Fund’s
Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB) has not been updated or certified since
2003.
Real sector statistics
21.
National accounts data are weak, with inconsistencies, both internally and with
balance of payments statistics. Estimates for the informal sector are based on information
that dates back to 1978. The Directorate General of Statistics (DGS) of the Ministry of
Finance (MoF) provides Fund missions with a breakdown of GDP by expenditures and
sectors, both in nominal and real terms. Historically, data on oil sector transactions have
been weak, raising questions about transparency in the inter-play between the oil companies
operating in the country and the government agencies dealing with them. With the assistance
of the resident statistical expert, the DGS completed the national accounts estimates for
2005, the new base year, and has initiated compilation of the 2006 accounts.
22.
Annual data on employment in the central government are available from the MoF,
but are not consistent with data from the civil service roster of the Ministry of the Civil
Service. As part of the structural reforms undertaken in the context of the post-conflict
program, the government completed an audit of public service employees and established a
new civil service payroll roster. Data on employment in the private sector are not available.
23.
Movements in the prices of commodities consumed by households are recorded for
the capital city of Brazzaville (weights for 1977 and price reference period of
December 1977) and the second-largest city of Pointe Noire (price reference period of
January 1996 and weights for 1989). Weights no longer reflect current household

7
consumption patterns. Data are compiled on a monthly basis. The authorities intend to
compile a CPI that is harmonized with other countries in the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC).
Government finance statistics
24.
Compilation of government finance statistics (GFS) has benefited from recent
efforts to increase the comprehensiveness of the data through the adoption of systematic
compilation practices. The increased interagency cooperation is in line with the
recommendations of the May 2002 multisector mission, which recommended that systematic
procedures be established for the compilation of government finance statistics, based, to the
extent possible, on a unified set of accounting and administrative records using the GFSM
2001 classifications.
25.
The Republic of Congo has reported (in September 2008) GFS data to STA for fiscal
years 2004 and 2005 using the GFSM 2001 template, and indicate that data for 2006 and
2007 will be reported no later than June 2009. High-frequency fiscal data has not yet been
reported for publication in IFS. The compilation of GFS statistics to be reported to the Fund
should be carried out in close cooperation with the compilers of the TOFE.
26.
Progress is underway to address these shortcomings. In February/March 2003, a FAD
follow-up mission found that most of the recommendations of the 2001 FAD mission on
expenditure management, in particular with regard to the centralization of all government
revenue and execution of public expenditure through the budget, are being implemented, and
steps have been taken to computerize expenditure chain accounting.
27.
The Caisse congolaise d’amortissement (CCA) produces comprehensive data on the
outstanding stock of external public debt, including arrears and their composition, together
with detailed projections on debt service due. These data are provided to Fund missions.
However, the debt-stock data cannot be reconciled with flow data in the balance of
payments. The CCA also produces domestic debt data. Concerns still exist with regard to the
reconciliation of fiscal and monetary statistics.
28.
There is no centralized, comprehensive database on the operations of public
enterprises. However, some information has been made available to Fund missions by
individual enterprises. TOFE compilers do not have access to relevant financial statements of
the Société nationale des pétroles congolais, which carries out several operations on behalf of
the government (notably in the oil sector).
Monetary and financial statistics
29.
The Bank of Central African States (BEAC) regularly reports monetary, interest
rates, and exchange rate statistics for publication in IFS, but delays occur sometimes in the
submission of data to STA. The accuracy of national monetary statistics may be affected by

8
large cross-border movements of BEAC issued banknotes among the CEMAC member
countries. However, the Republic of Congo is moderately affected by such movements:
6.2 percent of banknotes issued in the Congo by the BEAC national directorate circulate in
Cameroon and 1.2 percent in Gabon, while currency in circulation in the Republic of Congo
includes 2.3 percent of banknotes from Cameroon and 3.2 percent from Gabon. The
magnitude of banknote movements between the Republic of Congo and CEMAC member
countries other than Cameroon and Gabon is very small.
30.
In this regard, the BEAC started in mid-2007 a project to migrate monetary statistics
of member countries of the CEMAC to the methodology in the Monetary and Financial
Statistics Manual (MFSM). As a part of this project, a regional workshop was organized by
the BEAC in December 2007 to finalize the mapping of source data from commercial banks
to the MFSM concepts and framework. STA participated in this workshop to provide
guidance and advice. Submission of data by the BEAC using the standardized report forms is
pending.
External sector statistics
31.
As in other CEMAC countries, the national agency of the BEAC is responsible for
the collection and the dissemination of balance of payments statistics. The balance of
payments statistics are prepared on an annual basis while the compilation system has been
specifically designed to produce quarterly data. Since 1995, data are being prepared using the
Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition. The BEAC provides annual data on exports of
goods and services and on capital flows other than public debt. Balance of payments data for
1995 through 2005 are published in the Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS), and
STA is working with the authorities in updating the data series.
32.
In May 2002, a technical assistance mission found the compilation system and
procedures to be conceptually sound but flawed in their application due to the absence of
documented sources and methods, understaffing, and insufficient training. This situation
resulted in significant delays in the production of balance of payments statistics and, in
general, poor monitoring of the quality of the input data provided by respondents.
Furthermore, the opacity surrounding certain transactions in the oil sector introduces an
important element of imprecision. In addition, net investment flows are overestimated by
significant unrecorded disinvestment operations that are part of the tax regime arrangements
obtained by oil-drilling nonresident companies. In February 2007, a follow-up STA balance
of payments statistics mission made a number of recommendations aimed at improving
institutional arrangements for balance of payments statistics compilation.

9

REPUBLIC OF CONGO: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
As of October 1, 2008
Date of latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
7
Data

Frequency
of
7
Reporting

Frequency of
7
publication

Exchange Rates

Current

Current

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
1
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Broad Money

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Aug-08

Sept-08

M

M

M

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – General
4
Government

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

Jun-08

Aug-08

M

Q

Q

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Jun-08

Aug-08

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

Jun-08

Aug-08

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Jun-08

Aug-08

A

A

A

2007

Aug-08

A

A

A

Jun-08

Aug-08

Q

Q

Q

...

...

NA

NA

NA

Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
International Investment Position
1

6

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic non-bank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on the Republic of Congo
December 8, 2008

1.
The following information has become available since the staff report was issued.
The information does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
Sharply rising food prices pushed overall consumer price inflation (CPI) to
7.8 percent in the twelve months through October 2008. Food prices increased by
10.2 percent during this period, while non-food prices rose by 4 percent. Food items account
for 60 percent of the CPI.
The increase in the CPI was higher than projected but the decline in global commodity and
non-fuel commodity prices which began in the third quarter of this year should help to lower
inflation through the end of 2008. In this regard, the staff estimates suggest that the
authorities’ end-year inflation projection of 6 percent could still be reached.

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/20
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 13, 2009

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2008 Article IV Consultation with
the Republic of Congo
On December 8, 2008, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with the Republic of Congo.1
Background
Economic developments in 2007 were mixed but have improved more recently. Economic
activity declined last year because of a temporary fall in oil production (caused by an
accident on an oil platform), leading also to a significant deterioration in the external current
account, which moved into deficit for the first time in many years. Inflation moderated in
2007, as bottlenecks that affected important transportation routes were eased. The
implementation of economic policies was uneven, with a lack of expenditure control and
program monitoring giving rise to significant fiscal slippages, and weaknesses in institutional
and administrative capacity giving rise to delays in structural reform.
The recovery of oil production and better economic policy implementation contributed to an
improvement in economic performance through the first semester of 2008, although inflation
accelerated. On current trends, overall real GDP growth in 2008 could reach about
7½ percent, with activity in the non-oil sector broadening; the transportation, construction,
and telecommunications sectors are particularly strong. High food and energy costs pushed
inflation to 5.7 percent (year-on-year) through June 2008, but the expectation is for a
moderation of consumer prices in the period ahead. Driven by high oil exports and high
world oil prices through most of the year, the current external account is projected to swing
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return
to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive
Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board,
summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

Washington, D.C. 20431

●

Telephone 202-623-7100

●

Fax 202-623-6772

●

www.imf.org

2
from a deficit of 26 percent of GDP last year to a surplus of 0.6 percent in 2008. Foreign
direct investment continues to expand in the oil sector, partly in response to new
discoveries, and could reach more than 23 percent of GDP this year. Congo’s external
public debt has declined sharply in the past several years, as a result of Paris Club
rescheduling and debt relief from London Club creditors (in the context of the enhanced
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative). The real effective exchange rate has
appreciated sharply since 2007, primarily reflecting Congo’s relatively high rate of inflation,
compared with its trading partners.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed Congo’s continued strong growth in 2008 reflecting a
resumption of oil production and solid non-oil sector activity, and the significant improvement
in the external current account position driven by high oil prices. At the same time, higher
food and energy costs pushed up inflation. Directors welcomed the contribution of better
policy implementation in supporting economic activity, including through the establishment
of a new reporting and monitoring structure, and were encouraged by Congo’s satisfactory
completion of its staff-monitored program earlier this year.
Looking ahead, Directors welcomed Congo’s commitment to continued adjustment
and economic reform supported by the new PRGF arrangement. They stressed that
sustained ownership and determined implementation of the envisaged policies will be crucial
to allow Congo to face the many remaining challenges in accelerating growth and alleviating
poverty. Foremost among these challenges are the need to improve international
competitiveness, to raise output growth through diversification, and to strengthen fiscal
consolidation and debt sustainability. Efforts will also be needed to address institutional and
administrative bottlenecks that have hindered past reform efforts. Confronting these
challenges will be critical to enable Congo to make progress toward meeting the Millennium
Development Goals.
Directors noted the recent appreciation in Congo’s real effective exchange rate driven
by the country’s relatively high inflation compared with its trading partners. The international
competitiveness of the non-oil export sector has also been hampered by weak institutions
and inadequate infrastructure. Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to pursue a
broad-based approach to improve international competitiveness and diversify the economy.
Fiscal consolidation will have a key contribution to make by creating fiscal space to allow
rebuilding of the country’s infrastructure. In addition, the authorities will need to persevere
with ambitious structural reforms that include measures to enhance the business
environment and reduce the costs of doing business, deepen financial intermediation
through adoption of the financial sector strategy, raise the operating and financial
performance of state-owned enterprises in the oil sector, and liberalize trade.
Directors noted that the authorities’ fiscal strategy aims to achieve long-term
sustainability through gradual, but sustained, consolidation. Fiscal consolidation is important
to ensure inter-generational equity by preserving the country’s oil wealth and to improve
debt sustainability. Directors noted that the authorities’ objective of lowering the basic nonoil primary deficit, by the equivalent of about 3 percent of non-oil GDP per year, aims to

3
strike a broad balance between putting fiscal policy on a sustainable path, and front-loading
public investment to address urgent needs, while taking account of administrative and
institutional capacity constraints. A few Directors saw scope for a stronger pace of fiscal
adjustment. The authorities were encouraged to resist possible spending pressures related
to the upcoming elections.
The achievement of fiscal sustainability is likely to require actions on several fronts,
including: re-orienting spending by reducing or eliminating poorly targeted programs, such
as for general fuel subsidies; mobilizing more domestic non-oil resources; and enhancing
public financial management through the timely and full implementation of the recently
adopted action plan. A concerted effort should also be directed at improving the
management of public investment, with assistance from Congo’s development partners.
More transparent and strengthened governance, particularly in the oil sector, will be
important for achieving the authorities’ policy objectives. Directors welcomed the recent
measures in this area—including the action plans to improve the operating and financial
performance of the state-owned enterprises in the oil sector and the returns from the
commercialization of Congolese oil. They stressed the importance of further steps to
enhance the monitoring and reporting of oil revenue, and to prevent fraud and promote best
practices in the use of public resources. Directors looked forward to the completion of the
first report under the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Directors took note of the recent improvements in the external debt indicators but
noted that Congo is still at a high risk of debt distress. Consequently, prudent debt
management and debt relief will be essential for achieving external sustainability. Directors
therefore welcomed the authorities’ intention to finance development increasingly through
their own resources and to seek foreign financing only on highly concessional terms. They
encouraged the authorities to accelerate efforts to regularize relations with all creditors,
including the remaining London Club and litigating creditors. Directors stressed the
importance of satisfactory performance under the PRGF arrangement and timely
implementation of the policy triggers for HIPC Initiative debt relief. A few Directors
expressed their willingness to consider advancing the timetable for reaching the HIPC
Initiative completion point to mid-2009 if sufficient progress can be made on the HIPC
Initiative triggers.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Republic of Congo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2004–08
2004

2005

2006

2007
Est.

2008
Proj.

(Annual percent change)
Output and inflation
GDP at constant prices
Oil
Non-oil
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (end-of-period)

3.5
0.5
5.0
16.8
1.1

7.8
12.5
5.4
21.3
3.1

6.2
6.8
5.9
18.5
8.1

-1.6
-17.2
6.6
-7.9
-1.7

7.6
9.0
7.0
25.6
6.0

(Percent of GDP) 1
External sector
Current account balance (including public transfers)
External public debt service (before debt relief)
(percent of exports of goods and services)
Nominal effective exchange rate

20.3

11.8

1.6

-26.1

0.6

14.1

11.9

13.7

10.7

4.5

3.4

-0.4

-0.4

5.1

...

(Percent of GDP) 1
Public finance
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Primary balance (deficit - )
Basic primary non-oil balance (percent of non-oil GDP)
Oil sector
World oil price (U.S. dollars per barrel)
Oil production (Millions of barrels)

1

Unless otherwise noted.

69.9
61.6
22.7
-25.9

108.2
64.7
58.1
-29.6

141.5
87.2
68.6
-51.3

113.5
84.2
36.6
-55.7

155.5
72.4
90.1
-43.2

37.8
82.1

53.4
92.6

64.3
98.7

71.1
81.7

99.8
89.0

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

Press Release No. 08/311
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 8, 2008

IMF Executive Board Approves US$12.53 Million PRGF Arrangement for the Republic
of Congo and Interim Assistance under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today approved a three-year
arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) for the Republic of
Congo in an amount equivalent to SDR 8.46 million (about US$12.53 million and 10 percent
of quota) in support of the government's economic program for 20082011. The first
disbursement under the PRGF arrangement will be in an amount equivalent to SDR 1.21
million (about US$1.79 million).
In addition, the Board granted interim assistance under the Enhanced Initiative for Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) in an amount equivalent to SDR 77,000 (about US$ 0.11
million).
Following the Executive Board's discussion on the Republic of Congo, Mr. Murilo Portugal,
Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chairman, stated:
“Strong growth in the non-oil sector of the Congolese economy continued and the balance of
payments strengthened considerably in 2008. These positive developments were supported
by better policy implementation, including the successful implementation of the staffmonitored program during the first semester of this year. The program’s fiscal targets were
comfortably met and satisfactory progress was made in structural reform. The authorities also
continued to strengthen governance and transparency related to the use of public resources.
“The authorities took a number of measures to mitigate the impact of high food and fuel
prices earlier this year, including some tariff and tax reductions, and additional pro-poor and
capital spending. The drop in world oil prices will help to reduce general fuel subsidies and
could facilitate the authorities’ intended move to a new pricing mechanism.

“Against the background of the global economic slowdown, Congo faces a number of
challenges to accelerate growth and alleviate poverty, including the need to improve

Washington, D.C. 20431

●

Telephone 202-623-7100

●

Fax 202-623-6772

●

www.imf.org

2
international competitiveness, raise output growth through diversification, and consolidate the
fiscal position. The authorities’ medium-term economic and financial program, supported
by a new arrangement under the Fund’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, should help
to address these challenges.
“The authorities’ program targets a gradual but continued fiscal consolidation, recognizing
the finite horizon for oil production. A decline in the basic non-oil primary fiscal deficit of
about 3 percent per year over the medium term would allow scaling up of public investment
to address urgent needs, while ensuring a sustainable fiscal path. The reduction in the basic
non-oil primary deficit is projected to come from cuts in non-priority spending and domestic
revenue mobilization.
“The authorities’ structural reform agenda is designed to support broadening of the economic
base, bolster Congo’s competitiveness, and strengthen transparency. This agenda includes:
further reform of public financial management (PFM) through the timely and comprehensive
implementation of a PFM action plan established with the assistance of Congo’s development
partners; enhanced public investment management; adoption and implementation of a financial
sector strategy to deepen intermediation; improved operating and financial performance of stateowned enterprises in the oil sector; trade liberalization; and better governance and transparency
with regard to the use of public resources more generally.
“Congo’s external debt indicators have improved recently but the country has not yet achieved
external sustainability. The authorities’ program aims to support the regularization of relations
with all creditors, the implementation of a new debt management strategy in line with Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) regional guidelines—which include
access to foreign financing only on highly concessional terms—and debt relief under the
Enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC). In this context, satisfactory
performance under the PRGF arrangement and timely implementation of the HIPC triggers are
essential,” Mr. Portugal said.

3
ANNEX
Background
The Republic of Congo has experienced strong economic growth in 2008, reflecting the resumption
of oil production after an oil-platform accident as well as solid non-oil activity, driven by the
telecommunication, construction, and transport sectors. Real GDP growth is projected to be about 7.6
percent in 2008. In 2007 real GDP contracted by 1.6 percent due to a sharp decrease in oil production.
Higher food and energy costs pushed up consumer price inflation in the first half of 2008, reaching
5.7 percent in the 12 months through June 2008. Inflation is expected to moderate in the second half
of 2008. The fiscal policy performance has improved recently, after a period of budget slippages and
delays in implementing structural reforms. Although the basic, non-oil, primary fiscal deficit dipped
to 55.7 percent of non-oil GDP in 2007, based on present policies it should improve significantly this
year. Driven by high oil exports, the current account is projected to swing from a deficit of 25
percent of GDP last year to a surplus of 0.6 percent of GDP in 2008. Congo’s external public
debt has declined sharply in the past several years, partly as a result of Paris Club debt
rescheduling and debt relief from London Club creditors under the enhanced Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
Program Summary
The authorities’ medium-term economic program is designed to support balanced growth, low
and stable inflation, as well as fiscal and external sustainability. The macroeconomic framework
for 2008-11 aims to achieve:
•
Annual real GDP growth in the non-oil sector of about 8 percent.
•

Low and stable inflation of about 3 percent per year.

•

An improvement in the external position with the current account moving into surplus
this year, and a rising surplus in the medium term.

Medium-term policies to achieve these objectives include:
•

Gradual, but continued fiscal consolidation to ensure steady progress toward long-term
sustainability, recognizing the finite horizon for oil production.

•

The regional central bank’s focus on keeping inflation low within the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC).

•

Further opening of the economy through trade liberalization.

•

Structural reforms in areas critical to the success of the program, including strengthening
of public financial management, improvement in the financial and operating performance
of state-owned enterprises, and adoption and implementation of the financial sector
strategy.

4

Republic of Congo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2004–08

2004

2005

2006

2007
Est.

2008
Proj.

(Annual percent change)
Output and inflation
GDP at constant prices
Oil
Non-oil
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (end-of-period)

3.5
0.5
5.0
16.8
1.1

7.8
12.5
5.4
21.3
3.1

6.2
6.8
5.9
18.5
8.1

-1.6
-17.2
6.6
-7.9
-1.7

7.6
9.0
7.0
25.6
6.0

(Percent of GDP) 1
External sector
Current account balance (including public
transfers)
External public debt service (before debt
relief)
(percent of exports of goods and services)
Nominal effective exchange rate

20.3

11.8

1.6

-26.1

0.6

14.1

11.9

13.7

10.7

4.5

3.4

-0.4

-0.4

5.1

...

(Percent of GDP) 1
Public finance
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Primary balance (deficit - )
Basic primary non-oil balance (percent of nonoil GDP)
Oil sector
World oil price (U.S. dollars per barrel)
Oil production (Millions of barrels)

1

Unless otherwise noted.

69.9
61.6
22.7

108.2
64.7
58.1

141.5
87.2
68.6

113.5
84.2
36.6

155.5
72.4
90.1

-25.9

-29.6

-51.3

-55.7

-43.2

37.8
82.1

53.4
92.6

64.3
98.7

71.1
81.7

99.8
89.0

Statement by Laurean Rutayisire, Executive Director for the Republic of Congo
December 8, 2008

I. Introduction
On behalf of my Congolese authorities, I thank staff for the constructive dialogue during the
Article IV consultations and the review of the Staff-Monitored Program (SMP). I would also
like to thank the Executive Board and Management for the continued support to the Republic
of Congo. The authorities appreciate the set of reports prepared for Board consideration,
which highlight key strategic areas that could help the country enhance growth in a
sustainable manner with a view to reducing poverty, while preserving fiscal and external
sustainability.
At the outset, I would like to recall the backdrop that sheds light on the efforts of my
Congolese authorities and their unyielding commitment and achievements in securing
macroeconomic stability and implementing structural reforms over the past years. The
implementation of the PRGF arrangement signed in 2004 was steady, amid numerous
challenges related to the civil conflict aftermath. In 2006, the program was undermined by
fiscal slippages stemming from unavoidable spending sources, namely the high cost of
carrying out democratic elections and building strong institutions, building social and
economic infrastructure following a destructive conflict, and containing spillovers from
political instability in the central Africa region.
In 2007, my Congolese authorities, cognizant of the need to resume sound economic
management, have embarked on a SMP with a view to consolidating the fiscal stance,
establishing a good track record paving the way for a new PRGF arrangement. To date, after
implementing two SMPs, staff’s assessment concurred that my authorities have made good
progress in improving public financial management, especially fiscal consolidation,
enhancing governance and transparency and implementing structural reforms aimed at
diversifying the economy. Growth is projected to reach 7.6 percent in 2008 and all fiscal
targets under the last SMP were comfortably met. On several other fronts, the Republic of
Congo has also been performing well. After developing an interim Poverty Reduction
Strategy that led the country to the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in
March 2006, the final PRSP was completed in April 2008. The authorities are moving
steadfastly on the triggers for the HIPC floating completion point.
My authorities’ agenda for the coming years builds on these positive achievements as well as
lessons from the past, while taking account of the daunting challenges ahead. To accompany
their efforts, my Congolese authorities are requesting Directors’ support for a new three-year

2

PRGF arrangement. They are confident that the key policies set forth in this program, along
with the PRS will help foster growth, diversify the economy away from oil, further improve
public financial management, enhance governance and transparency, build human and
physical capacity, consolidate macroeconomic stability, and reduce poverty.
II. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Performance under the SMP
Congo’s macroeconomic performance has been strong over 2007-08. The projected end-year
rate of 7.6 percent owes to a resumption of oil production and buoyant non-oil activity,
driven by the telecommunications, construction, and transportation sectors. Inflation recently
accelerated as a result of high food and energy prices, but should ease in the period ahead.
High world oil prices associated with authorities’ measures to ensure expenditure discipline
and strong non-oil tax collection, substantially improved the fiscal position.
The authorities have stepped up actions to strengthen their external position. After obtaining
debt rescheduling from Paris Club and London Club creditors under the enhanced HIPC
Initiative, they are negotiating fair settlements with all creditors. It is also worth mentioning
that FDI continues to expand in the oil sector, partly as a result of investments in newly
discovered fields.
The SMP implementation was broadly satisfactory. At the end of June 2008, the indicative
target for the non-oil basic primary deficit was met comfortably, demonstrating the
authorities’ ability to control and monitor public spending. All other quantitative targets were
observed, but external arrears to some Paris Club members accumulated. On the structural
front, the government made progress in the areas of public financial management by
adopting and beginning to implement an action plan. The authorities also took measures to
better control and manage public investment, including an audit of past investments, the
creation of an inter-ministerial committee and an advisory body to provide guidance and
project appraisal.
As regards the oil sector, very bold actions to improve transparency and ensure sound
management of oil revenue have been taken. In that regard, my authorities are implementing
an action plan to improve the operating and financial performance of the state-owned oil
refinery, CORAF. In the same line, they have prepared a draft strategy to address
institutional and procedural deficiencies in the commercialization of Congolese oil by SNPC,
and have pursued the certification of oil revenue, in order to safeguard oil resources. In
February 2008, Congo became a candidate country to the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and continues working toward completing the first EITI report before the
end of this year. In early October 2008, as a prior action to support their request for a new
PRGF arrangement, the authorities proceeded with a price adjustment of petroleum products

3

that would reduce subsidies significantly. The publication on the government website of all
information agreed with the Fund has continued as a means to further improve transparency.
III. Medium-Term Prospects and Economic Policies
My Congolese authorities are determined to continue with the implementation of economic
policies that aim at supporting balanced growth, low and stable inflation, and fiscal and
external sustainability. They are also committed to pursuing efforts to reach the completion
point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.
The economic prospects appear favorable, with relatively high world oil prices, the full
resumption of oil production from the Nkossa field, and the start of production in the new
Moho Bilondo field. Expansion of volumes should compensate if price were to fall. As a
result, the overall real GDP is expected to rise from 7.6 percent in 2008 to nearly 13 percent
in 2009. Inflation is planned to remain high this year, but to moderate in 2009, as the impact
of recent high food and energy costs dissipate.
To support the objectives put forward in their macroeconomic framework, my authorities
intend to achieve over the medium-term a more robust growth in the non-oil sector, about 8
percent per year. They believe this constitutes the minimum necessary to reduce poverty
durably and to make meaningful progress toward improving income and meeting the MDGs.
In this regard, the authorities intend to rebuild the country’s infrastructure, which was
damaged by several years of conflict. In particular, they will place high priority on
investment projects in transportation, energy and water, as well as in the social sector.
1. Fiscal Policy
For the rest of 2008, the fiscal stance will remain consistent with targets set earlier this year
in the SMP, including a reduction of the basic non-oil primary deficit to 43.2 percent of nonoil GDP. For 2009, the program envisages a further decline in the basic non-oil primary
deficit to 40.2 percent of non-oil GDP, based on nominal cuts in non-priority spending,
including further decline in fuel subsidies. To ensure a better management of the budget, the
authorities intend to undertake a number of PFM measures, such as submitting to Parliament
next year’s budget consistent with the targets under the proposed PRGF arrangement and
using economic, functional and administrative classifications. They will also adopt a threeyear action plan to improve public investment management. It is also the authorities’
intention to prepare a medium-term expenditure framework, which can ensure adequate
implementation of public expenditure and tracking of pro-poor spending. To enhance
transparency and accountability and strengthen oil revenue, my authorities will continue with

4

quarterly certification of oil revenues and lodge the proceeds in the Treasury within 45 days
of oil sales.

2. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies
The pegged exchange rate regime has served the congolese economy well. The authorities
are taking the necessary actions to maintain low and stable inflation in line with the CEMAC
convergence criterion, which will help preserve Congo’s international competitiveness.
To facilitate the implementation of monetary policy, they intend to continue to reduce the
stock of statutory advances, with a view to repaying them fully by the end of 2008. The
authorities also continue to work closely with the CEMAC partners to develop the regional
securities market.
Cognizant of the key role a dynamic financial sector plays in the development of private
sector activity, the authorities will adopt by the end of this year the financial sector strategy
established in collaboration with Fund staff. This strategy will contribute to expand credit to
the private sector, strengthen the legal framework, improve information on the cost of credit
and credit history, diversify financial instruments, and ensure that the country’s pension
system is placed on a sound footing.
3. Debt management and Structural Policies
Despite recent improvements, Congo is still at high risk of debt distress. Accordingly, my
authorities are determined to pursue a prudent management of the debt. In this regard, they
are committed to finance development through their own resources and to seek foreign
financing only on highly concessional terms. They also intend to accelerate efforts to
regularize relations with all creditors, including non-London Club and litigating creditors. It
is also their priority to implement in the coming year a new debt management strategy, in
line with CEMAC regional guidelines.
The structural agenda will aim at continuing to strengthen public financial management,
further enhancing governance and transparency over the use of public resources, and
accelerating financial and oil sector reforms. At the same time, the authorities are determined
to implement the triggers under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, which encompass a broad
range of structural measures. Finally, the authorities intend to accelerate reform of public
enterprises, in order to enhance efficiency. For the oil sector especially, my authorities intend
to finalize by mid-2009 a strategic study on how this sector can make the greatest
contribution to Congo’s economic development.

5

IV. CONCLUSION
Congo is a post-conflict country facing daunting development challenges. Amid difficult
pressures, my authorities have endeavored to build a good track record over the last period to
resume with sound policymaking and fully regain the trust of the international partners. All
signs to date indicate that the Republic of Congo is back on track, and efforts need to be
sustained. On this path, my authorities strongly believe that the assistance from the Fund and
the donor community is of great importance if they are to tackle successfully the issues of
sustained growth, debt relief, broad-based economy and poverty reduction. My authorities
are committed to strengthen domestic capacity for program ownership in order to ensure a
successful implementation of reforms. My Congolese authorities are hopeful that they can
continue to count on the donor community to provide them with the necessary support to
their development efforts.

5

