June 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/206

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

April 29, 2005
March 16, 2005

May 16, 2005
2005

Haiti: 2005 Article IV Consultation and Review of the Program Supported by
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the
Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Haiti
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV
consultation with Haiti and review of the program supported by emergency post-conflict assistance,
the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the combined 2005 Article IV Consultation and Review of the Program
Supported by Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on March 16, 2005, with the officials of Haiti on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on April 29, 2005. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN), summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its May 16, 2005, discussion of the staff report on issues related to the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Haiti.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
HAITI
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
and Review of the Program Supported by Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Haiti
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Christopher Towe and Mark Plant
April 29, 2005

•

Discussions covering the 2005 Article IV consultation and review of the program supported by
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) took place in Port-au-Prince during March 6–16,
2005. The staff team comprised P. Gajdeczka (Head), G. Everaert, L. Jaramillo, C. Sancak (all WHD),
J. Mathisen (PDR), M. Vimond (Senior Administrative Assistant, MCD), and was assisted by
M. Rached (Resident Representative). K. Florestal (OED) and A. Kouame (World Bank) attended key
meetings. The mission met with Economy and Finance Minister Bazin, Central Bank Governor
Magloire, Planning Minister Pierre, other senior officials, and representatives of the private sector and
donor community.

•

The last Article IV consultation was completed on January 24, 2003. Executive Directors expressed
deep concern about Haiti’s worsening economic and social conditions. They called for a firm
commitment to a sound medium-term economic program, backed by a track record of policy
implementation, which could lead to a PRGF-supported program.

•

The EPCA-supported program is broadly on track. On January 10, 2005, the Executive Board
approved a purchase of 12.5 percent of quota under the Fund’s EPCA policy and the authorities are
expected to request a second EPCA purchase in July/August. All end-December 2004 quantitative
targets were observed by wide margins and preliminary data indicate that end-March 2005 quantitative
targets were also met. However, there have been delays in implementing some key structural measures.

•

Article IV consultation discussions focused on the supplementary budget for April-September 2005,
the 2005/06 budget framework, and the fiscal reform agenda. Consideration was also given to the
policies needed to bring inflation to single digits and to strengthen the central bank’s financial position.
Although the transitional nature of the present government meant that specific medium-term policies
could not be discussed, the authorities agreed, that increased fiscal effort and continued donor support
are necessary to improve the provision of basic services and promote growth.

•

Publication. The authorities expressed their intention to publish this staff report and accompanying
papers on the IMF website.

-2-

CONTENTS

PAGE

Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. 4
I.

Introduction................................................................................................................... 5
A.
B.
C.

The Setting ........................................................................................................ 5
Policy Advice and Performance........................................................................ 7
Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................... 7

II.

Near-Term Outlook and Risks .................................................................................... 11

III.

Policy Discussions ...................................................................................................... 11
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

IV.

Fiscal Policy and Reforms .............................................................................. 12
Monetary and Financial Sector Policies ......................................................... 15
Structural Reforms and Governance ............................................................... 17
Medium-Term Outlook and Debt Sustainability ............................................ 18
Other Issues..................................................................................................... 20

Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................ 20

Boxes
1.
Political Developments ................................................................................................. 6
2.
Fund Engagement in Haiti ............................................................................................ 9
3.
GDP Growth, Medium-Term Projections, and Millennium Development
Goals ........................................................................................................................ 13
4.
Recommendations on the Central Bank’ s Operations................................................ 16
Tables
1.
2.
3.a
3.b
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Indicative Targets, September 2004–March 2005 ...................................................... 23
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators .............................................................. 24
Central Government Operations (In millions of gourdes) .......................................... 25
Central Government Operations (In percent of GDP) ................................................ 26
Summary Accounts of the Banking System................................................................ 27
Balance of Payments 28
Medium-Term Scenario .............................................................................................. 29
Indicators of Fund Credit, 2004–09 ............................................................................ 30
Indicators of External Vulnerability ........................................................................... 31
Stock of Arrears and Projected Debt Service, 2000–05.............................................. 32
External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000–05 .......................................... 33
External Assistance to the Government and Debt Service ......................................... 34
Millennium Development Goals ................................................................................. 35
Status of Main Policy Actions Under the EPCA ........................................................ 37

-3-

Figures
1.
Inflation and Monetary Devlopments ......................................................................... 39
2.
Fiscal Developments ................................................................................................... 40
3.
External Developments ............................................................................................... 41
Annexes
I.
Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ 42
II.
Relations with the World Bank Group........................................................................ 45
III.
Relations with the IDB................................................................................................ 47
IV.
Statistical Issues .......................................................................................................... 48
V.
Debt Sustainability Analysis....................................................................................... 50

-4-

Executive Summary
Recent developments and performance under the EPCA
•

Economic and political conditions in Haiti have been difficult. The political situation
deteriorated in late 2003 and led to the resignation of President Aristide. A transition
government that was formed in early 2004 has been charged with restoring security and
economic stability, and preparing for national elections, which are now scheduled for
October-November 2005.

•

The recovery has been weaker than expected. Weak exports and fiscal revenue, stagnant
private sector credit, and delays in donor disbursements suggest that economic activity has
not rebounded. However, inflation has declined, the exchange rate has stabilized, and net
international reserves have increased.

•

Performance under the EPCA-supported program has been satisfactory. All endDecember targets were observed, and preliminary data indicate that end-March targets
were also met. While many structural measures were implemented as envisaged, key
measures such as the census of public sector employment and domestic arrears have been
delayed.

Policy discussions
•

Revenue shortfalls and delays in donor funded projects have required revisions to the
budget. In particular, while administrative steps are expected to allow the revenue targets
to be met, expenditures will be re-prioritized to provide maximum support to economic
recovery. The authorities are also seeking additional external financing to cover additional
outlays on electricity, demobilization, and elections.

•

The macroeconomic framework for 2005/06 envisages real GDP growth of 3 percent and
inflation of 10 percent. The challenge, thereafter, will be to sustain growth of 4 percent
and generate the government revenue needed to fund a substantial improvement in social
services and the public sector’ s institutional capacity. Critical prerequisites will be
successful elections, national reconciliation, and continued donor support.

•

Monetary policy needs to be tightened to achieve the program’ s inflation and external
targets. The large excess reserves in the banking system need to be absorbed at marketdetermined interest rates. Also, a plan to recapitalize the BRH needs to be introduced in
the 2005/06 budget to strengthen its financial position.

•

Haiti’ s external debt appears unsustainable and new external assistance should be
provided on highly concessional terms.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Setting
1.
Economic and political conditions in Haiti have been very difficult in recent
years. The political deadlock following the disputed 2000 parliamentary elections
undermined private sector confidence and dampened investment, and led to a sharp cutback in
donor assistance. As a result, economic conditions in Haiti deteriorated significantly, with
negative GDP growth, high inflation, and large fiscal and external deficits. The political
polarization intensified, leading to street demonstrations and increasing violence that
culminated in an armed conflict in early 2004, and President Aristide’ s resignation in
February 2004 (Box 1).
2.
A transition government was formed in early 2004 to lead Haiti to national
elections, which are now scheduled for October-November 2005. A United Nations
stabilization mission (MINUSTAH) has been deployed to help restore security and help
prepare elections, but there have been recurrent episodes of escalation in violence.1 Over the
past year, financial stability has been restored but economic conditions remain difficult and
business confidence is low.
3.
The economic consequences of the political turmoil in early 2004 and the
devastating floods in May and September have been severe. The property damage and the
interruption to economic activity resulting from the armed conflict are estimated to have
totaled 5½ percent of GDP. The floods also caused the loss of thousands of lives, extensive
damage to housing, and destroyed crops in Haiti’ s most productive agricultural areas.
4.
Social conditions in Haiti are the most difficult in the Western Hemisphere. An
estimated 76 percent of the population lives below the poverty line (on less than US$2 a day)
and 55 percent in extreme poverty (on less than US$1 a day). Haiti’ s income distribution is
highly skewed, with the poorest 20 percent of the population accounting for 1.5 percent of
incomes and the wealthiest 20 percent for 68 percent. The United Nations ranks Haiti 153rd
on its Human Development Index (out of 177 countries), and the country is unlikely to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.2

1

2

MINUSTAH includes about 6,000 troops and 1,400 international police.

See A Common Vision of Sustainable Development: National Report on Millennium Development
Goals, UNDP and Government of Haiti, 2004.

-6-

Box 1. Haiti: Political Developments
1990 – Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a popular priest, is elected president.
1991 – President Aristide is overthrown in a military coup seven months after taking office. The
United Nations approves sanctions.
1994 – Aristide is reinstalled in office with the help of a U.S.-led military intervention.
1995 – Aristide disbands the army. Aristide supporters win parliamentary elections. Since the
constitution precludes the president from serving two consecutive terms, Aristide is succeeded by a
close ally, René Préval.
1997–99 – Following a period of political deadlock, Préval dissolves parliament and rules by decree.
2000–01 – Aristide is reelected president, but the international community criticizes irregularities in
parliamentary elections.
2002-03 – Dissatisfaction with the government grows amid deteriorating economic conditions and
opposition becomes increasingly vocal.
January–February 2004 – Street demonstrations intensify and as a result of an armed rebellion,
President Aristide resigns on February 29 and leaves the country.
March 2004 – As envisaged by the constitution, the chief of the Supreme Court, Boniface Alexandre,
succeeds as president. A transition government, led by Gérard Latortue, is formed to lead the country
to elections. A multinational interim force arrives.
June 2004 – U.N. stabilization force (MINUSTAH) arrives to replace the multinational interim force,
and reaches full strength in December 2004.
October 2004 – Violence escalates on the anniversary of the coup that first overthrew Aristide in
1991.
January 2005 – The Electoral Council announces the schedule for national elections.
October 2005 – Municipal elections scheduled.
November 2005 – Parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled.
February 2006 – A newly-elected president and government to start their terms.

-7-

5.
At the July 2004 conference, donors pledged US$1.1 billion of new financing for
the period July 2004–September 2006.3 This assistance is intended to help strengthen
political and economic governance, promote economic recovery and job creation, improve
access to basic services, reestablish security, and promote national dialogue ahead of 2005
elections. Through end-March 2005, disbursements of budgetary assistance to Haiti are
estimated at US$163.5 million. Project disbursements, however, have been slow reflecting
weak government capacity to prepare and implement projects, security concerns, as well as
procedural delays on the part of donors.
B. Policy Advice and Performance
6.
The Fund has been actively engaged with Haiti in recent years and a track record
of policy implementation is being established. The Fund’ s policy advice has focused on
macroeconomic stabilization, improvement in fiscal transparency and accountability, and the
need to clear external arrears and develop a medium-term strategy that could be supported by
a PRGF arrangement. This approach—
endorsed by the Executive Board at the conclusion of
the 2002 Article IV consultation—
guided two Staff-Monitored Programs (SMP) during
2003-04 and an EPCA-supported program approved on January 10, 2005 (Box 2).
C. Recent Economic Developments
7.
The EPCA program is broadly on track, but the economic recovery has been
weaker than expected (Text Table 1). According to the data provided by the authorities, all
end-December and end-March targets were observed (Table 1). Many structural measures
were implemented as envisaged, although key measures such as the census of public sector
employment and domestic arrears have been delayed (Table 13). Financial stability has been
maintained, but the weakness in exports and fiscal revenue, stagnant credit to the private
sector, as well as slower-than-anticipated project disbursements by donors suggest that the
recovery has fallen short.4

3

External assistance was pledged in support of a broad reform and development program (the Interim
Cooperation Framework - ICF) prepared jointly by the authorities and donors. The pledges also
included extensive technical assistance to address key institutional reforms necessary to support
economic growth.

4

There are no monthly statistics on production and Haiti does not produce quarterly GDP data.

-8-

Text Table 1. Haiti: Performance under the EPCA
2004/05
Oct.-March
Prog.

Prel.

Oct.-Sept.
Prog.

Proj.

(Annual percentage change)
GDP at constant prices
Consumer prices (12-month, end-of-period)

...
...

...
...

2.5
12.0

2.5
12.0

...
63.7
0.3
-2.2
-0.1
0.0

-7.5
83.6
-1.2
-6.0
0.0
0.0

-8.6
83.6
-1.5
-6.6
0.0
0.4

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
External current account balance (excluding grants)
Net international reserves (millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
Central government overall balance (including grants)
Central government overall balance (excluding grants)
Central bank financing of the government
Fiscal financing gap

...
57.6
-0.4
-2.2
0.2
0.0

1/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH. Projected end-September 2005 stock
reflects the authorities' downward revision of the end-September 2004 stock.

8.
However, progress has been made in containing inflation, and the exchange rate
has stabilized. A significant tightening of financial policies in 2003 helped reduce inflation
and stabilized the exchange rate (Figure 1). Inflation picked up again in early 2004, following
renewed central bank financing of the budget and widespread supply constraints, and the
gourde depreciated by 7 percent against the U.S. dollar during September 2003–
February 2004. After budget discipline was restored in April 2004 and monetary financing of
budget deficits was eliminated, inflation began to decline again and the gourde rebounded to
the mid-2003 level
Text Figure 1. Haiti: Exchange Rate 1/
(1990=100)
(Text Figure 1). However,
0.07
prices have been highly
210
volatile on a month-to-month
0.06
basis, as a result of supply
disruptions caused by the
160
Real Effective Exchange Rate
0.05
(left scale)
September 2004 floods, and
the pass-through of world
0.04
110
prices of petroleum. Recent
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
price developments are
(left scale)
Exchange Rate
0.03
(US$/gourdes, right scale)
consistent with the
60
program’ s objective of
0.02
bringing inflation down to
12 percent (12-month rate)
0.01
10
by September 2005.
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Source: Central Bank of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ An increase indicates an appreciation.

-9-

Box 2. Haiti: Fund Engagement in Haiti
At the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions, Executive Directors urged the authorities to re-establish
a basis for growth and improved living standards and stressed the importance of embarking on a mediumterm economic program, possibly in the context of a SMP that could establish a track-record of policy
implementation and lead to a PRGF-supported program. This approach guided two SMPs that preceded
an EPCA-supported program approved in January 2005.
SMP (April 2003–March 2004). A one-year SMP aimed at consolidating stabilization gains achieved
since early 2003 and clearance of external arrears. The macroeconomic framework of the SMP was
broadly maintained until December 2003, when the program went off-track, due to large expenditure
overruns. The SMP provided a framework for the reengagement of the IDB, and in June 2003 Haiti
cleared its arrears, thereby enabling the resumption of disbursements and development assistance.
SMP (April–September 2004). The new SMP, agreed in June 2004, sought to restore financial stability,
provide a macroeconomic framework for donor assistance, and establish a track record of policy
implementation that could build a basis for a possible future request for the use of Fund resources.
Performance under the SMP was satisfactory; all quantitative targets were observed by wide margins and
good progress was made on structural measures.
EPCA (October 2004–September 2005). The authorities requested a purchase under the Fund’s EPCA
policy to help address the impact of the conflict in early 2004. The EPCA-supported macroeconomic
program was agreed in late 2004, and on January 10, 2005, the Executive Board approved the purchase of
SDR10.23 million (12.5 percent of quota). The quantitative targets were observed (Table 1) and most of
the structural measures agreed for end-December were implemented as envisaged (Table 13). The
authorities indicated their intention to request an additional purchase under the EPCA. The
macroeconomic program underpinning the ECPA facilitated the reengagement of the World Bank with
Haiti. In early January, 2005, Haiti cleared its arrears to the World Bank; the Bank’s Executive Board
approved a fast-disbursing adjustment operation and an emergency recovery and disaster management
project.

9.
With the decline in inflation and exchange rate stability, the BRH has relaxed
monetary conditions in several steps. During August–October 2004, interest rates were
reduced to 7.6 percent from 13.6 percent, and the stock of excess reserves of the banking
system increased sharply reaching 25 percent of required reserves by March 2005.5 As a
result, commercial bank prime lending rates declined somewhat, while average gourde
deposit rates are now below dollar deposits rates. Nevertheless, private sector credit growth
has remained stagnant, reflecting low business confidence and weak domestic demand
(Figure 1).

5

Since June 2001, reserve requirements are 31 percent of gourde and dollar deposits at the commercial
banks.

- 10 -

10.
Current expenditure was cut to protect the fiscal targets during October 2004–
March 2005. Tax receipts were below target by around 0.2 percent of GDP, as a result of the
security situation and strikes by customs officials. Also, donor-financed capital outlays fell
below the programmed levels by 0.2 percent of GDP. The authorities responded by delaying
planned wage increases (by the equivalent of 0.3 percent of GDP), while increasing capital
expenditures financed by domestic resources. As a result, the overall fiscal deficit (excluding
grants) was in line with the program.
11.
The authorities are finalizing a supplementary budget for April–September 2005.
In the face of growing pressures to implement budgetary outlays and slower-than-expected
disbursement of donor assistance, the authorities are planning to re-orient expenditure to help
stimulate economic activity. Also, the overall level of spending will be increased by about
0.4 percent of GDP to cover the needed additional outlays on elections, demobilization, and
support to the electricity sector. The overall fiscal deficit is expected to reach 6.6 percent of
GDP (or 1.5 percent of GDP including grants)—
above the target assumed in the EPCA
program—
and there remains a financing gap of 0.4 percent of GDP. Unless additional donor
support is identified, the gap would need to be covered by central bank financing.
12.
Net international reserves (NIR) have stabilized at about US$65 million. With
continued strong inflows of private remittances, the BRH has been able to maintain NIR
above the program floor, while meeting foreign exchange needs of the government (Figure 3).
Nevertheless, reserve adequacy indicators suggest that gross reserves are still low by
international standards (Text Figure 2).
Text Figure 2. Haiti: Gross Reserves
500

30
Three months of imports

Percent

20

Gross reserves as share
of imports (left axis)

400
350

Gross reserves as share of
broad money (M3; left axis)

300

15

250
200

10

150
Gross reserves (right axis)
100

5

50
0

0
Sep-98

Sep-99

Sep-00

Sep-01

Sep-02

Sep-03

Sep-04

U.S. dollar million

25

450

- 11 -

13.
Haiti has cleared arrears to the World Bank (US$52 million) and obtained
deferral of debt-service obligations from three bilateral creditors. On January 4, 2005,
Haiti used US$46 million of its own reserves and a US$6.4 million grant from Canada to
clear its external payments arrears to the World Bank. Following the Board approval on
January 6, the World Bank disbursed US$46 million, enabling the replenishment of Haiti’ s
international reserves. In parallel, France, Italy, and Spain granted Haiti forbearance on the
stock of arrears and informed that a formal comprehensive treatment of its debt-service
obligations would take place after a PRGF-supported program is in place.
II. NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK AND RISKS
14.
Significant downside risks to the near-term outlook derive from the political
situation, and the lifting of quotas under the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC).
On the political front, security concerns and lack of government’ s control over provinces may
jeopardize prospects for fair and safe elections scheduled for late 2005. In addition, weak
coordination of donor financing with the budget and likely delays in disbursement of donor
assistance could further undermine private sector confidence and derail economic recovery.
Finally, Haiti’ s textile assembly export sector faces increasing competition in U.S. markets
now that ATC quotas have been abolished, and its survival is in question.6
15.
Despite the increased risks to the near-term economic outlook, the staff agreed
with the authorities to keep the 2004/05 macroeconomic framework unchanged. The staff
cautioned, in particular, that the GDP growth objective of 2½ percent would be difficult to
achieve, given signs in the first two quarters that the economic recovery had been delayed.
The authorities argued, however, that growth in the second half of the year would pick up
strongly in response to accelerated external disbursements and improved allocation of
expenditures in the supplementary budget to key development sectors, and that this year’ s
growth objectives could be achieved.7 Also, taking into account projected disbursements and
the inflow of private remittances, the end-September NIR target of the BRH is expected to be
met.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
16.
The authorities’ key objectives are to consolidate the macroeconomic
stabilization and to jump-start the economy. Although the transition government is unable
to commit to policies beyond 2005, it places a priority on ensuring that near-term economic
policies provide a firm basis for medium-term growth, and on a reform agenda that will be
formed after national elections in 2005. During the discussions, the staff stressed that
6

According to preliminary data for January–February 2005, Haiti’s textile exports were not affected
by the elimination of ATC quotas.

7

At a March 2005 meeting in Cayenne (French Guyana) donors agreed on a list of projects that would
be disbursed on an accelerated basis.

- 12 -

sustained growth would require political stability, a substantial strengthening of social and
economic infrastructure, as well as institutional capacity, supported by continued donor
engagement and commitment to combating corruption (Box 3). Continued expansion of
Haiti’ s national income will be essential to reduce poverty and help lessen dependency on
foreign aid.
17.
The authorities noted Haiti’s need for additional financing support from the
Fund, including a second EPCA purchase. They stated that continued assistance from the
Fund would also provide a macroeconomic framework that could extend beyond national
elections when negotiations could begin with a newly-elected government on a program that
could be supported by the PRGF. The staff noted that a positive track record of policy
implementation under the EPCA program could provide a basis for a future request for Fund
resources.
A. Fiscal Policy and Reforms
18.
The authorities and staff agreed on the need for budget corrections to protect the
fiscal objectives of the EPCA-supported program. The authorities were confident that
targets for budgetary revenues in the second half of the fiscal year could be met by
strengthening tax administration, including by intensifying customs inspections and
reestablishing controls over imports from the Dominican Republic. The staff observed that the
main risk to revenue projections was a deterioration in security conditions, which would
affect both domestic incomes and tax administration. On the expenditure side, the staff
stressed the importance of safeguarding key social expenditures, especially in light of their
importance for political cohesion and stability. The authorities stated that in consultation with
donors, a package of projects was being prepared focusing on infrastructure and the provision
of basic social services, which will be incorporated in the supplementary budget and
implemented before the end of this fiscal year. Additional donor financing is being sought to
cover the remaining financing gap.
19.
The mission raised questions regarding the large budgetary transfers in support
of electricity. The authorities estimate that additional central government transfers to the
Electricité d’ Haïti (EDH) totaling G400 million (0.3 percent of GDP) will be needed through
end-September 2005 to ensure the supply of electricity in Port-au-Prince. The staff noted that
the EDH’ s very difficult financial condition and lack of adequate internal expenditure control
mechanisms represented a significant source of fiscal vulnerability and urged the authorities
to establish an effective monitoring mechanism. The authorities agreed with the staff’ s
proposal, reiterating their commitment to full accountability and transparency in public sector
operations. They noted that such a mechanism will be set up by end-April, and that all new
contracts for electricity production would be subject to open and competitive bidding
procedures.

- 13 -

Box 3. Haiti: GDP Growth, Medium-Term Projections, and Millennium Development Goals
GDP growth in Haiti has been on a declining trend during the past 20 years, but has fluctuated widely in response to political
developments and external aid flows.
•

During the 1970s, real GDP growth averaged 4.6 percent, fueled by expansion in light manufacturing, the garment assembly
industry, tourism, as well as public investment financed by foreign aid.

•

In the 1980s, growth turned negative, affected by a hurricane and drought,
and a U.S. recession. The political instability after the fall of the Duvalier
regime in 1986 led to further economic decline.

•

Following President Aristide’s election in 1991, growth recovered as
macroeconomic conditions and relations with donors improved.

•

During 1992–94, real GDP declined by a cumulative 25 percent, reflecting
the effects of the military coup, the international economic and political
embargo, and the cutoff of foreign aid. Agriculture suffered from shortages
of inputs, the assembly sector contracted, and tourism ceased.

•

•

After President Aristide’s return to Haiti in 1994, substantial economic
assistance helped re-invigorate growth, and activity expanded in
construction and manufacturing. However, growth weakened subsequently
due to growing political instability, declining foreign aid, and poor
agricultural performance.

10

(percent)

5
0
-5

GDP growth
-10

Trend growth

-15
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Sources: IFS and Fund staff estimates

During 2001–04, real GDP growth averaged -1.2 percent, as the political impasse undermined business confidence and nonhumanitarian aid was suspended. Political tensions culminated in an armed conflict and change of government in February
2004, with damage estimated at 5½ percent of GDP.

Over the medium-term, real GDP growth is expected to exceed its recent
trend on the assumption of increased foreign aid flows and political stability.
Recent trend growth is estimated at 0.7 percent, reflecting the dampening effect of
the recent drop in activity.1 With restored business confidence and the resumption
of foreign assistance, GDP growth could revive more strongly to nearly 4 percent,
a rate that is similar to that achieved during the 1970s. In the short term, large
capital inflows are expected to boost growth mainly through construction. In the
medium term, growth will be supported by public investment largely financed by
foreign aid, private sector investment and productivity gains from structural
reforms.
Haiti would need to double the average GDP growth rate currently projected
at 4 percent per year to halve head-count poverty by 2015.2 Haiti is ranked
153 on the Human Development Index—76 percent of the population, and
88 percent of the rural population, lives below the poverty line (US$2 per day
income per person).
1

Figure 1. Haiti: Actual and Trend GDP
growth 1970-2003

Figure 2. Haiti: GDP growth and external
aid, 1970-2003
15

600

10

400

5

200

0

0

-5
-10
-15
1970

GDP growth (left axis, in percent)

-200

External loans and grants (right
axis, US$ million)

-400

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Sources: IFS and Fund staff estimates

Trend output growth was calculated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter.

2

Cutting headcount poverty in half between 2003 and 2015 would require annual growth of GDP per capita of 2.9 percent. See Human
Development Report 2003, “Millennium Development Goals: A compact among nations to end human poverty.”

20.
The staff stressed the need to bolster the budget execution process. Weaknesses in
expenditure monitoring coupled with very conservative budget management had contributed

-600

- 14 -

to keeping spending well below the targets set under the last SMP and the EPCA program.
The staff and authorities agreed that aid coordination and implementation of projects agreed
under the Interim Coopeartion Framework needed to be accelerated as soon as possible to
boost economic recovery, create employment, and expand provision of key social services.
21.
The mission and the authorities agreed on the broad parameters that would
govern the 2005/06 budget. The key macroeconomic assumptions for 2005/06 include real
GDP growth of 3 percent, inflation of 10 percent, and an increase in NIR to US$114 million
by end-September 2006. In order to increase key public services and, public investment,
while eliminating BRH financing, domestic revenues and external financing would need to
fully cover recurrent and capital expenditures. The overall deficit (excluding grants) of
7 percent of GDP would be fully covered by external concessional loans and grants.
22.
Aid coordination needs to be strengthened to ensure effective use of the pledged
external assistance. The authorities noted that they are seeking donor support in preparation
of projects that were agreed under the ICF and are to be included in the public investment
program. The total amount of external assistance for the 2005/06 central government budget
is projected at US$328 million, mostly from Canada, the European Union, the IDB, the
United States, and the World Bank (Table 11). However, the team noted that it projected a
budget financing gap of about US$20 million (0.4 percent of GDP) and that external cash
budget support would not be sufficient to even cover Haiti’ s debt service obligations, and
urged the authorities to work with donors to secure additional financing.
23.
The authorities are planning to prepare the 2005/06 budget soon enough to allow
proper planning, coordination with donors, and consultation with civil society.
Accordingly, they committed to conveying indicative spending ceilings to ministries, as well
as to transmitting project proposals for the public investment program, consistent with the
priorities of the ICF and in time for Cabinet discussion in July. This would enable the
budget’ s submission for public consultation prior to its final approval in September.8
24.
The authorities are committed to improving budget management and
expenditure control. They emphasized that a broad strategy for reform of public financial
management is needed, especially in view of governance weaknesses and increased donor
funding. The authorities identified the following priority areas: (i) the budget formulation
process, to enable identification of strategic spending priorities; (ii) the expenditure approval
process, to limit discretionary recourse by ministries to current accounts; (iii) the preparation
and execution of the public investment program, which is presently handicapped by
inadequate institutional capacity; and (iv) budget monitoring, which is constrained by the
absence of reliable, timely monthly fiscal data. The authorities welcomed the envisaged

8

Two technical assistance missions from FAD—on revenue administration and tax policy, and on
public expenditure management—are envisaged to help enhance the budget preparation process.

- 15 -

technical assistance from the Fund which they saw as instrumental in developing a fiscal
reform agenda for the medium term.9
B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies
25.
The staff underscored the importance of reducing inflation to single digit levels.
The team noted that exchange rate stability—boosted by inflows of private remittances—
and the
elimination of monetary financing of the budget deficit had played a key role in helping
reduce inflation over the past year. At the same time, weak economic activity had also
reduced pressures on domestic prices. However, interest rates on gourde deposits were now
below those on dollar deposits and were highly negative in real terms, and the staff cautioned
that, especially given the large excess reserves in the banking system, there was a risk that
pressures on the exchange rate could emerge. Therefore, a tightening of the monetary policy
stance was needed, both to avoid destabilizing the exchange rate and to support the program’ s
inflation objectives.
26.
The BRH officials responded that the monetary stimulus introduced last year
was still needed to support economic recovery. Moreover, they observed that BRH losses
would have been exacerbated if the banking system’ s excess reserves (estimated at 7.1
percent of gourde broad money) had been sterilized. Nevertheless, the officials underscored
their commitment to containing inflation and agreed to a gradual absorption of the liquidity
overhang in the coming year.
27.
The authorities are seeking to strengthen their monetary policy framework. The
BRH targets inflation with broad money as the operational target, while also taking into
account the need to avoid exchange rate instability while maintaining a market-determined
floating regime. The authorities recognized the need to upgrade their capacity to forecast
liquidity, which would require better coordination between monetary and central government
financial operations, and have requested technical assistance from the Fund. Also, markets for
financial instruments need to be modernized to provide clear signals about market conditions.
In the near term, the BRH will reinstate a conventional auction for a predetermined amount of
BRH bonds, in line with the recommendations of the recent IMF technical assistance mission
(Box 4).

9

Haiti’s fiscal performance and medium-term issues are discussed in the accompanying selected issues
paper.

- 16 -

Box 4. Haiti: Recommendations on the Central Bank’s Operations
•

Reinstate a conventional auction for BRH bonds, with bids accepted for the preannounced amount.

•

Establish a formal targeting framework, with a macroeconomic forecast to link
the bond auction to the targets on monetary policy.

•

Convert outstanding BRH credit to the government into bonds that would provide
the central bank with income sufficient to conduct monetary operations.

•

Gradually reduce reserve requirements to internationally comparable levels
(10 percent or less).

•

Review the BRH’ s regulations and guidelines relating to foreign currency
exposure limits and the management of foreign currency risks.

28.
The authorities and staff agreed that the present floating exchange rate regime is
appropriate in Haiti’s circumstances.10 The authorities noted that the appreciation of the
gourde over the past year reflected its recovery from a year before, and expressed the view
that it did not have a significant impact on Haiti’ s competitiveness, as wage costs remain very
low and export performance does not appear to have been affected.11 They suggested that
political instability, weak infrastructure, and poor security conditions were more important
factors weighing on competitiveness.12 Also, since mid-2004 both nominal and real exchange
rates have depreciated somewhat (Text Figure 1).
29.
The authorities agreed on the need to strengthen the BRH by addressing its losses
and increasing its independence. The legal, operational, and financial autonomy of the
central bank needs to be bolstered by modernizing its legal basis and properly defining its role
and relations with the government. The staff noted, however, that there was an even more
urgent need to address the operational losses of the BRH and to develop a plan to strengthen
10

It is generally agreed that a flexible exchange rate is appropriate in situations with low level of
international reserves, weak fiscal position and vulnerability to real shocks.
11

Average daily wages in the assembly sector are estimated at US$4−5 (equivalent to monthly wages
of about US$100).
12

The HOPE Act, currently under consideration by the U.S. congress, is intended to provide limited
duty-free access to certain Haitian exports of apparel products manufactured with components
originating in the U.S. or countries to which the U.S. grants trade preferences. Last year, the HERO
Act—a more favorable alternative for Haiti to the HOPE Act—lapsed without Congressional approval.

- 17 -

its financial position to enable it to conduct monetary operations effectively.13 The authorities
agreed to introduce in the 2005/06 budget a plan to recapitalize the BRH. This latter step is to
be supported by IMF technical assistance.
30.
The authorities were confident that financial system vulnerabilities were modest.
Official data indicate that the financial system remains stable, an assessment also supported
by banking supervisors and commercial banks’ auditors. In particular, although
nonperforming loans increased as a share of total loans from 7 percent in September to
8.3 percent in December 2004, the average risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio was
15.1 percent. The BRH continues to monitor the financial position of commercial banks, and
it is working on a new banking law that would, inter alia, strengthen the supervisory role of
the central bank. Also, the BRH has recently extended its supervision to credit cooperatives.
C. Structural Reforms and Governance
31.
The authorities stressed the importance they attach to enhancing public sector
governance and transparency. The staff agreed that considerable progress has been
achieved in implementing structural reforms in the first half of the fiscal year (Table 13). The
expenditure approval process has been streamlined and the discretionary use of ministerial
current accounts has been sharply reduced. Also, the Anti-Corruption Unit became
operational by end-2004, pre-audits of the state-owned telephone and electricity companies
have been initiated, and requests for offers for audits of three other key public sector
enterprises have been published. In the financial sector, the IMF safeguards assessment and
the external audit of the BRH accounts have been largely completed.
32.
The staff welcomed the authorities’ commitment to implement the remaining
structural measures under the program. The staff recommended completing the census of
employment in order to reduce the number of “ghost workers” and release resources for
priority areas in the 2005/06 budget, and also implementing the survey of domestic arrears.
The authorities agreed, and indicated that the census of employment in education and the
survey of domestic payment arrears were to begin in May. Also, they confirmed that the
information on the execution of the budget and the list of beneficiaries of a governmentsupported program to compensate private businesses for damages suffered from the early
2004 conflict would be published in line with their earlier commitment. The authorities will
also continue to limit discretionary spending through current ministerial accounts to below
10 percent of budgetary credits for nonwage current spending.

13

The main sources of the BRH’s financial losses are subsidized lending to the central government
and high sterilization costs, resulting in losses estimated at 1 percent of GDP in 2003/04. See Selected
Issues paper “Losses of Haiti’s Central Bank.”

- 18 -

D. Medium-Term Outlook and Debt Sustainability
33.
The staff’s medium-term GDP growth projection takes into account the trend
output growth and increased foreign aid inflows (Box 3 and Table 6). The projection
assumes a continued inflow of external assistance of about 10 percent of GDP annually, to
support extensive public investment program. Accordingly, growth would average 4 percent,
the external current account deficit (excluding external grants) would stabilize at 7 percent of
GDP by 2009, and gross international reserves would increase to the equivalent of three
months of imports.
34.
To support increased provision of key social services and to underpin the
strengthening of the public sector’s institutional capacity, government domestic
revenues need to increase by 3 percentage points of GDP over the medium term. This
would require reforms in the areas of tax policy and tax administration, and strengthened
public sector governance and transparency. Strengthening essential public services would
require selective wage increases to recruit and maintain quality staff in key security,
education, and health sectors, and the wage bill as a share of GDP is projected to rise by 2009
to 5 percent of GDP, the levels observed in the mid-1990s. The authorities noted that
improvements in tax administration, and its extension over the entire country, would likely
bring large increases in government revenues. They agreed that the main risks to the mediumterm outlook derive from potential delays in holding elections and achieving national
reconciliation, which could undermine continued donor involvement and derail economic
recovery.
35.
The authorities believe that stronger growth is possible with renewed donor
support, sound macroeconomic policies, and a stable business climate. They underscored
the need to upgrade the country’ s infrastructure, noting that unreliable provision of
electricity, inadequate road networks, and difficult security conditions were the main
impediments to growth and investment. The staff agreed that higher GDP growth would be
desirable—
along the lines of the projections prepared for the 2002 Article IV consultation
(Text Figure 3)—
to boost incomes and employment and enable Haiti to converge toward the
Millennium Development Goals. However, such performance would require a pace of
structural reforms and of investment that in the staff’ s view could not be assumed under
present conditions. Raising growth to high sustainable levels over the medium term would
require achieving broad domestic consensus on the economic and social strategy and making
substantial progress toward political stability and domestic security.

- 19 -

Text Figure 3. Haiti. Real GDP Growth
6
Art. IV 2002 strong
scenario

Current projections

4

2

0
2003
-2

Actual

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Art. IV 2002, weak scenario

-4

36.
The team cautioned that additional donor support of about US$50 million was
needed to close the external financing gap projected for 2005/06. Total external financing
is projected at US$454 million, of which US$328 million is for the 2005/06 budget and the
rest corresponds to humanitarian assistance and funding of elections. The bulk of this external
financing is expected in the form of grants, but the existing commitments in support of the
elections appear to fall short of the projected cost. The staff encouraged the authorities to seek
additional financial support to help meet Haiti’ s foreign exchange needs and the external
reserves objectives.
37.
The authorities shared the staff’s concerns about Haiti’s debt sustainability.14
Based on end-2004 data, the debt-export ratio (in net present value (NPV) terms) of
187 percent suggests that Haiti’ s debt may be unsustainable. The team noted that although on
more favorable assumptions (higher export growth or concessionality of pledged assistance),
the debt situation appeared less worrisome, the fiscal capacity to carry the present level of
debt was weak, which illustrated the importance of ensuring that donor assistance was
provided only on highly concessional terms and of establishing growth-oriented policies. The
staffs of the IMF and World Bank will undertake a formal assessment of Haiti’ s HIPC
eligibility, and expect to present its results in a joint paper to their respective Boards later this
year.
38.
The BRH stressed the importance of further accumulation of international
reserves for strengthening Haiti’s external position. In this context, the BRH welcomed
the staff’ s analysis and discussion of the applicability of alternative benchmarks for
establishing medium-term reserve accumulation targets. The BRH recognized that according
to commonly used benchmarks the present level of international reserves was too low.
14

See Annex V—Debt Sustainability Analysis.

- 20 -

Officials stressed, however, that determining the appropriate level of reserves in Haiti would
require consideration of qualitative factors such as the floating exchange regime, the high
share of imports directly linked to private remittances and to the assembly export sector, and
low debt-service obligations. Nevertheless, they noted that reserve coverage of about three
months of imports could be a useful interim operational target that could provide sufficient
protection against external vulnerabilities.
E. Other Issues
39.
The authorities welcomed technical assistance from the Fund. In March 2005, a
technical assistance mission from Fund’ s Monetary and Financial Systems Department
identified the technical assistance priorities of the BRH and advised the authorities on the
appropriate instruments to upgrade the central bank monetary operations framework. A
parallel mission from the Finance Department completed an on-site safeguards assessment of
the BRH. Two technical assistance missions from the Fiscal Affairs Department are
envisaged to recommend measures on revenue administration and tax policy, and public
expenditure management. This expenditure management technical assistance mission has
reviewed steps to strengthen the budget formulation process and the use of a new budget
nomenclature. A technical assistance mission from the Statistics Department will recommend
measures to strengthen the quality and timeliness of monetary data reported to the Fund.
40.
The staff underscored the urgency to improving the government’s capacity to
produce quality and timely fiscal and monetary data. While the periodicity and coverage
of economic statistics made available to the Fund are broadly adequate, problems exist with
regard to their timeliness, which does not meet the standards stipulated in the Technical
Memorandum of Understanding under the EPCA-supported program. The most severe
problems exist with regard to data on Haiti’ s international reserves, which largely reflect the
excessive decentralization of accounting and financial reporting at the BRH. The staff
welcomed the authorities’ commitment to strengthen data reporting and reliability, especially
for data required for the monitoring of performance under the program.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
41.
The political transition initiated last year and the renewed donor support have
created conditions for restoring growth and dealing with Haiti’s acute social problems.
Over the past year, the transition government has restored financial stability, and good
progress was made on the structural front. The EPCA program is broadly on track, the gourde
has stabilized, inflation is on the decline, net international reserves have increased, and many
structural measures were implemented as envisaged despite a difficult political and security
environment. The international community pledged large resources at the July 2004
conference in Washington, and the Fund approved financial assistance in support of the
EPCA program.
42.
The challenge ahead will be to raise growth over the medium term. As a first step,
it would be important to fully implement the social and economic agenda agreed with donors,

- 21 -

restore security, and establish conditions for fair and safe elections. Prerequisites for raising
growth on a sustainable basis would include achieving broad domestic consensus on the
economic and social strategy, prudent macroeconomic policies, and continued commitment to
good governance. In that context, an important task of a new government to be formed in
early 2006 would be to develop a medium-term development and poverty reduction strategy
that could be supported by the international community.
43.
In the near term, however, the weaker-than-expected economic recovery will
require policy adjustments and additional donor support. The authorities are finalizing a
supplementary budget for April−September 2005 that seeks to deal with revenue shortfalls
and delays in project disbursements. Welcome steps have also been taken to strengthen tax
administration to prevent further revenue shortfalls and protect priority outlays, including in
areas where implementation of donor funded projects was slower than anticipated. Given the
political and economic importance of sustaining electricity supply, the supplementary budget
also provides additional resources needed to cover higher fuel costs and weaker hydro
production. Additional outlays will also be needed to strengthen security and the
government’ s control over provinces, which are essential for ensuring successful elections.
The authorities have appropriately appealed to the international community to accelerate
disbursement of pledged assistance, including for the additional financing needs of the
budget, while the recourse to central bank financing should be minimized.
44.
The transition government’s recognition of the importance of broad
consultations with civil society and political parties on the 2005/06 budget is welcome.
Early initiation of this process will help align donor support with government priorities and
the needs of all stakeholders, and will be especially important in view of the political
transition that is envisaged to occur in the first half of next year. The staff welcomes the
authorities’ commitment to ensure that in the 2005/06 budget total government expenditure
will be fully covered by domestic revenues and external donor financing, and there will not be
any recourse to domestic financing.
45.
Monetary conditions need to be tightened to consolidate progress in reducing
inflation and protect the program’s external objectives. The liquidity in the banking
system appears excessive and needs to be absorbed and interest rates raised to positive levels
in real terms. The authorities are committed to re-establishing price-based auctions for BRH
bonds and to introducing in the 2005/06 budget a plan to strengthen the financial position of
the central bank. The staff encourages publication of the interim audit of the BRH and
welcomes the completion of the IMF safeguards assessment mission.
46.
The floating exchange rate regime has been appropriate in Haiti’s circumstances.
The authorities’ interventions in the foreign exchange market have been implemented
judiciously, without disturbing market conditions while allowing an increase in international
reserves to more comfortable levels. The staff supports the BRH’ s objective of increasing its
net international reserves over the medium term.

- 22 -

47.
The authorities are encouraged to build on the progress that has been achieved
on the structural front. It will be important to carry forward the momentum for reforms, and
in particular to complete the census of employment in the public sector, the survey of
domestic arrears of the government, and to publish the list of beneficiaries of a governmentsupported program to compensate private businesses for damages suffered from the early
2004 conflict. The staff also encourages the authorities to strengthen the budget execution
process, and welcomes the authorities’ commitment to ensure that government transfers to
the electricity sector are used as envisaged, and that all contracts on electricity production
adhere to open and competitive bidding procedures.
48.
The staff supports the authorities’ efforts to enhance aid coordination and
mobilize additional donor financing. It will be important to ensure that additional financial
support that may be required for the supplementary budget be provided and external budget
financing pledged for this year be fully disbursed, which will play a key role in reinvigorating
the economy and restoring private sector confidence. For 2005/06, resources need to be
identified to ensure full financing of the budget and elections. New financing needs to be
provided on highly concessional terms to minimize Haiti’ s external debt burden, which could
become a source of vulnerability. The staff welcomes the regularization of arrears to the
World Bank and the agreement by some bilateral donors to defer debt-service payments and
the treatment of arrears until a PRGF-supported program is in place.
49.
There is an urgent need to improve data reporting to the Fund for program
monitoring and surveillance. Serious problems continue with the delivery of timely fiscal
and monetary data consistent with the standards agreed for program monitoring. These
problems can be remedied by implementing the recommendations of the IMF safeguards
assessment mission and technical assistance from the Fund.
50.
It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Haiti be held on the
standard 12-month cycle.

0
0
55
…
…

Nonconcessional external loans contracted or guaranteed by the
central government
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Up to one year
Over one-year maturity

Net international reserves of central bank (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Memorandum items: 5/
Government total revenue (in millions of gourdes)

Government total expenditure (in millions of gourdes)

5,893

4,027

7

0
0

0

806

...

...

14

...
...

...

551

-370

-330
0

-330

Dec. 04

Prog. with
adjustor 3/

5,562

3,611

36

0
0

0

169

-805

-773
-33

-805

Actual

11,764

7,979

3

0
0

0

741

297

378
0

378

Prog.

...

...

3

0
0

0

741

297

378
0

378

Mar. 05

Prog. with
adjustor

11,429

7,715

9

0
0

0

619

-178

-164
-5

-169

Actual 4/

Actual

12

0
0

0

251

217

339
0

339

June 05

Prog.

18,732

11,964

Cumulative flows since September 2004

26,084

15,921

29

0
0

0

34

-163

0
0

0

Sept. 05

Prog.

1/ Refer to technical memorandum for definitions of indicative targets.
2/ Stock at end-September has been updated with revised information provided by authorities.
3/ In December 2004, Haiti received additional cash budgetary support of US$12.7 million from Canada, which triggers the adjustor in section II.B of the TMU. Accordingly, the targets on BRH financing
of the government and of the public sector and on BRH net domestic assets are adjusted downward by US$6.7 million, and the floor on the NIR is adjusted upward by the same amount.
4/ Monetary data is estimated from daily and weekly reports provided by the BRH as of March 25, 2005. Government revenue and expenditure figures reflects actual data through February and estimations for March.
5/ Not targets.

Sources: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank of Haiti, and Fund staff estimates.

0

6,612

-115

-74
0

21,659
-79
21,097

-74

Prog.

21,581

Domestic arrears of the central government

Net domestic assets of the central bank (in millions of gourdes)

Net domestic banking sector credit to the nonfinancial public sector
(in millions of gourdes)

Net central bank credit to the NFPS (in millions of gourdes)
Of which:
Central government
Rest of NFPS

end-September 2004 2/

Actual stock at

EPCA

Table 1. Haiti: Indicative Targets, September 2004–March 2005 1/

Actual

- 23 -

- 24 Table 2. Haiti: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
Fiscal Year Ending September 30

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Prog.

Proj.

Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices 1/
GDP deflator
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end-of-period)

0.9
11.1
11.5
15.3

-1.0
11.6
16.8
12.3

-0.5
10.1
8.7
10.1

0.5
26.9
32.5
42.5

-3.8
21.9
27.1
22.5

2.5
15.0
16.6
12.0

2.5
15.0
16.6
12.0

3.0
10.6
9.6
10.0

External sector
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Real effective exchange rate (+ appreciation)

-2.5
6.8
-6.0

-7.8
-2.9
7.9

-10.5
-6.9
-8.9

21.0
13.6
-8.5

12.8
6.0
31.6

4.8
24.4
...

8.6
31.6
...

4.4
5.4
...

Central government
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue 2/
Total expenditure

2.0
-0.3
13.4

5.2
3.8
8.7

15.4
20.2
20.6

37.5
37.3
39.8

31.0
15.9
17.5

27.8
46.5

68.7
25.7
49.8

18.1
18.0
19.4

Money and credit
Net domestic assets 3/
Credit to public sector (net) 3/
Credit to private sector 3/
Broad money (including foreign currency deposits)
Velocity (GDP relative to broad money)
Average interest rate on time deposits

18.1
7.9
16.9
36.2
2.6
15.0

9.4
8.5
-3.5
5.2
2.7
13.5

17.0
9.4
5.9
17.2
2.5
7.6

26.2
9.3
13.0
39.8
2.3
15.0

10.6
4.6
3.4
9.1
2.5
7.5

6.9
-0.3
7.2
12.8
2.7
...

6.2
0.0
4.9
12.5
2.6
...

7.7
0.0
7.7
13.0
2.6
...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Gross investment
Gross national savings
Of which: Public sector savings
Savings-investment balance 4/

27.3
23.9
0.7
-3.5

25.9
22.3
-0.6
-3.6

24.9
22.4
1.0
-2.5

30.7
29.8
-0.3
-0.9

27.3
26.5
1.0
-0.8

27.5
24.8
0.2
-2.7

29.1
25.7
-0.6
-3.4

29.3
25.1
0.2
-4.3

Central government overall balance (including grants)
Central government overall balance (excluding grants)
Central bank net credit to the central government

-2.2
-2.5
2.5

-2.4
-2.8
2.6

-3.0
-3.2
3.1

-3.5
-3.6
3.1

-2.4
-3.7
2.0

-1.2
-6.0
0.0

-1.5
-6.6
0.0

-1.7
-7.0
0.0

External current account balance (including official grants)
External current account balance (excluding official grants)
External public debt (end-of-period)
Total public debt (end-of-period) 5/
External public debt service (in percent of
exports of goods and nonfactor services)

-1.0
-6.6
29.9
31.3

-2.0
-6.5
33.6
36.8

-1.0
-4.9
36.1
39.4

-0.1
-4.8
44.4
48.2

0.4
-2.8
37.2
39.5

0.5
-7.5
30.7
32.6

0.2
-8.6
31.2
34.1

-1.0
-9.1
30.7
33.2

7.9

8.7

7.9

8.5

9.2

9.2

9.3

7.8

33.0
54.5
206.9
1.3
36.8

80.1
85.4
271.0
1.7
...

64.0
83.6
277.1
1.6
...

6.1
113.6
345.8
1.9
...

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Overall balance of payments
Net international reserves 6/
Liquid gross reserves 7/
In months of imports of the following year
Exchange rate (gourdes per dollar, end-of-period)

-51.9
162.9
222.3
2.1
28.3

-7.9
108.8
227.3
2.2
25.5

-68.5
53.0
177.7
1.5
29.7

-10.9
38.8
157.1
1.2
42.0

Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Based on the authorities' revised nominal GDP for 2000, 2001, and 2002.
2/ Excluding grants.
3/ In relation to broad money (including foreign currency deposits) at the beginning of the period.
4/ External current account balance excluding official capital grants.
5/ Includes external public sector debt, outstanding Central Bank bonds, and credit from commercial banks to the NFPS.
6/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
7/ Gross reserves excluding capital contributions to international organizations.

- 25 Table 3a: Central Government Operations
(In millions of gourdes)
2003/04
Oct-Sept.
Est.

Proj.

2005/06
Oct-Sept.
Proj.

Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Current revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Other current revenue
Grants
Budget support
Project grants

14,306
12,457
12,457
8,769
3,481
207
1,848
476
1,372

5,388
4,027
4,027
3,021
1,003
2
1,361
350
1,011

5,647
3,611
3,611
2,596
917
98
2,036
1,129
907

5,650
3,952
3,952
2,855
1,094
2
1,698
350
1,348

6,247
4,104
4,104
2,598
1,112
394
2,143
970
1,174

13,022
7,942
7,942
5,474
2,463
5
5,080
700
4,380

12,235
7,942
7,942
5,474
2,463
5
4,292
757
3,535

24,059
15,921
15,921
11,351
4,560
10
8,138
1,400
6,738

24,129
15,657
15,657
10,668
4,491
498
8,472
2,855
5,616

28,497
18,477
18,477
…
…
…
10,020
529
9,490

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Net Operations
Operations
Other current expenditure 1/
Transfers to the central bank 2/
Interest payments
External
Domestic
Transfers and subsidies 3/
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Of which: counterpart funds
Foreign-financed

15,996
11,037
4,126
4,517
5,160
-660
0
1,150
662
488
1,261
4,960
3,031
...
1,929

5,893
4,242
1,883
1,072
1,072
0
0
271
150
121
1,015
1,651
454
63
1,197

5,562
4,067
1,476
1,325
795
530
0
217
87
129
1,050
1,495
348

5,867
3,528
1,393
895
978
-83
0
285
157
128
955
2,339
991
1,348

14,319
7,590
2,825
2,144
2,144
0
0
590
348
242
2,031
6,729
1,542
405
5,188

15,115
9,042
3,307
2,271
2,271
0
0
607
353
255
2,857
6,073
1,184
0
4,889

26,084
15,611
6,121
4,289
4,289
0
0
1,140
656
484
4,061
10,473
2,492
570
7,981

26,544
16,637
6,176
4,491
4,044
447
0
1,108
597
512
4,861
9,906
2,523
0
7,384

31,702
18,018
7,465
5,017
0
0
606
1,054
570
484
3,876
13,684
1,061

1,147

5,871
3,779
1,412
1,072
1,072
0
0
279
158
121
1,015
2,093
496
103
1,596

12,623

1,897
1,421

135
-215

672
-456

523
173

1,546
576

1,053
353

-343
-1,100

1,711
311

1,875
-980

989
459

-1,691

-1,866

85

-1,919

381

-6,377

-2,880

-10,162

-2,415

0

Current account balance
Including current grants
Excluding grants
Overall balance exc. exceptional outlays
Exceptional outlays

Oct-Dec
Prog.
Prel. 4/

2004/05
Jan-Mar
Prog.
Prel. 5/

April-Sept.
Prog.

Proj.

Oct-Sept.
Prog.

1,722

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants

-3,413
-5,261

-505
-1,866

85
-1,951

-222
-1,919

381
-1,763

-1,297
-6,377

-2,880
-7,173

-2,024
-10,162

-2,415
-10,886

-3,205
-13,225

Financing
External net financing
Loans (net)
Disbursements
Budget support
Project loans
Amortization

3,413
605
-179
954
397
557
-1,136

505
620
438
737
551
186
-300

-85
682
438
791
551
240
-352

222
-190
1,705
1,997
1,748
249
-291

-381
-990
984
1,243
1,068
175
-259

1,297
1,757
1,645
2,318
1,511
808
-673

2,218
2,054
1,933
2,636
1,283
1,353
-702

2,024
2,187
3,788
5,052
3,810
1,243
-1,264

1,753
1,747
3,355
4,669
2,902
1,768
-1,314

3,205
2,365
2,365
3,763
630
3,133
-1,398

784
784
0

183
232
-49

244
293
-49

-1,896
43
-1,938

-1,973
26
-1,999

112
112
0

121
121
0

-1,601
386
-1,987

-1,609
439
-2,048

0
0
0

2,807
2,789
2,821
-32
18
800
-783
0

-115
-115
-74
-41
0
0
0
0

-767
-767
-773
6
0
0
0
0

412
412
453
-41
0
0

609
609
609
0
0
0
0
0

-460
-460
-378
-82
0
0
0
0

164
164
164
0
0
0
0
662

-163
-163
0
-163
0
0
0
0

6
6
0
6
0
0
0
662

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
840

Arrears (Net)
Accumulation
Reduction
Internal net financing
Banking system
BRH
Commercial banks
Arrears (Net)
Accumulation
Reduction
Financing gap

0

Sources: Ministry of Finance and Economy; and Fund staff estimates
1/ Includes statistical discrepancy.
2/ To cover net operational losses of the central bank.
3/ Includes expenditures reclassified from operations to transfers and subsidies in 2004/05.
4/ Total external financing, including grants, was higher than programmed, primarily due to the disbursement of a US$12.7 million (G483 million) grant from Canada in late December.
5/ Foreign-financed capital expenditures include the disbursement of a US$2.8 million grant from Canada for Haiti's membership fee for the Caribbean Development Bank.
Grants were higher than programmed due to the increase in the grant component of World Bank financing.

- 26 Table 3b. Haiti: Central Government Operations
(In percent of GDP)
2003/04
Oct-Sept.
Est.

Oct-Dec
Prog.
Prel. 4/

2004/05
Jan-Mar
Prog.
Prel. 5/

April-Sept.
Prog.

Proj.

Oct-Sept.
Prog. 6/

Proj.

2005/06
Oct-Sept.
Proj.

Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Current revenue
Domestic taxes
Customs duties
Other current revenue
Grants
Budget support
Project grants

10.2
8.9
8.9
6.2
2.5
0.1
1.3
0.3
1.0

3.3
2.4
2.4
1.8
0.6
0.0
0.8
0.2
0.6

3.4
2.2
2.2
1.6
0.6
0.1
1.2
0.7
0.5

3.4
2.4
2.4
1.7
0.7
0.0
1.0
0.2
0.8

3.8
2.5
2.5
1.6
0.7
0.2
1.3
0.6
0.7

7.9
4.8
4.8
3.3
1.5
0.0
3.1
0.4
2.6

7.4
4.8
4.8
3.3
1.5
0.0
2.6
0.5
2.1

14.5
9.6
9.6
6.9
2.8
0.0
4.9
0.8
4.1

14.6
9.5
9.5
6.4
2.7
0.3
5.1
1.7
3.4

15.1
9.8
9.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.3
0.3
5.0

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Net Operations
Operations
Other current expenditure 1/
Transfers to the central bank 2/
Interest payments
External
Domestic
Transfers and subsidies 3/
Capital expenditure
Domestically financed
Of which: counterpart funds
Foreign financed

11.4
7.9
2.9
3.2
3.7
-0.5
0.0
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.9
3.5
2.2
0.0
1.4

3.6
2.6
1.1
0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
0.3
0.0
0.7

3.4
2.5
0.9
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.9
0.2
0.0
0.7

3.5
2.3
0.9
0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.6
1.3
0.3
0.1
1.0

3.5
2.1
0.8
0.5
0.6
-0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.6
1.4
0.6
0.0
0.8

8.7
4.6
1.7
1.3
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.2
0.1
1.2
4.1
0.9
0.2
3.1

9.1
5.5
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.7
3.7
0.7
0.0
3.0

15.8
9.4
3.7
2.6
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.4
0.3
2.5
6.3
1.5
0.3
4.8

16.0
10.1
3.7
2.7
2.4
0.3
0.0
0.7
0.4
0.3
2.9
6.0
1.5
0.0
4.5

16.8
9.6
4.0
2.7
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.3
0.3
2.1
7.3
0.6
0.0
6.7

1.4
1.0

0.1
-0.1

0.4
-0.3

0.3
0.1

0.9
0.3

0.6
0.2

-0.2
-0.7

1.0
0.2

1.1
-0.6

0.5
0.2

-1.2

-1.1

0.1

-1.2

0.2

-3.9

-1.7

-6.1

-1.5

0.0

1.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants

-2.4
-3.7

-0.3
-1.1

0.1
-1.2

-0.1
-1.2

0.2
-1.1

-0.8
-3.9

-1.7
-4.3

-1.2
-6.1

-1.5
-6.6

-1.7
-7.0

Financing
External net financing
Loans (net)
Disbursements
Budget support
Project loans
Amortization

2.4
0.4
-0.1
0.7
0.3
0.4
-0.8

0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.1
-0.2

-0.1
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.1
-0.2

0.1
-0.1
1.0
1.2
1.1
0.2
-0.2

-0.2
-0.6
0.6
0.8
0.6
0.1
-0.2

0.8
1.1
1.0
1.4
0.9
0.5
-0.4

1.3
1.2
1.2
1.6
0.8
0.8
-0.4

1.2
1.3
2.3
3.1
2.3
0.8
-0.8

1.1
1.1
2.0
2.8
1.8
1.1
-0.8

1.7
1.3
1.3
2.0
0.3
1.7
-0.7

0.6
0.6
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0

0.1
0.2
0.0

-1.1
0.0
-1.2

-1.2
0.0
-1.2

0.1
0.1
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0

-1.0
0.2
-1.2

-1.0
0.3
-1.2

0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
2.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.6
-0.6
0.0

-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.5
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.3
-0.3
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

-0.1
-0.1
0.0
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

140,346

165,432

165,432

165,432

165,432

165,432

165,432

165,432

165,432

188,540

Current account balance
Including current grants
Excluding grants
Overall balance excl. capital exceptional outlays
Exceptional outlays

Arrears (net)
Accumulation
Reduction
Internal net financing
Banking system
BRH
Commercial banks
Arrears (net)
Accumulation
Reduction
Financing gap
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (millions of gourdes)

Sources: Ministry of Finance and Economy; and Fund staff estimates
1/ Includes statistical discrepancy.
2/ To cover net operational losses of the central bank.
3/ Includes expenditures reclassified from operations to transfers and subsidies in 2004/05.
4/ Total external financing, including grants, was higher than programmed, primarily due to the disbursement of a US$12.7 million (G483 million) grant from Canada in late December.
5/ Foreign-financed capital expenditures include the disbursement of a US$2.8 million grant from Canada for Haiti's membership fee for the Caribbean Development Bank.
Grants were higher than programmed due to the increase in the grant component of World Bank financing.
6/ Program ratios differ slightly from those in Country Report No. 05/65 due to a minor revision in nominal GDP.

- 27 Table 4. Haiti: Summary Accounts of the Banking System
Fiscal Year Ending September 30
2003/04
Dec.

2004/05
Sept.

Actual

Actual

Dec.
Prog.

March
Prel.

Prog.

June

Sept.

2005/06

Proj.

Prog.

Proj.

Prog.

Proj.

Proj.

(In millions of gourdes)
I. Central Bank

Net foreign assets 1/
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Net international reserves (program)
Commercial bank deposits
Net domestic assets
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector 2/
Of which: Credit to the central government
Liabilities to commercial banks
Of which:
Cash-in-vault and reserve deposits
BRH bonds
Other
Currency in circulation

5,430
129
34
95

6,564
178
55
124

6,823
185
62
123

7,917
213
90
122

6,751
183
58
126

7,475
196
64
132

7,163
194
66
128

7,557
198
66
131

7,920
214
84
130

8,300
217
84
134

10,658
274
114
160

4,413
20,803
20,687
-18,619

2,121
21,581
21,659
-21,253

2,936
21,506
21,585
-20,427

2,301
20,775
20,887
-20,654

2,790
21,959
22,038
-21,027

2,176
21,412
21,496
-21,793

2,221
21,920
21,998
-21,555

1,779
21,486
21,571
-22,265

1,902
21,581
21,659
-21,536

1,469
21,561
21,645
-22,650

476
21,561
21,645
-23,644

-13,623
-4,996
2,229

-17,708
-3,545
1,793

-16,957
-3,471
1,857

-17,110
-3,544
2,179

-17,103
-3,924
1,857

-18,250
-3,543
2,558

-17,671
-3,884
1,857

-18,026
-4,240
2,558

-17,991
-3,545
1,857

-17,519
-5,131
2,558

-18,700
-4,943
2,558

9,843

8,685

9,759

10,218

9,541

9,651

9,384

9,336

9,822

9,769

11,134

II. Consolidated Banking System
Net foreign assets
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Of which: Commercial banks NFA

14,285
339
210

12,683
344
166

14,739
399
213

15,561
418
205

14,758
399
216

15,738
412
216

15,243
412
218

15,519
406
208

16,165
436
222

16,257
426
208

19,645
506
233

Net domestic assets
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector 1/
Credit to the private sector
In gourdes
In foreign currency
In millions of U.S. dollars
Other

42,933
20,339
21,171
10,982
10,189
242
1,423

44,078
21,097
21,142
10,893
10,249
278
1,839

44,359
21,023
21,415
11,073
10,341
280
1,921

44,142
20,292
21,860
11,597
10,263
276
1,989

45,791
21,476
22,436
11,619
10,816
293
1,880

45,843
20,919
22,332
11,644
10,688
280
2,592

46,625
21,436
23,349
12,039
11,310
306
1,839

46,475
20,994
22,889
11,746
11,144
292
2,592

47,927
21,097
25,031
13,205
11,827
320
1,798

47,607
21,069
23,947
12,250
11,697
306
2,592

52,547
21,069
28,887
15,593
13,294
344
2,592

Broad money
Currency in circulation
Gourde deposits
Foreign currency deposits
In millions of U.S. dollars

57,217
9,843
23,372
24,002
570

56,761
8,685
25,824
22,252
604

59,098
9,759
26,584
22,755
617

59,703
10,218
26,227
23,257
625

60,549
9,541
27,607
23,401
634

61,581
9,651
27,275
24,655
645

61,868
9,384
28,436
24,047
651

61,994
9,336
28,390
24,268
657

64,092
9,822
29,440
24,831
672

63,865
9,769
29,386
24,709
669

72,192
11,134
33,491
27,567
737

5.4
3.1
-0.3
2.1

4.5
4.5
0.6
3.9

5.0
4.2
-0.2
3.1

6.1
6.8
0.0
6.9

6.3
6.2
-0.1
4.9

5.3
7.7
0.0
7.7

11.9
10.2
14.0
10.1
6.6
6.2
12.7
8.9
17.1
13.2

12.1
9.6
13.8
11.1
7.6
4.0
10.5
6.3
15.4
7.9

12.9
13.1
14.0
11.6
11.2
0.0
18.4
21.2
15.4
14.8

12.5
12.5
13.8
11.0
10.7
-0.1
13.3
12.5
14.1
10.1

13.0
14.0
14.0
11.6
10.2
0.0
20.6
27.3
13.6
12.4

..

..

(Percentage change relative to broad money in the preceeding period) 3/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector 2/
Credit to the private sector

1.6
8.4
3.2
3.5

-1.5
10.6
4.6
3.4

3.6
0.5
-0.1
0.5

5.1
0.1
-1.4
1.3

3.7
3.0
0.7
2.3

39.8
13.3
33.5
62.9
45.5
23.9
22.1
16.9
28.2
14.6

9.1
2.9
17.9
2.6
17.1
12.8
9.2
7.3
11.2
26.9

3.3
-0.9
13.7
-5.2
8.3
3.4
1.2
0.8
1.5
15.8

4.3
3.8
12.2
-3.1
9.5
-0.2
3.3
5.6
0.7
13.9

3.6
4.0
9.7
-2.8
6.0
0.7
7.5
5.4
9.9
19.7

5.4
5.2
8.3
2.4
7.8
-1.9
7.0
5.6
8.6
14.3

42

37

38

37

..

..

9.5

11.6

11.5

13.3

11.1

12.1

11.6

12.2

12.4

13.0

14.8

50.7
48.1
42.4

46.3
48.5
46.1

46.1
48.3
45.4

47.0
46.9
44.1

45.9
48.2
46.2

47.5
47.9
43.3

45.8
48.4
47.0

46.1
48.7
44.4

45.8
47.2
47.5

45.7
48.8
45.8

45.1
46.0
46.7

(12-month percentage change)
Broad money
Currency in circulation
Gourde deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits (U.S. dollars) 4/
Credit to the nonfinancial public sector 2/
Credit to the private sector
Credit in gourdes
Credit in foreign currency
Credit in foreign currency (U.S. dollars) 4
Memorandum items:
End-of-period gourdes per U.S. dollar
Net international reserves in
percent of broad money
Share in foreign currency (in percent)
Bank deposits
Credit to the private sector
Commercial Bank US$ loan / US$ deposits

Sources: Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits. For program monitoring, they are excluded from net international reserves.
2/ Excludes special accounts.
3/ For all quarters, percentage change is calculated relative to the previous September.
4/ Percentage change calculated on US dollar values.

..

- 28 Table 5. Haiti: Balance of Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
2002

Current account deficit (-) (excluding grants)
Trade balance (deficit -)
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: Assembly industry exports
Imports, f.o.b.
Of which: Petroleum products
Services (net)
Receipts
Payments
Income (net)
Of which:
Interest payments
Private transfers (net) 1/

2003

2004
Prel.

2005
Prog.

Proj.

2006
Proj.

-168.1
-709.4
273.2
220.8
-982.6
-157.3
-92.6
163.7
-256.3
-15.2

-141.0
-785.4
330.4
278.1
-1,115.8
-146.3
-152.1
130.9
-283.0
-14.3

-97.5
-809.9
372.7
319.0
-1,182.6
-218.0
-204.9
131.7
-336.6
-13.6

-333.0
-1,078.8
390.7
334.1
-1,469.5
-307.6
-211.9
159.2
-371.0
-22.2

-375.5
-1,151.1
404.8
344.2
-1,555.9
-273.8
-216.8
159.8
-376.6
-22.7

-409.8
-1,217.6
422.7
358.9
-1,640.3
-265.3
-232.1
176.5
-408.6
-25.9

-13.5
649.0

-14.7
810.8

-17.7
931.0

-17.6
979.9

-17.8
1,015.1

-13.6
1,065.8

External grants

135.1

137.2

113.1

357.5

385.9

364.1

Current account deficit (-) (including grants)

-33.0

-3.7

15.6

24.5

10.4

-45.7

Capital and financial accounts (deficit -)
Public sector capital flows (net)
Loan disbursements
Amortization
Banks (net) 2/
Direct investment
Other 3/

-35.4
-8.0
13.0
-21.0
3.1
4.7
-35.3

-7.2
25.3
49.6
-24.3
-46.8
7.8
6.5

17.4
-4.6
24.0
-28.6
29.0
5.9
-12.9

56.9
99.7
133.0
-33.3
-50.1
7.4
0.0

53.6
88.3
122.9
-34.6
-42.1
7.4
0.0

51.8
56.3
89.6
-33.3
-24.5
20.0
0.0

Overall balance (deficit -)

-68.5

-10.9

33.0

81.4

64.0

6.1

68.5
41.0
27.4
0.0

10.9
9.7
1.3
0.0

-33.0
-52.8
19.8
0.0

-81.4
-38.0
-43.4
0.0

-81.4
-39.1
-42.3
0.0

-56.1
-56.1
0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

17.4

50.0

-4.9

-4.8

-2.8

-7.5

-8.6

-9.1

-1.0
-10.5
-6.9
286.1
200.9
7.9
135.1
177.7

-0.1
21.0
13.6
284.7
195.9
8.5
125.5
157.0

0.4
12.8
6.0
261.0
186.8
9.2
178.3
206.9

0.5
4.8
24.3
248.9
...
9.2
215.8
277.1

0.2
8.6
31.6
240.4
173.3
9.3
217.4
277.1

-1.0
4.4
5.4
230.0
...
7.8
273.5
345.8

2.2

1.8

2.0

2.0

1.9

2.3

0.9

0.6

0.7

0.9

0.9

1.1

1.5

1.2

1.3

1.7

1.6

1.9

Financing
Change in net international reserves (increase -) 4/
Change in arrears (reduction -)
Rescheduling
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Current account balance, excluding
grants (in percent of GDP)
Current account balance, including
grants (in percent of GDP)
Exports (f.o.b) growth
Import (f.o.b) growth
External debt as percent of exports
NPV of external debt as percent of exports
Debt service as percent of exports
Net foreign assets of the central bank (US$ million)
Gross liquid international reserves (US$ million) 4/
Gross international reserves (in months
of imports of goods and services)
Gross international reserves (in months
of imports of goods and services) 5/
Gross liquid international reserves (in months
of next year's imports of goods and services) 4/
Sources: Data provided by the central bank; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Based on remittances transferred through authorized "transfer houses" and central bank, estimates of such transfers channeled through other means.
2/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
3/ Includes short-term capital and errors and omissions.
4/ Includes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.

- 29 Table 6. Haiti: Medium-Term Scenario
Proj.
2007

2008

2009

3.0
10.0

4.0
8.0

4.0
7.0

4.0
6.0

-1.5
14.6
9.5
16.0
0.0
1.5

-1.7
15.1
9.8
16.8
0.0
1.7

-1.6
15.7
10.5
17.3
0.0
1.6

-1.7
16.2
11.2
17.9
0.0
1.7

-1.6
17.3
12.3
18.9
0.0
1.6

9.1

12.5

13.0

13.6

11.7

10.9

-26.6
-5.1
-0.5
27.4
4.6
-0.1
-4.8
0.0
0.0
157.1
1.2

-22.9
-5.8
-0.4
26.3
3.2
0.4
-2.8
0.0
0.0
206.9
1.3

-26.4
-5.0
-0.5
23.3
8.9
0.2
-8.6
0.4
0.4
277.1
1.6

-27.1
-5.2
-0.6
23.8
8.1
-1.0
-9.1
1.1
0.4
345.8
1.9

-26.4
-5.5
-0.1
23.7
7.7
-0.7
-8.4
0.0
0.0
380.3
2.0

-25.8
-5.8
0.0
23.2
8.2
-0.2
-8.4
0.0
0.0
476.3
2.5

-24.5
-5.7
0.1
23.0
7.8
0.7
-7.1
0.0
0.0
603.7
3.0

119,616

140,346

165,432

188,540

214,143

239,265

264,887

2002

Real sector (annual percentage rate)
Real GDP growth
Inflation (CPI end-of-period)

-1.0
12.3

-0.5
10.1

0.5
42.5

-3.8
22.5

2.5
12.0

Fiscal sector (in percent of GDP)
Central government overall balance (including grants)
Total revenue and grants
Central government revenue 1/
Central government expenditure 2/
Domestic financing
External financing

-2.4
8.0
7.6
10.4
2.6
-0.2

-3.0
8.5
8.3
11.5
2.7
0.3

-3.5
9.1
9.0
12.6
2.9
0.6

-2.4
10.2
8.9
12.6
2.0
0.4

5.2

17.2

39.8

-20.9
-3.0
0.0
17.3
4.5
-2.0
-6.5
0.0
0.0
227.3
2.2

-20.5
-2.7
-0.4
18.7
3.9
-1.0
-4.9
0.0
0.0
177.7
1.5

85,700

93,840

Monetary sector
Growth in Broad Money
External sector (in percent of GDP)
Trade Balance
Services (net)
Income (net)
Private transfers (net)
External grants
Current account (incl. official transfers)
Current account (excl. official transfers)
External financing gap
Of which : Central government
Liquid gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of imports of the following year
Memorandum Items:
Nominal GDP (millions of gourdes)
Sources: Haitian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes current revenue and transfers from the BRH.
2/ Includes exceptional outlays.

2003

Prel.
2004

2001

2005

2006

- 30 Table 7: Haiti Indicators of Fund Credit, 2004-2009
(Fiscal year ending September 30)
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Outstanding Fund credit 1/
In millions of SDRs
In millions of Gourde
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services

7.6
446.0
9.3
0.3
2.2

14.8
855.5
18.1
0.5
4.0

11.8
751.5
14.4
0.4
3.0

10.2
700.1
12.5
0.3
2.5

6.4
461.4
7.8
0.2
1.5

1.3
96.4
1.6
0.0
0.3

Debt service to the Fund 2/ 3/
In millions of SDRs
In millions of Gourde
In percent of quota
In percent of GDP
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service due

5.0
294.8
6.1
0.2
1.5
16.0

3.5
204.7
4.3
0.1
1.0
10.3

3.5
225.3
4.3
0.1
0.9
11.4

2.0
136.3
2.4
0.1
0.5
5.9

4.2
304.9
5.2
0.1
1.0
11.4

5.5
412.6
6.7
0.2
1.2
14.3

-3.0
0.0
3.0

-1.5
0.0
1.5

-3.8
0.0
3.8

-5.1
0.0
5.1

(In millions of SDRs)
Net use of Fund credit
Disbursements
Repayments

-4.9
0.0
4.9

7.2
10.2
3.0

Sources: IMF, Finance Department, and staff projections.
1/ Includes the 12.5 percent of quota disbursement under the emergency post-conflict assistance.
2/ Including SDR charges.
3/ Before subsidization of GRA charges.

- 31 Table 8. Haiti: Indicators of External Vulnerability
(Units as indicated)
Prel.

Debt indicators
Total external public debt in percent of GDP
Total external public debt in percent of exports 1/
External debt service in percent of GDP
Amortization
Interest
External debt service in percent of exports 1/
Amortization
Interest
External debt service in percent of current central government reve
Amortization
Interest
Other indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Remittances and grants in percent of gross disposable income
Real effective exchange rate appreciation (+) (end of period)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
Current account balance (US$ million) 2/
Capital and financial account balance (US$ million)
Public sector
Private sector 3/
Liquid gross reserves (US$ million)
In months of imports of the following year 1/
In percent of amortizations due in the following year
In percent of base money
Sources: Central Bank of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Goods and services.
2/ Including grants.
3/ Includes short-term capital, errors and omissions.

Proj.

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

33.6
273.3
1.1
0.8
0.3
8.7
6.2
2.5

36.1
286.1
1.0
0.6
0.4
7.9
4.8
3.1

44.4
284.7
1.3
0.8
0.5
8.5
5.3
3.2

37.2
261.0
1.3
0.8
0.5
9.2
5.7
3.5

31.2
240.4
1.2
0.8
0.4
9.3
6.1
3.1

30.7
230.0
1.0
0.7
0.3
7.8
5.6
2.3

30.6
235.4
1.1
0.8
0.3
8.3
6.0
2.2

30.6
238.1
1.1
0.8
0.3
8.7
6.4
2.2

30.5
233.8
1.1
0.8
0.3
8.3
6.4
2.0

15.1
10.8
4.3

13.1
8.0
5.1

15.3
9.5
5.7

13.7
8.5
5.2

12.7
8.4
4.3

11.1
7.9
3.2

10.5
7.7
2.8

10.2
7.6
2.6

9.1
6.9
2.2

-7.8
-2.9
18.6
7.9
23.8
-72.5
64.5
0.8
63.8
227.3
2.2
1,084.5
49.9

-10.5
-6.9
19.1
-8.9
27.1
-33.0
-35.4
-8.0
-27.5
177.7
1.5
730.6
40.0

21.0
13.6
25.3
-8.5
40.5
-3.7
-7.2
25.3
-32.5
157.1
1.2
548.6
36.7

12.8
6.0
23.4
31.6
39.7
15.6
17.4
-4.6
22.0
206.9
1.3
598.3
34.9

8.6
31.6
26.2
...
...
10.4
53.6
88.3
-34.7
277.1
1.6
833.0
47.1

4.4
5.4
25.9
...
...
-45.7
51.8
56.3
-4.5
345.8
1.9
923.4
63.4

4.3
3.6
25.4
...
...
-32.7
67.2
77.0
-9.8
380.3
2.0
909.4
65.0

5.3
3.8
25.5
...
...
-8.9
104.9
88.2
16.8
476.3
2.5
1,074.6
76.0

5.4
1.9
25.0
...
...
35.4
91.9
85.7
6.2
603.7
3.0
1,361.8
90.3

- 32 -

Table 9. Haiti: Stock of Arrears and Projected Debt Service, 2000–05
(Fiscal year ending September 30, in millions of U.S. dollars)
2000

Total arrears

2001

2002

2003

2004
Est.

2005
Proj.

6.0

17.8

50.9

52.1

78.1

...

Multilateral Creditors
IDB
IDA-WORLD BANK
IMF
Other (OPEC and FIDA)

2.1
0.2
0.8
0.2
0.9

11.2
4.0
6.1
0.0
1.1

39.0
19.6
19.0
0.0
0.4

33.3
0.0
32.4
0.0
0.9

49.2
0.0
49.2
0.0
0.0

...
...
...
...
...

Bilateral Creditors

3.9

6.6

11.9

18.8

28.9

...

...

...

...

...

...

55.9

Multilateral creditors
IDB
IDA-WORLD BANK
IMF
Other (OPEC and FIDA)

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...

45.8
21.6
16.5
4.8
3.0

Bilateral Creditors

...

...

...

...

...

10.1

Projected debt service 1/

Sources: BRH; and staff projections
1/ Excluding arrears reduction.

- 33 Table 10. Haiti: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000–05
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Prel.
2004

Proj.
2005

1,467.2
461.3
0.4
810.8
137.2
7.8
49.6
0.0

1,582.5
504.4
4.0
931.0
113.1
5.9
24.0
0.0

2,066.2
564.6
-4.9
1,015.1
385.4
7.4
98.7
15.6

1,193.2
1,238.9
6.4
27.4
14.3
-63.3
-3.1

1,462.6
1,398.8
37.5
1.3
15.1
-35.6
46.8

1,566.6
1,519.2
26.4
19.8
7.4
42.6
-29.0

2,139.5
1,932.5
94.3
-42.3
5.0
65.6
42.1

46.6

-43.9

-4.6

-15.8

0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

73.3
40.3
15.6
17.4

2000

2001

2002

2003

External resources (identified)
Exports of goods and services
Income (net)
Private transfers (net)
Official transfers (net)
Foreign Direct investment
Medium- and long-term official loans
Of which: IMF purchase

1,405.3
503.0
28.2
578.0
221.3
8.0
66.9
0.0

1,269.6
442.6
12.5
623.6
160.6
2.0
28.3
0.0

1,237.1
436.9
-1.7
649.0
135.1
4.7
13.0
0.0

Use of resources
Imports of goods and services
Debt Service payments
Of which: net accumulation of arrears
IMF repurchases and charges
Buildup of gross reserves
Commerical banks buildup of reserves

1,386.8
1,355.0
32.6
6.0
4.0
-59.9
55.1

1,316.2
1,300.8
25.6
11.8
1.0
4.9
-16.3

-18.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Other capital incl. errors and omissions
Financing gap
Program loans and grants
IMF purchase
Residual financing need

Sources: Data provided by the central bank; and Fund staff estimates.

- 34 Table 11. Haiti: External Assistance to the Government and Debt Service
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2003–04

2004–05

2005–06

Cumulative
2003–06

External assistance to the government 1/

70.6

345.8

328.0

744.5

Budgetary financing of projects
Bilateral creditors
United States
Canada
Taiwan
France
Others
Multilateral creditors
World Bank
IDB
EU
Other

48.6
33.2
14.8
4.7
5.9
4.0
3.8
15.4
0.0
9.5
5.4
0.5

194.3
94.1
31.5
35.1
14.1
7.0
6.3
100.2
6.7
40.0
49.1
4.5

300.4
157.2
78.4
58.6
0.0
8.9
11.2
143.3
21.0
56.7
60.3
5.3

543.4
284.5
124.7
98.4
20.0
19.9
21.4
258.9
27.7
106.2
114.7
10.3

Budget support
Bilateral creditors
United States
Canada
Taiwan
France
Others
Multilateral creditors
World Bank
IDB
EU
Other

22.0
12.0
12.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
0.0
10.0
0.0
0.0

151.5
50.4
36.4
12.7
0.0
1.3
0.0
101.1
61.8
39.3
0.0
0.0

27.6
12.6
12.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
0.0

201.1
75.0
61.0
12.7
0.0
1.3
0.0
126.1
61.8
64.3
0.0
0.0

Debt service
Bilateral creditors
Multilateral creditors

50.7
10.2
40.6

55.9
10.1
45.8

46.4
9.0
37.5

153.1
29.2
123.9

Net transfers
Bilateral creditors
Multilateral creditors

19.9
35.1
-15.2

289.9
134.4
155.5

281.6
160.8
120.8

591.3
330.3
261.1

Sources: Data provided by donors, the central bank, and staff projections.
1/ Includes only identified financing; excludes humanitarian assistance and election financing.

- 35 Table 12. Haiti: Millennium Development Goals (Cont.)

1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

Target
2015

Goal 1. Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than
one dollar a day.
1. Population below US$1 a day (in percent)
2. Poverty gap ratio at US$1 a day (in percent)
3. Share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent (in percent)

76
55

Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people suffering hunger
4. Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
5. Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (in percent)

26.8
65.0

27.5
60.0

17.3
49.0

13.4
32.5

Goal 2. Achieve Universal Primary Education
Target 3. Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a full course of
primary schooling.
6. Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
7. Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5
8. Youth literary rate (percent ages 15-24) 2/

22.1

56.1

100

54.8

59.7

65.3

66.2

66.2

98.6

100.8

101.1

101.1

4

4

4

123
79
53

118
76
53

Goal 3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
Target 4. Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and
to all levels of education by 2015
9. Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (percent)
10. Ratio of young literate females to males (percent ages 15-24)
11. Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent)
12. Proportion of seats held by women in the national parliament (percent) 2/

94.6
96.3
39.5

100
100

Goal 4. Reduce Child Mortality
Target 5. Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under five mortality rate
13. Under-five mortality rate (per 1,000)
14. Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
15. Immunization against measles (percent of children under 12 months)

150
102
31

137
91
49

125
81
53

1,000
23

1,100
19.5

680
23.8

Goal 5. Improve Maternal Health
Target 6. Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
16. Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
17. Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel

50

- 36 Table 12. Haiti: Millennium Development Goals (Concl.)

1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

Target
2015

Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria, and Other Diseases
Target 7. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS
18. HIV prevalence among females (percent ages 15-24)
19. Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
20. Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS

11

17.6

5.5
28.1
200,000

5.6

Target 8. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases
21. Prevalence of death associated with malaria
22. Share of population in malaria risk areas using effective prevention and treatment
23. Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
24. Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (percent)

604

433
31

409
41.2

3.2
0.4
6.4
0.2

0.4
6.4
0.2

53

46

71

23

28

34

2

386
46

Target 9. Integrate the principles of sustainable development into policies and programs. Reverse the loss
of environment resources.
25. Forest area (percent of total land area)
26. Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
27. GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per Kg oil equivalent)
28. CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
29. Proportion of population using solid fuels

5.7
7.7
0.2

0.4
6.2
0.1

Target 10. Halve by 2015 proportion of people without access to safe drinking water
30. Access to improved water source (percent of population)

76.5

Target 11. Achieve by 2020 significant improvement for at least 100 million slum dwellers
31. Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
32. Access to secure tenure (percent of population)

66.2

Goal 8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development 1/
Target 16. Develop and implement strategies for productive work for youth
45. Unemployment rate of population ages 15-24 (total)
Female
Male
Target 17. Provide access to affordable essential drugs
46. Proportion of population with access to affordable essential drugs
Target 18. Make available new technologies, especially information and communications
47. Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
48. Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

6.9

8.4

20.7

32.5

55.2

Sources: World Bank; UN Statistics Division, and Fund staff estimates
1/ Targets 12-15 and indicators 33-44 are excluded because they cannot be measured on a country specific basis. These are related to official
development assistance, market access, and HIPC initiative.
2/ Data for 2004 are the same as 2003 data.

- 37 -

Table 13. Haiti: Status of Main Policy Actions Under the EPCA
Status
Fiscal Policy
•

Prepare the 2005/06 budget according to the new budget nomenclature for all
revenue and expenditure by end-March 2005. In particular:
¾

Establish, by end-March 2005, a macro framework for the 2005/06
budget, and indicative ceilings for current and capital expenditures
(inclusive of donor-financed spending) to be sent to spending ministries;
and

¾

Limit the amount budgeted for the "interventions publiques" post to
2 percent of domestically financed spending, and cease systematic
internal control for normal expenditure by end-December 2004 by the
Cour Supérieure des Comptes et du Contentieux Administratif (CSCCA),
the external audit body established by the Constitution.

•

Complete a comprehensive survey to identify domestic payment arrears of the
central government by end-March 2005; verify the authenticity of the reported
arrears by the CSCCA and establish a strategy to clear past arrears by endJune 2005.

•

Finalize and publish the CSCCA's audit report on the annual accounts of the
central government for 2001/02 and 2002/03 by end-September 2005.

•

CSCCA to launch an audit of the treasury accounts for 2003/04 by endSeptember 2005, with a view to completing and publishing the audit by
December 2005.

•

Extend computerized data collection at customs.

•

Implement pre-shipment verification to all ports of entry and borders of Haiti
by September 2005.

•

Establish a program for the reinforcement and use of the central tax payer file
on the basis of tax payers’ Fiscal Identification Number (NIF) by March 2005.

To be completed by end-April
2005.

Decree ending the systematic
internal control by the
CSCCA has been approved by
the Cabinet and will shortly
be published in the next
official journal.
A consultant will be hired to
assist with the survey, which
is envisaged to be completed
by end-June 2005.

Customs has been training
personnel to enhance
computerized data collection.

A program has been prepared.

Monetary and Financial Sector Policy
•

Continue monthly briefing sessions between the BRH and the banking sector
and introduce quarterly briefings for the private sector to communicate the
orientation of monetary policy and receive feedback.

•

Strengthen surveillance of cooperatives, including by expanding on-site
inspections.

•

Revise by September 2005 a draft of a new central bank (BRH) law that would
establish independence of the central bank.

Monthly briefing sessions for
the banking sector have taken
place regularly; however
quarterly briefings for the
private sector have not yet
started.
A plan to strengthen
surveillance of cooperatives is
in place. On-site inspection
started in November 2004.

- 38 -

Table 13. Haiti: Status of Main Policy Actions Under the EPCA
•

Complete IMF safeguards assessment.

•

Complete external audit of the 2003/04 BRH annual accounts by an
international, reputable auditing firm.

The on-site inspection was
completed on March 18,
2005.
An external audit firm has
been hired.

Program financing and arrears clearance
•

Regularize arrears to the World Bank.

•

Contact Paris Club creditors to develop a plan for addressing arrears and start
the data reconciliation process.

Completed.
An informal standstill
agreement on payments to
selected Paris Club creditors
has been reached for the
program period. Data
reconciliation process
ongoing.

Governance
•

Anti-Corruption Unit to become operational by end-December 2004.

•

Complete pre-audit of Teleco and launch pre-audit of EDH by end-December
2004.

•

Complete a census of employment by end-March 2005 of the ministries and
key public enterprises (Teleco, EDH, CAMEP, AAN, and APN).

•

Prepare by end-December terms of reference for hiring international financial
auditing firms with a view to launching the audit of CAMEP, AAN, and APN
before end-June 2005.

Completed.
Pre-audits of Teleco and EDH
have been initiated.
The census is envisaged to be
completed by end-June 2005.
Requests for offers for audits
of the three public sector
enterprises have been
published.

Other
•

Set up a working group of the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the BRH
and establish meetings regularly to ensure quality and timeliness of fiscal and
monetary data reporting.

•

Implement and publish new CPI by June 2005, with the August 2004 base.

Working group has been
meeting twice a month since
November 2004.
Good progress has been made
on the implementation of new
CPI.

- 39 -

Figure 1. Haiti- Inflation and Monetary Developments 1/
... helped by a reduction of monetary financing of the
budget and low food price inflation, notwithstanding
pressures from international fuel prices.

The exchange rate has stabilized, and CPI inflation has
been declining...
70

60

17

50

14

40

11

30

8

20

5

10

2

0

-1

Monthly inflation by component
(percent)

Inflation and exchange rate
60
50

Other

Monthly inflation

Transportation

40

Exchange rate
30

Food

(G/US$)

20

As credit to the central government has declined,
monetary authorities have eased monetary conditions
by accumulating net international reserves...

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Sep-03

Jun-03

Sep-02

Mar-05

... and reducing the overall stock and interest rates on
BRH bonds.

50

50

Contribution to gourde money growth
(12-month percent change relative to gourde
money)

30

35

M2

30

20

Net credit to central government

Stock

6,000

(millions of gourdes)

5,000

25

4,000

20

3,000

15
10

0

Mar-05

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Sep-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

Dec-02

Sep-02

0

Mar-05

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

Dec-02

10

5

5

0

0

Dollar time deposit

Sources: BRH, IHSI, and Fund staff estimates
1/ Data for March 2005 are estimated based on BRH weekly reports. Data available through March 25, 2005.

Dec-04

Credit, 12-month
growth (percent, left axis)

Jun-04

10

Gourde time
deposit

15

Mar-04

15

5

25
20

15

20

10

91-day
BRH bond

30

Dec-03

20

Interest rates
(weighted average, percent)

Jun-03

(as percent of required
reserves)

25

35

25

Excess reserves

30

30

Dec-02

35

40

Sep-02

40

35

Mar-03

Commercial banks' excess reserves
and credit to the private sector

45

... and banks reduced interest rates on gourde deposits
to below dollar deposit rates.

Sep-04

Commercial banks' excess reserves increased while
recovery of credit to the private sector remains sluggish,
50

0
Sep-02

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

0
Sep-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

Dec-02

Sep-02

-10

1,000

(percent, left axis)

5

NIR

2,000

91-day bond rate

Sep-03

10

7,000

40

Sep-03

40

8,000

BRH bonds

45

Mar-05

Dec-04

Sep-04

Jun-04

Mar-04

Dec-03

Sep-03

Jun-03

Mar-03

Sep-02

Dec-02

0

Mar-03

(percent, left axis)

10

Dec-02

12-month inflation

- 40 -

Figure 2. Haiti. Fiscal Developments 1/
(In percent of GDP; fiscal year ending September 30)
and while wages and salaries increased, non-wage
current expenditures declined sharply as spending
through current accounts was restrained...

Government revenues increased due to improved
customs administration,
12

Current Revenues
10

Customs Duties

Other

Domestic
taxes

7

25

Current Expenditures

Non-wage
current
expenditure

Wages and
Salaries

6

8

Current
accounts 2/
(right scale)

5
6

20

15

4

10

3

5

4
2
0

2
2001

2002

0

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

2001

2002

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

2/ Spending through current accounts in percent of budgetary credits for
nonwage current spending.

..helping improve the fiscal position.

The fiscal program has remained broadly on track,
except in the first half of 2004,...

4

7

Current Account Balance

6

3

5

Net Central Bank Financing
Actual

4

2

Program

3
1

2
1

0

0
-1

-1

2001

2002

2001

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

...with a shift from domestic financing to external
financing...
Net financing of the deficit

6.0
5.0
4.0

Second
SMP EPCA

-2

-2

7.0

First SMP

Internal net
financing

2002

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

...and an increasing share of grant financing.
8.0

External net
financing

7.0

External financing

6.0

Grants

5.0

3.0

4.0

2.0
1.0

3.0

0.0

2.0

-1.0

1.0

-2.0

Loans

0.0
2001

2002

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

Sources: Ministry of Finance, BRH, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Six-monthly data are annualized.

2001

2002

2003H1 2003H2 2004H1 2004H2 2005H1

- 41 -

Figure 3. Haiti. External Developments
Private remittances and official grants have
contributed to a balanced current account...
1500

...while both exports and imports were largely
unaffected by the developments in 2004.
35

Current Account Balance
Private remittances
(million U.S. dollars)
Official grants

1000

Trade Balance
(percent of GDP)

30

-19

Trade Balance
(right scale)

Imports

-20

25

500

-21

20

0

-22

15

Exports

-500

-23

10

Balance on goods and
services

-1000
-1500

2001

2002

Current account
incl. grants
2003

-24

5
0

-25

2004

2001

A sharp increase in private remittances...

Private Remittances and Official Grants
(million U.S. dollars)

160

900

150

850

140

800

130

750

Official grants

Net private
remittances
(right scale)

110
100
2001

2002

2003

International Reserves
(million U.S. dollars)

180
160
140

Net international reserves
(program definition)

120

700

80

40
650

20

600
2004

0
2001

200

REER
(left scale)

180

2002

2003

50

1500

External Debt
0.040

Percent of GDP
45

1350
40

1300

0.030
140

100
Jan-01

0.025

Exchange rate
(right scale)
Jan-03

Million U.S.
dollars

35

1250
1200
1150

0.020
Jan-02

1450
1400

0.035

160

120

2004

...while exchange rate fluctuations strongly affected
debt to GDP ratios.
0.045

Exchange rates
(US$/gourdes)

Gross liquid assets
of the BRH

60

...and contributed to a rebound in the real
exchange rate,
220

2004

200

100

120

2003

...helped boost international reserves...
950

170

2002

Jan-04

Sources: BRH and Fund staff estimates

30
2001

2002

2003

1100
2004

- 42 -

ANNEX I

HAITI—FUND RELATIONS
As of March 31, 2005
I.

Membership status: Joined September 8, 1953; Article VIII.

II.

General resources account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
81.90
92.06
0.07

Percent
of Quota
100.00
112.41
0.08

III.

SDR department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
13.70
0.03

Percent of
Allocation
100.00
0.19

IV.

Outstanding purchases and loans:
PRGF Arrangements
Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance

SDR Million
6.07
10.23

Percent of Quota
7.41
12.49

V.

Financial arrangements:

VI.

Type of
Arrangement

Approval
Date

PRGF
Stand-by
Stand-by

10/18/96
03/08/95
09/18/89

Expiration
Date

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

10/17/99
03/07/96
12/31/90

91.05
20.00
21.00

Amount
Drawn
(SDR million)
15.18
16.40
15.00

Projected obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/interes
t
Total

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

3.04
0.54

3.04
0.70

0.69

3.84
0.65

5.12
0.48

3.57

3.71

0.69

4.49

5.60

- 43 VII.

Exchange arrangements:
Managed floating with no predetermined path for the exchange rate. The change from a
fixed to managed floating regime took place in January 1990. Haiti's exchange system is
free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions. Since September 1991 all transactions have taken place at the free
(interbank) market rate.

VIII.

Article IV Consultation
The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on
January 24, 2003. Haiti is on the standard 12-month cycle.

IX.

Technical assistance: A long-term macroeconomic advisor worked in the president’ s
office from May 1999 to February 2001.
Technical assistance missions since 1997:
Department
TGS

Dates
October 1997; February 1999

Purpose
Information technology

FAD

April 2005
August–September 2004
June 1999
October 1998
March 1997–September 1998

Public expenditure management.
Public expenditure management
Industrial exemptions
Large taxpayer unit
Exemptions system and investment
code
Direct taxation and exemption
system

November 1997
MFD

March 2005
July–August 2002
January 2002
May 2001
October 2000
October 2000
January 2000
June 1999
August–October 1998;
June–July 1999; October 2000
July 1998
January 1997
August 1997
October 1995–April 1998

Monetary Operations
Money laundering
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Money laundering
Banking supervision
Dollarization and policy
response
Central bank organization
Banking supervision
Banking law
Role of the central bank
Banking law and monetary
policy
Banking supervision

- 44 -

STA

January 1996–October 1997;
June 1996; July 1996;
February 1999; March 2000
February 1997; March 1998;
August 1998
November 1996; March 2000

Real sector statistics
Money and banking statistics
Balance of payments statistics

LEG

March, June, and
September 2000

Banking and central bank laws

INS

April 2002

Course on financial
programming

X.

Resident representative: Mr. Mounir Rached has been the Fund’ s Resident
Representative since October 2002

- 45 -

ANNEX II

Haiti—Relations with the World Bank Group
(Prepared by World Bank Staff)
Following the change of government in March 2004, the World Bank stepped up its engagement
in Haiti as part of a broader Government/multi-donors partnership to respond to Haiti’ s social,
economic and institutional needs. In that context, a joint government-donors needs assessment
carried out in May provided the basis for the Transitional Government’ s two year Interim
Cooperation Framework (ICF). The ICF was presented at an international donors conference on
July 19–20, 2004 at World Bank Headquarters, where donor countries and international
organizations pledged US$1.08 billion in fresh resources to support the implementation of the
ICF. The Bank pledged to support the ICF with up to US$150 million in IDA grants and credits
complemented with US$3.5 million in small grants from the Post-Conflict Fund and
US$6.4 million in small grants from the trust for Low Income Countries Under Stress (LICUS).
The Bank and the Haitian authorities have since prepared a Transitional Support Strategy (TSS)
to program the Bank’ s support to Haiti for the period July 2004-June 2006. The TSS was
reviewed by the Bank’ s Board on January 6, 2004. On the same day, the Board approved a fastdisbursing Economic Governance Reform Operation (EGRO) for US$61 million and an
emergency recovery and disaster management project for US$12 million. The approval of the
IDA assistance followed the clearance of Haiti’ s arrears to the World Bank on January 4, 2005.
The Bank is also preparing a technical assistance project (US$2 million) to strengthen
institutional capacity for the design and implementation of policies and help improve the
institutional environment for increased donor financing in the future. During the second year of
the implementation of the TSS, the Bank would provide up to an additional US$75 million in
IDA assistance contingent on progress in the first year of the program. This additional assistance
may help create economic and social opportunities in rural areas and small towns, including
through community-driven development projects and a multi-sectoral investment program. In an
effort to reduce Haiti’ s debt burden, the Bank made maximum use of the grant provision under
IDA 13 to convert into grants 51 percent of its fiscal year 2004/05 financing to Haiti. Under IDA
14, there will be room to convert into grants a similar and possibly a larger share of the Bank’ s
fiscal year 2005/06 financing to Haiti.
The Bank’ s policy dialogue, financial and technical assistance span several thematic areas
including: civil society monitoring of governance policy performance, strategic communication
for development, donor coordination, public enterprise audit and management, rural
development, budgetary management and financial control, public sector procurement, anticorruption, management of road maintenance fund, school feeding and public-private partnership
in education, solid waste management, disaster management and early warning systems, rural
safe water provision and management, and energy.

- 46 -

Since July 2004, the Bank’ s disbursements to Haiti have amounted to about US$50 million, of
which nearly US$47 million in budget support on account of the EGRO.
The IFC’ s priorities in Haiti include strengthening domestic financial institutions and job
creation. The IFC currently has two investments in Haiti: (i) a US$400,000 equity investment in
Micro Credit National; and (ii) a US$20 million investment in Grupo M – a Dominican textile
company with an important investment in Haiti to finance the start-up of an industrial park/free
trade zone located just across the border in Ouanaminthe, Haiti.
The most recent World Bank Country Assistance Strategy for Haiti was reviewed by the Bank’ s
Board in 1996.

- 47 -

ANNEX III

Haiti—Relations with the IDB
(Prepared by IDB Staff)
The IDB’ s portfolio of 10 projects under its ongoing transition strategy of re-engagement
(2003–04), totaling US$400 million, is presently in full implementation, supporting Haiti’ s
reconstruction agenda. Since reactivation of its lending in July 2003, the IDB has disbursed over
US$80 million of this amount through end-2004, leaving an available balance of
US$320 million. These interventions, combining investment and policy-based loans, are
complemented with a strong program of nonreimbursable technical assistance and nonfinancial
products to underpin program and policy preparation and implementation and increase country
knowledge.
In July 2004, the IDB pledged US$263 million in additional financing to support implementation
of the Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF). To operationalize this pledge in full, the IDB’ s
Board of Executive Directors approved a new Transition Strategy (2005–06) on March 9, 2005,
covering over 11 operations, totaling US$270 million, to continue financing Haiti’ s transition
agenda as well as longer-term actions. This strategy strengthens efforts to stabilize the economy,
deepen governance reforms, alleviate pressing social needs, lay the foundation for pro-poor
growth, strengthen natural disaster prevention and environmental management, and lead to an
elected government in 2006.
The IDB’ s growing involvement in Haiti thus supports longer-term economic governance
reforms, particularly in the critical areas of fiscal management and tax reform and
administration, and associated institutional development, in close coordination with the IMF and
the World Bank. In parallel, the IDB provides financing for high impact investments to
rehabilitate critical infrastructure, increase productivity, and increase provision of basic services
to vulnerable groups and communities on a national level. As an overarching objective, IDB
program execution builds on an implementation support and institution-building strategy based
on a flexible approach. This approach includes special measures to strengthen local capacities to
facilitate execution and speed up disbursements, and is also pursued through high-level special
implementation and monitoring review missions.
The Bank supports all pillars of Haiti's short and medium term reconstruction
agenda: (a) political governance and national dialogue with technical assistance to create rulebased mechanisms for alternative dispute resolution, and for dealing with gender issues; (b)
economic governance and institutional development through fiscal and financial sector reform
loans, and capacity building for public administration reform; (c) economic recovery through
rebuilding infrastructure (roads, ports, airports) and private sector development; further
assistance to agriculture intensification with a rural economy development program; and loans to
reduce the impact of natural disasters and for watershed management; and (d) access to basic
services through a vocational training program to increase opportunities for low income youth
and meet private sector skill demands; improve living standards and income generation in urban
areas of the capital and main cities and towns of the interior, through an urban rehabilitation
loan.

- 48 -

ANNEX IV

HAITI—STATISTICAL ISSUES
Real sector: The Haitian Institute of Statistics (HIS) is publishing a harmonized CPI on a
monthly basis, as recommended and facilitated by Fund technical assistance. The institute has
made progress in implementing recommendations made by several Fund technical assistance
mission to improve the quality of real sector statistics, and it has published national accounts for
the period 1986/87 to 2003/2004 based on the interim base year 1986/87. The institute also
publishes data on economic activity of the real sector on a quarterly basis, including indices of
industrial production, energy, construction, and domestic and external trade. The March 2000
technical assistance STA mission had recommended that the HIS establish a new base year for
national accounts and a revised CPI. The HIS will soon publish a new CPI which has been
rebased to a more recent period (August 2004) using the weights of the 2000 household survey.
The HIS carries out household budgetary surveys on a periodic basis; in the past, these have
been complemented by studies on issues such as housing, education and employment. A further
study on transport is underway. The Institute is currently engaged in the preparatory work for the
fourth population and habitat census. Further technical assistance may be needed to address the
outstanding deficiencies that continue to hinder the quality of real sector statistics.
Government finance: Haiti reports monthly and annual GFS data on a regular basis for
publication in IFS. However, no GFS data have been published in the GFS Yearbook for the past
15 years. This is a disappointing given that the 1995 multisector mission recommended the
establishment of a system of compilation and reporting of GFS data to the Fund. Progress is slow
due to the lack of human and financial resources. Data provided in 2001 via the Central Bank of
Haiti were not published in the 2001 GFSY owing to insufficient detail and consistency
problems. Further work is required to extend coverage and breakdowns, to improve the link
between the nonfinancial and the financial transactions as well as the outstanding debt, and to
compile a functional breakdown of expenditure. These improvements require additional human
and financial resources. The reporting of budgetary expenditures, especially on the ministerial
discretionary accounts should be improved to increase transparency. There is a need to improve
the timeliness of publication of accounts of public enterprises, as well as of the accounts of the
nonfinancial public sector.
Monetary accounts: Continuous work on monetary statistics has helped to improve the
sectorization and classification of accounts in the analytical balance sheets of the Bank of the
Republic of Haiti (BRH) and commercial banks. Efforts have been undertaken to strengthen
reporting requirements for commercial banks so as to strengthen bank supervision, enforce
reporting according to Basel Core Principles, and step up the fight against illicit transactions.
This has at times affected the timeliness of compilation and reporting of money and banking
statistics.
Balance of payments: Progress has been made towards improving the reliability of balance of
payments data. The implementation of several technical assistance mission recommendations has
contributed to an improvement in the balance of payment data. Notwithstanding the progress,
there is scope for improvement, most notably in the methodology for compiling trade data,
collecting trade and services data and making more systematic use of existing sources, (such as
customs, port and airport agencies, airlines, and oil companies).

- 49 -

HAITI: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF APRIL 29, 2005
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data 6/

Frequency
of
Reporting 6/

Exchange Rates

Apr. 2005

Apr. 2005

D

D

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities 1/

Apr. 2005

Apr. 2005

D

D

M

Reserve/Base Money

Feb. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Broad Money

Feb. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Feb. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Feb. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Interest Rates 2/

Apr. 2005

Apr. 2005

W

W

M

Consumer Price Index

Mar. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition
of Financing 3/ – General Government 4/

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition
of Financing 3/– Central Government

Mar. 2005

Apr. 2005

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt 5/

Sept. 2004

Apr. 2004

A

I

A

External Current Account Balance

Sept. 2004

Nov. 2004

A

I

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Sept. 2004

Nov. 2004

A

A

NA

2004

Jan. 2005

A

A

A

Sept. 2004

Apr. 2004

A

I

A

GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt

Frequency
of
Publication 6/

1/ Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
2/ Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3/ Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4/ The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
and local governments.
5/ Including currency and maturity composition.
6/ Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).

- 50 -

ANNEX V

HAITI—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
This note presents a debt sustainability analysis (DSA) prepared using the framework for
low-income countries approved in early 2004 (Debt Sustainability in Low-Income
Countries—
Proposals for an Operational Framework and Policy Implications)
(www.imf.org). This DSA will be updated jointly with World Bank staff based on a new
framework considered by the Boards of the Fund and the Bank in April 2005
(Operational Framework for Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income
Countries—
Further Considerations) (www.imf.org). The macroeconomic scenario
underlying this DSA is the baseline scenario described in Section III.D of this Staff
Report. The analysis is based on estimated end-2004 debt data and takes into account the
pledges of financial assistance at the July19-20, 2004 donors’ conference, updated in the
context of the 2005 Article IV consultation discussions. A joint World Bank-IMF formal
preliminary assessment of Haiti’ s HIPC eligibility is planned for later in 2005 and will
be based on loan-by-loan reconciled data.
1.
The results of the debt sustainability analysis presented in this paper suggest that
Haiti’ s debt burden is high and could become a source of vulnerability. Under the baseline
scenario, Haiti’ s debt-burden indicators will remain high over the medium term. In
particular:
•

At end-2004, the NPV of external debt-to-exports ratio was well above levels
considered to be sustainable.1 This result is robust to whether current year exports
or the three-year average is used as a denominator. However, other key debt ratios—
NPV of debt-to-GDP and debt service-to-exports—were at levels generally considered
to be sustainable.

•

The NPV of external debt-to-export ratio is expected to only gradually decline
during 2005–23. Although exports are projected to grow faster than the economy as
a whole, the ratio of NPV of debt-to-exports remains above 150 percent for the next
five years and above 100 percent until 2020. The other key ratios—NPV of debt-toGDP and debt service-to-exports—are projected to decline gradually to half their
present levels over the next 20 years.

•

The debt sustainability analysis of the total public debt yields similar results.2 As
domestic debt as a share of GDP is very small, and the NPV of total public debt-toGDP ratio declines closely in line with the NPV of the external debt-to-GDP ratio.

1

Ratios are calculated relative to exports of goods and services.

2

The stock of domestic debt consists of central bank short-term bonds held by commercial banks.

- 51 -

The NPV of total public debt-to-revenue ratio declines from about 200 percent in
2004, and remains above 150 percent until 2011, largely reflecting low revenue
mobilization in Haiti. The debt service-to-revenue ratio declines from about
14 percent in 2004 to below 5 percent in 2015, reflecting in part the targeted increase
in the revenue mobilization.
2.
Haiti’s external debt and debt-service indicators are very sensitive to changes in
the economic environment. Indeed, plausible external shocks have a significant impact on
the debt ratios (Box 1, and Figures 1 and 2). The results of the alternative scenarios used to
assess Haiti’ s vulnerability to shocks are as follows:
•

A worst-case scenario is generated as a combination of (one-half standard
deviation) shocks to export growth, the GDP deflator, and private and official
transfers.3 Under such an “extreme stress test,” the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
would double relative to the baseline and remain above 150 percent for the entire
projection period. Also, the other key debt ratios—NPV of debt-to-GDP and debt
service-to-exports—
would increase above the conventional sustainability thresholds
for several years.

•

If key macroeconomic variables were to remain at their historical (1995–2003)
averages, the decline in the debt ratios would be slower than in the baseline
scenario. The historical scenario attempts to replicate past macroeconomic
performance under the previous cycle of external assistance to Haiti, and is less
favorable than the baseline scenario.

•

An increase in international interest rates would reduce calculated NPV of
Haiti’s debt. Under an alternative “variable discount rates” scenario, it is assumed
that discount rates applied to estimate the NPV of future debt service would follow
the WEO projected increase in U.S. dollar interest rates. This would result in Haiti’ s
debt levels in NPV terms falling below 150 percent of exports of goods and services
in 2005.

•

An increase in the grant element of all future assistance would lower debt
burden indicators. For example, if half of the currently assumed concessional
borrowing were provided in the form of grants, Haiti’ s debt burden would decline to
sustainable levels about five years faster than envisaged under the baseline scenario.

•

Two alternative scenarios for total public debt also indicate continued
vulnerability. The historical scenario, assuming real GDP growth and the primary

3

Other shocks (scaled to historical levels) that were tested and found to produce less “extreme”
results include: borrowing on less favorable terms, lower real GDP and export growth, as well as a
sharp depreciation of the exchange rate.

- 52 -

deficit equal the historical 1995-2003 averages, only marginally differs from the
baseline, as the impact of lower growth is offset by a lower primary deficit. Under the
most extreme stress test (real GDP growth in 2005 and 2006 is assumed to be one
standard deviation lower than the baseline growth rate), indicators of total public debt
decline much less favorably than under the baseline, with the highest debt ratio in
2013.
3.
The analysis suggests that Haiti’s debt burden will remain high for a
considerable period. Under the present financing mix, Haiti’ s debt burden—
in terms of NPV
of debt-to-exports—would remain above 150 percent over the medium term. Moreover,
Haiti’ s debt burden is very sensitive to changes in the external environment and financing
mix. Haiti’ s debt indicators would remain above the sustainability thresholds for several
years under the “most extreme stress” test, and would improve more slowly than under the
baseline scenario if key variables were to remain at their historical averages.
4.
These conclusions are not intended to preempt the results of the planned
preliminary HIPC DSA, which will be based on more detailed debt data and a different
methodology. The planned study will assess Haiti’ s HIPC eligibility on the basis of NPV of
debt-to-exports ratio, and is expected to be prepared jointly with World Bank staff in late
2005. 4

4

Haiti does not qualify under the “fiscal window,” which requires a revenue-to-GDP ratio above
15 percent (as well as a 30 percent exports-to-GDP ratio).

- 53 -

Box 1. Key Assumptions and Scenarios
Key assumptions underlying the baseline scenario:
•

Current account: Income elasticity of imports is assumed to be unity. Exports grow somewhat
faster than GDP (reflecting their potential in manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism). Private
remittances would stabilize as a share of GDP during 2005–09 and decline gradually thereafter.

•

Capital account: Foreign direct investment is assumed to grow in line with GDP, net annual
borrowing to remain positive in the long run (but fall as a share of GDP), and the terms of new
borrowing to be highly concessional (based on the weighted average of the present financing
mix) interest rate of 1.6 percent, grace period of 9.6 years, and a maturity of 38 years);

•

External debt in arrears not addressed until 2007;

•

Public sector revenues and grants as a percentage of GDP increase up from 13 to 23 percent
over the projection period. Public sector expenditure increases in line with public sector
revenues and grants.

•

The average real interest rate on domestic short-term debt is 1 percent.

•

Unless otherwise noted, a 5 percent discount rate is used for all years and all creditors.

Main alternative scenarios:
•

Historical scenario: Key variables are assumed to remain at their historical (1995–03) averages
in 2004–23. These variables include real GDP growth, CPI inflation (used as a proxy for GDP
deflator due to data deficiencies), noninterest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt
creating flows (Table 1);

•

The most extreme stress test is a combination of lowering growth of real GDP, export value,
and private and official transfers by one-half standard deviation, and increasing the GDP
deflator by the same magnitude;

•

Variable discount rate: The discount rates are projected to move in lockstep with WEO
projected U.S. dollar LIBOR rates i.e., 3.31 percent in 2005, 4.12 percent in 2006, and 4.35 for
outer years;

•

The higher grant element scenario assumes that half of current borrowing is provided in the
form of grants.

- 54 -

Figure 1. Haiti: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-2023
(In percent)

30

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
25
20
15
Baseline

10

Variable discount rate1/
5
50 percent of loan as grant financing 2/
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
200

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

180
160
140
120
100
80
60

Baseline

40

Variable discount rate1/

20

50 percent of loan as grant financing 2/

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
15
13

Debt service-to-exports ratio (results of all scenarios identical)

11
9
7
5
3

Baseline

1
-1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Fund staff projections and simulations.
1/ The discount rates are projected to increase as in WEO.
2/ Assuming about half of current borrowing will be provided as grants.

- 55 -

Figure 2. Haiti. Indicators of Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-23
(In percent)
45

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

40

Baseline
Historical scenario

35

Most extreme stress test

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
400

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

350

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
Historical scenario

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
18

Debt service-to-exports ratio

16
14
12
10
8
6

Baseline

4

Historical scenario

2

Most extreme stress test

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

- 56 -

Figure 3. Haiti: Indicators of Total Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2004-2023 1/
(In percent)

35

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
30
25
20

Baseline
Historical scenario

15

Most extreme stress test

10
5
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
250

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

200

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

150

100

50

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
16
14

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

12
10
8
6
4

Baseline
Historical scenario

2

Most extreme stress test

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Fund staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test yields highest ratio in 2013. This test uses the baseline real GDP growth rate
minus one standard deviation in 2005 and 2006.
2/ Reserves exclude grants.

30.6
195.9
30.6
195.9
12.1
12.1
0.0
-8.8

0.5
42.5
1.3
5.6
12.9
32.8

3.0
202.2

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Noninterest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Inflation (CPI end-of-period)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)
NPV of external debt/3 year avg. of good and services
3.5
201.6

-3.8
22.5
1.3
9.3
8.6
35.3

26.6
186.8
26.6
186.8
10.1
10.1
0.0
6.3

37.2
37.2
-7.2
0.8
-0.9
28.7
14.3
43.0
-29.5
-0.1
-0.2
1.9
0.5
1.4
-8.2
0.1
-0.6

2004

0.2

-0.2

5.5
16.8
0.7
34.3
50.6
...

5.6

-19.5

2.4
17.1
1.4
15.9
25.0
...

3.3

Standard
Deviation 6/

2.0

Historical
Average 6/

4.4
191.4

2.5
12.0
1.4
11.9
27.2
41.5

22.4
172.9
22.4
172.9
10.1
10.1
0.0
5.4

31.2
31.2
-6.0
-1.2
-0.6
31.4
13.0
44.4
-32.2
0.1
-0.2
-0.4
0.4
-0.8
…
-4.9
1.0

2005

4.5
184.2

3.0
10.0
1.0
6.1
6.0
40.9

22.8
170.9
22.8
170.9
8.6
8.6
0.1
1.2

30.7
30.7
-0.5
-0.3
0.7
32.3
13.4
45.7
-31.9
0.3
-0.4
-0.6
0.3
-0.8
…
-0.2
0.0

2006

4.8
175.2

4.0
8.0
1.0
3.5
4.5
45.7

21.9
168.0
21.9
168.0
8.6
8.6
0.0
0.5

30.6
30.6
-0.1
-1.1
0.4
31.9
13.0
44.9
-31.4
-0.2
-0.6
-0.8
0.3
-1.1
…
1.0
0.0

2007

5.0
176.5

4.0
7.0
1.0
4.7
4.7
45.6

21.8
169.3
21.8
169.3
8.7
8.7
0.0
-0.1

30.6
30.6
0.0
-1.6
-0.1
31.5
12.9
44.4
-31.4
-0.3
-0.7
-0.8
0.3
-1.1
…
1.6
0.0

2008

5.3
176.3

4.0
6.0
0.9
7.4
3.1
45.6

21.6
165.7
21.6
165.7
8.3
8.3
0.0
-0.8

30.5
30.5
-0.1
-2.5
-0.9
30.2
13.0
43.2
-30.7
-0.4
-0.7
-0.9
0.2
-1.1
…
2.3
0.0

2009

Projections

5.7
172.2

4.0
2.4
0.8
7.9
5.7
45.6

21.2
160.1
21.2
160.1
7.7
7.7
0.0
-0.5

30.1
30.1
-0.4
-2.5
-0.9
29.7
13.2
42.9
-30.5
0.0
-0.7
-0.9
0.2
-1.1
…
2.1
0.0

2010

3.6
7.6
1.0
6.9
8.5
44.1

-0.5

-31.3

-0.2

2005-010
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations for 1995-2003.

Source: Staff simulations.

44.4
44.4
8.4
-0.5
-0.4
31.7
15.6
47.3
-32.1
-0.1
-0.3
0.2
0.3
-0.1
-10.8
19.6
0.0

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Noninterest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
Of which: exceptional financing

Estimate
2003

Table 1. Haiti: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003-23 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

6.9
...

4.0
2.4
0.6
8.2
6.5
45.6

19.4
140.1
19.4
140.1
6.3
6.3
0.0
0.1

28.0
28.0
-0.7
-2.2
-0.6
29.0
13.9
42.9
-29.8
0.1
-0.7
-0.9
0.2
-1.1
…
1.5
0.0

2013

12.9
...

4.0
2.4
0.2
8.2
6.5
45.6

13.1
80.4
13.1
80.4
2.4
2.4
-0.1
0.5

20.4
20.4
-0.7
-1.6
-0.2
26.6
16.2
42.9
-27.5
0.7
-0.7
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
…
0.9
0.0

2023

4.0
2.4
0.4
8.2
6.5
45.6

-0.7

-28.8

-0.4

2011-23
Average

- 57 -

- 58 -

Table 2. Haiti: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2003-23
(In percent)
Estimate
2003
2004

2005

Projections
2006
2013

2023

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
31

27

22

23

19

13

31
31
31
31

27
27
27
27

22
25
19
21

21
24
18
21

19
20
15
15

14
15
10
8

31
31
31
31
31
31

27
27
27
27
27
27

23
24
24
24
34
31

24
23
24
24
42
31

20
20
20
19
33
25

13
13
13
13
19
17

196

187

173

171

140

80

196
196
196
196

187
187
187
187

167
193
149
166

160
178
137
159

137
143
109
106

88
91
64
49

196
196
196
196
196
196

187
187
187
187
187
187

163
208
163
173
260
163

173
254
173
182
346
173

157
239
157
165
300
157

88
138
88
91
150
88

12

10

10

9

6

2

12
12
12
12

10
10
10
10

7
9
10
10

7
10
9
9

5
10
6
6

3
8
2
2

B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/

12
12
12
12
12
12

10
10
10
10
10
10

9
11
9
9
9
9

9
14
9
10
13
9

10
14
10
10
14
10

7
10
7
7
12
7

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

43

43

43

43

43

43

Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
A3. Discount rates are 5 percent in 2004, and increase in lockstep with WEO 2/
A4. Half of new borrowing in 2005-2023 is assumed to be provided as grants 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
A3. Discount rates are 5 percent in 2004, and increase in lockstep with WEO 2/
A4. Half of new borrowing in 2005-2023 is assumed to be provided as grants 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
A3. Discount rates are 5 percent in 2004, and increase in lockstep with WEO 2/
A4. Half of new borrowing in 2005-2023 is assumed to be provided as grants 2/
B. Bound Tests

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and nondebt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 59 -

Table 3. Haiti: Averages and Standard Deviations Used for Alternative Scenarios

Non-interest current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Real GDP growth
CPI, end of period (proxy for GDP deflator in U.S. dollars)
Export growth (US dollar terms, in percent)
Net transfers to GDP ratio
Net non-debt creating flows (FDI) to GDP ratio
Source: Fund staff calculations.

1995-2003
Average

Standard
Deviation

-2.0
2.4
17.1
15.9
19.5
0.2

3.3
3.3
10.4
24.1
5.6
0.2

-3.8
1.3
-9.0
...
21.9
-12.0
0.7

2.4
1.4
6.1
2.5
13.3
0.4
0.6

0.3

Historical
Average 5/

3.3
0.7
12.2
21.7
5.7
12.0
0.4

1.3

Standard
Deviation 5/

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Gross debt including domestic bonds issues by the central bank.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues including grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations based on 1995-2003.
6/ Historical average for 1998-2003.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent) 6/
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent) 6/
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/ 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

o/w external

Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/

0.5
2.0
-11.9
13.6
26.9
19.2
0.1

26.9
24.7
24.7
0.0
3.3
203.2
186.8
12.3
8.8

35.2
31.8
31.8
0.0
4.3
285.7
258.0
13.6
-5.8

NPV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)

-8.4
-10.6
0.4
13.2
1.7
13.6
-11.0
1.2
-0.7
1.9
-12.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

8.4
7.0
2.6
12.3
0.7
14.9
4.4
-0.5
-0.3
-0.2
4.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which : contribution from average real interest rate
of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

39.4
37.2

47.8
44.4

2004

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2003

Estimate

2.5
1.3
-0.7
...
15.0
44.9
0.6

25.5
22.4
22.4
0.0
2.3
138.2
121.4
7.9
5.9

-5.1
-3.5
0.8
18.5
6.6
19.3
-4.3
-1.3
-0.4
-1.0
-3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.6

34.3
31.2

2005

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

3.0
1.1
-1.1
...
10.6
6.8
0.7

26.3
23.7
23.7
0.0
2.1
139.4
125.5
6.9
0.1

1.0
1.6
1.1
18.9
6.4
20.0
0.4
-1.3
-0.3
-1.0
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

35.3
32.7

2006

4.0
1.0
0.5
...
9.3
6.3
0.7

23.9
22.5
22.5
0.0
1.9
123.7
116.2
6.7
2.9

-1.8
-0.9
1.1
19.3
6.2
20.4
-2.0
-1.7
-0.3
-1.4
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.9

33.5
32.1

2007

4.0
1.0
7.7
...
7.4
8.8
0.7

23.5
22.3
22.3
0.0
2.1
117.0
110.9
6.5
1.6

-0.4
-0.3
1.3
20.1
6.3
21.4
-1.6
-1.5
-0.2
-1.3
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

33.1
31.9

2008

Table 4. Haiti: Total Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003-2023

4.0
0.9
9.4
...
6.4
7.7
0.7

4.0
0.9
3.4
...
6.0
9.1
0.7

2.0
105.0
98.0
5.4
1.7

0.0

0.0
2.0
114.2
105.1
6.1
0.8

23.2
21.7
21.7

-0.6
-0.4
1.1
22.1
6.1
23.2
-1.5
-1.6
-0.3
-1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

32.9
31.3

2010

23.9
22.0
22.0

0.3
-0.4
1.2
21.0
6.1
22.1
-1.6
-1.5
-0.2
-1.3
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8

33.5
31.6

2009

4.0
1.0
2.6

...
6.0
4.0
0.7

...
9.1
13.9
0.7

1.4
92.9
86.2
4.5
0.8

0.0

21.7
20.2
20.2

-0.5
-1.1
0.3
23.4
5.3
23.7
-1.5
-1.5
-0.3
-1.2
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7

31.6
30.1

2013

3.6
1.0
3.2

1.1

2005-10
Average

6.0
4.0
0.7

...

4.0
1.0
-2.5

0.4
65.8
59.3
2.6
0.4

0.0

15.8
14.2
14.2

-0.7
-1.5
-0.3
24.0
3.4
23.7
-1.3
-1.3
-0.3
-1.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8

25.4
23.9

2023

6.0
4.0
...

...

4.0
1.0
-0.3

0.2

2011-23
Average

- 60 -

Statement by Roberto Steiner, Alternate Executive Director for Haiti
and Ketleen Florestal, Advisor to Executive Director
May 16, 2005

On behalf of our authorities, we would like to thank management and staff for a fruitful
policy dialogue. We would also like to express our appreciation for the recent technical
assistance missions from MFD and FAD. The recommendations that resulted from the
Safeguard Assessment are also appreciated. Fund assistance supports the interim
government’s efforts to restore the credibility of public institutions. We agree with the thrust
of the papers, and would like to confirm that our authorities consent to their publication.
Haiti’s overall good performance under the EPCA is underscored in the papers. While
macroeconomic and financial stability have to a large extent been restored, the reports also
note delays in implementing certain structural reforms. We wish to stress the authorities’
determination to carry forward much needed institutional reforms, which for the most part
have been delayed due to factors beyond their control. The government is faced with the
daunting task of fostering financial stability and trying to re-build institutions that are critical
for growth and poverty alleviation, in the context of an unstable security situation and with
the political complexities that a transitional government inevitably confronts.
Recent developments in public finance
The supplementary budget for April-September 2005 has been voted by the Council of
Ministers and is due to be published shortly. It aims mostly at re-orienting expenditures to
stimulate economic activity, taking into account delayed disbursements of donor assistance
and additional necessary expenditures. These relate mainly to the elections, the funding of
the power company’s (EDH) purchases of fuel, and the increased cost of the SGS service
contract to cover the pre-shipment inspection of imports. Additional funds have been
allocated to EDH to replace the concluded external funding of its purchases of fuel, which
are indispensable to maintaining a minimum electricity supply of 12 hours per day. The costs
of SGS inspections have quadrupled as more physical inspections have been requested, in
addition to paper verifications in order to improve taxation at customs and discourage fraud,
particularly in the case of imports through the border with the Dominican Republic.
The public sector is being depleted of a significant number of its skilled staff, who is either
emigrating or being pulled by the private sector and international organizations in Haiti
through more competitive salaries. This has further weakened the public sector’s capacity to
carry out reforms and execute projects. To halt the hemorrhage of qualified staff, two general
wage increases were granted, cumulating to 45 percent. Nevertheless, this increase corrected
only partially the significant reduction in real wages during the past decade.
The census of employment and payments arrears in public entities is a complex process,
which is being completed. The methodology retained was to have an ad hoc committee do a
census within each institution and to subsequently have the Ministry of Economy and
Finance (MEF) carry a verification of the findings. The census at the National Police Force

-2will be shortly completed by the MEF. The case of the Education Ministry is noteworthy as it
is the single most important employer in the public sector, and a particularly problematic
case given past disorderly hiring practices and accumulated arrears. Arrears in this Ministry
are being reviewed by the MEF. The census for 43 public institutions is already complete.
The ad hoc committee responsible for the census of employment for the 23 other public
institutions has been reinstated after a temporary suspension of its work. The final report of
the census of employment is scheduled for the end of June.
The government had projected zero financing from the central bank (BRH). With fiscal
receipts lagging and in the absence of expected donor disbursements, important cuts in
expenditures were operated and certain budgeted outlays delayed. Nevertheless, the
government kept current with its debt service. The reduction in investment contributed to
depressing further economic activity in the context of low business confidence. The
government shared with Fund staff its concern that failure to invigorate the economy would
have a significant impact on the democratic building process, and discussed the possibility of
undertaking budget reallocations and of using BRH credit to cover exceptional outlays for
the elections and to offset the end of USAID support to the electricity sector.
The government is redoubling efforts to increase tax collection. Revenues have picked up
during the last three months, mostly due to the strengthened administrative controls and
recovery of arrears by the internal revenue service. Customs receipts have also improved
recently, even if the administration is having difficulties controlling fraud at the border with
the Dominican Republic. With the support of the U.S. Treasury, the IADB, and the Fund, an
improvement of tax administration is expected in the short term. The strengthening of the
infrastructure of provincial custom offices is being undertaken with help from UNCTAD.
The interim government believes that improved budget management and expenditure control
are paramount to sustainable fiscal consolidation. The expenditure approval process has been
rationalized, allowing for observance of regular budget processes and a very significant
reduction of current account use. Modernization efforts are being undertaken with the help of
the IADB and the World Bank. The annuity of the budget process has been reinstated and
preparation of the budget for FY 2005-06 is on track. Two weeks ago the budget process was
officially launched with the publication by the Prime Minister of the broad orientations for its
preparation, including the request for investment budgets from sector ministries. The draft
budget will be ready for discussion with civil society in July. The pre-audit of TELECO, the
state-owned communications company, has been completed and the modernization of its
accounting system is underway. Terms of reference for the audit of EDH, the electricity
company, are being drawn and the audit will be carried soon, with financial assistance from
the World Bank and the Canadian government.
The motto behind public sector reforms is accountability, transparency and efficiency. The
Table of Operations of the Central Government is distributed monthly by e-mail to a wide list
of members of civil society, the private sector, international organizations, and to scholars
and interested parties. The MEF has announced the launching at the end of this month of its
website. It is to be an important medium for informing on budget execution and reform

-3implementation. The anti-corruption unit created in September 2004 has been fully
operational since December.
Monetary policy and the BRH’s balance sheet
With the strengthened fiscal position, the BRH was able to reduce inflation sharply, enhance
official reserves and ensure exchange rate stability. Nevertheless, challenges remain, in
particular the high level of dollarization of the banking sector, the pass-through of
international fuel prices, the limited scope for diversification of monetary policy instruments,
and the vulnerability of the BRH’s balance sheet.
During the past fiscal year interest paid by the government to service its debt to the BRH did
not cover the cost of interest paid to commercial banks on central bank paper. Recently,
however, the BRH has been able to decrease interest rates on bonds while still maintaining an
adequate stock of bonds. Interest on government debt, which represents close to 60 percent of
BRH receipts, now covers the cost of the central bank paper issued. In spite of this, the BRH
feels that it needs more room to carry out its operations without endangering its balance
sheet. An agreement has been reached with the MEF to raise the monthly interest payments
to the BRH. The conversion of outstanding credit to the central government into interestbearing bonds is being contemplated for the medium term and should significantly improve
central bank revenue. Fund TA has been looking at the different functions of the central
bank, particularly its fiscal role as collector of taxes for the government. While unusual and
costly to the bank, the BRH cannot be alleviated of this function without taking into
consideration the actual capacity of the fiscal administration, its needs to be modernized and
strengthened, and the imperative necessity to raise fiscal revenue significantly.
Staff mentions problems of excess liquidity and suggests that interest rates on bonds be
increased. Although sensible, this suggestion fails to fully take into account the operational
framework of bond market operations. Since mid-August 2004 the BRH sold in its weekly
auction just enough bonds to replace those coming due during that week, keeping thus the
bond stock constant at around 3.5 billion gourdes. This meant that the BRH fixed both prices
and quantities. In turn, banks started overbidding. Recently, the BRH issued an
administrative order forbidding banks to bid beyond their excess liquidity. Simultaneously,
because of signs of nervousness in the exchange rate market, the BRH has decided to
increase weekly volumes sold. As a result, outstanding bonds now reach 4.8 billion gourdes.
Without raising interest rates, the BRH was able to mop up an important portion of excess
liquidity and stabilize the exchange rate market. The BRH stands ready to change posture if
the situation so warrants.
The BRH is thankful for the Safeguard Assessment report, showing no imminent
vulnerabilities. BRH officials consider the conclusions and recommendations of the
assessment a useful tool in framing its reform agenda. The mission concluded that many
elements of an adequate safeguard framework are present at the BRH, including a wellfunctioning external auditing mechanism, a legal framework that guarantees its operational
independence, and well-managed operations and foreign reserves. However, the report
underlined certain vulnerabilities, some of which the bank was already addressing. They

-4concerned a lack of written guidelines relative to the process of generating and exchanging
information within and between departments and potentially conflicting functions of the
internal audit department. The interim audit report will, as usual, be published on the BRH’s
web site and later in its annual report.
The banking sector has been under constant scrutiny and the BRH board is confident that the
financial system’s vulnerabilities are modest. The BRH does not intend to relax prudential
regulations and reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits, given the vulnerability of
the dollarized banking system to an external shock. The authorities believe that an FSAP
would be beneficial and hope that the Fund will be able to attend to this request promptly.
Debt sustainability
The latest DSA suggests that Haiti could potentially be eligible for assistance under the HIPC
Initiative. The ratio of NPV of debt to exports at end-September 2003 and 2004 after full use
of traditional debt relief mechanisms was estimated to be 200 and 199 percent respectively.
This ratio is projected to be around 189 percent this year, well beyond the threshold adopted
under the operational framework. We are hopeful that the assessment of eligibility being
carried out by the World Bank and the Fund will be concluded soon. Debt relief is urgently
needed to break the cycle of low growth, poverty, and political instability. Given Haiti’s
large debt, our authorities hope that additional support will be provided primarily in the form
of grants.
Conclusions
Looking forward, Haiti faces a number of challenges and downside risks. The recent
elimination of the ATC quotas and the expiration of the benefits under the CBTPA
(Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act) in 2008, will affect growth and employment. A
compensating factor would be the passage of the HOPE bill by the United States Congress.
The authorities are hopeful that this will in fact happen.
Donor commitment to timely disbursement of pledged resources and donor coordination are
paramount for an efficient use of scarce resources. Staff has identified a US$50 million
financing gap for FY06. Our authorities are convinced that once a new government is
elected, the donor community will be able to move fast and the financing gap will be closed.
The development of a medium-term development and poverty reduction strategy I-PRSP in
the course of the next twelve months is important in order to reduce delays in embarking on a
PRGF arrangement, which will be instrumental in changing the long-standing negative trend
of social and economic indicators and vital to mobilizing adequate funding for achieving the
MDG goals.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/78
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 17, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Haiti
On May 16, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Haiti.1
Background
Economic and social conditions in Haiti deteriorated significantly during the early 2000s as the
continued political stalemate undermined external financial support and private investment,
and structural reforms came to a halt. This resulted in economic stagnation, high inflation, and
widespread unemployment. The political turmoil in early 2004 and the devastating floods in
May and September compounded these difficulties and led to a contraction of real GDP by
3¾ percent in 2003/04.
The transition government that was formed in early 2004 prepared a broad social and
economic strategy that gained support of the international community and substantial pledges
of financial assistance during a July 2004 donors' conference. The government’s
macroeconomic policies were framed in the context of a Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) with
the Fund covering the period April–September 2004, and from October 2004 were supported
by the Fund’s Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA), which was approved by the
Fund’s Board on January 10, 2005.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2The authorities’ program for 2004/05 aims to: (i) strengthen security and the rule of law in
preparation for national elections in 2005; (ii) create conditions for economic recovery and
reconstruction of government and social infrastructure; (iii) enhance governance and the
institutional and administrative capacity of the government; (iv) improve access to basic
services; and (v) promote employment opportunities for the unskilled and for displaced
populations.
Performance under the SMP and the EPCA-supported program has been satisfactory.
Financial stability has been largely restored; the exchange rate has stabilized; inflation has
declined; and net international reserves have increased. However, partly owing to slower-thananticipated project disbursements by donors, economic recovery in the first two quarters of
2004/05 appears to have been weaker than expected, as indicated by exports and fiscal
revenue performance, as well as stagnant credit to the private sector. This suggests a risk that
the GDP growth objective of 2½ percent for 2004/05 may not be attained, especially in view of
the still unsettled political situation and the lifting of quotas under the Agreement on Textiles
and Clothing.
Progress has also been made in implementing structural reforms. The expenditure approval
process has been streamlined and the discretionary use of ministerial current accounts was
sharply reduced. In addition, the Anti-Corruption Unit became operational by end-2004,
pre-audits of the state-owned telephone and electricity companies were initiated, and requests
for offers for audits of three other key public sector enterprises were published. In the financial
sector, the IMF safeguards assessment and the external audit of the Bank of the Republic of
Haiti (BRH) accounts have been largely completed.
Executive Board Assessment
The Executive Directors welcomed the progress achieved by the Haitian authorities toward
restoring macroeconomic stability and implementing structural reforms, and were encouraged
by Haiti’s performance under the program supported by the Fund’s EPCA policy, which is
broadly on track. They noted in particular that, despite difficult political and security conditions
and the devastating floods in 2004, the authorities have been successful in stabilizing the
exchange rate, bringing down inflation, and strengthening international reserves. Directors
observed that the key challenge is to put in place policies that would promote faster growth
and generate adequate fiscal revenues for improving social services, institutional capacity, and
infrastructure, and for bringing down poverty.
Directors considered that the actions taken by the authorities to reengage donors, clear
arrears to the World Bank, and increase the Fund’s involvement in Haiti have been important
steps toward a medium-term development program aimed at raising the rate of growth and
reducing poverty.
Directors noted the urgency of reviving economic activity and restoring confidence ahead of
the elections scheduled for November 2005. In this context, they recognized the need for a
supplementary budget for April–September 2005 that would help safeguard social and security

-3expenditures in the context of lower-than-envisaged revenues and donor disbursements.
Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to secure additional assistance from the
international community to help close the financing gap in 2004/05 and to fully cover the cost
of elections, noting that such assistance should be in the form of highly concessional loans or
grants and be well-coordinated with the authorities’ development strategy. They encouraged
the Haitian authorities to continue to cooperate closely with donors, including through regular
information sharing, on the implementation of the social and economic agenda agreed at last
year’s donor conference, and welcomed the steps being taken to accelerate donor
disbursements and advance the preparation of projects for next year’s budget.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to prepare the 2005/06 budget in time to allow for
consultations with political parties and civil society, noting that a newly elected government
would begin its term in the middle of the fiscal year, and the importance of aligning donor
support with the budget priorities. Key objectives for the budget will be to strengthen revenue
collection and administration, including through broadening the tax base, in order to help meet
urgent expenditure demands. Directors welcomed the government’s objective to avoid funding
expenditures with central bank financing. They looked forward to the adoption of measures to
improve budget management and expenditure control, and supported Fund technical
assistance in this area.
Directors welcomed the staff’s analysis of debt sustainability and agreed that Haiti’s debt
burden is high and could become a source of vulnerability. They noted the authorities’ efforts
to clear debt service arrears, and recommended that nonconcessional debt be avoided and
new official assistance be provided either on highly concessional terms or through grants.
Directors looked forward to a joint Fund-Bank preliminary analysis of Haiti’s Heavily Indebted
Poor Country (HIPC) eligibility to be undertaken later in 2005. A few Directors expressed their
willingness to support initiatives toward granting debt relief under the HIPC Initiative if Haiti
was found to be eligible.
Directors underscored the need to tighten monetary policy and absorb the excess liquidity in
the banking system to safeguard the monetary and external objectives under the EPCAsupported program. They supported a rapid implementation of the intended change in the
auctioning mechanism for auctioning central bank bonds, in line with the recommendations of
the Fund’s recent technical assistance mission. Directors expressed concern about the
significant operational losses of the central bank, and welcomed the authorities’ intentions to
include a plan for strengthening its financial position in next year’s budget. They also
welcomed the completion of the IMF safeguards assessment mission, and encouraged the
publication of the interim audit report of the central bank. Directors supported the authorities’
request for a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission to assess the condition
of the financial sector and identify remaining weaknesses. Directors agreed that a flexible
exchange rate regime has served Haiti well, and supported the objective of increasing net
international reserves over the medium term.
Directors welcomed the progress achieved in the first half of the fiscal year in implementing the
structural reform agenda and stressed the importance of the authorities’ completion of their

-4remaining commitments as agreed under the program. In particular, Directors encouraged the
authorities to complete the survey of domestic arrears, the census of government employment,
and publish information on budget execution. While Directors acknowledged the importance of
sustaining electricity supplies, they also underscored the need to ensure that government
transfers to the state-owned electricity utility are used appropriately and carried out in a
transparent manner. They called for strengthened expenditure control mechanisms in the
electricity company, and for competitive bidding procedures for all energy-related contracts.
Directors noted the challenge of raising Haiti’s economic growth rate over the medium term.
This would require achieving broad domestic consensus on the social and economic strategy,
progress toward national reconciliation, and actions to improve the security situation. In
addition, it will be essential to maintain prudent macroeconomic policies, speed up the
implementation of reforms, particularly those related to strengthening capacity in the public
sector, and improving governance and transparency. Directors reiterated the Fund’s readiness
to continue its support to Haiti through a further drawing under the EPCA-supported program
and continued technical assistance. A satisfactory track record of policy implementation under
the EPCA program, and progress on a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) would
provide a basis for discussions on a future Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
supported program.
Directors urged the Haitian authorities to take decisive steps to improve the quality and
timeliness of statistical data reporting to the Fund, and in particular to take advantage of further
technical assistance in this respect.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after
Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in
a particular case. The Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation is also available.

-5-

Haiti: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators
Fiscal Year Ending September 30
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Proj.
(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
GDP at constant prices
-1.0
-0.5
Consumer prices (end-of-period)
12.3
10.1
Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP)
25.9
24.9
Gross national savings (in percent of GDP)
22.3
22.4

0.5
42.5
30.7
29.8

-3.8
22.5
27.3
26.5

2.5
12.0
29.1
25.7

-3.0
-3.2
1.0

-3.5
-3.6
-0.3

-2.4
-3.7
1.0

-1.5
-6.6
-0.6

(Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money)
Money and credit
Net domestic assets
9.4
17.0
Credit to the public sector (net)
8.5
9.4
Credit to the private sector
-3.5
5.9
Broad money (including foreign currency deposits)
5.2
17.2

26.2
9.3
13.0
39.8

10.6
4.6
3.4
9.1

6.2
0.0
4.9
12.5

21.0
13.6
-0.1
-4.8
44.4
8.5

12.8
6.0
0.4
-2.8
37.2
9.2

8.6
31.6
0.2
-8.6
31.2
9.3

38.8
157.1
1.2
-8.5

54.5
206.9
1.3
31.6

83.6
277.1
1.6
...

(In percent of GDP)
Public finances
Central government overall balance (including grants)
Central government overall balance (excluding grants)
Public sector savings

-2.4
-2.8
-0.6

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports (f.o.b.)
-7.8 -10.5
Imports (f.o.b.)
-2.9
-6.9
Current account balance (including official grants, in percent of GDP)
-2.0
-1.0
Current account balance (excluding official grants, in percent of GDP)
-6.5
-4.9
External public debt (end-of-period, in percent of GDP)
33.6
36.1
External public debt service (in percent of exports of goods
8.7
7.9
and nonfactor services)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
108.8
53.0
Liquid gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/
227.3 177.7
In months of imports of the following year
2.2
1.5
Real effective exchange rate (appreciation +)
7.9
-8.9

Sources: Ministry of Economy and Finance; Bank of the Republic of Haiti; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes commercial banks' foreign currency deposits with the BRH.
2/ Gross reserves excluding capital contributions to international organizations.

