© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001

July 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/270
August 2, 2001

January 29, 2001

Bolivia: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Bolivia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Bolivia, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 23, 2006, with the officials of Bolivia on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on June 28, 2006. The views expressed in the staff report are
those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the
IMF.

•

a staff statement of July 17, 2006 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 17, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Bolivia.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BOLIVIA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2006 Consultation with Bolivia
Approved by Markus Rodlauer and Carlo Cottarelli
June 28, 2006
•

Discussions. Article IV consultation discussions were held during May 8–23 with, among
others, Vice-President Garcia-Linera, Planning Minister Villegas, Finance Minister Arce,
Hydrocarbons Minister Soliz-Rada, CBB President Raul Garron, key embassies, and
representatives of the oil companies and the financial sector. The mission team comprised
Messrs. Furtado (head), Gracia, and Mansilla; and Ms. Jaramillo-Mayor (all WHD);
Mr. Cortavarría-Checkley (MFD); Mr. Dodzin (PDR); and Mr. Simone (FAD); and was
assisted by the Fund’s resident representative, Mr. Vesperoni. Mr. Cuevas (OED) participated
in the policy discussions.

•

Political setting. Following a protracted period of political instability and social unrest, general
elections were held in December 2005. Evo Morales, elected with a strong majority, is the first
Bolivian president of indigenous origin and has vowed to reduce poverty and inequality
through social inclusion and institutional changes. Elections for a constitutional assembly will
be held on July 2, 2006.

•

Economic setting and key policy issues. The new government has inherited a favorable
macroeconomic situation, including a low fiscal deficit and inflation, and record international
reserves. The short-term outlook remains favorable, reflecting the continued strength of natural
gas and mineral exports. The authorities expressed a strong commitment to maintain
macroeconomic stability. In the structural area, their policy framework relies on a greater
economic role for the state, notably in the strategic hydrocarbons and mining sectors.

•

MDRI. Bolivia has benefited from the debt relief from the IMF under the Multilateral Debt
Relief Initiative. This covered 100 percent of all outstanding debt incurred by Bolivia to the
Fund before January 2005, amounting to approximately US$230 million (2½ percent of 2005
GDP and 4½ percent of public external debt).

•

Fund relations. Bolivia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4. The
exchange system is free of restrictions on current international payments and transfers, and
there are no significant controls on capital flows. The last Article IV consultation was
concluded on July 7, 2003 (Country Report No. 03/257). The latest Stand-By Arrangement
expired on March 31, 2006. Fund relations are summarized in Appendix I.

2

Contents

Page

I.

Background

..........................................................................................................5

II.

Report on the Discussions........................................................................................6
A.
Recent Economic Developments and Short-Term Outlook.........................8
B.
Hydrocarbons Policy....................................................................................8
C.
Fiscal Policy.................................................................................................9
D.
Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Policies .........................13
E.
Competitiveness.........................................................................................15
F.
Medium-Term Outlook..............................................................................17

III.

Debt Sustainability Analysis..................................................................................19

IV.

Staff Appraisal .......................................................................................................20

Boxes
1.
Social and Governance Indicators ...........................................................................7
2.
Nationalization of Hydrocarbons...........................................................................10
3.
Micro-Credit Institutions .......................................................................................16
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators .........................................................24
Operations of the Combined Public Sector............................................................25
Monetary Survey....................................................................................................26
Central Bank of Bolivia .........................................................................................27
Commercial Banks Performance Indicators ..........................................................28
Financial and External Vulnerability Indicators ....................................................29
Summary Balance of Payments .............................................................................30
Comparison of Medium-Term Scenarios...............................................................31
Millennium Development Goals............................................................................32

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Key Economic Indicators.......................................................................................33
Fiscal Developments..............................................................................................34
Monetary Developments........................................................................................35
Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Developments ...................................................36
Medium-Term Scenarios .......................................................................................37

3

Appendices
1.
Fund Relations .......................................................................................................38
2.
External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)......................................42
3.
Relations with the World Bank..............................................................................52
4.
Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank.........................................54
5.
Statistical Issues .....................................................................................................56

4

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•

Over the past year, Bolivia has experienced far-reaching political changes, which
culminated in the election of a government with an unprecedented popular mandate. Given
its wide base of support, the new government is uniquely positioned to implement policy
initiatives that are conducive to higher and more equitable growth.

•

Benefiting from a favorable external environment, the Bolivian economy displayed positive
trends in 2005 that are so far being maintained in 2006. This includes satisfactory GDP
growth and a strong balance of payments, led by the hydrocarbons sector, low inflation, smaller
fiscal deficits, and historically high levels of international reserves. The banking system has
remained stable and financial dollarization has declined somewhat. Reflecting relief under the
MDRI, the public debt-GDP ratio has been substantially reduced.

•

The overall deficit of the combined public sector is projected to narrow to near balance in
2006, but this is driven by a large increase in hydrocarbons-based revenue that may be
partially reversed in coming years. Accordingly, there is a need to strengthen domestic
taxation, carefully scrutinize spending, and rationalize intergovernmental fiscal relations. Large
fuel subsidies should be phased out while protecting vulnerable groups.

•

The central bank should continue to pursue a cautious monetary policy stance, which could
be supported by greater exchange rate flexibility. The crawling peg does not allow an agile
response to changes in external conditions and discourages exchange rate risk management.
Accordingly, the authorities should move gradually towards greater exchange rate flexibility. The
transition would have to be managed cautiously given the high dollarization and vulnerability to
deposit outflows.

•

The authorities’ medium-term policy framework calls for a greater state role in the
economy, but also emphasizes continued macroeconomic stability and improvements in
governance. The government would participate in the strategic economic sectors of hydrocarbons
and mining, and support small- and medium-scale producers through expanded access to credit
and land. While emphasis on macroeconomic stability and improved governance is welcome, the
envisaged role for the state is a source of serious concern because of its potential fiscal cost and
adverse impact on the environment for private investment.

•

However, while the short-term outlook is positive and the global environment for exporters
of energy and minerals is expected to remain favorable, the medium-term outlook for
Bolivia presents important challenges and risks. The outlook is particularly sensitive to
developments in the hydrocarbons sector, where considerable uncertainty prevails at this stage
regarding the modalities for implementing the recent nationalization decree. The authorities
should undertake all efforts to achieve expeditiously mutually acceptable operating arrangements
with the concerned energy companies. Other risks include potential institutional changes in the
context of the forthcoming constitutional assembly, and a possible loss of trade preferences from
the United States and Andean countries.

5

I. BACKGROUND
1.
Despite wide-ranging economic reforms over the past two decades, the
accomplishment of macroeconomic stability, and a major expansion of the
hydrocarbons sector, Bolivia has achieved only modest gains in poverty reduction and
inequality has remained high. The reform process, which encompassed privatizations and
liberalization of the exchange and trade systems, contributed to a major decline in inflation
and to an increase in growth in the 1990s. However, the growth performance deteriorated
during 1999–2003 in the context of rising social tensions and political instability, and the
partial recovery of the last two years has been concentrated in the highly capital-intensive
hydrocarbons sector. As a result, Bolivia’s key social indicators have continued to lag
(Box 1).
2.
Over the past year, Bolivia has experienced major political changes, against the
background of entrenched dissatisfaction with the country’s poor social indicators and
weak governance. Following a protracted political crisis, the constitution was amended in
June 2005 to allow early presidential and congressional elections for a new full five-year
period in December 2005, together with the first direct elections for regional governors.
Agreement was also reached on calling a constitutional assembly and a referendum on
regional autonomy in July 2006. The elections resulted in a major renewal of Congress and in
a landslide victory for Evo Morales, the first indigenous head of state in Bolivian history.1
3.
The new government has inherited a favorable macroeconomic situation,
associated in large measure with the extremely favorable international environment. In
2005, GDP growth was just above 4 percent and the fiscal deficit narrowed to 2.3 percent of
GDP (Figures 1 and 2). Inflation was contained below 5 percent following an acceleration
early in the year due to petroleum price increases, supply disruptions, and imported inflation.
Financial sector stability improved as deposits and credit increased for the first time in
several years, and the balance of payments remained strong with official foreign exchange
reserves rising to historic highs. Financial dollarization declined, due to expectations of
exchange rate appreciation as well as prudential and tax measures that have increased the
cost of holding foreign currency.2 The Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative has resulted in a
substantial reduction of the public debt burden.3

1

The new government has a majority in the lower house and strong support in the senate, in sharp contrast with
the weak congressional position of previous governments. However, it faces opposition by a majority of the
newly elected regional governors.
2

Since May 2005, dollar deposits are subject to higher reserve requirements than boliviano deposits. Also, a
financial transaction tax was introduced in mid-2004 that affects sight and savings dollar deposits, as compared
to only sight boliviano deposits.
3

The combined contributions from the IMF and the World Bank reduced Bolivia’s external public debt by
about US$1.8 billion, or from about 50 percent to about 30 percent of GDP.

6

4.
The Bolivian authorities have partially implemented the policies recommended
in the 2003 Article IV consultation, which were reflected in the design of the program
supported by the recently-expired Stand-By Arrangement. Fund advice emphasized
regaining fiscal sustainability and improving the efficiency of public spending, maintaining
low inflation and seeking a gradual build-up of international reserves, and strengthening the
corporate and financial sectors. Under the SBA, substantial progress was made in reducing
macroeconomic imbalances and reducing financial sector vulnerabilities. However, important
structural issues, including inefficient government spending, remain to be addressed. The
2005 Ex Post Assessment concluded that a new focus was needed on improvements in
governance, with a view to strengthening management of public expenditure, rationalizing
the tax system, and removing institutional impediments to growth.4
II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
5.
The authorities’ key objective is to reduce poverty and inequality and achieve
improvements in governance, underpinned by prudent macroeconomic management.
They plan to achieve these objectives with a policy framework that calls for a greater state
role in the two strategic economic sectors (hydrocarbons and mining),5 and for targeted
government interventions in support of small- and medium-scale producers, notably through
expanded access to credit and the redistribution of land under an extensive land reform.6 The
authorities noted that their policies would be reflected in their National Development Plan, an
umbrella policy document just finalized. In addition to these issues, a substantial portion of
the discussions focused on the short- and medium-term impact of the May 1, 2006 decree on
nationalization of the hydrocarbons sector.
6.
The mission supported the government’s emphasis on maintaining
macroeconomic stability and its vision of greater equity, transparency, and
accountability. The staff noted, however, that a careful balance should be sought between a
greater role of the state and the preservation of appropriate incentives for private investment

4

According to the indicators of Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi, over the last decade Bolivia’s governance
declined across four of the six dimensions measured. By 2004, in all areas except regulatory quality, Bolivia
was below the average for South America and ranked in the bottom half of all countries sampled. On political
stability and corruption, Bolivia ranked in the bottom third of the sample.

5

The government intends to strengthen its role in the mining sector through a revival of the state company
Corporación Minera de Bolivia (COMIBOL). Large private mining operations will be allowed to proceed, but
under as yet unspecified higher taxation.
6

The government has announced a land reform that would involve redistribution of significant extensions of
land in the next five years. Although the land currently targeted for redistribution is owned by the Bolivian
state, the government has indicated that it will eventually seize and redistribute privately-owned land that is
unproductive, was obtained illegally, or is being used for speculation.

7

Box 1. Bolivia: Social and Governance Indicators
•

A substantial decline in real per capita income in the period 1999–2003, which was
followed by only a modest recovery, contributed to social unrest and to the political crises
of recent years. The extensive reform process of the 1980s and 1990s was accompanied by an
increase in per capita income in Bolivia, improved social indicators, and some reduction in
poverty. However, this trend has been reversed since the late 1990s, partly due to negative
external shocks—including the Brazilian and Argentine crises. Furthermore, the economic
recovery of the last few years has been concentrated almost exclusively in the hydrocarbons
intensive region of Tarija. Thus, the per capita real GDP gains of the 1990s in the highlands and
lowlands have been almost completely lost, with per capita income levels in 2004 similar to
those of 1992.

•

Social discontent was also fuelled by increased perceptions of poor governance. As social
conditions were weakening, so too were perceptions about the governance of the country.
Indicators across six dimensions of governance produced by Kaufman et al. (2005)—including
voice and accountability, political stability, and control of corruption—show some
improvement until the late 1990s, followed by a steady deterioration across all measures.

•

While Bolivia will be able to meet some of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), it
is unlikely to halve extreme poverty by 2015. Some of the MDGs, such as universal primary
education and gender equality in primary education, will likely be met. Some other goals, such
us reducing child mortality, improving maternal health, combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and
other diseases, and increasing access to safe and drinking water, appear within reach, although
further efforts are required (Table 9). However, the objectives of reducing poverty to 34 percent
and extreme poverty by half will probably not be met since they would require sustained annual
growth rates of 5.5–6.5 percent through 2015.
118
116

Headcount poverty indicators
(in percent of individuals 1/)

Real per Capita GDP
(1992 = 100)

114
112

106

Poverty

Gini
Coefficient

National

1997
1999
2003

36.5
40.7
41.3

63.6
63.5
65.2

...
0.58
0.61

Capital Cities

1993
1997
1999
2002

23.7
21.3
20.7
23.5

52.0
50.7
46.4
51.0

...
...
0.49
0.54

110
108

Extreme
Poverty

104
102

1/ Income based measures. The poverty indices express
the number of individuals below the poverty line.

100
1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Bolivia
Highlands (La Paz, Oruro and Potosi)
Lowlands (Santa Cruz, Beni and Pando)
Valleys (Cochabamba, Chuquisaca and Tarija)

Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas Bolivia

8

needed to support growth and raise employment and living standards. In view of the
increasing role that is being proposed for the state, the mission also highlighted the need to
preserve strong and efficient public institutions. Moreover, given the objective of
maintaining macroeconomic stability, close attention must be paid to the economic impact of
government interventions, including their short- and medium-term fiscal cost. In this
connection, the mission noted the authorities’ assurances that Bolivia’s unsuccessful
experiences of the past with public enterprises and development banking would not be
repeated.
A. Recent Economic Developments and Short-Term Outlook
7.
Thus far in 2006, the economy has kept the positive trends observed in 2005.
Economic activity has been led by high export values of hydrocarbon and mining products,
which have contributed to a strong external current account surplus. Inflation has continued
in the low single digits, following a decreasing trend that started in the fourth quarter of
2005, and the overall fiscal position is in surplus. In particular, sub-national governments
have been accumulating sizable deposits at the central bank, thereby helping sterilize the
monetary impact of the rapid international reserve accumulation. Indicators of banking
system soundness have been broadly stable, with high liquidity and capital adequacy ratios
above mandatory levels.
8.
The economic outlook for the remainder of 2006 remains positive, helped in
large part by continued highly favorable external conditions, notably high energy
prices. Real GDP growth is expected at just above 4 percent, with inflation in the low single
digits (Table 1). The combined public sector is expected to record a near balance for the year
as a whole as the temporary extra revenues accrued from the new hydrocarbons policy
framework would not be translated immediately into investment spending by YPFB.
Reflecting debt relief under the MDRI, the ratio of public debt to GDP is projected to decline
from 71 percent at end-2005 to 51 percent by end-2006.7 Accumulation of official reserves is
projected to continue, reflecting a strong external current account surplus associated with
high international prices of fuels and minerals.
B. Hydrocarbons Policy
9.
Key implementation aspects of the nationalization decree issued on May 1
remain to be negotiated over a period of six months, including the tax regime, export
pricing, and compensation for the assets that are being nationalized. High-level
negotiating commissions have been appointed by Bolivia and Brazil, and in parallel
discussions are being held concerning natural gas exports to Argentina. The authorities
emphasized that the nationalization decree was consistent with the 2004 national referendum
and the 2005 hydrocarbons law, which the electoral platform of the new government had
7

The implementation of the MDRI has released fiscal resources equivalent to about 0.5 percent of the GDP per
year over 2006-11.

9

committed to implement. They also stressed that the new agreements with energy companies
would all be approved by Congress, which in their view would provide for a more stable
legal regime. The mission underscored the importance of reaching mutually acceptable
arrangements with the concerned companies in order to ensure further development of
Bolivia’s natural gas reserves and sustained export growth.
C. Fiscal Policy
10.
Budget execution in the first three months of 2006 showed an overall surplus of
2.1 percent of GDP for the combined public sector (CPS).8 While expenditure was
seasonally low, this surplus reflected mostly strong hydrocarbons-based revenue associated
with high oil and gas prices. In particular, sub-national governments accumulated deposits at
the central bank at a brisk pace, as their share of hydrocarbons-based revenue was boosted by
the change in revenue sharing agreements mandated by the 2005 hydrocarbons law.
11.
The overall deficit of the CPS for 2006 is now estimated at only 0.1 percent of
GDP, compared with 3.0 percent of GDP projected in the budget, as higher
hydrocarbons-based revenues will not be immediately spent. The revenue projection has
been revised upward, mainly reflecting increased hydrocarbons prices in international
markets and a new hydrocarbon take for YPFB, temporarily set by the nationalization decree
at 32 percent of the value of production of gas and oil in the two largest gas fields. This
would more than compensate for a significant overall spending increase, associated mainly
with: (a) a higher wage bill in the wake of wage increases to the health and education sectors;
(b) increased subsidies for diesel imports resulting from higher external prices; and (c) higher
capital spending by subnational governments (Table 2). The substantial public enterprise
surplus in 2006 reflects mainly the fact that the new revenue accruing to YPFB is not likely
to be translated immediately into project spending.
Structural fiscal issues
12.
The government is planning to take a range of structural fiscal measures,
including to strengthen revenue and improve the budget process. The authorities are
working on a base-broadening and equity-enhancing tax reform that would include limiting
tax exemptions, rationalizing and revamping free trade zone legislation, shifting large
taxpayers in special regimes to the regular regime (e.g., transportation), and bringing into the
tax net activities with potentially large taxpayers such as gambling. The authorities also
indicated that they will abolish the financial transactions tax (FTT) on boliviano deposits and
make it permanent for short-term dollar deposits above US$2,000 in order to retain fiscal
revenues while creating an incentive for dedollarization. A reform of mining sector taxation

8

The CPS comprises the nonfinancial public sector and the central bank.

10

Box 2. Bolivia: Nationalization of Hydrocarbons
Background
•

The 1996 “capitalization” (privatization) process granted a majority stake and
managerial control of public enterprises to private investors. At that time, ten companies in
telecommunications, electricity, transport and hydrocarbons were divested in favor of foreign
investors and the Bolivian population. Foreign firms acquired a 50 percent stake and complete
managerial control of those companies in return for investment commitments. Some shares
were also distributed among workers. The remaining shares (about 49 percent) were used to
create a fund, the Fondo de Capitalización Colectiva (FCC), whose management was assigned
to the private pension funds. The dividends on these shares were earmarked to pay the
Bonosol—a minimum pension payment (currently set at Bs. 1800) to all Bolivians who were 21
years or older at end-1995, collectable annually after reaching 65 years of age.

•

The authorities believe that the capitalization process in the hydrocarbons sector has not
been beneficial for Bolivia and that it has breached the constitution. In particular, they feel
that the bulk of the gains from the expansion of the hydrocarbons sector has been captured by
the foreign energy companies. Moreover, they argue that the current contracts with those
companies are not valid because they were not ratified by parliament as would be required
under the constitution.

The current nationalization initiative
•

The May 1 nationalization decree reverses the “capitalization” process in the
hydrocarbons sector. It has mandated a return to a state majority stake and managerial control
over hydrocarbons companies, which is facilitated by the return of management of the FCC’s
shares in hydrocarbons companies to the state. With FCC shares under state management,
effective control over the capitalized enterprises could be accomplished by buying additional
equity from workers and the foreign stakeholders. In this connection, the authorities will
undertake an audit of the capitalized companies to determine their cost structure, profitability
and whether they have fulfilled their investment commitments. In addition to stipulating that
YPFB must regain control of the natural gas companies Chaco and Andina, and the pipeline
company Transredes, YPFB must also acquire a controlling stake in the two oil refineries and a
logistics company owned by the Brazilian company Petrobrás and by a German-Peruvian
consortium, respectively. However, it is not clear that the foreign companies affected by the
decree will agree to terms for selling their shares.

•

The mission emphasized the importance of maintaining efficient and independent
management in the enterprises that are targeted to revert to state control. The mission also
expressed concern about the possible implications of changes in the status of FCC funds for the
financing of BONOSOL payments.

11

And modifications to the tax refund system are also being considered, as are changes to the
pension law aimed mainly at reducing the replacement rate required to retire under the
private system (to facilitate for retirement at ages 55 for men and 50 for women, instead of at
age 65 for both). The draft budget framework law is expected to be reviewed and resubmitted
to parliament,9 and an improved balance between expenditure responsibilities and resources
across levels of government will be sought.
13.
The mission suggested ways to improve the tax system and cautioned about the
cost of changes in the pension system. To spread the tax burden more fairly, the mission
discussed with the authorities the possibility of introducing a personal income tax, which
could exclude the lower 80 percent of the income distribution. The authorities stated that they
were not considering such a tax at this stage. On the FTT, the mission reiterated past staff
advice that the tax should be totally removed in the context of the forthcoming tax reform
and suggested that dedollarization efforts should be supported, instead, by financial sector
regulations. In addition, the mission urged the authorities to ensure that increased tax take in
the mining taxation regime would be consistent with continued investment in the sector.
Regarding the tax refund system, the mission supported efforts to reduce fraud while
ensuring timely refunds to exporters. On pension reform, the mission recommended that the
authorities analyze carefully the fiscal costs and the implications for the budget of possible
changes to the pension law, particularly if these involve bringing forward pension payments.
14.
In line with an election commitment, the government has implemented a
compression of salaries for senior officials. As one of his early actions, the President cut
his own salary by more than half, which automatically triggered a reduction in the maximum
possible salary in the public sector. As a result, public entities (including the central bank, the
superintendency of banks, and the tax administration) had to cut salary scales significantly at
senior levels. The mission expressed concern that this policy might give rise to outflows of
qualified high level officials from those public entities, which would run counter to the
envisaged greater role of the state. The authorities argued that the salary cuts were fully
manageable, adding that their medium-term impact would have to be assessed within the
broader context of a phased reform of the public sector’s salary structure to be implemented
over the next two-three years, designed to facilitate retention of high-quality staff.
15.
Rigidities in domestic petroleum pricing are giving rise to large explicit and
implicit subsidies, estimated at about 7 percent of GDP. Domestic petroleum prices
continue to be set administratively, without appropriate regard to changes in international
prices. The explicit subsidy (1¼ percent of GDP) reflects budgetary transfers to importers to
compensate them for the gap between the low wholesale price of diesel and its import cost.
9

The law would aim, inter alia, to avoid spending increases without congressional approval, require that the
budget be prepared within a medium-term framework, strengthen rules on subnational government debt, and
adopt a functional classification consistent with international standards.

12

The implicit subsidy (5¾ percent of GDP) arises from the low domestic price of crude oil
(set at US$27 per barrel) and natural gas (US$0.58 per million BTU), which support
correspondingly low domestic prices of gasoline and other oil derivatives.10 There is
consensus that these subsidies are inefficient, as they are captured primarily by higher
income groups and give rise to smuggling, while discouraging investment and energy
conservation. Accordingly, the mission suggested that subsidies be phased out by moving
domestic petroleum product prices gradually to market-based levels, while using part of the
substantial resulting fiscal savings to protect vulnerable groups. The authorities emphasized
that a planned change in the energy matrix of Bolivia over the medium term would lead to a
gradual reduction in diesel subsidies and smuggling.11 While acknowledging these plans, the
mission underscored that a need would still remain to address domestic price distortions
since the change in the energy matrix in itself would not necessarily reduce implicit and
explicit subsidies, and the strategy for such a change had yet to be fully specified.
Intergovernmental fiscal relations
16.
The revenue sharing/expenditure allocation system gives rise to structural
imbalances between the central government and subnational governments, which
reduces the effectiveness of public expenditure and the scope for fiscal management.
These imbalances will be aggravated by changes introduced in 2005. Specifically, with the
full-year impact of the 2005 hydrocarbons law (which has reduced the central government’s
share of hydrocarbons-based revenue to around 35 percent in 2006, from 55 percent), total
tax revenue kept at the central level will be reduced by about 2 percent of GDP while
spending responsibilities remain the same across government levels. The combination of
higher revenue sharing with increased spending at the national level undermines the central
government’s finances and, consequently, the overall fiscal position.
17.
The mission therefore underscored the need to reform the intergovernmental
fiscal relations system in order to reduce imbalances across levels of government. The
existing revenue-sharing agreement should be reassessed in light of the capacity to generate
revenue and the needs of each regional and local government, and there also needs to be a
balanced allocation of spending responsibilities across the different layers of government.
The mission underscored the critical importance of these reforms for the medium term fiscal
outlook, and indicated that the Fund stands ready to provide technical assistance in this area,
in coordination with the World Bank. The authorities agreed with the mission’s view on the
importance of better allocating responsibilities to subnational governments, and on the need
10

An adjustment in downstream prices to market levels would benefit the budget (about 1¼ percent of GDP in
reduced expenditure and 4 percent of GDP in additional IDH and royalties); and oil companies (whose revenue
before profit tax would increase by about 1¾ percent of GDP).

11

The change in the energy matrix would involve the replacement of some oil derivatives (i.e., diesel) by
derivatives from natural gas.

13

to improve the underlying fiscal position of the central government. They indicated that these
issues are to be taken up in the context of the Constitutional Assembly.
D. Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Policies
18.
The central bank has continued to pursue a cautious monetary policy stance,
facilitated by a large increase in public sector deposits. Sustained foreign exchange
inflows have boosted central bank NIR by close to US$500 million during January–May,
about the same increase as in the whole of 2005. This was largely sterilized by an
accumulation of public deposits at the central bank of over 4 percent of GDP. Nonetheless,
the 12-month growth of base money stood at more than 40 percent reflecting a sizable carry
over from 2005. Although, as suggested by decelerating inflation, much of this expansion
appears to be matched by an increased real demand for bolivianos, the central bank has taken
the precaution of absorbing some liquidity through open market operations, mostly in
boliviano denominated instruments and at lengthening maturities (Tables 3 and 4, and
Figure 3).
19.
Looking ahead, the central bank may be called upon to step up its open market
operations and/or to exercise further exchange rate flexibility as needed to forestall
inflationary pressures. Monetary policy may be called upon to contain mounting
expansionary pressures once the fiscal accounts shift into a deficit in the second half of the
year, in the context of a continued strong balance of payments position. The mission noted
that the capacity of monetary and exchange rate policies to maintain low inflation will hinge
on the evolution of the non-hydrocarbons fiscal deficit. In particular, it would be very
difficult for the central bank to contain the pressures that would result from a rapid
unwinding of public sector deposits without resorting to sharp interest rate and/or exchange
rate action.
20.
The mission recommended that the authorities move toward increasing
exchange rate flexibility. Over the years, the crawling peg regime has contributed to
maintaining competitiveness while the small adjustments that characterize the regime have
succeeded thus far in keeping the balance sheets effects manageable in Bolivia’s highly
dollarized environment. The downside of this regime is that it does not allow an agile
response to changes in external conditions, while it tends to discourage market participants
from improving their management of exchange rate risk. There are indications that the
currency is currently undervalued, as suggested by a real effective exchange rate that is well
below the average level over the past 20 years despite the expansion of the hydrocarbons
sector and substantial external debt reduction. While adjustment could be achieved through
discrete nominal changes under the crawling peg regime, the mission pointed to the benefits
of greater exchange rate flexibility in terms of allowing a more timely response to external
shocks, as well as encouraging agents to internalize exchange rate risks. Moreover, the
current prospect of currency appreciation in light of the underlying strength of the balance of
payments should also contribute to reduce dollarization under a more flexible exchange rate
regime. The mission noted that such greater flexibility, which could be achieved in the
context of a managed float, would require an adjustment of the monetary policy framework

14

(to monetary or inflation targeting).12 The transition should be carefully managed as large
exchange rate fluctuations could be particularly disruptive in Bolivia’s dollarized economy.
13
The authorities acknowledged the shortcomings of the current regime, and were therefore
open to gradually incorporating greater exchange rate flexibility in the anti-inflation policy
menu.
Financial sector issues
21.
The international reserves and liquidity of the financial system are at high levels
and financial sector stability has improved, but important challenges remain. Reserve
coverage of banking system deposits is close to 100 percent, and some banks have completed
the accounting of new loan loss provisioning requirements ahead of the schedule permitted
by the relevant regulation. However, the financial system remains vulnerable to large
deposits outflows and systemic risks need to be carefully monitored. Moreover, bank
profitability is still low and banks are yet to internalize in full the risk posed by financial
dollarization (Tables 5 and 6). For some banks, significant holdings of restructured loans, and
some incidence of unprovisioned nonperforming loans, remain a source of vulnerability.14
22.
The mission underscored that the strengthening of the supervisory and
institutional banking framework should continue.15 Further progress is still required to
mitigate credit risk arising from dollar loans to non exporters, improve the regulation and
supervision of financial conglomerates and market risk, introduce partial coverage deposit
insurance and eliminate the option of the central bank to participate in bank resolution, and
strengthen legislation on money laundering and corporate restructuring. The authorities were
also advised to ensure that the transfer of the Financial Intelligence Unit to the ministry of
finance does not affect its performance during the transition period and that compliance with
its additional responsibility (investigation of corruption by public officials) does not detract
from its main role. While the authorities were confident that existing losses in banks’ loan
portfolio have been already identified, and did not see a vulnerability in the financial sector
that might require immediate action, they attached importance to remain vigilant.
12

The mission noted that, in Bolivia's highly dollarized environment, the effectiveness of traditional monetary
targeting might be hampered by instability in the demand for money. Key policy recommendations from a 2004
MFD technical assistance report on enhancing the use of local currency and the flexibility of the exchange rate
have already been implemented, including improved prudential supervision, issuance of inflation-indexed
bonds, and raising liquidity requirements on dollar deposits.

13

However, if the exchange rate were to appreciate, as suggested by the strong balance of payments position,
banks would stand to benefit from the reduced credit risk from unhedged borrowers.

14

The proposed land reform could impact the banking system, particularly to the extent that it involved the
redistribution of foreclosed properties or land collateralizing loans without fair and immediate compensation.

15

In this regard, the strengthening of the independence of the SBEF and recent measures to improve the
monitoring of the banks’ liquidity risk are welcome.

15

23.
The authorities are in the process of designing a public development banking
system (SINAFID) to subsidize credit for small-scale enterprises in selected sectors and
facilitate the absorption of new technology. SINAFID would merge existing development
financial entities (NAFIBO and FONDESIF) and maintain ownership of the state-owned
Banco Union. The authorities stated that credit would be channeled through private sector
financial institutions, if agreement on the conditions is reached, but did not discard the
possibility of using Banco Union for these purposes (Box 2). While further details on
SINAFID are yet to be determined, the mission welcomed the authorities’ assurances that
sound management of these public development banks would be a priority and also their
commitment to complement, rather than replace, lending activities of private institutions.
However, the mission noted that, as previous experience in Bolivia16 and other countries
suggests, development banking tends to be problematic as it is prone to generate solvency
problems in the involved financial institutions and to create fiscal costs. Accordingly, the
mission advised, inter alia, that: (i) development banking be kept as a second-tier activity;
(ii) earmarking of government revenues to finance development banking be avoided, and the
quasi-fiscal costs of development banking be included in the budget; (iii) participation of
private financial institutions be strictly voluntary; and (iv) a comparable and prudent
supervisory regime be maintained, avoiding regulatory forbearance.
E. Competitiveness
24.
In recent years, competitiveness of nontraditional exports, which exclude
hydrocarbon and mineral exports, has hinged on a depreciated real exchange rate, low
labor costs, and preferential access to key markets. Since late 2002, the real exchange rate
has depreciated steadily by more than 20 percent, and is currently at a historical low
(Figure 4). Wages in dollar terms have also been the lowest in the region. Bolivia has taken
advantage of the benefits provided by the Andean free trade area and customs union, in
particular for soy-product exports, which now represent about 10 percent of total exports.
The country has also benefited from duty-free access to the U.S. market for certain
products—including apparel and jewelry—under the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug
Eradication Act (ATPDEA), which account for about 7 percent of total exports.
25.
However, these key determinants of competitiveness may shift against Bolivia in
the period ahead. A continued strong balance of payments position, driven by natural gas
exports, may lead to real appreciation pressures on the boliviano. In this regard, the mission
underscored the need to contain these pressures through prudent fiscal and monetary policies,
and continued openness of the exchange system. On the wage front, despite recent

16

Four development banks were closed during the 1990s due to solvency problems.

16

Box 3. Bolivia: Micro-Credit Institutions
•

Though still a small part of the financial system, micro-credit institutions have been
growing rapidly in recent years. These institutions, known in Bolivia as fondos financieros
privados (FFPs), hold only about 7 percent of financial system deposits and credit to the private
sector. However, between December 2002 and end-March 2006, their deposits increased by
almost 60 percent (to US$234 million), and their loan portfolio rose by more than 50 percent
(to US$270 million). Furthermore, in contrast to the banking system, FFP deposits and lending
maintained a growing trend despite the political and economic turmoil of recent years.

•

Lending rates of FFPs are higher than those of the banking system due to the nature of
their client pool. Micro-credit institutions provide loans to small scale clients in the informal
sector. This implies that FFPs have a large number of clients (58 percent of financial system
borrowers in 2005), with an average loan size less than 10 percent of the average for the
financial system. Also, 40 percent of FFPs branches are in rural areas, compared to 20 percent
for banks. These characteristics imply large operational and administrative costs, more than
double those of banks as a percent of loan portfolio. As a result of this cost structure, average
FFP lending rates are relatively high (at 38 percent for boliviano credit, and 23 percent for
dollar credit) compared to an average of 12 percent for banking sector credit.

•

The government’s policy initiative to provide concessional lending to small businesses is
expected to have some impact on the activities of micro-credit institutions. To jump start its
initiative, the government recently channeled US$30 million, financed by a grant from
Venezuela, to selected sectors at 4 percent interest and a 10-year maturity. An additional grant
of US$70 million is expected in 2007. Concessional lending would continue thereafter based on
other financing sources. FFPs have argued that it is impossible for them to compete on these
terms and fear that, unless selection criteria and collection efforts are similar to their own, this
policy could undermine credit culture. However, the envisaged concessional lending operations
may also reach borrowers that are not currently serviced by FPPs.

2500
2000

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Deposits and Lending of
Micro Credit Institutions
(In millions of bolivianos)

1500
1000

Credit
Deposits

500

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia, and Superintendency of Banks.

25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0

Number of
borrowers

0
1999

Characteristics of Micro Credit Institutions
and Banks, 2005
Banks
Micro credit
institutions

Number of
depositors

(In thousands, left axis)

Average size of
loans

Avg deposit
account

(In US$, right axis)

17

adjustments to the minimum wage—currently at US$63 per month—wages are not likely to
catch up with those in the region in the near term. However, Bolivia’s wages in manufactured
goods are higher than those of competitors outside the region, such as China and India.
Furthermore, recent changes in the labor regime have raised redundancy costs, albeit
modestly, with some impact on overall labor costs. The authorities explained that the
competitiveness impact of this measure was minimal, and emphasized its benefits in terms of
enhanced workers’ rights.
26.
The mission expressed concern about the erosion of preferential access once
ATPDEA expires at end-2006, and as Andean countries implement bilateral free trade
agreements with the U.S. Though Bolivia has formally requested an extension of ATPDEA
to the United States government, bilateral FTA agreements between the U.S. and other
ATPDEA beneficiaries raised the possibility that the ATPDEA might not be extended. A free
trade agreement with the United States could substitute for ATPDEA benefits, but Bolivia
has not engaged in negotiations to this end. Meanwhile, the bilateral free trade agreements of
Peru and Colombia with the United States may weaken Bolivia’s ability to compete in the
soy market as these countries will tend to substitute Bolivian soy products with cheaper
imports. The authorities stated that they are engaging with their Colombian counterparts in
efforts to extend the transition period for soy duty reduction to the United States. They also
indicated that they are seeking alternative markets, and that their recent trade agreement with
Venezuela and Cuba would help absorb some exports.
F. Medium-Term Outlook
27.
The medium-term economic outlook is characterized by both continuing
favorable external conditions and major uncertainties regarding private investment
and overall growth. In view of the large remaining uncertainty about the prospects for
foreign investment in the hydrocarbons sector, the mission’s baseline medium-term scenario
(2006–11) assumes unchanged natural gas production and exports (Tables 7 and 8, and
Figure 5). On this basis, annual GDP growth would stay above 3 percent as zero growth in
the hydrocarbons sector would be partially offset by the positive impact of a key mining
project expected to come into production next year. Higher growth rates would require a
more generalized increase in manufacturing, agriculture, and other sectors over the medium
term. However, prospects for higher growth in these sectors are dampened by a host of
factors, ranging from uncertainties regarding the environment for private investment to the
potential loss of export markets.
28.
The medium-term fiscal outlook is highly dependent on the evolution of
hydrocarbons-based revenues. This in turn hinges on several factors, including the level of
additional royalties, possible new export prices of hydrocarbons, and productivity of the
nationalized natural gas fields. Since these parameters depend on the outcome of negotiations
with oil companies, considerable uncertainty remains over the medium-term fiscal path.
Against this background, the staff’s baseline fiscal scenario projects an initial jump in the
deficit in 2007 in the absence of the exceptional hydrocarbons take for YPFB available in

18

2006 and as expenditures are projected to rise due to increased YPFB investments and
payments for the acquisition of shares in the nationalized companies. While the increase in
the deficit from the low level of 2006 will be large (3 ½ percentage points of GDP), its
macroeconomic impact will be more limited because the increase in the domestic component
of the deficit (i.e. the deficit excluding net payments to foreign hydrocarbon companies) will
be small (0.4 percentage points of GDP). While this fiscal expansion, in itself, is unlikely to
endanger macroeconomic stability—in light of the strong external position it is indeed
consistent with a further increase in net international reserves (see Table 8)—it would bring
the deficit to a level that is at the border of what can be regarded as appropriate from a longterm fiscal sustainability perspective. Assuming a broadly unchanged policy stance in
subsequent years, the fiscal deficit is projected to remain within the range of 3–4 percent of
GDP. The ratio of expenditure to GDP would gradually return to the 2006 levels by 2011,
partly reflecting declining levels of public investment, pension payments, and explicit fuel
subsidies as a share of GDP.17 Meanwhile, constant hydrocarbons production, relatively
stable hydrocarbon prices, and a gradual decline in grants would combine to generate a
roughly commensurate fall in total revenue. As a result, the public debt ratio would remain
stable at about 50 percent of GDP during the projection period. While this baseline scenario
would therefore appear sustainable, it should not be viewed with complacency as the
projected fiscal deficit beyond 2007 would demand considerable fiscal discipline, notably a
control over subnational government spending consistent with falling transfers from the
center as hydrocarbons revenue declines as a share of GDP.
29.
On the external front, high prices of minerals and hydrocarbons would support
the continuation of substantial, albeit declining, current account surpluses. As noted,
Bolivia would also benefit from an increase in exports from a new mining project expected to
start production in 2007. At the same time, the prospects for some agricultural and
manufacturing exports may be hindered by erosion of trade preferences. Under the baseline
scenario, FDI inflows are modest and, in the hydrocarbons sector, would be aimed solely at
supporting current capacity levels. Overall, the strength of the external sector would be
reflected in further accumulation of international reserves over the medium term.
30.
The above scenario is subject to a range of downside risks. First, substantial
investment may be required just to sustain hydrocarbons production at current levels. Second,
as noted, maintenance of a stable public debt ratio in the post-MDRI period will require
broad-based expenditure containment. Third, as also discussed above, Bolivia’s
competitiveness for nontraditional exports hinges on preferential access to the Andean
Community and U.S. market, a competitive real exchange rate, and low labor costs—all
factors subject to reversal. These risks are compounded by the prospect of wide-ranging
institutional changes in the context of the forthcoming constitutional assembly, and the
referendum on regional autonomy, which could complicate macroeconomic management and
17

Declining explicit fuel subsidies would reflect the authorities’ plan to change the energy matrix towards
increased use of natural gas.

19

could affect financial sector stability. The mission noted that, in order to mitigate these risks,
the authorities will need to keep within a prudent fiscal envelope and enhance
competitiveness. In this context, it is very important to improve governance and maintain a
stable legal framework, including in taxation and property rights.18 The authorities indicated
that efforts will be made to minimize related policy uncertainties, particularly during the
period of the forthcoming constitutional assembly.
31.
At the same time, there remains ample scope for an alternative scenario leading
to sustained upside growth and poverty reduction benefits over the medium-term
compared with the baseline scenario, in the context of appropriately designed policies.
These could comprise: (i) ensuring that negotiations in the hydrocarbons sector lead to
additional investment consistent with increased production and exports; (ii) strengthening the
fiscal position through a bolder tax reform than currently contemplated that would also
improve the investment climate and help promote greater equity; and (iii) more broadly,
sustaining macroeconomic and structural policies that enhance the environment for private
investment, and expand Bolivia’s access to external markets.
III. DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
32.
While Bolivia’s external and public debt have declined significantly in relation to
GDP in recent years, as a result of the sharp reduction in the fiscal deficit and
implementation of the MDRI, the debt sustainability analysis points to the potential for
some reversal of these gains over the long term. The NPV of Bolivia’s external debt is
projected to fall gradually from 35 percent of GDP in 2006 to 24 percent of GDP by 2026.
The public external debt service to export ratio is projected to remain at comfortable, albeit
increasing levels. However, the NPV of the overall public debt shows an increasing trend in
the period beyond 2011, rising by about 7 percentage points of GDP, to 51 percent of GDP
by 2026. This would be driven by a slight increase in the fiscal deficit associated with
declining hydrocarbon revenues as a share of GDP. These results are sensitive to standard
stress tests and specific adverse shocks. In particular, a decline in natural gas production and
exports of 5 percent annually over the next five years (i.e., a cumulative decline of more than
20 percent), would place the NPV debt-to-exports ratio on a steadily rising path that could
bring it near the HIPC threshold at the end of the projection period. Conversely, a one-time
50 percent increase in the natural gas export prices to Brazil and Argentina relative to the
baseline would bring about a declining trend in the long term path of the debt ratio.

18

For example, the government’s initiative in the area of land reform will need to be carefully managed,
especially because it incorporates the possibility of redistribution of private land. Aside from its potential
impact on confidence in property rights, this initiative may affect the financial system, particularly if it involves
foreclosed properties or properties that have been used as collateral..

20

IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
33.
Over the past year, Bolivia has experienced far-reaching political changes, which
culminated in the election of a government with an unprecedented popular mandate.
Given its wide base of support, and the fact that it has inherited a favorable macroeconomic
situation, the new government is uniquely positioned to implement policy initiatives that are
conducive to higher and more equitable growth.
34.
Benefiting from a favorable external environment, the Bolivian economy
displayed positive trends in 2005 and so far in 2006. This includes satisfactory GDP
growth and a strong balance of payments, led by the hydrocarbons sector, low inflation,
smaller fiscal deficits, and historically high levels of international reserves. Despite periods
of political uncertainty, the banking system has remained stable and dollarization, although
still exceptionally high, has declined somewhat. Reflecting debt relief under the MDRI, the
burden of the public debt has been substantially reduced. The strong emphasis placed by the
authorities on safeguarding macroeconomic stability—seen by them as a national asset of the
Bolivian people and an important foundation for increased growth and higher living
standards—is highly commendable.
35.
Following a sharp decline in the fiscal deficit during 2003–05, the combined
public sector is projected to record a near balance in 2006. However, this is partly the
result of a large increase in hydrocarbons-based revenue, including exceptional revenues
created by the nationalization decree that may not be maintained beyond the current year.
While the higher deficits in the range of 3–4 percent of GDP projected for 2007 onwards
appear manageable, they should be viewed as an upper bound beyond which Bolivia’s debt
sustainability would be in jeopardy. Accordingly, aiming at a deficit close to the lower bound
of this range—or below—seems more appropriate, as it would to maintain a safety margin
against shocks that may otherwise lead to a rebound in the debt ratio in coming years. In any
case, careful scrutiny is of the essence in spending decisions and the authorities are
encouraged to strengthen expenditure management at all levels of government. In this
context, the firmness displayed by the government in containing wage increases to fiscally
responsible levels is welcome. However, salary cuts at the higher levels appear at odds with
the government’s economic strategy, which is partly based on assigning a more strategic role
for the state and may therefore require an upgrading of the management of public entities. In
this connection, the plan to reform the public sector salary structure in order to facilitate
retention of high-quality staff is a welcome initiative. Regarding pensions, the authorities
should carefully analyze the fiscal costs and the implications for the budget of planned
changes to the pension law, particularly if these involve bringing forward pension payments.
36.
Rigidities in domestic petroleum pricing generate inordinately large explicit and
implicit subsidies. These subsidies are inefficient and regressive, as they are captured
primarily by higher income groups and give rise to smuggling, while discouraging
investment and energy conservation. Accordingly, there is a need to move domestic
petroleum product prices to international market-based levels, which could be undertaken
gradually while using part of the resulting fiscal savings to protect vulnerable groups.

21

37.
Despite the outlook for continued high hydrocarbons-based revenue, attention
must be given to enhancing domestic taxation in order to entrench fiscal sustainability
and improve the efficiency and equity of public finances.Current plans to reduce
exemptions, rationalize the free trade zones legislation, shift large taxpayers in special
regimes or outside the tax system to the regular regime, and modify the VAT refund system
to reduce fraud, are welcome. The authorities are encouraged to revisit the scope for
introducing a tax on high personal incomes, which would exclude the bulk of the population
and thereby spread the tax burden more fairly. In the mining sector, where the government is
considering an increased tax take, it is important that revenue measures do not discourage
additional private investment.
38.
Strengthening the budget process and intergovernmental fiscal relations is
crucial to enhance fiscal transparency and accountability at all levels of government.
The authorities are therefore encouraged to review expeditiously and resubmit to Congress
for early approval the draft budget framework law, which is aimed at enhancing the budget
process at all levels of government. Regarding intergovernmental relations, the current
revenue sharing/expenditure allocation system gives rise to structural imbalances between the
central government and subnational governments, which reduces the effectiveness of public
expenditure and the scope for fiscal management. It should therefore be reassessed in light of
the capacity to generate revenue at the subnational level, and consistent with an agreed
allocation of spending responsibilities across the different layers of government.
39.
Following many years of successful monetary and exchange rate management,
including several near-crisis periods, the central bank has continued to pursue a
cautious monetary policy stance. Looking ahead, while fiscal policy will play a key role in
forestalling inflationary pressures, the central bank should stand ready to step up its open
market operations and/or to exercise further exchange rate flexibility as needed to maintain
low inflation. On the exchange rate policy front, the crawling peg regime has contributed to
maintain competitiveness while keeping the balance sheets effects manageable in Bolivia’s
highly dollarized environment. However, the crawling peg does not allow an agile response
to changes in external conditions, and the currency may indeed be undervalued at this stage.
The crawling peg also discourages market participants to improve their management of
exchange rate risk. Accordingly, the staff recommends a gradual move towards greater
exchange rate flexibility, which could be achieved in the context of a managed float. Such a
move would require an adjustment of the monetary policy framework to monetary or
inflation targeting, although in Bolivia’s highly dollarized environment, inflation targeting
appears more suited as the effectiveness of traditional monetary targeting might be hampered
by instability in the demand for local currency.
40.
While international reserves are high and the financial sector has strengthened
notably, important challenges remain. In particular, the system remains highly dollarized
and vulnerable to large deposit outflows, bank profitability is still low, and banks are yet to
internalize in full the risk posed by financial dollarization. Moreover, the significant holdings
of restructured loans and the unprovisioned portion of nonperforming loans of some banks
remain a source of vulnerability. Accordingly, the authorities are encouraged to continue

22

with their efforts to closely monitor banks’ performance and to strengthen the supervisory
and institutional banking framework. In addition, care must be taken that the proposed public
development banking system (SINAFID) does not introduce distortions in the banking
system, and that the related fiscal costs are clearly included in the budget. In particular, the
authorities are urged to keep development banking as a second-tier activity, the participation
of private financial institutions strictly voluntary, and a comparable supervisory regime free
of regulatory forbearance.
41.
On the structural policy front, the staff strongly supports the government’s
emphasis on greater equity, transparency, and accountability. However, the parallel
emphasis on an elevated role for the state is a source of serious concern as it has the potential
for impacting adversely on the environment for private investment. The authorities are
therefore urged to maintain a careful balance between the pursuit of a greater role for the
state and the preservation of appropriate incentives for private investment needed, which
remains critical to support growth and raise employment and living standards. Moreover,
given the objective of maintaining macroeconomic stability, close attention must be paid to
the economic impact of government interventions, including their short- and medium-term
fiscal cost.
42.
In the hydrocarbons sector, considerable uncertainty prevails at this stage
regarding the modalities for implementing the recent nationalization decree. A key
concern in this regard is that any deterioration of the relationship between the government
and private investors in this strategic sector could produce serious collateral damage on the
environment for domestic and foreign private investment in other areas of the economy and
hurt medium-term growth prospects. The authorities are therefore urged to undertake all
efforts to achieve, as soon as possible within the six-month period established by the May 1
decree, mutually acceptable arrangements with the concerned oil companies on the key
issues of taxation, export pricing, and payments for the assets that are being nationalized.
Moreover, the expanded role newly assigned to YPFB in the hydrocarbons sector will
demand high-quality management and full transparency, consistent with international
accounting and auditing standards.
43.
While the short-term outlook is positive and the global environment for
exporters of energy and minerals is expected to remain favorable, the medium-term
outlook for Bolivia presents a range of challenges and risks. First, as noted, it will be
critical for the country’s investment and export prospects to wrap up the strategic
negotiations over hydrocarbons policy in a manner that is conducive to full development of
the sector’s potential. Second, avoidance of a rebound in the public debt ratio in the postMDRI period will require enhancing domestic taxation, containing expenditure, and
strengthening intergovernmental fiscal relations. Third, key determinants of competitiveness
may shift against Bolivia in the period ahead. A continued strong balance of payments
position, driven by natural gas exports, could lead to appreciation pressures on the boliviano.
Furthermore, recent changes in the labor regime have raised redundancy costs, albeit
modestly, with some impact on overall labor costs. To counteract these effects, it will be
necessary to maintain prudent fiscal and monetary policies, and continued openness of the

23

exchange system. Finally, Bolivia faces the prospect of an erosion of its access to important
markets as the ATPDEA is scheduled to expire at end-2006, and other Andean countries are
expected to implement in the near future bilateral free trade agreements with the United
States. The authorities will therefore need to intensify their efforts to expand Bolivia’s access
to external markets. Last but not least, the medium-term outlook hinges crucially on the
maintenance of a stable legal framework, notably with regard to taxation and property rights,
which takes on added relevance in light of the land reform initiative and the potential for
major institutional changes in the context of the forthcoming constitutional assembly.
44.
Bolivia’s economic statistics are of adequate quality, timeliness, and coverage to
allow the conduct of Fund surveillance.
45.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Bolivia be held on the
standard 12-month cycle.

24

Table 1. Bolivia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators

Income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
CPI inflation (period average)
CPI inflation (end-of-period)

Proj.
Prel.
2009
2005
2006
2007
2008
(Annual percentage changes)

2002

2003

2004

2.5
2.8
0.9
2.4

2.9
6.2
3.3
3.9

3.9
7.4
4.4
4.6

4.1
4.6
5.4
4.9

4.1
3.9
5.3
4.9
4.1
4.0
4.0
4.0
(In percent of GDP)

2010

2011

3.1
4.3
4.0
4.0

3.3
3.4
4.0
4.0

3.3
3.3
4.0
4.0

3.0
3.4
4.0
4.0

Combined public sector
Revenues and grants
Of which:
Royalties on hydrocarbons
Expenditure
Current
Capital
Overall balance
Total public debt
NPV of the public debt

24.5

24.1

27.0

31.7

35.9

35.1

33.4

32.6

31.9

31.4

2.3
33.3
24.9
8.4
-8.8
69.3
44.8

2.8
32.0
23.9
8.1
-7.9
74.0
51.5

3.4
32.6
23.4
9.2
-5.6
77.2
54.6

6.7
33.9
23.7
10.3
-2.3
70.8
53.4

10.1
36.1
25.0
11.1
-0.1
50.8
42.7

9.7
38.7
25.4
13.4
-3.6
49.8
42.2

8.9
36.6
24.9
11.8
-3.3
49.5
42.1

8.2
36.1
24.4
11.8
-3.5
49.6
42.2

7.6
35.8
24.2
11.6
-3.8
50.1
42.8

7.1
35.3
24.1
11.2
-3.9
50.8
43.5

External sector
Current account
Merchandise exports
Of which: Natural gas
Merchandise imports

-4.1
16.4
3.4
22.4

1.0
19.7
4.7
19.9

3.9
24.5
7.1
21.1

5.0
28.5
10.5
25.0

5.0
32.7
14.0
29.0

4.8
31.0
13.4
26.8

3.5
29.0
12.2
25.7

2.0
27.4
11.3
25.7

1.3
26.1
10.4
25.3

0.8
25.3
9.7
24.9

1,085
36.7

1,266
42.0

1,474
49.6

2,019
57.2

2,564
64.7

2,657
60.7

2,815
59.3

2,901
56.9

2,959
54.2

3,020
51.8

Gross international reserves 1/
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of broad money
Money and credit
NFA of the banking system
NDA of the banking system
Of which: Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)
Broad money
Interest rates (percent, end-of-period)
Yield on treasury bills in local currency
Yield on treasury bills in U.S. dollars
Exchange rates
Bolivianos/U.S. dollar (end-of-period) 2/
REER, period average (percentage change)
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (in millions of Bolivianos)

(Changes in percent of broad money at the beginning of the period, unless otherwise
-11.4
0.8
41.5
-10.7

3.5
-4.7
38.9
-1.2

3.8
-5.5
33.7
-1.7

25.2
-8.0
32.2
17.2

15.4
-2.6
32.6
12.9

3.0
7.5
32.6
10.5

3.3
5.1
32.6
8.4

1.7
5.6
32.6
7.3

1.0
6.2
32.6
7.2

0.9
5.9
32.6
6.7

17.2
4.9

10.9
6.2

10.6
4.3

7.9
7.4

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

7.48
0.4

7.82
-10.2

8.04
-6.3

8.00
-4.5

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

82,529 90,005 96,837 103,509 110,510

117,627

56,682 61,980 69,152 75,285

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes reserves from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) and includes Offshore Liquidity Requirements (RAL).
2/ Official (buy) exchange rate.

25

Table 2. Bolivia: Operations of the Combined Public Sector
(In percent of GDP)

2002

2003

2004

Prel.
2005

Proj.
2006

Revenue and grants

24.5

24.1

27.0

31.7

35.9

Current revenue
General government
Tax revenue
Hydrocarbons
Of which: excise taxes of fuel
Other
Of which: FTT
Customs duties
Nontax revenue
Public enterprise operating balance
Central bank operating balance

22.2
21.6
17.8
4.6
2.3
13.2
...
1.0
3.8
0.1
0.5

21.2
21.1
17.8
4.6
1.7
13.2
...
0.9
3.4
-0.1
0.2

24.5
24.1
20.7
5.0
1.7
15.7
0.5
1.0
3.4
0.1
0.3

29.5
29.0
25.7
9.2
2.5
16.6
0.8
1.0
3.3
0.1
0.3

33.1
31.5
28.3
12.5
2.3
15.8
0.7
1.0
3.3
1.1
0.4

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Wages
Goods and services
Interest
Transfers (excludes pensions)
Of which: petroleum product subsidies
Pensions
Other
Capital expenditure

33.3
24.9
9.3
2.9
2.6
1.7
...
4.5
3.8
8.4

32.0
23.9
9.4
2.6
2.8
1.5
...
4.4
3.2
8.1

32.6
23.4
9.1
2.1
2.9
1.9
0.7
4.3
3.1
9.2

33.9
23.7
8.8
2.0
3.1
2.3
0.8
4.1
3.4
10.3

36.1
25.0
8.7
2.1
2.8
3.6
1.3
4.1
3.7
11.1

Overall balance

-8.8

-7.9

-5.6

-2.3

-0.1

Financing
External
Domestic
Central bank
Commercial banks
Pension funds
Other domestic

8.8
6.0
2.8
1.6
-2.0
1.6
1.5

7.9
5.3
2.6
-0.2
-0.2
1.6
1.5

5.6
3.9
1.6
-0.8
0.7
1.5
0.2

2.3
2.3
0.0
-2.1
1.3
1.5
-0.7

0.1
1.6
-1.4
-2.5
-0.3
1.3
0.0

-11.1

-10.7

-9.0

-9.0

-10.3

56.7

62.0

69.2

75.3

82.5

Memorandum items:
Nonhydrocarbons balance
GDP (in billions of Bolivianos)

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

26
Table 3. Bolivia: Monetary Survey 1/
2002

2003

2004

Prel.
2005

Proj.
2006

(Changes in millions of Bolivianos unless otherwise specified)
Net foreign assets
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

-2,666
-379

772
100

886
110

6,018
738

4,357
547

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities
Other

177
1,021
-2,276
1,157
273

-1,040
-250
-1,162
139
234

-1,286
-345
-1,659
811
-92

-1,917
-1,840
1,363
-415
-1,025

-722
-2,328
2,315
50
-760

Broad money

-2,489

-267

-400

4,101

3,635

12,533
1,561

18,648
2,288

24,125
3,021

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities
Other

13,106 12,758 11,372
9,616
3,189
3,720
3,624
1,875
22,559 23,583 22,819 24,510
-3,088 -3,193 -2,500 -2,950
-9,554 -11,353 -12,571 -13,820

7,411
-1,951
26,380
-2,845
-14,172

Broad money 2/

22,092

(Stocks in millions of Bolivianos unless otherwise stated)
8,986
1,278

Net foreign assets
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

10,831
1,401

23,590

23,905

28,264

31,537

(Changes in percent of broad money at beginning of period)
-11.4

3.5

3.8

25.2

15.4

0.8
4.4
-9.8
5.0
1.2

-4.7
-1.1
-5.3
0.6
1.1

-5.5
-1.5
-7.0
3.4
-0.4

-8.0
-7.7
5.7
-1.7
-4.3

-2.6
-8.2
8.2
0.2
-2.7

-10.7

-1.2

-1.7

17.2

12.9

Broad money (average stock in percent of GDP)
Credit to private sector (average stock in percent of GDP)
Banking system liquid foreign asset coverage of dollar deposits (percent)

38.3
41.5
46.9

37.1
38.9
53.0

32.6
33.7
65.0

34.2
32.2
92.0

35.5
32.6
110.0

U.S. dollar and dollar-indexed deposits (in percent of total deposits)
U.S. dollar and dollar indexed credit (in percent of total credit)

91.4
95.3

90.5
97.0

86.5
95.3

81.7
91.8

75.6
87.7

Net short-term foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Credit to the private sector
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities
Other
Broad money
Memorandum items:

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Stocks and flows in foreign currency are valued at the accounting exchange rate for the corresponding period.
2/ At the beginning of 2005 Banco Los Andes was reclassified as a bank. This has led to a steep increase in the recorded
levels of broad money and credit to the private sector in 2005.

27

Table 4. Bolivia: Central Bank of Bolivia 1/
2002

2003

2004

Prel.
2005

Proj.
2006

(Flows in millions of Bolivianos unless otherwise stated)
Net international reserves
(Flow in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial intermediaries
Of which: open market operations (increase -)
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other
Currency issue

-1,936
-275

718
93

1,112
138

4,105
503

3,523
442

2,273
935
380
163
1,055
-96

-231
-135
-187
-18
-32
124

-354
-561
-355
-294
873
-311

-2,208
-1,543
-604
-221
8
-69

-2,317
-2,066
-255
-353
3
0

337

487

758

1,897

1,206

(Stocks in millions of Bolivianos unless otherwise stated)
Net international reserves
(Stock in millions of U.S. dollars)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial intermediaries
Of which: open market operations (-)
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities (-)
Other
Currency issue

5,428
772

6,866
888

8,640
1,076

12,785
1,569

17,543
2,197

-2,391
1,706
1,467
-71
-980
-4,584

-3,341
2,112
1,475
-95
-1,064
-5,864

-4,357
1,710
1,200
-391
-227
-7,039

-6,605
236
627
-615
-220
-7,247

-10,157
-3,330
94
-946
-216
-6,706

3,037

3,525

4,283

6,180

7,385

(Change in percent of currency issue at beginning of period)
-71.7

23.6

31.6

95.8

57.0

Net domestic assets
Net credit to nonfinancial public sector
Net credit to financial intermediaries
Of which: open market operations (increase -)
Medium- and long-term net foreign liabilities (increase -)
Other

84.2
34.6
14.1
6.0
39.1
-3.6

-7.6
-4.5
-6.1
-0.6
-1.1
4.1

-10.0
-15.9
-10.1
-8.3
24.8
-8.8

-51.6
-36.0
-14.1
-5.2
0.2
-1.6

-37.5
-33.4
-4.1
-5.7
0.1
0.0

Currency issue

12.5

16.0

21.5

44.3

19.5

Memorandum items:
Currency issue (average stock in percent of GDP)
NIR coverage of broad money (percent)

4.1
24.6

4.4
29.1

4.7
36.1

5.7
45.2

6.5
55.6

Net international reserves

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Stocks and flows in foreign currency are valued at the accounting exchange rate for the corresponding period.

28

Table 5. Bolivia: Commercial Bank Performance Indicators
(In percent)

Dec.

Mar.
2006

5.7
0.8
0.5

6.1
1.1
0.7

6.5
1.4
1.0

3.4
0.7

7.0
4.2

9.1
6.3

12.8
9.6

15.5
4.1
73.6
23.5
38.3
26.9
29.8

13.7
3.0
78.1
20.6
35.5
24.8
30.1

13.7
3.5
74.7
21.1
33.9
23.7
30.2

11.3
2.1
81.1
17.2
31.2
22.1
29.4

12.2
2.8
76.9
18.6
30.6
21.2
30.6

12.9
168.9

24.3
159.2

18.1
150.0

21.1
144.8

12.9
132.3

17.2
129.7

94.1
30.2
6.1

94.6
33.1
7.0

95.9
31.8
7.1

95.5
31.6
6.6

90.8
31.2
7.1

90.1
33.6
6.7

89.7
33.2
5.2

12.9

14.9

14.9

14.9

14.6

14.7

14.5

2005
Jun.
Sep.

2002

2003

2004

Mar.

4.1
0.4
0.1

4.4
0.6
0.3

5.3
0.2
-0.1

5.6
0.3
0.0

5.5
0.4
0.1

3.5
0.6

5.1
2.7

1.4
-1.2

2.3
-0.4

Assets quality ratios
Ratios to end-of-period total loans
Nonperforming loans
Nonperforming loans (net of provisions)
Provisions (as percentage of NPL)
NPL + repossessed assets
"Expanded NPL" 1/
"Expanded NPL" (net of provisions) 1/
Provisions over "expanded NPL" 1/

17.6
6.4
63.7
...
...
...
...

16.7
4.4
74.0
...
...
...
...

14.0
2.2
84.3
...
40.7
28.8
29.1

Ratios to net worth
Nonperforming loans (net of provisions)
"Expanded NPL" (net of provisions) 1/

33.2
...

24.1
...

Liquidity ratios
Ratios to end-of-period total deposits
Total loans
Total liquidity assets
Of which: Government papers

94.6
30.2
5.1

Capital adequacy ratio
Qualif. capital over risk-adjusted assets

16.1

Profitability ratios
Ratios to total average assets
Operating income
Profits before taxes
Profits after taxes
Ratios to average equity
Profits before taxes
Profits after taxes

Sources: Superintendency of Banks; and Financial Institutions.
1/ Refers to the sum of NPLs and current performing restructured loans.

29

Table 6. Bolivia: Financial and External Vulnerability Indicators
(End-of-period; in percent, unless otherwise indicated)

2002

2003

2004

2005

Proj.
2006

...
...

10.4
9.5

10.6
9.5

9.8
11.6

...
...

Velocity of money
Credit to the private sector (average stock, percent of GDP)

...
41.5

2.1
38.9

2.4
33.7

2.4
32.2

2.3
32.6

Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits
Share of foreing currency loans in total credit

91.4
95.3

90.5
97.0

86.5
95.3

81.7
91.8

75.6
87.7

Nonperforming loans (percent of total loans)
Loan-loss provisions (percent of nonperforming loans)
Risk-based capital-assets ratio

17.6
63.7
16.1

16.7
74.0
15.3

14.0
84.3
14.9

11.3
81.1
14.7

...
...
...

2,521
506

2,384
513

2,151
485

2,263
719

2,350
824

1.1
3.7
0.5
0.4

23.0
-8.7
6.1
-10.2

34.3
14.1
11.9
-6.3

24.5
27.0
12.4
-4.5

26.9
28.1
18.1
...

Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP)
Net FDI inflows (percent of GDP)

-4.1
0.4
8.5

1.0
-0.1
2.4

3.9
-2.4
0.7

5.0
0.3
-3.0

5.0
0.7
1.2

Total external debt (percent of GDP)
Medium- and long-term public debt (percent of GDP)
Medium- and long-term private debt (percent of GDP)
Total external debt (percent of exports of goods and services)
Short term external debt (original maturity, percent of total external debt)

55.9
55.9
...
...
0.27

74.9
63.8
11.1
380
0.20

68.4
57.7
10.7
283
0.23

65.5
52.9
12.6
224
0.25

43.7
32.3
11.4
131
0.36

1,085
36.7
6
45.6
772

1,266
42.0
7
53.5
888

1,474
49.6
8
68.1
1,076

2,019
57.2
8
87.0
1,568

2,564
64.7
9
108.2
2,197

Nonfinancial public sector
Overall balance (percent of GDP)
Primary balance (percent of GDP)

-8.8
-6.2

-7.9
-5.1

-5.6
-2.6

-2.3
0.8

-0.1
2.6

NFPS gross debt (percent of GDP)
Of which: in domestic currency (percent of GDP)
NFPS net debt (percent of GDP)

69.3
13.4
62.2

74.0
10.2
66.4

77.2
19.6
68.2

70.8
17.9
60.8

50.8
18.4
40.6

Financial indicators 1/
Lending rate in domestic currency
Lending rate in U.S. dollars

Foreign currency deposits at commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Commercial banks' net short-term foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Exports, U.S. dollars (percent change)
Imports, U.S. dollars (percent change)
Terms of trade (percent change)
Real effective exchange rate (percent change)

Gross international reserves (GIR) (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/
GIR (percent of broad money)
GIR (in months of imports of goods and services)
GIR (percent of short-term debt and banks' FX deposits)
Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Source:s Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff extimates.
1/ Excludes nonbank financial institutions.
2/ Central bank gross reserves, excluding reserves from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) and offshore liquidity
requirements (RAL).

30

Table 7. Bolivia: Summary Balance of Payments
2002

2003

2004

Prel.
2005

2006

Proj.
2008
2009

2007

2010

2011

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted)
Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Natural gas
Of which: natural gas to Brazil
Volume (millions of cubic meters p/day)
Price (US$ per thousand cubic feet)
Natural gas to Argentina
Volume (millions of cubic meters p/day)
Price (US$ per thousand cubic feet)
Mining
Soy - related 1/
Other
Imports, c.i.f.
Services (net)
Income (net)
Transfers (net)
Of which: HIPC assistance from grants

-324
-471
1,299
266
206
10.3
1.5
...
...
...
348
244
442
-1,770
-18
-205
369
80

85
-18
1,598
381
360
13.8
2.0
...
...
...
367
306
543
-1,616
-69
-302
474
67

337
302
2,146
620
542
19.5
2.2
49
2.2
1.7
456
387
684
-1,844
-71
-385
491
68

467
329
2,671
984
794
22.4
2.8
163
4.8
2.7
548
263
876
-2,341
-74
-373
584
62

518
391
3,390
1,445
1,155
24.0
3.7
250
6.3
3.1
863
187
895
-2,998
-154
-378
659
55

540
472
3,500
1,516
1,212
24.0
3.9
262
6.3
3.2
999
179
807
-3,028
-162
-435
664
32

423
395
3,524
1,488
1,190
24.0
3.8
257
6.3
3.2
1,042
161
833
-3,129
-170
-441
639
33

264
219
3,557
1,467
1,173
24.0
3.8
254
6.3
3.1
1,072
168
850
-3,338
-178
-446
670
38

175
116
3,630
1,450
1,160
24.0
3.7
251
6.3
3.1
1,127
168
884
-3,514
-187
-455
702
39

122
52
3,736
1,434
1,147
24.0
3.7
248
6.3
3.1
1,206
176
919
-3,683
-197
-467
733
44

Capital and financial account
Capital transfers 2/
Direct investment (net)
Gross investment
Disinvestment and investment abroad
Portfolio investment (net)
Public sector loans
Disbursements
Amortization
Banks' net foreign assets, excl. liquid asset requirement
Nonbank private sector loans
Other, including errors and omissions

32
0
674
...
...
-19
321
577
-256
16
-34
-926

-7
7
195
...
...
-68
374
744
-370
-124
111
-502

-211
8
63
385
-320
-35
234
547
-313
18
65
-563

26
9
-280
404
-681
-153
162
498
-336
-97
293
93

74
240
127
442
-315
2
149
436
-287
-98
60
-406

-479
9
-202
242
-443
-24
136
360
-224
-26
0
-372

-291
9
-156
142
-297
-17
161
360
-199
11
0
-300

-202
10
95
142
-47
-15
156
360
-204
5
0
-453

-139
10
95
142
-47
-15
179
420
-241
7
0
-416

-83
10
95
142
-46
-13
209
470
-261
11
0
-396

Overall balance

-293

77

126

493

593

61

133

62

36

39

293

-77

-126

-493

-593

-61

-133

-62

-36

-39

17

16

13

11

9

8

8

9

8

8

275

-93

-138

-503

-602

-69

-141

-71

-43

-47

-4.1
16.4
-22.4

1.0
19.7
-19.9

3.9
24.5
-21.1

5.0
28.5
-25.0

3.5
29.0
-25.7

2.0
27.4
-25.7

1.3
26.1
-25.3

0.8
25.3
-24.9

Financing
Exceptional financing
Change in net international reserves (increase -)

(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance
Merchandise exports
Merchandise imports

5.0
32.7
-29.0

4.8
31.0
-26.8

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves (end-of-period)
MDRI debt relief (on flow basis)
Principal
Interest
GDP

854
...
...
...

1,057
...
...
...

1,212
...
...
...

1,674
...
...
...

2,212
93
82
11

2,281
100
87
13

2,422
63
52
11

2,493
41
30
11

2,537
35
25
10

2,584
30
20
10

7,917

8,102

8,749

9,358

10,355

11,307

12,165

13,004

13,883

14,777

Sources: Central Bank of Bolivia; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding reexports.
2/ In 2006 includes effect of MDRI debt relief from the IMF.

6.7
-3.0

Public sector
Overall balance, before hydrocarbons based revenue (in percent of GDP)

Hydrocarbons based revenue (in percent of GDP)

Overall balance (in percent of GDP)

1/ As in Country Report No. 05/393.

Source: Fund staff estimates and projections

28.9

8.7

Local currency broad money (annual percentage change)

Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)

8.7

Monetary sector
Broad money (annual percentage change)

1,628

1.5

Current account balance (in percent of GDP)

Net international reserves (in millions of US dollars)

62

1,002
747
22.5
2.6
211
6.5
2.5

2,721

WEO oil price (US$ per barrel)

Natural gas
Of which : Natural gas to Brazil
Volume (millions of cubic meters p/day)
Price (US$ per thousand cubic feet)
Natural gas to Argentina
Volume (millions of cubic meters p/day)
Price (US$ per thousand cubic feet)

External sector
Exports, f.o.b. (in millions of US dollars)

71

-9.7

CPI inflation (period average)

Public debt (in percent of GDP)

3.1

3.4

28.0

6.6

7.1

1,716

1.1

60

1,033
768
22.5
2.6
218
6.5
2.6

2,702

69

-2.6

6.3

-8.9

3.9

4.1

27.4

5.9

6.0

1,799

1.0

58

1,037
771
22.5
2.7
219
6.5
2.6

2,748

67

-2.3

5.9

-8.2

3.0

3.0

26.6

6.2

6.1

1,892

0.1

57

1,023
760
22.5
2.6
215
6.5
2.6

2,770

66

-2.2

5.5

-7.7

3.0

3.0

Sixth Review Baseline 1/
2007
2008
2009

Income and prices
Real GDP Growth

2006

25.8

6.0

6.0

1,996

-0.4

57

1,018
756
22.5
2.6
214
6.5
2.6

2,819

64

-1.9

5.2

-7.0

3.0

3.0

2010

32.6

30.5

12.9

2,197

5.0

67

1,445
1,155
24.0
3.7
250
6.3
3.1

3,390

51

-0.1

10.1

-10.3

4.1

4.1

2006

Table 8. Bolivia: Comparison of Medium-Term Scenarios

32.6

16.1

10.5

2,266

4.8

70

1,516
1,212
24.0
3.9
262
6.3
3.2

3,500

50

-3.6

9.7

-13.3

4.0

3.9

32.6

13.9

8.4

2,407

3.5

69

1,488
1,190
24.0
3.8
257
6.3
3.2

3,524

50

-3.3

8.9

-12.1

4.0

3.1

32.6

11.8

7.3

2,478

2.0

68

1,467
1,173
24.0
3.8
254
6.3
3.1

3,557

50

-3.5

8.2

-11.7

4.0

3.3

32.6

11.4

7.2

2,521

1.3

67

1,450
1,160
24.0
3.7
251
6.3
3.1

3,630

50

-3.8

7.6

-11.5

4.0

3.3

Article IV Baseline
2007
2008
2009
2010

32.6

10.8

6.7

2,568

0.8

66

1,434
1,147
24.0
3.7
248
6.3
3.1

3,736

51

-3.9

7.1

-11.0

4.0

3.0

2011

31

32
Table 9. Bolivia: Millennium Development Goals
First
Observation

1998

2000

2001

45.0

39.0

...

2002

Target
2015

2003

2004

...

41.3

...

24

...

...

24.2

...

19

Goal 1. Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people
whose income is less than one dollar a day.
Population below US$1 a day (in percent)

41.2 (1990)

...

38.3 (1990)

25.6

55.4 (1992)

...
...

96.4
...

97.0
71.5

97.7
74.8

97.1
75.0

...
...

100
100

6.6 (1992)
3.4 (1992)

...
...

...
...

3.7
1.1

2.9
0.9

3.4
0

...
...

0
0

89 (1990)
68 (1994)

67
77

...
90

...
92

...
86

54
80

...
...

30
95

416 (1990)
27 (1995)

235
42.0

...
52.0

...
54.0

...
53.9

229
55.3

...
...

104
70

1.8 (1990)

5.2

5.0

9.4

6.5

11.5

13.4

13

7.5 (1990)
52.6 (1995)

24.8
55.8

8.8
71.2

5.0
78.1

4.3
81.2

6.1
...

4.1
...

2
95

57.5 (1992)
28 (1992)

...
...

...
...

72.0
40.7

72.0
41.5

72.0
41.3

72.3
41.6

78.5
64

17.8 (1995)

19.4

17.2

20.5

21.6

...

...

Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people
suffering hunger
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 3)
Goal 2. Achieve Universal Primary Education
Target 3. Ensure that, by 2015, children will be able to complete a
full course of primary schooling.
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5
Goal 3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
Target 4. Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary
education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education by 2015.
Gender disparities at completion of primary education (percent)
Gender disparities at completion of secondary education (percent)
Goal 4. Reduce Child Mortality
Target 5. Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under
five mortality rate
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization against measles (percent of children under 12-months)
Goal 5. Improve Maternal Health
Target 6. Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the
maternal mortality ratio.
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel (percent)
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria, and Other Diseases
Target 7. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS
HIV prevalence, total (percent ages 15-24)
Target 8. Halt by 2015, and begin to reverse, the incidence of malaria
and other major diseases
Incidence of malaria (per 1,000 people)
Incidence of tuberculosis cases cured (percent of diagnosed)
Target 10. halve by 2015 proportion of people without access to safe
drinking water
Access to potable water (percent of population)
Access to improved water source (percent of population)
Goal 8. Develop a global Partnership for Development
Target 17. Provide access to affordable essential drugs
Proportion of households expenditure on essential drugs (percent of
national health expenditure)
Source: Bolivian authorities

15

33
Figure 1. Bolivia: Key Economic Indicators
5

5

Real GDP Growth
(In percent)

7

7

CPI Inflation
(In percent)

6
GDP growth

4

4
12-month
change

5

3

3

GDP growth excluding
hydrocarbons

2

6

2

1

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

12-month
average

1

1

0

0

1

0
2001

2002

2003

0
2005

2004

-1

-1
Dec-00

Dec-01

2000

Net International Reserves and
Deposit Coverage

Dec-02

Dec-03

Dec-04

Dec-05
100

10.0

External Current Account Developments
2500

2000

8.0

Exports
(in millions of US dollars)
(left scale)

6.0

Imports
(in millions of US dollars)
(left scale)

1600

4.0
1200

1500

Reserve coverage of bank deposits
(in percent)
(right scale)

80
70

NIR
(in millions of US dollars)
(left scale)

60
50

2.0

0.0

1000

90

40
800
30

Current Account
(in percent of GDP)
(right scale)

500

-2.0
20

400
-4.0

-6.0

0
2001

2002

2003

Source: Bolivian authorities.

2004

2005

10
0
Dec-00 Nov-01

0
Oct-02

Sep-03 Aug-04

Jul-05

34
Figure 2. Bolivia: Fiscal Developments
30

10

Government Revenue
(In percent of GDP)

9

27

12

35

Government Spending
(In percent of GDP)
11

8
Total revenue
(left scale)

Total spending
(left scale)

7
30

24

10

6
Hydrocarbons revenue
(right scale)

9

5

21

4

25

8

Capital expenditure
(right scale)

3
Non-hydrocarbons revenue
(left scale)

18

2

7
20
Current expenditure
(left scale)

1
15
2001
14

2002

2003

0
2005

2004

14

Fiscal Deficit
(In percent of GDP)

12

12
Non-hydrocarbons
deficit

10

15
2001
11

2002

2003

6

5
2005

2004

Financing of the Fiscal Deficit
(In percent of GDP)

9

11

9

External

10

8

7

7

5

5

3

3

1

1

8
Overall
deficit

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

Domestic
2001

2002

2003

2004

Source: Bolivian authorities.

2005

-1

-1
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

35
Figure 3. Bolivia: Monetary Developments
29

29

100

100

Dollarization of Deposits and Credit
(In percent of total)

Banking System Deposits and Credit
(In billions of bolivianos)
27

27

Credit

25

96

96
Dollar credit

25

23

92

92

88

88

23

21

21

19

19

84

Deposits
17

17

15

15

Dec-00

Dec-01

Dec-02

Dec-03

Dec-04

20

80

80

76

76

Dec-00

Dec-05

Dec-01

Dec-02

Dec-03

Dec-04

Dec-05

3.5

Composition of Treasury Paper
(In percent of total)

Velocity and Money Multiplier
18
3

Boliviano-denominated

100

16

100

Of which inflation-indexed
Dollar-denominated

2.5

14
M3 Velocity
(right scale)

12

M2 Velocity
(left scale)

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

2

10
8

84

Dollar deposits

1.5

M2 Money multiplier
(right scale)

6

1

4
0.5
2
0

0
2001

2002

2003

Source: Central Bank of Bolivia.

2004

2005

0

0
Dec-02

Mar-04

Sep-04

Mar-05

Sep-05

Mar-06

36
Figure 4. Bolivia: Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Developments
105

105

Exchange Rates
(Dec-2002 = 100; increase = appreciation)

100

100
REER average
(1990-2005)

95
90

95
90

85

85

REER

80

80
NEER

75

75

70

70

65

65

Nominal exchange rate
index vis-à-vis Brazil

60

60

55

55

Dec-02
14

Apr-03

Aug-03

Dec-03

Apr-04

Aug-04

Dec-04

Apr-05

Aug-05

Dec-05
14.00

Policy Interest Rates
(In percent)

12

12.00
90 day T-bill rate, local currency

10

10.00

8

6

8.00

6.00

90 day T-bill rate, foreign currency

4

4.00

2

2.00
U.S. three month T-bill rate

0

0.00

Dec-02

Apr-03

Aug-03

Dec-03

Apr-04

Aug-04

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

Dec-04

Apr-05

Aug-05

Dec-05

37
Figure 5. Bolivia: Medium-Term Scenarios
4.5

4.5

Real GDP Growth
(In percent)

Exports
(In millions of US dollars)

3800
3600
4.0

4.0

2700
2500

Total Exports
Article IV
(left scale)

3400

2300

3200

2100

Article IV
3.5

3.5

3000
2800
2600

1500
Article IV
(right scale)

2400

6th Review

2200
2.5

2.5
2005
Prel.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

15
14

900
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

80

80

Public Debt
(In percent of GDP)

15
14

Non-hydrocarbons deficit

13

1100

6th Review
(right scale)
2005
Prel.

16

Fiscal Deficit
(In percent of GDP)

1300

2000

2011

16

1700

Gas Exports

3.0

3.0

1900

6th Review
(left scale)

13

12

12

11

11

Article IV

10

10

9

9

8

8

7

6th Review

70

70

60

60

7
6th Review

6
5

6
5

Overall deficit

4

4
Article IV

3

Article IV
50

50

3

2

2
6th Review

1

1
0

0
2005
Prel.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

40

40
2005
Prel.

2006

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

38

APPENDIX I. BOLIVIA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of May 31, 2006)

I.

Membership Status: Joined December 27, 1945; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
171.50
172.30
8.87

Percent of Quota
100.0
100.47
5.17

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
26.70
25.80

Percent of Allocation
100.00
96.63

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-By Arrangements

SDR Million
9.66

Percent of Quota
5.63

V. Financial Arrangements:
Type

Stand-By
PRGF
PRGF

Approval
date
4/02/03
9/18/98
12/19/94

Expiration
date
3/31/06
6/07/02
9/09/98

Amount approved
(SDR million)
145.78
100.96
100.96

Amount drawn
(SDR million)
111.50
63.86
100.96

Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
VI.
and present holdings of SDRs):
Expectations Basis

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0.26
0.26

2.42
0.49
2.90

4.83
0.29
5.12

2.42
0.07
2.49

0.03
0.03

Obligations Basis

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0.26
0.26

0.51
0.51

2.42
0.49
2.90

4.83
0.29
5.12

2.42
0.07
2.49

39

VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
Original
I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Framework
Decision point date
Sep 1997
Assistance committed
448.00
by all creditors (US$ Million)1
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
29.00
(SDR equivalent in millions)
21.25
Completion point date
Sep 1998
II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR Million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
21.25
Interim assistance
-Completion point balance
21.25
-Additional disbursement of interest income2
Total disbursements
21.25

Enhanced
Framework
Feb 2000

Total

854.00
55.32
41.14
Jun 2001
41.14
-41.14
3.09
44.23

VIII. Implementation of MDRI Assistance:
I.
Total Debt Relief (SDR Million)3
Of Which: MDRI
HIPC
II.
Debt Relief by Facility (SDR Million)

62.39
-62.39
3.09
65.48
160.93
154.82
6.11

Eligible Debt
Delivery Date

GRA

PRGF

Total

January 2006

6.70

71.15

77.85

January 2006

83.08

N/A

83.08

1

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at the
decision point. Hence these two amounts can not be added.

2

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim
period.
3

The Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries
that are qualified for the assistance. The debt relief covers the full stock of debt owed to the Fund as of end2004 which remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for such debt relief. The MDRI is financed by
bilateral contributions and the Fund's own resources, as well as the resources already disbursed to the member
under the HIPC Initiative (see Section VII above).

40
IX.

Safeguards Assessment. Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Central
Bank of Bolivia (CBB) was subject to an assessment with respect to the April 2, 2003
Stand-By Arrangement (SBA). A safeguards assessment was completed June 27,
2003, and while no systemic risks with the CBB’s safeguards were identified,
uncertainties were expressed about the de facto lack of operational independence and
program monetary data. An update assessment was completed September 27, 2004 in
conjunction with an augmentation of the SBA. This assessment confirmed that
measures had been implemented to address all previously identified vulnerabilities,
except for those requiring a change in the central bank law.

X.

Exchange Arrangement. The Bolivian currency is the boliviano and the exchange
rate regime is a crawling peg. The central bank holds a daily foreign exchange
auction, accepting all bids that are at least equal to the central bank’s minimum price.
If acceptable bids exceed the amount offered for auction, the lowest acceptable bids
are prorated so as to exhaust the amount offered. The minimum price is adjusted from
time to time in light of the evaluation of Bolivia’s real exchange rate with respect to
Bolivia’s key trading partners. On May 31, 2006, the official selling rate was
US$8.06 per U.S. dollar.

XI.

Article IV Consultation. The last Article IV consultation and request for the first
review under the Stand-By Arrangement was completed by the Executive Board on
July 7, 2003 (Country Report No. 03/257). Bolivia is on a 12-month consultation
cycle.

41
XII.

Technical Assistance.

Department

FAD

Tax administration

FAD
FAD
MAE

Fiscal decentralization
Central bank operations and domestic capital markets
Vulnerability of the banking system

MAE
STA
STA

Money and banking statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Monetary operations, monetary, and exchange rate
policy

MAE
STA
MAE
FAD
FAD
MFD
FAD
LEG
MFD
MFD
FAD
FAD
MFD/LEG
FAD
FAD
MFD
FAD
STA

XII.

Purpose
Modernization of customs administration and follow-up
missions

National accounts statistics
FSAP
Customs reform
Tax Administration
Training of bank supervisors on AML/CFT
Pension reform
Review of draft AML law (desk review)
Banking sector
Banking sector
Tax policy
Tax administration
Financial Intelligence Unit and AML/CFT legislative
advice
PSIA
Decentralization and public expenditure management
Promote use of domestic currency
Public expenditure management: the budget process
Monetary statistics

Date

June 1999, May 2001,
Dec. 2001
June 1999, Feb. 2000,
June 2001
December 2000
June 1999
Oct. 1999, April 2000,
Dec. 2000
Jan 1999, Sept. 2001
August 1999
May 2002
August 2002
Nov. 2002, Jan. 2003
December 2002
May 2003
July 2003
April 2004
July 2004
July 2004
August 2004
August 2004
August 2004
September 2004
October 2004
October 2004
October 2004
April 2005
March 2006

Resident Representative. Mr. Esteban Vesperoni took over the post of IMF resident
representative in February 2006.

42
APPENDIX II. BOLIVIA: EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS (DSA)
While Bolivia’s external and public debt have declined significantly in relation to GDP
in recent years as a result of the sharp reduction in the fiscal deficit and implementation
of the MDRI, the debt sustainability analysis points to the potential for some reversal of
these gains over the long term. Bolivia’s external debt (public and private) decreased
significantly and is projected to fall further in the medium to about 36 percent of GDP in
2011 and stabilize in both nominal and NPV terms in the longer term (2016–26). The public
external debt service to export ratio is also projected to remain at comfortable, albeit
increasing levels. However, while the NPV of total public debt (external and domestic)
remains stable in the period (2006–11) at about 43 percent, it shows an increasing trend in
the period (2012–26) reaching about 50 percent in 2026 driven by a gradually increasing
deficit as a percent of GDP that goes from about 3.9 percent of GDP in 2011 to 4.3 percent in
2026. The gradual deterioration of the deficit is driven by broadly stable hydrocarbon prices
and production which imply declining hydrocarbon revenues as a share of GDP.
The outcome seems sensitive to standard stress tests, particularly to a continuation of
past historical trends, permanently lower real GDP growth and to devaluation.
Solvency would be particularly compromised under adverse shocks. In particular, a decline
in natural gas production and exports of 5 percent annually over the next five years (i.e., a
cumulative decline of more than 20 percent), would place the debt ratio to GDP on a rising
path. Conversely, debt sustainability would improve substantially under the assumption of a
one-time 50 percent increase in the natural gas export prices relative to the baseline scenario.
These results underscore the need of reaching mutually acceptable agreements with the
private sector in the hydrocarbons sector to promote continued private investment and
growth.
Main assumptions

The baseline scenario is projected for the period 2006–26. The macroeconomic framework
for the period 2006–11 is detailed in the staff report tables. The baseline assumes that a
negotiated agreement is reached with the nationalized companies that do not disrupt current
production levels. The main assumptions for the long-term projections under the baseline
scenario are:
•

Average annual real GDP growth: 3.5 percent

•

Inflation: 4 percent

•

Export growth: 5 percent

•

Gas prices: stable with a price to Brazil of 3.7 U.S. dollars per thousand cubic feet in
longer term

•

Gas volumes: stable at 2006 levels

•

The average concessionality of the public sector borrowing is expected to decrease
gradually and effective interest rate somewhat increase.

•

The real effective exchange rate will remain constant.

43
•

The evolution of domestic public debt is consistent with the path for the overall fiscal
deficit percent and available domestic financing.

External debt sustainability
Bolivia is expected to maintain its external debt sustainability throughout the period in
consideration. The stock of total public and private external debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to
fall to about 36 percent by 2011 and stabilize at the range of 26–28 percent by 2026. At the
same time, the composition of public external debt is expected to shift to less concessional
sources, and therefore the speed of reduction of public external debt NPV to GDP ratio will
be lower than that of the nominal debt. Also, the debt service to export ratio is expected to
increase somewhat. Nevertheless, these indicators are projected to remain at comfortable
levels, with NPV external public debt to GDP ratio being close to 20 percent of GDP by the
end of the period.
Bolivia’s risk of debt distress is low given its debt levels and the overall rating of its
macroeconomic policies According to the World Bank’s IDA Resource Allocation Index
(IRAI) Bolivia is classified as a medium performer with respect to quality of policies and the
related thresholds on NPV of debt-to-GDP and debt-to-exports ratios (40 and 150 percent,
respectively) are met with ample margins under the baseline projections and even under
stress scenarios.
The standardized stress tests show that Bolivia’s external debt would remain
sustainable under several shocks and their combinations (Table 2). Bolivia NPV to GDP
ratio experiences highest increase under the 30 percent devaluation shock in 2007, but
nevertheless stabilizes at around 30 percent of the GDP. The stress test assuming borrowing
on less favorable terms also leads to higher, but stabilizing ratios.
The prospects for external debt sustainability, however, would be compromised under
alternative adverse scenario that assumes fall in gas production (5 percent fall each
year in 2007–11) (Figure 2). Assuming that related shortfalls in fiscal revenues are
compensated by additional external borrowing, such scenario puts the NPV of external public
debt on higher and rising path and may require adjustment measures to return to stable debt
ratio. On the other hand, the positive shock assuming one time 50 percent increase in gas
prices in 2007 improves the external solvency with further improvement in NPV of debt to
exports ratio and debt service indicators.
Public debt sustainability
While Bolivia is expected to maintain its public debt sustainability in the short to
medium term (2006–11), long term prospects would crucially depend on developments
in the hydrocarbons sector. While the NPV of debt is broadly constant until 2011 and the
NPV of external debt is flat given the rather constant expected external financing as a share
of GDP, after 2011 the overall deficit increases slowly and this implies the need
accommodate this with additional domestic financing as declining pension and investment

44
spending is not enough to compensate for the increasing interest bill and the reduction of
hydrocarbon revenues as a share of GDP.
The standardized stress tests show that Bolivia’s public debt sustainability is sensitive
to several shocks (Table 4). Bolivia NPV to GDP ratio experiences highest increase under a
historical pattern, a permanent reduction in growth and a 30 percent devaluation shock in
2007. The stress test assuming historical parameters is the one that shows the higher NPV of
debt as a share of GDP in 2026 at a level of 77 percent of GDP.
While the prospects for public debt sustainability would be seriously compromised
under an alternative adverse scenario that assumes fall in gas production (5 percent fall
each year in 2007–11), a positive shock on gas prices would improve the outlook
substantially. Assuming that related shortfalls in fiscal revenues are compensated by
additional external borrowing, such scenario puts the NPV of external public debt on higher
and rising path and may require adjustment measures to return to stable debt ratio. On the
other hand, the positive shock assuming one time 50 percent increase in gas prices in 2007
raises the prospects for public debt sustainability with further improvement in the level of
NPV of debt-to-revenue ratio and debt service indicators.

8.3

8.4

2.5
-1.2
3.0
12.2
4.5

...
...
...
...
23.7
...
0.0
5.8

53.2
53.2
-2.1
-3.7
3.7
7.3
17.5
24.8
-4.6
1.1
-8.4
0.9
1.6
-1.4
0.7
1.7
-0.2

2000

8.2

1.7
-4.3
2.9
3.4
-4.7
...

...
...
...
...
22.5
...
-0.2
-0.1

55.2
55.2
1.9
-3.3
1.8
5.6
18.7
24.3
-4.8
1.0
-8.2
3.0
1.6
-0.9
2.4
5.2
-0.1

2001

7.9

2.5
-5.3
2.8
2.7
3.6
...

...
...
...
...
26.5
...
-0.1
1.8

55.9
55.9
0.7
-2.8
2.5
6.2
19.7
25.9
-4.7
1.0
-8.5
3.2
1.6
-1.4
3.1
3.5
-0.2

2002

8.1

2.9
-0.6
2.3
25.6
-0.1
...

...
...
...
...
21.3
16.2
0.0
-21.3

74.9
63.8
19.0
-4.7
-2.3
1.1
24.2
25.3
-5.8
2.5
-2.4
0.0
1.2
-1.6
0.3
23.8
-0.2

2003

8.7

3.9
3.9
2.4
30.6
13.8
...

...
...
...
...
18.9
13.5
0.0
1.0

68.4
57.7
-6.5
-10.1
-5.5
-2.6
29.3
26.6
-5.6
2.8
-0.7
-3.9
1.6
-2.7
-2.8
3.6
-0.1

2004

9.4

4.1
2.8
3.3
22.0
23.1
...

46.7
139.7
34.1
102.0
16.5
13.8
0.1
-4.1

65.5
52.9
-2.9
-6.5
-7.1
-2.7
33.4
30.7
-6.2
1.9
3.0
-2.4
2.1
-2.6
-1.9
3.5
-0.1

2005

1.3
3.5
0.3
13.0
11.1
...

5.4

2.6
-1.1
2.8
13.3
4.4
...

0.8

-5.1

4.8

Standard
Deviation 2/

-6.1

0.5

Historical
Average 2/

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

10.4

4.1
6.3
3.7
21.9
24.4
17.9

35.1
95.5
23.7
64.5
13.0
8.1
-0.4
14.6

43.7
32.3
-21.7
-8.7
-7.2
-2.3
36.8
34.5
-6.4
1.5
-1.2
-0.3
2.2
-2.4
…
-13.1
-0.1

2006

11.3

3.9
5.1
5.1
3.5
1.6
19.0

33.4
95.9
23.0
66.0
11.8
7.0
-0.4
-4.3

41.2
30.8
-2.5
-7.5
-6.8
-2.7
34.9
32.1
-5.9
1.8
-1.1
0.5
2.0
-1.6
…
5.0
-0.1

2007

12.2

3.1
4.3
5.1
1.8
3.6
19.0

32.3
97.9
22.6
68.5
11.2
6.5
0.0
-4.0

39.6
29.9
-1.6
-3.2
-5.6
-2.0
33.0
30.9
-5.3
1.7
1.7
0.8
2.0
-1.2
…
1.6
-0.1

2008

13.0

3.3
3.4
5.0
1.4
6.4
19.0

31.2
99.7
22.1
70.7
11.0
6.3
0.1
-2.7

38.2
29.1
-1.4
-2.3
-4.1
-0.5
31.3
30.8
-5.2
1.6
1.2
0.6
1.9
-1.2
…
0.8
-0.1

2009

Projections

13.9

3.3
3.3
5.0
2.4
5.2
17.8

30.4
101.2
21.9
72.9
11.9
7.3
0.0
-2.1

37.1
28.6
-1.2
-3.3
-3.2
0.3
30.0
30.3
-5.1
1.5
-0.7
0.6
1.8
-1.2
…
2.2
-0.1

2010

14.8

3.0
3.4
5.0
3.1
4.8
17.1

29.9
102.7
21.9
75.2
12.0
7.6
0.0
-1.9

36.2
28.2
-0.8
-2.7
-2.7
0.8
29.1
29.9
-5.0
1.4
-0.6
0.7
1.8
-1.0
…
1.8
-0.1

2011

3.5
4.3
4.8
5.7
7.7
18.3

2006-11
Average

21.4

3.5
4.0
5.2
5.0
3.6
15.4

26.3
101.9
20.8
80.5
12.2
8.8
0.1
-1.7

30.7
25.2
-0.9
-2.6
-2.7
0.8
25.8
26.6
-4.2
0.8
-0.4
0.5
1.5
-1.0
…
1.7
-0.1

2016

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
3/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
4/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes. In 2003 it reflects the inclusion of private debt in the total.
5/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
6/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 6/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

0.4
-3.0
2.8
-3.3
-9.6

...
...
...
...
25.5
...
-0.3
3.9

NPV of external debt 5/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions

55.3
55.3
0.4
-4.9
4.3
8.2
15.8
24.0
-4.7
0.8
-12.3
3.1
1.6
-0.2
1.7
5.3
-0.2

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which : public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 3/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual 4/
Of which : exceptional financing

1999

Actual

Table 1. Bolivia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2006-2026 1/

44.6

3.5
4.0
5.8
5.0
5.1
12.9

23.9
119.8
21.3
106.5
16.4
14.2
1.4
-0.2

26.6
24.0
-0.2
0.0
-0.4
2.1
20.0
22.1
-2.9
0.3
-0.2
0.6
1.4
-0.9
…
-0.2
0.0

2026

3.5
4.0
5.4
5.0
5.5
14.7

-0.4

-3.8

-1.6

2012-26
Average

45

46

Table 2. Bolivia: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2006-26
(In percent)
Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2016 2026

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline

24

23

23

22

22

22

21

21

24
24

27
24

27
24

25
24

25
24

24
24

22
25

31
29

24
24
24
24
24
24

24
24
25
25
26
32

24
25
27
23
26
32

23
24
27
23
25
31

23
24
26
22
25
31

23
24
26
22
25
31

22
21
25
21
24
29

22
21
26
21
25
30

65

66

69

71

73

75

81

107

65
65

77
68

81
72

80
75

82
79

82
84

85
98

155
147

65
65
65
65
65
65

66
71
66
71
65
66

69
79
69
70
61
69

71
81
71
72
63
71

73
83
73
75
65
73

75
86
75
76
67
75

81
87
81
81
73
81

107
111
107
107
98
107

8

7

6

6

7

8

9

14

8
8

7
7

8
7

9
7

10
7

11
7

10
8

12
16

8
8
8
8
8
8

7
7
7
7
7
7

7
7
7
7
6
7

7
8
7
7
7
7

8
9
8
8
7
8

8
9
8
9
7
8

8
10
8
9
7
8

11
12
11
11
10
11

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Fund staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt
creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline, while grace and maturity periods are the same
as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline
level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

47
Figure 1. Bolivia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2026
(In percent)
40

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
35

30

25

20

Baseline
Most extreme stress test

15
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
160

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
140
120
100
80
Baseline

60

Most extreme stress test
40
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
16

Debt service-to-exports ratio
14
12
10
8
6
Baseline

4

Most extreme stress test

2
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: Fund staff projections and simulations.

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

Source: Fund staff projections and simulations.

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Higher gas prices

Low gas production

Baseline

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

Figure 2. Bolivia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2026
(In percent)

48

0.4
...
2.4
-0.6
...

2.5
3.4
5.2
1.3
...

...
...
...
...
3.7
...
...
8.9
...

1.7
3.7
1.9
10.4
...

...
...
...
...
6.8
...
...
10.4
...

...
...
4.2
25.1
2.4
29.4
...
...
...
...
3.8
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-1.1
0.0
...

60.0
42.1

2001

2.5
4.8
3.1
6.9
...

...
...
...
...
8.8
...
...
10.6
...

9.4
8.1
6.2
24.5
2.3
30.7
3.5
-0.1
1.4
-1.5
3.5
-1.6
0.0
0.0
-1.6
0.0
1.3

69.3
49.2

2002

2.9
4.7
6.1
-2.2
...

...
...
...
...
9.3
...
...
11.7
0.4

4.7
2.7
5.1
24.1
2.9
29.1
-0.9
-1.2
0.8
-2.0
0.3
-1.5
0.0
0.0
-1.5
0.0
2.0

74.0
51.0

2003

3.9
4.7
8.5
4.5
...

...
...
...
...
15.0
...
...
35.1
-0.6

3.3
-2.8
2.6
27.0
2.5
29.6
-4.1
-2.7
0.1
-2.8
-1.4
-1.3
0.0
0.0
-1.3
0.0
6.0

77.2
68.3

2004

1/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
2/ Coverage is for the nonfinancial public sector. Gross debt is used as a concept.
3/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
4/ Revenues including grants.
5/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/ 5/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Of which : external

Gross financing need 3/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/

Of which : foreign-currency denominated
Of which : external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)

...
...
...
...
3.5
...
...
7.7
...

...
...
1.5
25.9
1.8
27.4
...
...
...
...
...
-1.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
0.0
...

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which : contribution from average real interest rate
Of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

NPV of public sector debt

...
55.0

...
57.0

Public sector debt 2/
Of which : foreign-currency denominated
...
...
1.5
25.6
2.2
27.0
...
...
...
...
2.0
-0.9
0.0
0.0
-0.9
0.0
...

2000

1999

Actual

4.1
3.6
3.4
9.8
...

54.9
46.9
32.1
...
12.3
173.3
101.5
31.8
5.6

-6.4
-4.5
-0.8
31.7
2.2
30.9
-2.6
-2.0
1.1
-3.0
-0.7
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-1.1
0.0
-1.9

70.8
62.9

2005

2.9
4.1
4.7
5.8

2.6

Historical
Average 1/

1.5
0.6
2.4
6.2

2.2

Standard
Deviation 1/

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

4.1
3.6
5.3
12.3
17.9

42.7
35.4
22.2
...
5.5
118.2
61.6
20.3
17.4

-20.2
-7.4
-2.8
36.1
2.9
33.3
-3.7
-2.0
0.8
-2.8
-1.7
-0.9
0.0
0.0
-0.9
0.0
-12.8

50.6
43.4

Est.
2006

3.9
5.0
4.9
12.5
19.0

42.2
33.9
21.7
...
7.7
120.2
61.8
18.3
1.8

-0.9
-1.1
0.9
35.1
2.9
36.0
-1.5
-0.3
1.6
-1.9
-1.2
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.2

49.7
41.4

2007

3.1
4.9
4.3
-2.9
19.0

42.1
32.9
21.5
...
7.2
126.2
64.4
19.4
0.9

-0.3
-0.8
0.6
33.4
2.0
33.9
-0.8
0.1
1.6
-1.5
-0.9
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.4

49.4
40.2

2008

3.3
4.8
3.4
1.9
19.0

42.2
32.1
21.3
...
7.7
129.5
65.2
20.2
0.8

0.1
-0.2
0.8
32.6
1.9
33.5
-0.5
0.0
1.6
-1.6
-0.6
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.3

49.5
39.3

2009

Table 3. Bolivia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003-2026

3.3
4.7
3.3
2.0
17.8

42.8
31.3
21.2
...
8.2
133.9
66.4
21.4
0.7

0.4
0.1
1.1
31.9
1.8
33.0
-0.5
0.0
1.6
-1.6
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.3

49.9
38.5

3.0
4.7
3.4
1.3
17.1

43.5
30.9
21.3
...
8.4
138.4
67.9
22.6
0.4

0.7
0.3
1.1
31.4
1.7
32.5
-0.2
0.3
1.7
-1.4
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.5
0.0
0.3

50.6
38.0

3.5
4.6
4.1
4.5
18.3

0.3

Projections
2006-11
2010
2011 Average

...

3.5
4.7
4.0
1.8
15.4

3.5
5.4
4.0
2.5
12.9

10.3
202.8
83.9
34.8
0.7

...
9.1
161.1
71.7
26.3
1.0

51.3
27.9
21.2

0.4
0.4
1.1
25.3
1.1
26.4
-0.7
0.0
1.8
-1.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

55.3
31.9

2026

46.1
28.4
20.5

0.3
0.0
1.2
28.6
1.1
29.9
-0.9
-0.2
1.5
-1.8
...
-0.4
0.0
0.0
-0.4
0.0
0.3

52.1
34.4

2016

3.5
5.0
4.0
2.1
...

1.2

2012-26
Average

49

50

Table 4.Bolivia: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2006-2026
Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2016 2026
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

43

42

42

42

43

44

46

51

42
42
43

44
38
43

45
36
43

47
33
44

49
30
46

51
28
47

60
16
55

77
1
73

43
43
43
43
42

44
46
45
58
42

46
49
49
58
42

47
50
49
58
42

48
50
50
59
43

50
51
51
59
43

57
54
54
62
46

68
60
59
68
52

118

120

126

129

134

138

161

203

116
116
118

124
109
122

136
106
130

145
100
136

154
94
143

163
88
150

210
56
192

304
3
286

118
118
118
118
117

125
130
129
165
119

137
147
145
173
126

143
152
149
178
129

151
158
155
183
133

160
163
160
189
138

199
190
187
216
161

268
235
234
269
204

20

18

19

20

21

23

26

35

21
21
21

19
19
19

20
19
20

22
19
21

24
19
22

25
19
24

32
16
30

49
11
45

20
21
21
21
21

19
19
19
20
19

20
21
21
22
20

22
23
23
23
20

23
24
24
25
22

25
25
25
27
23

31
30
30
32
27

43
39
39
45
35

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007
NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

51

Figure 3. Bolivia: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2026 1/
70

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
65
60
55
50
45
Baseline

40

Most extreme stress test
35
30
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
280
260

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

240
220
200
180
160
140

Baseline
Most extreme stress test

120
100

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
50
45

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

40
35
30
25
Baseline
20

Most extreme stress test

15
10
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2016.
2/ Revenue including grants.

52

APPENDIX III. BOLIVIA: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK1
The World Bank’s support to Bolivia will be delivered according to the strategy spelled
out in the Interim CAS, currently under preparation, to be presented to the World
Bank Board on July 20, 2006. Due to the political uncertainty and risks, the Interim CAS is
being designed to cover a two-year period (FY06–FY07) that will allow the Bank to
implement a work program in Bolivia while these uncertainties are being clarified. It will
accompany and support the new Administration that assumed power in January 2006. The
Bank will seek to build a partnership with the Government to support its development
strategy with lending, analytical work and technical assistance. The Interim CAS lending
would include IDA resources to finance investment credits for approximately US$50 million
a year. The level of assistance in the Interim CAS would be sufficient to support an average
of three projects and three pieces of ESW per year. To the extent possible, these projects and
programs would be designed and implemented in a collaborative fashion with donor partners
that would include drawing on financial and human resources to leverage the Bank’s
resources and have a greater development impact.
The World Bank’s program in Bolivia has nine projects currently being executed –
seven investment projects, a GEF project and a rapid disbursement project––for a total
of US$372 million. Of this amount, only US$15 million are nonconcessional funds. These
projects finance interventions in various sectors including education, health, rural
development, institutional strengthening and road construction. The World Bank program in
Bolivia includes two trust funds: a grant for US$300,000 aimed at the institutional
strengthening of the Technical Secretariat of the Constituent Assembly; and a grant
amounting to US$212,000 intended for the strengthening of the Congress Budget
Commission.
The Bank is discussing with the Government the possible following program for FY–07:
•

The Secondary Education pre-SWAP, for US$10 million, whose objective is to
support the Government’s education strategy which aims to expand secondary
education coverage and retention of disadvantaged groups, improve the quality of
education services in targeted areas where secondary enrollments are particularly low,
and strengthen decentralized education management.

•

The Urban Infrastructure for Poor Project, for US$30 million, which aims to
increase the effective and sustainable use of infrastructure services in the cities of La
Paz, El Alto and Santa Cruz. In La Paz, the project will finance a package of demanddriven local investments at the neighborhood level. In El Alto it will finance
infrastructure investment for paving, drainage and measures to implement a massive
transit policy. In Santa Cruz, it will finance infrastructure investment for the
interconnection of water wells and the southern water pumping station.

1

Prepared by World Bank staff.

53
•

The Community-Based Land Administration Project for US$15 million. This
project aims to establish a decentralized beneficiary-driven land distribution
mechanism that allows organized landless or poor farmers to acquire suitable
agricultural lands and implement investment subprojects which puts them on a
sustainable, higher-income, livelihood path.

Recent and ongoing technical assistance and economic sector work includes:
•

The Country Economic Memorandum, completed in July 2005, focuses on
employment-generating economic growth and policies aimed at improving the
investment climate and boosting exports. This study has been widely disseminated
among the Government, the civil society, the productive sectors, and the international
community.

•

The World Bank has produced Discussion Sectorial Notes on 23 different economic and
social issues that will be published in Spanish and in English. These notes are a result
of technical discussions that the Bank held with all major political parties starting in
August 2005 and including, President Morales’s party (MAS). The Bank presented
these draft notes to the Government in March 2006.

•

The Country Social Analysis, under preparation, combines a quantitative and
qualitative approach besides participatory methods; it seeks to explain at the macro
level the social, economic, cultural, and institutional environment for development.

•

The Institutional Governance Review, under preparation, analyses the
decentralization issue. Alternative scenarios are presented and their implementation
analyzed in a sequence of approximately five years.

54
APPENDIX IV. BOLIVIA: RELATIONS WITH THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK1
As of December 31, 2005, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) had approved
loans to Bolivia amounting to US$3.77 billion, with disbursements totaling
US$3.14 billion. Bolivia’s outstanding debt to the IDB was US$1.77 billion. During the first
half of the decade, net cash flows to the country were mostly positive, owing in large
measure to debt relief provided by the IADB under the HIPC Initiative and other
extraordinary financing disbursed in 2003. The IADB’s portfolio in Bolivia also includes
active nonreimbursable technical cooperation projects amounting to US$23 million
(US$15.6 million undisbursed), and US$8.3 million in credits for small and micro projects.
Sustainable poverty reduction is the overarching objective of the Bank’s country
strategy with Bolivia. In pursuit of this objective, the Bank is supporting government-led
efforts to overcome the country’s economic and social development challenges in three main
areas: (a) improving the managerial capacity and transparency of the State, (b) supporting
competitiveness and sustainable development of the private sector; (c) enhancing efficiency
and equity in basic services delivery. The IADB is updating its country strategy on the basis
of the priorities of the new government inaugurated in January 2006 and the policy
framework envisaged for the medium term under the National Development Program that is
expected to be announced next April.
The backdrop for the strategy’s implementation remains is complex, characterized by a
widespread reorientation of the reform process, need for continued fiscal consolidation,
weak policy implementation and institutional capacity and an over-arching political
agenda dominated by the constituent assembly and the referendum for regional
autonomy. In this context, the country strategy update is being conceived as a process in
which the Bank, in concert with the Government and other development partners, (i) remains
engaged in areas of high priority to attenuate economic risks and preserve the social gains of
the last decade (pension and tax administration, microfinance), (ii) continues cooperating
with the administration in improving planning, budgeting and the ongoing fiscal
decentralization process, and (iii) sharpens the focus of its assistance on local/rural
development and the provision of productive infrastructure.
From the operational standpoint, the Bank’s portfolio in Bolivia represents a valuable
resource base from which to implement the strategy. As of March 15, 2006, undisbursed
balances amounted to US$409 million. The IADB´s lending program will continue providing
Bolivia in 2006 with concessional resources to support fiscal sustainability, while protecting
investments that are critical for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The proposed
IADB lending program for Bolivia for FY2006 consists of three loans amounting to
approximately US$100 million (in support of basic infrastructure, institutional reforms in the
public sector and competitiveness).

1

Prepared by IDB staff.

55

Discussions among Bank shareholders regarding the possibility of Bank participation
and the potential scope for MDRI type debt relief are ongoing. In the event that such a
scheme were to be approved, additional debt relief to that already being provided by the
Bank to Bolivia under the HIPC Initiative could become effective in 2007.

56
APPENDIX V. BOLIVIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
The timeliness and coverage of economic statistics in Bolivia is generally adequate for
monitoring purposes. Significant advances have been made in recent years, but
improvements are still needed in a number of areas, as noted below. Many national
agencies, including the National Institute of Statistics (INE), post statistical information on
the Internet. Bolivia has participated in the GDDS since November 2000 and plans to
subscribe to the SDDS in FY07 are in the advance stages.
I. REAL SECTOR
•

National accounts. The INE plans to initiate in 2006 a thorough revision of the
national accounts statistics, including a revision of the base year. This process is
expected to be completed over the next 3 years. A 2002 STA mission on national
accounts statistics found that efforts to improve the quality of the real sector statistics
were hampered by an inadequate statistical law and insufficient resources to
undertake censuses and surveys.

•

Labor market. The quality of the household and employment surveys has
deteriorated in the last few years, due mainly to financial constraints. The Survey of
Improvement in Living Conditions (MECOVI), which replaced earlier household
surveys, was last conducted in November 2002. In addition, some important surveys
have been discontinued such as the annual manufacturing survey (in 2001) and the
employment survey (in 2003), leading to a lack of quarterly information on
employment and wages. However, plans to reestablish these surveys are underway.

•

Prices. The consumer price index (CPI) covering the four largest cities has a base
year of 1991, and was revised on the basis of a household budget survey that was
conducted over a 12-month period that began in June 2, 2003. Industrial producer
price indices and external trade unit values are compiled by INE, but are in need of
revision as regards their coverage, product breakdown, and base year (1990=100).
II. FISCAL SECTOR

The Ministry of Finance (MoF) provides timely information on revenue, current and
investment spending, and financing for the consolidated general government (central
government and decentralized entities), public enterprises and the central bank, with
appropriate disaggregation, on a monthly basis. The MoF also provides annual data to
STA on the operations of the consolidated central government, and regional and local
governments for publication in Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. However, these
data do not cover all operations of decentralized agencies and operations channeled through
special funds. The ongoing implementation of a comprehensive financial management
system, with funding from the IDB, will help ensure proper monitoring of public sector
financial operations including local debt and social spending.

57
III. EXTERNAL SECTOR
The Central Bank of Bolivia (BCB) provides data on balance of payments and
international investment position statistics to STA for publication in the Balance of
Payments Statistics Yearbook and the International Financial Statistics (IFS). The
classification of accounts is broadly in accordance with the fifth edition of the Balance of
Payments Manual. Although quarterly balance of payments data are available before the end
of the year, these data are submitted to STA only once a year. The BCB also provides
monthly trade data to the Fund, but the import data are only available with a lag. Upon
request, Fund staff has access to more detailed and timely balance of payments and debt data.

The authorities are working on a data base on gross flows of short and medium-term private
debt. However, there is some concern about the quality of private capital flows as the foreign
direct investment survey was discontinued in the third quarter of 2004.
IV. MONETARY SECTOR
Monetary data are provided on the balance sheets of the central bank, commercial
bank, nonbank financial institutions, and two state-owned second-tier banks, Nacional
Financiera Boliviana (NAFIBO), and Fondo de Desarrollo del Sistema Financiero
(FONDESIF). Data on the monetary survey are available with a short lag. Commercial bank
data are collected by the Superintendency of Banks and they become available with a lag of
six to eight weeks. The coverage of banks in the monetary survey is comprehensive. A STA
mission in April 2006 found that the central bank has implemented most of the
recommendations of the 2001 STA advisory mission, and monetary statistics are now
broadly in line with the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual. The mission found
weaknesses in data provided by deposit institutions, which could be improved with the
implementation of the new standardized report forms.

Jun. 2006
Apr. 2006
Apr. 2006
Apr. 2006
Mar. 2006
May 2006
May 2006
Mar. 2006
Dec. 2005
Dec. 2005
Mar. 2006
Mar. 2006
Mar. 2006
May 2006

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities2

Reserve/Base Money

Broad Money

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Interest Rates3

Consumer Price Index

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing4 – General
Government5

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing4– Central Government

Stocks of Non Financial Public Sector-Guaranteed Debt6

External Current Account Balance

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services7

GDP/GNP

Gross External Debt

Jun. 2006

Apr. 2006

May 2006

Jun. 2006

Mar. 2006

May 2006

May 2006

Jun. 2006

May 2006

Mar. 2006

Apr. 2006

Apr. 2006

Apr. 2006

Jun. 2006

Jun. 2006

Date
received

M

Q

M

Q

M

M

M

M

W

M

M

M

M

D

M

Frequency
of
Data1

M

Q

M

Q

M

M

M

M

W

M

M

M

M

D

M

Frequency
of
Reporting1

2

M

Q

M

Q

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

Frequency of
publication1

Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
3
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
4
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
5
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and
local governments.
6
Including currency and maturity composition.
7
Monthly frequency for goods only.

1

May 2006

Exchange Rates

Date of
latest
observation

(As of June 9, 2006)

BOLIVIA: INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE

58

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
July 17, 2006
The information below, which has become available following the issuance of the Staff
Report, does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
1.
Elections for the constitutional assembly and referendums on regional
autonomy. In the elections held on July 2, the governing party Movimiento al Socialismo
(MAS) obtained 51 percent of the vote, and as a result will be represented by 137 of the 255
delegates to the constitutional assembly. As a two-thirds majority is required to approve
constitutional reforms, consensus building with other political groups will be needed. In the
regional referendums, four of the nine departments favored autonomy. The specific
modalities whereby greater autonomy will be granted to these departments will be defined by
the constitutional assembly, which will begin deliberations on August 6 and is also expected
to consider a wide range of possible institutional changes in the political and economic areas,
including with respect to the economic role of the state, land tenure, and property rights.
2.
National Development Plan. The government has finalized the National
Development Plan (NDP), which is aimed at raising growth and reducing poverty and
inequality, and sets out policies towards these objectives. The main points include:
•

Key objectives. For the period 2006-11, the NDP targets an average real GDP growth
of 6.3 percent; a 9 percentage point reduction in poverty (to 50 percent); and a sharp
decline in the unemployment rate, to 4 percent.

•

Policy approach. In line with the views advanced by the authorities during the Article
IV discussions, the NDP advocates a greater state role in the economy and support for
small- and medium scale producers, including through development banking.
Regarding the role of the state in the economy, the government would recover control
of all the enterprises privatized in the mid-1990s (except the former national airline),
which implies that—although no related legislation is yet in place—the
nationalization process for the hydrocarbons sector described in the Staff Report
would eventually be extended to the telecommunications, electricity, and water
sectors. The independent regulatory agencies would be abolished, except for the
superintendency of banks. A new framework for FDI would introduce new
requirements regarding financial information, technology transfer, minimum
employment creation, and use of local inputs and services.

•

Macroeconomic framework. The higher growth rates than in the staff’s baseline
scenario would come from projections of strong growth in the hydrocarbons sector
(as opposed to unchanged production in the staff’s scenario) and larger public
investment and FDI. Under the additional assumption of much higher hydrocarbonsbased revenues, the fiscal deficit would trend downwards beyond 2008. However, the
external current account would be somewhat weaker than under the staff’s scenario
due to stronger import growth. The NDP expresses a firm commitment to

-2macroeconomic stability, also reflected in low projected inflation, and vows
continued openness in the exchange system under an unchanged exchange rate
regime. A special fund would be created to absorb extraordinary hydrocarbons
revenues.
Bolivia: Medium-Term Scenarios
Staff Baseline
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

National Development Plan
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Income and prices (percent growth)
Real GDP
Of which : Hydrocarbons
Construction
CPI inflation (period average)

4.1
9.1
16.8
4.1

3.9
0.0
10.0
4.0

3.1
0.0
0.0
4.0

3.3
0.0
6.0
4.0

3.3
0.0
6.0
4.0

3.0
0.0
6.0
4.0

4.1
9.1
16.8
4.0

5.3
19.4
36.1
3.0

6.4
14.8
21.5
3.0

6.9
14.6
2.5
3.0

7.5
14.7
13.8
3.0

7.6
7.2
24.7
3.0

Combined public sector (percent of GDP)
Revenue
Of which : Hydrocarbons
Expenditure
Of which : Capital expenditure
Overall balance

35.9
12.5
36.1
11.1
-0.1

35.1
11.9
38.7
13.4
-3.6

33.4
11.0
36.6
11.8
-3.3

32.6
10.3
36.1
11.8
-3.5

31.9
9.6
35.8
11.6
-3.8

31.4
9.0
35.3
11.2
-3.9

34.2
11.2
37.6
11.3
-3.4

38.2
13.8
41.9
14.1
-3.7

38.6
14.5
42.1
14.4
-3.5

39.9
15.4
42.7
15.4
-2.8

39.8
15.6
42.2
15.4
-2.4

39.3
15.3
41.4
15.2
-2.1

External sector (US$ billion)
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, c.i.f.
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment (net)

3.39 3.50 3.52 3.56 3.63 3.74
-3.00 -3.03 -3.13 -3.34 -3.51 -3.68
5.0
4.8
3.5
2.0
1.3
0.8
0.13 -0.20 -0.16 0.09 0.09 0.10

3.22 3.74 4.36 5.08 5.74 6.36
-2.93 -3.60 -4.20 -5.03 -6.10 -6.88
4.5
3.1
2.4
2.2 -0.9 -1.5
0.08 0.42 0.72 0.64 1.01 1.28

Sources: Bolivian authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.

•

Sectoral policies. The NDP envisages employment programs, increases in public
investment, and improvements in public services. It specifies detailed sectoral
policies in education; health and sanitation; justice and security; culture and
technology; social safety net and community development. In addition, the plan
outlines industrial policies for hydrocarbons, mining, manufacturing,
telecommunications, power, transport, agriculture, housing, and tourism. Land reform
is expected to expand access to land by small-scale farmers. In the trade area, the
NDP would support export promotion policies and selective import restrictions to
promote domestic industries.

3.
Natural gas exports to Argentina. The governments of Bolivia and Argentina have
reached understandings on an increase in the price of natural gas, from US$3.63 to US$5.00
per million British Thermal Units (BTU)—with effect from July 15, 2006, and up to an
export volume of up to 7.7 million cubic meters per day (currently, Argentina imports 5.5
million cubic meters per day).
•

Bilateral negotiations. The governments will designate representatives for the
purpose of negotiating, by December 31, 2006, a 20-year agreement whereby the
export price would be updated annually (with effect from January 1), according to a
formula to be specified, and the volume could increase to up to 27 million cubic
meters per day by 2026. The understandings envisage joint investments to support the
higher export volumes as well as production in Bolivia of natural gas derivatives and
gas-based electricity.

-3•

Economic impact. In 2006, the higher natural gas price to Argentina is expected to
yield additional fiscal and export revenues amounting, respectively, to 0.5 and
0.8 percent of GDP. Over the medium term, the revenue impact will hinge on the
extent to which the joint investments materialize, but is likely to at least double
reflecting the full-year effect. The associated long-term paths of the ratios of the
external and public debts to exports and GDP would likely fall within the range
associated with the positive shock (across-the-board 50 percent price increase on all
exports of natural gas) assumed in the debt sustainability exercise.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/77
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 19, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with
Bolivia
On July 17, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Bolivia.1
Background
Despite wide-ranging economic reforms over the past two decades, the accomplishment of
macroeconomic stability, and a major expansion of the hydrocarbons sector, Bolivia has
achieved only modest gains in poverty reduction and inequality has remained high. The reform
process, which encompassed privatizations and liberalization of the exchange and trade
systems, contributed to a major decline in inflation and to an increase in growth in the 1990s.
However, the growth performance deteriorated during 1999–2003 in the context of rising social
tensions and political instability, and the partial recovery of the last two years has been
concentrated in the highly capital-intensive hydrocarbons sector. As a result, Bolivia’s key
social indicators have continued to lag.
Over the past year, Bolivia has experienced major political changes, against the background of
entrenched dissatisfaction with the country’s poor social indicators and weak governance.
Following a protracted political crisis, the constitution was amended in June 2005 to allow early
presidential and congressional elections for a new full five-year period in December 2005,
together with the first direct elections for regional governors. Agreement was also reached on
calling a constitutional assembly and a referendum on regional autonomy in July 2006.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2The elections resulted in a major renewal of Congress and in a landslide victory for Evo
Morales, the first indigenous head of state in Bolivian history.
The new government has inherited a favorable macroeconomic situation, associated in large
measure with the extremely favorable international environment. In 2005, GDP growth was just
above 4 percent and the fiscal deficit narrowed to 2.3 percent of GDP. Inflation was contained
below 5 percent following an acceleration early in the year due to petroleum price increases,
supply disruptions, and imported inflation. Financial sector stability improved as deposits and
credit increased for the first time in several years, and the balance of payments remained
strong with official foreign exchange reserves rising to historic highs. Financial dollarization
declined, due to expectations of exchange rate appreciation as well as prudential and tax
measures that have increased the cost of holding foreign currency. The Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative has resulted in a substantial reduction of the public debt burden.
Thus far in 2006, the economy has kept the positive trends observed in 2005. Economic
activity has been led by high export values of hydrocarbon and mining products, which have
contributed to a strong external current account surplus. Inflation has continued in the low
single digits, following a decreasing trend that started in the fourth quarter of 2005, and the
overall fiscal position is in surplus. In particular, sub-national governments have been
accumulating sizable deposits at the central bank, thereby helping sterilize the monetary
impact of the rapid international reserve accumulation. Indicators of banking system
soundness have been broadly stable, with high liquidity and capital adequacy ratios above
mandatory levels.
The economic outlook for the remainder of 2006 remains positive, helped in large part by
continued highly favorable external conditions, notably high energy prices. Real GDP growth is
expected at just above 4 percent, with inflation in the low single digits. The combined public
sector is expected to record a near balance for the year as a whole as the temporary extra
revenues accrued from the new hydrocarbons policy framework would not be translated
immediately into investment spending by Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB).
Reflecting debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (see Press Release No.
05/286), the ratio of public debt to GDP is projected to decline from 71 percent at end-2005 to
51 percent by end-2006. Accumulation of official reserves is projected to continue, reflecting a
strong external current account surplus associated with high international prices of fuels and
minerals.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that, benefiting from prudent macroeconomic policies and a very
favorable external environment, the Bolivian economy sustained a strong performance in 2005
and so far in 2006. This performance reflected satisfactory GDP growth, a strong balance of
payments, low inflation, improvements in the fiscal position, and historically high levels of
international reserves. Despite periods of political uncertainty, the banking system has
remained stable and dollarization has declined somewhat. Reflecting debt relief under the
MDRI, the burden of the public debt has been substantially reduced.

-3Looking ahead, Directors noted that Bolivia’s short-term prospects are favorable but mediumterm challenges remain. They encouraged the government to take advantage of its strong
mandate to push forward with the necessary policies for cementing the recent macroeconomic
gains, enhancing the business climate, and promoting higher, diversified, and more equitable
growth. In this context, Directors welcomed the authorities’ emphasis on safeguarding
macroeconomic stability and strengthening governance.
Directors stressed the importance of fiscal prudence and strengthened public expenditure
management to ensure fiscal sustainability. The combined public sector is projected to be
close to balance in 2006 reflecting mostly strong revenues from the hydrocarbon sector.
However, the deficit would re-emerge in 2007 in the absence of another exceptional
hydrocarbon revenue yield, and also reflecting higher YPFB investments and payments for the
acquisition of shares in the nationalized companies. Directors noted that this could have
possible implications for debt sustainability. The authorities were therefore encouraged to
strengthen expenditure management at all levels of government. In this context, Directors
welcomed the government’s firmness in containing wage increases to manageable levels.
However, some Directors observed that salary compression at the higher levels appears at
odds with the government’s economic strategy that may require an upgrading of the
management of public entities. It was also stressed that the resources made available as a
result of debt relief under the MDRI should be spent effectively.
Directors stressed that enhancing fiscal transparency and accountability at all levels of
government will require strengthening the budget process and intergovernmental fiscal
relations. The authorities were encouraged to resubmit to Congress the draft budget
framework law. Regarding intergovernmental relations, the current revenue sharing and
expenditure allocation system should be reassessed in light of the capacity to generate
revenue at the subnational level, and made consistent with an agreed allocation of spending
responsibilities across the different layers of government.
Directors expressed concern at rigidities in domestic petroleum pricing that generate
inordinately large explicit and implicit subsidies. Accordingly, they stressed the need to move
domestic petroleum product prices to international market-based levels, which could be
undertaken gradually while using part of the resulting fiscal savings to protect vulnerable
groups. Reflecting these subsidies explicitly and transparently in the budget would increase
the public’s awareness of their cost and support for their rationalization.
Directors recommended that attention be given to enhancing domestic taxation. Current plans
to reduce exemptions and special regimes, rationalize the free trade zones legislation, and
modify the VAT refund system to reduce fraud are welcome. Directors encouraged the
authorities to revisit the scope for introducing a tax on high personal incomes, which would
exclude the bulk of the population and thereby spread the tax burden more fairly. In the mining
sector, where the government is considering an increased tax take, they noted the importance
of ensuring that revenue measures do not discourage additional private investment.
Directors commended the central bank for continuing to pursue a cautious monetary policy
stance. However, to better address inflationary concerns and improve the economy’s ability to
weather external shocks, many Directors recommended that the authorities consider a gradual
and well-sequenced move towards greater exchange rate flexibility, which could be achieved

-4in the context of a managed float. Such a move would require an adaptation of the monetary
policy framework to monetary or inflation targeting. In this context, a number of Directors noted
that it would be premature to adopt an inf lation targeting regime especially in view of the
challenges associated with Bolivia’s still dollarized economy. Some other Directors considered
that, instead of moving to a managed float, it could be preferable to improve the operation of
the current exchange rate regime.
Directors cautioned that, while the financial sector has strengthened notably, important
challenges remain. In particular, care must be taken that the proposed public development
banking system does not introduce distortions in the banking system, and that any related
fiscal costs are clearly included in the budget.
Directors welcomed the government’s emphasis on greater equity, transparency, and
accountability. However, they saw the parallel emphasis on an elevated role for the state as
risking the environment for private investment. Directors recommended that the authorities
should therefore maintain a careful balance between government interventions in the economy
and the preservation of appropriate incentives for private investment that remains critical to
support growth and raise employment and living standards.
Directors observed that considerable uncertainty prevails in the hydrocarbons sector regarding
the modalities for implementing the recent nationalization decree. They urged the authorities to
work to achieve mutually acceptable arrangements with the concerned oil companies.
Moreover, Directors noted that the expanded role newly assigned to YPFB will call for highquality management and full transparency, consistent with international accounting and
auditing standards.
Directors underscored that Bolivia may face a more competitive external environment for its
nontraditional exports in the period ahead, including with the prospect of an erosion of
preferential access to important markets. The authorities will therefore need to intensify their
efforts to expand Bolivia’s access to external markets. In addition, Directors considered that
the medium-term outlook hinges crucially on the maintenance of a stable legal framework,
notably with regard to property rights, which takes on added relevance in light of the land
reform initiative and the potential for major institutional changes in the context of the
forthcoming constitutional assembly.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5Bolivia: Selected Economic Indicators
2001
Income and prices
Real GDP
GDP deflator
CPI inflation (period average)
CPI inflation (end-of-period)

.

1.7
1.7
1.6
0.9

2002

2.5
2.8
0.9
2.4

Prel.
2003
2004
(Annual percentage changes)
2.9
6.2
3.3
3.9

3.9
7.4
4.4
4.6

2005

Proj.
2006

4.1
4.6
5.4
4.9

4.1
5.3
4.1
4.0

(In percent of GDP)
Combined public sector
Revenues and grants
Of which:
Royalties on hydrocarbons
Expenditure
Overall balance
Total public debt
External sector
Current account
Merchandise exports
Of which: Natural gas
Merchandise imports
Gross international reserves 1/
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of broad money

25.1

24.5

24.1

27.0

31.7

35.9

2.6
32.0
-6.8
60.0

2.3
33.3
-8.8
69.3

2.8
32.0
-7.9
74.0

3.4
32.6
-5.6
77.2

6.7
33.9
-2.3
70.8

10.1
36.1
-0.1
50.8

-3.4
15.8
2.9
20.9

-4.1
16.4
3.4
22.4

1.0
19.7
4.7
19.9

3.9
24.5
7.1
21.1

5.0
28.5
10.5
25.0

5.0
32.7
14.0
29.0

1,375
39.1

1,085
36.7

1,266
42.0

1,474
49.6

2,019
57.2

2,564
64.7

(Changes in percent of broad money at the beginning of the period)
Money and credit
NFA of the banking system
NDA of the banking system
Of which: Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)
Broad money
Interest rates (percent, end-of-period)
Yield on treasury bills in local currency
Yield on treasury bills in U.S. dollars

11.8
-9.3

-11.4
0.8
-10.7

3.5
-4.7
38.9
-1.2

3.8
-5.5
33.7
-1.7

25.2
-8.0
32.2
17.2

...
...
...
...

2.6
12.9
5.6

17.2
4.9

10.9
6.2

10.6
4.3

7.9
7.4

...
...

Sources: Bolivian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes reserves from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) and includes Offshore Liquidity Requirements (RAL).

Statement by Javier Silva-Ruete, Alternate Executive Director for Boliva
and Javier Cuevas, Advisor to Executive Director
July 17, 2006

1.
The Bolivian authorities share the staff’s appraisal that despite two decades of
significant structural reforms ─which formed part of the conditionality in successive
programs with the Fund─ economic growth was insufficient and poverty and inequality
remain high. It is imperative to change this situation; the unprecedented and widened
majority reached in the general elections gives the new government the legitimacy and the
great opportunity to make fundamental economic and social reforms to achieve higher and
more equitable growth.
Recent Political and Economic Developments
2.
On the political front, the election of constituents for the Constitutional Assembly and
the referendum on departmental autonomy were held on July 2. The political party of
President Morales reached 50.7 percent of total ballots and obtained 137 of 255 seats in the
Constitutional Assembly. The “no” to departmental autonomy won with 57.6 percent at
national level, even though the “yes” in favor of departmental autonomy won in four
departments.1 The Constitutional Assembly will be installed on August 6 with the objective
of discussing departmental autonomy and elaborating a new constitution in the coming
twelve months.
3.
On the economic front, the satisfactory economic performance observed last year is
continuing in 2006, helped in part by favorable external conditions. Real GDP growth was
4.3 percent in the first quarter; inflation is low and is expected to stay within the band
envisaged by the central bank in the period ahead; international reserves increased strongly
between January and May; fiscal surplus rose to 3.9 percent of GDP during the same period;
and the public debt-GDP ratio reduced, reflecting relief under the MDRI. The government
has announced a land reform to involve the redistribution of land that is unproductive or was
obtained illegally. The authorities concluded the international bid process to exploit and
industrialize the great deposits of iron in the east of the country and they are analyzing the
winning company’s offer. Furthermore, the government has launched its National
Development Plan which covers the next five years and is based on four strategies: an
economic strategy aimed to increase productivity and competitiveness; a social-community
strategy oriented to improve life conditions and reduce poverty through the enhancement of
education, health, sanitation and the social safety net; an international relationship strategy
aimed to enhance the external sector in economic, political, and cultural ambits; and a social
power strategy oriented to strengthen democracy through promoting social inclusion. The
1

Bolivia is divided into nine departments.

2
authorities stress that these strategies will be developed in a consistent manner with prudent
fiscal and monetary stances and emphasize their commitment to maintain macroeconomic
stability, which is considered an asset of Bolivian society.
4.
With respect to the hydrocarbon nationalization process, the government has reached
a new agreement with Argentina to increase the price and volume of natural gas exports. The
new agreement involves an increase in price from US$3.63 to US$5 per million British
thermal units (BTU) for the current contract of 7.5 million cubic meters per day. The new
price will be in effect from July 15 to December 2006, while a technical commission from
both countries will study a formula to establish the price of natural gas for 2007 onwards.
Moreover, the agreement includes the sale of an additional 20 million cubic meters per day in
the next 20 years once a new pipeline to Argentina has been built. The negotiation with
Brazil on the new price is underway and the government is conducing audits in the projects
involved to establish whether companies fulfilled their investment commitments in order to
evaluate the value of the nationalized assets and determine possible new participations in the
new contracts.
Economic Policies
5.
The authorities highlight the need to attain greater equity, transparency, and
accountability underpinned by cautious macroeconomic policies. They assign a greater state
role in mining and hydrocarbons activities and the receipts from these sectors will be used to
improve education, health, and infrastructure in order to reduce poverty and inequality and
enhance competitiveness. The authorities are aware that private investment is important to
growth and job creation, so they emphasize that public investment in other economic sectors
will be complementary to private investment. In this vein, the government supports the
growth of small and medium companies, through facilitating credit access. These sectors are
labor intensive and their expansion would help reduce high unemployment, which is the
major cause of the rise in poverty.
Fiscal Policy
6.
According to preliminary information, budget execution showed an overall surplus of
3.9 percent of GDP in the first five months of 2006, reflecting a prudent management, strong
hydrocarbons revenues associated to higher oil and gas prices, and low seasonal
expenditures. A fiscal surplus of 1.4 percent of GDP remains, even if the receipts from the
new hydrocarbon law and the nationalization decree are not taken into account. Moreover,
the higher natural gas price to Argentina would generate additional fiscal receipts of 0.5
percent of GDP. Therefore, public finance would show an overall fiscal surplus in 2006.
However, this exceptional fiscal outcome will not be repeated next year because the state oil
company, YPFB2, and sub-national governments will begin to execute their investment
2

Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos.

3
prospects. In this regard, the authorities envisage higher deficits of approximately 3 percent
of GDP in the National Development Plan for the period 2007–2011, which will be
manageable, according to the staff’s evaluation.
7.
The authorities are concerned that the current revenue sharing and expenditure
allocation system creates structural imbalances between central government and sub-national
governments and undermines the scope for fiscal management. In this regard, the
authorities’ objective is to reduce the earmarking problem and their intention is that part of
the receipts from the difference between the new and current prices of natural gas exports to
Argentina and Brazil will be deposited in a fund of stabilization and development to partially
address the current imbalance and prevent future exogenous shocks.
8.
The authorities are working on a tax reform to broaden the tax base, improve equity,
and increase revenues. Moreover, the authorities will eliminate the financial transactions tax
(ITF) on boliviano deposits and make it permanent for short-term dollar deposits above
US$2000. The authorities consider that the FTT and exchange rate appreciation have created
incentives for dedollarization; therefore, they prefer maintaining this tax as it was described.
The FTT has existed in some neighboring countries for many years and there is no clear and
empirical evidence on its negative effects on the financial sector.
9.
With regards to spending, the main problem is high fuel subsidies, which have been
increasing and the staff stresses the need to phase them out. However, despite the fact that
subsidies are inefficient and give rise to smuggling, it is very difficult to reduce subsidies in
the near term, particularly when there is a very hard political agenda to undertake. In this
respect, the authorities are planning to change the energy matrix over the medium term in
order to increase natural gas consumption and gradually reduce fuel subsidies and smuggling.
Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Policies
10.
International reserves have continued growing strongly during the first half of the
year and they were sterilized by an accumulation of public deposits at the central bank. The
base money expansion remains high, but it has been matched partially by an increase in real
demand for bolivianos and the central bank has absorbed liquidity, mostly in instruments
denominated in domestic currency and with longer maturities. Looking forward, the
authorities are conscious that an abrupt change in public finance from a surplus to deficit
could jeopardize the central bank’s ability to contain pressures of inflation. Nevertheless, it
has demonstrated the capacity and flexibility to adjust the interest rate, despite episodes of
great economic and political instability in the previous four years.
11.
The crawling peg regime has contributed to maintaining competitiveness and the
minor devaluations were prudent and necessary in order to preserve the health of a highly
dollarized financial system. Nonetheless, the high cost of transport and deficient basic
infrastructure are undermining the competitiveness of nontraditional exports, which will be

4
more affected by the erosion of preferential access to U.S. and Andean countries’ markets.
In this regard, a mission led by the Vice-President, Garcia-Linera, will be in Washington,
D.C. to try to extend the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA),
which ends in December 2006. Given that there are problems and uncertainty that weaken
competitiveness, the authorities consider it prudent to maintain the managed float regime and
exercise more exchange rate flexibility, as needed to prevent inflationary pressures. In
addition, possible appreciation pressures on the exchange rate arising from high
hydrocarbons revenues will be contained through cautious fiscal and monetary policies.
12.
Financial sector stability has improved. Nonperforming loans, as a percentage of
total loans, have reduced from 18 percent in 2002 to 11 percent in 2005, and provisions, as a
percentage of nonperforming loans, have increased from 64 percent to 81 percent during the
same period. However, profitability is still low and financial dollarization remains high,
even though the latter has fallen between 2003 and 2005 due to the introduction of ITF and
exchange rate appreciation. Furthermore, the authorities consider that land reform will not
be a source of vulnerability for the banking system since most loans are collateralized with
urban real estate rather than rural land.
Medium-Term Outlook
13.
The medium-term economic outlook remains favorable, although the fiscal outlook is
highly dependent on hydrocarbons-based revenues. To reduce this vulnerability, the
authorities are working on a tax reform to widen the base tax and increase revenues. In
addition, YPFB is working on new investment settlements in order to sustain production of
hydrocarbons at current levels. The government attaches great importance to the
diversification of the economy to gradually reduce the high dependence on hydrocarbons and
mining sectors and, consequently, to lessen the vulnerability of external shocks.
14.
Finally, on behalf of the Bolivian authorities, we would like to thank the Fund for the
debt relief under the MDRI. We would also like to underscore that the authorities attach
great importance to the longstanding relationship with the Fund and thank the staff for the
candid dialogue.

