© 2009 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 201

July 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/223
August 2, 2001

Euro Area Policies: 2009 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
Member Countries
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2009 Article IV consultation with member
countries forming the euro area, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

The staff report for the 2009 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 28, 2009, with the officials at EU institutions in the
context of the Article IV consultations with member countries forming the euro area. Based
on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
July 1, 2009. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 17, 2009, discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Germany, on behalf of the euro-area Member
States and the European Community.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
EURO AREA POLICIES
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation with Member Countries
Prepared by the European Department
Approved by Marek Belka and Tamim Bayoumi
July 1, 2009

•

A staff team held discussions at the European Central Bank (ECB), the
European Commission (EC), Eurostat, and the Committee of European
Banking Supervisors (CEBS) during May 15–28, 2009. The team comprised
Messrs. Belka (Head), Čihák, Everaert, Fonteyne, Harjes, Stavrev, and Ms.
Sgherri (all EUR), Mr. Nier (MCM), and Mr. van der Mensbrugghe (EUO).

•

Meetings were held at the ECB with President Trichet, Mr. Bini Smaghi, Mr.
González-Páramo, Mr. Stark, Ms. Tumpel-Gugerell, and senior staff. At the
EC, the mission met with Commissioner Almunia, Mr. Buti (Director General
for Economic and Financial Affairs), Mr. O’Sullivan (Director General for
Trade), and other senior officials. The mission also met with representatives of
labor unions, financial market participants, and think-tanks. Messrs. Belka and
Everaert discussed the mission’s preliminary findings at the May 28 Euro
Working Group meeting, and presented its concluding statement to the
Eurogroup Ministers on June 8. Mr. Stein (Executive Director) and Mr. Pineau
(ECB Observer at the Executive Board) attended most of the meetings.

•

The authorities released the mission’s concluding statement in Luxembourg
on June 8, 2009.

2
Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Staff Appraisal ........................................................................................................................4
II. Outlook, Risks, and regional Spillovers ................................................................................6
III. Policy Discussions: Ensuring a Sustainable Recovery.........................................................9
A. Financial Sector.........................................................................................................9
B. Monetary Policy in Uncharted Territory .................................................................15
C. Fiscal Policy: Mitigating the Downturn while Ensuring Sustainability..................19
D. Trade, Regional, Other Structural Issues, and Statistics .........................................23

Figures
1. Euro Area: Leading Indicators .........................................................................................26
2. Euro Area Financial Indicators: Corporate Bond Rates and Equities..............................27
3. Euro Area Financial Indicators: Credit Markets ..............................................................28
4. Financial Indicators in New Member States ....................................................................29
5. Libor/Euribor Rates, Policy Rates and Spread.................................................................30
6. Euro Area: External Developments .................................................................................31
7. Margins of Euro Area Exporters to Main Export Destinations .......................................32
8. Euro Area: Inflation and Labor Costs, 1999–2009 ..........................................................33
9. Euro Area: Recent Developments of the ECB’s Liquidity Operations............................34
10. Euro Area: Monetary Policy and Market Expectations ...................................................35
11. Euro Area: Money and Credit, 1980-2009.......................................................................36
12. Euro area: Changes in Credit Standards to Enterprises and Households, 2005-08 .........37
13. Euro Area: Fiscal Developments .....................................................................................38
14. European Union: Labor Markets and Structural Reform.................................................39
Tables
1. Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2005–10 .............................................................40
2. Euro Area: Balance of Payments ......................................................................................41
Boxes
1. Assessment of the Euro.........................................................................................................8
2. Large Bank Loss Estimates Call for Thorough Assessment of
Individual Banks’ Capital Needs. ...........................................................................................10
3. Has the Financial Crisis Impaired Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area?...................17
Appendix I. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................42

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The euro area remains in recession, amid tentative signs of improvement and an uncertain
outlook. Three key elements are weighing on the recovery: (i) remaining stresses in the
financial system, including adverse feedback loops with the real sector as a result of the
recession; (ii) soft demand associated with fragile confidence; (iii) and structural rigidities,
especially in the labor market, which also constrain the area’s potential growth. The
discussions focused on actions needed to support the recovery, return to self-sustaining
growth, and address cross-border spillovers in the EU.
Financial sector policies: There was agreement that the financial sector remains key to the
shape and the robustness of the recovery. While a broad policy arsenal to shore up the sector
has been put in place, take up of various measures, in particular of recapitalization, has been
lagging. The staff recommended a more proactive approach consisting of a comprehensive
review of the financial positions of banks to assess capital needs and viability, accompanied
by follow-up action comprising disclosure, recapitalization, and, where needed, restructuring
or resolution of financial institutions. The EC advocated a very similar approach, while the
ECB emphasized the need for a speedy implementation of the measures already in place.
There was broad agreement that the proposed new financial stability arrangements for the EU
ought to be implemented on an ambitious time table.
Monetary policy: The ECB and the staff concurred that monetary policy has to maintain a
supportive stance, keeping in mind both downside risks and exit strategies. The staff argued
for keeping interest rates low by continuing to provide unlimited term funding at fixed rates
as long as disinflationary pressures persist. All unconventional measures would need to
remain under consideration to deal with the risk of protracted deflation. The ECB emphasized
that the design of its unconventional tools reflected the concern to ensure a relatively
straightforward exit and noted that, if needed, it could issue its own paper or offer additional
short-term deposit facilities to mop up liquidity.
Fiscal policy: With a slow recovery ahead, authorities and staff agreed that a supportive
fiscal stance should continue into 2010, while emphasizing the need for countries to cast any
short-term fiscal actions in medium-term consolidation programs supported by the Stability
and Growth Pact (SGP). The staff cautioned against a premature withdrawal of stimulus,
while arguing for a pre-announcement of fiscal consolidation plans, to be implemented as
soon as recovery takes hold. It was agreed that national fiscal institutions should foster
ownership of consolidation goals, and that surveillance has to be stepped up at EU and
national levels over progress toward medium-term objectives—which should better reflect
the level of debt and costs of aging.
Structural and trade policies: With the crisis likely curbing potential growth, there was
agreement that reinvigorated structural reforms are highly desirable, especially to support
economic restructuring and keep the labor force attached to the labor market. All agreed on
the importance of countering protectionist pressures from the crisis and concluding an
ambitious Doha Round agreement to bring about new trade opportunities.

4

I. STAFF APPRAISAL
1.
The euro area is in recession with tentative signs of improvement yet to
germinate into a recovery. The euro area has been hard hit by the collapse in trade on the
heels of the global financial turmoil, exacerbated by a correction of home-grown imbalances
in some countries. Survey indicators have been recovering, and the fall in indicators of
economic activity slowing. But stresses in the financial system, corporate defaults, rising
unemployment, and fragile confidence are weighing on the recovery, while structural
rigidities could undermine potential growth. Thus, while the decline in activity should
moderate through the remainder of 2009 and give way to a modest recovery in 2010, such a
scenario remains surrounded with high uncertainty.
2.
To support the recovery and return to self-sustaining growth, policymakers need
to take further decisive action, especially in the financial sector. A broad arsenal of
financial sector, monetary, and fiscal policy tools have been deployed to address the crisis. It
is now urgent to complete the task by implementing a proactive strategy to deal with
remaining stresses in the financial system. The momentum to establish new financial stability
arrangements in the EU should be seized without delay, and extended to efforts to deliver
fiscal sustainability and to structural reforms, with the latter crucial to shore up flagging
growth potential. More effective coordination of policy actions across areas and borders,
including support for neighboring emerging economies, will be beneficial to help restore
confidence in the region’s economy.
3.
A resolute and coordinated clean up of the banking system is essential to restore
trust in the financial system. The financial positions of banks need to be reviewed to assess
capital needs and viability, including a thorough forward-looking assessment of the impact of
the ongoing recession on capital. Most importantly, this review should be followed up by
comprehensive action involving disclosure, recapitalization, cleansing of the financial system
of its impaired assets, and, if needed, restructuring of financial institutions. While national
authorities will have to be in the driving seat, coordination of the exercise at the EU level will
be essential for its effectiveness, including in boosting confidence. To avoid disorderly
bankruptcy or recurring taxpayer bailouts of unviable institutions, national resolution toolkits
should be expanded to allow national authorities to take control of financial institutions at an
early stage.
4.
The ambitious reform of the EU’s financial stability architecture agreed in June
should be executed on the envisaged timetable. Securing adequate resources, effective
decision-making mechanisms, and independence for the new institutions will be essential, as
will an unconstrained information flow among these bodies, central banks, and supervisors.
The European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) will need sufficient legal scope to establish a
single rulebook, supported with effective transposition mechanisms at the national level and
effective binding powers, which should not be unduly diluted by concerns over infringement

5
of national fiscal sovereignty. Central banks will have to play a strong leadership role in the
European Systemic Risk Board, which should provide early warnings of a build-up of
systemic risk and a much needed bridge between macroprudential analysis and supervisory
and regulatory action. In parallel, the accelerated work under the ongoing crisis management
roadmap should address crisis resolution and burden sharing issues, in the context solidly
underpinning the single passport.
5.
With the euro area facing strong disinflationary pressures, monetary policy will
need to remain supportive. As a result of the ECB’s far-reaching unconventional measures
to support liquidity, initiated from the onset of the crisis, and its broad collateral policy, the
liquidity premium in money markets has virtually disappeared and inflation expectations
have remained well in positive territory. Still, headline inflation is likely to stay very low and
a small deflation risk remains present, despite strong nominal rigidities. Thus, it will be
essential to maintain the accommodative monetary stance as long as disinflationary pressures
persist, by keeping interest rates low through the unlimited provision of term funding at fixed
rates. The benefits of further cuts in the policy rate need to be weighed against their possible
adverse impact on the functioning of money markets, but any potential margin for further
reductions ought to be utilized as soon as possible. If downside risks were to intensify, a
more forceful signal to keep interest rates low would be necessary. To deal with
contingencies, all unconventional options, including active credit easing, will need to remain
under consideration. Reassuringly, the ECB has taken care to secure a safe exit from its
unconventional policies.
6.
While fiscal policy will need to continue to support economic activity in 2010, it
is essential to embed short-term actions in credible medium-term consolidation
programs to address solvency concerns. Given the large automatic stabilizers, planned
discretionary measures are broadly appropriate, with further stimulus to be readied in case the
euro-area economy takes a notable turn for the worse. To boost effectiveness and to avoid
distortions in the single market, more ex-ante coordination of fiscal measures would be
beneficial. To address solvency concerns, short-term actions need to be combined with preannounced fiscal adjustments, to be implemented as soon as the recovery takes hold and
supported by application of the SGP. National fiscal institutions should foster ownership of
consolidation goals and focus more on the level of debt and the cost of aging, as proposed by
the EC. Surveillance over progress toward these medium-term objectives will have to be
stepped up at both EU and national levels.
7.
Intensified structural reforms are vital to secure a durable post-crisis recovery.
Measures supporting shorter working hours and raising social benefits, while important
during the recession, will need to be reversed to limit their adverse impact on potential
growth. With economic restructuring ahead, a heightened focus on training, education, and
job-matching will be very useful. And implementing the services directive, revamping the
Lisbon agenda, and facilitating an ambitious and early conclusion of the Doha round will
contribute to the foundations of a solid recovery.

6
8.
It is proposed that the next consultation on the euro-area policies in the context of the
Article IV obligations of member countries follow the standard 12-month cycle.
II. OUTLOOK, RISKS, AND REGIONAL SPILLOVERS
9.
The euro area economy has been experiencing a deep recession, with tentative
signs of improvement yet to evolve into a recovery (Figure 1, Table 1). The euro area was
hit hard by the collapse in
8
8
trade, amplified by tight
Contribution to Growth
6
6
(Quarter-over-quarter annualized, percentage points)
financial conditions on the
4
4
heels of the global financial
2
2
turmoil and a correction of
0
0
home-grown imbalances in
some countries. Underlying
-2
-2
factors of the economic
-4
-4
Public consumption
decline are the large decrease
-6
-6
Net exports
in financial wealth (Figure 2),
Inventories
-8
-8
Gross fixed capital formation
an associated rise in
Private consumption
-10
-10
precautionary savings,
GDP growth (in percent)
-12
-12
increased difficulties in
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
obtaining credit (Figure 3),
Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculation.
and an adjustment of global
imbalances. During the second
half of 2008, a considerable buildup in inventories mirrored the surprise drop in demand,
with the resulting inventory correction contributing significantly to a dismal first quarter in
2009. The recent improvement in sentiment and activity and leading indicators have thus far
been signaling only a reduction in the pace of contraction in output. Owing to the tight
financial and trade integration of the EU, feedback loops have been operating across borders
and between the financial and real sector, with the recession now adding to the financial
sector’s woes. While the global crisis is the common driver, individual euro area countries
are affected to varying degrees depending on the extent of their fiscal, financial, and external
imbalances, and exposure to the global manufacturing cycle. Financial stresses differ across
euro area countries: toxic legacy assets are unevenly distributed; home grown real estate busts
feature large in Ireland and Spain but not at all in, e.g., Germany; and exposure to emerging
economies is of considerable importance for Austria, Belgium, Greece, and Italy, but much
less so elsewhere. And new member states (NMS) have been hard hit but with similar crosscountry differences (Figure 4).
10.
On the back of extraordinary policy support and a gradual decline in global risk
aversion, financial conditions have improved, but remain relatively tight and corporate
defaults are set to rise. Growth in lending to households has been on a decelerating trend
since before the beginning of the financial crisis in 2007, while bank lending to corporations
slowed markedly in late 2008, primarily in response to weaker economic activity. Bank credit

7
to the private sector is very subdued and the banking sector will take time to fully resume its
vital intermediation role. Supply effects seem to be negatively impacting recent bank loan
developments, reflecting efforts to reduce leverage and capital shortages of banks. As cuts in
policy rates were passed on—though not fully—and spreads fell, money market yields,
including the one-year Euribor, declined significantly (Figure 5). Borrowing costs for
investment grade companies fell back close to the historical average, but for lower-rated
firms, credit costs remain high in real terms. And, while large non-financial corporations
have managed to secure credit directly in financial markets, financing conditions for small
and medium sized companies that have access to credit only through collateralized bank
lending remain tight. Even though the corporate sector entered the recession in relatively
solid financial shape, and structural reforms in some countries had increased its resilience,
current credit spreads predict a sharp rise in default rates.
11.
After years of successful job creation and increasing participation rates,
unemployment is set to rise appreciably in the euro area. Past improvements in labor
market performance stem from the introduction of flexible contracts, targeted cuts in social
security contributions, and stepped up use of active labor market policies. As a result, job
creation in the EU was strong during the last upswing. However, the duality between
permanent and non-permanent jobs has increased. The current crisis will stress labor markets,
and is likely to expose the inequity of this labor market duality.
12.
The recovery is likely to be slow and subject to considerable risks. The decline in
activity should moderate through the remainder of 2009 and give way to a modest recovery
starting in the first half of 2010. Ongoing deleveraging, corporate restructuring, and rising
unemployment will weigh on domestic demand. The adjustment of global imbalances and the
relatively strong real exchange rate will limit support from the external side (Figure 6 and
Box 1). Over the medium term, the euro-area’s remaining rigidities in labor and product
markets, weak private balance sheets in some countries, and the larger role of the public
sector are likely to constitute a drag on growth. Upside risks stem from low inventory levels,
some pent-up demand, and further declines in the cost of credit which could support an
earlier rebound in economic activity. Downside risks lie in a further weakening of the
financial sector’s ability to support demand, globally as well as in Europe, abrupt adjustment
of external imbalances, and a further deterioration of economic activity in key trading
partners. Policy measures have significantly reduced negative tail risks in the financial sector
and in emerging European economies that faced severe market pressures. Nonetheless some
tail risks remain from a possible return of financial strains within the euro area, which could
have adverse consequences on some member countries and emerging economies, or
conversely from a deepening of the crisis in emerging Europe. Such tail risk could become
more pronounced if policy support is prematurely withdrawn or policy coordination falters.

8
The Growth Outlook for the Euro-area Economy
13.
The EC and the ECB broadly share
Real GDP
this growth outlook. The EC’s forecast
Vintage
2008
2009
2010
published in May sees growth in 2009 and
Projections
2010 slightly stronger than the staff, but also
(Annual average percentage change)
0.8
-4.2
-0.4
WEO
April 1/
includes a significant, and retrospective,
0.8
-4.8
-0.3
WEO
July update 1/
0.6
-5.1
to
-4.1
-1.0
to 0.4
ECB
June
reduction in potential output. The authorities
EC
May
0.8
-4.0
-0.1
Consensus
June
-4.2
0.3
pointed out that adjustment, especially in
Sources: EC; ECB; and IMF.
countries with large home-grown imbalances, 1/ Not adjusted for number of working days.
would reduce productive capacity and raise
the structural unemployment for several years. The ECB staff forecast virtually coincides
with the IMF’s July WEO update. Consensus forecasts remain more sanguine.

Box 1. Assessment of the Euro
On the back of increased volatility over the past several months, the real effective value of the
euro has depreciated by about 3 percent from its peak in mid-2008, reaching a level around
12 percent above its long-term average in May. This depreciation reflects a weakening vis-à-vis
the US dollar (13 percent) and the Japanese yen (18 percent), partly offset by a strengthening
mainly against the pound sterling (11 percent) and some East European currencies. The high
volatility of the nominal effective rate of the euro since the beginning of this year reflect the
high uncertainty in the foreign exchange markets as a result of the crisis. The current account
turned to a deficit of 1 percent of GDP in 2008 from a small surplus in 2007 (Table 2).
Euro Area: Exchange Rate Developments.
140
U.S. dollar-euro exchange rate
(Right scale)

130

170

1.5

160

1.4

Real effective exchange rate
(Long-term average, 1993-2006)

120

1.6

1.3

Long-term average + 1 SD

110

1.2
1.1

100
90

Long-term average - 1 SD

80

Real effective exchange rate
(CPI; Average 1993-2006=100)

70
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

1.00
Yen-euro exchange rate
(Left scale)

0.95
0.90

150

0.85

140

0.80

130

Pound-euro exchange rate
(Right scale)

120

0.75
0.70
0.65

110

1.0

100

0.9

90

0.8

80

0.7

70
1999

0.60
0.55
Nominal effective exchange rate
(Average 1993-2006=100, left scale)

0.50
0.45
0.40

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Source: International Financial Statistics.

Staff assessment is that the euro is somewhat on the strong side relative to its fundamentals.
Based on the exchange rate developments from February 25 to March 25, CGER estimates
place the euro’s overvaluation in a range of 0–15 percent. This assessment is broadly in line
with developments of the margins of euro area exporters in the area’s main trading destinations
over the past couple of years (Figure 7).
CGER Assessment of the Euro Effective Exchange Rate 1/
(Percent deviation from estimated equilibrium)
Macro balance

Equilibrium real
exchange rate

External
sustainability

Overall

Fall 2008 WEO

5

15

2

0-15 above

Spring 2009

5

17

0

0-15 above

1/ For details, see Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies, IMF Occasional Paper 261.

9
14.
The crisis has amply demonstrated the importance of intra-euro area and intraEU spillovers. While all agreed that the increased economic and financial integration within
Europe had been beneficial, it had also amplified the cross border transmission of shocks,
while membership of the euro area clearly yielded protective benefits. The retrenchment of
investors associated with the global increase in risk aversion and the flight to safety triggered
a fanning out of sovereign spreads, even within the euro area, and underscored the
vulnerabilities associated with large fiscal and external imbalances. Cross-border capital
flows are likely to be lower permanently, causing serious adjustment problems for countries
with large current account deficits. For euro area members and countries with pegged
exchange rates, the adjustment will be more arduous in the short run than for countries with
more flexible exchange rates. However, even in these cases, the task ahead will be difficult as
exchange rate volatility may prevent use of monetary easing to support demand, while
adverse balance sheet effects—households and businesses in many emerging economies hold
sizable foreign currency liabilities—will dampen spending and raise nonperforming loans.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS: ENSURING A SUSTAINABLE RECOVERY
Discussions focused on the policies required to secure a durable recovery. EU institutions
agreed that a more proactive and coordinated approach to relieve financial stress would be
essential, and that backing from national authorities—which would have to be in the driving
seat—would be key. Monetary and fiscal stances would need to continue to be supportive for
some time, anchored in solid medium-term oriented frameworks with respect to price
stability and fiscal sustainability. The staff underscored that policy actions would have to
fully take into account cross-border spillovers. It welcomed the proposed new EU financial
stability architecture, and encouraged the authorities to strengthen EU and national
frameworks to achieve fiscal consolidation and structural reform.
A. Financial Sector
Managing the Crisis
15.
The financial sector remains key to the shape and the robustness of the economic
recovery. The ECB noted that euro area banks reported record credit losses for 2008, even
though they were less exposed to toxic legacy assets than other advanced economies such as
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. While most banks still meet the
minimum regulatory capital requirements, there is substantial uncertainty about the value of
their distressed assets and the implications of the ongoing recession for asset quality. The
perceived undercapitalization of banks by market participants is negatively affecting
confidence, constraining credit flows and economic activity, and leaving the financial system
hamstrung in fulfilling its vital intermediation role. The ECB—acknowledging the high
degree of uncertainty and the gravity of the problems faced by the euro area’s banking
system—felt that capital needs would be lower than the GFSR estimates and released its own
estimates of likely bank losses after the mission (Box 2). The ECB agreed that

10

Box 2. Large Bank Loss Estimates Call for Thorough Assessment of Individual Banks’ Capital
Needs
As a result of the current global financial crisis and the ongoing recession, euro-area banks are
expected to incur substantial losses. Even though euro-area banks were less exposed to toxic legacy
assets than banks in some other advanced economies, they reported large losses in 2007 and 2008. Staff
and the authorities agree that a second wave of sizeable losses, tied to the recession, lies ahead.
Subsequent to the mission, the ECB released its own estimates of likely bank losses and expected writedowns which are considerably lower than the Spring 2009 GFSR estimates.
Projected Euro Area Bank Losses 2007-10
(Billions of U.S. Dollars)
GFSR (April)

ECB (June)

Total losses

904

649

Losses on:
Loans
Securities

524
380

431
218

Recognized:
Write-downs 1/
Provisions 2/

154
-

215
150

Further expected write-downs

750

283

Sources: ECB (Financial Stability Review June 2009); and IMF (GFSR April 2009
1/ As of December 2008 (GFSR), May 2009 (ECB).
2/ 2007 and 2008.

The differences between the GFSR and ECB estimates mainly reflect:
•

Asset coverage: The GFSR covered all securities held by banks, except government securities,
regardless of the jurisdiction of the assets. The ECB’s coverage is somewhat more restrictive,
however based on individual bank level data.

•

Loss estimation methodology and loss rates: The ECB estimated loss rates for specific loan
categories, including mortgages, using models based on relationships found in euro-area data,
whereas the GFSR relies on models estimated using US chargeoffs with adjustments for the
different macroeconomic outlook and loan characteristics pertinent to the loan book of euro area
banks. The different approach results in the ECB projecting significantly lower loan losses, in
particular on mortgage loans.

•

Treatment of provisions: The GFSR does not net out provisions made in 2007 and 2008 to
estimate further expected write-downs.

The substantial uncertainty about the resulting capital shortfalls underscores the need for a
thorough institution-by-institution assessment. The ECB’s write-down estimates imply significantly
lower capital needs than those projected in the GFSR. However, the ECB does not present an estimate of
capital needs on a comparable basis. In addition, it argues against using a simple leverage ratio as a capital
benchmark, given differences in accounting systems affecting the measurement of assets, and the need to
take into account differences in risk profiles and earnings capacity across institutions. The ECB agreed
with staff that its analysis would need to be complemented by bottom up stress tests to assess individual
banks’ capital needs.

institution-by-institution estimates are needed to clarify capital needs, which it noted is the
prerogative of national supervisors.
16.
Actions undertaken by policymakers have helped contain systemic risk, but
considerable stresses persist, and cross-country coordination remains challenging.

11
Euro Area: Increases in Deposit Guarantees During the Crisis
Policy actions have so far
Austria
*
focused on stabilizing the
Belgium
banking system and
Cyprus
Before the crisis
Finland
preventing bank runs, but
Current
France
considerable stresses remain,
Germany
*
Greece
including in the non-bank
Ireland
*
financial sector, as noted in
Italy
Luxembourg
the ECB’s June 2009
Malta
Financial Stability Review
Netherlands
Portugal
published subsequent to the
*
Slovak Rep.
1
mission. Coordination of
Slovenia
*
Spain
policy actions improved over
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
time as the scale and scope of
Deposits covered up to (EUR thousand)
the problems sank in, and the
Source: IMF staff, based on data from country authorities.
Notes: * unlimited; dashed lines denote agreed EU minimums (before crisis and current).
EC and the ECB undertook
efforts to coordinate key
parameters and underlying principles, but both institutions acknowledged that lack of
integration of decision making at the EU level hampered the efficiency of the policy
response. Recognizing the appreciable differentiation in financial systems, problems, and
policy contexts across countries, a menu approach was adopted, accompanied by special
guidelines on state aid and an accelerated approval procedure of interventions in the financial
system. The minimum level of deposit guarantees, the provisions for guaranteeing debt
securities, the pricing of public capital, and the conditions for treating impaired assets,
including the principles of valuation, have largely been harmonized. Still, national authorities
have explored the considerable leeway remaining within these parameters, resulting in some
cross-border tensions (e.g., from remaining differences in deposit guarantees) and to some
extent dampening confidence in the policy measures.

17.
The take-up under existing programs, especially of public resources for
recapitalization, was seen to be falling short. Fairly large sums have been committed by
member states since October 2008 to recapitalize financial institutions and more recently to
cleanse balance sheets of toxic assets. However, just over half of the programs had been
taken up by eligible financial institutions by end May 2009. Interlocutors cited the possible
stigma and conditionality, including a review of viability and restructuring, attached to these
programs as reasons for the poor take up. In addition, staff noted that the voluntary nature of
participation could be an important factor as financial institutions have incentives to muddle
through, holding on to shareholder upside and control, despite the potential aggregate costs of
such behavior to the economy at large.

1

ECB, June 2009 Financial Stability Review

12
18.
Against this background, the staff advocated a resolute and coordinated clean
up of banks to fully restore confidence in the financial system. Staff underscored three
reasons why a more proactive approach to cleaning up the financial system remained a top
priority. First, without a properly functioning financial system, monetary and fiscal policies
will not be as effective as they could be in supporting demand. Second, with the wave of
losses from the recession still to hit the financial system, there continues to be a significant
risk of a further negative feedback loop with the real economy. Third, without further
comprehensive action, the European financial system could well remain on a drip-feed of
taxpayers’ money for a long time to come. Private investors will not step in, and constraints
associated with government intervention will reduce overall efficiency. This would be a
recipe for a prolonged spell of slow growth.
19.
The staff called for such a clean-up to proceed in the context of a comprehensive
strategy, involving an assessment of capital needs and viability, and immediate followup action. Stress tests are currently being conducted at the national level and in a coordinated
fashion for the largest 22 banks in the EU. The EC and the ECB are providing the common
parameters for both the baseline and alternative scenarios. On current plans, the objective of
these stress tests is to provide an aggregate view of the resilience of the financial system in
Europe rather than to identify the capital needs on an institution-by-institution basis. Staff
urged the authorities to shift gears and engage in a comprehensive review to assess capital
needs and viability, also taking into account the impact of the ongoing recession on capital.
Most importantly, such a review would need to be followed up with action comprising
disclosure, recapitalization, and, where needed, restructuring or resolution of financial
institutions. The EC advocated a very similar approach, while the ECB emphasized the need
to raise the uptake of the measures already put in place. Both acknowledged that getting
national authorities fully on board would be challenging.
20.
Establishing or improving resolution regimes for financial institutions is vital. In
the present circumstances, policymakers in many EU countries face the unappealing choice
between disorderly bankruptcy and recurring taxpayer bailouts when dealing with unviable
institutions. There was broad agreement that the resolution toolkit should be expanded—if
necessary through a review of existing legal frameworks—to allow national authorities to
take control of fragile financial institutions at an early stage and implement resolution action
as needed. Some interlocutors thought that a special EU-level framework would be required
for dealing with failures in cross-border banks—and initial discussions on such a framework
are under way—but the staff pointed out that introducing special resolution regimes at the
national level could be done quicker, and—when sufficiently harmonized—constitute a
stepping stone toward an EU-level regime (see Selected Issues, Chapter II).
21.
Immediate adjustments to cross-border financial stability arrangements would
help manage the ongoing crisis, while better coordinated supervision of national
markets is equally necessary. Experience with the resolution of cross-border financial
institutions has been mixed at best, in one case leading to a break-up of the institution along

13
national lines. The staff called for countries to honor their commitment to adhere to the 2007
ECOFIN crisis management principles as well as existing bilateral MoUs, including with
respect to emerging economies in the region.2 The staff also pointed out that strengthening of
the Committees of Supervisors (Level-3) and implementation of the June 2008 crisis
management MoU need not await progress with broader reforms. While full-blown mediation
in case of conflicts among national authorities may be difficult, the presence of a neutral
observer from an EU institution could help diffuse tensions in cross-border crisis
management and resolution and advise on the consistency of approaches with existing
agreements and frameworks. Persistent efforts to remove distortions created in the early
stages of the crisis (e.g., on deposit guarantee coverage and conditions for guarantees of bank
liabilities, including in the euro area interbank market), and to achieve better ex ante
coordination in the future are also needed. Finally, existing cross-border financial stability
bodies should become more action-oriented. Interlocutors suggested that they were focused
on the redesign of the overall architecture rather than on potential immediate improvements,
leading the staff to express concern about their ability to deal with short-term risks should
they materialize.
22.
The EU’s competition authorities are mindful of preserving a level playing field.
EU institutions issued harmonized guidelines for public interventions in the financial system
to avoid competitive distortions and secure an efficient and orderly exit from such
interventions. Competition authorities are playing an important role in ensuring that
restructuring plans lead to viable institutions. While their actions have yielded useful
revisions to such plans in some important cases, staff felt that at this stage, the trade-off
between speed and efficiency of intervention ought to be in favor of the former, overly tight
deadlines for phasing out interventions ought to be avoided, and cross-border spillovers of
restructuring plans (e.g., in the context of divestiture requirements) duly taken into account.
Staff noted that it would be important to avoid discriminatory attempts to revive credit, with
uncertain consequences for the behavior of foreign branches and subsidiaries.
Overhauling the EU’s Financial Stability Arrangements3
23.
The EU has agreed to an ambitious overhaul of its financial stability
arrangements. This overhaul will seek to address existing shortcomings and the tensions
with the EU’s objective of creating a single financial market that have been exposed by the
global financial crisis (see Selected Issues, Chapter III). Two new cross-border institutions
are to be established:
2
3

See Annex I of the October 2007 ECOFIN Council conclusions

Further information is contained in: Marek Belka’s recent speech; IMF Survey Article on IMF-Bruegel-NBB
conference on the future face of Europe’s financial system; De Larosière Group report; Turner review; Fund
staff op-ed in the FT; European Commission Proposal; June 9, 2009 ECOFIN Conclusions; and June 18-19,
2009 European Council Conclusions.

14
•

a European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS), bringing together the national
supervisors with three independent supranational European Supervisory Authorities
(ESAs)4 accountable to the EU institutions. The ESAs will be mandated to establish a
single rulebook, ensure consistent supervisory practices, centralize relevant
microprudential data in a single European database, ensure the consistent application
of EU rules, mediate and settle disputes among national supervisors, and directly
supervise rating agencies. National supervisors, organized in colleges for cross-border
institutions, will continue to conduct day-to-day supervision in all other cases.

•

a European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), organizationally linked to the
ECB/ESCB5, to bridge the gap between macro- and micro-prudential oversight. The
ESRB will comprise the Governors of the ESCB, the heads of the ESAs, and a
representative of the EC, with supervisors and the president of the EFC participating
as observers. Supervisors will also constitute an advisory body. A Steering Committee
will seek to ensure the smooth functioning of the ESRB.

Framework Directives will allow the ESAs to set binding harmonized technical standards in
certain areas. These would come into effect, subject to endorsement by the EC, from a fixed
date.6 The EC has proposed efficient decision-making mechanisms for the ESAs and ESRB,
based on qualified majority and majority voting respectively.
24.
The staff and authorities agree that this overhaul should be executed on an
ambitious time table. The staff strongly supported the overhaul, which was under discussion
at the time of the mission. It emphasized that it will be essential to secure adequate resources
and effective decision-making mechanisms for the new bodies; achieve unrestricted flows of
information among supervisors and central banks within the new structures; and establish
efficient rule-making mechanisms to create and maintain a single rulebook. The staff and the
EC agreed that the ESAs should have binding powers to mediate and settle conflicts between
supervisors in the course of the regular exercise of supervisory duties, a position opposed by
some member states who see this impinging on fiscal sovereignty. The staff argued that
central banks should play a strong leadership role in the ESRB, which will need to use its
broad mandate to provide early warnings of a build-up of systemic risk and recommend
corrective action. The authorities plan to enact the necessary legislation by the end of 2009,
with a view to establishing the new structure in the course of 2010.

4

The European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
(EIOPA), and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).

5

6

European System of Central Banks.

Under the Lamfalussy structure, the Level 3 Committees only had an advisory role in rule-making, which
remained the purview of the European Commission and European Parliament.

15
25.
Fundamental progress on crisis resolution is also needed. In parallel to the
supervisory overhaul, the EU is planning to accelerate the establishment of a comprehensive
cross-border crisis management framework. The staff emphasized the importance of
addressing the “too big to save” and “too big to fail” problems. Hence, the new framework
should comprise tools for early intervention, a special regime to deal cost-efficiently with
failing institutions outside regular bankruptcy proceedings, clear loss-allocation rules that
apply losses to shareholders and unsecured creditors, and a private first-line funding
mechanism for resolution efforts. While a fiscal backstop will be needed, such a framework
should seek to reduce the dependence of the financial system on contingent fiscal support,
thus facilitating agreement on a “burden sharing” mechanism.
26.
The mission pointed out that the supervisory overhaul would address some of
the challenges facing countries with banking systems dominated by foreign ownership,
especially the NMS. In particular, the integrated system of supervisors could help to further
improve the quality of supervision in the region. The ESRB could reduce the likelihood of an
unsustainable buildup of risk in countries with a large foreign bank presence, if it paid
sufficient attention to systemic risks in individual countries, and if it effectively managed to
coordinate a response by supervisors and other relevant authorities. The proposed ESFS and
the colleges of supervisors should result in better home-host cooperation and more effective
supervision of cross-border risks, and give more voice to host-countries, such as the NMS.
B. Monetary Policy in Uncharted Territory
27.
The euro area is facing strong disinflationary pressures, with inflation widely
projected to remain significantly below 2 percent in 2009–2010. Mainly due to base
4.5

4.5

Euro Area: HICP Inflation
(Year-on-year, percent)

4.0

Forecast
4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

HICP excluding, food, alcohol, and tobacco
HICP

0.5

0.5

± 1 S.D.

Sources: Eurostat and IMF staff estimates.

2011M1

2010M7

2010M10

2010M4

2010M1

2009M7

2009M10

2009M4

2009M1

2008M10

2008M7

2008M4

2008M1

2007M10

2007M7

2007M4

2007M1

2006M7

2006M10

2006M4

2006M1

2005M7

2005M10

2005M4

2005M1

2004M7

-0.5
2004M10

-0.5
2004M4

0.0

2004M1

0.0

16
effects from the sharp fall of commodity prices, but also as a result of the significant
weakening in economic activity, headline inflation has declined steeply to zero percent in
May 2009 from its peak of 4 percent in mid-2008. Core inflation excluding energy, food
alcohol and tobacco eased
by less, declining to an
Inflation is Projected Significantly Below 2 Percent in 2009–2010
average of 1.6 percent, after
Vintage
2008
2009
2010
hovering around 1.9 percent
Projections
during 2007–2008
April
3.3
0.4
0.6
WEO
(Figure 8). Staff projections
3.3
0.2
0.7
WEO
July update
3.3
0.1-0.5
0.6-1.4
ECB
June
for 2009 are similar to the
3.3
EC
May
0.4
1.2
EC and ECB staff
Consensus
May
3.3
0.4
1.2
Sources: EC, ECB, and IMF.
projections and all agreed
that headline inflation could
be temporarily negative around mid-2009 due to base effects from commodity prices. There
was also agreement that inflation will remain significantly below 2 percent in 2010, although
both the EC and the ECB project somewhat higher inflation than staff, because of higher
anticipated unit labor costs (ULCs). Staff acknowledged that ULCs have accelerated in 2008,
but noted that this was largely owing to past tight labor markets, while more recently the
increase was because of downward adjustment of hours worked in response to weakening
demand. Staff also pointed out that growth of some labor cost measures has declined in
2008Q4 and reasoned that on the back of large and increasing output gaps and deteriorating
labor markets it is likely for the ULCs to decline appreciably over the near term.
28.
The ECB viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly balanced, while the
staff saw a small risk of sustained deflation. Staff pointed out that the large output gaps
and growing unemployment would eventually increase downward pressure on prices and
noted that the key source of the tail risk of deflation lies in a possible deeper than-envisaged
decline in economic activity stemming from an adverse feedback loop between the financial
and real sectors. The ECB representatives argued, however, that a number of factors mitigate
deflation risks. First, they noted that the sticky wages and prices in the services sector will
cushion downward pressure on prices, despite the large projected output gaps, and pointed
that the recent wage increases were not set based on deflation scenarios. Second, they
maintained that the effect of the monetary policy easing already in the pipeline is expected to
gather pace, as monetary transmission, although impaired somewhat, seems to remain
functional, a view shared by staff (Box 3 and Selected Issues, Chapter I). Finally, they
highlighted that the ECB has expanded its balance sheet significantly by implementing large
passive unconventional measures, which have helped the transmission and resulted in
effective interest rates at longer maturities (important benchmarks for market rates in the euro
area) that are comparable to those of other major central banks (Figure 5).

17
Box 3. Has the Financial Crisis Impaired Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area?
In the face of an unprecedented financial crisis, the ECB has eased monetary policy significantly
since October 2008, bringing its policy rate down (by 325 basis points) to 1 percent. The cost of
credit to both businesses and households also declined, but by much less, as credit spreads
initially increased and eased only recently. These developments, as well as the tightening of
credit standards, raise the question of whether the effectiveness of monetary policy has been
reduced during the recent financial crisis.
The effectiveness of monetary policy and the role of expectations are analyzed using a set of
bivariate vector autoregression (VAR) models comprising the EONIA and various market rates
and a general equilibrium theory-based framework. The results suggest that the traditional
transmission channels (interest rate, bank lending, and broad credit) have continued to operate,
but at a lower efficiency. During the crisis, the transmission slowed down (the lags have become
longer), the policy reaction needed to stabilize the economy became stronger, and the
transmission subject to more noise. Also, inflation expectations, while remaining broadly stable,
declined significantly in the last quarter of 2008, reflecting the major deterioration in economic
activity.
The VAR impulse responses show that policy rate changes have been transmitted to market
rates, although the degree and the
Euro Area: Pass-through of ECB Policy Rate to Market Rates
speed of pass-through varies (first
figure). The impact on the threemonth euro interbank offered rate
(Euribor) is close to one-for-one,
and the speed of adjustment high,
with the maximum impact
transmitted within a month. The
initial impact on corporate bond
yields and new loans to
nonfinancial corporations is
similarly quick, although the full
adjustment is more protracted and
the impact on higher-grade bond
yields is smaller than on lower-grade bond yields (0.6 to 0.7 percentage point for AA- and
AAA-rated bonds versus 1.2 percentage points for BBB-rated bonds). The pass-through of the
policy rates to loans for house purchases is somewhat smaller and the speed of adjustment
lower.
(Response to non-factorized one unit innovations)

1.5

1.5

3-month Euribor

AAA-rated bond yields
BBB-rated bond yields

1.3

1.3

New loans for house purchase, above 10 years

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.5

0.5

0.3

0.3

0.0

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Sources: ECB, Haver, and IMF staff estimates.

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

18
The VAR results suggest that the
pass-through to all market rates
has slowed since the crisis
(second figure). In particular,
impulse responses from the first
difference bi-variate VARs
imply that the time for the full
adjustment of market rates has
increased to over 12 months,
from between 3 months and 6
months before the crisis.
The transmission to lower grade
corporate bonds seems to have
been particularly negatively
affected, following the crisis—
the initial response of the BBBrated corporate bond yields has
switched from positive before
the crisis to negative thereafter.

Euro Area: The Impact of Crisis on Policy Rate Pass-through
(VARs in first Difference, Response to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations)
0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05

3-month Euribor

0.00
1

3

0.10

5

7

1
0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

Pre-crisis

0.10

-0.05

9 11 13 15 17 19

BBB-rated Bond Yields

-0.05

AAA-rated Bond Yields

0.06

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19

New Loans for House Purchases
(Over 10 years)

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

-0.05

Post-crisis
-0.10

-0.10
1

3

5

7

0.00

0.00
1

9 11 13 15 17 19

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19

Source: IMF staff estimates.

Impulse responses from the theory-based model support the results from the VARs that after the
crisis the overall transmission has slowed. For both supply and demand shocks, the policy
reaction needed to stabilize the
Euro Area: Effectiveness of Monetary Policy
(Pre- and Post- Crisis, in basis points)
economy is somewhat stronger,
with the time needed for the
policy feedback to pass through
rising to about 2½ years, from
about 1½ year before the crisis
(third figure, first column).
Similarly, the time for a full
transmission of monetary policy
shocks to inflation has increased
after the crisis to close to three
years, from about two years
before the crisis (third figure,
upper right panel). Compared
with the findings from the VAR,
these results suggests that not
only the first stage of the
Source: IMF staff estimates.
transmission, the pass-through
to market rates, but also the overall working of the transmission mechanism seems to have
become less effective after the crisis.
0.20
0.15

Demand shock: respon se of policy rates
(25 basis points increase in output gap)

0.10

0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.20

Monetary po licy shock: response of inflatio n
(25 basis points increase in policy rates)

0.10

0.15
0.10

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05

-0.05

Supp ly shock: response of policy rates
(25 basis points increase in inflation)

0.15

1

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40

0.20

0.00

-0.05

4

0.05
0.03

0.05

Mone tary policy shock: response of output
(25 basis points increase in policy rat es)

-0.05

1 4

7 10 13 16 19 22 2 5 28 31 34 37 40

0.03

0.01

0.01

-0.01

-0.01

-0.03

-0.03

-0.05

Post-crisis

-0.05

-0.07

Pre-crisis

-0.07

0.00

-0.05

7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40

-0.09

-0.09

1

4

7 10 13 1 6 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40

29.
The ECB’s actions have been helpful in cushioning the impact of the financial
crisis. The ECB initially focused on lengthening the term funding of its liquidity provision.
Since October 2008 the ECB widened its collateral requirements to avoid them becoming a
funding constraint and stepped up further liquidity operations by providing unlimited term
funding at fixed rates, which seems to have eliminated liquidity premia (Figure 9). It also cut

19
interest rates by a cumulative 325 basis points to an all-time low of 1 percent (Figure 10).
Recently the ECB extended the maturity of its refinancing operations to 12 months and
engaged in purchases of covered bonds—a credit market segment particularly hard hit by the
financial crisis. The first 12 month operation conducted on June 24, 2009 attracted
widespread interest with 1121 banks participating and provided euro 442 billion in
refinancing. There was agreement that these measures helped anchor inflation expectations
and improved monetary transmission. As a result, the reduction in the policy rate has been
transmitted to market rates, thereby easing financial conditions—though they remain tight.
ECB staff felt that the deceleration of credit growth to private sector (Figure 11), did not
contain conclusive evidence of supply constraints. Nevertheless, they agreed that the
tightening of lending standards due to banks’ funding conditions suggested that supply
factors might play an increasing role (Figure 12).
30.
There was agreement that the supportive monetary policy stance needed to be
maintained, while keeping in mind both downside risks and exit strategies. Staff argued
for keeping interest rates low by continuing to provide unlimited term funding at fixed rates
as long as strong disinflationary pressures persist. While the benefits of further cuts in the
policy rate have to be assessed against the possible adverse effects on the functioning of
money markets, staff felt that any further room to reduce rates ought to be utilized as soon as
possible. If downside risks were to intensify, a more forceful signal to keep interest rates low
would be necessary. Furthermore, staff suggested that to deal with contingencies, all
unconventional options, including active credit easing needed to be considered. The ECB
representatives—while not suggesting that the current level of 1 percent should be considered
a floor—pointed out that room for further rate cuts was limited as it would inevitably
compress the margin with the deposit rate. The experience with a narrower corridor at end2008 had shown that it was likely to hamper the functioning of the interbank market. The
ECB also stressed that announcing a floor to the policy rate or pre-committing to keep
interest rates low could be counterproductive, as it could create market distortions. On exit
strategies, the ECB emphasized that by design, exit from the unconventional measures would
be relatively straightforward. It also noted that, if liquidity needed to be mopped up, the ECB
could issue its own paper or offer additional short-term deposit facilities. Staff flagged the
potential high costs, if large absorption measures prove necessary, but agreed with the ECB
that exit from several unconventional measures would be triggered automatically as their
conditions become unattractive when the market returns to normal.
C. Fiscal Policy: Mitigating the Downturn while Ensuring Sustainability
31.
In response to the deepening financial crisis, governments are extensively using
public balance sheets to shore up the financial system. Governments in Europe have
committed large resources to guarantee, recapitalize, and resolve financial institutions, as

20
well as support certain asset markets.7 Altogether, the immediate impact of these support
measures on government financing reaches 6.3 percent of GDP on average. Explicit
guarantees provided so far are also quite large, especially in Ireland. Nevertheless, the costs
are likely to be smaller. For European advanced economies, indicative estimates based on
financial derivative pricing models suggest that outlays from contingent liabilities could
average around 2–5 percent of GDP, cumulative for 2009–13.8
Headline Support for the Financial Sector and Upfront Financing Need
(As of April 15, 2009; percent of 2008 GDP)
Capital
Injection

Purchase of
Assets and
Lending by
Treasury

(A)

(B)

Central Bank
Support
Provided with
Treasury
Backing
(C)

Guarantees
1/

Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

5.3
4.7
1.2
3.8
2.1
5.3
1.3
3.4
2.0
2.4
0.0
2.1
1.1
3.9

0.0
0.0
1.3
0.4
3.3
0.0
0.0
2.8
15.8
0.0
4.6
5.3
0.0
13.8

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.9

30.0
26.2
16.4
18.0
6.2
257.0
0.0
33.7
0.0
12.0
18.3
47.3
0.0
51.2

Average 6/

2.5

3.7

2.1

25.0

(D)

Up-front
Government
Financing
2/
(E)
5.3
4.7
1.5 3/
3.7
5.4
5.3
1.3
6.2
15.8
2.4
4.6
5.8 4/
1.1
20.2 5/
6.3

Sources: IMF, Update on Fiscal Stimulus and Financial Sector Measures (published April 26, 2009).
http://www.imf.org/external/np/fad/2009/042609.htm)
1/ Excludes deposit insurance provided by deposit insurance agencies.
2/ Includes components of (A), (B), and (C) that require up-front government outlays.
3/ Support to the country's strategic companies is recorded under (B), of which 14bn euro will be
financed by a state-owned bank, not requiring upfront Treasury financing.
4/ Part of the capital injection will be undertaken by the Stabilization Fund.
5/ Cost to nationalize Northern Rock and Bradford & Bingley recorded under (B), entailing no up-front financing.
6/ PPP GDP weights.

32.
With more time needed to repair the financial system and a slow recovery ahead,
there is broad agreement that fiscal policy has to continue to support economic activity
into 2010. Most euro area countries are providing stimulus packages to counter the downturn
and safeguard jobs. Although the discretionary fiscal impulse is estimated to turn negative in
7

Almost all countries have provided capital injections and guarantees for financial sector liabilities. Some have
purchased illiquid assets from financial institutions or extended direct loans. In several countries central banks
have also extended assistance to financial institutions through credit lines, purchase of assets, asset swap, and
liquidity provisions without direct treasury funding. While such operations do not require upfront treasury
funding, they could eventually generate fiscal costs.

8

These estimates are obtained by applying the expected default frequency implied credit default swap spreads—
which are indicators of the “insurance” premium for providing the guarantee—to the guaranteed amounts.

21
2010 the functioning and magnitude of
automatic stabilizers also need to be taken
into account to fully assess the role of
fiscal policy in cushioning the downturn.
Indeed, in most euro area economies, the
estimated effect of automatic stabilizers is
expected to increase significantly in 2009
and continue to operate in 2010. Given the
large automatic stabilizers, the
discretionary measures currently adopted
are deemed broadly appropriate, while
additional stimulus should be readied for
further contingencies—in case the euroarea economy were to take a significant
turn for the worse—and if accompanied by
actual measures to secure sustainability.

Euro Area Economies:
Estimated Cost of Discretionary Measures,
2008–10 1/
(Percent of GDP, relative to 2007 baseline)
2008

2009

2010

Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Luxemburg
Malta
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain

0.3
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
1.9

1.5
0.8
1.7
1.7
0.7
1.6
0.1
0.0
0.2
3.7
0.6
0.8
1.0
2.3

1.7
0.4
0.0
0.5
0.8
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
3.6
0.4
0.7
0.0
0.3

Average 2/
Discretionary impulse 3/

0.3
0.3

1.1
0.8

0.9
-0.2

33.
The composition of the fiscal
Source: IMF staff estimates.
stimulus is seen to be as critical as its
1/ Figures reflect the budgetary cost of crisis-related
size, and coordination is essential. The
discretionary measures in each year compared with 2007,
key is to ensure that fiscal initiatives boost based on measures announced through early March 2009.
They do not include (i) "below-the-line" operations that involve
activity over the relevant time frame, while acquisition of assets, (ii) discretionary measures that were
already planned for, (iii) automatic stabilizers. Some figures
seeking lasting benefits to productive
reflect staff's preliminary analysis.
capacity. The length and severity of the
2/ PPP-GDP weighted. The average does not include
Slovenia and the Slovak Republic.
downturn justify greater weight on public
3/ Change from previous year.
investment in projects that typically have
long lags but bring substantial longer-term
benefits. Tax cuts, on the contrary, could be implemented quickly, but are likely to have a
more modest growth impact. In a tightly integrated region such as the euro area, the benefits
of fiscal expansion are likely to spill across borders while costs—namely increasing debt
levels and potentially higher interest expenditure—amass locally. A simultaneous area-wide
stimulus magnifies the growth effect of a stimulus in each single country. Tailoring
discretionary fiscal efforts to country circumstances is also beneficial, with more action by
countries with better starting positions in terms of debt and deficits, more robust financial
systems, and more credible consolidation frameworks. The staff emphasized that in the
context of the ongoing mid-term review of EU budgetary policies, some fine tuning along
these lines would be helpful.
34.
While the use of public resources to shore up the financial system and cushion
the downturn is necessary, it also implies a significant deterioration in the fiscal
position of euro area economies. Deficits are set to increase from 0.6 percent of GDP in
2007 to 6.9 percent by 2010, while public liabilities are projected to stock up substantially
over the period (Figure 13). Financial markets seem to have responded to these

22
developments by requiring
higher sovereign default risk
premia for most countries,
and differentiating across
sovereign issuers much more
than before. While global
developments play a role in
the recent increase in euro
area sovereign interest rate
differentials, countryspecific factors—in
particular rapidly rising
projected debt levels and
concerns about the solvency
of national banking systems
and their budgetary
consequences—are
becoming increasingly
important.9

Selected Euro Area Sovereign Spreads
(Yields on 10-year government bonds over Bunds, in basis points)
350

350
Austria
Belgium

300

Finland
France

300

Greece
Ireland
Italy
250

Netherlands
Portugal

250

Spain

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0
Jun-08 Jul-08 Aug-08 Sep-08 Oct-08 Nov-08 Dec-08 Jan-09 Feb-09 Mar-09 Apr-09 May-09

0

35.
To address solvency
Source: Datastream.
concerns, short-term
actions need to be embedded in credible medium-term consolidation programs—
supported by the application of the SGP. The EC underscored that the SGP had
demonstrated sufficient flexibility to allow fiscal policy to support the economy, and would
need to play a key role in anchoring fiscal adjustment, once the crisis abates. The ECB
strongly endorsed this position, reiterating its view that to ensure trust in the sustainability of
public finances, an ambitious and credible adjustment effort will be required. While there
was general agreement that fiscal adjustment would need to be swift, tailored to individual
country circumstances, and duly take into account the starting level of debt and the
prospective cost of aging, the staff’s suggestion to pre-announce the plans for fiscal
adjustment to reduce uncertainty received less unanimous support. Staff felt that the concerns
about the possible negative short-run impact of entitlement reforms are overstated, as—for
example—raising the retirement age with life expectancy or well-designed health care
reforms need not necessarily lower aggregate demand
36.
Various options were discussed to enhance the anchoring role of the preventive
arm of the SGP. Under the current framework, countries are required to steer fiscal policy in
line with medium-term objectives (MTOs)—the so-called preventive arm. Nevertheless, the

9

See Silvia Sgherri and Edda Zoli, “Sovereign Risks in the Euro Area” IMF Working Paper (forthcoming).

23
SGP has so far failed to provide sufficiently strong reasons for EU members to adhere to their
targets. What could be done?
•

Encourage reforms putting national institutions and rules in tune with the SGP. In
particular, MTOs could be better integrated into medium-term fiscal frameworks at
the national level, providing the SGP with a suitable institutional interface in each
country. The EC noted such governance reforms are being emphasized in its
surveillance exercises, but peer pressure on member states would need to be stepped
up.

•

Strengthen the preventive arm. One possibility would be to link the EDP and the
MTOs, for instance by keeping the EDP in force until the MTO has been reached.
Alternatively, MTOs could be treated as the reference value under the EDP for those
countries deemed to have unsatisfactory debt dynamics. Since both options require an
amendment to the EU Treaty, the authorities felt that the benefits do not outweigh the
costs of reopening the treaty, at least not for now.

•

Enhance the commitment value of MTOs. Staff felt that the process leading to the
definition of MTOs was opaque, reducing their public visibility and, correspondingly,
their signaling value and political relevance. The intent by the EC to link the MTOs
explicitly to the level of debt and the cost of aging is a promising avenue, which
would help put the MTOs at the core of EU budgetary surveillance and, more
generally, public scrutiny.
D. Trade, Regional, Other Structural Issues, and Statistics

37.
EU officials were strongly aware of the importance of countering protectionist
pressures from the crisis. Staff emphasized two key challenges in this respect. First,
governments should forego any scope within their WTO commitments to raise barriers or
favor domestic industries. EC representatives broadly concurred, confirming that the EU is
fully committed to the renewed pledge by G20 Leaders in their April Summit in London, and
to ensuring that crisis measures taken across the world are no threat to open markets. Second,
it was important to conclude an ambitious Doha Round agreement in order to tighten
commitments and bring about new trade opportunities. While the EU trade regime overall
remains very open, the reintroduction of dairy export subsidies has adverse economic effects
for the EU and for its partners, and could complicate rather than facilitate a Doha agreement.
38.
Staff welcomed the authorities’ efforts to further support trade-related
development. Especially since the outbreak of the crisis, the EU has been working to push on
trade facilitation to help developing countries in a number of ways. Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreements have either already been concluded or will be concluded
with all African, Caribbean, and Pacific countries by the end of 2009 or in early 2010.
Progress has also been made in the implementation of the reformed Generalized System of
Preferences (GSP) for developing countries. The review of Rules of Origin (RoO) under

24
reformed GSP, announced last November, was an important step forward. In this aspect, staff
encouraged liberal RoO that also promote South-South trade. Finally, staff welcomed that the
EU (including its member states) is the largest contributor to Aid for Trade initiatives
(committing more than EUR 7 billion per year) and encouraged the EU to build on this
record given the added importance in present global economic circumstances.
39.
The EU authorities have provided support to countries hit hard by the crisis,
though the staff felt that the EU’s approach could be strengthened. Several NMS have
undertaken adjustment programs supported by financial assistance from the IMF and other
bilateral and multilateral sources. In this context, the EU increased its balance of payment
facility for non-euro area EU members to EUR 50 billion from EUR 12 billion to be able to
cover a sizeable share of their financing needs and the ECB established repurchase
arrangements with some NMS. Disbursement of structural, cohesion, and globalization funds,
of which NMS are the main beneficiaries, is being accelerated. While welcoming these
initiatives, the staff noted the merits of a more preemptive approach and underscored that
with the crisis more deeper and protracted than envisaged further assistance and full
coordination of financial crisis measures would be essential. Furthermore, plans to deal with
adverse contingencies would have to be put in place.
40.
Structural reform efforts are being adjusted to boost the EU’s recovery
potential, in the context of the European Economic Recovery Plan.10 The crisis has
curbed potential growth, jeopardized fiscal consolidation, and reduced external financing,
requiring a narrowing of external imbalances and a reallocation of resources from nontraded
to traded sectors, especially in countries facing financing constraints. In recognition of the
need to boost potential growth, promote a solid recovery, and address fiscal sustainability
concerns, the EU’s efforts to address the crisis include a structural reform dimension.
However, it also includes a set of demand support measures such as higher and longer
unemployment and social benefits and subsidies for reduced working time. It was agreed that
these measures would need to reversed to prevent lasting damage to potential growth. In this
context, staff emphasized that it will be essential to focus on training and education, pension
and health care reform, and building productivity-enhancing infrastructure with a regional
dimension.
41.
While recent labor market reforms have paid off, the crisis is expected to put
their effectiveness to a severe test. Reforms had brought the EU within reach of the Lisbon
employment rate target (of 70 percent), though the recent crisis constitutes a setback. The
expected sharp rise in unemployment is likely to place an additional burden on public
finances. At the same time, the duality of the labor market created by having different
employment protection regimes for permanent and fixed-term contracts implies that the latter
will bear the burden of the crisis, with possible strains on cohesion and reversal of migration.
10

The European Economic Recovery Plan.

25
EC representatives felt that the fiscal burden of the flexicurity model would be modest as
spending on active labor market policies had not increased much. They were more concerned
about the risk that resolving the labor market duality would lead to an increase in overall
employment protection with negative consequences on potential growth.
42.
The Lisbon process, which especially since its re-launch in 2005 has contributed
to reforms, will need to be reinvigorated to sustain progress (Figure 14).11 There is
evidence that it has helped where it was needed most, with countries in worse starting
positions implementing more reforms. Reforms in the euro area have been somewhat stronger
than elsewhere, which is indeed needed for the smooth functioning of the monetary union. In
contrast, reform momentum in NMS has been slower, after an initial period of rapid progress.
However, there was agreement that the Lisbon process had to be made more effective by
adjusting goals and indicators in the context of renewing the process in 2010, possibly
making more use of rankings, and establishing better accountability at the national level.
43.
Preparation for the creation of a single internal market in services is entering a
crucial phase. Countries are expected to ensure the comprehensive transposition of the
services directive into national law by December 28, 2009.12 With services constituting
almost three-fourths of economic activity, effective implementation would deliver tangible
benefits, especially to the battered consumer, and counterbalance inward-looking tendencies.
Inter alia, adopting the services directive would do away with a considerable number of
administrative and regulatory barriers. The pace of preparation will, however, need to be
stepped up in several countries.
44.
While euro area statistics permit effective macroeconomic surveillance, the
financial crisis has exposed new needs (Appendix 1). The staff welcomed the ongoing and
planned improvements in the quality, scope, and timeliness of data provision. The addition of
house price and service sector statistics and the move to a 30-60-90 day system for GDP,
main aggregates, and sectoral and financial accounts are noteworthy. The staff encouraged
the authorities to continue their efforts to improve the availability of data to monitor financial
developments and risks and to provide an efficient and effective information basis for the
ESRB.

11

EU website on the Lisbon strategy.

12

EU website on the services directive.

26
Figure 1. Euro Area: Leading Indicators
66

12

PMI Manufacturing and Industrial Production

9

58

6

54

3

50

0

46

-3

42

-6

38

-9
-12

Output
New orders

30

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-3

26

-18

22

-21

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

6

60

4

55

2

50

0

45

-2

40

-4
PMI Manufacturing
PMI Services
GDP growth (right scale)

30

25
2004Q3

-3

-4

62

62
PMI: Employment

65

2002Q2

-2

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
8

2000Q1

Belgian BNB business indicator

-4

PMI and Output

35

German IFO business indicator
French INSEE business indicator

-15

Industrial production (right scale)

70

4
National Leading Indicators

62

34

4

2006Q4

-6

58

58

54

54

50

50

46

46

42

42

38

Manufacturing employment

38

Services employment

-8

34

34

-10

30

30

2009Q1

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Sources: Eurostat; Reuters; IFO; INSEE; National Bank of Belgium; and staff calculations.

27
Figure 2. Euro Area Financial Indicators: Corporate Bond Rates and Equities
(Yields in percent, spreads in basis points)

10
IBOXX Euro Corporates
IBOXX Euro Corporates
IBOXX Euro Corporates
IBOXX Euro Corporates
IBOXX Euro Corporates

9
8
7

10

Selected IBoxx Yields
A Rated All Maturities
AA Rated All Maturities
AAA R ated All Maturities
All Maturities
BBB R ated All Maturities

9
8
7

6/1/09

5/1/09

4/1/09

3/1/09

2/1/09

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

9/1/08

10/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

1/1/08

12/1/07

11/1/07

10/1/07

2/1/07

9/1/07

3
8/1/07

3
7/1/07

4

6/1/07

4

5/1/07

5

4/1/07

5

3/1/07

6

1/1/07

6

700

700
Selected IBoxx Spreads 1/

600

600

A rated; all maturities
AA rated, all maturities
AAA rated; all maturities
All maturities
BBB rated; all maturities

500
400

500
400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

120

6/1/09

5/1/09

4/1/09

3/1/09

2/1/09

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

10/1/08

9/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

1/1/08

12/1/07

11/1/07

10/1/07

9/1/07

8/1/07

7/1/07

6/1/07

5/1/07

4/1/07

2/1/07
3/1/07

1/1/07

0

90

Stock Prices

110

80

100

70

90

60

80

50

Euro Stoxx 50, Index, Jan. 1, 2007=100
Impl. volatility (in percent, right scale)

70

40

Sources: DataStream; and Bloomberg.
1/ IBoxx corporate bond rates over German benchmark bond yields.

6/1/09

5/1/09

4/1/09

3/1/09

2/1/09

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

10/1/08

9/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

1/1/08

12/1/07

11/1/07

10/1/07

9/1/07

8/1/07

7/1/07

6/1/07

10
5/1/07

40
4/1/07

20

3/1/07

50

2/1/07

30

1/1/07

60

Sources: DataStream; Bloomberg; and CitiBank.
6/1/09

5/1/09

6/1/09

5/1/09

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

10/1/08

9/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

4/1/09

0
4/1/09

100

3/1/09

200
3/1/09

UBS
Deutsche bank
BNP Paribas
Banco Santander
Citigroup
Unicredit
2/1/09

Credit Default Swaps 5-Year Spreads

2/1/09

700

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

10/1/08

9/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

350

1/1/08

12/1/07

11/1/07

6/1/09

5/1/09

4/1/09

3/1/09

2/1/09

1/1/09

12/1/08

11/1/08

10/1/08

9/1/08

8/1/08

7/1/08

6/1/08

5/1/08

4/1/08

3/1/08

2/1/08

1/1/08

12/1/07

11/1/07

10/1/07

9/1/07

8/1/07

7/1/07

6/1/07

5/1/07

4/1/07

2/1/07
3/1/07

1/1/07

500

1/1/08

12/1/07

600

11/1/07

10/1/07

250

9/1/07

8/1/07

300

10/1/07

300
7/1/07

6/1/07

5/1/07

4/1/07

2/1/07
3/1/07

1/1/07

400

9/1/07

400

8/1/07

500

7/1/07

6/1/07

5/1/07

4/1/07

3/1/07

2/1/07

1/1/07

28

Figure 3. Euro Area Financial Indicators: Credit Markets

600

iTraxx CDS Europe Index
(Basis points)
600

Main
HiVol
500

400

300
300

200
200

100
100

0
0

400

iTraxx CDS Europe Index
(Basis points)
400

350

Financial
Nonfinancial
300

250

200
200

150
150

100
100

50
50

0
0

29
Figure 4. Financial Indicators in New Member States
200

200

Stock Markets

270

Central Eastern European Countries
240
160

270
Southeastern European and Baltic Countries

160

Estonia

240

Latvia
210

Lithuania

210

Bulgaria
180
120

Romania

180

120

80

150

150

120

120

90

90

60

60

30

30

80

40

40
Czech Rep.

Hungary

Poland

Slovak Rep.

0
0
Jan-06 Aug-06 Apr-07 Nov-07 Jul-08 Mar-09

0
0
Jan-06 Aug-06 Apr-07 Nov-07 Jul-08 Mar-09

Euro EMBI Spreads
600

600

Southeastern European and Baltic Countries
900

500

Czech Rep.
Hungary

500

800

Poland
400

Slovak Rep.

300

700

300

200

100

100

0

Sources: Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations.

Bulgaria
Lithuania
Romania

900
800
700

Latvia

400

200

0
Jan-06 Aug-06 Apr-07 Nov-07 Jul-08 Mar-09

1000

1000

Central Eastern European Countries

600

600

500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0
0
Jan-06 Aug-06 Apr-07 Nov-07 Jul-08 Mar-09

30
Figure 5. Libor/Euribor Rates, Policy Rates and Spread
(Units as indicated)
8

8

8

8

Overnight Libor
(Percent)

Policy Rates
(Percent)

7

7

7

7

6

6

6

6

5

5

5

5

4

4

4

4

3

3

3

3

2

2

1

1

2
United States
Euro area (Euribor)
United Kingdom

1

0

0
Jan-06

Jul-06

Jan-07 Aug-07 Feb-08 Sep-08 Mar-09

2.0
1.8

1.8

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0
Jul-06

Jan-07 Aug-07 Feb-08 Sep-08 Mar-09
400

400
Libor to OIS Spread
(Basis points, 12 month)
350

350

300

300

250

250

200

150

US dollar
Euro area (Euribor to
OIS)
Sterling

100
US Dollar
Euro area (Euribor)

0.2

0.2

Sterling

0.0

0.0
O/N

1W

1M

2M

3M

Source: Bloomberg.

4M

5M

6M

12M

1

0
Jan-06

2.0
Libor Curves
(Percent, as of 6/4/09)

2

United States
Euro area
United Kingdom

50

0
Jan-06 Jul-06 Jan-07 Aug-07 Feb-08 Sep-08 Mar-09

200

150

100

50

0

31
Figure 6. Euro Area: External Developments
The euro has peaked against the US dollar in 2008Q2
and has depreciated since...
100
N et FDI and portfolio
flows (billions of euro, 3quarter moving
average)

80

1.7

0.4

1.6

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

60

1.5

40

1.4

20

1.3

0

1.2

-20

1.1

-40

1.0

Euro-dollar
exchange rate
(right scale)

-60
-80
1999Q4

2002Q1

2004Q2

2006Q3

...with similar movements in effective exchange
rates.

0.1

Euro

0.0

-0.1

-0.1
U.S. dollar

-0.2

-0.3

0.8

-0.4

120

-0.4

1999

2001

110

105

105

100

100

1400

95

90

90
Medium-term equilibrium real
effective exchange rate 1/

85
80

Real effective exchange rate
(CPI; 1993-2006=100)

75
1999

75
2001

2003

2005

2009

1400
1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

Rest of the world 2/

2007

2009

600

400

400
Euro area 3/

200

0

0

-200

-200

-400

-400

-600
80

2007

Current Account Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

200
95

85

2005

115

Real effective exchange rate
(Long-term average, 19932006, ± 1 SD)

110

2003

… while the current account continues
to hover around balance.

1200
115

-0.2

-0.3

The real value of the euro is now on the strong side...
120

0.1

0.0

0.9

2008Q4

0.4

Nominal Effective Exchange Rates
(Log levels, 2002.1=0)

-600

United States

-800

-800

-1000

-1000
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Sources: ECB; Haver Analytics; and IMF, World Economic Outlook.
1/ Staff estimate, based on a time series estimate with stochastic trend, a macroeconomic balance approach,
and an external sustainability assessment.
2/ Rest of the world calculated as residual (excludes global discrepancy).
3/ Excludes intra-area trade (ECB data).

32

Figure 7. Margins of Euro Area Exporters to Main Export Destinations
(Export unit value relative to ULC in manufacturing, 2000=100)
110

110

105

105

105

105

100

100

100

100

110

Extra-area

U.S.

110

95

95

95

95

90

90

90

90

85

85

85

85

80

80

80
2000Q1
110

2001Q4 2003Q3

2005Q2

2007Q1

2008Q4
110

U.K.

2000Q1

80
2001Q4

2003Q3

2005Q2 2007Q1

110

105

105

105

100

100

100

2008Q4
110

Japan

105
100

95

95

95

95

90

90

90

90

85

85

85

85

80

80

80
2000Q1
110

2001Q4 2003Q3

2005Q2

2007Q1

2008Q4
110

Russia

2000Q1

80
2001Q4

2003Q3

2005Q2 2007Q1

110

110

105

105

105

100

100

100

2008Q4

China

105
100

95

95

95

95

90

90

90

90

85

85

85

85

80
2000Q1

2001Q4 2003Q3

2005Q2

2007Q1

110

80
2008Q4
110

2001Q4

2003Q3

2005Q2 2007Q1

110

80
2008Q4
110

ASEAN

OPEC

105

80
2000Q1

105

100

100

105

105
Total exports

100

Manufactured products

100

95

95

95

95

90

90

90

90

85

85

85

85

80
2000Q1

2001Q4 2003Q3

2005Q2

2007Q1

80
2008Q4

80
2000Q1

Sources: Eurostat; OECD; and IMF staff calculations.

2001Q4

2003Q3

2005Q2 2007Q1

80
2008Q4

33
Figure 8. Euro Area: Inflation and Labor Costs, 1999–2009
(Percent, unless otherwise specified)
Headline inflation has declined significantly...
4.5

Inflation
(Year-on-year percent change)

4.0
3.5

...as commodity price have fallen sharply.
4.5

5

4.0

4

3.5

3.0

25

Components Inflation
(Year-on-year percent change)

20
Services (overall index
excluding goods)

3

15

2

10

1

5

0

0

3.0
Headline
HICP

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5
Core HICP 1/

-1

Non-energy
industrial
goods

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

-2

0.0

-3
1999

0.0
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Although some measures of labor costs increased
...

Energy
(right scale)

-5

Food,
alcohol, and
tobacco
(right scale)

-10

-15
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

...measures of underlying inflation have declilned.
6.0

3.5

5.0

3.0

3.0

4.0

2.5

2.5

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

6.0

Labor Costs
(Year-on-year percent change)

5.0

Hourly labor costs

4.0

Compensation
per employee

3.5

Inflation Measures
(Year-on-year percent change)

Unit labor costs
1.0

1.0
Weighted trimmed inflation
Weighted median inflation

0.0
2000Q4

0.0
2002Q4

2004Q4

2006Q4

2008Q4

Sources: Eurostat; ECB; and Haver Analytics.
1/ Excludes energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco.

0.5
1999

0.5
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

34

Figure 9. Euro Area: Recent Developments of the ECB’s Liquidity Operations
90000

400000

6.0

EONI A Volume and ECB Deposit Facility

6.0
EONIA and Policy Rate

80000

350000

5.0

5.0

4.0

4.0

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0

70000

300000

60000
250000
50000
200000
40000
150000

100000

50000

ECB Eurozone
Liquidit y Recourse
to the Deposit
Facility
EONIA volumes
(right scale)

30000
20000

1.0
10000

0
0
01-Jan-08 06-May-08 09-Sep-08 13-Jan-09 19-May-09

900

900
800
700

600

Open Market Operations
(Billions of euros)
Longer-term refinancing
operations
Main (weekly) refinancing
operation

EONIA
Policy rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate

1.0

0.0
0.0
1-Jan-08 6-May-08 9-Sep-08 13-Jan-09 19-May-09

250

250
Euribor-Eonia Swap
(1 year; left scale) 1/

800
200
700

600

150

Liquidity premium 2/
1YR Banks CDS
Premium (left scale)
3/

200

150

500

500
400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

50

50

0

0

100

100

0

0
1-Jan-05 1-Dec-05 1-Nov-06 1-Oct-07 1-Sep-08

-50

-50

01-Jan-07 01-Sep-07 01-May-08 01-Jan-09

Sources: DataStream; and Bloomberg.
1/ Euribor refers to "the best price between the best banks" provided by Euribor panel members.
2/ The liquidity premium is the difference between the Euribor - Eonia Swap spread and the CDS premium.
3/ The one-year banks CDS premium is the average of premia for the "best" five Euribor panel banks out of 24 with
the lowest premium.

35
Figure 10. Euro Area: Monetary Policy and Market Expectations
(Percent, unless otherwise specified)
The ECB lowered rates by 325 bps since
October 2008 to an all time low of 1 percent...

...and markets expect rates to remain low over the near term.

7

7

Policy Rates
6

6

5

5

6.0

6.0

5.5

5.5

5.0

5.0

4.5

4.5

4.0
4

4

3

3

2

2

Actual 3-month EURIBOR

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5
2.0

2.0
Main refinancing rate

1.5

1.5
EONIA swap curve (12/1/08)

1

1

Euro area
United States

0
1999

0
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

1.0

EONIA swap curve (3/30/09)

1.0

0.5

EONIA swap curve (6/1/09)

0.5

0.0
0.0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
… while break-even inflation has recovered from the end2008 lows and is in line with the ECB target.

Analysts' inflation expectations remain anchored...

3.0

3.0

2.8

2.8

2.6

2.6

2.4

2.4

2.2

2.2

2.0

2.0

1.8

1.8

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

10-year break-even
inflation rate

1.0

1.0
0.8

5-year inflation rate
expectations 1/

0.8
0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2
0.0

0.0
2000

2001

2003

2004

2006

2007

2009

4.5

4.5
4.0

Break-Even Inflation Rates

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0
0.5

EU 10-year
US 10-year
UK 10-year

1.0
0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Sources: Bloomberg; Datastream; ECB; Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Survey of Professional Forecasters.

36
Figure 11. Euro Area: Money and Credit, 1980-2009
(Percent, unless otherwise specified)
...and M3 growth continues to decelerate.

Monetary conditions have eased...
4

4
Real interest rate contribution

3

3

Monetary conditions index 1/
2

18

18

16

16

14

14

12

12

10

10

2

1

1

0

0

8

8
M3 growth

-1

-1

-2

-2

6

6

4

4

2
-3

-3

-4
1999

-4
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

-2
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

-2
2009

Loan growth to households is subdued, and that to nonfinancial
corporations, while still high, declined significantly.
0.6

Money Velocity
(Log scale)

16

16
(Year-on-year percent change)

0.5

0.5

0.4

0

0

Trend breaks in money velocity continue, making
inference about inflation difficult.
0.6

2

Real money gap
(right scale) 2/

ECB reference
range

14

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
2

0.0

-0.1
1980Q4

0.0

1987Q4

1994Q4

2001Q4

-0.1
2008Q4

0
-2
2000Q4

2
Loans to households
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchases
Loans to nonfinancial corporations

0
-2

2002Q4

2004Q4

2006Q4

2008Q4

Sources: ECB; Datastream; Bloomberg; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Deviations from 1993–2006 mean.
2/ Based on M3 corrected for the estimated impact of portfolio shifts. Deviation (in percent of the actual real
stock, deflated by HICP) from an estimate of the long-run real stock that would have resulted from constant nominal
M3 growth at its reference value of 4.5 percent and HICP inflation in line with the ECB's definition of price stability,
taking December 1998 as the base period.

37

Figure 12. Euro Area: Changes in Credit Standards to Enterprises and Households,
2005–08
80

80
C hanges in credit standards applied to the approval of loans to or credit lines to enterprises
(net percentages of banks reporting tightening credit standards)

60

60
Realized

40

Expected

Competition
from other
banks

40

20

20

0

0
Costs related to
bank's capital

-20

Expectations
regarding general
economic activity

Industry or firmspecific outlook

-20

-40
2003Q1
2003Q3
2004Q1
2004Q3
2005Q1
2005Q3
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1

-40

65

Changes in credit standards applied to the approval of loans to households for house purchase
(net percentages of banks reporting tightening credit standards)

55
45
35

55
45

Realized
Expected

35

25

25
Competition from
other banks

15
5

15
5

-5
-15

65

Housing market
prospects

Expectations
regarding general
economic activity

Cost of funds
and balance
sheet constraints

-25

-5
-15

2003Q1
2003Q3
2004Q1
2004Q3
2005Q1
2005Q3
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2006Q1
2006Q3
2007Q1
2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1

-25

Source: European Central Bank.

38

Figure 13. Euro Area: Fiscal Developments
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted)
4

4
Overall Balance

5

5
Primary Structural Balance
(Percent of potential GDP)

2

4

0

3

3

-2

2

2

-4

1

1

-6

-6

0

0

-8

-8

-1

-1

-10

-10

-2

-2

-12

-12

-3

-3

-14

-4

2
0

UK
US

Euro

-2
-4

area

Japan

-14
1995 1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

8

4

4
2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

-8

-8

FIN

NLD

DEU

AUT

BEL

ITA

FRA

-14
PRT

-14
ESP

-12
GR E

-10

-12
IRL

-10

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5
Dec. 2007

Dec. 2006

-1.5
Dec. 2008

-2.5
-3.0
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1997

2001

2005

2009
90

General Government Debt
(Percent of GDP)

85

85

80

80

75

75

70

70

65

65
60

60
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

9

9
8

Contributions to Projected Changes in Headline
Deficit

8

7

(Changes from 2007)

7

6
5

Discretionary and pre-existing measures
Automatic stabilizers

6
5

4

4

3

3

2

2

-2.5

1

1

-3.0

0

-2.0

Dec. 2005

1993

-1.0
-1.5

-2.0

1989

90

1999
1.0

Structural Balance Targets in Stability Programs
(Percent of potential GDP)

-1.0

1985

6

2

0.5

-4
1981

8
Structural Balance, 2008 estimates
(Percent of potential GDP)

6

4

0
2008

2009

2010

Sources: European Commission; IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF staff calculations.

39

Figure 14. European Union: Labor Markets and Structural Reform
…interrupting a trend rise in employment.

Unemployment is set to increase...
78

12
Unemployment R ate
(Percent of total labor force)

11

Employment Rate and Labor Force Participation
Rate
(Percent of total population)

74
70
66

10

62
Employment/population ratio

58

9

Employment/working age
population ratio

54
8

50
Unemployment rate

7

46
42
38

6
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2000

2010

Unemployment Rate
(2008 Q4)

10
8
6
4
2
Spain
Latvia
Slovakia
France
Croatia
Ireland
Lithuania
Hungary
Portugal
Greece
Estonia
Germany
Belgium
Italy
Poland
Sweden
Finland
UK
Malta
Romania
Luxembourg
Bulgaria
Czech
Slovenia
Austria
Cyprus
Denmark
Netherlands

0

120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Lisbon target

… but also more broadly, including tax-benefit
systems.

2.3

GRC

1.9
1.7
SVK

1.5

LUX

ITA BEL
HUN

1.3

CZE
FRA

IRL

1.1

PRT AUT
DEU

ESP

SWE
DNK

FIN

0.9

GBR

NLD

Employment and Economic Freedom

8.3
(index of economic freedom)

POL

2.1
(index of PMR)

8.5

Product Market Regulation and Employment Rate

2.5

2008

Employment Rate in 2008 Q3
(Percent of working age population)

..especially in product markets, ...
2.7

2006

Denmark
Netherlands
Sweden
Austria
UK
Cyprus
Finland
Estonia
Portugal
Germany
Latvia
Slovenia
Ireland
Czech
Lithuania
Bulgaria
France
Spain
Luxembourg
Romania
Greece
Slovakia
Belgium
Poland
Italy
Hungary
Malta

16
12

2004

…further reforms are needed to meet targets, ...

Countries are affected differently, ...
14

2002

GBR
EST
DNK
FIN
AUT
SVK
N LD
LUX DEU
HUN LTU
ESP
CYP
SW E
LVA
ITA
FRA
PRT
BEL
GRC
CZE
BGR
POL
ROM

8.1

IRL

7.9
7.7
7.5
7.3
7.1
6.9
6.7
6.5

0.7

SVN

6.3
55

60

65

70

75

Employment in percent of active population

80

55

60
65
70
75
Employment in percent of active population

Sources: OECD; Eurostat; Fraser Institute; Haver; and IMF staff calculations.

80

40

Table 1. Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2005–10
(Percent change)

Demand and Supply
Real GDP
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Final domestic demand
Stockbuilding 1/
Domestic Demand
Foreign balance 1/
Exports 2/
Imports 2/
Resource Utilization
Potential GDP
Output gap
Employment
Unemployment rate 3/
Prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices
Public Finance 4/
General government balance
General government structural balance
General government gross debt
Interest Rates 3/ 5/
EURIBOR 3-month offered rate
10-year government benchmark bond yield
Exchange Rates 5/
U.S. dollar per euro
Nominal effective rate (2000=100)
Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/
External Sector 4/ 7/
Current account balance
Trade balance 8/

2005

2006

2007

2008

1.7

2.9

2.7

0.7

-4.8

-0.3

1.8
1.5
3.3
2.1
-0.2
2.0
-0.1
5.0
5.7

2.0
1.9
5.5
2.7
0.1
2.8
0.2
8.3
8.2

1.6
2.2
4.8
2.4
0.0
2.4
0.3
5.9
5.3

0.4
2.0
0.0
0.6
0.1
0.7
0.0
1.0
1.0

-1.5
1.6
-11.6
-3.1
-0.2
-3.4
-1.2
-16.7
-14.1

-0.6
1.9
-3.6
-0.7
0.0
-0.7
0.4
-0.5
-1.5

1.8
-0.7
1.0
9.0

1.6
0.6
1.6
8.3

1.7
1.6
1.8
7.5

1.3
1.1
0.8
7.6

-0.3
-3.5
-2.3
10.1

0.4
-4.2
-1.9
11.9

2.0
2.2

2.0
2.2

2.4
2.1

2.4
3.3

0.4
0.2

0.5
0.7

-2.5
-2.6
69.6

-1.2
-2.0
67.8

-0.6
-1.8
65.7

-1.9
-2.4
69.6

-6.2
-3.7
81.0

-6.9
-3.9
88.0

2.2
3.4

3.2
3.8

4.2
4.4

4.2
4.4

1.1
4.1

…
…

1.25
121.7
129.6

1.26
122.6
130.3

1.37
128.9
137.8

1.47
137.0
146.8

1.38
135.8
140.7

…
…
…

0.1
0.5

-0.1
0.1

0.1
0.5

-0.5
-0.1

-1.0
-0.5

-1.0
-0.6

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; DataStream; Eurostat; and ECB Monthly Bulletin.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/
6/
7/
8/

Contribution to growth.
Includes intra-euro area trade.
In percent.
In percent of GDP.
Latest available data for 2009.
Based on normalized unit labor costs.
Based on ECB data, which exclude intra-euro area flows.
Data for goods.

2009
2010
Staff projections

41
Table 2. Euro Area: Balance of Payments

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009Q1

(Billions of euros)
Current account
Goods
Services
Income
Current transfers

-27.0
67.9
-2.8
-40.3
-52.0

46.0
121.8
16.9
-43.7
-49.1

20.9
98.7
22.5
-44.8
-56.1

60.5
94.3
32.1
-6.2
-59.5

9.3
43.6
38.7
0.2
-73.4

-10.5
12.2
43.2
13.6
-79.5

11.1
46.5
49.3
1.4
-86.0

-93.5
-6.1
41.8
-32.4
-96.9

-25.5
-6.3
4.2
2.1
-25.6

5.5

10.9

12.2

16.6

11.3

9.1

13.7

12.4

3.1

-28.4
-109.6
72.9
132.4
-59.1
-0.7
-8.9
18.0

-13.4
22.6
138.0
46.2
91.9
-12.2
-159.3
-2.5

-14.1
-9.7
54.4
32.8
21.4
-13.7
-72.8
28.0

-26.0
-79.6
72.0
24.8
47.1
-8.2
-22.4
12.6

10.2
-205.7
127.0
121.6
5.7
-17.3
88.7
17.7

141.6
-157.6
293.9
144.2
149.7
3.3
3.0
-0.9

41.3
-92.4
159.7
48.1
111.4
-67.1
46.2
-4.9

313.5
-251.4
439.2
35.7
403.2
-30.8
160.5
-4.1

105.0
-52.4
144.5
-51.0
195.4
10.5
-3.3
5.6

Errors and omissions

49.8

-43.5

-18.9

-50.8

-30.8

-140.3

-66.0

-232.4

-82.7

Current account
Goods
Services
Income
Current transfers

-0.4
1.0
0.0
-0.6
-0.7

0.6
1.7
0.2
-0.6
-0.7

0.3
1.3
0.3
-0.6
-0.7

0.8
1.2
0.4
-0.1
-0.8

0.1
0.5
0.5
0.0
-0.9

-0.1
0.1
0.5
0.2
-0.9

0.1
0.5
0.5
0.0
-1.0

-1.0
-0.1
0.5
-0.3
-1.0

-1.1
-0.3
0.2
0.1
-1.1

Capital account

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Equity
Debt instruments
Financial derivatives
Other investment
Reserve assets

-0.4
-1.5
1.0
1.9
-0.8
0.0
-0.1
0.3

-0.2
0.3
1.9
0.6
1.3
-0.2
-2.2
0.0

-0.2
-0.1
0.7
0.4
0.3
-0.2
-1.0
0.4

-0.3
-1.0
0.9
0.3
0.6
-0.1
-0.3
0.2

0.1
-2.5
1.6
1.5
0.1
-0.2
1.1
0.2

1.7
-1.8
3.4
1.7
1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.5
-1.0
1.8
0.5
1.2
-0.7
0.5
-0.1

3.4
-2.7
4.7
0.4
4.4
-0.3
1.7
0.0

4.7
-2.3
6.5
-2.3
8.7
0.5
-0.1
0.3

Errors and omissions

0.7

-0.6

-0.3

-0.6

-0.4

-1.6

-0.7

-2.5

-3.7

7,075.3 7,324.3 7,544.5 7,854.5 8,148.6 8,548.9 8,982.5 9,263.6

2,239.1

Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Equity
Debt instruments
Financial derivatives
Other investment
Reserve assets

(Percent of GDP)

Memorandum items:
GDP (billions of euros)
Reserves of the eurosystem 1/
(billions of euros)
Source: ECB.
1/ End of period stocks.

392.7

366.1

306.7

281

320.1

325.8

347.4

383.9

395.8

42
APPENDIX I—STATISTICAL ISSUES
Statistics for the euro area (and the EU-27) are produced by Eurostat,1 in conjunction with
national statistical agencies within the European Statistical System (ESS), and the ECB,
working with national central banks within the Eurosystem/ESCB. These statistics are of
sufficient quality, scope, and timeliness to allow effective macroeconomic surveillance,
thanks to major progress made since the introduction of the euro. However, the financial
crisis has exposed new needs, notably, new data and information systems to allow better
macrofinancial risk monitoring and support the work of the new European Systemic Risk
Board. The ECB has comprehensive statistical and logistical systems, a legal framework, and
a program of ongoing work that could be built upon for this purpose. The IMF's
Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB)2 provides comprehensive information on
the Euro area's statistical practices for the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) data
categories.
Recent and ongoing developments include:
•

The legal and institutional underpinnings of the statistical framework have been
strengthened. A new European Statistics Regulation3 has revised the legal basis for
the collection and compilation of statistics in the EU. It set forward the principles that
govern the production and dissemination of data; established a European Statistical
System Committee tasked with providing professional guidance to the ESS and
regularly reviewing and updating the 2005 European Statistics Code of Practice; and
revised confidentiality provisions to facilitate cooperation within the ESS. The
institutional framework was also reinforced with two other new bodies: the European
Statistical Advisory Committee (ESAC), a user group, and the European Statistics
Governance Advisory Board (ESGAB), which monitors adherence to the European
Statistics Code of Practice. 4

•

A decision has been made to add data to the Principal European Economic Indicators
on housing starts and house prices, as well as some short-term indicators on activity

1

Eurostat has introduced a new, more user-friendly website. See: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/. The ECB has
maintained a statistical data warehouse for euro area and related national statistics. See
http://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/. The division of tasks between both statistical systems has been spelled out in a
Memorandum of Understanding (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_mou_with_eurostat1.pdf ).
2

Available at: http://dsbb.imf.org/.

3

Regulation No. 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, published in the Official Journal of
the European Union on March 31, 2009.

4

Peer reviews form part of the European Statistical System implementation strategy of the Code of Practice in
enhancing the integrity, independence and accountability of its statistical authorities. Peer reviews of individual
National Statistical Institutes may be found at:
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/quality/code_of_practice/peer_reviews

43
in the services sector. New guidelines with respect to seasonal and calendar day
adjustments have come into effect, and a draft guideline has been prepared to
harmonize revision policies. The publication of vintage data is under consideration,
but would require adapted IT solutions. Eurostat is also investigating ways to better
monitor short-term output developments and identify turning points. The introduction
of NACE rev. 2 is proceeding on schedule toward full implementation by 2011.5
•

For the national accounts, Eurostat and the ECB are moving toward a “30-60-90”
approach: publishing flash data after 30 days; European aggregates and the main
income, expenditure and output components after 60 days; and the sectoral and
financial sector accounts after 90 days. The quarterly savings and investment rates
together with the investment rate and profit share of non-financial corporations are to
be added to the Principal European Economic Indicators, with some country
breakdown published as of October 2009. The European System of Accounts (ESA)
is under review to align it with the UN’s February 2009 revision of the System of
National Accounts 2008 (2008 SNA). Adoption is targeted by June 2010, and full
implementation by 2014. Work is ongoing on Supply/Use and Input/Output tables for
the euro area. The ongoing EU KLEMS project to create a database on productivity
by industry, which aims to better measure multifactor productivity, is scheduled for
completion by 2012-13.6

•

A revised draft manual for the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) is being
finalized. At the same time, implementation is underway of the transition toward
measuring consumer prices based on consumption segments rather than specific
products, which should broaden the scope of prices considered. Internal simulations
for a dwellings price index for the euro area have been produced, with regular
production planned from 2010 onwards. For the time being, the ECB publishes a halfyearly residential property price index for the euro area. Work on setting up an index
of expenditure on home sales is proceeding.

•

Various aspects of the statistical treatment of public interventions in the financial
sector remain under consideration, notably with respect to public debt securities
issued solely for lending to the private sector. For asset purchases and lending, the
deficit impact depends on the degree of subsidy involved and the likelihood of

5

NACE stands for Nomenclature Générale des Activités Economiques dans les Communautés Européennes and
is the European classification system of economic activities. NACE is fully compatible with the UN’s ISIC
classification, but provides greater detail. NACE rev. 2 came into force on January 1, 2008, and is being
introduced gradually during the 2008-11 period. It provides a better and more detailed classification of
economic activities, tailored to the structure of a modern economy. NACE rev. 2 is linked with a revised
Classification of Products by Activity (CPA) which is being introduced in parallel.
6

See: http://www.euklems.net/

44
repayment. Despite improvements, resources for the monitoring of member states’
government finance statistics remain tight as the crisis has raised the workload.
•

The harmonized compilation of Producer Price Indices for services has started, with
reporting gearing up. The next target is a production index on services possibly for
dissemination by 2012.

•

A Task Force on the quality of the Labor Force Survey has concluded its work, and
follow-up action is being considered. A new legal basis has been established for the
quarterly statistics on job vacancies, inter alia ensuring a full EU-wide collection and
reducing reporting delays (first estimate at Q+45 days). It will apply for data from the
first quarter of 2010 onward.

•

New regulations have been introduced covering Intrastat and Extrastat reporting,7 in
part to reduce the reporting burden. The new Intrastat reporting strengthens quality
requirements and introduces new statistics by business characteristics, but increases
the reliance on extrapolation from 3 to 5 percent of imports. The revised Extrastat
reporting reflects changes in customs systems and should better allow the
identification of quasi-transit trade. Annual reconciliation rounds have been
introduced to identify and address large bilateral asymmetries in trade and balance of
payment data.

•

The ECB is undertaking broad-based efforts to improve the availability of statistics to
monitor financial developments and risks. During the next few years, it will expand
the statistical coverage of non-bank financial intermediaries, notably investment
funds, hedge funds (including a first legal definition), insurance corporations, and
pension funds. It aims to introduce new securitization statistics by end-2010, new
statistics on collateralization and exposure to credit risks, more advanced and timely
interest rate statistics, a comprehensive micro database and standardized electronic
reference data for securities, and enhanced consolidated statistics on financial
institutions. In May 2009, together with the BIS and the IMF, the ECB released the
first part of the Handbook on Securities Statistics, which covers debt securities issues.

•

The ECB plans to introduce non-financial balance sheet data per institutional sector
by end 2009, based on the progress made in measuring housing wealth in its quarterly
financial accounts for the euro area. It is working with the Commission to establish a
twice-yearly survey on financing conditions for SMEs, from later this year onward. It
will also coordinate surveys organized by the national central banks on household
financing and consumption, to be conducted every three years, the first results of
which are expected in 2010.

7

Intrastat covers intra-EU trade and is based on reporting by businesses. Extrastat covers extra-EU trade and is
based on customs declarations.

45
•

Moreover, the ECB and Eurostat participate in the IMF-led Inter-Agency Group on
Economic and Financial statistics which has established a new website to provide
comparable Principal Global Indicators (PGIs) for the G-20 economies including the
euro area.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/95
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 30, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation on
Euro Area Policies
On July 17, 2009, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV Consultation on Euro Area Policies. 1
Background
The euro area remains in recession, with signs of improvement yet to evolve into a recovery.
The large drop in financial wealth, an associated increase in private savings, tight financing
conditions, and the adjustment of global imbalances are key drivers of the economic decline,
exacerbated by the correction of home-grown imbalances in some countries. Bank credit to the
private sector is very subdued and efforts to reduce leverage and capital shortages of banks
seem to be negatively affecting recent bank loan developments. Given the tight financial and
trade integration of Europe, adverse feedback loops have been operating across borders and
between the financial and real sector, with the recession now adding to the financial sector’s
woes. The recent improvement in sentiment and high frequency and other leading indicators
has thus far been signaling only a reduction in the pace of contraction in output, while the shape
and timing of the recovery remain highly uncertain. The ongoing crisis is also likely to dampen
growth potential, in part reflecting structural rigidities.
The euro area is facing strong disinflationary pressures. Headline inflation has fallen sharply to
zero percent in May 2009 from its peak of 4 percent in mid-2008, largely reflecting base effects
from the steep decline of commodity prices, but also the significant weakening in economic
activity. Core inflation excluding energy, food alcohol and tobacco eased by less, declining to an
average of 1.6 percent, after hovering around 1.9 percent during 2007–2008. Given large output
gaps, inflation is widely projected to remain significantly below 2 percent in 2009–2010. Against
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2

this background the ECB has eased monetary policy significantly, with policy rates currently at
1 percent from 4.25 percent in early October 2008.
The euro area’s financial system remains under considerable strain although actions
undertaken by policymakers have helped contain systemic risk. The ECB has deployed a wide
array of unconventional measures: it lengthened the term funding of its liquidity provision,
widened its collateral requirements, and has been providing unlimited term funding at fixed rates
since October 2008. Other policy actions so far have focused on stabilizing the banking system
and preventing bank runs, but their take-up, especially of resources for recapitalization has
fallen considerably short of amounts made available and disclosure has remained limited,
reflecting differences in approach across countries. For the largest cross-border institutions,
coordinated stress tests are under way with the aim to provide an aggregate view of the
resilience of the EU’s banking system.
The EU members have agreed to an overhaul of their financial stability arrangements. The two
new cross-border institutions to be created—a European System of Financial Supervisors and a
European Systemic Risk Board—will seek to address existing shortcomings in the EU’s
financial stability arrangements and the tensions with advancing the EU’s single financial market
objective that have been exposed by the global financial crisis.
The fiscal position of the euro area is projected to deteriorate significantly, as public finances
are used to shore up the financial system and cushion the downturn. Euro area governments
have committed large resources to guarantee, recapitalize, and resolve financial institutions. As
a result, the euro area’s fiscal deficit is projected to increase from 0.6 percent of GDP in 2007 to
6.9 percent by 2010, pushing up government debt significantly over the period.
Executive Board Assessment
The Executive Directors welcomed the broad arsenal of macroeconomic policies and financial
sector interventions deployed by euro area authorities and Member States to address the crisis.
Directors emphasized that further decisive policy action, especially in the financial sector, is
essential to achieve a recovery and return to self-sustaining growth. They also noted that the
crisis could dampen potential growth, calling for reinvigorated structural reforms.
Directors observed that the euro area is in recession, amid some tentative signs of
improvement. While survey indicators have been recovering and the fall in indicators of
economic activity slowing, the remaining stresses and risks in the financial system, and rising
corporate defaults and unemployment are weighing on the expected recovery. Thus, Directors
expected the decline in activity to moderate through the remainder of 2009 and to give way to a
modest recovery in 2010, but underscored the significant uncertainty surrounding this scenario.
Directors considered that a resolute and well-coordinated approach to relieve financial stress is
essential for a durable recovery, and that backing from national authorities will be key. They
welcomed the intention of national authorities—in cooperation with the relevant EU
institutions—to thoroughly assess the financial position of banks, including the impact of the

3

recession. Such an assessment should be accompanied by comprehensive follow-up action
involving suitable disclosure, recapitalization, measures to address the problem of impaired
assets, and resolution of unviable financial institutions. To facilitate resolution, national
resolution toolkits should be expanded to allow national authorities to take control of financial
institutions at an early stage.
Directors welcomed the June 2009 European Council endorsement of an ambitious reform of
the EU’s financial stability architecture, including through the creation of a European Systemic
Risk Board and the establishment of a European System of Financial Supervisors. They
emphasized that the reform should be implemented according to the envisaged timetable and
on a well-coordinated basis. Securing adequate resources, effective decision-making
mechanisms, and independence for the new entities, as well as an unconstrained information
flow within the new architecture, will all be essential. Directors underscored that the European
Supervisory Authorities will need sufficient legal scope to establish a single rulebook, effectively
transposed at the national level. In parallel, the accelerated work under the ongoing crisis
management roadmap should address weaknesses in the crisis resolution framework, as well
as burden sharing issues at the EU level.
Directors welcomed the ECB’s far-reaching unconventional (ECB: non-standard) measures to
support liquidity and credit as well as its accommodative monetary policy stance. They
emphasized that, given large and increasing output gaps and inflation projected to remain very
low for some time, it will be essential to maintain this stance as long as disinflationary pressures
persist. Directors noted that this could best be done by keeping interest rates low through the
unlimited provision of term funding. They emphasized that a crystallization of downside risks
would require a more forceful signal to keep interest rates low, while retaining all unconventional
options open to deal with contingencies. Directors commended the ECB for embedding exit
strategies in the design of most of its unconventional policies.
Directors agreed that fiscal policy will need to continue to support economic activity in 2010, but
emphasized that credible medium-term consolidation programs should be put in place to
address solvency concerns. Directors were of the view that planned discretionary measures are
broadly appropriate, given the large automatic stabilizers. They emphasized that application of
the SGP, which would support fiscal consolidation once the recovery takes hold, will need to be
bolstered by a strengthening of national fiscal institutions to foster ownership of consolidation
goals. Accordingly, Directors noted that surveillance over progress toward medium-term
consolidation objectives should be stepped up at both the EU and national levels.
Directors underscored that the crisis provides a window of opportunity to push forward with
intensified structural reforms needed to address long-standing rigidities. With economic
restructuring ahead, they encouraged a heightened focus on training, education, and jobmatching. Directors emphasized that implementing the services directive, revamping the Lisbon
agenda, and facilitating an ambitious and early conclusion of the Doha round will contribute to
the foundations of a solid recovery.

4

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2009 Article IV Consultation with the Euro Area is also available.

5
Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators
(Percent change)

Demand and Supply
Real GDP
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Final domestic demand
Stockbuilding 1/
Domestic Demand
Foreign balance 1/
Exports 2/
Imports 2/
Resource Utilization
Potential GDP
Output gap
Employment
Unemployment rate 3/
Prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices
Public Finance 4/
General government balance
General government structural balance
General government gross debt
Interest Rates 3/ 5/
EURIBOR 3-month offered rate
10-year government benchmark bond
yield
Exchange Rates 5/
U.S. dollar per euro
Nominal effective rate (2000=100)
Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/
External Sector 4/ 7/
Current account balance
Trade balance 8/

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

0.8

2.2

1.7

2.9

2.7

0.7

-4.8

-0.3

1.2
1.7
1.3
1.3
0.1
1.5
-0.6
1.3
3.2

1.6
1.6
2.3
1.7
0.2
2.0
0.3
7.4
7.0

1.8
1.5
3.3
2.1
-0.2
1.9
-0.1
5.0
5.7

2.0
1.9
5.5
2.7
0.1
2.8
0.2
8.3
8.2

1.6
2.2
4.8
2.3
0.0
2.5
0.3
5.9
5.3

0.4
1.9
0.0
0.8
0.1
0.7
0.0
1.0
1.0

-1.5
1.7
-11.6
-3.1
-0.1
-3.4
-1.2
-16.3
-13.6

-0.6
1.9
-3.6
-0.6
0.0
-0.7
0.4
-0.5
-1.5

1.9
-0.8
0.7
8.7

2.0
-0.6
0.7
8.8

1.8
-0.7
1.0
9.0

1.6
0.6
1.6
8.3

1.7
1.6
1.8
7.5

1.4
0.9
0.8
7.6

-0.2
-3.7
-2.3
10.1

0.5
-4.5
-1.9
12.0

2.2
2.1

1.9
2.2

2.0
2.2

1.9
2.2

2.3
2.1

2.3
3.3

0.4
0.2

0.5
0.7

-3.0
68.7

-2.9
-2.9
69.1

-2.5
-2.6
69.6

-1.2
-2.0
67.8

-0.6
-1.8
65.7

-1.9
-2.4
69.6

-6.2
-3.7
81.0

-6.9
-3.9
88.0

2.3

2.1

2.3

3.2

4.3

4.4

1.1

…

4.0

4.0

3.4

3.8

4.4

4.4

4.1

…

1.13
117.6
121.6

1.24
122.0
128.0

1.25
121.7
129.6

1.26
122.6
130.3

1.37
128.9
137.8

1.47
137.0
146.8

1.38
135.8
140.7

…
…
…

0.3
1.3

0.8
1.2

0.1
0.5

-0.1
0.1

0.1
0.5

-0.7
-0.1

-1.1
-0.4

-1.1
-0.5

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; DataStream; Eurostat; and ECB Monthly Bulletin.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Includes intra-euro area trade.
3/ In percent.
4/ In percent of GDP.
5/ Latest available data for 2009.
6/ Based on normalized unit labor costs.
7/ Based on ECB data, which exclude intra-euro area flows.
8/ Data for goods.

2009
2010
Staff projections

Statement by Klaus Stein, Executive Director for Germany, on behalf of the
Euro Area Authorities
July 17, 2009
In my capacity as President of EURIMF, I submit this buff statement on the Article IV
consultation with the euro area. It reflects the common view of the Member States of the euro
area and the European Union in their respective fields of competence.
The authorities of the euro area Member States are grateful for open and fruitful consultations
with the Fund staff and for their constructive policy advice. While broadly concurring with
the staff’s findings, views differ on a few aspects, as will be outlined in my statement. It will
also provide an update recent economic developments.
Short-term economic outlook
The euro area, like other advanced economies, is in the midst of a severe recession. In the
first quarter of this year GDP contracted at an unprecedented pace due to weaknesses in both
domestic and foreign demand.
Following the disappointing first-quarter GDP numbers, some tentative signs of
stabilization have emerged recently. A substantial inventory correction is under way, while
indicators related to global trade have started to send promising signals. Reflecting these
positive developments in global demand, the huge drag on euro area GDP from the export
collapse may start easing.
On the domestic side, recent business sentiment indicators and available May industrial
production data for the largest euro area economies are also sending encouraging signs, which
may imply a less negative outlook. Low inflation and the fiscal stimuli will maintain a
stimulating effect on the economy. However, for firms to resume investment, a parallel
improvement in financial conditions is necessary, and indicators related to the latter are
somewhat mixed. On the one hand, stock markets have recovered somewhat and money
markets rates further declined. On the other hand, government bond yields have increased and
credit standards remain tight.
While the first positive signals are clearly welcome, it is important to avoid reading too much
into them. Most soft indicators remain still below the levels that mark the start of an
expansion phase. In addition, their recent improvements are still to be confirmed by hard
data. In the labor market, the full impact of the current crisis is yet to come, although
unemployment has already strongly increased in many Member States.
Therefore, the authorities' assessment of the emerging positive signals is cautious.
Nevertheless, the most recent indicators are in line with the view that the decline in activity
should moderate throughout the remainder of 2009 and give way to a modest recovery in
2010. Euro area authorities concur with the staff that the growth outlook for the euro area
economy remains surrounded by exceptional uncertainty.

2
Financial sector issues
Safeguarding financial stability is one of the highest priorities for the euro area Member
States. Since the outbreak of the current financial crisis, euro area governments, along with
other EU Member States, have committed very substantial amounts of public funding in
various forms – totaling around 25 per cent of euro area GDP – in support of the banking
sector. Together with the substantial liquidity provided by the ECB to euro area money
markets, these measures have averted a financial meltdown. The most acute phase of the crisis
has now passed. Indeed, the main indicators of stress in the financial system are signaling a
progressive stabilization.
Despite the financial stabilization achieved, the banking sector in the euro area remains
fragile, as in other parts of the world,. The support to banks provided by Member State
governments is apparently still needed to ensure a sufficient basis for the required recovery in
confidence. Banks have not yet fully utilized the available amounts of public funds. Banks in
the euro area as well as in the EU are still highly leveraged. Moreover, uncertainty about the
quality of their assets remains. This has fuelled some concerns about the overall health of
their balance sheets. As pointed out by the staff, restoring confidence in the viability of the
banking sector is a precondition for sustainable recovery of the broader economy.
Upon request of the Economic and Financial Council, the Committee of European Banking
Supervisors (CEBS) coordinates an EU-wide forward-looking stress testing of the banking
system, in cooperation with the Commission and the ECB. The results of the test will be
reported to Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in September 2009 and will
provide additional information on the banking sector's ability to absorb possible shocks and
the overall financial stability implications, and complement in this way the estimates made by
the staff, the ECB and by analysts, on the potential losses to be incurred by the EU/euro area
banking sector in case of an adverse macroeconomic scenario.
As indicated by the staff, the financial crisis has posed an important challenge for the
functioning of the Single Market and the European financial system and underscored the need
for the EU to strengthen its financial stability arrangements. Co-ordination of financialmarket support measures among EU Member States has helped to limit market fragmentation
and competitive distortions and to restore financial stability in the short-term.
Looking ahead, there is a clear need to enhance the regulatory and supervisory framework
in order to reduce the possibility of similar crises in the future. To that end, the EU has
decided to reform its framework for financial supervision. In June 2009, the European
Council endorsed proposals by the Commission to establish a European Systemic Risk Board
(ESRB) and a European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS). The ESRB will monitor and
assess potential threats to the stability of the EU financial system and, where necessary, issue
risk warnings and recommendations for action and monitor their implementation. The ESFS
will comprise three new European Supervisory Authorities with powers as regards the EU
banking, insurance and securities sectors and coordinate responsibilities between national
supervisory authorities, which will remain responsible for the day-to-day supervision of
individual firms. Without impinging on fiscal responsibilities of Member States, the three
authorities will have binding and proportionate decision-making powers in respect of whether

3
supervisors are meeting their requirements under a single rule book and relevant Community
law and in case of disagreement between the home and host state supervisors. These
authorities will also have supervisory powers for credit rating agencies. The Commission
intends to adopt the necessary legislative proposals in September.
In parallel to this supervisory reform, the EU is revisiting financial-sector regulation on a
broad basis. Work is under way in a range of areas such as the capital requirements directive
(i.a. addressing securitization and procyclicality), deposit guarantees, credit-rating agencies,
hedge funds, OTC derivatives markets, and executive pay. These proposals need to be
adopted swiftly in order for the new framework to be fully in place in the course of 2010. In
addition, the Commission is working on a comprehensive cross-border framework for the
prevention and management of financial crises, including the introduction of special
resolution regimes for cross-border banks.
Monetary policy, inflation outlook, and liquidity management
The euro area authorities broadly agree with the staff assessment on the ECB’s monetary
policy, except on two points. (i) When assessing the risk of protracted deflation and its
policy implications, views differ. The assessment of the ECB is that the risk of protracted
deflation is at present very limited. Deflationary pressures are neither broad-based nor
entrenched in inflation expectations, which are firmly anchored over the medium to longer
term in line with the ECB’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, two per cent
over the medium term. (ii) In addition, the transmission of monetary policy to bank lending
rates, while difficult to assess at such an early stage, seems to be broadly in line with the past
behavior. In this respect, euro area authorities do not fully share the assessment of the staff
with respect to somewhat lower efficiency of the transmission channel.
Turning to the outlook for price developments, the fall of annual inflation rates into negative
territory in June is in line with previous expectations and reflects mainly temporary effects.
After a return to positive inflation rates, price developments are expected to remain dampened
over the policy-relevant horizon. Risks to the outlook for inflation are broadly balanced. On
the downside they relate, in particular, to the outlook for economic activity, while on the
upside they relate to higher than expected commodity prices and to unanticipated stronger
increases in indirect taxation and administered prices.
The outcome of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure,
as money and credit indicators continue to be weak, the latest data confirming their concurrent
deceleration. The flow of bank loans to non-financial corporations and households has
remained subdued – with a moderate monthly contraction in the outstanding amount of loans
to non-financial corporations over recent months –, reflecting in part the weakening in
economic activity and the continued low levels of business and consumer confidence.
In sum, the Governing Council of the ECB expects the current episode of extremely low or
negative inflation rates to be short-lived and price stability to be maintained over the medium
term, thereby continuing to support the purchasing power of euro area households. Against
this background, the current key ECB interest rate, which has been brought from 4.25 per
cent to one per cent between October 2008 and May 2009, remains appropriate.

4
This is also the case in view of the ECB’s enhanced credit support policy. Since the
financial crisis intensified in September 2008, the ECB has introduced monetary policy and
liquidity management measures that are unprecedented in nature, scope and magnitude, with a
view to protecting the flow of credit to the euro area economy.
The set of non-standard measures has been further enhanced with the extension of the
maturity of the longer-term refinancing operations with a fixed rate and full allotment to
12 months, and a program of covered bond purchases. In particular, with the conduct of a 12month refinancing operation in June this year, the Eurosystem has provided a significant
amount of liquidity to euro area banks. A record number of 1,121 bidders received a total
allotment of €442.2 billion, bringing the overall size of liquidity providing open market
operations again to levels observed in late 2008. Euribor fixing rates have decreased by
around 20 basis points since the announcement of the new one-year operation in early May
2009.
Outright purchases of covered bonds are another non-standard measure added in May 2009.
Covered bonds are debt securities issued by banks, which give them access to funding of a
longer-term nature than the ECB’s refinancing operations. Covered bonds allow banks to
better manage the maturity mismatch between their assets and liabilities. While it is expected
to be effective in supporting credit provision by banks, the covered bond purchase program
does not burden the Eurosystem with excessive credit risk. After the announcement of the
measure, there has been a wave of new issuances of covered bonds, and the spreads on
potentially eligible covered bonds have narrowed considerably.
All the measures taken, including the broadening of the list of assets accepted as collateral by
the Eurosystem, have contributed to improving financing conditions above and beyond what
could be achieved through reductions in key ECB interest rates alone. The improvement in
financing conditions resulting from past reductions in key ECB rates and from the enhanced
credit support measures should provide ongoing support for economic activity in the period
ahead. All non-standard measures seek to maintain price stability over the medium term and
to ensure that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. Once
the macroeconomic environment improves, the ECB will ensure that the measures taken are
quickly unwound and that the liquidity provided is absorbed. Hence, any threat to price
stability over the medium to longer term can be effectively countered in a timely fashion.
Fiscal policy
The euro area authorities share the staff assessment that the discretionary measures currently
adopted are broadly appropriate. The fiscal stance will continue to be supportive into 2010
and automatic stabilizers are sizeable. In this context, it is worth noting that in 2010 deficits
increase not only in nominal but also in structural terms. Further discretionary budgetary
stimulus is not warranted, under the assumption of an expected stabilization and eventual
recovery of economic activity in 2010.
The euro area authorities agree with the staff that the composition of the fiscal stimulus is
crucial and that the discretionary fiscal effort should be coordinated and tailored to country
circumstances. Calling for an immediate and coordinated effort to boost demand, the

5
European Economic Recovery Plan (EERP), endorsed by the European Council in December
2008, provided guidelines on the types of measures which were likely to maximize the impact
and to result in cross-country synergies and positive spill-over effects. The EERP also
stressed that Member States had very different starting points in terms of fiscal room for
maneuver. Indeed, a cross-country comparison of the fiscal policy responses to falling
aggregate demand, both in terms of stimulus packages and aggregate fiscal stance, highlights
significant differences in size. This, at least in part, reflects differences in the countries'
perceived ability to expand without facing adverse market reactions.
In its Orientations for fiscal policies in the euro area Member States issued on June 8th, the
Eurogroup stressed that the pace of fiscal consolidations should also be differentiated across
countries, taking into account the pace of the recovery, fiscal positions and debt levels, but
also the projected cost of aging, external imbalances and risks in the financial sector.
Ministers also committed to improve the coordination of the implementation of national
recovery measures.
The euro area authorities confirm their strong commitment to put in place robust mediumterm exit strategies that will lead to timely correction of the excessive deficits and therefore
underpin the credibility of fiscal policies. In line with the staff's suggestion to pre-announce
the plans for fiscal adjustment to reduce uncertainty, the Eurogroup highlighted that the
forthcoming round of stability programs would provide the opportunity for Member States to
present exit strategies. Notably, the strategies should: (i) include ambitious and realistic
budgetary targets; (ii) spell out the consolidation measures beyond the next budget year;
(iii) strengthen the national budgetary frameworks to underpin budgetary discipline and make
them more resilient to crises; (iv) implement structural reforms to ensure the long-term
sustainability of public finances, in particular in the area of aging-related expenditure.
In this context, the euro area authorities agree with some of the avenues put forward by the
staff to improve the functioning of the Stability and Growth Pact within its current
remit, e.g. the emphasis on strengthening national fiscal frameworks and incorporating agingrelated liabilities in the medium-term objectives (MTOs). In this vein, an agreement has been
reached and confirmed by the Ecofin in its meeting of July 7th, on the way to incorporate
aging-related implicit liabilities in the MTOs. By contrast, the authorities do not agree with
suggestions that would imply altering the balance between the preventive and the corrective
arms as established in the Stability and Growth Pact and in the Treaty (e.g. treating the MTO
as the reference value under the Excessive Deficit Procedure).
Structural reforms
The European Economic Recovery Plan of December 2008 gives priority to reforms that
support aggregate demand, employment, and household income in the short-run, whilst at the
same time improve the adjustment capacity and growth potential. It also recognizes that
the crisis presents a strategic opportunity to push forward with more ambitious reform
agendas.
The recent Commission's analysis showed that this downturn will in all likelihood leave an
important imprint on the European economy in terms of lower potential output going

6
forward. This may be related inter alia to a generally lower risk appetite after the crisis, procyclicality of R&D investment, as well as hysteresis effects in the labor market, which may
also have an impact on potential growth. Given that the aging populations will have additional
negative impact on long-term potential growth, a continued, even reinforced focus on
productivity-enhancing structural reforms will be an important pillar of the Lisbon strategy
post-2010.
On labor markets, the measures introduced in many EU Member States are helping to
mitigate the impact on unemployment in the short-term. However, given the depth of the
recession, there is a clear risk of a sharp rise in unemployment in the future, with all its social
and economic costs. In order to counteract this, more emphasis is now needed on policies to
enhance wage flexibility and incentives for firms to create jobs, and support the chances
for the unemployed to find new jobs, especially by investing in training to enhance skills and
by facilitating transition towards new jobs.
The implementation of the Services Directive is an essential measure to boost economic
growth and job creation given the untapped potential of the Internal Market for services.
Being an essential step in the structural reform process, the Directive is particularly important
for those euro area Member States, which suffer from competitiveness problems, and hence a
need to ensure the timely and full implementation of the Directive by December 2009.
Intra-EU spillovers
The financial market situation in the New Member States (NMS) has recently improved,
in line with the market sentiment towards emerging countries. Decisive policy action over
recent months, including the substantial increases in Fund and EU resources for financial
assistance to countries with balance-of-payments difficulties, coupled with policy adjustment
programs has contributed to this improvement. The EU is currently providing financial
assistance to three NMS particularly affected by the crisis, in the context of financing and
policy adjustment packages set up together with the Fund and other donors. In addition to
BoP assistance, the EU is supporting the NMS through several other financial channels (e.g.
frontloading of structural funds and EIB financing) and with policy advice in the context of
EU economic surveillance.
The euro area authorities agree with the staff that full coordination of financial crisis
measures is essential for the success of the assistance programs. This includes, in particular,
private sector involvement, especially of banks. It is also important to note that the crisis did
not affect all NMS with the same force. NMS which avoided large imbalances or policy
weaknesses fared relatively better, underlining the importance of sound policies and the need
for a differentiated approach towards individual countries in analysis and communication.
Trade policy
As noted by the staff, the EU attaches great importance to countering protectionist
pressures resulting from the crisis. For the world economy to return to sustainable growth, it
is absolutely essential to keep markets open for trade and investment, and encourage further
market opening.

7
The EU is fully committed to the G20 standstill pledge, and will keep its markets open to
trade and foreign investment. The EU also calls on other countries to demonstrate firm
political commitment to the standstill pledges, and to ensure their full implementation at the
highest political level.
The best insurance policy against protectionist pressures will be provided by a balanced,
comprehensive, ambitious and quick conclusion of the Doha Round based on the progress
that has already been achieved.
In parallel to the Doha Round, the EU has stepped up its engagement with a number of
trading partners by pursuing negotiations on comprehensive new generation Free Trade
Agreements, which aim to extend beyond present agreements both in scope and the depth of
commitments. Furthermore, negotiations for Economic Partnership Agreements have either
already been concluded or will be concluded soon. They are heavily asymmetric agreements
to the advantage of our African, Caribbean and Pacific partners.
The EU also remains committed to continuing its support to developing countries, including
through Aid for Trade and unilateral preferences, such as the Generalized System of
Preferences (GSP), the additional preferences offered under the "GSP+" incentive
arrangement and, for least developed countries, the Everything But Arms (EBA) initiative.

