October 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/300

© 2009 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 201

August 2, 2001

Republic of Kazakhstan: 2009 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Supplement; and
Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2009 Article IV consultation with the Republic of
Kazakhstan, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2009 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 15, 2009, with the officials of the Republic of
Kazakhstan on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the
time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on June 17, 2009. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 8, 2009 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org  Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the
2009 Consultation with the Republic of Kazakhstan
Approved by David Owen and David D. Marston
June 17, 2009
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Kazakhstan continues to face significant challenges from the ongoing difficulties in the banking
sector and the weak global backdrop. The financial system remains highly stressed despite largescale government support, NPLs are rising sharply, and the economy is expected to contract this year.
Nevertheless, Kazakhstan is better placed than many emerging market economies to weather the crisis
given its large official foreign currency assets, low public debt, and favorable medium-term prospects.
Policies should remain focused on managing the impact of the crisis and establishing the basis
for a resumption of growth. Monetary, fiscal and financial sector policies should continue to
complement each other in achieving these objectives.
A clearer and more comprehensive strategy is needed to strengthen the banking sector. A full
and independent assessment of all systemically important banks should be carried out in tandem with
the strengthening of regulation and supervision and the improvement of corporate governance. The
authorities are advancing in a number of key areas, including bank restructuring and recapitalization.
These efforts should continue in a transparent and equitable manner, and should be supported by
clearly defined roles for the Distressed Asset Fund and the Deposit Guarantee Fund.
A return to a more flexible exchange rate policy would be desirable when conditions in the
financial sector improve. The current dollar peg, however, is appropriate until problems in the
financial sector are resolved. Following the devaluation in February, flows in the foreign exchange
market should remain well balanced in the period ahead provided that confidence in the banking
sector does not deteriorate further.
Macroeconomic policies should remain supportive of growth. Inflation pressures are wellcontained and the current monetary policy stance is appropriate. There may be scope for additional
monetary easing, but real interest rates should remain positive to support depositor confidence. Fiscal
policy has provided considerable support to the economy. The focus now should be on effective
policy implementation, although there is room for additional stimulus if growth slows more sharply
than expected.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................1
I. Economic Contraction in the Face of Financial Crisis ...........................................................3
II. A Strong Policy Response, But Considerable Challenges Remain.......................................7
A. Dealing with Financial Sector Distress.....................................................................7
B. Policy Stimulus: How, and By How Much? ...........................................................12
C. Exchange Rate Policy: Providing Stability in an Unstable World..........................14
III. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................14
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–14..............................................................................26
2. Monetary Accounts, 2004–10..............................................................................................27
3. Selected Prudential indicators of the Banking Sector 2004–09...........................................28
4. Balance of Payments, 2006–14............................................................................................29
5. Gross Financing Requirements and Financing, 2008–10 ....................................................30
6. General Government Fiscal Operations, 2006–14...............................................................31
7. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–14.....................................................32
8. External Debt Sustainability/Framework, 2005–14.............................................................33
Figures
1. Recent Macroeconomic Developments ...............................................................................20
2. Recent Financial Market Developments..............................................................................21
3. Banking Sector Developments.............................................................................................22
4. External and Fiscal Sector Developments and Outlook ......................................................23
5. Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests .............................................................................24
6. External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests ..........................................................................25
Boxes
1. Spillovers to and from Kazakhstan ........................................................................................5
2. A Worst Case Scenario for Kazakhstan.................................................................................6
3. Kazakhstan’s Anti-Crisis Plan ...............................................................................................8
4. What is Samruk-Kazyna? ......................................................................................................9
5. What Will the Banking Sector Look Like After the Crisis?................................................16
6. Exchange Rate Regime Options for Kazakhstan .................................................................19
Appendix
Draft Public Information Notice ..............................................................................................34

3
I. ECONOMIC CONTRACTION IN THE FACE OF FINANCIAL CRISIS
1.
At the time of the 2008 Article IV consultation, Kazakhstan’s economy was
slowing after years of exceptionally strong growth (Table 1). As conditions in
international financial markets tightened in August 2007, local banks found it more difficult
to raise external financing. Credit growth came to an abrupt halt and the property bubble
burst. The run-up in oil prices during the first half of 2008, however, cushioned the impact of
the sudden-stop of capital inflows. By mid-2008, growth had slowed to 6 percent from the
10 percent rates during 2000–07 (Figure 1). The surge in oil prices pushed the current
account into surplus last year, from a large deficit in 2007, but inflation picked up sharply to
a peak of 20 percent in June 2008 driven by rising food prices.
Five Key features of the Kazakhstan Economy


Kazakhstan is resource-rich—oil output is expected to double by the middle of the
next decade with the opening of the giant Kashagan field. Oil accounts for more than
50 percent of exports and 40 percent of government revenues.



The government prudently built up an oil fund. Foreign currency assets in the fund
peaked at $28 billion in January 2009 and currently stand at $23 billion (22 percent of
GDP). These assets are largely invested in debt securities. Central bank foreign
exchange reserves are $19.9 billion (6 months of imports). Public debt is very low.



The banking system which is largely domestically-owned has relied heavily on
external financing (Eurobonds and loans) and around one-half of domestic deposits
and credits are in foreign currency. The top four banks account for 70 percent of
sector assets.



External debt is high at close to 100 percent of GDP. About 40 percent of this,
however, is intra-company debt within the extractive sector.



Kazakhstan remains an attractive investment destination. FDI in the energy sector
remains strong, while a number of bilateral financing deals with China, Korea,
Russia, and U.A.E. have recently been announced totaling $18 billion.

2.
The second wave of the global financial crisis and resultant worldwide recession
has exacerbated Kazakhstan’s difficulties. With oil and commodity prices falling sharply
and global financial markets freezing up, the economy has been hit hard, with GDP
contracting by over 2 percent (y/y) in the first quarter of 2009. Regional spillovers,
particularly from Russia, have aggravated the situation (Box 1: Spillovers to and from
Kazakhstan). Financial market indicators have deteriorated substantially, although CDS
spreads have recently fallen sharply from their peak levels, and the central bank devalued the
tenge by 20 percent in early February (Figure 2). Despite a contraction in imports, the current

4

Credit, Deposits, and Property Prices
(12-month growth, in percent)

Bank External Debt and Rollover
(in billions of dollars)

60

120

Outstanding external debt
Principal due
Rollover (in percent), RHS

50

100

40

80

30

60

120
Deposits
Credits
Price of new homes

100
80
60
40

20

40

10

20

0

0
07Q4

08Q1

08Q2

08Q3

08Q4

20
0
-20
Apr-07

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

Apr-09

Source: Kazakhstani authorites; and IMF staff calculations.

account moved back into deficit in early 2009 as exports slumped and national oil fund
(NFRK) foreign currency assets fell sharply as funds were disbursed under the anti-crisis
plan.
3.
The situation in the banking sector has deteriorated significantly, and risks and
uncertainties remain high (Figure 3, Table 3). The slowing economy and the exchange rate
devaluation have added to pressures on the banks. NPLs are now rising sharply, reaching
9.6 percent on a 90-day overdue basis (although payments on over 50 percent of the loan
book are overdue) and there are growing questions about the value of external assets,
particularly at BTA, the largest bank, which has 40 percent of its assets in Russia. Capital
adequacy is under pressure and several banks are facing solvency issues. Banks have nearly
$40 billion (40 percent of GDP) of external liabilities, about a quarter of which mature this
year (an estimated $3 billion was repaid in the first quarter). While in aggregate deposits are
growing, this is largely due to inflows from public sector entities and valuation effects from
the devaluation. Within the sector, banks perceived as healthy are benefiting at the expense
of weaker institutions. Faced with increasing liquidity problems, two large banks (BTA and
Alliance) and one smaller institution (Astana Finance) have stopped making principal
repayments. Pension funds have also been significantly affected by the sharp fall in asset
prices.
4.
Against this background, staff expects the economy to contract by 2 percent this
year, before posting modest growth of 2 percent in 2010. The contraction in the non-oil
economy in 2009 will be more pronounced, at 3.3 percent. The staff’s forecast is slightly
more pessimistic than the consensus (-1.1 percent in 2009, 1.8 percent in 2010). The more
modest contraction expected in Kazakhstan this year relative to a number of other emerging
market countries can be attributed both to the scale of the policy response (see below) and the
more drawn-out nature of the slowdown. Nevertheless, by end-2009, real GDP in Kazakhstan
will be 20 percent below its pre-crisis trend level. Lower oil prices will push the current

5
Box 1. Spillovers to and from Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan Trade
70
Exports in percent of GDP
Imports in percent of GDP
Share of exports to Russia

60
50
In percent

The slump in Russia is impacting Kazakhstan,
among other countries, while the slowdown in
Kazakhstan is in turn affecting the Kyrgyz
economy. While the 1998 Russian crisis is said to
have “de-linked” the central Asian region from
Russia—the declining share of exports to Russia,
which had begun prior to 1998, continued after the
crisis––growth in the region is still highly correlated
with Russia.1

40
30
20
10

The high growth correlation between Kazakhstan
and Russia is increasingly explained by financial
linkages, in addition
to trade flows—though oil price
developments, which affect both countries, also play a
role. Data since 2000 suggest a 1 percent change in
Russian GDP growth is associated with a 0.8 percent
change in Kazakhstan GDP growth.

0
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Impact of Russia growth shock on Kazakhstan growth
1.6
1.2

Impulse response
1 +/- S.E. conf. int.

0.8

In percent

Kazakhstan’s oil driven boom earlier in the decade
also spilled over to the Kyrgyz Republic, through
0.4
strengthening trade, labor and financial market
linkages. About 15 percent of Kyrgyz Republic’s
0.0
non-gold exports go to Kazakhstan; subsidiaries of
-0.4
Kazakh banks account for 50 percent of loans in the
Kyrgyz Republic; and migrant remittances from
-0.8
Kazakhstan are more than 20 percent of total (data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Quarters after shock
likely understate the true level). Not surprisingly,
changes in Kazakh growth appear to have a near oneto-one spillover to Kyrgyz GDP growth (controlling for the effect of Russia).

9

10

11

12

_____________________________________
1

“How Russia Affects the Neighborhood: Trade Financial and Remittance Channels,” by Nadeem Ilahi,
Fahad Alturki, and Jaime Espinosa, IMF Working Paper, forthcoming, July 2009.

account back into deficit this year, although with energy-related foreign direct investment
remaining strong and new bilateral financing emerging the overall balance of payments will
remain robust (Figure 4, Tables 4, 5).1 Inflation is expected to be around 8½ percent by yearend, broadly unchanged from current levels, as the weak demand environment limits the
ability of producers to pass on higher import costs. The weakening economy and large “anticrisis” spending will result in a fiscal deficit this year, the first since 2000 (Table 6).

1

Balance of payments analysis is complicated by very large errors and omissions in recent years—about
$6 billion in 2008, broadly the same size as the recorded current account surplus. Possible explanations include
unrecorded capital outflows and lags in the recording of imports.

6
5.
Considerable uncertainties still surround the near-term outlook. Higher oil prices
could lead to stronger growth, particularly in 2010, while the failure to deal forcefully with
the problems in the banking sector or a more protracted global recession would lead to a
deeper and longer contraction. In turn, this would feedback into banks’ asset quality,
undermine confidence in the banks, and in a worse-case scenario lead to a deposit run
(Box 2: A Downside Scenario for Kazakhstan).
Box 2. A Downside Scenario for Kazakhstan
The economic outlook for Kazakhstan is subject to several risks. These risks to the baseline scenario
(Tables 1–6) can be illustrated with a downside scenario, where a combination of negative factors affect the
economy. In this scenario, global economic conditions begin to deteriorate sharply and oil prices fall to
$35/barrel for a sustained period in the third quarter of 2009. Lower oil prices reduce the marginal
profitability of investing in the oil fields, and part of the expected FDI is delayed beyond 2010. External
financing to banks becomes minimal, with only half of the rollover rates as in the baseline. The worsening
financial conditions trigger a loss of confidence in the banking system and in the currency, leading to a run
on deposits and capital flight: 30 percent of the resident deposits in tenge are withdrawn and converted into
foreign currency, half of which either leave the country or are kept outside the banking system. In addition,
nearly 30 percent of the residents’ foreign currency deposits are withdrawn and leave the country. The central
bank uses its reserves to defend the exchange rate peg against the U.S. dollar.
The squeeze on bank balance
sheets in such a scenario
would be the epicenter of an
economic crisis, dissipating
through the economy mainly
through credit channels.
Assuming no change in
policies, the severe contraction
in credit would result in a deep
recession, with real activity
falling by over 6 percent (y/y)
and the fiscal deficit
deteriorating to nearly 7 percent
of GDP by year-end. Lower
export revenues would drive the
overall current account deficit
to around 10 percent of GDP
for the two years, despite a
significant fall in imports.
Official foreign currency assets
would drop sharply if the
exchange rate peg were
defended.

Kazakhstan: Selected Indicators Under the Baseline and
No-Policy Action Downside Scenarios, 2005-2010 1/

14

14

10

Real GDP growth (yoy, in %)

10
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)

10

10

5

5

6

6

0

0

2

2

-5

-5

-2

-10

-2
Baseline scenario
Downside scenario

-6
-10
2005

2006

2007

2008

-6

2009

10

-10
2010
10

-10
Baseline scenario
Downside scenario

-15
-20
2005

2006

2007

2008

-15

2009

60

-20
2010
60

Official FX assets 1/ (e.o.p., US$ billion)

Overall Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)
6

6

50

50

2

2

40

40

-2

30

-2
Baseline scenario

-6

-10
2005

-6

Downside scenario

2006

2007

2008

2009

30
Baseline scenario
Downside scenario

20

-10 10
2005
2010

2006

2007

Source: Kazakhstani authorities and staff estimates.
1/ Comprises central bank and national oil fund foreign currency assets.

2008

20

2009

10
2010

7
II. A STRONG POLICY RESPONSE, BUT CONSIDERABLE CHALLENGES REMAIN
6.
The authorities have introduced a range of measures to support the banking
sector and the real economy. At the center of the government’s strategy is its $10 billion
anti-crisis plan (Box 3: Kazakhstan’s Anti-Crisis Plan). Additional support is also coming
from tax cuts in the non-extractive sector and substantial liquidity injections provided by the
central bank. The authorities emphasized that their prudent policies during the boom years—
which resulted in the accumulation of a large stock of foreign currency assets and very little
public sector debt—had enabled them to respond forcefully to the current crisis.
7.
With implementation of the anti-crisis plan now moving ahead, the authorities
are confident that growth will pickup. They currently expect the economy to expand by
1 percent this year, and strengthen slightly further in 2010. While acknowledging the
downside risks, particularly if the global recession were deeper or longer-lasting than
currently expected, they also believe there is upside potential if oil prices rise further and the
anti-crisis plan successfully restores confidence.
A. Dealing with Financial Sector Distress
8.
The authorities emphasized that they are taking a multi-pronged approach to
dealing with the banking difficulties. They have provided substantial support to the top
four banks through the public development agency Samruk-Kazyna (SK) (Box 4: What is
Samruk-Kazyna?). While recognizing that conditions in the banking sector as a whole will
deteriorate further given economic conditions, their immediate priority is to deal with the two
large banks (BTA and Alliance) with significant problems (Text Table 1). The Financial
Supervision Agency (FSA) has given both banks until mid-July 2009 to present viable
restructuring and recapitalization plans that will enable them to meet regulatory
requirements. The authorities emphasized that if such plans are not presented, they will
consider options regarding exit strategies.


Loan loss provisions have been raised, but more needs to be done to reflect
deteriorating asset quality. The authorities noted that consistent with the
recommendations in last year’s staff report and the 2008 FSAP Update, the bank
supervisors have stepped-up their analysis of bank balance sheets. As a result, banks
had substantially raised their provisioning levels. Nevertheless, given the ongoing
economic contraction, NPLs will undoubtedly rise further in the coming months, and
the authorities expect that provisioning levels will need to increase further to
25–30 percent by end-2009 (compared to the current level of 16 percent). To cushion
the impact of deteriorating asset quality, SK has injected capital into the top three
banks, with a controlling share taken in BTA in February. Special audits
commissioned by the authorities and carried out by international firms are being
finalized at BTA and Alliance to assess the financial condition of the banks.
However, the audits originally planned for Halyk Bank and KKB, the other two major

8
banks that have received public money, have not taken place. Stress test scenarios
indicate the likely need for further capital provision to the banking sector and/or the
need for debt restructuring, although the size of these needs will depend on the extent
of the deterioration in asset quality (Text Table 2).
Box 3. Kazakhstan’s Anti-Crisis Plan
The authorities have introduced a range of measures to support the banking sector and the real economy. At
the center of the government’s strategy is its $10 billion (9.5 percent of GDP) anti-crisis plan (ACP), which broadly
entails: (i) provision of public support to the top four banks; (ii) steps to aid the completion of unfinished residential
construction projects and spur housing demand; (iii) financial assistance to the SME and agricultural sectors; and
(iv) increased public investment in the industrial sector. The ACP draws upon the combined efforts of the
Government, NBK and FSA, with Samruk-Kazyna (SK) serving as the main vehicle for crisis relief (see Box 4).
To date, approximately $6 billion of the ACP has been disbursed.

Direct equity support has so far
Summary of the Anti-Crisis Plan
focused on the top three banks. SK
Comment
Amount ($, bns )
has acquired equity stakes in BTA
Allocated Disbursed
(75 percent), Halyk (21 percent),
Support to:
KKB (20 percent), totaling
Financial sector
4.0
4.0 Capital and deposits provided.
$2.2 billion. Another $220 million
Mortgage loan refinancing
1.0
1.0 Provided to banks to refinance
existing mortgages.
is expected for additional equity in
Construction sector
2.0
0.0 To finish uncompleted housing
Halyk and $200 million has been
projects.
Agriculture
1.0
0.0 Provided to KAZ Agro.
set aside for a potential stake in
SMEs
1.0
1.0 Provided to banks for onlending.
Alliance. The remainder of the
Infrastructure/industry
1.0
0.0
disbursed $4 billion in financial
sector support is mostly in the
TOTAL
10.0
6.0
form of deposits.
Financing From:
Oil Fund

10.0

10.0

$9bn already transferred to SK and



$1 billion (of $3 billion) in
$1bn to KazAgro.
construction and real estate
Memo items:
support has been disbursed. Funds
Distressed Asset Fund
1.0
0.6 Capital provided from budget.
… Implemented Jan 1, 2009.
will be channeled to finance the
Tax cuts
4.0
…
Lower reserve requirements
3.0
completion of viable construction
Source: Kazakhstani authorities
projects and to refinance
mortgages—roughly 20 percent of all bank mortgages—with average interest rates of 10 percent, down
from 20 percent.



$1 billion earmarked for SME lending has been disbursed through the banking system at interest rates of
12.5 percent—down from recent average rates of 22 percent—with a maturity structure of up to 7 years.
Approximately 70 percent is to refinance existing loans and 30 percent for new credit.



To date, none of the $1 billion earmarked for agricultural development has been disbursed. This money is
expected to be spread between microcredit and large-scale projects.



To date, none of the $1 billion earmarked for the development of industrial innovation projects has been
disbursed. Large infrastructure projects are expected to garner a large portion of these funds.

Funding for the ACP has come largely from the NFRK. To date, the NFRK has disbursed $10 billion, of which
$9 billion has been made available to SK in the form of debt ($5 billion) and a capital injection ($4 billion), while
the remaining $1 billion has been allocated to KazAgro National Holding—another state entity charged with
administering support to the agriculture sector. The government could be exposed to some contingent liabilities
from the ACP through SK.

9
Box 4. What is Samruk-Kazyna?
Samruk-Kazyna (SK) is a newly formed state entity reflecting the end-2008 merger of the state asset
holding company (Samruk) and the sustainable development fund (Kazyna). The purpose of the merger
is to strengthen the positions of these companies so that they can play a central role in helping Kazakhstan
overcome the crisis. SK’s overall strategic goal, however, is to effectively mange its ownership in state
development institutions, national companies, and other legal entities. SK is not consolidated in the fiscal
accounts.
SK employs more than 260,000 people among 404 subsidiaries and associates spread across key sectors
of the economy, including energy, mining, telecoms, transportation and finance and banking. This diverse
structure contains some of the largest companies in Kazakhstan, including full equity stakes in KazMunaiGas
($24 billion total revenue in 2008), the Development Bank of Kazakhstan (DBK, $230 million), and Kazakh
Temir Zholy ($4.2 billion). This breadth leaves SK well-placed to administer anti-crisis policies, support
domestic producers and implement longer-term development goals. It also provides a natural base of support
to the banking sector through the placement of deposits by its companies. SK estimates that total deposits by
its entities in the top 10 banks exceeds one third of the deposit base. While this has certainly helped support
liquidity in the banking system, it also clearly carries risks. If the companies need to access their deposits for
operational purposes, the stability of some banks would be adversely affected.
At the end of 2007, SK had a consolidated
balance sheet of approximately 5.6 trillion tenge
($46.9 billion), or 45 percent of GDP.1 Total
market capitalization currently stands at just over
$30 billion. While 2008 financial statements are not
yet available, the $9 billion in NFRK funding
suggests that SK’s balance sheet is now more than
50 percent of GDP. Looking ahead, the expected
realization by the DBK of $5 billion from the $10
billion Chinese development loan will make this
share even larger.

Samruk-Kazyna Consolidated Balance Sheet
In trillions of tenge
2007

2006

Long-term assets

3.5

2.7

Current assets

2.1

1.2

5.6

3.9

Long-term liabilities

1.4

1.1

Current liabilities

1.3

0.5

Equity Capital

2.9

2.3

5.6

3.9

ASSETS

Total Assets
LIABILITIES

Total Liabilities & Equity Capital
Source: Samruk and Kazyna

___________________________
1

This figure reflects the combination of the separate audited consolidated financial statements for Samruk
and Kazyna. Fully audited and consolidated 2008 financials for SK are pending.



Banks have received large-scale public liquidity support. The NBK has continued to
provide direct liquidity support, while SK has taken on an increasingly dominant role
with deposits in the banks by companies under its umbrella. SK has also swapped
BTA and Alliance bonds for its own bonds; the banks are able to use the SK bonds as
collateral at the NBK. The banks are also channeling anti-crisis support to key sectors
of the economy at below-market interest rates.

10
Text Table 1. Comparison of Key Bank Ratios
(In percent at end April 2009 unless otherwise stated)
BTA
Systemic importance (assets in percent of total banks' assets)
Capital adequacy ratio
Loan-to-deposit ratio
Share of loans to nonresidents (end February 2009)
Contingent liabilities (in percent of total assets)
Foreign borrowing/Capital 1/
Construction and real estate loans as share of loans (end 2008) 2/
Loan repayments in 2009 ($ bn) 2/
Overdue loans (in percent of all loans)
NPLs (90 days basis)
NPLs 3/
Provisions (in percent of all loans)
Provisioning ratio (Provisioning/Overdue loans)

KKB

27.3
10.4
374.4
51.2
80.1
214.4
39.0
2.9
23.7
7.0
21.3
19.5
0.82

Halyk

19.3
12.5
203.9
13.4
61.3
379.0
36.0
1.5
15.8
8.0
18.2
20.8
1.32

13.7
13.0
119.4
9.7
47.5
86.3
19.0
0.6
21.9
11.2
12.9
15.3
0.70

Alliance
8.5
13.6
340.1
3.7
89.5
301.8
14.5
0.6
47.8
24.1
11.9
15.1
0.32

ATF

BCC

7.9
14.8
269.5
1.1
70.0
73.3
23.0
1.1
29.3
10.5
13.2
12.1
0.41

6.8
18.5
163.2
3.6
64.3
193.7
19.0
0.1
12.8
5.4
9.7
10.8
0.84

Source: FSA.
1/ Foreign borrowing via deposits of special purpose vehicles.
2/ Source is Visor Capital.
3/ Non-performing loans are calculated as the sum of loans classified as doubtful 5th category, bad loans and actual provisions for homogenous
loans.

Text Table 2. Stress Test Scenarios 1/ 2/
March-09
(Actual)

Scenario 1 3/

Scenario 2 4/ Scenario 3 5/

NPLs (90 Day Basis) (% of total loans)
NPA (% of assets) 6/
Loss Provisions (% of assets) 6/
Capital adequacy ratio (%)
Capital/GDP Ratio (%)
Number of banks below 12% capital adequacy ratio
Number of top 6 banks below 12% capital adequacy ratio
Number of banks with negative capital
Number of top 6 banks with negative capital

7.6
…
11.6
14.0
10.9
4
2
0
0

20.0
24.8
17.3
9.4
6.5
13
3
6
1

30.4
35.9
25.9
-0.4
-0.2
13
3
8
3

37.2
41.0
28.3
-3.4
-2.1
16
5
9
3

Capital adequacy ratio of banks below 12% requirement
Recapitalization requirements for return to 12% Ratio ($ bn) 7/
In % of 2009 GDP

10.6
0.6
0.5

1.4
5.3
4.6

-15.8
12.4
11.7

-12.2
13.5
12.7

0.5
0.0
0.1

1.8
0.4
3.2

6.8
2.4
3.2

6.8
2.4
4.3

Memo: Recapitalization requirements ($ bn)
BTA
Alliance Bank
Other banks

Sources: FSA and IMF Staff estimates
1/ Assumes that bad debt write offs are 25 percent of NPLs and there is a 40 percent recovery rate.
2/ Assumes 50% provisioning on NPLs and 100% on bad debts.
3/ Assumes 20 percent NPLs for all banks.
4/ Assumes 20 percent NPLs for all banks except BTA and Alliance, whose NPLs and recovery rates are adjusted upwards to reflect
worse loan books.
5/ Assumes 30 percent NPLs for all banks except BTA and Alliance, whose NPLs and recovery rates are adjusted upwards to reflect
worse loan books.
6/ Non performing assets (NPAs) include estimates include noncash assets that are subject to impairment.
7/ Assumes no restructuring of other bank liabilities



Following the standstills, negotiations to restructure the debt of two banks are
starting. Leading investment banks (Goldman Sachs and UBS for BTA, and Lazards
for Alliance Bank) and legal firms (White and Case) are acting as advisors in the
restructuring processes. The authorities hope that the banks can reach agreements
with creditors to restructure their debts.

11


The deposit insurance fund (KDIF) has been strengthened. The capital base of the
KDIF has been increased fourfold to T 100 billion tenge (about 0.6 percent of GDP)
and the deposit ceiling for individuals raised from T 0.7 million per depositor per
bank to T 5 million tenge (approximately $33,333). Reserves of the KDIF are
sufficient to cover deposits at the 23 smallest banks or 4 medium-sized banks, but not
at the large banks. The KDIF has the right to borrow from the NBK.



A distressed asset fund has been set up, but its role needs to be clarified. Cognizant
of the advantages of a centralized approach to cleaning up bad assets, the authorities
established a distressed asset fund, but to date it has not begun operations as debates
over the types of assets to be bought and their valuation have yet to be settled. Earlier
this year, SK established a property fund with certain features of a distressed asset
fund to buy unfinished construction projects from property developers at pre-bubble
prices, who in turn will repay their outstanding loans to the banks. SK is expected to
take responsibility for completing, managing, renting, and eventually selling these
properties.



The authorities have been strengthening the bank resolution framework. The FSA
has received new powers to intervene in a bank and the government has received new
authority to acquire shares to cover capital deficiencies, powers it has subsequently
exercised to intervene in BTA. 2 The amendments also allow for a “good bank-bad
bank” approach, successful in many similar cases. New amendments to the banking
law are underway and by mid-2009 the FSA should have the powers to undertake a
more comprehensive bank resolution, including by creating bridge (or stabilization)
banks and purchase and assumption transactions.



The regulatory and supervisory framework is being strengthened. The FSA is:
raising bank capital requirements; limiting banks’ ability to borrow in foreign
wholesale markets; planning to curb new lending in foreign currency through
provisioning requirements on loans to borrowers that do not have effective currency
hedges; and raising the minimum holdings of state securities in pension fund
portfolios. Measures are also being introduced to strengthen the fiduciary
responsibilities of company directors.



Contingency planning has helped manage the crisis. Consistent with the 2008 FSAP
Update recommendations, the authorities have developed a detailed contingency plan
to be activated in the case of problems at a large bank or in the event of a systemic
crisis (Text Table 3). The preparations proved very useful given recent developments,
and key agencies are continuing to review, develop, and update the plan.

2

Amendments and Additions to Laws Addressing the Stability of the Financial System, October 23, 2008.

12

Text Table 3. Assessment of the Implementation of the
Key Recommendations of the 2008 FSAP Update Mission
(in the areas of banking and supervision)
Recommendation

Assessment of Implementation

Strengthen the framework for bank resolution and
crisis management.
Complete contingency plans, including by
operationalizing the Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the NBK, FSA, and Government.

A comprehensive contingency planning framework/plan
that defines the responsibilities of various agencies and
a high level anti-crisis committee has been established,
guided by the MoU. The bank restructuring/resolution
framework has been strengthened by the increased legal
powers given to the FSA.

Assess options to recapitalize the Kazakhstan
Deposit Insurance Fund (KDIF).

The level of retail deposits guaranteed by the KDIF has
been raised from 700,000 tenge to 5 million tenge and
the KDIF has been recapitalized to partially cover this
extra potential liability.

Complement ongoing efforts to improve financial
surveillance, including with improvements to the
Early Warning System (EWS) at the NBK and
completion of a microeconomic EWS by the FSA.

Financial sector surveillance has been improved at both
the NBK and FSA. Their Financial Stability Report is now
more forward looking. However, more needs to be done
on the modeling of risks at both the macro and micro
levels. The FSA has begun strengthening its stress
testing capabilities, though a lack of staff resources
hampers progress. An MCM TA project to help the FSA
with stress testing techniques is underway.

Ensure that individual banks prepare contingency
plans to address possible systemic shocks and
individual vulnerabilities.

On-going.

Collect better information about the composition of
banks’ assets and liabilities abroad, including with
regard to maturity, pledges, and availability.

Data availability has improved.

Move further toward a modern, risk-based approach
to supervision, paying greater attention to the need
for effective corporate governance and risk
management in the banks.

Still on-going. The FSA has introduced a number of new
prudential measures, including tighter provisioning
standards, and a new NPL definition in line with
international norms. However, moves to a more riskbased approach have been slow, limited by capacity
constraints.

Improve consolidated supervision, including crossborder supervision.

Limited progress.

B. Policy Stimulus: How, and By How Much?
9.
The authorities have allowed the automatic fiscal stabilizers to operate and have
introduced additional spending through the anti-crisis plan and other initiatives.
Revenues have fallen with the weakening economy and the tax cuts in the non-extractive
sector introduced at the beginning of the year. Expenditures have risen sharply in recent
years as spending, directed through SK to mitigate the impact of the crisis, has increased. The
authorities intend to maintain nominal expenditures broadly at the level set out in the budget,

13
and allow the fiscal position to move into deficit this year. The deficit will be financed from
the oil fund. Specifically, the authorities intend to divert all the revenues that would usually
accumulate in the oil fund during the year (and in 2010) to cover the revenue shortfall in the
budget.
10.
Looking forward, if the economy
weakens more than expected, a further
stimulus would be feasible. A stimulus in
2010 could be financed from the oil fund
and, given the strong starting position,
would not raise sustainability concerns. 3
Indeed the fiscal position is robust to a
broad range of shocks (Figure 5, Table 7).
The authorities stressed that in the nearterm fiscal policy would remain flexible
and respond to changing economic
circumstances. Over the medium-term, however, there is a strong commitment to fiscal
consolidation and the rebuilding of the oil fund, which has proved such an important buffer
during the current crisis.
30

Sustainable Non-oil Deficit under the Baseline Scenario 1/
(percent of Non-oil GDP)

25

Baseline WEO oil price

20

Non-oil deficit (Baseline scenario)

15

Non-oil deficit (Further stimulus in 2010)

10

5

0

2007

2012

2017

2022

2027

1/ Non-oil deficit that would maintain per capita oil wealth constant in real terms.

11.
The authorities are very concerned about the social impact of the crisis. They
have set themselves the goal of keeping the unemployment rate to below 8 percent
(7.2 percent currently). Fiscal spending is being reallocated toward projects that have an
immediate employment impact under the government’s “Strategic Employment Program.”
The goal is to create 380,000 new jobs. Financial support is also being given to SMEs and
the agricultural sector under the anti-crisis plan, while reforms are being introduced to ease
regulatory and administrative burdens, particularly in the SME sector. The social safety net is
also being strengthened. Pension payments and childcare allowances were raised at the
beginning of the year. Recently, social benefits have been re-indexed with a higher inflation
rate following the devaluation.
12.
Monetary policy has been eased as the economy has weakened and inflation
pressures declined. The central bank has reduced reserve requirements and in May and
June 2009 cut its policy interest rate by a total of 100 basis points to 8.5 percent. Looking
forward, the central bank will continue to face a balancing act between keeping inflation on a
downward path and supporting the financial sector and the real economy.

3

A further stimulus in 2010 of 2 pp of GDP followed by fiscal consolidation over the medium term to bring the
deficit back to 2007 levels would be sustainable given Kazakhstan’s longer-term prospects for oil production.

14
C. Exchange Rate Policy: Providing Stability in an Unstable World
13.
The February 2009 devaluation of the tenge appears to have stabilized exchange
market pressures. The tenge was pegged to the U.S. dollar in late-2007 when the global
financial turmoil first hit Kazakhstan. This policy was sustained during 2008, although
pressures on the exchange rate began to increase toward year-end as oil prices fell and the
Russian ruble depreciated. In January 2009, reserve losses mounted, deposit dollarization
rose, and some large banks saw significant deposit outflows. Following the 20 percent
devaluation against the U.S. dollar (with a +/-3 percent band established around the central
parity of T/$150), staff estimate that the real effective exchange rate is now broadly in line
with fundamentals (Text Table 4).
Text Table 4. Kazakhstan: Methodologies to Assess Real Exchange Rate Misalignment 1/
Underlying Current Account
Estimated over(+)/ under(-)
Balance 5/
Current Account Norm
valuation
Macroeconomic Balance 2/

13.4

13.1

0.3

na

na

3.9

Constant Annuity to GDP

10.8

12.5

6.0

Constant Real Per Capita Annuity

10.8

9.4

-5.0

Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate 3/
External Sustainability 4/

1/ Based on augmented specifications of "Methodology for CGER Exchange Rate Assessments," SM/06/283. Underlying current
account balance excludes imports for oil sector development.
2/ Based on 2014 projections.
3/ Based on current fundamentals (2009). Medium term fundamentals are 2014 projections.
4/ The underlying CA and "norm" exclude income; estimates based on 2006 NFA and NPV of oil wealth.

14.
The central bank intends to keep the dollar peg until the global economic
situation has stabilized, but they will revisit the exchange rate regime at the appropriate
time. The authorities noted that the step devaluation in February had been necessary to
increase the competitiveness of import–competing industries and reduce depreciation
expectations. They considered the move a success. The exchange rate is currently sitting
comfortably in the middle of its band and the central bank has recently been buying dollars in
the market. The central bank believes that the pick-up in oil prices, the debt standstill at some
banks, and the large bilateral financing deals will all support the exchange rate. External
debt, while high, remains manageable at the economy-wide level (Figure 6, Table 8). The
authorities have announced their intention to seek WTO membership as a customs union,
together with Russia and Belarus.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
15.
The global recession and the ongoing difficulties in the banking sector are
having a significant negative effect on Kazakhstan’s economy. Nevertheless, mediumterm prospects remain favorable with a significant expansion in oil production expected over
the next decade. Against this background, economic policies need to deal with the impact of
the crisis and establish the basis for a resumption of growth. The general direction the

15
government is following under its Anti-Crisis Program and other policy initiatives is
appropriate, and implementation of the plan is moving ahead quickly in a number of areas.
The policy response—raising provisioning and capital levels in the banks, strengthening
financial sector oversight, developing contingency plans, maintaining a stable exchange rate,
and easing fiscal policy—are in line with the recommendations of the 2008 Article IV report.
16.
A clear and comprehensive solution to banking sector problems is urgently
needed. This will help restore confidence in the system, establish the basis for a sound
financial sector going forward, and contribute to improving the investment climate. Without
such a resolution, the risks of an extended period of poor economic performance will
increase. With the economy contracting, a further deterioration in asset quality is inevitable,
and a full assessment, including of the off-balance sheet and overseas assets/liabilities
positions, of the large banks is needed. For BTA and Alliance Bank, the special audits should
be completed promptly and the results used to assess the scope for developing business plans
and the associated restructuring and recapitalization efforts that would make these banks
robust to the vagaries of future economic cycles. This will involve working closely and
cooperatively with creditors, who should be treated in a consistent and equitable manner in
accordance with applicable law and international norms and best practices. At the same time,
creditor negotiations should not dictate how the government uses its authority under the
banking law to ensure a viable banking sector. A prompt resolution is important because the
underlying businesses of these banks will deteriorate rapidly if uncertainties about their
future linger. For the other large banks, a detailed independent assessment of their balance
sheets would give the government a clearer picture of their financial situation, and whether
any further action needs to be taken. As part of these overall efforts, additional government
support may be needed to protect financial stability, but this should be designed to limit, to
the extent possible, public costs.
17.
It is important that the authorities have a full complement of tools available to
them to ensure an efficient restructuring of the banking sector and reduce the risk of
spillovers across the sector if one institution fails. The proposed amendments to the
banking law will broaden the FSA’s options for dealing with troubled banks, although the
overall consistency and effectiveness of the bank resolution framework could still be
improved further. The FSA needs to more actively use the full range of its enforcement
powers when prudential standards are not met and avoid regulatory forbearance. The role
envisaged for the Distressed Asset Fund should be clarified. It is essential that the KDIF is in
a position to respond quickly and effectively if needed: its ability to tap a credit line from the
NBK, as set out in the KDIF law, and other procedures should be clearly established.
18.
Looking forward, the goal should be to develop a stable banking system that
relies primarily on domestic financing, particularly tenge denominated deposits, rather
than external borrowing in foreign currency (Box 5: What Will the Banking Sector Look
Like After the Crisis?). This will take time, as public confidence in the banks will need to be
restored and the public convinced that deposits offer an attractive savings vehicle.

16
Government intervention in the financial sector will need to be carefully scaled back over
time, including returning ownership to the private sector.

Box 5. What Will the Banking Sector Look Like After the Crisis?1
The on-going crisis in the banking sector provides an opportunity for the authorities to build a more
sustainable financial system that can contribute to economic development. Since the emergence of the
current banking structure following the 1998–99 economic crisis, the system grew very rapidly with assets
rising from 20 percent of GDP in 1999 to a peak of 92 percent in 2007. This was fuelled by a high level of
foreign borrowing (the loan-deposit ratio reached over 200 percent in 2007), with around half of all lending
conducted in foreign exchange, primarily to the nontradables sector. Structural features of Kazakhstan’s
economy create an environment conducive to boom-bust cycles in which fluctuations in global commodity
demand and induced large-scale capital flows can create major swings in banks’ balance sheets. This
structure has proved to be inherently fragile given its vulnerability to sudden stops of foreign inflows, a high
concentration of lending in the real estate/construction sectors, and the indirect credit risks from lending in
foreign exchange.
The banking system that emerges from the
Drivers of Banks ' As s et Growth
120
crisis is likely to be smaller than before,
(Contribution to annual grow th, in percent)
100
but with less risks. Already the system is
Domestic borrow ing
Foreign borrow ing
downsizing as a result of the deleveraging
80
Deposits
process and recognition of bad loans. PostCapital
60
Total assets
crisis, system asset growth will be
constrained by three key factors: (i) the
40
domestic deposit base which is small at about
20
30 percent of GDP; (ii) the capital base; and
0
(iii) the more limited importance of foreign
borrowings through wholesale markets. Bank
-20
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Steady
funding will be tilted more toward domestic
State
Source: Kazakhstani authorities; and staff calculations.
sources as new regulations now limit the size
of foreign borrowing, and more generally
foreign investors better appreciate the specific country and institutional risks. This suggests that credit growth
will mainly be a function of banks’ ability to mobilize the domestic deposit base and to raise new capital.
Based on estimates of key parameters, including nominal GDP growth, financial deepening and deposit
mobilization, system modeling suggests that, from a predicted post-crisis assets to GDP ratio of about 70
percent, the banking system in nominal terms would be able to grow sustainably by about 20–25 percent
annually, compared to over 60 percent during 2000 to 2007. Given the lower share of overseas financing,
there should be less dollarization with a higher share of tenge denominated funding and lending.
As discussed in the main text, policies that would underpin a more viable banking sector include:
macroeconomic policies that deliver low inflation, positive real interest rates, and a more flexible exchange
rate; a stronger regulatory and supervisory framework; and the development of financial markets to provide
longer-term tenge financing and risk diversification.
____________________________
1
This box summarizes the accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Reducing the Risks in the Banking Sector.”

19.
To underpin this process, financial sector regulation and supervision need to be
strengthened and corporate governance at the banks improved. In particular,

17


The FSA needs the legal authority, independence, and resources to carry out its
mandate and must be able and willing to intervene early and forcefully when it sees
the financial condition of a bank deteriorating. To achieve this: (i) offsite supervisory
capacities need to be further developed, including by conducting more rigorous stress
tests; and (ii) the frequency and depth of onsite inspections increased. Adequate legal
protection for the FSA and its supervisory staff also needs to be ensured.



The steps being taken by the FSA to strengthen the regulatory system are welcome,
although it is important that the timing of the introduction of these measures does not
put undue pressures on banks in the near-term. At the right time, the FSA should also
consider stronger restrictions on foreign currency lending to unhedged borrowers and
clearer limits on off-balance sheet liabilities and exposures to related parties.



Measures to strengthen the fiduciary responsibilities of company directors are
welcome. The clear identification of the full ownership structure of a bank should be
a requirement for receiving and maintaining a banking license. This will lay the basis
for more effective implementation of connected lending limits.



Over time, domestic capital markets need to be developed to provide alternate
funding sources for borrowers. The limited ability to raise long-term tenge financing
is an impediment for banks to provide longer-term local currency loans.



Recent steps to strengthen the regulation and supervision of pension funds are
welcome. The impact (and contingent cost) of government guarantees in the pension
industry, however, should be fully assessed.

20.
Inflation has been well-contained since the February devaluation, and the
current monetary policy stance is appropriate. Given the weak demand environment,
inflation should remain well-contained this year and then gradually decline during the course
of 2010. When inflation is established on a downward path, there will be scope for some
further easing of policy, although it is important to keep real interest rates at positive levels to
support domestic deposits and help banks move toward a sustainable funding base.
21.
Regarding exchange rate policy, there will be benefits to allowing greater
exchange rate flexibility over the medium-term. While the dollar peg provides important
stability, it also has limitations. A more flexible exchange rate would enhance the
effectiveness of monetary policy, stem the build-up of unhedged foreign exchange exposures,
and help the economy respond to commodity price movements, although here the primary
burden of adjustment should fall on fiscal policy (Box 6: Exchange Rate Regime Options in
Kazakhstan). A return to a managed float or a move to a basket peg would be appropriate. To
prepare for a change in the exchange rate regime, in addition to adaptations to prudential
arrangements, steps are needed to strengthen balance sheets. Recent initiatives to facilitate

18
the refinancing of foreign currency mortgage and SME loans into tenge are therefore
welcome. The peg to the U.S. dollar, however, remains appropriate for now until the
problems in the financial sector are resolved. The NBK should be able to keep the tenge
within its announced +/- 3 percent band around the central rate of T/$150 in the period ahead
provided that confidence in the banking sector does not deteriorate further. Staff encourages
the authorities to continue to pursue trade liberalization through multilateral fora.
22.
Fiscal policy is providing considerable support to the economy. With public debt
low and financing readily available, allowing the automatic fiscal stabilizers to work and
maintaining expenditures as the government is doing is appropriate. However, given the scale
of the resources committed through the anti-crisis plan and the budget this year, the primary
focus should now be on the effective implementation of this spending. In this context, regular
progress reports on the implementation of the anti-crisis plan should continue and timely
financial accounts for Samruk-Kazyna published.
23.
If the downturn is more protracted than currently expected, there is scope for
fiscal policy to support the economy again in 2010. Any additional spending should focus
on strengthening the social safety net and supporting spending on development priorities
such as infrastructure, health, and education. Once the current downturn has abated, however,
it will be important that the non-oil fiscal deficit is put on a firm downward path and that
financial resources are once again accumulated in the oil fund.
24.
The government has announced that one of its top priorities is to limit the
increase in unemployment. In this context, the intention to ease the burden of regulation on
businesses, particularly in the SME sector, is welcome. Initiatives to broaden job retraining
programs, together with a strengthening of the social safety net, will also help ease the
burden of adjustment for those laid off.
25.
The government’s intention to meet all validation indicators of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and raise participation of Kazakhstan’s oil
companies in the initiative over the next three years is welcome. This is an important
further step to increase transparency in the oil sector. Staff also urges prompt passage of the
latest draft of the AML/CFT legislation that is still pending parliamentary approval.
26.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

19
Box 6. Exchange Rate Regime Options for Kazakhstan1
After being operated as a heavily managed float, the tenge was pegged to the U.S. dollar in October 2007 during
the first wave of the financial crisis. Pegged regimes have considerable merit in providing stability, particularly in
countries lacking a strong nominal anchor—and are prevalent in most oil exporters. However, “hard pegs” are prone
to risks of a disorderly exit. Once conditions in financial markets stabilize, several options could be considered to
allow greater exchange rate flexibility, including pegging to a basket of currencies, pegging to the price of oil, or
moving to a managed float.
Different exchange rate regimes help stabilize the economy against different shocks. Results from a general
equilibrium model for a commodity exporter with external debt suggest that the optimal exchange rate regime
depends on the central bank’s policy objectives,
Box Chart 1: 10 percent increase in the oil price with small negative correlation to USD
such as stabilizing output and inflation, and
2
2
1.5
1.5
some key correlations such as between oil
Output
Inflation
1
1
prices and the U.S. dollar. When compared
0.5
0.5
to a single-currency peg or a commodity
0
0
peg, pegging the tenge to a basket of the
-0.5
-0.5
Currency basket peg
three currencies most relevant for
Currency basket peg
-1
USD peg
-1
USD peg
Kazakhstan’s trade –the U.S. dollar, the
Oil
price
peg
-1.5
-1.5
Oil price peg
euro and the Russian ruble– appears to
-2
-2
1
5
9
13
17
21
25
29
33
37
1
5
9
13
17
21
25
29
33
37
provide more stability in output and inflation
for most shocks that Kazakhstan faces, such as an increase in the oil price that causes a small depreciation of the U.S.
dollar against other major currencies (Box Chart 1).
While an oil price peg may be useful in some cases, in practical terms it is likely to be difficult to implement. A
peg to the oil price, i.e. adjusting the tenge/dollar exchange rate to stabilize the price of oil in domestic units (à la
Frankel) might better mitigate the effects of oil price shocks that have a large negative correlation with the dollar.
However, with large and unpredictable swings in oil prices, fully adjusting the value of the tenge for oil price
movements would have created
Box Chart 2: Constructed Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates under Different Regimes
large swings in the nominal and
160
550
Real Effective Exchange Rates:
real exchange rates in the last few 165 Nominal Exchange Rates:
500
Actual, $/Euro/Ruble Basket Peg and Oil price Peg
Actual, $/Euro/Ruble Basket Peg and Oil price Peg
150
Jan. 2007 - Feb. 2009
Jan. 2007 - Feb. 2009
145
years (Box Chart 2). These
450
Actual KZT/$ peg
140
400
swings would in turn have had
Oil price peg (right axis)
125
350
adverse balance sheet effects and
130
105
$/Euro/Ruble basket peg
300
$/Euro/Ruble basket peg (left axis)
hindered the development of the
120
250
85
Oil price peg
non-oil sector. Opting for a partial
200
110
Actual KZT/$ peg (left axis)
65
oil peg instead would lead to a
150
complex and less transparent
100
100
45
Jan-07
Jul-07
Jan-08
Jul-08
Jan-09
Jan-07
Jul-07
Jan-08
Jul-08
Jan-09
regime, eliminating any
credibility gains from having a peg.
A currency basket or a managed float offer better options than a commodity peg for Kazakhstan. A currency
basket peg or a managed float would lessen the role of the exchange rate as a strict nominal anchor, but provide more
autonomy to the central bank, and appear better suited for Kazakhstan as discussed further in the main text. In
particular, a managed float would allow taking into account changes in commodity prices and trading partners’
currencies.
Finally, exchange rate policies need to be supported by appropriate oil revenue management. To the extent that
oil revenues are spent rather than saved, changes in the global price of oil will have an impact on the real economy,
and employing the exchange rate to counter these effects can only be a partial solution. The first best option is to
eliminate the procyclical bias in fiscal policy by saving a greater share of oil revenues.
__________________________
1
This box summarizes the accompanying Selected Issues Paper “Options for Future Exchange Rate Regimes in
Kazakhstan.”

20
Figure 1. Kazakhstan: Recent Macroeconomic Developments
Kazakhstan’s economy remains under severe pressure, with real GDP growth contracting by 2.2 percent (y/y) in the first
quarter of 2009. Inflation has declined from its summer 2008 peak in response to the collapse in demand. Weak global
demand and subdued commodity prices have contributed to falling exports. Imports are also contracting.
Real GDP is now contracting…
14

…driven by (i) a sharp contraction in industrial production;
ii) a slowdown in construction…
20

(y/y percent change)

12

Real GDP

10

Oil

(12-month growth, in percent)
Industrial production, LHS
Construction Volume, RHS

16

100
80

12

60

6

8

40

4

4

20

0

0

Non-oil

8

2
0

-4
06Q1 06Q3 07Q1 07Q3 08Q1 08Q3 09Q1

…as the real estate bubble burst;…

-8
Apr-07

120

Actual and Equilibrium Nominal House Prices
(Thousands of tenge/sq.m) 1/

100

Equilibrium
prices
(broken lines)

Almaty
prices

Oct-08

-40
Apr-09

(12-month growth, in percent)

60
40
20

200

0

100
0
Apr-01

Kazakhstan prices
Apr-03

Apr-05

Apr-07

Apr-09

… and; (iv) a moderation in real wage growth which has
affected consumption,…
35

Apr-08

80

300

40

Oct-07

…(iii) a collapse in external demand and terms of trade…

500
400

-20

-4

-2

-60
Apr-07

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

Apr-09

…and has contributed to lower inflation despite the
devaluation of the tenge.
(12-month growth, in percent)
Overall
Non-food

18

20

15

15

12

10
5

9

0
-5
Apr-07

Imports

21

Nominal wages
Real wages

25

Exports

-40

24

(12-month growth, in percent)

30

-20

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

Apr-09

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Based on equilibrium user-cost approach (see SM/08/173).

6
May-07

Nov-07

May-08

Nov-08

May-09

21

Figure 2. Kazakhstan: Recent Financial Market Developments
The crisis in global financial markets spilled over to Kazakhstan. Spreads and domestic equities markets have been severely
affected, but are showing signs of recovery. Following the devaluation in February, the new peg is being maintained within a +/-3
percent band and to support liquidity the NBK cut reserve requirements and the policy rate.
Sovereign CDS spreads have recently come down in line
with global trends…
1,800

…as have CDS spreads on banks.
8,000

(in basis points)

(in basis points)

7,000

1,500

Kazakhstan
MS CDX Index
Russia

1,200

KKB

6,000

Halyk

5,000

900

BTA

4,000
3,000

600

2,000
300

1,000

0
Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

Equity prices have declined significantly, but have recently
displayed signs of recovery.

Dec-07

Jun-08

(Index; Nov 1, 2006=100)

(in percent)

Jun-09

Kazprime
Policy rate

14

150
12

125

10

100
75

Dec-08

The central bank has recently lowered its policy rate and
liquidity conditions continue to improve.
16

200
175

0
Jun-07

Jun-09

KASE index

8

50
6

25
0
Jun-07

Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

The exchange rate remains well supported around the
midpoint of the new band…
160

7.5

155

7.0

150
145
140

+/- 3% band
Tenge/U.S.$ (LHS)
Tenge/Ruble (RHS)

5.5

110

4.5

125

4.0

120

3.5
Dec-07

Jun-08

Dec-08

3.0
Jun-09

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and IMF staff estimates.

Dec-08

Jun-09

(Index; 2000=100)
130
120

130

Jun-08

140

6.0

5.0

Dec-07

…bringing the effective exchange rates in line with levels
preceding the depreciation of the ruble.

6.5

135

115
Jun-07

4
Jun-07

REER
NEER

100
90
80
Apr-07

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

Apr-09

22
Figure 3. Kazakhstan: Banking Sector Developments
The banking system is undergoing a rapid adjustment to the sudden stop in capital inflows in August 2007 and the global crisis
since September 2008. There is a severe credit crunch and slowing economic activity is affecting loan quality and capital
adequacy. Dollarization is on the rise.
Banks have been shrinking their balance sheets in response
to the sudden stop in external financing…
60

175

(in billions of dollars)

250
Credit growth, in percent (LHS)

150

Banks' external assets
Banks' external liabilities

50

…resulting in a sharp squeeze in domestic credit growth.

230

Loans to deposits ratio (RHS)

125

210

40

100

190

30

75

170

50

150

25

130

20
10
Apr-07

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

0
Apr-07

Apr-09

NPLs are rising and higher provisions are eroding bank
capital adequacy, forcing some to recapitalize.
10

20
Loss loans (% of total loans), RHS
Capital adequacy ratio, LHS

16

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

110
Apr-09

Deposit dollarization has increased with exchange rate
uncertainty.
60
Comm. banks' FX deposits (% of total) 1/

8

12

6

8

4

4

2

Comm. banks' FX loans (% of total) 1/

50

40

0
Apr-07

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

0
Apr-09

With the implementation of the anti-crisis plan, deposits of
public entities account for a larger share of the system’s
deposits.
3,000

30

20
Apr-06

Apr-07

Apr-08

Apr-09

The rise in corporate liabilities is a vulnerability, including for
banks.
80

(in billions of tenge)

2,500
2,000

60

Households
Private corporates
Public entities

Foreign Currency Balance Sheet by Sector ($bns.)
Liabilities
Assets
Net Assets

40
20
0

1,500

-20

1,000

Dec-04

-40

500
0
Apr-07

-60

Mar-08 Mar-09

-80

Oct-07

Apr-08

Oct-08

Apr-09

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Accounting for exchange rate valuation effects.

Official
Sector

Financial
Sector

Household Non-financial
non-oil
Sector
Corporate

23
Figure 4. Kazakhstan: External and Fiscal Sector Developments and Outlook
Sustained FDI flows and the emergence of bilateral financing deals will support the external position even as the current account
moves into deficit. Weak growth and tax changes will weigh heavily on non-oil revenues, dragging the overall fiscal balance into
deficit. All incoming oil revenues will be diverted to the budget, covering the revenue shortfall from the non-oil sector.
Weak trade dynamics and subdued global commodity prices
will contribute to a deterioration in the current account
balance…
30

…though healthy FDI flows primarily into the oil sector will
strengthen the external financing position.
30

(in percent of GDP)

Trade Balance

25

Current Account
Balance

20

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

2007

2008

100

(in percent of GDP)
Intracompany Debt

2006

2009 proj. 2010 proj.

External debt is close to 100 percent of GDP, but about 40
percent of this is intra-company debt.
120

Net FPI (excl. NFRK flows)
Net FDI
Other
Fin. Acc. (excl. NFRK flows)

20

15

2006

(in percent of GDP)

25

Bank Debt

2009 proj. 2010 proj.

(in billions of U.S. dollars)

30

GIR
NFRK FX deposits

26

80

2008

The oil fund’s (NFRK) foreign assets have been mobilized for
the anti-crisis plan.
34

Other Debt

2007

22

60

18

40

14

20

10
6
May-06

0
2006

2007

2008

2009 proj. 2010 proj.

Non-oil revenue has plummeted in line with slowing growth
and anti-crisis spending has increased…
34

Non-oil Revenue (% of non-oil GDP)
Total Expenditures

31
28

May-08

May-09

...dragging the overall fiscal balance into deficit, which will be
financed from the oil fund.
12

(in percent of GDP)

May-07

(in percent of GDP)

8

Overall Fiscal Balance
Non-oil Fiscal Balance

4
0

25

-4
22

-8

19

-12

16

-16
2006

2007

2008

2009 proj. 2010 proj.

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and IMF staff estimates.

2006

2007

2008

2009 proj. 2010 proj.

24

Figure 5. Kazakhstan: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Net public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios

5

Gross financing need under baseline
(right scale)

4
2

0

0
-2

-5

-15
Baseline
2007

2009

-6

-15.0

-8

2011

2013

10

10
Baseline:

4.1

Scenario:

2.5

Historical:

8.7

0
-5

Growth
shock

-7.4

-10
-15
Baseline
-20
2003

2005

2007

2009

Historical:

-15.0

0

-5

-5

-20
2003

5
0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-20
2013

-20
2003

2011

2013

-20

10
Baseline:
Scenario:

1.2
-0.4
2.9

5
0

PB shock

-6.0
-8.3

-15.0

-5
-10
-15
-20

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Contingent liabilities shocks 3/

5

0

0

0

-5

-5

-5
-11.7

Baseline -15.0
2013

10
contingent
liabilities
shock

5
0
-5
-6.5

-10

-10

-15

-15

-10

Baseline
-20

2011

2009

-17.1

No policy change

5

2009

2007

-10
-15

i-rate
shock

Historical:

5

2007

2005

5

10

2005

-15.0

10

10

-20
2003

Baseline

-15

Combined shock 2/

-15

5

0

10

-10

5.9
-9.9

Baseline

2011

Combined
shock

3.2

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock (in percent per year)

5

5

-10

-12.6

-10
2005

Baseline:
Scenario:

-4

Historical

-10

-20
2003

10

10

10

-20
2003

-15.0

-15
-20

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occurs in 2009. This is consistent with the extent of needed capital support
to the banks in Scenario 2 of Text table 2.

25
Figure 6. Kazakhstan: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt, excluding intra-company debt, in percent of GDP)
Baseline and historical scenarios
70

40

70

30

60

20

50

Interest rate shock (in percent)

Gross financing need under baseline
(right scale)
60

Baseline

50

i-rate shock
41

40

10

40

Historical
30

0
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

30
2004

Growth shock (in percent per year)
70

60

60

40

Growth
shock

30
2004

Baseline:

4.0

Scenario:

2.4

Historical:

8.7

2006

2008

Baseline

2010

8.0
8.9

Historical:

5.8

2006

2008

Baseline

2010

38

2012

2014

Non-interest current account shock
(in percent of GDP)

70

50

Baseline:
Scenario:

CA shock
51

45

40

38

2012

50

2014

30
2004

Baseline:

4.0

Scenario:

2.0

Historical:

1.1

2006

Combined shock 2/

2008

Baseline
38

2010

2012

2014

Real depreciation shock 3/
100

70

90
60

80

Combined
48
shock

30 %
depreciation

75

70

50
60
50

40
Baseline
30
2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

38

38

40

2014

30
2004

Baseline
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes
represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average
for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2009 (in addition to the mid-February depreciation).

26

Table 1. Kazakhstan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006–14
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011
2012
Projections

2013

2014

(annual percent change; unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts and prices
Real GDP
Real oil
Real non-oil
Crude oil and gas condensate production
Consumer price index (eop)
Consumer price index (p.a)
GDP Deflator

10.7
9.9
10.8
65
8.4
8.6
21.6

8.9
6.3
8.5
68
18.8
10.8
15.5

3.2
2.5
3.3
71
9.5
17.2
23.0

-2.0
8.7
-3.3
76
8.5
8.2
-0.8

2.0
7.0
1.3
81
6.3
7.3
11.1

6.0
1.0
6.7
82
6.0
6.0
6.0

5.6
2.9
6.0
84
6.0
6.0
3.8

5.6
2.5
6.0
86
6.0
6.0
3.7

7.5
11.0
7.1
95
6.0
6.0
4.7

Exchange rate (tenge per U.S. dollars; eop)
Exchange rate (tenge per Russian rubles; eop)
Real effective exchange rate (p.a) (+ appreciation)

-4.4
3.6
7.5

-5.6
1.4
2.2

-0.2
-15.8
6.8

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

26.7
12.3
25.2
1.5

26.9
12.2
24.5
2.4

26.8
11.9
23.3
3.5

(in percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
General government fiscal accounts
Revenues and grants
of which: oil revenues
Expenditures and net lending
Overall fiscal balance
Statistical discrepancy

27.5
10.2
20.2
7.2

28.8
9.4
24.2
4.7

27.8
12.4
26.8
1.1

25.0
10.9
27.0
-2.1

26.3
12.9
27.0
-0.7

26.5
12.6
26.2
0.3

0.0

0.1

-0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Financing

-7.2

-4.6

-1.3

2.1

0.7

-0.3

-1.5

-2.4

-3.5

Non-oil fiscal balance
Non-oil overall fiscal balance (percent of non-oil GDP)
Expenditures (percent change)

-3.0
-4.3
22.0

-4.7
-6.6
50.2

-11.3
-16.5
40.7

-12.9
-17.4
-1.8

-13.6
-19.0
13.1

-12.3
-17.2
9.1

-10.8
-14.7
5.2

-9.8
-13.0
6.8

-8.4
-11.1
6.9

9.7
9.7
2.0
9.7
59.0
…

12.7
12.7
1.9
12.7
59.0
…

(annual percent change; unless otherwise indicated)
Monetary accounts
Reserve money
Broad money
Broad money velocity (annual average)
Credit to the economy
Credit to the economy (percent of GDP)
NBK refinance rate (eop; percent)

126.4
78.1
2.8
80.5
47.8
9.0

-2.5
25.9
2.8
55.1
58.9
11.0

4.2
35.4
2.6
5.1
48.9
10.5

16.5
12.2
2.3
13.9
57.2
…

14.6
24.4
2.1
16.6
58.9
…

11.6
17.9
2.0
12.0
58.7
…

9.9
9.9
2.0
9.9
58.8
…

(in billions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External accounts
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Exports of goods and services
Oil and gas condensate
Imports of goods and services
Foreign direct investments (net, percent of GDP)
NBK gross reserves (eop) 1/
In months of next year's imports of goods and services
NFRK foreign assets (eop)
Public external debt, incl. guaranteed (percent of GDP)
Total external debt
in percent of GDP
excluding intracompany debt (percent of GDP)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of tenge)
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Crude oil, gas cnds. Production (Mbrl/day) 2/
Oil price (in U.S. dollars per barrel)

-2.5
41.6
23.6
-32.9
8.2
19.1
5.1
14.1
1.8
74.0
91.4
59.9

-7.8
51.9
28.1
-44.9
7.6
17.6
4.3
21.0
1.4
96.9
92.4
63.7

5.1
76.4
41.5
-49.5
7.9
19.9
6.4
27.5
1.2
107.8
79.5
52.3

-2.1
46.7
24.4
-37.5
7.7
23.9
7.1
22.3
1.5
106.0
98.9
59.2

2.3
57.1
33.2
-40.2
5.5
33.6
8.8
22.9
1.4
111.9
92.4
52.4

3.3
64.4
35.1
-45.6
4.9
43.6
10.4
27.3
1.2
112.1
80.8
45.9

3.5
70.7
37.7
-50.3
4.7
53.1
11.5
33.4
1.1
117.8
75.8
41.9

3.4
77.2
40.0
-55.3
4.6
60.2
11.9
41.6
1.0
128.3
73.8
40.8

4.4
87.3
45.5
-60.7
4.3
67.4
12.1
53.0
0.9
139.0
69.5
38.2

10,214
81.0
1.34
64.3

12,850
104.8
1.39
71.1

16,313
135.6
1.45
97.0

15,863
107.2
1.56
60.5

17,975
121.0
1.66
74.5

20,197
138.8
1.68
78.0

22,143
155.4
1.73
80.0

24,251
173.8
1.77
81.3

27,295
200.0
1.95
82.5

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes deposits of the National Fund.
2/ Based on a conversion factor of 7.5 barrels of oil per ton.

27
Table 2. Kazakhstan: Monetary Accounts, 2004–10
2004
Dec.

2005
Dec.

2006
Dec.

2007
Dec.

2008
Dec.

2009
Apr.

2009
2010
Dec.
Dec
Projections

(in billions of tenge)
Monetary Survey
Net Foreign Assets

1,192

1,200

2,296

1,961

4,054

5,075

5,650

7,673

Net Domestic Assets
Domestic Credit
Net claims on central government
Net claims on other government
Credit to the private sector
Other claims on the economy
Other items, net

647
1,099
-609
26
1,555
126
-451

1,126
1,822
-998
47
2,709
64
-696

2,394
3,592
-1,914
34
4,881
592
-1,199

3,446
5,583
-2,649
43
7,574
615
-2,137

2,696
5,265
-3,075
34
7,970
336
-2,569

2,440
5,869
-4,246
630
8,777
708
-3,429

2,376
7,702
-3,229
638
9,080
1,214
-5,326

2,070
8,176
-3,176
638
10,590
125
-6,106

Broad money
Currency in circulation
Total deposits
Non-liquid liabilities
Statistical discrepancy

1,635
379
1,255
9
196

2,065
412
1,654
30
231

3,678
601
3,077
129
883

4,630
740
3,890
90
688

6,268
858
5,410
80
403

6,556
747
5,809
104
856

7,029
770
6,259
111
885

8,746
649
8,098
111
885

Accounts of National Bank of Kazakhstan
Net foreign assets
Net international reserves 1/

1,672
1,013

2,027
966

4,219
2,428

4,648
2,121

5,645
2,343

6,298
2,945

6,740
3,382

7,818
4,514

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net claims on central government
Net claims on other government
Net claims on the private sector
Net claims on banks
Other items, net

-981
-903
-731
7
1
-181
-78

-1,367
-1,279
-1,125
17
0
-172
-89

-2,711
-2,576
-2,051
5
1
-532
-135

-3,156
-2,916
-2,790
6
0
-133
-239

-3,562
-3,356
-3,283
6
1
-79
-206

-4,031
-3,495
-4,404
606
2
301
-536

-4,993
-2,504
-3,414
606
3
301
-2,489

-5,820
-2,552
-3,361
606
3
201
-3,268

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Liabilities to banks
Required reserves
Other liabilities
Demand deposits
Other deposits

578
411
164
85
79
3
0

663
459
197
110
87
7
0

1,501
687
797
665
132
17
0

1,464
860
568
558
10
37
0

1,471
987
328
295
33
211
0

2,193
866
737
561
175
590
0

1,714
669
767
159
174
279
0

1,966
767
767
197
174
432
0

Other liquid liabilities

112

10

7

28

612

74

33

33

Deposit money banks
Net foreign assets

-480

-828

-1,923

-2,687

-1,591

-1,223

-1,090

-145

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net claims on central government
Net claims on other government
Credit to the private sector
Banks' reserves
Net claims on other financial corporations
Other items, net

1,629
2,002
122
19
1,554
353
-46
-373

2,494
3,101
127
30
2,708
296
-60
-607

5,105
6,168
136
28
4,879
1,195
-71
-1,064

6,602
8,500
141
37
7,573
840
-92
-1,898

6,258
8,621
209
28
7,969
597
-182
-2,363

6,471
9,364
158
24
8,775
906
-499
-2,893

7,369
10,206
185
31
9,077
998
-85
-2,838

7,890
10,728
185
31
10,587
500
-576
-2,838

Banks' liabilities
Demand deposits
Other deposits
Other liabilities

1,149
365
775
9

1,666
524
1,112
30

3,182
884
2,169
129

3,916
925
2,901
90

4,667
1,149
3,438
80

5,248
1,504
3,640
104

6,279
1,573
4,595
111

7,745
1,957
5,677
111

82.3
68.2
53.7
3.6
2.8
40
51

12.5
26.3
74.2
3.7
3.2
42
50

131.0
78.1
80.2
2.8
2.4
35
48

-2.5
25.9
55.2
2.8
3.2
33
43

0.5
35.4
5.2
2.6
4.3
41
44

43.0
35.1
14.9
2.4
3.0
54
52

16.5
12.2
13.9
2.3
4.1
59
51

14.6
24.4
16.6
2.1
4.5
58
51

Memorandum items
Reserve money (percent change, yoy)
Broad money (percent change, yoy)
Credit to the economy (percent change, yoy)
Velocity of broad money
Money multiplier
Foreign currency deposits (in percent of total deposits) 2/
Foreign currency loans (in percent of total loans) 2/
Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Does not include oil fund resources.
2/ Commercial banks only

28
Table 3. Kazakhstan: Selected Prudential Indicators of the Banking Sector 2004–09
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009
April

Capital adequacy ratio (K2)
Tier I capital (K1, percent of assets)

15.3
8.0

14.9
8.0

14.8
9.0

14.2
10.7

14.9
12.4

13.5
10.4

Growth in banks’ total assets
Off-balance sheet (OBS) items (percent of total assets) 1/

60.4
68.9

68.5
63.8

96.5
76.4

31.7
94.4

1.8
82.1

15.8
69.3

53.8
40.5
149.5

74.2
63.9
119.9

80.2
64.4
127.3

55.2
48.7
68.1

5.2
12.2
-8.0

14.9
12.4
4.1

27.7
43.8
…
6.3
2.9
4.1

26.8
41.8
…
5.3
2.2
5.6

27.8
47.3
…
4.9
1.6
5.0

45.9
60.3
…
3.2
1.5
5.9

44.4
57.0
5.2
8.1
4.4
11.1

43.3
56.8
9.6
15.2
7.5
15.9

-17.1
-29.8
43.0
43.4

-17.1
-12.5
41.9
45.6

-19.2
-3.6
35.2
38.2

23.1
2.9
30.3
42.0

24.5
5.0
40.0
43.5

25.2
-1.9
51.8
51.5

Growth in banks' loans (credit to the private sector)
Growth of claims on private non-financial institutions
Growth of claims on households
Classified assets to total assets 2/ 3/
Classified loans to total loans 2/ 3/
Percentage of loans which are past due over 90 days in loan portfolio 4/
Percentage of doubtful category 5 and loss loans in total loan portfolio
Loans classified as loss (percent of total loans)
Loan loss provisions (percent of total loans)
Net foreign assets (percent of total assets)
Net open position in FX (percent of Tier I capital)
Share of resident deposits denominated in FX
Share of FX loans to residents
Securities (percent of total assets)

16.9

14.1

13.7

6.5

6.9

10.5

Liquid assets to short-term liabilities 5/
Loans in percent of deposits
Share of liabilities in foreign exchange to total liabilities

102.7
106.9
60.6

95.0
165.3
67.9

117.8
173.9
62.3

97.0
227.7
62.2

158.2
201.5
59.7

225.1
194.9
60.6

Loan to deposit ratio, excluding deposits of nonresident legal entities
FX loans in percent of FX deposits
Return on assets, before tax (percent of assets, e.o.p)
Return on equity, before tax (percent of equity, e.o.p)

115.6
105.1
1.2
11.5

155.2
199.1
1.6
16.6

151.4
235.2
1.4
14.6

237.1
336.0
2.6
18.4

206.5
254.2
0.2
1.9

199.3
219.5
-2.9
-25.4

Sources: FSA and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Includes contingent claims, contingent liabilities, transactions in foreign exchange and precious metals, and derivatives.
2/ Loans or assets classified as doubtful and loss.
3/ New classification scheme introduced in early 2003.
4/ The category of NPLs on a 90 days basis was introduced in July 2008.
5/ Excludes demand deposits from July 2008.

29
Table 4. Kazakhstan: Balance of Payments, 2006–14
(In billions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2006

2007

2008

2009

2012

2013

2014

-2.0

-8.2

7.0

-2.3

2.8

4.6

5.5

5.9

8.9

Trade balance
Exports (f.o.b.)
Oil and gas condensate
Non-oil exports
Imports (f.o.b.)
Oil and gas condensate
Non-oil, gas imports

14.6
38.8
23.6
15.2
-24.1
-1.8
-22.3

15.1
48.4
28.1
20.2
-33.3
-2.5
-30.8

33.5
72.0
41.5
30.5
-38.5
-2.7
-35.7

14.2
43.2
24.4
18.8
-29.0
-1.9
-27.1

22.0
53.2
33.2
20.0
-31.2
-2.3
-28.9

25.0
59.9
35.1
24.9
-35.0
-2.6
-32.4

27.2
65.7
37.7
28.0
-38.5
-2.8
-35.7

29.1
71.4
40.0
31.4
-42.2
-3.0
-39.3

34.3
80.5
45.5
35.0
-46.2
-3.1
-43.1

Services and income balance
Services, net
Income, net
of which: Income to direct investors

-15.4
-5.9
-9.5
-7.7

-21.2
-8.1
-13.1
-11.3

-25.6
-6.6
-18.9
-16.6

-15.5
-5.0
-10.5
-6.8

-18.1
-5.1
-13.0
-9.0

-19.1
-6.1
-13.0
-9.5

-20.3
-6.8
-13.6
-10.2

-21.6
-7.3
-14.3
-10.8

-23.6
-7.7
-15.9
-12.3

-1.2

-2.2

-1.0

-1.0

-1.1

-1.2

-1.4

-1.6

-1.8

16.2
6.7
-4.2
-4.5
-5.8
14.1

8.4

1.2

10.8

9.9

8.4

7.1

4.2

1.3

8.0
-5.6
-4.6
-6.1
5.4

10.7
-5.6
-9.5
-6.4
-0.2

8.2
-4.9
2.9
5.6
-0.5

6.6
-5.3
1.6
0.1
1.7

6.8
-5.3
-3.1
-3.0
4.8

7.3
-5.3
-4.5
-4.4
4.3

8.1
-5.0
-6.3
-6.2
2.4

8.6
-5.0
-9.1
-9.0
1.9

Errors and omissions
Overall balance

-3.1

-3.2

-6.0

-4.4

-3.0

-3.0

-3.0

-3.0

-3.0

11.1

-3.0

2.2

4.0

9.7

10.0

9.5

7.1

7.2

-11.1

3.0

-2.2

-4.0

-9.7

-10.0

-9.5

-7.1

-7.2

-2.5
47.9
29.1
18.7
-29.8

-7.8
46.1
26.8
19.3
-31.7

5.1
53.1
30.6
22.5
-28.4

3.5
42.3
24.3
18.0
-24.8

3.4
41.1
23.0
18.1
-24.3

4.4
40.2
22.7
17.5
-23.1

Exports
Non-oil exports
Volume on non-oil exports
Average price of non-oil exports
Imports
Oil and gas imports
Non-oil imports
Volume on non-oil imports
Average price of non-oil imports
Exports of oil and gas condensate (in MT)

37.0
38.9
5.4
31.7
34.2
10.0
36.6
17.2
16.6
54.6

24.7
33.5
15.5
15.6
37.9
37.4
37.9
24.1
11.1
60.8

48.9
50.8
47.8
2.0
15.6
8.5
16.2
12.3
3.5
1.2

-40.0
-38.2
-11.2
-30.4
-24.5
-30.3
-24.0
-4.4
-20.5
1.4

23.1
6.0
3.1
7.9
7.5
23.1
6.4
1.6
4.7
1.5

12.7
24.4
12.0
5.9
12.0
9.9
12.2
7.8
4.1
1.5

9.6
12.7
9.3
3.1
10.1
7.7
10.3
7.2
2.9
1.6

8.6
12.0
9.5
2.3
9.7
6.6
9.9
7.3
2.5
1.6

12.7
11.5
9.5
1.8
9.4
6.6
9.6
7.3
2.2
1.8

NBK gross international reserves (in bill. USD)
In months of next year's imports of g&n.f.s.
excluding bank deposits in FX at NBK
National Fund (including interest), e.o.p.

19.1
5.1
17.9
14.1

17.6
4.3
14.1
21.0

19.9
6.4
19.2
27.5

23.9
7.1
…
22.3

33.6
8.8
…
22.9

43.6
10.4
…
27.3

53.1
11.5
…
33.4

60.2
11.9
…
41.6

67.4
12.1
…
53.0

External debt in percent of GDP
excluding intra-company loans
World oil price (USD per barrel)

91.4
59.9
64.3

92.4
63.7
71.1

79.5
52.3
97.0

98.9
59.2
60.5

92.4
52.4
74.5

80.8
45.9
78.0

75.8
41.9
80.0

73.8
40.8
81.3

69.5
38.2
82.5

Current account

Current transfers
Capital and financial account
Foreign direct investment
Amortization of intracompany liabilities
Portfolio investment, net
of which: National Fund
Other investment

Financing: Net international reserves of NBK

(in percent of GDP)

Memorandum items: 1/
Current account
Exports of goods
Oil exports
Non-oil exports
Imports of goods

2010
2011
Projections

-2.1
40.3
22.7
17.6
-27.1

2.3
43.9
27.4
16.5
-25.8

3.3
43.2
25.3
17.9
-25.2

(annual growth rate, in percent)

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Estimates and projections are based on GDP at market exchange rates.

30
Table 5. Kazakhstan: Gross Financing Requirements and Financing, 2008–10
(In billions of U.S. dollar; unless otherwise specified)

Gross external financing requirements
Current account deficit (if surplus = -)
Maturing short-term debt
Amortization of medium- and long-term debt
Medium and long-term to external private creditors
Medium and long-term to external official creditors
IMF
To other official creditors
Amortization payments by domestic private sector
Amortization payments by domestic public sector
Available financing
Net FDI (including privatization receipts)
Roll-over of short-term debt 1/
Medium- and long-term borrowing
Of which: bilateral financing
Other net capital flows
Exceptional financing
Reserve accumulation (decrease = +)

2008

2009

2010

13.5

24.3

5.7

-7.0
11.8
8.7
8.5
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1

2.3
10.6
11.4
11.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1

-2.8
2.8
5.7
5.6
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1

13.5

24.3

5.7

14.5
12.2
17.2
--28.3
0.0
-2.2

10.9
10.2
14.9
5.0
-7.6
0.0
-4.0

9.6
3.7
12.1
3.1
-10.0
0.0
-9.7

Memorandum items:
Gross international reserves in billions of U.S. dollars
in months of imports

19.9
6.4

23.9
7.1

1/ Short-term debt rollover is high due to high rollover in the non-bank sector, debt standstill for two large banks
in 2009, and related rollover assumptions for 2010.

33.6
8.8

31
Table 6. Kazakhstan: General Government Fiscal Operations, 2006–14
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011
2012
Projections

2013

2014

2,804

3,706

4,542

3,964

4,734

5,354

5,909

6,532

7,313

2,804
2,709
1,039
1,670
42

3,706
3,393
1,208
2,185
36

4,542
4,520
2,024
2,496
35

3,964
3,829
1,723
2,106
34

4,734
4,524
2,316
2,209
38

5,354
5,041
2,546
2,495
43

5,909
5,555
2,729
2,826
47

6,532
6,129
2,963
3,166
52

7,313
6,842
3,252
3,589
58

(in billions of Tenge)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
o/w: Tax revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil tax revenue
o/w: Income from capital transactions
Grants

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2,067
2,060
1,562
498
8

3,106
3,098
2,318
779
8

4,369
4,326
3,336
991
42

4,290
4,272
3,309
963
18

4,854
4,833
3,731
1,103
21

5,295
5,271
4,032
1,239
23

5,570
5,545
4,187
1,358
26

5,949
5,921
4,434
1,488
28

6,357
6,325
4,651
1,674
31

736

600

173

-326

-120

59

338

583

956

-1

9

-235

0

0

0

0

0

0

Financing
Domestic financing, net
Foreign financing, net
Privatization receipts
NFRK 1/

-738
-85
2
48
-703

-591
274
-45
60
-880

-206
277
23
24
-529

326
273
2
17
34

120
206
1
12
-97

-59
573
-1
8
-639

-338
524
-3
6
-865

-583
557
-4
4
-1,141

-956
603
-3
3
-1,559

Total revenue and grants

27.5

28.8

27.8

25.0

26.3

26.5

26.7

26.9

26.8

27.5
26.5
10.2
16.3
0.4

28.8
26.4
9.4
17.0
0.3

27.8
27.7
12.4
15.3
0.2

25.0
24.1
10.9
13.3
0.2

26.3
25.2
12.9
12.3
0.2

26.5
25.0
12.6
12.4
0.2

26.7
25.1
12.3
12.8
0.2

26.9
25.3
12.2
13.1
0.2

26.8
25.1
11.9
13.2
0.2

Total expenditure and net lending
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Net lending

20.2
20.2
15.3
4.9
0.1

24.2
24.1
18.0
6.1
0.1

26.8
26.5
20.4
6.1
0.3

27.0
26.9
20.9
6.1
0.1

27.0
26.9
20.8
6.1
0.1

26.2
26.1
20.0
6.1
0.1

25.2
25.0
18.9
6.1
0.1

24.5
24.4
18.3
6.1
0.1

23.3
23.2
17.0
6.1
0.1

Primary balance
Overall balance
Non-oil primary balance
Non-oil overall balance

7.5
7.2
-2.7
-3.0

4.9
4.7
-4.5
-4.7

1.4
1.1
-11.0
-11.3

-1.7
-2.1
-12.5
-12.9

-0.3
-0.7
-13.2
-13.6

0.6
0.3
-12.0
-12.3

1.8
1.5
-10.5
-10.8

2.8
2.4
-9.4
-9.8

3.9
3.5
-8.0
-8.4

Financing
Domestic financing, net
Foreign financing, net
Privatization receipts
NFRK 1/

-7.2
-0.8
0.0
0.5
-6.9

-4.6
2.1
-0.3
0.5
-6.8

-1.3
1.7
0.1
0.1
-3.2

2.1
1.7
0.0
0.1
0.2

0.7
1.1
0.0
0.1
-0.5

-0.3
2.8
0.0
0.0
-3.2

-1.5
2.4
0.0
0.0
-3.9

-2.4
2.3
0.0
0.0
-4.7

-3.5
2.2
0.0
0.0
-5.7

7.2
-303
-4.3
25.2
17.3
3.1
0.3
6.7
-10.7
14.1
3.3
10,214

4.7
-608
-6.6
27.1
19.4
3.3
0.3
5.8
-14.2
21.0
2.5
12,850

1.1
-1,851
-16.5
22.4
15.4
2.9
0.4
6.6
-13.6
27.5
9.4
16,313

-6.7
-2,049
-17.4
19.0
14.1
3.2
0.4
8.6
-16.8
22.3
11.1
15,863

-4.8
-2,436
-19.0
18.9
13.5
3.3
0.3
8.7
-14.4
22.9
12.3
17,975

-3.3
-2,487
-17.2
19.4
13.9
3.2
0.3
10.6
-12.7
27.3
9.4
20,197

-1.7
-2,391
-14.7
19.6
14.4
3.3
0.3
12.0
-12.7
33.4
8.4
22,143

-0.5
-2,380
-13.0
19.6
14.7
3.3
0.4
13.2
-13.5
41.6
7.5
24,251

1.0
-2,296
-11.1
19.6
14.9
3.2
0.4
14.0
-15.0
53.0
6.2
27,295

Total expenditure and net lending
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Net lending
Overall budget balance
Statistical discrepancy

(in percent of GDP)
Total revenue
o/w: Tax revenue
Oil revenue
Non-oil tax revenue
Income from capital transactions

Memorandum items:
Augmented overall balance (in percent of GDP) 2/
Non-oil balance (in billions of tenge)
Non-oil balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Non-oil revenues (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Non-oil revenues (in percent of GDP)
Wages (in percent of GDP)
Interest payments (in percent of GDP)
Gross debt to GDP (percent)
Net liabilities (in percent of GDP)
NFRK FX assets (in billions USD) 1/
Use of oil revenues (in percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP (in billions KZT)

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities, Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ National Fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan. (-) is accumulation in the Fund.
2/ Treats purchases of Samruk-Kazyna bonds under the anti-crisis plan as expenditure.

32

Table 7. Kazakhstan: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005-14
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

1 Baseline: Net public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

Actual
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Projections
2011
2012

2013

2014

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
0.6

-6.0
0.0

-10.7
0.0

-14.2
0.0

-13.6
0.0

-16.8
0.0

-14.4
0.0

-12.7
0.0

-12.7
0.0

-13.5
0.0

-15.0
0.0

-6.1
-6.4
-6.2
28.1
21.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.3

-4.7
-6.6
-7.5
27.5
20.0
1.3
1.3
0.9
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
1.9

-3.5
-3.6
-4.9
28.8
23.9
1.8
1.8
1.0
0.8
0.0
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.6
0.5
-1.4
27.8
26.4
2.1
2.1
1.7
0.4
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1

-3.1
0.1
1.7
25.0
26.7
-1.5
-1.5
-1.2
-0.3
...
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-3.2

2.4
1.1
0.3
26.3
26.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.3
...
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
1.4

1.7
-0.1
-0.6
26.5
25.9
0.6
0.6
-0.2
0.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8

0.0
-1.7
-1.8
26.7
24.8
0.2
0.2
-0.5
0.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

-0.8
-2.6
-2.8
26.9
24.2
0.2
0.2
-0.5
0.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.8

-1.5
-3.4
-3.9
26.8
22.9
0.5
0.5
-0.4
0.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.9

-21.5

-39.1

-49.2

-48.9

-67.1

-54.5

-47.9

-47.6

-50.2

-56.1

-4.1
-2.3

-7.1
-5.7

-4.2
-4.4

-1.0
-1.4

2.1
2.3

0.7
0.9

-0.2
-0.3

-1.5
-2.3

-2.3
-4.1

-3.5
-6.9

-17.2
-18.4

-16.2
-16.0

-15.1
-13.6

-14.1
-11.8

-13.3
-10.2

-12.6
-8.3

-2.0
8.0
8.8
...
-0.8
-1.0
1.7

2.0
8.0
-3.1
...
11.1
2.0
0.3

6.0
8.0
2.0
...
6.0
2.9
-0.6

5.6
8.0
4.2
...
3.8
1.3
-1.8

5.6
8.0
4.3
...
3.7
2.7
-2.8

7.5
8.0
3.3
...
4.7
1.8
-3.9

-18.4

-16.0

-13.6

-11.8

-10.2

-8.3

1.2

-17.2
-16.6
-15.2
-16.3
-16.8
-6.8

-15.1
-13.5
-11.2
-13.4
-14.4
-4.8

-13.8
-10.7
-8.0
-11.2
-12.7
-3.5

-14.1
-9.2
-6.5
-10.6
-12.7
-3.7

-15.3
-8.0
-5.8
-10.8
-13.5
-4.6

-17.1
-7.4
-6.0
-11.7
-15.0
-6.5

0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.6
0.3

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2008-2013

2.1
1.2

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of loca
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflato
Primary deficit

9.7
4.5
-13.3
-2.9
17.9
11.9
-6.2

10.7
4.7
-16.9
4.7
21.6
0.8
-7.5

A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005-09

8.9
5.0
-10.5
5.9
15.5
30.4
-4.9

3.2
8.2
-14.8
0.2
23.0
16.9
-1.4

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/2 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006 10/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

1/ Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - (1+g - g + (1+r]/(1+g++g)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate;  = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate;
a = share of foreign-currency denominated debt; and  = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

Table 8. Kazakhstan: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2005–14
(excluding intra-company debt, in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

Actual
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Projections
2012
2013

2014

I. Baseline Projections
1 External debt

42.4

59.9

63.7

52.3

59.2

52.4

45.9

41.9

40.8

38.2

5.2
-10.7
0.1
-8.8
53.4
44.6
-3.5
-7.4
1.7
-2.7
-6.4
15.9

17.5
-21.1
-0.2
-10.7
51.3
40.6
-11.1
-9.8
2.7
-3.2
-9.3
38.6

3.9
-16.6
4.1
-6.7
49.5
42.8
-10.8
-9.9
3.7
-4.1
-9.5
20.4

-11.4
-29.1
-8.4
-19.8
56.3
36.5
-9.5
-11.2
3.3
-1.6
-12.9
17.7

6.9
12.1
0.3
-4.8
40.5
35.7
-8.2
20.0
4.6
1.4
14.0
-5.2

-6.8
-11.8
-3.3
-9.5
43.7
34.1
-6.3
-2.2
4.2
-1.1
-5.3
5.0

-6.5
-13.6
-5.0
-10.2
44.4
34.2
-5.7
-2.9
3.6
-2.7
-3.8
7.1

-4.0
-12.5
-5.4
-10.3
43.7
33.4
-5.4
-1.8
3.4
-2.3
-2.9
8.5

-1.1
-11.2
-5.1
-10.0
42.9
32.9
-4.7
-1.4
3.2
-2.1
-2.6
10.1

-2.6
-11.5
-5.5
-11.1
42.3
31.2
-3.5
-2.5
3.0
-2.6
-2.8
8.9

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

79.3

116.6

128.7

92.9

146.1

119.9

103.5

95.8

95.1

90.2

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 3/
in percent of GDP

14.4
25.3

18.7
23.1

30.5
29.1

13.5
10.0

27.2
26.1

5.8
5.0

3.2
2.4

14.5
9.6

9.0
5.3

17.9
9.1

2 Change in external debt
3 Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
4
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
5
Deficit in balance of goods and services
6
Exports
7
Imports
8
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
9
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
10
Contribution from nominal interest rate
11
Contribution from real GDP growth
12
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
13 Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3)

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions
9.7
20.7
6.1
35.0
34.6
-0.1
3.5

10.7
28.1
8.9
36.2
29.1
0.2
11.1

8.9
18.9
8.1
24.8
36.5
-4.1
10.8

3.2
25.3
6.6
47.1
10.2
8.4
9.5

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

8.7
11.8
5.8
28.7
21.4
1.1
6.6

3.3
16.4
1.7
18.8
17.0
3.9
3.4

Projected
Average
-2.0
-21.2
6.8
-44.6
-24.6
-0.3
8.2

2.0
9.9
7.9
20.7
7.0
3.3
6.3

6.0
7.9
7.9
16.1
14.5
5.0
5.7

5.6
6.7
8.3
11.1
10.3
5.4
5.4

5.6
6.5
8.6
10.3
10.5
5.1
4.7

7.5
7.4
8.5
14.0
9.6
5.5
3.5

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/

II. Stress Tests for External Debt Ratio
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010-2014 4/

4.1
2.9
8.0
4.6
4.5
4.0
5.6

57.2

50.9

44.1

39.1

36.1

32.5

-10.8

57.8
58.5
59.2
59.2
99.3

55.6
57.1
58.9
58.9
96.0

49.7
52.0
54.8
54.8
88.2

45.9
48.9
52.7
52.7
83.1

44.6
48.4
53.3
53.3
80.9

42.0
46.3
52.1
52.1
76.3

-5.7
-5.3
-6.3
-5.9
7.6

B. Bound Tests
B1. Nominal interest rate is at baseline plus one-half standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B3. Non-interest current account is at baseline minus one-half standard deviations
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/4 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2009

1/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms,
g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0)
and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
4/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
5/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain
at their levels of the last projection year.

33

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

10-Year
Historical
Average

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-5.8

34

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/xx
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 1, 2009

Appendix 1

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with the
Republic of Kazakhstan
On July 1, 2009, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with the Republic of Kazakhstan. 1
Background
At the time of the 2008 Article IV consultation, Kazakhstan’s economy was slowing in response
to the tightening of global liquidity conditions in August 2007. Domestic banks’ access to
international financial markets declined, credit growth stalled, and property prices collapsed
following years of rapid gains. High oil prices, however, initially cushioned the impact of the
sudden stop in capital inflows, and the economy slowed down to 6 percent by mid-2008 from
the double-digit growth rates of earlier years.
The second wave of the global financial crisis and lower oil prices in late 2008 slowed real
activity further, and the economy began to contract. A deteriorating current account balance
and banks’ large external debt repayments put the currency under pressure, and the central
bank devalued the tenge by 20 percent against the U.S. dollar in early February.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

35

The slowing economy and the exchange rate devaluation have added to the pressures on bank
balance sheets, and as asset quality inevitably deteriorates further, these pressures will only
rise. Several banks are now facing solvency issues; two large banks and one smaller institution
have stopped making principal repayments, and the banks are now in negotiations with their
creditors to restructure their liabilities. The continuing drop in asset prices has also impacted
the assets of the pension funds.
The authorities have responded to the growing economic problems with a $10 billion anti-crisis
plan, funded from the National Oil Fund, that focuses on recapitalizing banks and supporting
economic activity. The anti-crisis plan is being complemented by additional budgetary
measures, liquidity support from the central bank, and regulatory measures by the financial
supervisory agency. The large stock of public foreign assets built up during the boom years
and low public debt put the authorities in a strong position to respond to the crisis. Central bank
reserves have stabilized around $20 billion and pressures on the exchange rate have eased
following the devaluation.
The economy is expected to contract by 2 percent this year, recovering modestly in 2010 to
grow by 2 percent. Lower oil prices will push the current account balance back into a deficit,
although with foreign direct investment remaining strong and new bilateral financing emerging
the overall balance of payments will remain robust. CPI inflation will remain contained as the
weak demand environment limits the ability of producers to pass on higher import costs from
the devaluation earlier in the year. The weakening economy and large “anti-crisis” spending will
push the fiscal position into a deficit this year, the first since 2000.

Executive Board Assessment

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

36

Kazakhstan Selected Economic Indicators, 2005-10
2005

2006

2007

2008

Proj. 1/
2009

Proj. 1/
2010

-2.0
8.5

2.0
6.3

25.0
26.9
-2.1
-12.9
8.6

26.3
26.9
-0.7
-13.6
8.7

16.5
12.2
13.9
...

14.6
24.4
16.6
...

(Changes in percent)
Real economy
Real GDP
CPI (end-of-period)

9.7
7.5

10.7
8.4

8.3
18.8

3.2
9.5

(In percent of GDP)
Public finance
Government revenue and grants
Government expenditures
General government balance 2/
General government non-oil balance
General government debt (end-of-period) 3/

28.1
22.2
5.8
-4.8
8.1

27.5
20.2
7.2
-3.0
6.7

28.8
24.1
4.7
-4.7
5.8

27.8
26.5
1.1
-11.3
6.6

(Changes in percent)
Money and credit
Base money
Broad money
Banking sector credit to the economy
NBK refinance rate (eop; percent)

12.5
26.3
74.2
8.0

131.0
78.1
80.2
9.0

-2.5
25.9
55.2
11.0

0.5
35.4
5.2
10.5

(In percent of GDP)
Balance of payments
Trade balance
Current account balance
External debt
Gross international reserves
In billions of U.S. dollars, end of period
In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services

18.1
-1.8
76.0

18.1
-2.5
91.4

14.4
-7.8
92.4

24.7
5.1
79.5

13.2
-2.1
98.9

18.2
2.3
92.4

7.1
2.6

19.1
5.1

17.6
4.3

19.9
6.4

23.9
7.1

33.6
8.8

...
...
...

...
...
...

(Changes in percent)
Exchange rate
Tenge per U.S. dollar (end of period)
Tenge per Russian ruble (end of period)
Real effective exchange rate (p.a) 4/

3.0
-0.8
3.7

-4.4
3.6
7.5

-5.6
1.4
2.2

-0.2
-15.8
6.8

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Staff projections.
2/ Under this definition of the general government balance, privatization revenue is treated as a financing item
and measured from below the line, which includes a statistical discrepancy.
3/ Gross domestic and external debt, including government guaranteed debt.
4/ A positive sign indicates appreciation.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN
2009 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
(In Consultation with Other Departments)
June 17, 2009
Contents

Page

I.

Relations with the Fund ........................................................................................................ 2

II.

Relations with the World Bank............................................................................................. 6

III.

Relations with the EBRD...................................................................................................... 8

IV.

Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..................................................................... 14

V.

Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................. 15

2
Annex I. Kazakhstan: Relations with the Fund
(As of June 3, 2009)


Mission: Article IV consultation discussions were held May 5–15, 2009 in Astana and
Almaty. The concluding statement of the mission is available at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/ms/2009/051509.htm.



Staff Team: Messrs./Mmes. Callen (head), Ilahi, Oner, and Al-Eyd (all MCD), Blavy
(SPR), and Saker (MCM). Messrs. Kiekens and Orynbaev (both OED) joined the policy
discussions.



Country Interlocutors: Prime Minister Massimov, National Bank of Kazakhstan Deputy
Chairman Akishev, Minister of Finance Zamishev, Minister of Economy and Budget
Planning Sultanov, Minister of Energy Mynbayev, Financial Supervision Agency
Chairwoman Bakhmutova, and other officials, private sector participants, academia, and
the press.



Fund Relations: Kazakhstan accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4
in 1996 and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments
and transfers for current international transactions. The exchange rate regime has been
classified as a conventional peg (previously a managed float).



Statistical Issues: The authorities subscribe to the SDDS and the provision of data is
adequate for surveillance purposes.



Outreach: The mission met with the local press and made a presentation on the regional
outlook at Kazakh Economical University.

I.

Membership Status: Joined: 07/15/92; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account

SDR Million

% Quota

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in the Fund

365.70
365.70
0.01

100.0
100.0
0.0

III.

SDR Department

SDR Million

Holdings

0.90

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans

None

V.

Financial Arrangements
Type
EFF
EFF
Stand-by

Approval Date
12/13/99
7/17/96
6/05/95

Expiration Date
3/19/02
7/16/99
6/04/96

% Allocation
n.a.

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)

329.10
309.40
185.60

0.00
154.70
185.60

3

VI.

Projected Obligations to the Fund

None.
VII.

Safeguards Assessments

Not applicable to the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK) at this time.
VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangements
The currency of Kazakhstan is the tenge, which was introduced in November 1993. The
official exchange rate is determined on the basis of foreign exchange auctions that are held
daily. Auctions are held for U.S. dollars, euros, and Russian rubles, and official rates are
quoted for over 30 other currencies on the basis of cross-rates. From late 1999 to October
2007, the exchange rate regime was a managed float with no preannounced path. Since
October 2007 the tenge has effectively been pegged to the U.S. dollar. After a period of
downward pressure, the peg was devalued on February 4, 2009. On June 3, 2009, the
tenge/U.S. dollar rate was 150.22. The exchange rates at numerous exchange bureaus are
very close to the auction rate, and the spread between buying and selling rates is very small.
The exchange system is free from restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions.
IX.

Article IV Consultation

Kazakhstan is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last consultation was
concluded on July 9, 2008 (see IMF Country Report No. 08/288).
X.

FSAP Participation and ROSCS

Kazakhstan participated in the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) in 2000.
The staff report on the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) was issued on
November 27, 2000 (FO/DIS/00/142). The FSSA included the following ROSC
modules: Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, Core Principles for
Systemically Important Payment Systems, Code of Good Practices on Transparency in
Monetary and Financial Policies, IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities
Regulation, and IAIS Insurance Core Principles. An FSAP Update mission took place in
February 2004 and a second FSAP Update mission took place in March 2008. The fiscal
transparency module was completed in October 2002 and the final report published in
April 2003. A data module mission took place in April/May 2002, and its final report was
published in March 2003. An update of the data ROSC was undertaken in 2006 and the
report was published in February 2008 (see Annex V).

4
XI.

Technical Assistance

Kazakhstan has received technical assistance and training by the Fund in virtually every area
of economic policy, including through about 75 technical assistance missions provided
during 1993–2009 by FAD, LEG, MCM, STA, and the IMF Institute. In addition to shortterm missions, the Fund has provided resident advisors to the National Bank of Kazakhstan,
to the Agency of Statistics of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and to the Ministry of Finance.
Other international agencies and governments, including the World Bank, EU TACIS,
EBRD, UNDP, and OECD, also are providing a wide variety of technical assistance.
The following list summarizes the technical assistance provided by the Fund to Kazakhstan
since 2002.
Monetary and Capital Markets
Technical assistance has enabled steady progress to be made in a number of areas related to
monetary and exchange affairs, including banking legislation, central bank accounting,
payments system reform, central bank organization and management, foreign operations and
reserve management, banking supervision, monetary statistics, currency issuance, monetary
operations, and money-market development.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

December 2002: Sequencing of Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Sector
Supervision.
January 2003: Assessment of the CPSS Core Principles for Systematically Important.
Payment Systems and Transparency of Payment System Oversight.
September 2004: Bringing Banking Prudential Regulation up to EU Standards.
September 2004: Implementing Inflation Targeting: Next Steps.
November 2007: Strengthening Banking Supervision and Risk Assessment.
January 2009: Developing Banking Sector Stress Testing. As part of this project,
peripatetic experts will continue to visit the FSA over the course of 2009.

Fiscal Affairs
The Fiscal Affairs Department has given comprehensive advice to Kazakhstan in the areas of
tax and expenditure administration, the establishment of a treasury system, and the
introduction of a social safety net.
1.
2.
3.

April 2003: Customs Administration.
1997–2004 Treasury Modernization.
September 2004: Treasury Reform Process.

5
Statistics
The Fund’s technical assistance program in statistics has focused on the development of the
institutional framework appropriate to the needs of a market economy. The assistance has
concentrated on establishing procedures for collecting and compiling monetary, government
finance, balance of payments (including external trade), and national accounts.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

November 2002: International Reserves Template.
January 2006: Real sector and balance of payments statistics.
August 2006: Real sector statistics.
December 2006: ROSC Update mission (and DQAF).
April 2008: GFSM 2001 Implementation.
January 2009: Monetary statistics.

Legal Department
December 2003: Draft Law on Mandatory Reporting on Certain Financial Transactions
April 2008: Reforms to Tax Law.
IMF Institute
Kazakhstani officials have participated in courses in Washington and at the Vienna Institute
in the areas of macroeconomic management, expenditure control, financial programming,
taxation, statistics, and other areas. In addition, the Fund’s Institute has conducted courses in
the region. Seminars and training sessions have also been conducted by MCM and STA
technical assistance missions.
XII.

Resident Representatives

Position terminated in August 2003.

6
Annex II. Kazakhstan: Relations with the World Bank Group
(As of June 1, 2009)
Kazakhstan became a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) and International Development Association (IDA) in July 1992
and of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in September 1993. The Bank’s
lending program was curtailed earlier in this decade as a result of the country’s reduced
borrowing needs, but in FY09 it was revived and four new projects were launched. In
addition to lending activities, the Joint Economic Research Program (JERP) allows the Bank
to transfer knowledge in support of the government’s critical development needs. In FY09
the total financing of JERP amounts to just over $3 million, of which about 66 percent is
financed by the Government. JERP is built around four pillars aligned with the
government’s strategic priorities: (i) reform of public administration and public finance; (ii)
macroeconomic management and crisis mitigation; (iii) improvement in human development
outcomes; and (iv) private sector development and improvement to business climate.
At present, the Bank’s program comprises twelve projects (IBRD loans) with a total
commitment of $2,598 million, of which $279 million is disbursed and outstanding. Six
loans with total commitment amount of $299 million are disbursing (Syr Darya Control and
Northern Aral Sea - Phase I, Nura River Clean-Up, Agricultural Post-Privatization
Assistance - Phase II, Agricultural Competitiveness, North–South Electricity Transmission,
and Forest Protection and Reforestation). Four projects with total commitment amount of
$173.9 million were launched recently: Ust–Kamenogorsk Environment Remediation,
Customs Development, Health Sector Technology Transfer and Institutional Reform, and
Technology Commercialization. The World Bank has just approved the largest investment
loan in its history in the amount of $2,125 million to support the reconstruction of the South
Western transport corridor at a total cost of $6.7 billion, in which ADB, EBRD, IsDB and
JBIC also participate. Four projects are under preparation: Irrigation and Drainage
Improvement - Phase II, Vocational Education and Training, Tax Administration, and Syr
Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea - Phase II, with an expected financing envelope of
about $434 million. Two more loans covered by Government guarantees are under
preparation with KEGOC, the National transmission company; these add up to $248 million.
Kazakhstan is the IFC's largest client in Central Asia. IFC’s efforts in Kazakhstan are
directed to foster private sector led growth, particularly in the non-extractive sectors and
frontier regions. This includes ongoing support to the financial sector and when possible,
investments to promote SME development as well as investments in manufacturing,
infrastructure, and the service sector. Looking ahead, the IFC will focus on: (a) further
stabilization, diversification and extension of the maturity of the funding base in the banking
sector and (b) establishment of the best international banking and corporate governance and
regulatory environment. As the global financial crisis has deepened, we have primarily
focused on identifying partner financial institutions through which IFC could make a
stabilizing impact on the financial sector in Kazakhstan and with which we can effectively

7
increase access to finance in the priority sectors in the economy. As of early-May 2009,
IFC’s total committed portfolio in Kazakhstan was $345 million, which is mostly in the
financial sector and general manufacturing. In the past year, IFC has increased its investment
program in Kazakhstan to help alleviate problems with access to finance. IFC grew its
activities tenfold in FY08 ($110 million) compared with FY05 ($11 million) and is expecting
another significant increase in its investment commitments in FY09, despite the financial
crisis. Already around $186 million have been committed during this fiscal year through
early May 2009 and we have a significant pipeline of potential investment projects.

8
Annex III. Kazakhstan: Relations with the EBRD
(As of May 1, 2009)
The EBRD is the largest investor outside the oil and gas sector in Kazakhstan.
As of 31 April, 2009 the EBRD’s total business volume, including co-financing, in
Kazakhstan stood at €8.1 billion, with Bank investments totalling €2.3 billion. The Bank’s
portfolio reached €1,574 million. During 2008, the bank signed 19 projects, including
regional ones, for a total amount of EBRD finance of €431 million. The sector allocation of
business volume has shifted towards the corporate, power and energy sectors. 70 percent of
all EBRD investments are in the private sector. The Bank’s involvement in selected major
infrastructure projects will slightly increase the public sector share of the portfolio going
forward.
The EBRD involvement in the country remains guided by the Bank’s most recent country
strategy for Kazakhstan, approved in November 2006 and amended in 2008.
The Bank’s main operational objectives for 2009
Enterprise sector:
The Bank will continue to pursue its main strategic objective to assist Kazakhstan in
diversifying its economy. In the near term, this strategy will incorporate anti-crisis measures.
To this end, the Bank’s approach, which has traditionally emphasised capital expansion, will
be enhanced to include rapid-response support for existing clients and creditworthy new
borrowers, including provision of liquidity and balance-sheet restructuring. While
emphasising immediate measures to combat the crisis, the Bank will not lose sight of its
fundamental objective to support sustainable growth of the private sector, and will thus
continue to provide financing for sound long-term investment projects, and support
companies which are well-positioned to expand and/or retool even in the time of crisis.
Opportunities exist in general industry, agribusiness, telecom, as well as in selected segments
of the natural resources sector (non-hydrocarbon extraction, services for the oil and gas
sector). In the transport sector, the on-going restructuring of Kazakhstan’s railways creates
scope for working with private operators, including container, shipping and freight
forwarding companies.
Additional opportunities in the enterprise sector are likely to be offered by energy-efficiency
projects, delivery of which will be ramped up with the addition of a full-time Energy
Efficiency and Climate Change (E2C2) advisor to the country-based staff, as well as by
participation in existing and new investment funds.
The Kazakh state’s involvement in the country’s economy is not likely to abate in the current
crisis conditions. With that in mind, it will be strategically vital to develop an appropriate
level of co-operation with the National Welfare Fund Samruk-Kazyna (SK). While

9
engagement at the holding company level will be difficult, the Bank will selectively pursue
opportunities to co-operate with SK at the project level, including in the corporate sector, in
situations where the projects are based on sound market principles, and subject to the usual
integrity considerations. The EBRD will also selectively consider possibilities to co-finance
with such SK-owned institutions as the Development Bank of Kazakhstan, as well as through
co-investing with SK in investment funds.
Financial sector:
Support of the financial sector, which, inter alia, has served as the primary conduit for
channelling funds to SMEs, will remain a leading priority for the EBRD in Kazakhstan,
particularly during the financial crisis. Although the Bank will not act as a lender of last
resort, it will seek to support its main partner banks throughout the crisis, including through
the provision of equity and quasi-equity, senior debt, and trade finance facilities, and will
position itself to assist its partner banks in consolidation of the sector, that may ensue. With
the syndication market unlikely to recover in the near-term, a certain scaling-down of the
magnitude of support that the EBRD can mobilise should be expected.
While support of SME’s will continue to drive the use of the Bank’s funds, additional
opportunities to expand EBRD’s relationship with its partner banks will be afforded by new
products, such as the Kazakhstan Energy Efficiency Framework Facility. On the other hand,
demand for products like mortgage financing is likely to decline in the near term.
The Government’s temporary take-over of some of the leading banks may afford
opportunities for the EBRD to engage in the medium term, once the key elements of the
restructuring are in place.
The Bank will seek to engage with non-bank financial institutions in Kazakhstan, including
leasing and insurance companies, and non-bank micro-lenders, and will consider the
possibility of launching a micro-finance bank.
Infrastructure and energy sectors:
Transport
The Bank will pursue rehabilitation of key international road corridors (such as the
TRACECA and CAREC corridors), for which sovereign support may be required, provided
the financing package is accompanied by sector reform. To that end, the Bank will seek
to co-finance with other IFIs and to coordinate police advice and technical assistance. In
addition, the Bank will continue to seek right opportunities to engage in the financing of road
PPP’s. The Bank will continue to provide assistance and advice to the Ministry of Transport
and Communications and the PPP Centre of Kazakhstan to ensure that potential concessions
are in line with international best practice and deliver value for money. In parallel, the Bank

10
will work with potential bidders to explore the possibility to provide financing to the
concessionaire, in cooperation with other IFIs.
In the rail segment, the Bank will seek to replicate its existing successful transaction with
Transtelecom, pursuing similar deals with other subsidiaries of Kazakhstan Temir Zholi
(KTZ), such as Kaztemirtrans. In connection with the financing, the Bank will provide
technical assistance to support KTZ’s restructuring efforts based on the draft Rail Reform
Strategy 2009–2014.
Municipal and Environmental Infrastructure (MEI)
Given the legal constraints to the Kazakh municipalities’ ability to borrow or guarantee
indebtedness of municipal companies, the Bank has historically not been very active in the
sector in Kazakhstan. With the addition of a locally-based MEI banker to the country team,
the Bank has pursued development of creative mechanisms for financing municipal projects
in Kazakhstan, reflected in the currently pending transactions (Almaty Water, Almaty
Electrotrans, Karaganda Water, Aktau Water, etc). In addition to urban transport and
water/waste-water projects, the Bank will consider projects in the district heating segment,
where historical underinvestment has created significant rehabilitation needs.
Power and Energy
In line with the “Sustainable Energy Action Plan” (“SEAP”) signed in June 2008 with the
Kazakh Government, the Bank will remain committed to financing bankable power and
energy projects in Kazakhstan that have a positive systemic effect in the power sector –
including use of best available technology, promotion of renewable sources, energy
efficiency and environmental standards – for both state and private operators. These criteria
will be key drivers for project selection going forward. The Bank will also through technical
assistance support the development of a legal framework that supports their market
penetration, and strengthen regulatory agencies and tariff environment.
Main trends in Kazakhstan portfolio over 2008-2009
o The most notable progress was made in Infrastructure sector
KTZ Transtelecom Communication Infrastructure Modernisation: In October 2008 the
Bank successfully syndicated a $105 million A/B loan to Transtelecom, a subsidiary of the
state railway company Kazakhstan Temir Zholi KTZ. The loan will finance the construction
of a 4,600 km long fibre optic cable along the railway tracks, which will improve the
telecommunication infrastructure in Kazakhstan. The transaction was the first in planned
series of interventions with the KTZ Group, which also will support the ongoing railway
sector reform.

11
South-West Corridor Road Project: In March 2009, the Bank signed a $180 million
sovereign loan for the rehabilitation of West China - West Europe International Road Transit
Corridor, a key international transport link connecting Europe with China. The EBRD
financing will upgrade a 102 km section between the border with Russia and the city of
Aktobe. Other sections of the corridor will be rehabilitated with loans provided by the World
Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank, as well as with
budget financing from the Government.
Shymkent Vodokanal: The EBRD provided a $8 million loan to the private water utility
TOO Vodnye Resursy Marketing to improve the water and wastewater services in the city of
Shymkent in Southern Kazakhstan. The investments will improve the efficiency and quality
of the water supply and sewerage services. It includes the rehabilitation of the water network,
the replacement of parts of the sewage system and the installation of frequency controllers.
The feasibility study for the project was funded from the EBRD Shareholder Special Fund.
o The Bank continues to focus on Kazakhstan Power and Energy sector of
economy.
At present the power sector is suffering from significant inefficiency and capacity
underinvestment. As a response, the Bank initiated and implemented Kazakhstan
Sustainable Energy Finance Facility program (KAZSEFF). Under this program the EBRD
via bank-partners will support private sector investments in energy efficiency and renewables
in Kazakhstan with a $75 million framework. Kazakhstan bank-partners will provide loans to
local companies to promote energy efficiency investments. Bank Center Credit is the first
recipient with a $10 million loan.
In May 2009, the Bank has approved two loans worth a total $100 million to ATFBank in
Kazakhstan to support lending to small and medium-sized enterprises and to promote energy
efficiency of Kazakh industrial companies.
In March 2009, the Bank approved its first equity investment in the power sector of
Kazakhstan, the EBRD is investing up to KZT 9.2 billion (€46 million equivalent) to acquire
a stake in the private power company Central-Asian Electric Power Corporation (CAEPCO).
The capital injection will be used for the company’s investment programme up to 2013,
including the upgrade and rehabilitation of CAEPCO’s generation and distribution assets to
improve efficiency, reliability and performance.
o The Bank continues its support and cooperation with Kazakhstan Bankpartners
As of May 2009 the total Bank’s investments in the Kazakh banking systems reached
€1.5 billion including: Bank Equity €192 million; Bank Lending €674 million; non-bank

12
financial institutions €47million; SME finance €319 million. In 2008, the EBRD committed
loans and guarantees under the Regional Trade facilitation program was about €50 million.
o During 2008-2009 the Bank made a significant progress in financing Corporate
sectors, especially agribusiness sector.
During 2008 the Bank signed 6 projects in the agribusiness sector for the total EBRD finance
€85 mln. In 2009 the Bank supported the expansion of CCI (Coca-Cola Icecek of Turkey),
the exclusive Coca-Cola bottler for selected countries in Central Asia, the Caucasus and the
Middle East, by providing a € 19 million loan for the expansion of production, modernisation
of Almaty Bottlers’ production facilities and distribution networks in Kazakhstan.
Priorities for the coming year
Power shortages are becoming an important constraint on private sector development,
especially in Southern Kazakhstan. To support the Government with regulatory
improvements and tariff reform will be key for the Bank’s operations in this area, leading to
investments in power generation, transmission and distribution. The Bank will focus on
implementation of the Sustainable Energy Action Plan, financing priority investments in
power generation and supporting energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy.
Continued technical assistance will be given to improve sector regulation.
The transport and communication infrastructure will be key to the country’s long-term
competitiveness and regional cooperation and integration. Kazakhstan has launched its first
tenders for PPPs in the road sector, the successful implementation of which will require
application of best practice. The Bank will support the Governments in structuring the PPPs
and consider participating in the financing. In addition, the Bank will support the ongoing
reform of the railway sector and financing improvements of railway infrastructure.
Development of municipal and environmental infrastructure will be a priority.
In the financial sector, the Bank’s assistance is needed in light of the global credit crunch,
the resulting large repayment obligations of Kazakh banks, and the related slowdown of bank
lending in Kazakhstan. The Bank will continue to provide long-term debt, to support the
equity of banks, to facilitate the entry of strategic investors, and will aim to reconnect
Kazakh banks to the international financial markets through arranging syndicated loans (A/B
structure). For 2009, the focus will be on SME and micro lending, as well as the introduction
of energy efficiency credit lines. In addition, the Bank will have an important role to play in
working with private equity funds and non-bank financial institutions to promote the
development of the local capital market as a complement to bank lending. Transparency of
shareholding structures and the willingness to improve corporate governance will be a
precondition to any future Bank financing in Kazakhstan.

13
EBRD Portfolio 31 April 2009
Euros million
Sector Business Group (SIC)
Commitments
Energy
Private
175
State
228
FI
Private
916
State
31
Corporate
Private
567
State
45
Infrastructure
Private
25
State
392
TOTAL
2,379

Portfolio
153
208
473
31
410
0
25
274
1,574

14
Annex IV. Kazakhstan: Relations with the Asian Development Bank
(As of May 7, 2009)
Kazakhstan became a member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1994. As of
March 2008, total public sector loan commitments amounted to $483 million, covering
14 loans in agriculture and natural resources, education, finance, transport and
communications, and water supply, sanitation and waste management. Kazakhstan is no
longer eligible for concessional resources from the Asian Development Fund. As of
January 2008, total loan disbursements amounted to $435 million. ADB's focal areas
continue to be private sector development, environmentally sustainable development, and
regional cooperation.
Private sector operations are at the forefront of current and future ADB operations in
the country. A Private Sector Operations Agreement between the Republic of Kazakhstan
and the ADB was signed in November 2004. It provided a basis for ADB's business
opportunities in the Kazakhstani private sector. During 2006–2007, seven private sector
financings in the amount of $550 million were approved by the ADB for Kazakhstan to boost
financial sector and SME development in the country.
ADB’s debut local currency bonds (in Tenge) in Kazakhstan were issued in
August 2007. The issue had a principal amount of 6 billion Tenge (equivalent to
$49 million). Proceeds of the Tenge bond issue were used to finance ADB’s private sector
banking activities in the country (ADB’s first local currency loan to JSC Bank Center Credit
to support small- and medium-sized business was approved on August 7).
ADB operations for the private sector focus primarily on two sectors: (i) finance and
capital markets, and (ii) infrastructure. In the financial and capital markets sector, ADB
assists private sector intermediaries in banking, leasing, micro credit, small- and mediumenterprises (SME), private equity funds, insurance, and securitization. In the infrastructure
sector, ADB’s focus is on telecommunications, power and energy, water supply and
sanitation, ports, airports, toll roads, and support for subsovereign credit.
This new thrust towards private sector operations will be supported by public sector
technical assistance, investments to create an enabling environment for the private
sector, and selected public lending programs. The latter will be in rural water supply and
water resources management to improve livelihood in rural areas and reducing urban-rural
gap. After the successful completion of water resources management and land improvement
project in South Kazakhstan Oblast in December 2006, the Government requested the ADB
to assist with a second phase project to complete irrigation on the remaining 87,000 ha in the
project area. ADB approved a Project Preparatory TA in December 2007.

15

Annex V. Kazakhstan—Statistical Issues Appendix
(As of June 2009)
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance. Most affected areas
are monetary and balance of payments statistics, with remaining deficiencies in national accounts.
National Accounts: The quality of GDP estimates by industry is affected by the limited coverage of small
businesses in selected activities such as retail and construction. Second, while some progress has been made in
making GDP estimates by final expenditure consistent with output-based measures, compilation and
dissemination of quarterly GDP series data should be conducted on a discrete basis only. The 2006 Multi-topic
Statistics Mission on Oil Activities made recommendations in a number of other areas.
Government finance statistics: Progress has been made in the classification of the fiscal accounts consistent
with the Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). However, as a result of the
reorganization of the public sector, including the redefinition of budgetary units, difficulties have arisen with
regard to the recording and reporting of expenditure arrears.
Monetary statistics: The monetary statistics based on the Standardized Report Forms (SRFs) complied by the
central bank have internal inconsistencies, and a technical assistance mission in January 2009 provided several
recommendations. A new automated banking information system implemented in November 2008 has caused
delays in compiling the monetary statistics, and this new system does not provide sufficient details on financial
derivatives. Only one of seven monetary statistics-related recommendations made by the 2006 data ROSC
mission have been implemented.
Balance of payments: In general, the balance of payments is compiled in concordance with the fifth edition of
the Balance of Payments Statistics Manual (BPM5). However, foreign direct investment statistics are not fully
in line with the standards set forth in BPM5, as local branch offices of foreign companies operating in the
construction sector are considered nonresident entities. This leads to discrepancies with national accounts
statistics where this activity is treated as domestic production. In addition, the errors and omissions have been
large and increasing, reaching 4½ percent of GDP.

II. Data Standards and Quality
Participant in the Special Data Dissemination System
(SDDS) since March 2003. Metadata need to be
updated.

Data ROSC published in 2002.

Kazakhstan: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of June 3, 2009)
Memo Items
Frequency of
Data7

Frequency of
Reporting7

Frequency of
publication7

Exchange Rates

06/03/09

06/03/09

D

D

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
of the Monetary Authorities1

04/30/09

05/08/09

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

04/30/09

05/26/09

M

M

M

Broad Money

04/30/09

05/26/09

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

04/30/09

05/15/09

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

04/30/09

05/26/09

M

I

I

06/03/09

06/03/09

I

I

I

Consumer Price Index

05/30/09

04/30/09

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance, and Composition of
Financing3—General Government4

05/01/09

05/27/09

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance, and Composition of
Financing3—Central Government

05/01/09

05/27/09

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt5

04/01/09

04/30/09

Q

Q

Q

External Current Account Balance

Q4/2008

03/31/09

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Q4/2008

03/31/09

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

Q4/2008

04/30/09

Q

Q

Q

Q4/2008

03/31/09

Q

Q

Q

Q4/2008

03/31/09

Q

Q

Q

Interest Rates

2

Gross External Debt
International Investment Position
1

6

Data QualityMethodological
Soundness8

Data QualityAccuracy and
Reliability9

O, O, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

O, O, O, O

O, O, LO, O, O

O, LO, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, LNO

LO, O, O, O

O, O, O, O ,O

O, O, O, LO

LO, O, LO, O, O

Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of
financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D); weekly (W); monthly (M); quarterly (Q); annually (A); irregular (I); and not available (NA).
8
Reflects the assessment provided in the update of the data ROSC published in February 2008, based on the findings of the mission that took place during November 29–December 13, 2006 for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row.
The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O); largely observed (LO); largely not observed (LNO); not observed (NO);
and not available (NA).
9
Same as footnote 9, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, assessment of source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.
2

16

Date of latest observation

Date
received

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/91
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 28, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with
the Republic of Kazakhstan
On July 8, 2009, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with the Republic of Kazakhstan. 1
Background
At the time of the 2008 Article IV consultation, Kazakhstan’s economy was slowing in response
to the tightening of global liquidity conditions that started in August 2007. Domestic banks’
access to international financial markets declined, credit growth stalled, and property prices
collapsed following years of rapid gains. High oil prices, however, initially cushioned the impact
of the sudden stop in capital inflows, and the economy slowed down to 6 percent by mid-2008
from the double-digit growth rates of earlier years.
The second wave of the global financial crisis and lower oil prices in late 2008 slowed real
activity further, and the economy began to contract. A deteriorating current account balance
and banks’ large external debt repayments put the currency under pressure, and the central
bank devalued the tenge by 20 percent against the U.S. dollar in early February.
The slowing economy and the exchange rate devaluation have added to the pressures on
bank balance sheets, and as asset quality inevitably deteriorates further, these pressures will
only rise. Several banks are now facing solvency issues; two large banks and one smaller
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
institution have stopped making principal repayments, and the banks are now in negotiations
with their creditors to restructure their liabilities. The continuing drop in asset prices has also
impacted the assets of the pension funds.
The authorities have responded to the growing economic problems with a $10 billion anti-crisis
plan, funded from the National Oil Fund, which focuses on recapitalizing banks and supporting
economic activity. The anti-crisis plan is being complemented by additional budgetary
measures, liquidity support from the central bank, and regulatory measures by the financial
supervisory agency. The large stock of public foreign assets built up during the boom years
and low public debt put the authorities in a strong position to respond to the crisis. Central
bank reserves have stabilized around $20 billion and pressures on the exchange rate have
eased following the devaluation.
The economy is expected to contract by 2 percent this year, recovering modestly in 2010 to
grow by 2 percent. Lower oil prices will push the current account balance back into a deficit,
although with foreign direct investment remaining strong and new bilateral financing emerging
the overall balance of payments will remain robust. CPI inflation will remain contained as the
weak demand environment limits the ability of producers to pass on higher import costs from
the devaluation earlier in the year. The weakening economy and large “anti-crisis” spending
will push the fiscal position into a deficit this year, the first since 2000.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that the Republic of Kazakhstan faces significant challenges from
ongoing difficulties in the banking sector and the weak global environment. They commended
the authorities for their policy response to help shield the economy from the impact of the
global recession, including fiscal stimulus made possible by the prudent saving of windfall
profits and eased monetary policy. Directors emphasized that the main challenge ahead is to
resolve the weaknesses in the banking sector while maintaining an appropriate policy
response to the crisis.
Directors believed that a comprehensive solution to the growing problems in the banking
sector was needed in order to restore confidence in the system and improve the investment
climate. They urged the authorities to promptly deal with the external debt standstills at Bank
TuranAlem and Alliance Bank and called for independent assessments of the other large
banks. While supporting recent measures to improve the banking resolution framework,
Directors called for further action, including providing the Financial Supervision Agency with
the legal authority, independence and resources needed to carry out its mandate to intervene
early and forcefully when needed. They also emphasized the need to ensure effective
operation of the deposit insurance fund. Looking forward, Directors called for strengthened
financial sector regulation and supervision, including through improved on and off site
supervision and further restrictions on foreign currency lending to unhedged borrowers.
With inflation pressures abating, Directors viewed monetary policy as appropriately geared
toward supporting economic activity, including through the reduction in reserve requirements
and policy rates, and provision of adequate liquidity. Going forward, they emphasized the

3
importance of maintaining an appropriate balance between keeping inflation on a downward
path and supporting the financial sector and economy.
Directors noted staff’s assessment that the exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals.
They agreed that in the current circumstances, and following the step devaluation in February,
preserving a stable exchange rate is important for regaining depositor confidence, limiting the
risks from the corporate sectors’ large foreign exchange exposure, and helping reduce
inflation. Nonetheless, Directors saw benefit in moving toward a more flexible exchange rate
policy once conditions stabilize.
Directors supported the expansionary fiscal stance for 2009 given the current circumstances.
They recommended focusing on effective implementation of spending under the Anti-Crisis
Plan, and emphasized the need for transparent monitoring of disbursements through the
Samruk-Kazyna Fund. Directors welcomed the intention to maintain a flexible fiscal policy as
needed to respond to the crisis, as well as the commitment to return to a fiscal consolidation
path in the future.
Directors welcomed the policy initiatives to improve the business climate and promote job
creation. They supported the measures to strengthen social safety nets, and recommended
directing any additional spending under the Anti-Crisis Plan to these areas, in addition to
health, education and infrastructure.
Directors encouraged the authorities to continue working towards meeting their goals under
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. They urged the authorities to promptly pass
the draft Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism bill to help bring the
Republic of Kazakhstan’s legislation in line with international best practice

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Kazakhstan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2005–10
2005

2006

Proj. 1/
2009

Proj. 1/
2010

3.2
9.5

-2.0
8.5

2.0
6.3

27.8
26.5
1.1
-11.3
6.6

25.0
26.9
-2.1
-12.9
8.6

26.3
26.9
-0.7
.13.6
8.7

0.5
35.4
5.2
10.5

16.5
12.2
13.9
…

14.6
24.4
16.6
…

2007

2008

(Changes in percent)
Real economy
Real GDP
CPI (end-of-period)

9.7
7.5

10.7
8.4

8.3
18.8

(in percent of GDP)
Public finance
Government revenue and grants
Government expenditures
General government balance 2/
General government debt non-oil balance
General government debt (end-of-period) 3/

28.1
22.2
5.8
-4.8
8.1

27.5
20.2
7.2
-3.0
6.7

28.8
24.1
4.7
-4.7
5.8

(Changes in percent)
Money and credit
Base money
Broad money
Banking sector credit to the economy
NBK refinance rate (end-of-period; percent)

12.5
26.3
74.2
8.0

131.0
78.1
80.2
9.0

-2.5
25.9
55.2
11.0

(In percent of GDP)
Balance of payments
Trade balance

18.1

18.1

14.4

24.7

13.2

18.2

Current account balance
External debt
Gross international reserves
In billions of U.S. dollars, end-of-period
In months of imports of goods and non-factor services

-1.8
76.0
…
7.1
2.6

-2.5
91.4
…
19.1
5.1

-7.8
92.4
…
17.6
4.3

5.1
79.5
…
19.9
6.4

-2.1
98.9
…
23.9
7.1

2.3
92.4
…
33.6
8.8

(Changes in percent)
Exchange rate
Tenge per U.S. dollar (end-of-period)
Tenge per Russian ruble (end-of-period )
Real effective exchange rate (period average) 4/

3.0

-4.4

-5.6

-0.2

…

…

-0.8
3.7

3.6
7.5

1.4
2.2

-15.8
6.8

…
…

…
…

Sources: Kazakhstani authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Staff projections.
2/ Under this definition of the general government balance, privatization revenue is treated as a financing item and measured from
below the line, which includes a statistical discrepancy.
3/ Gross domestic and external debt, including government guaranteed debt.
4/ A positive sign indicates appreciation.

