January 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/22

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

Vietnam: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Vietnam
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Vietnam, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on June 17, 2005, with the officials of Vietnam on economic
developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these discussions,
the staff report was completed on September 13, 2005. The views expressed in the staff report
are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of
the IMF.

•

a staff statement of October 7, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its October 7, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article
IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Vietnam.

The document(s) listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent by
e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
VIETNAM
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for
the 2005 Consultation with Vietnam
Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Mark Plant
September 13, 2005
•

A staff team visited Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City during June 2–17, 2005 to conduct
the 2005 Article IV Consultation discussions. The team comprised Mr. Molho
(Head), Mmes. Baker (APD) and Al-Mashat (formerly APD) and Mr. Sakr (PDR),
and was assisted by Mrs. Adams, Senior Resident Representative. Mr. Takeda (APD)
joined the mission during June 13–14, and Ms. Phang (Executive Director) and
Mr. Duong (OED) attended the concluding meetings.

•

In concluding the 2004 Article IV Consultation in November 2004, Directors noted
the authorities’ success in achieving high growth and poverty reduction in recent
years, and encouraged them to build on these achievements by stepping up key
structural reforms in the state-owned commercial bank (SOCB) and state-owned
enterprise (SOE) sectors. In addition, they cautioned that the high rate of credit
growth should be reduced significantly, given the uncertain loan quality and banks’
weak balance sheets, as it could lead to mounting quasi-fiscal liabilities.

•

Weaknesses in the availability, timeliness, and quality of key data impede
surveillance. While data provision is still adequate overall, staff’s analysis was
affected by shortcomings in certain areas. At the time of the mission, monetary data
and data on international reserves were available with a three-month lag. Important
weaknesses also remain in the areas of public finance, the balance of payments,
national accounts, and SOE and SOCB operations.

•

The authorities are currently working, in conjunction with LEG and MFD, to remove
the three remaining exchange restrictions subject to Article VIII, sections 2, 3 and 4.

-2-

Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I.

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ..............................................................4
A. Economic Developments .........................................................................................4
B. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks .......................................................................11

II.

Policy Issues.................................................................................................................12
A. Monetary and Exchange Rates Policies ..................................................................12
B. Fiscal Policy ...........................................................................................................13
C. Structural Reforms .................................................................................................15
D. Other Issues.............................................................................................................17

III.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................18

Boxes
1.
Vietnam’s Garment Exports—Developments and Prospects ........................................7
2.
Monetary Policy in Vietnam—Challenges and Steps Ahead ........................................8
3.
Off-Budget Expenditure...............................................................................................10
Figures
1.
Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2005 ..................................................................21
2.
Monetary and Financial Indicators, 1998-2005 ...........................................................22
3.
Fiscal Sector Developments, 1998-2005 .....................................................................23
4.
External Sector Background, 1998-2005.....................................................................24
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Social and Demographic Indicators .............................................................................25
Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05 .....................................................................26
Balance of Payments, 2000–05 ...................................................................................27
Monetary Survey, 2000–05 .........................................................................................28
Summary of General Government Budgetary Operations, 2000–05 ..........................29
Medium-Term Scenario, 2002–10 ..............................................................................30
Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2000–05 ...........................................................31
Millennium Development Goals..................................................................................32

Annexes
I.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................33
II.
Relations with the World Bank....................................................................................38
III.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................44
IV.
Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................47
V.
Debt Sustainability Analysis........................................................................................52

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
•

Overall macroeconomic performance has remained strong since the conclusion of
the last Article IV consultation. Despite slowing nonoil export growth, GDP growth
was robust at about 7½ percent in the first half of 2005, and the current account has
continued to be more than financed with ODA and FDI. However, inflation has remained
high at about 7½ percent as of July, and the import cover of reserves remains low.

•

High credit growth in the context of weak bank balance sheets remains a cause for
concern. Bank credit continued to grow at an annual rate of 40 percent as of April 2005,
as the monetary effects of increases in the State Bank of Vietnam’s (SBV) policy rates
have been mitigated by liquidity-injecting open market operations, and SOCB lending
has continued to be aimed at helping to meet the government’s ambitious growth target of
8½ percent for 2005.

•

The overall fiscal deficit narrowed from 7.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 4½ percent of
GDP in 2004, but a growing program of off-budget operations has weakened fiscal
transparency and heightened concerns about medium-term debt sustainability.

•

The government has recently taken steps to speed up structural reform. The SBV’s
prudential standards were tightened in April, and banks were to provide accurate
accounts by end-July to be used as a basis for their reform and recapitalization plans.

Key Issues and Staff Recommendations
•

The staff supports the SBV’s aim to significantly reduce credit growth. To meet this
objective, all available instruments will need to be used in a concerted manner, and
SOCBs should no longer be pressured to increase their lending to SOEs.

•

Part of the oil revenue windfall should be saved in 2005 and the overall fiscal deficit
brought down to 3½ percent of GDP over the medium term. The recently-augmented
public investment program should be carefully reviewed and brought on budget, with
emphasis placed on transparent fiscal accounting and investment quality over quantity.

•

The staff encourages the authorities to adopt a more flexible exchange rate policy.

•

SOCB reform remains key to public sector debt sustainability. Recently-adopted
prudential regulations should be implemented strictly and without delay, and the SOCB
reform plans finalized on the basis of reliable estimates of their capital shortfalls. Early
action will also need to be taken to eliminate policy lending, improve SOCBs’ corporate
governance, and strengthen the SBV’s independence and supervisory authority.

•

Improvements in the reliability, timeliness and dissemination of key data are
urgently needed to enhance the quality of policy analysis and surveillance.

-4-

I. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
1.
Vietnam has recorded strong economic growth and impressive poverty
reduction over the past decade, supported by improvements in macroeconomic
management, political stability, and increasing integration with the global economy.
Sustained economic growth contributed to a decline in the poverty rate from 58 percent in
1993 to around 26 percent in 2004. This favorable performance was achieved with the
support of generally prudent macroeconomic policies, which helped to contain inflation and
promote external stability. However, implementation of structural reforms has been carried
out through a gradual approach, and has been uneven, especially in the important SOE and
SOCB sectors, whose quasi-fiscal activities remain substantial. Largely as a result, the public
sector has maintained its dominant role in the economy, and the process of transition to a
market-based system is far from complete.
2.
Overall macroeconomic performance has remained strong since the conclusion
of the 2004 Article IV consultation. Real GDP remained robust, and Vietnam has continued
to make rapid progress towards poverty reduction. With the abatement of the supply shocks
that caused a spike in food prices in 2004, inflation has shown some signs of moderation,
although it has remained high relative to recent years. Despite a recent slowdown of export
growth from the very high rates recorded in the past two years, the current account has
continued to be comfortably financed with ODA and private capital inflows, as Vietnam has
become an increasingly attractive destination for FDI.
3.
The consultation discussions focused on the policy challenges that need to be
addressed to build on the recent achievements and place Vietnam on a path of
continued rapid growth and poverty reduction. The discussions took place as the
authorities were beginning to formulate their new Five-Year Socio-Economic Development
Plan (SEDP) for the period 2006–2010. One of the new SEDP’s principal objectives would
be to sustain the annual rate of economic growth in the range of 7½ to 8 percent, with a view
to enabling Vietnam to graduate from the ranks of low-income countries by 2010. However,
the authorities were considering a number of possible scenarios on the stance of specific
policies, and there was still an internal debate on the tradeoffs between short-term growth
and macroeconomic stability, and the relative roles of public versus private investment.
Hence, the authorities were not yet in a position to share with the mission the government’s
definitive views on certain key policy issues. Consensus on these issues is to be reached over
the coming months, culminating in approval of the new SEDP by the Communist Party’s 10th
Congress in May 2006.
A. Economic Developments
4.
Real GDP growth picked up to 7.7 percent in 2004, and remained strong in the
first half of 2005, despite a number of successive external shocks. Buoyant consumption
and export growth offset slowing FDI and public investment during 2004. While growth was
adversely affected in the first half of the year by an outbreak of avian flu, drought, and rising
international prices of inputs such as steel and oil, it rebounded across all sectors in the

-5-

second half of 2004. Retail sales rose by 18 percent year-on-year (yoy) during the first half of
2005, pointing to continued rapid growth in real consumption, which is likely to have been
spurred in part by implementation of the civil service wage increases (30 percent, on
average) enacted in October 2004. However, with slowing export growth and a droughtinduced decline in hydroelectric power generation, the rate of growth of GDP remained at
about 7½ percent (yoy) during the first half of 2005. Thus, growth would have to rise to
around 9½ percent during the second half of the year if the official target of 8½ percent for
2005 were to be met, which would be required for the SEDP’s average growth target for
2001–05 to be achieved.
5.
Inflation rose sharply in 2004 and has remained high relative to recent years so
far in 2005. While most of the effects of the above-mentioned shocks have largely abated,
inflation has declined only moderately from 9½ percent (yoy) at end-2004 to about
7½ percent as of July 2005. To some extent, the continuing inflationary pressures reflect the
sustained strength of international commodity prices, together with the belated adjustment in
domestic petroleum prices.1 However, there have also been concerns about second-round
effects on domestic costs, as the increases in civil service wages have reportedly affected the
wages of skilled private sector workers. Underlying inflation could be higher than the actual
inflation figures suggest, as the authorities have put a freeze on a number of regulated prices
since mid-August 2004, including for electricity, coal, cement, and airline, train, and
waterway transport.2
6.
The balance of payments has remained in comfortable surplus. The surge in oil
prices, together with the rapid increase in non-oil exports, helped to narrow the current
account deficit to less than 4 percent of GDP in 2004. While garment exports stagnated in the
first half of 2005, a renewed surge in oil prices, continued strong performance of other
exports, and robust remittances3 and tourism receipts mitigated the impact on the current
1

Adjustments were made in March, July, and August, resulting in cumulative increases of
about 34 percent for gasoline prices and 54½ percent for diesel prices during the first eight
months of 2005. Combined with the adjustments made in 2004, average domestic gasoline
prices have increased by a cumulative 81½ percent since end-2003, and diesel prices by
70½ percent (compared with increases of about 85 and 100 percent, respectively, in the
corresponding international market prices). Although the direct contribution of oil price
increases to inflation has been limited so far, the bulk of the adjustment took place in July
and August, and can be expected to exert substantial upward pressure on inflation in the
coming months. In addtion, the indirect effects of rising prices of oil and other imported raw
materials are likely to be considerable.
2
3

Administered prices are estimated to account for about 26 percent of the CPI basket.

Chapter III of the Selected Issues paper provides a more detailed account of the increasing
importance of remittances in Vietnam’s balance of payments.

-6-

account (Box 1). With large inflows of FDI and ODA, gross official reserves rose by about
US$700 million in 2004 and by another US$740 million during the first six months of 2005,
to a level of US$7.1 billion at end-June.
7.
Credit growth surged to 42 percent in 2004, and seems to have remained very
high so far in 2005, despite some tightening measures taken since mid-2004.4 Lending by
the SOCBs came under strong upward pressure, as their corporate governance and profit
orientation remained weak, and the government and local authorities continued to exercise
moral suasion on them to finance a number of large SOE projects to help meet the SEDP’s
growth target. Despite the rise in U.S. interest rates, the differential between dong and dollar
lending rates (600 basis points), together with an announcement by the State Bank of
Vietnam (SBV) in January 2005 that exchange rate depreciation would be limited to
1 percent in 2005, encouraged increasing foreign-currency borrowing. While delays in the
reporting of aggregate monetary data and discrepancies with the reports by individual
commercial banks impede analysis of recent developments, the latest data for April 2005
suggest that the SBV’s tightening measures have had a limited impact on credit growth to
date. Although this may have been partly due to the large amount of excess liquidity within
the banking system, it also reflects SOCBs’ lack of profit orientation and institutional
rigidities. Moreover, SBV’s decisions to tighten were likely hampered by conflicting policy
objectives that constrain monetary policy (Box 2).
8.
Vietnam officially maintains a managed floating exchange rate regime, but the
exchange rate has de facto been pegged to the U.S. dollar over the last year. The dongU.S. dollar exchange rate depreciated by less than 1 percent in 2004, and was broadly stable
in the first half of 2005. With a widening of the inflation differential, the real effective
exchange rate has appreciated by about 4½ percent since end-2004. These developments
need not be a cause for immediate concern in light of the continued strength of the overall
balance of payments. Nonetheless, the import coverage of reserves has remained low, at
around 8½ weeks of imports, and heavy foreign-currency borrowing from domestic banks
has increased the economy’s exposure to exchange rate risks.
9.
The government’s overall financial position appears to have strengthened in
2004 and early 2005, although heavy reliance on off-budget operations has weakened
fiscal transparency and contributed to concerns about medium-term debt
sustainability. The official budget deficit narrowed from about 2 percent of GDP in 2003 to
less than 1½ percent of GDP in 2004. The budgetary position appears to have remained
strong in the first half of 2005, as a surge in oil-related receipts has more than offset the
increasing burden on the budget from petroleum subsidies and underperformance of
corporate tax receipts from the SOE sector. The overall fiscal deficit (the sum of the official
4

The tightening measures included an increase in required reserve ratios (July 2004), and
increases in the rediscount and refinance rates (50 bps each in January and April 2005) and
the base rate (25 bps in February 2005).

-7-

Box 1. Vietnam’s Garment Exports—Developments and Prospects
Vietnam’s garment exports have grown strongly in recent years, but since the removal of textile
and garment export quotas for WTO members at the beginning of 2005, Vietnam’s exports
have been facing severe competition, particularly from China.
Developments in 2005
•

Garment export growth in the first six months of 2005 decelerated sharply to about
0.1 percent (yoy), after averaging about 30 percent over the past three years. The effects of
the removal of garment export quotas are reported to have been amplified by Vietnam’s quota
distribution system, which may have continued to hinder timely reallocation among firms.

•

The largest markets for Vietnam’s garment exports are the U.S., the EU, and Japan
(constituting approximately 40, 20 and 15 percent respectively of Vietnam’s total garment
exports). Both export volume and prices are reported to have declined in the U.S. While
prices of garments exported to the EU also declined, their volume is reported to have
increased somewhat, as competition from other low-cost producers appears to have been less
severe and the EU removed quotas on Vietnam’s garment exports from January 2005.
Garment exports to Japan are not subject to quotas and have been stable thus far in 2005.

Challenges
•

Vietnam’s garment exports to the U.S. are still subject to quotas, which increase by 7 percent
annually. WTO accession is important to level the playing field by removing these quotas. In
the meantime, it will be important for the Ministry of Trade to take urgent steps to improve
its quota allocation system, with a view to increasing its flexibility.

•

However, to reap the full benefits of international integration, Vietnam will also need to
address competitive pressures from China, India, and other low labor-cost producers whose
exports are no longer subject to quotas. Many of these producers also benefit from higher
domestic input content and more advanced infrastructure than producers in Vietnam.

While Vietnam faces challenges in garment exports, the impact on its external position is
mitigated by the continued strong performance of a wide range of other exports, especially oil,
computers and electronics, and furniture, as well as buoyant tourism receipts and workers’
remittances.
1

Vietnam's Exports of Textiles and Garments
2001
Value in millions of US$
Annual growth in percent
Share in total exports in percent
Share in non-oil exports in percent
Share in total current receipts

1,975
4.4
13.1
16.6
10.3

2002
2,752
39.3
16.5
20.5
12.7

2003
3,687
34.0
18.3
22.6
14.3

1

Exports are mostly comprised of garments.

2

Preliminary. Growth is calculated in relation to the outcome of HI 2004.

3

Staff's projection.

2004
4,319
17.2
16.6
21.2
13.3

2

2005 HI

2005

2,052
0.1
14.2
18.5
---

4,470
3.5
14.2
18.8
11.3

3

-8-

Box 2. Monetary Policy in Vietnam―Challenges and Steps Ahead
Since the two-tier banking system replaced the monobank system in the late 1980s,
monetary policy has been guided by multiple, and at times conflicting, policy objectives,
including economic growth, price and currency stability, and financial system stability. The
potential conflicts between these objectives were partially mitigated or masked by favorable
domestic and external conditions in recent years. However, the current cycle of global
tightening and rising domestic inflation poses new challenges for monetary policy in the
context of the continuing opening up of the economy.
The conduct of an effective monetary policy in Vietnam has been circumscribed in
recent years by several institutional and structural constraints, including:
•

A segmented financial system dominated by 4 large state-owned commercial banks
(SOCBs), but also including a small, and more dynamic, segment of foreign-owned
and joint-venture banks. The SOCBs frequently operate on a non-commercial basis,
with a culture of policy lending, which is subject to direct government interference.
However, the rest of the banking system is more market-oriented. This complicates
the transmission of monetary policy, which operates under a mix of direct channels
(through the SOCBs) and market mechanisms (through other banks).

•

The rapid structural transformation of the financial system. Growing monetization,
and increasing internationalization of the banking system, are making it very difficult
to estimate stable relationships between key monetary and credit aggregates, interest
rates, and other economic and financial variables.

•

The conflicting policy objectives pursued by the SBV. Despite the recent increase in
inflation, the SBV has been tasked to continue to focus its operations on the need to
meet the economic growth objectives set by the National Assembly. As a result,
OMOs during the first five months of 2005 have been used primarily to inject
liquidity into the banking system, as needed to support the SOCBs’ financing of large
public infrastructure projects.

To ease these constraints and enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy a number of
far-reaching reform measures need to be implemented. These are as follows:
•

The objectives of monetary policy should be defined more narrowly and stated more
clearly in the SBV’s law.

•

Policy lending should be curtailed and completely removed from the banking sector
and banking supervision strengthened. This would serve to reduce the accumulation
of non-performing loans by SOCBs, encourage SOCBs to operate on a commercial
basis, alleviate the segmentation in the banking system, and thus facilitate
transmission of monetary policy through indirect, market mechanisms.

-9-

budget and off-budget investment expenditure) narrowed from 7.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to
4½ percent of GDP in 2004 leading to a slight decline in the debt stock to 41 percent of GDP.
However, this apparent improvement in the public finances is clouded by the government’s
large off-budget investment program for 2005–2010, which was recently augmented by the
National Assembly from 68 trillion dong (9½ percent of 2004 GDP) to 110 trillion dong
(15½ percent of 2004 GDP) (Box 3). While a significant portion of this investment program
could probably be financed by oil revenue windfalls as long as the recent sharp increase in
international oil prices is sustained, full execution could require issuance of a large amount of
new bonds bearing market-determined interest rates. Moreover, slow progress in SOCB
reform, together with high credit growth, has likely led to a large build-up of bad loans and
contingent government liabilities in the banking system. While the size of these liabilities is
uncertain, a substantial amount of additional government debt may eventually have to be
issued to cover the SOCBs’ capital shortfall. This debt, together with new infrastructure
bonds, could raise the public debt stock well above the authorities’ notional ceiling of
50 percent of GDP.
Summary Fiscal Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

(In percent of GDP)
Overall fiscal balance (incl. off-budget outlays)1
of which : Non-oil balance
Off-budget investment expenditure
Net-onlending (DAF)
ODA financed
Domestically financed
Education bonds
Infrastructure bonds
Bank recap. bonds (pre-2000 SOCB debt)
Municipal bonds
Official budget balance2

-5.0
-11.4

-5.0
-12.4

-4.5
-11.3

-7.2
-13.6

-4.5
-10.9

2.2

2.2

3.1

5.1

3.1

2.2
2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.2
1.0
1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.4
0.9
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0

2.9
1.2
1.7
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.3

1.9
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.3

-2.7

-2.8

-1.4

-2.0

-1.4

1

Defined as the sum of the official budget balance, adjusted as indicated in footnote 2 below, and
total off-budget investment expenditure.
2

Based on the authorities' definition, which excludes on-lending through the DAF and other off-budget
investment expenditure, and adjusted to exclude debt amortization payments and revenues carried over
from previous years.

10.
The government has recently signaled its intention to speed up the pace of
structural reform. In the banking system, the SBV’s loan classification, provisioning, and

- 10 -

Box 3. Off-Budget Expenditure
Vietnam’s off-budget operations appear to have been stepped up in recent years, raising
important questions about fiscal governance. The off-budget outlays, motivated in part by the
statutory budget deficit limit of 5 percent of GDP (Vietnamese accounting standards), have been
directed primarily at recapitalizing SOCBs and funding large multi-year public investment projects.
These projects have typically been approved by the National Assembly, with the associated bond
issuance authorized as funding becomes necessary. However, the increasing importance of off-budget
expenditure has undermined fiscal transparency, complicated public expenditure management, and
made it more difficult to assess medium-term public sector debt sustainability.
The main off-budget operations and associated sources of financing have been as follows:
•

On-lending through the Development Assistance Fund (DAF). The DAF provides soft loans for
the financing of eligible investment projects on a priority list approved by the Prime Minister.
DAF operations are funded in part through ODA loans, but there is also a significant
domestically-financed component, which is funded through the issuance of DAF’s own bonds,
loans from the Postal Savings Service Company, loans from the Social Security Fund, funds
mobilized by DAF branch offices (deposits) and project bonds. Net on-lending through DAF has
amounted to about 2-3 percent of GDP per year since 2000.

•

Education and infrastructure bonds. Education bonds are typically used to finance
improvements in school buildings and related facilities, while infrastructure bonds are used
primarily to finance investments in, and maintenance of, transportation and irrigation projects.
The National Assembly has authorized issuance of a total of 110 trillion dong (about
US$7 billion, or 15.6 percent of 2004 GDP) of education and infrastructure bonds for the period
2005–2010.

•

SOCB recapitalization bonds. In 2001, as a part of the government’s restructuring program for
SOCBs, non-performing loans worth 23 trillion dong (5.2 percent of GDP as of 2000) were
identified for resolution. Under this program, the four largest SOCBs received capital injections
totaling 10.9 trillion dong (2.5 percent of 2000 GDP), of which 9.7 trillion was provided in the
form of recapitalization bonds and the remainder in cash.

•

Municipal bonds. Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi are permitted to issue bonds equivalent to
100 percent of their annual investment budget (for other cities, the applicable limit is 30 percent),
subject to MOF approval. HCMC has so far issued bonds in the amount of 2 trillion dong
(0.2 percent of GDP), and is to issue another 2 trillion dong in 2005; while Hanoi has not yet
issued any municipal bonds, it is expected to issue bonds on the order of 1.5 trillion dong in 2005.

•

Extra-budgetary recurrent expenditure by local governments resulting in arrears to the
transport and irrigation sectors. While the size of these arrears is highly uncertain, the World
Bank estimated the arrears to the transportation sector at end-2003 to be about 14.4 trillion dong
(2.3 percent of GDP) and arrears to irrigation as of end-June 2004 of 1.3 trillion dong (0.2 percent
of GDP and equivalent to one-quarter of annual public investment in agriculture). The clearance
of these arrears is reportedly being financed through the issuance of government bonds and
special budgetary allocations. To prevent accumulation of new arrears, the MOF has reportedly
instructed local governments to cease spending outside their budgets.

- 11 -

prudential standards were tightened in April 2005, and banks have been instructed to produce
accurate financial statements based on the new standards by end-July.5 On that basis, the
government aims to develop plans for the SOCBs’ reform and recapitalization during the
latter part of the year. In the SOE sector, while the restructuring of enterprises has remained
slow, the auction mechanism for equitization has been expanded, shares of some larger SOEs
have been sold to the public, and the list of sectors reserved for state ownership has been
narrowed. The authorities also continue to work diligently toward WTO accession, including
by expediting the National Assembly’s consideration of an ambitious legislative agenda.
B. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks
11.
The outlook for the rest of 2005 is broadly positive but subject to risks, especially
if the authorities delay the adoption of needed measures to rein in monetary and fiscal
policies. Real GDP growth is projected to be about 7½ percent, underpinned by strong
consumption and a rebound in FDI in anticipation of Vietnam’s WTO accession. However,
inflation would remain higher than in recent years, at around 7 percent by end-2005, and
reserve coverage would remain low. The main risk to the outlook would be continued
reliance on a loose monetary policy, and an easing of the fiscal stance, aimed at spurring
public investment in projects of uncertain quality in pursuit of the official growth target.
While such policies might affect overall macroeconomic performance with a considerable
lag, they could increase short-term pressures on inflation and heighten external vulnerability.
Additional risks to the outlook include intensifying wage pressures, a weakening of export
demand, a widespread outbreak of the avian flu, and disruptions in production caused by
adverse weather conditions.
12.
Looking ahead to the medium-term, prospects for sustained, higher-quality
growth and poverty reduction depend critically on macroeconomic discipline and
market-oriented structural reforms. Assuming that credit growth is sharply reduced, the
fiscal deficit is kept in check, and SOCB and SOE reforms are stepped up, growth is
expected to remain robust in the range of 7–7½ percent, with inflation falling to around
3½ percent. As illustrated in the staff’s debt sustainability analysis (Annex V), the public
debt burden would remain manageable under this policy adjustment scenario. While the total
public debt stock could rise sharply over the next few years as the government covers the
costs of reform in the SOCB and SOE sectors, it would decline steadily in relation to GDP
over the longer term. However, failure to rein in credit growth and delays in banking sector
reform could lead to mounting demand pressure, a weakening of the balance of payments,
and an increasing stock of SOCB-related quasi-fiscal liabilities, which could threaten
medium-term fiscal sustainability. In addition, a significant fall in oil prices would reduce the
windfall, and could lead to a further rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the absence of a scaling
back of the government’s ambitious public investment program.
5

As of mid-August, three of the four large SOCBs were reported to have submitted their
accounts to the SBV.

- 12 -

II. POLICY ISSUES
13.
A key challenge for the policies to be adopted under the SEDP for 2006–2010
will be to meet Vietnam’s large investment requirements while protecting medium-term
sustainability. The authorities recognized the importance of building adequate flexibility
into the policy making framework of the SEDP to ensure consistency with the transition to a
more market-based economy. They agreed in principle with the staff that short-term growth
targets should not be pursued at any cost, and that the SEDP should be centered on policies
geared toward protecting macroeconomic stability and enhancing the quality rather than
quantity of investment. To promote higher-quality sustainable growth, prudent
macroeconomic policies will need to be supported by improvements in public sector financial
management, accelerated reforms in the SOE and SOCB sectors, open and fair trade and
investment regimes, and a reduction of the role of the state in the economy.
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
14.
The authorities and staff agreed that credit growth should be reined in
significantly. The weaknesses in the available monetary and credit statistics, together with
the institutional and structural factors discussed in Box 2, make it difficult to derive
appropriate short-term targets for the key monetary and credit aggregates. Nevertheless, the
mission considered the authorities’ target of 25 percent growth in credit to be broadly
appropriate going forward and supported their efforts to bring credit growth down to this
level. A slowing expansion of bank loans would be essential to limit the risk of inflation,
shore up international reserves, and prevent an unsustainable build-up of SOCB-related
quasi-fiscal liabilities. The authorities expressed confidence that they would be able to
restrain credit growth to their target. While the absence of a well-developed capital market
would make it difficult to complete some of the large investment projects now under way
without new bank financing, the recent tightening of prudential standards was expected to
make banks more cautious in their new lending.
15.
However, the staff cautioned that recent measures appeared to be sending mixed
signals to the market and, in the absence of a prompt and more concerted effort to slow
current credit growth rates, it could be difficult to meet the authorities’ target by end-2005.
The increases in policy rates seemed to have had limited impact on the lending behavior of
commercial banks, which remained intent on accommodating the economy’s strong demand
for credit. Moreover, the SBV carried out large liquidity-injecting open market operations
(OMOs) in early 2005 with a view to supporting SOCB lending for large SOE projects. The
authorities explained that most of their recent OMOs were of a short term duration, and will
likely be unwound by the end of the year. However, they acknowledged that the SBV could
come under pressure to maintain an easier monetary stance when seasonal demand for bank
loans rises toward year-end.
16.
While the dong does not currently appear to be significantly misaligned, and
fixing the exchange rate may help anchor inflationary expectations, continuation of
Vietnam’s de facto fixed exchange rate policy over a longer period of time would carry

- 13 -

significant risks. Despite a modest appreciation of the real effective exchange rate since end2003, Vietnam’s share in the world’s non-oil export market has continued to increase in the
first half of 2005, albeit at a somewhat slower rate than in 2004. However, competitiveness
could be quickly eroded in a high-inflation environment, with eventual adverse implications
for export and growth performance. Moreover, Vietnam’s exposure to international
competition is bound to increase in the period ahead, as it progressively dismantles its
remaining trade barriers and levels the playing field for domestic- and foreign-based
economic entities, in line with its commitments under the WTO. A more flexible exchange
rate would facilitate the economy’s adjustment to structural changes and exogenous shocks,
reduce external vulnerability, and create incentives for economic agents to improve their
management of exchange rate risks. To these ends, the SBV will need to make full use of the
flexibility built into the current regime while limiting intervention to addressing disorderly
conditions. The authorities acknowledged the importance of exchange rate flexibility, and
indicated that they were exploring ways to introduce a more flexible day-to-day management
of the dong.
B. Fiscal Policy
17.
The near-term risks to inflation and the challenge of protecting fiscal
sustainability call for an effort to save a good part of the oil revenue windfall in 2005,
with a view to containing the fiscal impulse resulting from surging oil prices. This would
help narrow the overall fiscal deficit, including net lending and off-budget outlays, from
4½ percent of GDP in 2004 to less than 4 percent of GDP in 2005. Such a reduction could be
achieved by containing investment expenditure and domestically-financed on-lending, the
quality of which is uncertain, to offset the increase in the wage bill. The staff also urged the
authorities to introduce as soon as possible needed adjustments in domestic petroleum prices,
especially for kerosene and diesel. The authorities informed the team that they were
considering a proposal to adjust petroleum prices, with a view to reducing the burden of oil
subsidies and discouraging smuggling into neighboring countries. In the event, domestic oil
prices were raised in July and again in August, but in light of renewed increases in
international oil prices, these hikes will likely be insufficient to eliminate oil subsidy
payments during the second half of the year.6 As regards the overall fiscal stance for 2005,
the authorities agreed that, consistent with the outcome of recent years, there was some scope

6

Subsidy payments accrued through August are estimated at 0.8 percent of GDP. Cash
payments have been paid mostly from the contingency built into the budget. However, the
full-year impact on the budget is highly uncertain, as the actual cost of oil imports responds
with a lag to changes in international oil prices, depending on the length of forward contracts.
Further complicating the calculation of the ultimate impact on the budget, trading companies
are required to subsidize across petroleum products (i.e., use profits from gasoline sales to
compensate for losses on diesel and kerosene) prior to receiving subsidy payments from the
budget.

- 14 -

for under-execution of investment spending, which together with the oil windfall, should
serve to keep the deficit below the level recorded in 2004.
18.
The authorities agreed that all capital expenditure should in principle be
brought on budget to align Vietnam’s fiscal transparency and expenditure management
with best international practices. The scrutiny associated with the budget process would
help to improve the quality of public expenditure, especially on provincial and local
infrastructure projects, which are currently subject to weak control mechanisms. While
recognizing the important development needs of the country, the staff encouraged the
authorities to review carefully the procedures for the screening of public investment projects.
Investment expenditure should also be better integrated with recurrent expenditure in the
budgeting process to limit problems related to inadequate maintenance. The authorities
agreed with some of these recommendations. However, they noted that the approval
procedures for large investment projects were to some extent affected by the lumpiness of the
projects, the absence of a multi-year budgeting framework, and legal constraints. These often
made it procedurally more efficient to have the National Assembly approve each multi-year
project on an ad hoc basis.7
19.
The authorities see some scope for a streamlining of the government’s significant
on-lending operations. In particular, the criteria for lending under the Development
Assistance Fund (DAF) need to be further tightened, and applied on a more uniform basis,
with domestically-financed operations scaled down.8 The team also recommended that DAF
operations be integrated into the budget, and fully reflected in the government’s accounts to
improve the analytical content of fiscal data. The authorities noted that they were working on
improving DAF’s operations, and informed the mission about their plans to have more
projects financed through the local infrastructure development funds. However, they believed
that DAF activities did not belong in the budget, as its liabilities were viewed not as
government debt, but rather as contingent liabilities akin to those of the banking sector. The
7

The current budget law includes no provisions for a multi-year public investment
framework, and the stipulated annual deficit ceiling of 5 percent of GDP (based on the
authorities’ definition, i.e., including amortization but excluding on-lending and other offbudget investment expenditure) would preclude financing of some large projects through the
budget. The authorities are currently working toward the development of a multi-year
budgeting framework to be implemented in 2008, with the help of technical assistance from
the World Bank.

8

The DAF has become one of the largest financial institutions in Vietnam, and has
outstanding loans equivalent to about 12 percent of GDP, half of which are financed through
ODA. In addition, there are 13 non-DAF regional infrastructure development funds, which
are still very small but could expand significantly in the period ahead. Eligibility criteria for
DAF lending were tightened in 2004, but it is unclear that these have been strictly adhered to,
and loan appraisal capacity remains in the early stages of development.

- 15 -

mission cautioned that local development funds should be restrained, and plans for them to
issue bonds put on hold, until a regulatory framework for their operations is in place.9
20.
The staff and the authorities agreed that, over the medium term, fiscal policy
should be geared to ensure public debt sustainability. While the ultimate size of
contingent liabilities associated with the banking system’s nonperforming loans is highly
uncertain, the eventual issuance of government bonds to cover SOCBs’ recapitalization costs,
together with full execution of the government’s planned infrastructure investment program,
would likely push the public debt stock on to a path of continuing expansion in relation to
GDP (Annex V). To place the debt-to-GDP ratio on a sustainable path, the team
recommended that the overall fiscal deficit be brought down to about 3½ percent of GDP.
Risks to revenue include a possible decline in the oil windfall due to a decline in oil prices,
which would necessitate a reprioritization and rephasing of the investment program to ensure
that the public debt burden will remain manageable. In addition, the forecasted gradual
decline in the contribution of oil revenues into the budget from 2007 onwards would require
the authorities to begin to place the sizeable non-oil deficit on a declining path over the
medium term. The authorities recognized that the shift in tax base to the harder-to-tax nonSOE sector would necessitate strong efforts to improve non-oil revenue performance,
including by reforming tax policies and administration. Consistent with FAD
recommendations, the reforms could include a progressive extension of the self-assessment
pilot, a rationalization of investment incentives, and the adoption of a single-rate VAT with a
higher threshold. In addition, strong efforts would be in order to improve the quality of
spending in line with the recommendations of the recently completed Public Expenditure
Review.
C. Structural Reforms
Financial Sector Reform
21.
A comprehensive reform of the banking system would be key to protecting
medium-term debt sustainability and achieving the SEDP’s broader economic and
social objectives. The authorities noted that they attach high priority to strengthening the
operation of SOCBs to enable them to meet the challenges of increasing competition
resulting from Vietnam’s ongoing international economic integration. The government is to
finalize its financial sector reform roadmap, including specific plans for the reform and
recapitalization of SOCBs, soon after the receipt of bank financial reports based on the new
prudential standards. To minimize the burden on the budget, the authorities planned to rely
on the equitization of the main SOCBs as a means to fund at least a part of their capital
shortfall.

9

Chapter I of the Selected Issues paper examines fiscal risks posed by DAF and local
investment funds.

- 16 -

22.
The team stressed the importance of ensuring the accuracy of banks’ reports
prior to finalizing their recapitalization plans, and emphasized the need for
accompanying measures to encourage SOCBs to operate on a commercial basis. The
introduction of private capital through equitization could play a positive role in this process,
especially if this were to enable foreign strategic investors to take controlling stakes in the
SOCBs. Improved SOCB corporate governance would also need to be supported by
measures to eliminate residual policy lending and strengthen the overall governance of the
banking system. In particular, the Ministry of Finance would need to assume a more active
ownership role in the enforcement of controls on SOCBs, and the SBV’s independence and
supervisory authority should be strengthened through the necessary legal reforms. The
authorities agreed with these recommendations. They informed the team that, given the
National Assembly’s full agenda associated with Vietnam’s WTO accession, the required
changes in the SBV and Credit Institutions Laws would have to be postponed until 2008.
However, they were confident that the existing legal framework gave them sufficient leeway
to introduce significant improvements in the governance of SOCBs in the meantime.
SOE Reform
23.
Restructuring of the SOE sector is another top priority. The mission urged the
authorities to push ahead with their equitization plans, while at the same time curbing
government interference in the management and investment decisions of SOEs. The team
emphasized the need to phase out administered prices, which may undermine the profitability
of some key SOEs, with a view to reducing opportunities for rent-seeking activities and, thus,
supporting the government’s fight against corruption. Where needed, to alleviate the impact
on the poor, price liberalization should be supplemented with the introduction of bettertargeted subsidies and safety nets, which should be explicitly accounted for in the budget.
The authorities agreed that, in principle, SOEs should be encouraged to operate on
commercial terms. However, they acknowledged that SOEs operating in strategic sectors
were at times instructed by the government to adopt policies aimed at broader social
objectives. The authorities informed the team that they are in the process of receiving
comprehensive financial reports from SOEs, which are to be used to formulate the SOE
reform strategy. However, they were not in a position to share these reports with staff.
Trade Liberalization and Private Sector Development
24.
The authorities remain committed to international economic integration, as they
appreciate how growing trade and foreign direct investment would be central to
Vietnam’s continued favorable growth performance in the period ahead.10 In this
context, they are making a determined effort to secure accession to the WTO as soon as
10

Chapter II of the Selected Issues paper reviews the pattern of Vietnam’s recent
international integration, with particular focus on the implications for the growth and
direction of its trade.

- 17 -

possible. As of mid-July 2005, bilateral WTO agreements had been concluded with
10 countries. However, more than a dozen agreements remained to be finalized, and the
authorities will be hard pressed to carry out this task in time to meet their target accession
date of end-2005.
25.
To meet the requirements for WTO accession and create a level playing field, the
authorities have modified the legislative agenda to allow key laws to be discussed at the
November session of the National Assembly. These include a new Common Investment
Law (CIL) and a Unified Enterprise Law (UEL), which are being developed in close
consultation with the private sector and foreign investor communities, and are viewed as key
to successful negotiations with some major trading partners. The team welcomed these
initiatives, and encouraged the authorities to implement the new laws in a credible and
transparent manner. This should go a long way towards fostering private investment,
including participation in infrastructure development projects, which should help to fund
Vietnam’s large investment needs without placing an excessive burden on the budget.
D. Other Issues
26.
The serious weaknesses in the availability, timeliness, and quality of economic
data are an impediment to effective surveillance. In the area of money and banking, in
particular, delays in data reporting to the Fund have increased in the last year, and
discrepancies between the reports of individual commercial banks and the SBV’s monetary
survey data have further hampered assessment of recent monetary and credit trends. The
authorities explained that the delays were partly due to implementation of a new chart of
accounts, which is still under way. While progress has been made on the coverage of fiscal
data, further improvements are needed in the areas of off-budget activities, debt statistics, and
contingent liabilities. Weaknesses also need to be addressed in the areas of the balance of
payments, national income accounts, and SOE and SOCB operations. The team stressed the
need for decisive measures to improve the reliability, timeliness and dissemination of
economic data, consistent with the authorities’ more general objective to meet the data and
policy transparency requirements of a market-based economy.
27.
The mission welcomed the recently-issued Anti-Money Laundering (AML)
decree and urged the SBV to adopt the necessary measures for its effective implementation.
In addition, it encouraged the authorities to amend the criminal code to criminalize the
financing of terrorism, and to incorporate and implement the other requirements for
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (CFT).
28.
The authorities expressed their intention to remove the three remaining
exchange restrictions subject to Article VIII, sections 2, 3 and 4, and accept Article VIII
of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement (Annex I). LEG and MFD have provided substantial
technical assistance in this regard, including by offering advice on the drafting of the
authorities’ proposed new foreign exchange legislation. The mission welcomed the
authorities’ plan to remove the remaining exchange restrictions, and encouraged them to

- 18 -

accept Article VIII as soon as possible, taking full advantage of the advice provided by LEG
and MFD.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
29.
In recent years, Vietnam has achieved sustained robust growth, which has
contributed to a significant decline in poverty and made Vietnam an attractive
destination for FDI. This favorable performance has been supported by measures to
increase international integration and move toward a more market-based economic system.
To build on these achievements in the period ahead, a more flexible policy framework needs
to be adopted under the new Five-Year Plan for 2006-2010. In addition, decisive action needs
to be taken to ensure macroeconomic stability, protect debt sustainability, and enable the
private sector to become the primary engine of growth.
30.
The outlook for 2005 remains positive, and should be strengthened by putting a
more prudent mix of macroeconomic policies in place. Growth in the first half of 2005 has
remained robust, yet somewhat lower than the authorities’ target of 8½ percent for the year.
At the same time, inflation has been significantly higher than in recent years, and reserve
coverage remains low. In this context, the staff cautions the authorities against stepping up
public investment in projects of uncertain quality in pursuit of the official growth target, and
urges them to protect macroeconomic stability by focusing on the quality rather than the
quantity of investment and growth.
31.
The staff supports the authorities’ aim to slow credit growth substantially, and
urges them to take all necessary steps to meet this objective. Slower credit growth will be
essential to prevent an unsustainable build-up of SOCB-related quasi-fiscal liabilities,
contain inflationary pressures, and shore up international reserves. To meet these objectives,
the SBV will need to use all available instruments in a concerted way, and SOCBs should no
longer be pressured to provide directed lending to SOEs.
32.
The staff encourages the authorities to adopt a more flexible exchange rate
policy. While the use of the exchange rate as a monetary anchor could help curb inflation in
the short run, Vietnam’s continued vulnerability to external shocks and increasing exposure
to foreign competition call for a more flexible exchange rate policy. Increased exchange rate
flexibility would also encourage improved management of exchange rate risks. To these
ends, the staff urges the authorities to limit intervention to addressing disorderly market
conditions and make full use of the flexibility embedded in the current exchange rate system.
33.
Given the near-term risks to inflation, the staff recommends that a good part of
the projected sizable oil revenue windfall be saved in 2005. This should help limit the
short-term fiscal impulse resulting from the rise in oil prices, while reducing the overall fiscal
deficit to less than 4 percent of GDP. Investment expenditure and domestically-financed onlending should be scaled back to offset increases in the wage bill, and the authorities should
consider further increases in domestic oil prices to avoid additional sizable oil subsidy
payments in the event that prices remain at current levels. In addition, the staff urges the

- 19 -

authorities to move closer into line with best practices in the areas of fiscal transparency and
public expenditure management by adopting an integrated system of fiscal accounting and
reporting.
34.
Over the medium term, the need to protect debt sustainability calls for the
overall fiscal deficit to be brought down to around 3½ percent of GDP. In light of the
significant oil revenue windfall over the medium term, the authorities should stand ready to
reconsider their investment program in the event that oil prices drop sharply. The expected
decline in oil-related receipts from 2007 onwards, and the pressures on the budget likely to
emanate from the quasi-fiscal liabilities incurred by the SOCB and SOE sectors, make it all
the more important to adopt a prudent fiscal stance. The achievement of the above objective
will require bold measures to reform tax policy and administration, and to rationalize
expenditure, including by improving the screening of investment projects and making all
public investment subject to the same level of scrutiny received by central government
expenditures.
35.
SOCB reform remains key to medium-term sustainability and would also be
instrumental in promoting higher-quality investment and growth. The recently-adopted
prudential regulations for commercial banks are an important step in the right direction and
should be implemented strictly and without delay. The staff urges the authorities to finalize
their SOCB reform and nonperforming loan resolution plans based on accurate and reliable
estimates of SOCBs’ capital shortfall. In order to be credible, these plans need to be
complemented by early action to eliminate policy lending, improve SOCBs’ corporate
governance, and strengthen the SBV’s independence and supervisory authority.
36.
SOE reform is an integral part of the move to a more efficient, market-oriented
economy. The authorities should strengthen initiatives to move forward with equitization of
larger SOEs, curb government interference in their management and investment decisions,
and provide incentives for them to operate on a commercial basis.
37.
An open trade and investment regime and a fair and transparent regulatory
environment will be key to promoting private sector-led growth. The staff welcomes the
authorities’ progress toward WTO accession, and encourages them to pass and implement the
legislation required to create a level playing field as soon as possible. Early liberalization of
administered prices will be essential to removing distortions and bottlenecks in the supply of
key industrial inputs. Market-determined prices, together with SOCB and SOE reforms,
would also serve to limit the scope for rent-seeking activities and should thus complement
the government’s administrative measures to prevent corruption.
38.
The staff urges the authorities to take prompt measures to improve the
reliability, timeliness and dissemination of Vietnam’s economic data. While data
provision is still adequate overall, staff’s analysis was affected by shortcomings in certain
areas. Improvements are urgently required in the quality of money and banking statistics to
enhance their usefulness in the assessment of monetary and credit policies. Improved
coverage and reliability of data on off-budget activities, public debt, and contingent liabilities

- 20 -

would also be necessary to help improve the assessment of fiscal policy. In addition, a strong
effort would be warranted to improve the quality and dissemination of balance of payments,
external debt, and official reserve data, so as to improve surveillance and consolidate
Vietnam’s attractiveness as a destination of FDI.
39.
The staff welcomes the recently-passed AML decree and urges the authorities to
strengthen the legal and institutional framework for CFT requirements.
40.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Vietnam take place
on the standard 12-month cycle.

- 21 -

Figure 1. Vietnam: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2005

8

8

REAL GDP GROWTH
(In percent of GDP)

DOMESTIC INVESTMENT AND SAVINGS
(In percent of GDP)

35

7

7

6

6

35

33

33

31

31

29

29

27

27

5

5

National savings
National investment
4
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

35

30

25

4
2005

35

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(12 month percentage change) Foreign Invested
Enterprises
Non State Owned
Enterprises
State Owned
Enterprises

30

15
13

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

25
2005

2004

15

INFLATION 1/
(12- month percent change)

13

11

11

9

9

7

7

5

5

3

3

1

1

-1

-1

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

25
1998

0

Nonfood

-3

-3

CPI
-5
1998

-5
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-5
1998

-5
1999

Source: Data provided by the Vietnames authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Based on the June 2000 CPI weights.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

- 22 -

Figure 2. Vietnam: Monetary and Financial Indicators, 1998-2005
70

70

60

GROWTH OF MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Year on year percentage change)

Broad money
Credit to the economy

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

Small survey 1/
10
1998

Large survey 2/
10

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

50
45

12,000

FOREIGN CURRENCY DEPOSITS AND LOANS
Small survey 1/

Large survey 2/

10,000

40

Foreign currency deposits
(In percent of broad money, left hand scale)

35

Deposits (In millions of US$, right hand scale)
8,000

30
25

6,000

20

Loans (In millions of US$,
right hand scale)

15

4,000

10

2,000

5
0

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
20

20

NOMINAL INTEREST RATES
(In percent per year)

Lending rate for working capital

18

16

3-month household deposits rate

16

14

Base lending rate (introduced August 2000)

14

18

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0
1998

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Source: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities and Fund estimates.
1/ Monetary survey comprising of State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), four large state owned commercial
banks (SOCBs), and 24 non-state banks.
2/ Monetary survey comprising of SBV, four large and two small SOCBs, and 78 non-state banks.

2005

- 23 -

Figure 3. Vietnam: Fiscal Sector Developments, 1998- 2005
30

30
REVENUE AND GRANTS
(In percentage of GDP)

25

140

25

Grants
Nonoil
Oil revenues

20 100

15

15

120

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

10

5

5

0

0

0
1998

40

140

Grants
Nontax revenue
Other taxes
T rade taxes
T axes on goods and services
Income taxes

120

20

10

REVENUE COMPOSITION
(In percent of total revenue)

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

40

EXPENDITURE AND NET LENDING
(In percentage of GDP)

35

35

Off-budge t (inc l. ne t le nding)
C a pita l e xpe nditure
Othe r c urre nt e xpe nditure

30

0
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

2005
8
7

8

BUDGET FINANCING
(In percentage of GDP)

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

30

Inte re s t pa ym e nt
Wa ge s a nd s a la rie s

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-1

-1

Foreign Financing
Domestic Financing

-2

-2
1998

1999

Source:Data provide by the Vietnamese authorities and Fund staff estimates.

2000

2001 2002

2003

2004

2005

- 24 -

Figure 4. Vietnam: External Sector Background, 1998- 2005
10000

7000

EXTERNAL RESERVES
(In millions of U.S. Dollars)

6

6000

EXTERNAL BALANCE
(In Percent of GDP)

6

8000

5000

2

2

-2

-2

-6

-6

6000
4000

3000

4000

2000
2000
1000

1998

1999

2000

2001

Net International Reserves 1/

Trade Balance

2002

2003

0

-14

2004

25,000

1998

-14
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

175

NOMINAL EXCHANGE RATES
22,500

-10
Current Account

NFA of Commercial Banks

0

-10

Gross International Reserves

125

Dong per U.S. Dollar (left hand scale)

EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES
(June 1997=100)
(A decline is a depreciation)

125

Dong per EURO (left hand scale)
20,000

Dong per Yen (right hand scale)

150

17,500

115

115

105

105

125
15,000

95

95
12,500
100

85

85
10,000
Nominal effective exchange rate
Real effective exchange rate
7,500
1998 1998 1999 2000 2000 2001 2002 2002 2003 2004 2004 2005

75

75

75
1998

1999

Source: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes foreign liabilities and commercial banks' foreign deposits.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

- 25 -

Table 1. Vietnam: Social and Demographic Indicators

Indicator

Poverty
1
Upper poverty line
Percent of population living below
1
Food poverty line
Percent of population living below
GDP per capita
Access to safe water: total
Urban
Rural
2
Access to health care

Unit of
Measure

1985

1993

Thousand dong

U.S. dollars
Percent of population
Percent of population
Percent of population
Percent of population

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
75.0

1,160
58
750
25
355
26.1
58.5
18.1
93.0

1,790
37
1,287
15
360
40.1
76.8
29.1
97.0

1,790
37
1,287
13
374
40.1
76.8
29.1
97.0

Thousand dong

1998
1999
2000
(or latest year available)

Same Region/
Income Group
East
LowAsia Income

2001

2002

1,790
37
1,287
13
401
40.1
76.8
29.1
97.0

…
32
1,287
10
413
40.6
76.3
39.6
…

…
29
1,287
10
440
48.5
76.3
39.6
…

...
…
…
...
914
…
…
…
...

...
…
…
...
432
…
…
…
...

Health
Mortality
Infant mortality
Under 5 mortality
Immunization
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (under 5)
4
Maternal mortality rate
Population per physician
Population per nurse
Population per hospital bed

Per thousand live birth
Per thousand live birth

63
105

36
47

30
40

30
40

28
34

23
30

20
26

34
44

80
121

Percent of age group
Percent of age group
Percent of age group
Per 100,000 live births
Persons
Persons
Persons

19.0
42.0
52.0
110
4,061
1,245
271

93.0
91.0
51.0
...
2,428
723
355

96.0
95.0
34.0
200
2,208
789
379

93.0
93.0
34.0
200
2,941
789
399

97.0
96.0
34.0
200
2,941
789
399

97.0
98.0
33.8
200
3,279
813
409

96.0
75.0
29.5
165
3,228
822
414

76.3
76.8
14.8
…
595
…
420

59.8
61.5
…
…
...
…
…

Human resources
Population
Age dependency ratio
Urban
Population growth rate
Urban
Life expectancy
Female advantage
Total fertility rate
Labor force (15-64)
Female

Millions
Ratio
Percent of population
Annual percent
Annual percent
Years
Years
Births per woman
Millions
Percent of labor force

60
0.82
19.6
2.2
2.4
62
3.8
4.6
29
48.9

69
0.74
19.8
1.7
2.8
67
4.5
3.3
36
49.5

75
0.66
23.1
1.6
3.7
68
4.8
2.4
39
49.1

77
0.64
23.6
1.5
3.5
68
4.8
2.3
40
49.0

78
0.62
24.2
1.4
3.8
69
4.8
1.9
40
48.9

79
0.60
24.7
1.4
3.7
69
4.9
2.2
41
48.8

80
0.58
25.1
1.3
2.8
70
4.9
1.9
42
48.7

1,823
0.50
37.3
0.9
3.3
69
3.5
2.1
1,038
44.5

2,506
0.70
30.8
1.8
3.0
59
2.1
3.5
1,138
37.9

Thousands sq. km.
Persons per sq. km.
Percent of land area
Percent
Thousand sq. km.
Kg. of oil equivalent

325
184
21.0
28.0
97
368

325
213
24.0
28.0
83
383

325
232
26.2
30.2
...
448

325
235
26.2
30.2
109
454

325
239
26.2
30.2
109
471

325
242
26.2
30.2
109
495

325
245
26.2
30.2
98
...

16,301
115
…
…
…
871

33,031
76
…
…
…
569

...
...
...

42.0
20.7
8.0

43.3
20.1
8.2

43.3
20.1
8.2

43.3
20.1
8.2

45.9
19.0
7.8

46.0
19.0
7.8

...
...
...

...
...
...

103.0
106.0
100.0
34
42.7
10.8
14.9

111.0
114.0
108.0
35
35.5
9.0
11.8

109.0
114.0
105.0
30
61.9
7.9
10.0

108.0
111.0
104.0
30
65.0
7.7
9.7

106.0
109.0
102.0
28
67.1
7.5
9.3

103.0
107.0
100.0
26
69.7
7.3
9.1

...
...
...
24

105.7
105.3
106.1

91.8
103.0
87.5

60.8
13.2
19.2

44.5
37.0
46.1

Natural resources
Area
Density
Agricultural lands
Agricultural land under irrigation
Forests and woodland
Energy consumption per capita
Income
Share of top 20 percent of households
Share of bottom 40 percent of households
Share of bottom 20 percent of households
Education
Net enrollment ratios
Primary
3
Male
3
Female
Pupil-teacher ratio: primary
Secondary
Illiteracy
Female

Percent of income
Percent of income
Percent of income

Percent of gross
Percent of gross
Percent of gross
Pupils per teacher
Percent of Gross
Percent of population age 15+
Percent of female age 15+

...
...

Sources: Vietnam: Statistical Yearbook (various years), and General Statistical Office, Vietnam Living Standards Survey 1997-1998 ; World Bank: Vietnam
st
Development Report 2000: Attacking Poverty , and Vietnam Development Report 2001: Entering the 21 Century , Vietnam Development Report 2004:
Poverty; Vietnam Population Committee: Demographic and Health Survey 2002; World Development Indicators; and staff estimates.
1

The upper poverty line is constituted by the cost of a representative food bundle yielding 2,100 calories per day, plus a representative nonfood component. The
poverty line represents the approximate cost of this food bundle only.
2
For 1993 and 1998, rural population.
3
For 1993 and 1998, net enrollment ratios.
4
For 1998 and 2002, comprises revised data.

- 26 Table 2. Vietnam: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-05
Nominal GDP (2004): US$45.3 billion
Population (2004): 82.0 million

GDP per capita (2004): US$552
Fund quota: SDR 329.1 million
2000

2001

2002

2003

2005

2004
Prel.

H1

1

Proj.

Real GDP (annual percentage change)
Industrial output

6.8
18.4

6.9
13.7

7.1
18.8

7.3
16.9

7.7
16.0

7.5
15.6

7.5
...

Saving-investment balance (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross investment

2.1
31.7
29.6

2.1
33.2
31.2

-1.2
32.0
33.2

-4.9
29.7
34.6

-3.8
31.7
35.5

...
...
...

-4.4
32.2
36.6

Inflation (annual percentage change)
Period average
End of period
GDP deflator

-1.6
-0.5
3.4

-0.4
0.7
1.9

4.0
4.0
4.0

3.2
2.9
6.7

7.7
9.5
7.9

9.2
7.6

...

8.0
7.0
5.3

General government budget
Total revenue and grants
of which: oil revenue
Total Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Net lending2
Off-budget expenditure

20.5
6.5
25.5
15.9
7.4
2.2
0.0

21.6
7.4
26.6
16.0
8.4
2.2
0.0

22.7
6.8
26.6
15.7
8.4
2.4
0.7

23.1
6.4
28.0
16.8
8.3
2.9
2.3

23.4
6.4
26.7
16.5
8.3
1.9
1.2

12.2
...
...
8.9
3.4
...
...

24.5
7.6
27.1
17.7
7.6
1.8
1.1

-5.0
-11.4

-5.0
-12.4

-4.5
-11.3

-7.2
-13.6

-4.5
-10.9

...
...

-3.8
-11.4

39.0
38.1

25.5
21.4

17.6
22.2

24.9
28.4

30.4
41.7

27.3
39.9

...
...

4.3
9.8

5.9
8.8

7.0
9.9

6.3
10.0

6.7
10.7

7.4
11.1

...
...

642
2.1
25.2
34.5

670
2.1
4.0
2.3

-419
-1.2
11.2
22.1

-1,946
-4.9
20.4
29.1

-1,700
-3.8
29.3
25.0

...
...
16.2
18.5

-2,246
-4.4
21.3
23.2

3,030
8.9
2,191

3,387
8.3
2,555

3,692
7.2
2,956

5,620
8.9
4,683

6,314
8.1
5,554

7,055
...
6,286

7,730
8.6
...

38.6
10.5

37.9
10.6

34.9
8.6

33.6
7.9

34.2
6.2

...
...

34.2
5.2

14,170
14,514

14,806
15,084

15,272
15,404

15,514
15,646

15,745
15,773

15,798
15,771

...
...

-2.8
2.2

0.9
1.5

-0.6
-3.8

-4.9
-5.9

0.0
2.0

2.1
4.4

...
...

441.6
401

481.3
413

535.8
440

613.4
489

713.1
552

...
...

806.9
...

Overall fiscal balance including off-budget expenditure
Non-oil overall fiscal deficit
Money and credit (annual percentage change, end of period)
Broad money
Credit to the economy
Interest rates (in percent, end of period)
Three-month deposits (households)
Short-term lending (less than one year)
Current account balance (including official transfers)
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of GDP)
Exports f.o.b (annual percentage change, U.S. dollar terms)
Imports f.o.b. (annual percentage change, U.S. dollar terms)
Foreign exchange reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars, end of period)
Gross official reserves, including gold
(in weeks of next year's imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Net international reserves, including gold
External debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service due (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)
Exchange rate (dong per U.S. dollar)
Period average
End of period
Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage change, base 1997)
Period average
End of period
Memorandum items:
GDP (in trillions of dong at current market prices)
Per capita GDP (in U.S. dollars)

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1
2

Data as of end-June, except broad money, credit to the economy and interest rates which are end-April.
Includes DAF operations. The authorities record ODA received for onlending; repayments are included under amortization.

- 27 -

Table 3. Vietnam: Balance of Payments, 2000-05
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel

2005
Proj

642
506

670
520

-419
-551

-1,946
-2,085

-1,700
-1,874

-2,246
-2,431

378
14,449
3,503
14,071
2,016

627
15,027
3,126
14,400
1,828

-876
16,706
3,270
17,582
2,017

-2,593
20,112
3,821
22,704
2,433

-2,368
26,003
5,666
28,371
3,571

-3,405
31,551
7,758
34,956
5,242

Non-factor services (net)
Receipts
Payments

-615
2,695
3,310

-572
2,810
3,382

-648
2,948
3,596

-778
3,272
4,050

-878
3,860
4,739

-848
4,825
5,673

Investment income (net)
Receipts
Payments

-597
185
782

-635
160
795

-793
167
960

-814
125
939

-938
180
1,117

-1,066
220
1,286

1,476
1,340
136

1,250
1,100
150

1,898
1,767
131

2,239
2,100
139

2,484
2,310
174

3,073
2,888
185

-526

-476

862

4,097

2,379

3,663

Gross foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows
Equity
Loan disbursements
FDI loan repayments

1,101
977
124
601

1,252
1,067
185
819

2,023
1,882
141
414

1,894
1,294
600
590

1,763
1,204
559
536

2,337
1,624
713
524

Medium and long-term loans (net)
Disbursements
ODA loans
Commercial loans
Amortization1

729
1,411
1,361
50
682

623
988
958
30
365

526
1,102
1,073
29
576

1,047
1,540
1,258
283
493

1,442
1,920
1,394
526
477

1,709
2,068
1,525
543
358

-1,755

-1,532

-1,273

1,745

-290

140

115

194

464

2,151

679

1,417

-115
-115

-194
-194

-464
-464

-2151
-2,151

-679
-679

-1,417
-1,417

3,030
8.9

3,387
8.3

3,692
7.2

5,620
8.9

6,314
8.1

7,730
8.6

2.1
-2.7
25.2
34.5
15.9
28.2
38.6
10.5

2.1
-1.9
4.0
2.3
8.7
4.3
37.9
10.6

-1.2
-4.8
11.2
22.1
12.9
23.8
34.9
8.6

-4.9
-8.4
20.4
29.1
21.3
30.2
33.6
7.9

-3.8
-8.4
29.3
25.0
24.8
22.3
34.2
6.2

-4.4
-9.4
21.3
23.2
17.0
19.8
34.2
5.2

Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
of which: oil
Imports, f.o.b.
of which: oil

Transfers (net)
Private
Official
Capital account balance

Short-term capital (net) 2
Overall balance
Financing
Change in SBV's NFA (-, increase)
Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves
In weeks of next year's imports of GNFS
Current account deficit (in percent of GDP)
Non-oil current account deficit (in percent of GDP)
Export value growth (in percent)
Import value growth (in percent)
Non-oil export value growth (in percent)
Non-oil import value growth (in percent)
External debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)

Sources: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
Including two debt buyback operations carried out in 2002 and 2003, respectively.
2
Including errors and omissions and trade credit.
1

- 28 -

Table 4. Vietnam: Monetary Survey, 2000-20051
2000

2001

2002

2003
Mar.

2004
June
Sept.

Dec.

Jan

Feb

2005
Mar.

Apr.

Dec.
Proj.

(In trillions of Dong)
Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

95.7
112.7
-17.0

117.6
135.9
-18.3

117.4
135.9
-18.4

131.4
150.5
-19.1

133.6
153.2
-19.6

130.5
152.1
-21.7

138.9
161.5
-22.6

145.8
172.3
-26.4

144.1
171.9
-27.8

148.8
177.2
-28.4

151.5
179.9
-28.4

153.5
182.3
-28.8

169.1
195.5
-26.4

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
2
Net claims on government

127.2
155.2
-0.5

162.2
191.2
2.1

211.7
239.9
8.8

279.8
316.9
20.1

303.8
341.5
17.0

328.4
372.4
15.6

345.8
391.4
7.0

390.4
435.2
14.9

393.7
448.8
18.1

396.4
455.8
15.3

402.4
464.1
8.2

410.6
477.5
7.6

510.3
561.3
15.0

155.7
32.3
69.9
85.8
-28.0

189.1
36.5
79.7
109.4
-29.0

231.1
46.2
89.5
141.6
-28.2

296.7
65.2
105.4
191.3
-37.0

324.5
71.9
115.8
208.6
-37.7

356.8
83.0
127.5
229.3
-44.0

384.4
90.1
134.5
249.9
-45.5

420.3
102.9
142.9
277.4
-44.9

430.7
106.3
...
...
-55.1

440.5
109.8
...
...
-59.4

455.9
111.6
...
...
-61.7

469.9
...
...
...
-67.0

546.3
...
...
...
-51.0

222.9
170.7
152.5
52.2
100.3
70.4
4,854
31.6

279.8
213.5
191.1
66.3
124.8
88.7
5,884
31.7

329.1
254.9
235.5
74.3
161.3
93.6
6,093
28.4

411.2
320.6
314.1
90.6
223.6
97.1
6,220
23.6

437.4
341.7
332.5
95.7
236.9
104.9
6,670
24.0

458.9
363.8
348.1
95.0
253.1
110.7
7,042
24.1

484.7
388.5
368.2
96.3
271.9
116.6
7,398
24.0

536.2
427.1
408.1
109.1
299.0
128.1
8,123
23.9

537.8
416.2
407.5
121.5
285.9
130.3
8,272
24.2

545.2
426.8
413.9
118.3
295.6
131.3
8,327
24.1

553.9
439.7
420.6
114.2
306.4
133.3
8,445
24.1

564.1
449.7
427.1
114.4
312.7
137.0
8,674
24.3

679.4
551.7
513.6
127.6
386.0
165.7
10,402
24.4

Credit to the economy3
of which in foreign currency
Claims on state enterprises3 4
34
Claims on other sectors
Other items, net
Total liquidity (M2)
of which: total deposits
Dong liquidity
Currency outside banks
Deposits
Foreign currency deposits
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of total liquidity)

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net claims on government2
Credit to the economy3
of which in foreign currency
Claims on state enterprises3
3
Claims on other sectors
Total liquidity (M2)
of which: total deposits
Dong liquidity
Currency outside banks
Deposits
Foreign currency deposits
(change during year, in millions of U.S. dollars)
Velocity4
4

Dong velocity
5
Money multiplier
Currency/broad money (in percent)
Currency/dong deposits (in percent)
Currency/total deposits (in percent)
Foreign currency deposits/total deposits
Foreign currency loans/total loans

56.4
28.2
34.2
-116.4
38.1
11.8
28.7
46.9
39.0
43.3
30.8
26.6
33.2
60.5

22.9
27.5
23.2
-534.2
21.4
13.1
14.1
27.5
25.5
25.1
25.3
27.0
24.4
26.0

-0.2
30.6
25.5
320.8
22.2
26.6
12.2
29.5
17.6
19.4
23.2
12.0
29.2
5.6

11.9
32.2
32.1
127.7
28.4
41.0
17.8
35.1
24.9
25.8
33.4
22.0
38.6
3.7

1.9

1.6

1.6

1.4

2.8
3.1
23.4
52.1
30.6
41.2
20.7

2.5
3.3
23.7
53.1
31.1
41.5
19.3

2.2
3.4
22.6
46.1
29.1
36.7
20.0

1.8
3.4
22.0
40.5
28.2
30.3
22.0

4.8
39.2
38.5
558.6
33.0
39.3
25.5
37.6
26.5
28.1
32.2
21.3
37.2
11.4

6.5
34.2
37.8
-26.7
43.1
57.9
...
...
25.5
28.8
23.1
15.4
26.7
33.6

9.6
36.5
40.0
-21.3
43.9
58.4
...
...
27.9
29.3
26.9
23.3
28.5
31.1

13.4
32.4
35.9
-51.6
40.5
55.3
...
...
26.6
28.7
26.5
19.4
29.3
27.1

19.2
30.6
35.9
-50.6
39.9
...
...
...
27.3
30.0
26.5
17.7
30.1
29.9

16.0
30.7
29.0
0.7
30.0
...
...
...
26.7
29.2
25.9
17.0
29.1
29.3

(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.5

1.5

1.5

1.4

1.2

1.9
3.6
21.7
40.0
27.7
30.8
24.9

1.9
3.9
20.6
37.3
26.0
30.3
24.5

1.9
3.9
20.3
36.6
25.4
30.5
...

1.6
4.4
18.8
33.1
23.1
30.0
...

7,144
9,598
352

7,415
9,722
476

7,730
10,615
1,369

2.1
3.7
21.9
40.4
28.0
30.7
22.2

3.9
35.2
35.5
73.7
34.2
38.1
30.4
36.5
24.5
26.1
26.8
18.9
30.0
18.0

2.0
3.7
20.7
37.5
26.1
30.4
23.3

6.9
37.1
34.8
-45.2
38.5
46.0
32.9
41.7
26.8
28.7
27.6
19.7
30.7
24.5

1.9
4.0
19.9
35.4
24.8
30.0
23.4

11.0
39.5
37.4
-26.0
41.7
57.8
35.6
45.0
30.4
33.2
29.9
20.4
33.7
32.0

1.7
3.8
20.3
36.5
25.5
30.0
24.5

2.0
3.5
22.6
42.5
29.2
31.3
24.7

(In millions of U.S. dollar, unless indicated otherwise)
6

Gross official international reserves (adjusted)
Net foreign assets of the banking system
(change during year, in millions of U.S. dollars)

3,030
6,599
2,235

3,387
7,805
1,206

3,692
7,640
-164

5,620
8,419
778

5,563
8,496
77

5,886
8,298
-121

5,833
8,817
398

6,314
9,246
827

6,946
9,148
-98

6,884
9,437
191

Sources: State Bank of Vietnam; and Fund staff estimates.
1

Data comprise the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), six state-owned commercial banks, and 83 non-state owned banks.
Fund staff projections exclude capital cost of banking reform and the possible issuance of international bonds by the government.
3
Fund staff projections exclude the possible transfer in collateralized nonperforming loans of commercial banks to an AMC.
4
Velocity is measured as the ratio of GDP to end-of-period total liquidity (M2) or dong liquidity respectively
5
Money multiplier is measured as the ratio of total liquidity (M2) to reserve money.
6
Excludes foreign currency counterpart of swap operations, government foreign currency deposits at the SBV, and foreign currency transactions related to the possible issuance of international bo
by the government.
2

- 29 -

Table 5. Vietnam: Summary of General Government Budgetary Operations, 2000-2005
(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel.

2005
Budget

Proj.
Staff

Total Revenue and grants
Oil revenues
Nonoil revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
Grants

20.5
6.5
13.6
11.5
2.1
0.5

21.6
7.4
13.8
11.6
2.2
0.4

22.7
6.8
15.5
13.0
2.6
0.4

23.1
6.4
16.4
13.7
2.8
0.3

23.4
6.4
16.7
13.6
3.1
0.3

22.7
...
...
...
...
0.2

24.5
7.6
16.6
13.5
3.1
0.3

Total Expenditure and net lending
Current Expenditure
Wages and salaries
Interest payments
Other current expenditure
Capital Expenditure

25.5
15.9
3.3
0.8
11.8
7.4

26.6
16.0
3.6
0.9
11.5
8.4

26.6
15.7
3.4
1.0
11.3
8.4

28.0
16.8
3.7
1.1
12.0
8.3

26.7
16.5
4.8
0.8
10.8
8.3

27.9
16.8
...
0.8
...
8.2

27.1
17.7
6.0
0.8
11.0
7.6

2.2
2.2
0.0

2.2
1.0
1.2

2.4
0.9
1.5

2.9
1.2
1.7

1.9
0.9
1.0

2.9
1.6
1.3

1.8
1.1
0.6

-5.0
-2.7

-5.0
-2.8

-3.8
-1.4

-4.9
-2.0

-3.3
-1.4

-5.2
-2.3

-2.6
-0.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.7
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0

2.3
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.3

1.2
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.3

...
...
...
...
...

1.1
0.2
0.7
0.0
0.2

-5.0
-11.4

-5.0
-12.4

-4.5
-11.3

-7.2
-13.6

-4.5
-10.9

...

-3.8
-11.4

Financing
Domestic (net)

5.0
1.3

5.0
2.9

4.5
2.6

7.2
5.2

4.5
2.8

...
...

3.8
1.2

Foreign (net)
Borrowing
Amortization

3.7
4.2
0.5

2.0
2.5
0.4

1.9
2.3
0.4

2.0
2.5
0.5

1.7
2.1
0.4

1.9
2.5
0.6

2.6
3.0
0.4

Net lending1
ODA financed
Domestically financed
Fiscal Balance (old definition, excl. off-budget investment)2
o/w Official budget balance (excl. net lending)
Off-budget investment expenditure
Education bonds
Infrastructure bonds
Reform bonds (pre-2000 SOCB debt)
Municiple bonds
Overall fiscal balance (new definition, incl. off-budget inv.)
o/w Non-oil balance

Memorandum Items:
Expenditure managed by units3
Public debt stock4
Domestic
Foreign
exchange rate (p.a.)
Non-oil GDP (trillions of dong)
Nominal GDP (trillions of dong)

1.4

1.8

1.6

2.4

1.6

1.8

1.8

...
...
...
14,170
421
442

37.0
6.4
30.5
14,806
462
481

38.5
10.6
28.0
15,272
517
536

41.9
13.5
28.3
15,514
592
613

41.0
13.4
27.6
15,739
680
713

...
...
...
...
767
807

41.2
14.1
27.0
...
767
807

Source: Vietnamese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1

Includes DAF operations. The authorities record ODA received for onlending; repayments are included under amortization.

2

Definition of the fiscal deficit contained in IMF Country Report No. 05/148 (Table 6, p. 32).

3

Self-financed expenditures undertaken by government administrative units, which are excluded from the above.

4

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt.

- 30 Table 6. Vietnam: Medium-Term Scenario, 2002-10

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007
2008
Projection

2009

2010

7.1
535.8

7.3
613.4

7.7
713.1

7.5
806.9

7.4
889.5

7.4
982.0

7.4
1084.8

7.3
1197.6

7.3
1321.5

4.0
4.0
4.0

3.2
2.9
6.7

7.7
9.7
7.9

8.0
7.0
5.3

7.0
6.5
2.7

6.0
5.5
2.8

5.0
4.0
2.9

4.0
3.5
2.9

3.5
3.5
2.9

(Percentage change)
Real GDP (annual percentage change)
Nominal GDP (in trillions of dong)
Inflation (annual percentage change)
Consumer prices (annual average)
Consumer price index, end of period
GDP deflator

(In percent of GDP)
Saving-investment balance
Gross national saving
Gross investment
ICOR

-1.2
32.0
33.2
4.4

-4.9
29.7
34.6
4.4

-3.8
31.7
35.5
4.3

-4.4
32.2
36.6
4.6

-4.0
31.9
35.9
4.6

-4.0
31.8
35.7
4.6

-4.0
31.4
35.4
4.5

-3.9
31.5
35.4
4.5

-3.9
31.0
34.9
4.5

Fiscal balance (old definition, excl. off-budget)
o/w Official budget balance (excl. net lending)

-3.8
-1.4

-4.9
-2.0

-3.3
-1.4

-2.6
-0.9

-2.1
-0.4

-2.4
-0.7

-2.3
-0.8

-2.2
-0.7

-2.2
-0.8

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Of which : oil revenue
Grants
Total Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Net lending 1

22.7
22.3
6.8
0.4
26.6
15.7
8.4
2.4

23.1
22.8
6.4
0.3
28.0
16.8
8.3
2.9

23.4
23.1
6.4
0.3
26.7
16.5
8.3
1.9

24.5
24.2
7.6
0.3
27.1
17.7
7.6
1.8

25.2
25.0
8.3
0.3
27.3
18.2
7.4
1.7

24.6
24.4
7.6
0.3
27.0
18.3
7.1
1.7

23.9
23.7
6.9
0.3
26.2
17.7
7.0
1.5

23.4
23.3
6.3
0.2
25.6
17.4
6.8
1.5

23.0
22.8
5.7
0.2
25.2
17.0
6.8
1.4

Off-budget investment expenditure

0.7

2.3

1.2

1.1

1.4

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.3

-4.5
-11.3

-7.2
-13.6

-4.5
-10.9

-3.8
-11.4

-3.5
-11.8

-3.5
-11.1

-3.5
-10.4

-3.5
-9.8

-3.5
-9.2

Overall fiscal balance (incl. off-budget investment)
o/w Non-Oil balance

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Exports
(Percentage change)
Imports
(Percentage change)
Net services and transfers (incl. investment income)
Of which: private transfers

-419
-1.2
-876
16,706
11.2
17,582
22.1
1,898
1,767

-1,946
-4.9
-2,593
20,112
20.4
22,704
29.1
2,239
2,100

-1,700
-3.8
-2,368
26,003
29.3
28,371
25.0
2,484
2,310

-2,246
-4.4
-3,405
31,551
21.3
34,956
23.2
3,073
2,888

-2,194
-4.0
-3,652
36,672
16.2
40,324
15.4
3,376
3,176

-2,299
-4.0
-4,322
41,015
11.8
45,337
12.4
3,714
3,494

-2,493
-4.0
-4,938
45,918
12.0
50,855
12.2
4,013
3,773

-2,639
-3.9
-5,536
51,642
12.5
57,178
12.4
4,325
4,075

-2,851
-3.9
-6,479
57,835
12.0
64,313
12.5
4,651
4,401

Capital and financial account (net)
Direct investment
Medium- and long-term loans
Of which: ODA disbursements
Short-term capital (net)

862
2,023
526
1,073
-1,273

4,097
1,894
1,047
1,258
1,745

2,379
1,763
1,442
1,394
-290

3,663
2,337
1,709
1,525
140

4,005
2,615
1,875
1,600
150

4,394
3,138
1,834
1,600
200

4,657
3,452
1,916
1,600
250

5,161
3,798
1,891
1,500
250

4,974
3,987
1,635
1,400
250

-305

-1,929

-693

-1,417

-1,811

-2,095

-2,164

-2,523

-2,123

3.7
7.2
1.7
8.6

5.6
8.9
1.8
7.9

6.3
8.1
1.8
6.2

7.7
8.6
1.9
5.2

9.5
9.5
2.1
5.0

11.6
10.3
2.6
5.5

13.8
10.9
3.1
5.8

16.3
11.5
3.3
5.4

18.4
...
3.9
5.7

12.2
34.9
35.1

13.3
33.6
39.5

15.5
34.2
45.3

17.4
34.2
50.9

19.6
35.9
54.5

21.8
37.7
57.7

24.0
38.7
61.9

26.5
39.4
67.1

28.8
39.5
72.9

Changes in reserves (- indicates increase) (USD million)
Memorandum items
Gross official reserves (in billions of US dollars)
(in weeks of next year's imports of GNFS)
Debt service payments (in billions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of exports of GNFS)
External debt (in billion US dollars) 2
(in percent of GDP)
Nominal GDP (US dollars)

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1
2

Includes DAF operations.
Includes the loan component of foreign direct investment and other private sector borrowing and short-term debt.

- 31 -

Table 7. Vietnam: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2000-05
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Prel.

2005
Proj.

27.7
39.0
28.0
46.9
20.7

28.9
25.5
31.7
27.5
19.3

27.6
17.6
28.4
29.5
20.0

26.9
24.9
23.6
35.1
22.0

27.3
30.4
23.9
45.0
24.9

27.5
26.7
24.4
...
...

25.2
34.5
2.1
-0.5

4.0
2.3
2.1
-0.5

11.2
22.1
-1.2
0.9

20.4
29.1
-4.9
4.1

29.3
25.0
-3.8
2.4

21.3
23.2
-4.4
3.7

-1.8
1.1
0.1
0.7

-1.5
1.3
0.2
0.6

-1.3
2.0
0.1
0.5

0.8
1.9
0.4
1.0

-0.3
1.8
0.6
1.4

0.1
2.3
0.7
1.7

14,170
-1.6
14,514
-3.5
2.2

14,806
-4.5
15,084
-3.9
1.5

15,272
-3.1
15,404
-2.1
-3.8

15,514
-1.6
15,646
-1.6
-5.9

15,745
-1.5
15,773
-0.8
2.0

...
...
...
...
...

3.0
8.9
2.2
19.7
256
6,599
19.4

3.4
8.3
2.6
18.3
425
7,805
19.2

3.7
7.2
3.0
17.3
375
7,640
14.9

5.6
8.9
4.7
21.4
555
8,419
13.3

6.3
8.1
5.6
20.2
716
9,246
11.9

7.7
8.6
...
...
788
10,615
11.8

Debt indicators
Total external debt (in US$ billion)2
Of which: Public and publicly guaranteed debt
Total external debt to exports of goods and services (in percent)2
Total debt service to exports of goods and services (in percent)
Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity (in US$ billion)
Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to total debt (in percent)

12.0
8.6
70.2
10.3
0.1
1.0

12.3
9.4
69.0
10.6
0.7
5.6

12.2
9.7
62.3
8.6
0.7
5.3

13.3
10.6
56.8
7.9
0.7
5.0

15.5
12.4
51.8
6.2
0.6
3.9

17.4
14.0
47.9
5.2
0.7
3.8

Financial market indicators
Ho Chi Minh City Stock Exchange Composite Index (end of period, July 2000 = 100)
Number of listed companies

207
5

235
12

183
21

150
21

239
29

...
...

Financial indicators
Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) 1 2
Broad money (M2: annual percentage change)3
3
Foreign currency deposits to broad money (in percent)
Credit to other (nonstate) sectors (annual percentage change)3
Foreign currency loans to credit to the economy (in percent)3
External indicators
Exports value growth (in percent)
Imports value growth (in percent)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP, including official transfers)
Capital account balance (in US$ billion)
Of which:
Short-term capital (net)
Gross foreign direct investment (inflows)
Of which: Loans
Medium-and long-term loans (net)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)4
(annual percentage change)
Exchange rate (dong per U.S. dollar, end of period) 4
(annual percentage change)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period, annual percentage change, + appreciation)
Reserve indicators
Gross official reserves, including gold (in US$ billion)
(in weeks of next year's imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Net official international reserves (in US$ billion)
Gross official reserves to broad money (M2) (in percent)
Gross official to short-term debt (remaining maturity basis) (in percent)
Net foreign assets of the banking system
(in weeks of next year's imports of goods and nonfactor services)

Sources: Vietnamese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1

Excludes domestic debt and unguaranteed external debt of state-owned enterprises, as well as contingent liabilities.

2

Restructuring of nonconvertible Russian debt was concluded in September 2000.
Starting in 2000, based on expanded monetary survey (currently comprising the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) and 84 credit institutions);
for previous periods, based on original monetary survey (SBV and 28 credit institutions).
3

4

Official mid-rate, which comprises the previous day's average interbank buying and selling rates.

- 32 Table 8. Vietnam: Millennium Development Goals
(In percent, unless otherwise specified)
1990

1995

2001

2002

2003

2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates
1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below US$1 a day
...
...
...
...
Poverty gap at US$1 a day
...
...
...
...
Share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
...
...
...
...
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
45.0
44.9
33.8
...
27.0
21.0
19.0
...
Share of population below minimum level of dietary energy consump

2.0
0.5
7.5
...
19.0

2 Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5
Youth literacy rate (ages 15-24)

...
...
94.1

2015 target = net enrollment to 100
87.8
94.0
...
89.0
94.4
...

...
...
...

...
...
...

3 Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education
Ratio of young literate females to males (ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament

...
99.1
52.9
...

2005 target = education ratio to 100
...
92.7
99.9
...
...
...
18.0
...

...
...
...
...

92.8
...
...
27.0

2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
53.0
44.0
30.0
26.0
38.0
32.0
23.0
20.0
85.0
96.0
97.0
96.0

23.0
19.0
93.0

2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
...
...
130.0
...
...
77.1
69.6
85.0

...
85.0

6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV, female (ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS

2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.
...
...
0.2
...
...
75.3
...
78.5
...
...
22,000
...
...
...
179.0
192.5
...
30.0
85.0
81.9

0.4
78.5
...
178.1
86.1

7 Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)

28.6
...
2.6
0.3
55.0
29.0

2015 target = various1
...
30.2
3.0
3.1
3.5
4.4
0.4
0.7
...
77.0
...
47.0

...
3.5
...
...
...
...

...
3.7
4.2
...
73.0
41.0

...
1.5
0.1

2015 target = various2
...
...
10.8
53.0
1.4
8.6

...
71.8
9.8

...
87.8
9.8

80.4
34.8
430.0
...
1.9
69.7
38.0
32.1
115.0

81.3
38.8
480.0

4 Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)
5 Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)

8 Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Population (in millions)
Gross national income (US$ billion)
GNI per capita (US$)
Adult literacy rate (percent of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
External debt (percent of GNI)
Investment (percent of GDP)
Trade (percent of GDP)

66.2
8.5
130.0
90.4
3.6
64.8
384.0
12.6
81.3

73.0
18.5
250.0
91.5
2.7
67.1
124.0
27.1
74.7

79.5
32.3
410.0
90.3
1.9
69.1
39.0
31.2
111.6

1.9
69.9
...
...
127.3

Sources: World Development Indicators database, April 2004 (www.developmentgoals.org). In some cases the data are for earlier or later years
than those stated.
1
Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve,
by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the
lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.
2
Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the Special Needs of the Least
Developed Countries. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent and productive work for youth. In
cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs. In cooperation with the private sector, make available
the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.

- 33 -

ANNEX I

Vietnam—Fund Relations
(As of June 30, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 09/21/1956; Article XIV

II.
General Resources Account:
Quota
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million

III

SDR Million
47.66
0.72

Percent Allocation
100.00
1.52

SDR Million

Percent

329.10
329.10
0.01

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.
Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Quota
PRGF arrangements
V.

Percent
100.00
100.00
0.00

160.44

48.75

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
290.00
362.40
145.00

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
124.20
241.60
108.80

Financial Arrangements:
Type
PRGF
ESAF
Stand-by

Approval
Date
04/13/2001
11/11/1994
10/06/1993

Expiration
Date
04/12/2004
11/10/1997
11/11/1994

VI.
Projected Obligations to Fund (in SDR Million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

18.12

22.26

16.56

24.84

24.84

0.98

1.86

1.76

1.66

1.53

19.10

24.12

18.32

26.50

26.37

Exchange Rate Arrangement and Exchange Restrictions:

On February 25, 1999 the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) revised the operation of the
interbank foreign exchange market. Under this regime, the SBV allows interbank foreign
exchange market rates to fluctuate by a maximum of ±0.25 percent a day (effective July
2002) from the previous day’s average interbank market rate.

- 34 -

ANNEX I

While Vietnam officially maintains a managed floating exchange rate regime, the
exchange rate has de facto been pegged to the U.S. dollar since August 2004. The SBV
governor made announcements in August 2004 and January 2005 that annual exchange rate
depreciation would be limited to one percent, and the dong in fact depreciated by 1 percent
vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar in 2004 and by 0.6 percent during the first eight months of 2005.
Given that the Fund’s exchange arrangement classification is based on de facto and not de
jure policies, Vietnam is now classified as maintaining a conventional fixed peg.
Vietnam currently maintains the following exchange restrictions subject to Fund
jurisdiction under Article VIII: (i) requirements for proof of payment of taxes other than
those specifically due on the underlying transaction originating the payment and transfer of
income, dividends or profits payable to non-residents; (ii) absolute limits of USD5,000 on the
amount of foreign exchange available for certain current international transactions by
individuals; and (iii) restrictions on amounts which nonresidents can re-exchange so as to
exclude the re-exchange of recent proceeds, if any, of current international transactions.
There is no timetable for their removal and staff does not recommend approval of these three
exchange restrictions. Vietnam also maintains exchange restrictions for security reasons, and
has notified the Fund of those restrictions pursuant to Executive Board Decision No. 144(52/51).
VIII. Article IV and XIV Consultations:
Vietnam is currently on a 12-month consultation cycle, subject to provisions of Board
Decision No. 12794-(02/76) of July 15, 2002. The last Article IV and Article XIV
Consultations were concluded on November 22, 2004.
IX.

Technical Assistance: See attached matrix.

Resident Advisor:
Tax Computerization (FAD) through April 1998
In-Country Training/Outreach:
•
•
•
•

STI Regional Course on Financial Programming and Policies, March 2005.
Workshop on Macroeconomic Policies for Parliamentarians (EXR/APD/INS), March
2004.
10-session Seminar for Parliamentarians on the Fundamentals of Macroeconomics
(APD), October-December 2003.
10-session Seminar on Topics in Financial Programming for State Bank of Vietnam
and related Government Agencies (APD), January-May 2002.

- 35 -

X.

ANNEX I

Other Visits

The Deputy Managing Director, Mr. Kato, visited Vietnam in May 2005. The Managing
Director, Mr. de Rato, visited in June 2004.
XI.

Resident Representative

Mrs. Susan Adams, Senior Resident Representative between August 2001 and August 2005,
was recently succeeded by Mr. Il Houng Lee.

- 36 -

ANNEX I

Vietnam-Summary of Technical Assistance, 2001-2005

Department

Purpose

Date

Tax self-assessment pilot projects
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
IT for Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
Assessment of training needs and organization change
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot preparations
FAD
Introduction of self assessment and reform of the tax administration
taxpayers services; debt collection
FAD
Assessment of tax self-assessment pilot implementation and
planning for the future
FAD
Strategic planning and tax self-assessment pilot implementation
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot implementation
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot implementation
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot implementation
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot implementation
FAD
Tax self-assessment pilot implementation

June-July 2004
August/04
October-November 2004
November/04
May/05
July/05

Tax Policy and Administration reform
FAD
Review the status of implementation of tax policy and administration reform
FAD
Tax policy and administration reform
FAD
Tax policy and administration reform
FAD
Tax policy and administration reform
FAD
Tax policy and administration reform
FAD
Assessment of the major taxes
FAD
Review of tax administration TA to date
FAD
Tax policy and administration reform- Strategic planning

July-August 2001
February-March 2002
July/02
November/02
May-June 2003
May-June 2004
November/04
March/05

SOCB Restructuring
MFD
SOCB restructuring
MFD
SOCB restructuring
MFD
SOCB restructuring
MFD
SOCB equitization

September/02
November/02
June/03
September/04

SOCB restructuring and foreign reserve management
MFD
Banking system restructuring and foreign exchange operations at the SBV

August-September 2001

Article VIII and current account liberazation
MFD/LEG
Reviewing Status of Article VIII acception
MFD/LEG
Drafting Foreign Exchange Ordinance

February/05
June/05

Banking supervision
MFD
Banking supervision strengthening
MFD
Banking supervision strengthening
MFD
Banking supervision strengthening

August/04
November/04
April/05

June-July 2002
November-December 2002
March-April 2003
May/03
August/03
September/03
November/03
February-March 2004
April/04

- 37 -

ANNEX I

Strengthening the SBV audit capacity in the SAO
MFD/OIA
Strengthening SBV audit capacity in the SAO
MFD
Strengthening SBV audit capacity in the SAO
FIN
Strengthening SBV audit capacity in the SAO

September/02
December/02
June/03

Monetary and Exchange Operation
MFD
Banking Issues, Moneraty and Foreign Exchange Operation
MFD/STA
Reviewing monetary TA

February/04
April/05

Anti-money laundering
TA program for anti-money laundering and combating the financing of
MFD/LEG
terrorism
The Progress in AML/CFT regime and internal control, workshop on
MFD/LEG
AML/CFT

December/03
March/05

National Income Account and Statistics
STA
Improvement plan of the real sector statistics project development
STA
National Income Account and Statistics
STA
National Income Account and Statistics
STA
National Income Account and Statistics
STA
National Income Account and Statistics

December/01
August-September 2002
May-June 2003
Feb-March 2004
Sep-04

Multisector Statistics/GDDS
Guidance on statistical practices and development in the areas of national
STA
accounts, prices, foreign trade, fiscal and socio-demographic data

July/01

Balance of payment statistics
TA in BOP statistics and guidance in the development of international
STA
investment position statistics
CPI Statistics
STA/MFD

CPI statistics and core inflation primary understanding

September/03

Arpil-05

Monetary Statistics
Monetary Statistics
STA

Arpil-05

Debt sustainable analysis
PDR
Debt sustainable analysis

October/02

Tax Administration Law
LEG
Tax law
LEG
Tax administration law

February/04
November-December 04

Capital market development
ICM
Capital Markets Development

May-June 2004

\

- 38 -

ANNEX II

Vietnam—Relations with the World Bank11

I. PARTNERSHIP IN VIETNAM’S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
The reform agenda of Vietnam is guided by a series of strategic plans and documents, including
the Comprehensive Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy (CPRGS), the 2001–2006 SocioEconomic Development Plan (SEDP) and the Ten-Year Socio-Economic Development Strategy.
The CPRGS, approved in 2002, represented a sharp improvement from earlier planning
documents based on a “command and control” view of the economy. Rather than spelling out
detailed sector-by-sector production targets, the CPRGS focused on development outcomes such
as poverty reduction and other Vietnam Development Goals (VDGs). Empirical evidence and a
broad consultation process were used to identify the policies best suited to attaining those
development outcomes. Efforts were also made to “cost” these policies and to align resources
towards their attainment. A set of monitoring indicators was developed to assess progress in
implementation. The CPRGS was “expanded” in December 2003 so as to better address policies
related to large-scale infrastructure. Broadly speaking, the reform agenda in the CPRGS is
structured around three main pillars: completing the transition to a market economy, ensuring
social inclusion and environmental sustainability, and building modern governance.
A Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the CPRGS was discussed by the Boards of the IMF and the
World Bank in June and July 2002, respectively. The Government completed the first CPRGS
Progress Report in November 2003. The Report evaluated performance in terms of economic
growth and poverty reduction, reviewed policy implementation and identified challenges ahead.
A JSA of the Progress Report was discussed by the Boards in 2004. More recently, a Joint Staff
Advisory Note for the second CPRGS Progress Report was distributed to the Boards of the IMF
and World Bank in August 2005.
The IMF’s support for Vietnam’s growth and poverty reduction efforts has included a three-year
arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) which expired in April
2004. The IMF has taken the lead in the policy dialogue on macroeconomic policies and has been
active on a set of structural issues, especially on trade and banking reform and related SOE
reform. The direct involvement of the IMF in these structural areas is justified because of their
potential impact on macroeconomic stability.
The World Bank has taken the lead in supporting the Government’s structural and institutional
reforms in a number of sectors. These wide ranging reforms cover the three broad pillars of the
CPRGS and are backed through a series of Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSCs). The
PRSCs provide resources directly to the government’s budget. The current PRSC cycle (PRSCs 1
to 5) covers a five-year period, much the same as the CPRGS and the last Socio-Economic
Development Plan. With the CPRGS approach being integrated into the preparation of the next
SEDP (2006-10), future PRSCs are proposed to be aligned to the implementation of this
forthcoming five-year plan.

11

Contact person: Ms. Keiko Sato.

- 39 -

ANNEX II

II. WORLD BANK GROUP STRATEGY AND LENDING
The World Bank Group is combining all of its instruments of assistance to support the objectives
laid out by the CPRGS. Those instruments include analytical and advisory activities, IDA project
support, IFC, Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF) and MIGA activities, a series of
PRSCs, and donor partnerships and ODA coordination. An update of the Country Assistance
Strategy, presented to the World Bank Board in January 2004, sets out the planned support of the
CPRGS objectives until the Bank’s FY06. Virtually all IDA credits will provide policy,
institutional and infrastructure support for Vietnam’s ongoing transition, with the series of
PRSCs being used as vehicles for the policy dialogue.
The implementation of the ambitious reform agenda spelled out in CPRGS and other strategies
and plans has been supported through four PRSC operations so far. PRSC 1, a two-tranche
operation for US$250 million, was approved by the Board in June 2001, based on an Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP). The focus of PRSC 1 was mainly on the structural
reform agenda, with policies articulated around five main areas: liberalizing trade, reforming
SOEs, strengthening the banking sector, creating an enabling environment for the private sector,
and improving the management and transparency of public finances. PRSC 2, a one-tranche
operation for US$100 million, was approved by the Board in June 2003. Under PRSC 2, based
on the CPRGS, the range of economic reforms supported was considerably broadened. In
addition to the mainly structural reforms covered by PRSC 1, this second credit included various
policy actions aimed at keeping development inclusive and building modern governance.
Measures related to education and health sectors, environmental sustainability, land management,
legal development and public financial management, were all part of PRSC 2. PRSC 3 and
PRSC 4 were one-tranche operations for US$100 million each. These were approved by the
Board in June 2004 and June 2005 respectively. Both of these later operations deepened the
broad range of reforms covered under PRSC 2.
In addition to providing resources to the budget, PRSC operations have served as an effective
coordination device, supported by an increasingly large number of donors. The Steering
Committee for PRSCs is led by the Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic reforms, and
brings together representatives from 24 line ministries and Government agencies. On the donor
side, PRSC operations have been co-financed by several bilateral and multilateral agencies, either
through grants or through parallel lending. More importantly, the process saw a transition in the
role of co-financiers, from providers of finance to partners substantially engaged in the
preparation of the operations and the policy dialogue with Government. This dialogue is
organized by policy areas, in which donors engage selectively, based on their interests and
technical capacity on the ground. All donors who seriously consider the possibility to partner in
this process are invited to participate in the preparation of PRSC operations, even if they cannot
commit to co-financing them in the short term.
The number of donors participating in this process has increased from four in PRSC 1 to seven in
PRSC 3 to eleven in PRSC 4. As many as 15 bilateral and multilateral donors could co-finance
PRSC 5. Three bilateral donors, namely Denmark, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom,
have co-financed all PRSC operations. These co-financiers together with Sweden contributed a
total of US$43 million to PRSC 1. For PRSC 2, Denmark, the Netherlands, and the United
Kingdom contributed a total of US$ 31 million as grant finance. In addition to these three, ADB,
Canada, the EC and Japan supported PRSC 3, mobilizing the equivalent of US$122 million.

- 40 -

ANNEX II

ADB and Japan contributed through parallel lending, whereas all other co-financiers provided
grants. Other bilateral donors actively participated in the preparation of this preparation, with a
view to join the process at some point. France, Ireland, Spain and Sweden might be in a position
to co-finance PRSC 4.
Several priorities are identified by the CPRGS to enhance equitable, inclusive, and sustainable
development. They refer to disadvantaged and lagging areas, to the living standards of ethnic
minorities, to gender equality, to access and affordability of social services for the poor, to the
mitigation of impacts from natural disasters, and to enhancing environmental management. The
World Bank favors a sector-wide approach for two projects supporting this agenda, Rural Roads
III and Education for All. Sectoral budget support in the education sector, approved by the Board
in June 2005 has been facilitated through significant progress in piloting a medium term
expenditure framework, as well as improved financial management.

Table 1: Selected Recent IDA Credits and Grants
Project Name

Original Amount
(US$ equivalent)

Effective Date

HIV/AIDS Prevention (Grant)

35.0

Aug-05

2nd Payments System and Bank Modernization Project

105.0

Approved Mar-05

Forest Sector Development Project

39.5

Jul-05

Water Resources Assistance Project

157.8

Dec-04

5.0

Nov-04

Road Network Improvement Project

225.3

Oct-04

Poverty Reduction Support Credit III

100.0

Oct-04

Urban Upgrading Project

222.5

Oct-04

Poverty Reduction Support Credit II

100.0

Dec-03

Primary Education for Disadvantaged Children Project

138.8

Oct-03

Public Financial Management Reform Project

54.3

Sep-03

Second Rural Finance Project

200.0

Apr-03

System Efficiency Improvement, Equitization and
Renewables (Energy Sector)

225.0

Feb-03

Regional Blood Transfusion Centers

38.2

Sep-02

Primary Teacher Development Project

19.8

Aug-02

Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project

102.8

Mar-02

Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project

110.0

Mar-02

Ho Chi Minh City Environmental Sanitation

166.3

Feb-02

Mekong Transportation and Flood Protection Project

110.0

Oct-01

Poverty Reduction Support Credit I

250.0

Oct-01

Rural Energy Project

150.0

Nov-00

Coastal Wetlands Protection and Development Project

31.8

May-00

Second Rural Transport Project

103.9

May-00

Three Cities Sanitation Project

80.5

Jan-00

Avian Influenza Emergency Recovery Project

- 41 -

ANNEX II

Efforts to improve governance focus on public financial management, information and
transparency, combating corruption, and legal development. Major technical assistance will be
provided by the World Bank in each of these areas, and IDA projects are being implemented in
Public Financial Management and Customs Modernization. So far, AsDB, UNDP, and a number
of donors have taken the lead on public administration and civil service reform, whereas the
World Bank plays the leading role in public financial management.
The scale of the lending program depends on the pace of the policy and institutional reform
agendas, as well as on progress in project preparation and implementation. Over the next two
years, the IDA program will range from less than US$300 million in the low case, to about
US$760 million in the high case, with a base case of US$580 million per year. The IFC and
MIGA programs are also expected to grow significantly as the investment climate improves.
Today Vietnam is the largest IDA-only borrower, and the second largest user of IDA resources in
the world after India. As of May 31, 2005 the original principal of approved IDA credits
amounted to US$5.45 billion out of which US$2.86 billion had been disbursed.
In addition to its lending program, the World Bank will work in capacity-building and
knowledge-sharing in key areas of emphasis. A Banking Sector Review was completed in 2002.
The 2002 Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey was used as the basis for the Vietnam
Development Report (VDR), titled “Poverty” in FY04. Annually, the VDR, co-authored by a
number of donors and NGOs, summarizes the accumulated knowledge and fosters the policy and
institutional reform agenda. The VDR for 2005 titled “Governance” focused on the fundamental
changes that are occurring in the way the Government operates. It covered areas such as:
modernizing planning, improving budget allocation, decentralization, strengthening service
delivery, managing public assets, administrative reform, fighting corruption, and aid
effectiveness. The next VDR will focus on the private sector. A Public Expenditure ReviewIntegrated Fiduciary Assessment was completed in FY05.
III. IMF-WORLD BANK COLLABORATION IN SPECIFIC AREAS
Collaboration between the World Bank and the IMF was essential to launch the PRSC-PRGF
program in 2001. The process leading to this program spanned four years, starting at the onset of
the East Asian crisis. The overall framework for this collaboration was laid out in 1998, in
preparation for what was then expected to be the second Structural Adjustment Credit for
Vietnam. The lead agency in each policy area was identified in the Policy Framework Paper, and
particularly in the Structural and Sectoral Policy Matrix for 1999-2001. The direct involvement
of the IMF in some of the structural areas such as financial sector reform, SOE reform and trade
reform was justified because of their potential impact on macroeconomic stability.
As a result of this overall framework, the World Bank supported policy reforms in collaboration
with the IMF in several areas, including external debt management, financial sector reform, SOE
reform, and public expenditure management. In some of these areas, the World Bank and the
IMF identified complementary sets of policy triggers for the PRSC and the PRGF programs
respectively. In others, cooperation between the two institutions has taken place in the context of
specific tasks, not directly related to lending. Since the expiration of the PRGF in April 2004 the
IMF has provided Letters of Assessment in support of the PRSC 3 and PRSC 4 operations.
Trade reform has been an integral part of the Government’s reform strategy, as evidenced by
considerable trade liberalization through the 1990s. The World Bank has supported the following

- 42 -

ANNEX II

trade liberalization measures: (i) removal of quantitative restrictions on the imports a series of
products; (ii) increases in the share of garment export quotas to be auctioned; (iii) further
liberalization of rice exports; and (iv) reduction of tariffs on imports from ASEAN countries in
the context of the ASEAN free trade agreement (AFTA). Progress in each of these areas has
been achieved since early 2001. In parallel to these steps, the Government successfully
completed a Bilateral Trade Agreement with the US and is currently aiming at securing accession
to the WTO by 2005.
The PRSC-PRGF represented a breakthrough. It also led to a program with several atypical
features, including initially retaining a relatively large share of the public sector in the economy,
and a plan to restructure, rather than immediately privatize, large SOEs.
The World Bank has worked closely with the Ministry of Finance, the National Steering
Committee on Enterprise Reform and Development and the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and
Social Affairs in all areas of the SOE reform program. In parallel it has mobilized resources
from several donors to carry out the various activities. The measures supported in this area have
included the monitoring of 200 highly indebted SOEs, and strengthening the recording and
reporting of systematic data on SOE performance. The World Bank plays a key role in the
monitoring of ownership transformations (especially equitizations, sales and liquidations) and
SOE creation. A series of diagnostic audits of 42 large SOEs have been implemented with the
objective of assessing SOE viability. Restructuring three large General Corporations (SOE
holding companies) in sectors where Vietnam has comparative advantage in world markets is
also a priority. The design and implementation of the social safety net for redundant SOE
workers has been an integral part of the World Bank’s work program.
In the area of public expenditure management, key remaining challenges include: (i) integrating
formulation of the recurrent and capital budgets within a medium-term expenditure framework;
(ii) improving budgetary data and increasing the transparency of data and information flows; and
(iii) ensuring an effective process for prioritizing and reallocating public expenditures to improve
sector outcomes, reduce poverty and limit the prospective increase in inequality. To meet these
challenges, the Government launched the Public Financial Management Reform Initiative
(PFMRI), a medium-term program for strengthening public financial management. This
overarching program deals with reforms in five areas: public expenditure management (including
state budget management, investment planning, and financial management information); public
debt management; revenue management; SOE fiscal risk management; and public asset
management. In 2005, a Government led Public Expenditure Review-Integrated Fiduciary
Assessment (PER-IFA) was conducted jointly with the World Bank and other donors. The PERIFA set forth a series of recommendations which have been endorsed by the Prime Minister.
Plans to implement these recommendations are currently under preparation.
The PFMRI is a Government-led initiative and donors are coordinating their financial and
technical support for the program. The IMF takes the lead in revenue management while the
World Bank takes the lead in public expenditure management. Currently, the IMF is providing
technical assistance to help develop a comprehensive program for reforming the tax system and
tax administration. The World Bank is leading the work in developing an integrated financial
management information system, through a Public Financial Management credit for US$54
million, approved in May 2003. The credit also supports the preparation of medium-term

- 43 -

ANNEX II

expenditure frameworks in four sectors and four provinces, and the development of a database of
public debts. The credit was co-financed by the UK’s DFID.
Jointly with other donors, the World Bank is also supporting an effort to modernize planning and
budgeting processes at the provincial level. This effort is part of a broader attempt by the
Government of Vietnam to “roll out” CPRGS to the provinces. The goal of the exercise is for
local policy makers to identify monitorable targets related to growth and poverty reduction, to
align resources to the attainment of those targets, and to introduce mechanisms for consultation
with the local population.
The World Bank, which has had a long-term role in the modernization of the financial sector, has
taken the lead in the effort to strengthen the banking system. Input has been provided by way of
direct technical assistance and policy dialogue, with the aim of rationalizing the Joint Stock
Banks, strengthening of State-Owned Commercial Banks (SOCBs), improving the supervision of
the system, and modernizing the infrastructure for banking. The areas of work with the SOCBs
have included the resolution of Non-Performing Loans (NPLs), provisioning for loan loss, recapitalizing banks as they meet their restructuring targets, introducing internal auditing, and
developing a viable payments system. Current efforts aim at improving the regulatory framework
for policy lending, and at developing more effective mechanisms for NPL resolution.
The IMF has assumed responsibility for advising on the monetary policy functions of the SBV. It
has also been directly and intensely involved in the central area of SOCB reform because of its
fiscal and macroeconomic implications, in particular NPL resolution and the resulting recapitalization. Also included in this has been work on minimizing directed lending, interest rate
liberalization and the process and timing of the recapitalization of SOCBs.
As a consequence of the many challenges facing the financial sector in its transition from a
Government directed and managed system to a market-based one, assistance from the World
Bank, IMF, AsDB, and other donors has been sought. The World Bank has led the effort of
donor coordination in the financial sector. It hosts regular financial sector donor coordination
meetings which have been recently supplemented by the IMF-hosted donor meetings specific to
assistance to the SBV.
Thus far there has been cooperation and assistance between the two organizations. The policy
actions supported by the PRSCs and PRGF have been complementary. A single-voice approach
has been taken on many difficult issues. Looking ahead, it will be important to avoid duplication.
The resolution of NPLs, the operation of Debts and Assets Trading Company and the State
Capital Investment Corporation, the equitization of SOCBs, the regulatory framework for policy
lending, and the management of fiscal risks by the Government are all areas where continued
collaboration is needed.
The IMF and the World Bank currently collaborate to strengthen the capacity of the General
Statistics Office in the area of economic statistics. The IMF focuses on improving balance of
payments, national accounts, and price statistics while the World Bank concentrates on issues
related to the production of high-quality household and enterprise surveys, and to access to data.

- 44 -

ANNEX III

Vietnam—Relations With the Asian Development Bank
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) resumed its operations in Vietnam in October 1993.
The latest Country Strategy and Program (CSP), endorsed in January 2002, proposes a focus
on four pillars to align ADB operations in Vietnam to the overarching objective of poverty
reduction: (i) sustainable growth through rural development and private sector development,
with a focus on small and medium enterprise development; (ii) inclusive social development,
by mainstreaming poverty, gender, and ethnic dimensions in ADB operations, with an
emphasis on human capital development through secondary education and health; (iii) good
governance, with special emphasis on public administration and civil service reform; and
(iv) geographic focus on the impoverished central region.
A new CSP (2007–2009) is currently under preparation and scheduled to be approved in
2006. The new CSP will be aligned with the Government’s five-year socioeconomic
development plan (2006–2010). It will be results-based (i.e., with indicators for development
outcomes and impacts as developed by the Government), and jointly processed with other
development partners like the World Bank. Through this CSP, ADB will continue to support
the Government in the implementation of the new 5-year plan and assist towards meeting the
investment gap. ADB will continue to provide Asian Development Fund (ADF) resources,
following Performance Based Allocation. In addition, ADB would provide Ordinary Capital
Resource (OCR) under its public sector and also private sector operations.
From October 1993 to end 2004, ADB approved 49 public sector loans, totaling about
US$2.941 billion from the concessional (ADF) and US$160 million from Ordinary Capital
Resources (OCR). Disbursements in 2004 amounted to US$182.350 million. Loans have
been provided mainly for (i) rehabilitating physical infrastructure in the agricultural, energy,
and transport sectors; (ii) financial sector reform with focus on non-banking sector;
(iii) public administration reform; and (iv) preventive heath care and secondary education. In
addition, ADB has provided 162 technical assistance grants amounting to US$108 million.
Since December 1998, Vietnam has been classified as a B-1 country by ADB, which makes
it eligible to supplement borrowing at ADF terms with borrowing at non-concessional (OCR)
terms. A US$120 million loan in the energy sector financed from OCR was provided in
2004.
Support for policy and structural reforms to improve public sector efficiency and to
encourage the development of the private sector is a vital component of ADB operations in
Vietnam. So far, ADB has approved ten policy-based program loans in the agricultural sector
(US$80 million in 1994 and US$60 million in 2002), the financial sector (US$90 million
in 1996, US$50 million in 2002 and US$35 in 2004), for SOE reform and corporate
governance (US$100 million in 1999, of which US$40 million was from OCR), for SME
development (US$60 million in 2004), for public administration reform (US$45 million in
2003) and for poverty reduction (US$6.4 million in 2004). In addition to program lending,
policy dialogue is an important feature in all of ADB’s loan projects in Vietnam. This
includes support for private sector development and increased efficiency of state-owned
utilities through reforming their rate structure and other measures to increase cost recovery

- 45 -

ANNEX III

and to strengthen financial management, policy analysis, and planning. Another component
of ADB assistance program to Vietnam is the promotion of regional cooperation, particularly
the cooperation in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) through enhanced connectivity,
increased competitiveness and a greater sense of community. Three GMS projects for
transportation and tourism infrastructure development have been financed as of end-2004.
ADB was reorganized in 2002, and Vietnam belongs to the Mekong Department, along with
Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, and Thailand. The Vietnam Resident Mission (VRM) has
been strengthened and has been performing programming functions. Delegation in project
administration has also been increasing. As of end-2004, 12 out of 32 on-going projects were
administered by VRM. ADB and Fund staff work closely together to support the process of
economic reforms in Vietnam. ADB staff participate in Fund missions, exchange
information, and consult on macroeconomic developments and policy matters. The resident
missions of the two institutions also cooperate closely.

- 46 -

ANNEX III

Table 1. Vietnam: Public Sector Assistance by Sector (including regional projects)
October 1993–December 2004
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Sector

Number

Lending
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Education
Energy
Finance
Health, Nutrition and Social Protection
Industry and Trade
Law, Economic Management and Public Policy
Multisector
Transport and Communications
Water Supply, Sanitation and Waste Management
Technical assistance
Advisory
Project Preparation

Approval Amount

49
10
5
3
6
3
2
4
4
7
5

2,941.57
596.70
239.00
299.98
335.00
131.30
68.50
151.40
220.69
595.00
304.00

165
116
49

108.390
71.939
36.451

Source: ADB.
Table 2. Vietnam: Loan and TA Approvals and Disbursements, 1999–2004
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Loan Approvals

220.0

188.5

243.1

233.5

179.0

296.4

Loan Disbursements

191.2

218.9

176.2

231.7

233.1

182.3

1191.6

1190.4

1086.2

1118.8

1198.1

1191.6

10.3

9.1

8.4

9.3

8.6

7.7

Undisbursed Balance at the
Beginning of the year
Memorandum item:
TA Approvals
Source: ADB.

- 47 -

ANNEX IV

Vietnam—Statistical Issues
The reliability and coverage of macroeconomic statistics have significant deficiencies. The
methodology for compilation and dissemination of these statistics is in need of substantial
improvement, so that data properly reflect economic developments and assist policy formulation,
implementation, and monitoring. The authorities are cooperating with the Fund, but work is
hampered in some areas by the lack of authorization to release data. Vietnam has few official
statistical publications that provide coverage beyond the real sector. A Vietnam page was
introduced in the GFS Yearbook in 1999 and in IFS in 2001.
Fund technical assistance has contributed to improvements in a number of statistical areas. STA
multisector statistics/General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) mission in July 2001
reviewed statistical practices and developments in the areas of national accounts, prices, external
trade, fiscal, monetary, balance of payments, and socio-demographic data. It found a number of
deficiencies and recommended improvements in an action plan. A follow-up STA mission took
place in December 2001 to begin addressing weaknesses in national accounts statistics
(discussed below). The mission agreed on a program to improve national accounts and price
statistics and a STA peripatetic expert has been assisting the GSO under a five-year project that
commenced in January 2002. There was also a follow up mission in balance of payments
statistics in September 2003. Vietnam is a GDDS participant with metadata published on the
Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board since September 30, 2003
(http://dsbb.imf.org/Applications/web/gdds/gddscountrycategorylist/?strcode=VNM).
National accounts
The General Statistical Office (GSO) provides quarterly and annual data on the gross domestic
product (GDP) by type of economic activity and annual data by expenditure12 (both in current
and constant prices), and monthly and annual data on external trade, industrial output, retail
sales, and prices. While the methodology for producing national accounts is broadly consistent
with the System of National Accounts 1993, the compilation process suffers from poor data
collection practices and a lack of coordination and communication between data collection
agencies. In 2001 the government introduced a new methodology for calculating GDP. The two
new handbooks on sources and methods for the Vietnam System of National Accounts and the
Quarterly National Accounts were published in 2003 in Vietnamese and are currently being
translated into English. In May 2005, the authorities released the results of the annual 2004
enterprise survey, upon which GDP estimates at constant 1994 prices are based.
Under current technical assistance projects, a peripatetic expert has been assisting the GSO in the
following areas: promoting the effective use of enterprise and economic census data in compiling
the national accounts statistics; improving estimates of GDP at constant prices; improving
12

GDP by type of expenditure was calculated from 2002Q1 to 2003Q2 but discontinued due
to lack of resources.

- 48 -

ANNEX IV

estimates of household final consumption expenditure; improving estimates of quarterly GDP;
further development of foreign trade and producer price indices; and developing wage indices.
The consultant has noted steady progress by the GSO in these areas.
Prices
The GSO has compiled and published a monthly consumer price index (CPI) in line with
international standards since January 1996. Effective July 2001, the GSO changed the CPI to
reflect a larger nonfood weight and broader consumption basket based on data from the 1998
Vietnam Household Living Standard Survey (VHLSS) rebased to 2000. The weights are planned
to be revised again when the results from the 2004 VHLSS become available. The introduction
of a producer price index was planned in late 2001, but has been delayed for technical reasons.
Trade price indices are also compiled, but not used in the national accounts by the GSO because
the sample size is deemed too small.
Government finance statistics
The Ministry of Finance’s (MoF) State Budget Department produces provisional monthly,
quarterly, and annual fiscal data on government operations shortly after the end of the reference
period; final data for the fiscal (calendar) year are produced after a delay of about six months.
These data reflect the consolidated operations of the state budget, which covers all four levels of
government: central, provincial, district, and commune. They exclude data on quasi-fiscal
activities of SOEs and extrabudgetary funds, among which are the Social Security Fund,
Enterprise Restructuring Fund, Development Assistance Fund, Export Support Fund, and
Sinking Fund (for repayment of on lent funds), for which no regularly reported data are currently
compiled.
The basis of recording of data is mainly on a cash basis for final annual data, but varies for
provisional data depending on their source. As a result, government financing data, in particular
domestic bank financing, cannot be reconciled as reported in the fiscal and monetary accounts.
Like the national accounts, provisional data are compiled before the end of the reference period
and thus involve a forecasted component. The quarterly data are only revised when data are
compiled for the same quarter of the following year. The MoF’s External Finance Department
maintains a centralized record of all general government external debt, excluding guarantees
issued on behalf of state-owned enterprises. The MoF, with support from the UNDP, aims to
strengthen the external debt management system, particularly the recording of disbursements and
multiple currency loans.
Despite these shortcomings, the authorities have made progress in a number of other areas
related to fiscal transparency, including implementation of an improved budget management law
and adoption of a 1986 GFS-consistent budget classification at all levels of government. The
authorities published for the first time in late 1998 the fiscal outturn for 1997 and the approved
budget for 1999, although both in highly aggregated form. Starting in late 2001, the MoF began
posting annual budget outturns and plans on its external website, including by major revenue and
expenditure items. However, considerable actions remain to be taken to improve the coverage of

- 49 -

ANNEX IV

fiscal data as recommended in the 1998 Bank-Fund report on fiscal transparency, the 2000
Public Expenditure Review, the STA multisector statistics mission of 2001.
In this context, the government continues to work toward gazetteing and publishing the annual
national budget, as well as preparing commune-level budgets, implementing the GFS-based
functional budget classification system, initiating work on revising government accounting
standards, and introducing an integrated financial management system (IFMS) for improving
treasury management and fiscal reporting. The STA mission found that the functional
classification had not yet been fully aligned with international classification standards, which
might hamper formulation, execution, and monitoring of fiscal policy. The IFMS will allow a
detailed classification of provisional budget data (as well as final accounts). In addition, it will
incorporate data on extrabudgetary funds into the Treasury database.
Monetary and financial statistics
The State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) reports monetary and financial data to the Fund, including:
(i) the monetary survey and the central bank balance sheet (both on a monthly basis and typically
with a six-week lag); (ii) detailed consolidated balance sheets (“derivation tables”) for six stateowned and 78 non state deposit money banks and individual balance sheets for the four large
state-owned commercial banks (SOCBs) (since the beginning of 2001 on a monthly basis and
typically with an eight-week lag); and (iii) deposit and lending rates of the large SOCBs (on a
monthly basis and for various maturities). However, recently monetary data has been submitted
to the team with a long lag because the authorities are adopting a new chart of accounts. In
addition, there have been statistical discrepancies between the old data and the newly submitted
series. Data on foreign reserves (gross and net official international reserves and net foreign
assets of the banking system) are received from the authorities but with substantial lags. In
January 1999, the SBV and commercial banks began implementing new charts of accounts for
compiling money and banking data, developed with STA assistance. However, they do not
adequately sectorize credit for monetary programming purposes, in particular failing to
distinguish between bank credit to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and to other nonstate sectors
of the economy. Therefore, in addition to its regular monthly reports, the SBV has designed a
new monthly report form for the four large SOCBs for submitting sectorized credit data to the
central bank. The STA mission in July 2001 encouraged the SBV to develop a reporting scheme
for a comprehensive breakdown of banks’ credit to the economy by borrowing sectors, sub
sectors, and ownership of enterprises. A follow-up mission took place during April 14-28, 2005.
The mission recommended changes to new bank report forms to allow greater sectorization of
bank credit. In addition, it recommended that a list of state-owned enterprises that should be
classified as private enterprises be distributed to banks to guide their data reporting on
enterprises; that funds for on-lending be reclassified out of banks’ “unclassified liabilities” to
“other deposits”; and gave a presentation of how Vietnam’s Fund accounts should be compiled
in monetary statistics. In addressing APD’s concerns that credit data for a state-owned bank
reported to the Fund were substantially lower than reported in its 2002 Annual Report, further
cooperation between the Fund and the authorities is needed to resolve the data discrepancies.
There are indications that these discrepancies are continuing in 2004, with data reported to the

- 50 -

ANNEX IV

Fund showing lower credit. This reflects possible noncoverage and/or omission of certain loans
and financial leases, offset by lower deposits and other liabilities.
External sector statistics
The SBV compiles quarterly and annual balance of payments (BOP) data with a one- to twomonth lag, although the data reported to the Fund for publication are less timely—the data
published in the July 2005 issue of the IFS are for 2002. The SBV does not compile international
investment position statistics. Since 1995, monthly and annual trade data have been compiled
using customs reports, but the coverage and accuracy of these data need to be improved. In
particular, the commodity breakdown of a large share of reported exports and imports
(approximately 17 percent and 22 percent respectively in 2004) is unknown. Data on invisibles
continue to be based largely on banking records, which provide incomplete coverage and
identification of the types of transactions. Improvements are particularly needed for data on
tourism revenue and workers’ remittances.
Improvements in BOP statistics, in particular foreign direct investment (FDI), also continue to be
hampered by interagency coordination problems. Data on FDI are now compiled by the SBV
based on quarterly and semi-annual survey reports received from foreign-invested enterprises
operating in Vietnam and supplemented by reports from SBV branches. The Ministry of
Planning and Investment (MPI) also collects administrative data on FDI. However, at the
September 2000 ASEAN Workshop on Improving the Quality of FDI Data, the Vietnamese
authorities indicated that problems persisted with the survey response rate, as not all FDI
enterprises were providing the requested information. Moreover, the 2001 STA GDDS mission
noted that no effort was made to distinguish head office and other nonresident liabilities in the
reported data. The 2003 balance of payments statistics mission recommended that the MPI, GSO,
and SBV work jointly to improve FDI questionnaires and processes, including collecting data on
both stocks and flows.
Data on contracting of commercial debt (by SOEs and privately owned firms) are maintained by
the SBV. Some loans are reported only after an extended delay, and the reporting of
disbursements and repayments remains poor. Data on contracting, disbursement, and service of
official debt are maintained by the MoF. The MPI also reports the loan obligations of foreign
investors. The STA mission found that the overlapping responsibility for debt statistics has at
times resulted in some deficiencies in coverage, including the lack of monitoring certain leasing
arrangements (e.g., for aircraft). The coverage of data on foreign grants is also incomplete.

4

3

2004

3/31/05

GDP/GNP

Gross External Debt

6/30/05

2004

...

Mar 2005

Apr 2005

June 2005

Feb 2005

...

Mar 2005

12/31/04

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services7

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

5

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government

...

7/21/05

...

7/15/05

6/15/05

6/15/05

6/15/05

6/15/05

6/15/05

6/15/05

7/13/05

Date
received

I

Q

M

A

...

Q

...

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

D

Frequency
of
6
Data

A

Q

M

A

...

Q

...

M

M

I

I

I

I

I

D

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

NA

3

2

Q

M

A

NA

A

NA

I

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

D

Frequency
of
6
publication

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments. Including
currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)
7
Services data available on an annual basis.

1

3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General Government

Consumer Price Index

4/30/05

3/31/05

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

2

3/31/05

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Interest Rates

3/31/05

Broad Money

3/31/05
3/31/05

1

7/13/05

Date of
latest
observation

Reserve/Base Money

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange Rates

AS OF JULY 13, 2005

VIETNAM: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE

- 51 ANNEX IV

- 52 -

ANNEX V

Vietnam – Debt Sustainability Analysis 13
Public sector debt sustainability
Given the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the quality of SOCB balance sheets, and of
the magnitude of SOCB recapitalization and reform costs which will eventually be borne by
the government, the DSA has been carried out in two stages. First, a baseline scenario, which
abstracts from contingent liabilities and focuses on the fiscal stance consistent with
stabilizing the debt to GDP ratio near its current level, is developed. Second, two scenarios
with alternative assumptions regarding the fiscal cost of SOCB reform are presented along
with policy implications.
Baseline
Under the baseline scenario, public and publicly-guaranteed debt increases slightly from
about 41 percent of GDP in 2005 to 42½ percent in 2009, before stabilizing. In net present
value (NPV) terms, the debt increases from 28 percent of GDP in 2005 to about 29 percent of
GDP and stabilizes at that level over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes: (i) real
GDP growth of 7–7½ percent; (ii) a fiscal deficit, including net-lending and off-budget
investment expenditure, of 3½ percent of GDP starting in 2006, based on the assumptions
that the official budget balance narrows from 1½ percent of GDP in 2004 to less than
1 percent of GDP over the medium term, net lending is gradually reduced from about
2 percent of GDP in 2004 to less than 1½ percent of GDP by 2010, and only 70 percent of
the authorities’ planned infrastructure spending program of 110 trillion dong is executed over
the period 2005–2010;14 and (iii) decreasing reliance on ODA from 2010 onward.
Under such a baseline scenario, the debt stock appears sustainable, but is subject to risks,
such as permanently lower growth and a higher primary deficit (alternative baseline scenarios
A2 and A3). While full implementation of the authorities’ infrastructure spending program
under current oil price assumptions (average US$58.70 per barrel) would lead to a modest
increase in the NPV of the debt-to-GDP ratio over the medium term (scenario A4), continued
full implementation in the event that oil prices were to fall by 20 percent relative to the WEO
baseline over the period 2006–2010 would lead to a continual increase in the NPV of the
debt-to-GDP ratio (scenario A5).

13

This DSA was prepared jointly by the Bank and the Fund on the basis of the joint
framework approved by Bank and Fund Boards in April 2005. (See “Operational Framework
for Debt Sustainability Assessments in Low-Income Countries—Further Considerations”,
available via the Internet: http://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/sustain/2004/020304.htm.)
14

Relative to the authorities’ initial program of 68 trillion dong, the assumed implementation
represents 110 percent.

- 53 -

ANNEX V

Alternative scenarios 15
The largest risk to medium-term debt sustainability is the existence of contingent liabilities
associated with SOCB reform. The two scenarios presented below should be viewed as
indicative, given the high degree of uncertainty regarding (i) the current stock of NPLs in the
banking system and (ii) the current and projected future SOCB capital shortfalls, which
depend on a number of difficult-to-predict policy variables. Both scenarios assume that the
pace of banking sector reform is stepped up from 2005 onwards, and that credit growth
decelerates markedly. As a result, the incidence of new nonperforming loans and the
associated provisioning requirements fall sharply over the medium term, and the SOCBs’
capital shortfall is effectively contained.
Using the latest available IAS audits (end-2002) for the four large SOCBs as a starting point,
both scenarios estimate the capital shortfall assuming that 15 percent of off-balance sheet
items were not recorded in the audits. Existing provisions were subtracted from the required
provisioning in both cases. Despite possible alternative funding sources, both scenarios
assume that the capital shortfall will be entirely financed by government bond issuance.16
The main differences between the scenarios include the methodology used to estimate the
capital shortfall, the assumed increase in capital-adequacy ratios (CAR), and the years over
which recapitalization bond issuance is spread.17
More specifically:
Banking reform scenario 1: 18
•
estimates the capital shortfall by incorporating provisioning assumptions based on
international experience, as audited balance sheet data are likely to significantly
understate the true capital shortfall. This scenario assumes losses of 33 percent on the
15

For the sake of comparability with the baseline, the alternative scenarios maintain all the
assumptions of the baseline scenario except the amount of bond finance required to cover the
capital shortfall as of end-2005.

16

The authorities could possibly partially finance recapitalization with proceeds from as-yet
unidentified asset sales. In addition, going forward SOCBs would likely raise capital from
the private sector either through equity or equity-like instruments, but it is unclear whether
this could be done prior to recapitalization.

17

The main methodological difference is that scenario 1 directly calculates provisioning
needs based on international experience, while scenario 2 is based on non-performing loan
estimates and loan classification.
18

This scenario represents an update of the exercise carried out for the 2004 Article IV
consultation and used as a basis for the DSA framework described in the staff report
(Country Report 05/148, Annex V, pp. 49 – 54).

- 54 -

ANNEX V

outstanding stock of loans, 40 percent on concessional and ODA loans, 50 percent on
directed loans, 100 percent on frozen and debt recovery loans, 50 percent on letters of
credit, 30 percent on loan guarantees, and 40 percent on performance guarantees and
other off-balance sheet items. This results in an overall provisioning rate of
38 percent for past loans and 22 percent for off- balance sheet items. The resulting
shortfall amounts to 20 percent of GDP. It is assumed to be filled by a capital
injection by the government, in the form of a transfer of government bonds to
SOCBs, spread over two years (2006-2007), and would bring the banks to solvency
(i.e. the CAR is set at zero).
•

Under this scenario, the debt stock jumps to over 63 percent of GDP in 2007 before
the adjustment in the primary deficit required to keep the overall deficit at 3½ percent
begins to rein in the debt stock. Over the long term, the primary adjustment, together
with the improving quality of SOCBs’ new lending, allows the government to
steadily diminish the impact of SOCB reform costs on the public debt burden, leaving
the debt stock at just above 47 percent by 2025.

Banking reform scenario 2:
•
estimates provisioning requirements in line with SBV's recent Decision 493 on loan
classification and provisioning: five percent for loans up to 90 days overdue,
20 percent from 90 to 180 days, 50 percent for up to 360 days, and 100 percent above
that threshold.19 Loans with insufficient information on their performance status were
placed in the highest risk category. This leads to an average provisioning of 13.3 percent, which is also applied to off- balance sheet items. To account for possible misclassification, provisioning against loans is increased by 50 percent. The CAR is set
at 8 percent of assets. The resulting shortfall amounts to 8 percent of GDP, and is
assumed to be filled by a capital injection by the government, in the form of a transfer
of government bonds to SOCBs, spread over five years (2006–2010).
•

Under this scenario, the debt stock approaches the government’s notional ceiling of
50 percent of GDP by 2010 and declines slowly over the long term to about 44 percent of GDP in 2025.20

The above scenarios show the important ways in which the level and evolution of contingent
liabilities can influence debt sustainability. SOCB policy affects public debt dynamics both
directly through the generation of quasi-fiscal liabilities and indirectly through the cost of
servicing the resulting public debt. Going forward, delays in reining in credit growth and
19

Banks had until end-July 2005 to provide reports based on the new classification contained
in Decision 493. As of mid-August, reportedly three of the four large SOCBs had done so.

20

The authorities do not have a legal debt ceiling, and treat the 50 percent notional ceiling as
indicative.

- 55 -

ANNEX V

implementing reforms, as well as lack of progress in improving the quality of investment,
could lead to further increases in contingent liabilities, which would likely have a negative
social impact, as interest expenditure crowds out social expenditure. Given the uncertainty
regarding the magnitude of the existing stock of contingent liabilities, and the fact that the
quality of new SOCB lending could improve more slowly than envisaged in the above
scenarios, the overall deficit target of 3½ percent of GDP should be viewed as an upper
bound for a sustainable fiscal stance.
External debt sustainability
Vietnam’s external debt is deemed sustainable under the baseline scenario, and should not be
affected by the cost of SOCB reform as long as these costs are domestically financed. The
stock of total external debt would rise modestly to about 40 percent of GDP by around 2015
before declining to about 32 percent in 2025. This scenario assumes (i) a gradually
narrowing current account deficit, reflecting a steady deceleration in the growth of exports
and imports from the current high levels and continued buoyant remittances and tourism
receipts; (ii) a slight increase followed by a gradual decline in ODA in U.S. dollar terms; and
(iii) an increase in FDI and commercial borrowing due to a steadily declining grant element
of new public sector borrowing and increasing private sector borrowing. Under this scenario
the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio falls from 28 percent in 2005 to 18½ percent in 2025, while
the debt service ratio falls from 5.3 percent in 2005 to 4.7 percent in 2025. The main risks
facing external debt dynamics are (i) a significant deterioration in the terms of external
financing; and (ii) a significantly weaker than projected export performance.
Staffs’ Assessment
Staff consider Vietnam to be at a low risk of external debt distress. Vietnam’s external debt
ratios are well below applicable policy-based debt thresholds both under the baseline and
under standard stress scenarios.21 However, the outlook for public debt dynamics is highly
sensitive to assumptions regarding the level of contingent liabilities as well as assumptions
related to continued fiscal consolidation and strong GDP growth. The analysis finds that
public debt dynamics could deteriorate over the long term under some stress scenarios; this
needs close monitoring in future assessments to determine whether a change in the debt
distress rating is warranted.

21

Vietnam is considered a “medium” performer on the basis of its 2004 CPIA score. Its
applicable external debt thresholds are the following: (i) NPV of debt-to-exports = 150 percent, (ii) NPV of debt-to-GDP = 40 percent, and debt service-to-exports = 20 percent.

- 56 -

ANNEX V

Table 1. Vietnam: Public Sector Debt - comparison of debt dynamics under various levels of contingent liabilities
(NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio)

Estimate
Projections
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

2015

2025

Baseline Scenario: Excluding Contingent Liabilities
Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt in NPV
Memo: Public and publicly guaranteed debt in percent of GDP (in dong)

28.0 27.9 28.1 28.2 28.3
41.2 41.6 42.2 42.5 42.5

28.8
42.4

29.1
42.4

28.7
42.3

28.0
28.6
28.0
28.0
28.0

28.2
29.8
28.0
28.3
29.9

28.6
31.3
28.4
29.2
32.2

29.1
32.7
28.8
29.8
33.9

29.6
34.1
29.3
30.3
35.3

30.4
35.9
30.2
31.2
36.9

32.4
42.3
33.2
30.6
40.4

36.3
52.9
41.6
29.3
43.1

28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0

28.6
30.2
29.3
33.8
37.2

29.8
32.5
31.0
33.2
37.0

30.5
32.4
30.9
32.6
36.7

31.2
32.4
31.0
32.2
36.6

32.2
32.8
31.3
32.4
36.8

34.8
32.4
31.2
31.0
35.8

37.8
30.9
30.0
29.6
33.1

28.0 38.4 49.0 48.4 47.6
41.2 52.1 63.2 62.7 61.7
0.2 10.5 11.4
1.3
0.9

46.8
60.4
0.6

41.2
54.5
0.3

33.5
47.0
0.0

28.0
28.6
28.0

38.7
40.4
38.6

49.9
52.6
49.5

50.5
54.1
49.2

51.2
55.8
48.8

51.9
57.4
48.5

51.6
61.8
45.7

50.0
67.2
46.7

28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0

39.3
40.7
39.9
44.3
37.2

51.3
53.8
52.5
54.2
48.4

51.3
52.9
51.7
52.8
48.3

51.0
52.0
50.8
51.5
48.0

50.7
51.0
49.9
50.4
47.7

47.2
44.7
43.8
43.1
43.5

42.7
35.8
35.1
34.3
36.2

29.9 31.9 33.6 34.3
43.6 46.0 47.9 48.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.0

35.2
48.7
1.0

33.1
46.3
0.0

30.2
43.8
0.0

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1
A4. Full execution of authorities' investment program
A5. Full exec. of authorties' investment program and oil price 20 percent lower than WEO
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Scenario 1: Contingent Liabilities Equivalent to 20 percent of GDP
Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt in NPV
Memo: Public and publicly guaranteed debt in percent of GDP (in dong)
Memo: of which debt creating flows from contingent liabilities in percent of GDP
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

Scenario 2: Contingent Liabilities Equivalent to 8 percent of GDP
Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt in NPV
Memo: Public and publicly guaranteed debt in percent of GDP (in dong)
Memo: of which debt creating flows from contingent liabilities in percent of GDP

28.0
41.2
0.2

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004

28.0
28.6

30.2
31.8

32.5
35.2

34.7
38.4

36.0
40.6

37.6
43.1

38.4
48.4

40.6
57.3

A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1

28.0

30.1

32.3

34.3

35.3

36.7

37.3

43.3

28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0

30.6
32.2
31.4
35.8
37.2

33.7
36.4
34.9
37.0
39.0

36.1
37.9
36.5
38.1
40.6

37.3
38.4
37.0
38.2
41.0

38.8
39.2
37.9
38.8
41.8

38.9
36.4
35.3
34.9
38.9

39.4
32.5
31.6
31.1
34.3

7.5
7.4
7.4
7.4
-3.8 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5
-11.4 -11.8 -11.1 -10.4

7.3
-3.5
-9.8

7.3
-3.5
-9.2

7.0
-3.5
-8.2

7.0
-3.5
-6.2

2.0
0.7
1.7
1.8
5.0

2.0
0.7
1.6
1.8
5.2

1.9
1.0
1.6
2.2
4.9

1.4
1.1
1.3
3.0
5.2

B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Memorandum items:
Real GDP growth
Overall fiscal deficit including off-budget investment expenditure
Non-oil fiscal balance
Primary balance
Baseline
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)

3.0
3.0
3.0
1.8
-2.0

2.2
2.2
2.2
1.8
4.2

2.1
1.8
2.1
1.8
4.5

2.1
1.1
1.9
1.8
4.7

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).

1

1.6
2.1
3.5
22.7
0.4
26.2
-2.2
-2.0
0.5
-2.4
-0.2
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
-0.5

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which : contribution from average real interest rate
of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
On-lending
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Bank recapitalization
Residual, including asset changes

7.1
1.9
4.3
-0.6
4.0
9.6

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
7.3
2.0
-0.1
-3.4
6.7
19.5

4.7
...

28.5
...
123.3

3.3
3.5
6.1
23.1
0.3
29.2
-3.4
-2.5
0.1
-2.6
-0.9
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8
-0.2

41.9
28.3

41.9
41.9

2003

7.7
1.7
-4.0
-5.5
7.9
-0.5

3.6
...

26.6
...
113.8

-0.8
-0.7
3.6
23.4
0.3
27.0
-4.8
-3.4
-0.4
-3.0
-1.5
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
-0.1

41.0
27.6

41.0
41.0

2004

3

4

1.5
0.1
4.2
6.8
5.8
8.3

2.1

Standard
Deviation

Revenues including grants.
Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium- and long-term debt.
4
Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

2

1

7.3
1.8
0.1
-1.8
7.7
11.4

2.5

Historical
4
Average

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
Central government and DAF bonds; as of 2005 includes contingent liabilities of the banking system.

4.4
...

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 2 3
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

NPV of public sector debt
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
2
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

27.3
...
120.3

38.5
28.0

Public sector debt
o/w foreign-currency denominated

1

38.5
38.5

Alternative scenarios
Banking reform scenario 1
Banking reform scenario 2

2002

Actual

7.5
1.8
-2.0
-2.4
5.3
9.1

3.3
2.8

28.0
...
114.5

0.1
-0.5
3.0
24.5
0.3
27.4
-3.7
-3.1
-0.2
-2.9
-0.6
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.7

41.2
27.0

41.2
41.2

2005

Estimate

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

7.4
1.8
4.2
...
2.7
7.2

5.3
1.8

27.9
...
110.6

0.4
0.9
2.2
25.2
0.3
27.4
-1.3
-2.3
0.5
-2.8
1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.5

41.6
27.8

52.1
43.6

2006

7.4
1.8
4.5
...
2.8
4.9

5.6
1.5

28.1
...
113.9

0.7
0.5
2.1
24.6
0.3
26.8
-1.6
-2.3
0.5
-2.8
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

42.2
28.6

63.2
46.0

2007

7.4
1.8
4.7
...
2.9
4.3

5.9
1.8

28.2
...
117.7

0.3
0.1
2.1
23.9
0.3
26.0
-2.0
-2.4
0.5
-2.9
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

42.5
28.8

62.7
47.9

2008

Table 1a.Vietnam: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002-2025

7.3
1.8
5.0
...
2.9
5.1

6.2
2.1

28.3
...
120.9

0.0
-0.1
2.0
23.4
0.2
25.5
-2.1
-2.3
0.6
-2.9
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

42.5
28.4

61.7
48.4

2009

7.3
1.8
5.2
...
2.9
5.3

6.5
2.1

28.8
...
125.2

-0.1
-0.1
2.0
23.0
0.2
25.0
-2.1
-2.3
0.6
-2.9
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

42.4
28.1

60.4
48.7

2010

7.4
1.8
3.6
...
3.2
6.0

2.2

2005-10
Average

Projections

7.0
2.2
4.9
...
2.9
7.4

7.2
1.9

29.1
...
128.3

0.0
0.0
1.9
22.7
0.1
24.6
-1.9
-2.0
0.8
-2.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

42.4
27.9

54.5
46.3

2015

7.0
3.0
5.2
...
2.9
6.9

9.0
1.5

28.7
...
126.6

-0.1
0.0
1.4
22.7
0.1
24.1
-1.5
-1.6
1.1
-2.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

42.3
22.9

47.0
43.8

2025

7.0
2.5
5.2
...
2.9
6.8

1.8

2011-25
Average

- 57 ANNEX V

- 58 -

ANNEX V

Table 2a.Vietnam: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2005-2025

Estimate
2005

2006

2007

2008

Projections
2009
2010

2015

2025

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

28.0

27.9

28.1

28.2

28.3

28.8

29.1

28.7

28.0
28.6
28.0
28.0
28.0

28.2
29.8
28.0
28.3
29.9

28.6
31.3
28.4
29.2
32.2

29.1
32.7
28.8
29.8
33.9

29.6
34.1
29.3
30.3
35.3

30.4
35.9
30.2
31.2
36.9

32.4
42.3
33.2
30.6
40.4

36.3
52.9
41.6
29.3
43.1

28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0

28.6
30.2
29.3
33.8
37.2

29.8
32.5
31.0
33.2
37.0

30.5
32.4
30.9
32.6
36.7

31.2
32.4
31.0
32.2
36.6

32.2
32.8
31.3
32.4
36.8

34.8
32.4
31.2
31.0
35.8

37.8
30.9
30.0
29.6
33.1

114.5

110.6

113.9

117.7

120.9

125.2

128.3

126.6

114.5
117.0
114.5

111.7
118.3
111.2

116.3
127.2
115.4

121.5
136.8
120.5

126.2
145.8
125.2

132.2
155.9
131.3

142.6
186.3
146.4

160.1
232.9
183.5

114.5
114.5
114.5
114.5
114.5

113.4
119.5
116.3
133.9
147.3

121.0
132.1
125.6
134.8
150.1

127.5
135.6
129.2
136.4
153.7

133.2
138.5
132.2
137.7
156.2

140.0
142.4
136.2
140.9
159.8

153.4
142.9
137.4
136.6
157.7

166.7
136.2
132.3
130.3
146.0

3.3

5.3

5.6

5.9

6.2

6.5

7.2

9.0

3.3
3.3
3.3

5.3
6.2
5.3

6.0
7.8
5.7

6.5
8.9
6.2

7.0
9.7
6.7

7.4
10.5
7.2

8.9
13.2
9.1

13.3
21.7
15.2

3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3

5.4
5.3
5.4
5.7
5.3

6.2
8.8
7.5
6.6
18.6

7.2
10.5
8.6
7.1
11.2

7.8
8.3
7.4
7.6
9.2

8.3
7.8
7.3
7.9
8.8

9.6
8.1
7.7
9.1
8.9

13.6
10.6
9.9
12.1
12.1

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1
A4. Full execution of authorities' investment program
A5. Full execution of authorities' investment program and oil price 20 percent lower than WEO
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006-2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1
2

Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

...
...
...
...
8.6
6.1
-0.1
3.4

NPV of external debt
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt rati

35.1

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)
39.5

7.3
5.0
2.4
19.0
26.3
...

...
...
...
...
7.9
3.3
2.4
5.5

33.6
-1.3
-2.3
4.2
8.5
59.1
67.7
-5.7
1.3
-3.3
-3.2
0.7
-2.3
-1.7
1.0
0.0

2003

45.3

7.7
6.4
2.4
27.7
23.8
...

19.3
29.2
12.4
18.8
6.2
2.6
2.2
2.5

34.2
0.6
-3.2
3.0
7.2
65.9
73.1
-5.5
1.4
-2.7
-3.6
0.7
-2.3
-2.0
3.7
0.0
1.3

-3.8

1.3
4.2
0.5
10.0
12.7
...

0.9

-4.5

7.1
1.9
3.0
16.8
14.1
...

5.5

2.1

50.9

7.5
4.5
2.8
21.8
22.7
43.7

19.5
27.3
12.8
17.9
5.2
1.8
2.3
3.5

34.2
0.0
-1.1
3.6
8.4
71.5
79.8
-6.0
1.2
-3.2
-1.4
0.9
-2.3
…
1.1
0.0

Historical Standard Estimate
Average 6/Deviation 6/
2004
2005

54.5

7.4
-0.3
2.7
16.3
15.0
41.4

20.9
26.9
14.0
18.0
5.0
1.4
2.5
1.4

35.9
1.7
-1.4
3.2
8.1
77.6
85.7
-6.2
1.2
-3.1
-1.5
0.9
-2.4
…
3.2
0.0

2006

57.7

7.4
-1.4
3.0
12.5
12.2
40.5

22.3
27.0
15.1
18.3
5.5
1.6
2.6
1.2

37.7
1.8
-2.0
3.0
8.4
82.5
90.9
-6.4
1.0
-3.5
-1.5
1.0
-2.5
…
3.8
0.0

2007

61.9

7.4
0.0
3.3
12.5
11.9
39.6

23.1
26.8
15.7
18.1
5.8
1.8
3.1
1.9

38.7
1.0
-2.2
2.9
8.3
86.5
94.7
-6.5
1.1
-3.6
-1.4
1.2
-2.6
…
3.2
0.0

2008

67.1

7.3
1.0
3.5
12.9
12.2
36.2

24.1
26.8
16.0
17.8
5.4
1.8
3.1
2.0

39.4
0.7
-2.4
2.7
8.0
90.1
98.1
-6.4
1.1
-3.7
-1.4
1.3
-2.6
…
3.1
0.0

2009

72.9

7.3
1.3
3.6
12.4
12.2
35.3

24.9
26.8
16.2
17.4
5.7
1.9
3.8
2.5

39.5
0.1
-2.3
2.6
8.2
93.1
101.3
-6.4
0.8
-3.6
-1.3
1.3
-2.6
…
2.4
0.0

2010

Projections

1

7.4
0.9
3.2
14.7
14.4
39.5

2005-10
Average

102.3

7.0
0.0
4.2
11.1
10.5
18.0

29.3
25.3
19.4
16.7
5.7
1.7
7.0
0.5

41.8
1.6
-2.2
2.1
5.9
115.7
121.6
-5.0
1.2
-3.2
-1.1
1.6
-2.6
…
3.8
0.0

2015

201.2

7.0
0.0
4.9
7.8
7.5
7.3

25.6
18.4
20.3
14.6
5.7
2.6
17.1
4.8

31.4
-3.2
-1.7
1.6
3.1
139.0
142.1
-3.2
1.7
-2.7
-0.7
1.6
-2.3
…
-1.4
0.0

2025

7.0
0.0
4.5
9.9
9.4
15.8

-3.1

-4.5

1.7

2011-25
Average

2

Includes both public and private sector external debt.
Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3
Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes
4
Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5
Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
6
Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

1

Source: Staff simulations.

7.1
0.8
2.4
10.2
19.1
...

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

Key macroeconomic assumptions

4

34.9
-3.0
-7.0
0.4
4.3
56.0
60.4
-5.4
1.4
-5.4
-1.9
0.8
-2.5
-0.3
3.9
0.0

1

External debt (nominal)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
3
Residual (3-4)
o/w exceptional financing

2002

Actual

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 3a. Vietnam: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002-2025

- 59 ANNEX V

- 60 -

ANNEX V

Table 3b. Vietnam: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2005-25
(In percent)
Estimate
2005

2006

2007

Projections
2008
2009
2010

2015

2025

12.8

14.0

15.1

15.7

16.0

16.2

19.4

20.3

12.8
12.8

12.1
15.1

11.9
17.4

11.8
19.0

12.1
20.3

12.2
21.2

14.6
28.3

11.1
33.2

12.8
12.8
12.8
12.8
12.8
12.8

14.2
19.9
14.3
17.0
19.1
20.0

15.5
30.9
15.5
21.6
25.8
21.5

16.2
30.0
16.1
21.5
25.2
22.4

16.5
27.0
16.5
20.5
23.3
22.9

16.7
24.0
16.6
19.3
21.4
23.1

20.0
19.6
19.9
19.5
19.6
27.7

20.9
20.3
20.9
20.3
20.3
29.0

17.9

18.0

18.3

18.1

17.8

17.4

16.7

14.6

17.9
17.9

15.6
19.5

14.4
21.1

13.7
22.0

13.4
22.5

13.1
22.8

12.6
24.4

8.0
23.9

17.9
17.9
17.9
17.9
17.9
17.9

18.0
28.0
18.0
21.9
25.3
18.0

18.3
42.9
18.3
26.2
32.6
18.3

18.1
39.8
18.1
24.9
30.4
18.1

17.8
34.4
17.8
22.7
27.0
17.8

17.4
29.5
17.4
20.8
23.9
17.4

16.7
19.5
16.7
16.8
17.7
16.7

14.6
16.7
14.6
14.6
15.3
14.6

1.8

1.4

1.6

1.8

1.8

1.9

1.7

2.6

1.6
1.6

1.3
1.3

1.3
1.3

1.1
1.3

1.0
1.3

0.9
1.2

0.7
1.4

1.5
3.4

B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
5
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006

1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6

1.3
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.3

1.5
1.9
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.5

1.6
4.0
1.6
2.5
3.2
1.6

1.7
6.2
1.7
3.2
4.4
1.7

1.7
5.8
1.7
3.1
4.1
1.7

1.5
1.9
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.5

2.3
2.7
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.3

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6

6.1

6.1

6.1

6.1

6.1

6.1

6.1

6.1

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 5
Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2006-25 1
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 2
B. Bound Tests

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1
Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating
flows.
2
Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline, while grace and maturity periods are the same as in
the baseline.
3
Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after
the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4
Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5
Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6
Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 61 -

ANNEX V

Figure 1a.Vietnam: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2025 1/
60

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
50

40

30

20
Baseline
No Reform

10

Most extreme stress test
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
250

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
200

150

100
Baseline
50

No Reform
Most extreme stress test

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
25

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
20

Baseline
No Reform
Most extreme stress test

15

10

5

0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ The most extreme stress test in the first two panels corresponds to "a 10 percent of GDP increase in other debtcreating flows in 2006" (B5), and "real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in
2006 - 2007" (B1) in the lower panel. Most extreme is defined as having the highest NPV after 10 years (i.e. 2015).
2/ Revenue including grants.

- 62 -

ANNEX V

Figure 1b. Vietnam: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2005-2025 1/
(In percent)

35

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
30
25
20
15
10
Baseline
5

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

30

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
25
20
15
10
Baseline

5

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

7

Debt service-to-exports ratio
6
5
4
3
2
Baseline
1

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ The most extreme stress test in the first two panels corresponds to "New public sector loans on
less favorable terms in 2006 - 2025" (A2), and "Export value growth at historical average minus one
standard deviation" (B2) in the lower panel. Most extreme is defined as having the highest NPV in
10 years (i.e. 2015).

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
October 7, 2005
The information provided below has become available since the issuance of the staff report
(SM/05/351, 9/14/05). The thrust of the staff appraisal remains unchanged.
41.
Recently-released data point to continued buoyant activity during the third
quarter of 2005. Preliminary data indicate that real GDP growth picked up to 8.1 percent
year-on-year (yoy) during the first nine months of 2005, compared with 7½ percent projected
growth for the full year in the staff report. Inflation picked up to 7¾ percent in September
(yoy), reflecting the effects of the latest round of increases in petroleum prices and
continuing food price inflation. Inflationary pressures can be expected to remain strong in the
fourth quarter of 2005 due to seasonal factors as well as the recently-announced 20.7 percent
increase in the common minimum wage, which took effect on October 1, 2005 (see below).
Preliminary projections by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) point to full-year inflation of
about 8 percent, compared with a projection of 7 percent in the staff report.
42.
The increase in the minimum wage has clouded the outlook for inflation and the
fiscal accounts. The common minimum wage, which is the basis for the determination of the
salaries and pensions of civil servants and provides a floor for salaries of employees of stateowned and non-FDI private enterprises, had last been raised in January 2003 (by 38 percent).
However, average civil service wages were increased by another 30 percent in October 2004,
when the civil service wage structure was decompressed, in line with the government’s
Master Program on Public Administration Reform for the Period 2001-2010. The latest
increase in the minimum wage, which will affect the incomes of about 11 million salaried
workers, can be expected to add to consumption demand in 2006, while at the same time
depressing the profitability of state-owned and domestic private enterprises. Although the
impact on the overall budget deficit may be buffered in the short run by the large oil revenue
windfall, the government’s wage and pension bill is projected to increase by at least
1 percentage point of GDP in 2006, thus increasing the burden of adjustment on investment
and nonwage recurrent spending.
43.
The rate of growth of credit to the economy fell marginally to 38 percent (yoy) in
June. Broad money growth remained unchanged at around 26½ percent, while total bank
deposits continued to expand at a rate of about 30 percent. Although reserve money growth
slowed from 15½ percent in May to 11½ percent in June, commercial banks have used their
considerable excess liquidity to finance continued rapid credit expansion. These trends are
likely to have continued in recent months, as the SBV has maintained a broadly
accommodative monetary policy. Moreover, on August 25, 2005, the Governor of the SBV
issued an official letter to commercial banks encouraging them to actively consider granting
loans to big government projects to support the achievement of the government’s economic
growth target for the remainder of 2005. Continuation of the recent policy stance would
likely lead to a significant overshooting of the SBV’s official credit growth objective for
2005.

-2-

44.
On September 21, 2005, the Prime Minister issued a decision to equitize the
Vietnam Bank for Foreign Trade (VCB) on a pilot basis. This decision stipulates that the
state is to maintain its majority share of VCB, with the sale of shares to be carried out in
various phases to bring about a gradual reduction of the state equity ratio. In the first phase in
2006, equitization is to be carried out in stages, with the shares to be sold at each stage
limited to 10 percent of equity for the purpose of recapitalization, and with state ownership
maintained at no less than 70 percent of VCB’s total equity. The sales of shares are to
continue during 2007-2010, with the state guaranteed to retain at least 51 percent of shares by
the end of the period. Among eligible buyers, each legal entity can own up to 10 percent of
the equity; each individual can own up to 5 percent; and each foreign investor up to
10 percent, with the total share holdings of foreign investors to be limited to 30 percent.
Thus, while one of the stated objectives of equitization is to improve VCB’s corporate
governance, the envisaged ownership limits would make it difficult for any foreign strategic
investors to make an important contribution in this area.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/5
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 24, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation
with Vietnam
On October 7, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Vietnam.1
Background
Vietnam’s overall macroeconomic performance has remained strong since the conclusion of the
2004 Article IV consultation. Real GDP growth picked up to 7.7 percent in 2004, and it remained
robust at about 7½ percent year-on-year (yoy) during the first half of 2005. With the abatement
of the supply shocks that led to a spike in food prices in 2004, inflation has shown some signs of
moderation, although it has remained high relative to recent years, at about 7½ percent (yoy) as
of July 2005. Despite a recent slowdown of garment export growth from the very high rates
recorded in the past two years, continued strong performance of other exports, and buoyant
remittances and tourism receipts, mitigated the impact on the current account. With sustained
inflows of ODA and FDI, the overall balance of payments has thus remained in comfortable
surplus. Gross international reserves have risen from US$6.3 billion at end-2004 to US$7.1
billion as of end-June 2005, although the import cover of reserves has remained low, at about
8½ weeks of imports.
Credit growth surged to 42 percent in 2004, and remained high at 39 percent as of May 2005,
despite some tightening measures taken by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV). Lending by the
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

1

-2state-owned commercial banks (SOCBs) continued to expand rapidly in support of the
government’s official growth target. An announcement by the SBV in January 2005 that
exchange rate depreciation would be limited to 1 percent in 2005 encouraged sustained growth
in foreign-currency borrowing. Broad money growth rose to 30 percent in 2004, before edging
down to a rate of 27 percent (yoy) in May 2005.
The fiscal position appears to have improved in 2004 and early 2005, but heavy reliance on offbudget operations and continued quasi-fiscal operations through the SOCBs make it difficult to
assess the underlying strength of the public finances. The official budget deficit narrowed from
about 2 percent of GDP in 2003 to less than 1½ percent of GDP in 2004. Surging net oil
receipts contributed to continued favorable fiscal performance in the first half of 2005. The
overall fiscal deficit (the sum of the official budget and off-budget investment expenditure)
narrowed from 7.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 4½ percent of GDP in 2004 leading to a slight
decline in the debt stock to 41 percent of GDP. However, the improvement in the public
finances is clouded by the recent augmentation of the government’s off-budget investment
program for 2005-2010 to 110 trillion dong (15½ percent of 2004 GDP). In addition, slow
progress in SOCB reform, together with high credit growth, has likely led to a large build-up of
bad loans and contingent government liabilities in the banking system.
The government has recently signaled its intention to speed up the pace of structural reform. In
the important banking system, the SBV’s loan classification, provisioning, and prudential
standards were tightened in April 2005, and the government aims to develop plans for the
SOCBs’ reform and recapitalization during the latter part of the year. State-owned enterprise
(SOE) reform appears to be moving forward through share auctions and a narrowing of the list
of sectors reserved for the state, and the authorities continue to work diligently toward WTO
accession.
The outlook for the rest of 2005 is broadly positive, provided that monetary and fiscal policies
can be appropriately reined in. Real GDP growth is projected to be about 7½ percent, on strong
consumption and a rebound in FDI in anticipation of Vietnam’s WTO accession. However,
inflation would remain higher than in recent years, at around 7 percent by end-2005, and
reserve coverage would remain low. The main risk to the outlook would be continued reliance
on a loose monetary policy, and an easing of the fiscal stance, which could increase short-term
pressures on inflation and heighten external vulnerability. Over the medium-term prospects for
sustained, higher-quality growth and poverty reduction remain broadly positive but hinge
critically on macroeconomic discipline and market-oriented structural reforms. Assuming
appropriate policies, growth is expected to remain robust in the range of 7 – 7½ percent, with
inflation falling to around 3½ percent. However, the public debt stock could rise sharply over the
next few years as the government covers the costs of the needed recapitalization and reform in
the SOCB and SOE sectors.

-3Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed Vietnam’s continuing transition toward a market economy, and
commended the authorities for the robust growth and significant poverty reduction achieved in
recent years despite a number of exogenous shocks. Directors noted that structural reforms and
prudent macroeconomic policies have made Vietnam an increasingly attractive destination for
foreign direct investment, and that the external current account deficit is comfortably financed by
private and official capital inflows. At the same time, Directors observed that the reserve
coverage is low and, while inflation has shown some signs of moderation since mid-2004, it has
accelerated recently, and is now expected to reach 8 percent in 2005. Directors encouraged the
authorities to adopt a more flexible, market-oriented policy framework under the new Five-Year
Socio-Economic Development Plan, centered on promoting private sector-led growth, achieving
macroeconomic stability, and improving the quality of public investment. They stressed the need
for more prudent macroeconomic policies, improved public sector financial management,
accelerated reform of state-owned enterprises, and fair and transparent laws and regulations.
Directors noted that the near-term economic outlook is favourable but subject to risks. They
cautioned the authorities that pursuit of an ambitious short-term growth target will likely
exacerbate inflationary pressures and weaken the external reserve position. In addition, given
the uncertain loan quality and weak balance sheets of the state-owned commercial banks,
continuing high credit growth could give rise to large quasi-fiscal liabilities that could threaten
medium-term debt sustainability.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to slow credit growth. However, they noted that the
recent policy actions by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) are unlikely to be sufficient for this
purpose, and may be sending mixed signals to the market. They urged a more concerted effort
to tighten liquidity, with a number of Directors calling for a discontinuation of the practice of
encouraging state-owned banks to finance large state-owned enterprise projects in order to
achieve the authorities’ growth target. Directors stressed the need to strengthen the monetary
policy framework, including through greater central bank independence and focus on the
objective of price stability.
While recognizing that there is no evidence of significant exchange rate misalignment and that a
fixed exchange rate regime may have helped to anchor inflation expectations in the last year,
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to explore in a forward-looking manner ways to
introduce more flexible exchange rate management. Several Directors noted that greater
exchange rate flexibility will facilitate adjustment to exogenous shocks, reduce external
vulnerability, and create incentives for economic agents to improve their management of
exchange rate risks. They advised that exchange market intervention be limited to addressing
disorderly market conditions, and that full use be made of the flexibility embedded in the current
exchange rate system. Directors welcomed the authorities’ positive efforts to accept the
obligations of Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, and to remove all remaining
exchange restrictions subject to approval under this Article.

-4Directors welcomed the strengthening of the fiscal position in 2004, while expressing concern
about the government’s continued reliance on off-budget operations. They urged continued
fiscal consolidation to help curb inflation and ensure public debt sustainability. Given the
projected gradual decline in oil-related receipts from 2007 onwards, Directors called for urgent
action to reduce the non-oil fiscal deficit. To this end, they suggested that a good portion of the
oil revenue windfall be saved and that, in light of the recent sharp increase in public wages,
investment and domestically-financed on-lending be contained in the period ahead, including
through a review of off-budget expenditures. Directors also stressed the importance of reforms
to improve the tax system, strengthen tax administration, rationalize public expenditure, improve
project selection, and better integrate the capital and recurrent budgets. They also encouraged
the authorities to move toward the adoption of best practices in the area of fiscal transparency,
including by adopting integrated systems of accounting and reporting for all budget and offbudget operations and for all public debt and contingent government liabilities.
Directors considered reform of the state-owned commercial banks to be crucial to efforts to
improve growth prospects and maintain fiscal sustainability in the medium term. They therefore
supported the authorities’ actions and plans to strengthen banking supervision, liberalize the
banking sector, and improve the governance of banks. In this regard, Directors welcomed the
recent tightening of prudential standards, including the adoption of regulations to bring loan
classification and provisioning in line with international standards, and plans for development of
a financial sector reform roadmap. They encouraged the authorities to ensure that the planned
resolution of the nonperforming loans of the state-owned banks is based on accurate and
reliable estimates of capital shortfalls. Furthermore, while supporting the authorities’ plans to
equitize the main state-owned banks, Directors emphasized that this should be accompanied by
the elimination of residual policy lending, the improvement of banks’ incentives to operate on a
commercial basis, and the strengthening of the SBV’s supervisory authority. A few Directors
also encouraged the authorities to allow strategic investors to take over bank management to
improve governance and increase efficiency.
Directors welcomed the recently-issued anti-money-laundering decree and encouraged the
authorities to pursue full membership in the Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering. They
stressed the importance of strengthening the regime for combating the financing of terrorism,
including by amending the criminal code so as to criminalize terrorism financing.
Directors urged the authorities to step up the restructuring of other state-owned enterprises as
well, particularly the larger ones. Important needed reforms include equitization, the curbing of
government interference in management and investment decision-making, and the provision of
incentives to operate on a commercial basis.
Directors appreciated the authorities’ commitment to international economic integration, and
stressed that an open trade and investment regime and fair and transparent laws and
regulations are key to promoting private-sector-led growth. In this regard, they supported
Vietnam’s objective of achieving WTO membership, and urged the authorities to pass and
implement the legislation aimed at creating a level playing field and a more liberal and
transparent investment regime. Liberalization of administered prices will be essential to remove

-5distortions and production bottlenecks, and, together with reform of state-owned enterprises,
including banks, should serve to support the government’s fight against corruption.
Directors urged the authorities to improve the reliability, timeliness and dissemination of
economic data. This is especially important with respect to money and banking statistics, offbudget fiscal activities, and public debt and contingent liabilities.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-6-

Vietnam: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-05
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

Real GDP (annual percentage change)
Industrial output

6.8
18.4

6.9
13.7

7.1
18.8

7.3
16.9

7.7
16.0

7.5
...

Saving-investment balance (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross investment

2.1
31.7
29.6

2.1
33.2
31.2

-1.2
32.0
33.2

-4.9
29.7
34.6

-3.8
31.7
35.5

-4.4
32.2
36.6

Inflation (annual percentage change)
Period average
End of period
GDP deflator

-1.6
-0.5
3.4

-0.4
0.7
1.9

4.0
4.0
4.0

3.2
2.9
6.7

7.7
9.5
7.9

8.0
7.0
5.3

General government budget
Total revenue and grants
of which: oil revenue
Total Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Net lending 1/
Off-budget expenditure

20.5
6.5
25.5
15.9
7.4
2.2
0.0

21.6
7.4
26.6
16.0
8.4
2.2
0.0

22.7
6.8
26.6
15.7
8.4
2.4
0.7

23.1
6.4
28.0
16.8
8.3
2.9
2.3

23.4
6.4
26.7
16.5
8.3
1.9
1.2

24.5
7.6
27.1
17.7
7.6
1.8
1.1

-5.0
-11.4

-5.0
-12.4

-4.5
-11.3

-7.2
-13.6

-4.5
-10.9

-3.8
-11.4

39.0
38.1

25.5
21.4

17.6
22.2

24.9
28.4

30.4
41.7

...
...

4.3
9.8

5.9
8.8

7.0
9.9

6.3
10.0

6.7
10.7

...
...

642
2.1
25.2
34.5

670
2.1
4.0
2.3

-419
-1.2
11.2
22.1

-1,946
-4.9
20.4
29.1

-1,700
-3.8
29.3
25.0

-2,246
-4.4
21.3
23.2

3,030
8.9
2,191

3,387
8.3
2,555

3,692
7.2
2,956

5,620
8.9
4,683

6,314
8.3
5,554

7,730
8.6
...

38.6
10.5

37.9
10.6

34.9
8.6

33.6
7.9

34.2
6.2

34.2
5.2

14,170
14,514

14,806
15,084

15,272
15,404

15,514
15,646

15,745
15,773

...
...

-2.8
2.2

0.9
1.5

-0.6
-3.8

-4.9
-5.9

0.0
2.0

...
...

441.6
401

481.3
413

535.8
440

613.4
489

713.1
552

806.9
...

Overall fiscal balance including off-budget expenditure
Non-oil overall fiscal deficit
Money and credit (annual percentage change, end of period)
Broad money
Credit to the economy
Interest rates (in percent, end of period)
Three-month deposits (households)
Short-term lending (less than one year)
Current account balance (including official transfers)
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of GDP)
Exports f.o.b (annual percentage change, U.S. dollar terms)
Imports f.o.b. (annual percentage change, U.S. dollar terms)
Foreign exchange reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars, end of period)
Gross official reserves, including gold
(in weeks of next year's imports of goods and nonfactor services)
Net international reserves, including gold
External debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service due (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)
Exchange rate (dong per U.S. dollar)
Period average
End of period
Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage change)
Period average
End of period
Memorandum items:
GDP (in trillions of dong at current market prices)
Per capita GDP (in U.S. dollars)

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes DAF operations. The authorities record ODA received for onlending; repayments are included under amortization.

Statement by Hooi Eng Phang, Executive Director for Vietnam
and Anh Quoc Duong, Senior Advisor to Executive Director
October 7, 2005
1.
We are pleased to convey to the management and staff of the Fund the authorities’
appreciation for the continued support extended to Vietnam through policy dialogue, technical
advice and training over the years. This relationship, which has been based on mutual trust and
respect, has provided a conducive platform for the authorities to embark on a forward-looking
economic program aimed at enhancing the country’s economic potential and strengthening its
capacity, in order to attain a more sustainable and broad-based growth path over the mediumterm. On behalf of the Vietnamese authorities, we would like to thank staff for their analytical
and well-written report. We are also appreciative of the selected issues papers, which
complement the staff report and offer helpful insights on three highly topical issues.
2.
The Vietnamese economy has made significant strides in moving from a centrally
planned economy to a state-managed market economy. The combination of favorable
macroeconomic conditions, socio-economic stability and increasing integration with the world
economy, facilitated by speedy trade reforms and private sector development, have contributed
to solid performances on the macroeconomic front with sustained, strong economic growth,
single digit inflation and impressive poverty reduction in recent years. To build further on these
achievements, the Vietnamese authorities are working diligently to achieve WTO accession by
year-end. Looking ahead, the authorities recognize that some challenges remain but they are
committed to continuing the implementation of structural reforms to ensure sustainable
development for the country. Thus far, active consultations between the authorities and the
Fund and other partners have largely been positive for progress in poverty reduction and
sustained economic growth.
Recent Economic Developments
3.
In the first half of 2005, the country was faced with several internal and external
difficulties. On the domestic front, the widespread drought and avian flu outbreak had caused
losses in tourism, agricultural production and decline in hydroelectric power generation. On the
external front, the sharp rise in the price of key imported commodities and petrol, the removal
of quotas on textile exports by WTO members and difficulties in seafood exports had posed
problems for the economic development of the country. Nevertheless, the authorities have
persevered with the implementation of policies and measures to maintain macroeconomic
stability while structural reforms, including SOE reforms, the enhancement of enterprise
competitiveness and the improvement of the legal framework in line with the integration
process were all broadly on track. The Vietnamese economy continues to perform well in
2005.
4.
Real GDP growth continues to strengthen to 8.1 percent (first nine months of 2005),
underpinned by strong consumption, buoyant domestic investment, expansion in exports and
a rebound in FDI in anticipation of Vietnam’s accession to the WTO. Despite the adverse
impact of the global rise in oil and commodity prices, inflation remains contained at 7.75

-2percent (yoy) in September 2005. The fiscal deficit has narrowed while the exchange rate has
remained broadly stable. The current account deficit, which has improved since 2004, has
remained manageable and is fully financed by strong capital inflows from both ODA and
FDI. The balance of payments position has been generally satisfactory while official reserves
have increased to US$ 7.1 billion as at end-June 2005. Overall, the macroeconomic outlook
for Vietnam is broadly positive with growth remaining robust at more than 7 percent.
Fiscal Policy
5.
The authorities have continued to pursue a prudent fiscal policy to ensure the
provision of a favorable macroeconomic and financial environment as a foundation for
growth. The official budget deficit narrowed markedly in 2004 and the first half of 2005. The
Government ’s budget deficit declined from 1.8 percent of GDP in 2003 to 1.7 percent in
2004 and is estimated to have remained restrained in 2005.
6.
During 2002-2004, off-budget outlays financed through the issuance of infrastructure,
education, bank reform and municipal bonds totalled VND 26 trillion. The overall general
government deficit, including off-budget operations but excluding on-lending through the
Development Assistance Fund (DAF), was 4.3 percent of GDP in 2003 but declined to 2.6
percent in 2004. In 2005, the authorities maintained their prudent fiscal policy stance,
reducing the budget deficit by efficient management and effective use of the budget revenues
and judicious planning for appropriate allocation of expenditure. In addition, the Government
has tightened the eligibility criteria for DAF lending. We are pleased to highlight that the
authorities have used the Medium Term Expenditure Framework to improve the quality of
expenditure planning and to sharpen their ability to link budgets to desired outcomes.
7.
The fiscal deficit has declined moderately in 2005 due partly to higher revenue from
high oil prices, land user fees and more efficient use of budget expenditures. In the
meantime, the authorities have accorded priority to efforts to strengthen the tax
administration, including unifying the corporate tax, modifying personal income tax and
launching a pilot VAT self assessment. In addition, the government has implemented a
comprehensive set of civil service reforms and adopted a systematic cost-benefit analysis for
projects. More forceful implementation of reforms of the SOEs, as discussed below, would
also have a positive impact on the fiscal position.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
8.
The authorities understand the staff’s concerns that the pursuit of targeted real GDP
growth of 8.6 percent in 2005 to achieve the average growth target of 7.5 percent set out in
the 2001-05 five-year plan would entail risks. The authorities have explained that such shortterm growth targets are regarded as indicative targets and would not be pursued with blind
determination. The authorities would like to assure staff that they are mindful of the risks
entailed in achieving a particular growth target, including the risk that the expansionary
monetary and fiscal policies needed might fuel inflation, increase risk of overheating, and
further weaken the external and reserve positions.

-39.
Rapid credit growth is a concern for our Vietnamese authorities because a potential
accumulation of nonperforming loans by the commercial banks could ultimately become a
fiscal burden and threaten medium-term debt sustainability. The authorities have
implemented several measures to tighten year-on-year credit growth from 41 percent of GDP
in 2004 to 25 percent in 2005. These include increasing the policy interest rate (including the
rediscount and refinancing rates), raising reserve requirements and tightening the prudential
standards. In addition, to promote investment quality, SBV has introduced new loan
classification and provisioning rules and will strictly implement the new regulations to
strengthen banking supervision to ensure a safe, efficient and effective growth in credit.
However, it should be noted that owing to the absence of a well-developed capital market,
bank credit has at times grown at rates that are in tandem with the achievement of the
economic development objective, and reflects the fact that banks provide financing for
medium-term investment projects that would otherwise not be undertaken or completed.
10.
The use of a managed float has kept the Dong-US Dollar exchange rate broadly stable
in the last two years. This has helped to contain inflation and facilitate investment and
international trade. However, in view of the staff’s advice on the importance of exchange rate
flexibility in the medium-term, the authorities have been exploring steps to introduce more
flexible management in a gradual and cautious manner. In the meantime, specific
administrative measures will continue to play an important role in protecting the domestic
and financial systems.
11.
The authorities have agreed to accept the obligations of Article VIII of the IMF’s
Articles of Agreement and have received advice and technical assistance from the Fund to
draft the new foreign exchange legislation, including the removal of the remaining exchange
restrictions. This new foreign exchange legislation is scheduled for approval by the National
Assembly in November 2005.
Structural Reforms
12.
The authorities are aware that sustained economic growth and enduring poverty
reduction would hinge on the pace of structural reforms aimed at improving the efficiency of
public sector financial management, accelerated reforms in the SOE and SOCB sectors, open
and fair trade and investment regimes, ensuring public debt sustainability and encouraging
private investment.
13.
On financial sector reforms, the authorities attach high priority to strengthening the
operations of SOCBs to enable them to meet the challenges of increasing competition arising
from Vietnam’s ongoing international economic integration. The government has developed
a financial sector reform roadmap, including specific plans for the reform and
recapitalization of the main SOCBs. At the same time, in order to improve the transparency
of the banking sector and determine the capital required to ensure the solvency of
commercial banks, the SBV has issued new regulations on asset classification and
provisioning as well as capital adequacy and other prudential regulations, including liquidity
mismatches. Banking supervision and regulation have also been strengthened to enhance the
sector’s economic efficiency and effectiveness and to reduce the accumulation of non-

-4performing loans and quasi-fiscal liabilities. The equitization of Vietcom Bank, an important
initiative and a pilot scheme under the SOCBs reform plan, would provide momentum to the
financial sector reform and shift the bank’s operation to a more commercial basis.
14.
Acknowledging that the efficient operation of SOEs is critical for Vietnam’s
successful transition to a more market-oriented economy, the authorities have made
tremendous progress on SOE reform based on the Master Plan for SOE transformations,
including the implementation of the auction mechanism, the rating exercise for SOEs, strict
budget controls and improvement of corporate governance. There have also been welcome
revisions to the legal documents required for improving the equitization process, extending
equitization to larger enterprises and listing equitized SOEs on the stock market. It should be
noted that by September 2004, about 55 percent of the planned transformations were
completed. According to the authorities’ plan, an additional 1,154 SOEs – about 25 percent
of total SOEs listed in 2001- will be transformed in 2005 and the first half of 2006.
15.
In 2005, the authorities continued to create a more supportive environment for private
enterprises. This included the introduction of the Common Investment Law and a Unified
Enterprise Law as well as a commitment to substantially streamline business registration
procedures and regulations. An additional 37,230 new private businesses were registered in
2004 while10,993 new businesses were registered in the first four months of 2005. In
addition, FDI has risen sharply in 2005. In the first four months of 2005, 177 investment
projects were licensed with a total committed investment of US$ 1,450 million. In addition,
significant progress was achieved on international integration due to determined efforts by
the authorities to secure early accession to the WTO. It should be noted that Vietnam has
already achieved compliance with tariff reduction schedules on regional trade agreements
and the adoption of international codes for the classification of imports and exports. In order
to create a level playing field and to meet the requirements for WTO accession, the
authorities have developed the Common Investment Law and a Unified Enterprise Law in
close consultation with the private sector and foreign investor communities.
Other Issues
16.
The authorities have taken progressive steps to improve transparency, particularly in
the publication of the budget. The administration reforms have been implemented under the
comprehensive civil service reform. The grassroots democracy regulations and the
implementation of the One Stop Shop at the local level has provided the framework for
improved accessibility to administrative services, increased transparency on fees, improved
the quality of service and streamlined the procedures.
17.
In addition, the authorities have increased emphasis on systemic measures in the fight
against corruption, representing a move away from a more punitive approach. The new law
on anti-corruption drafted by the Government Inspectorate is scheduled for approval by the
National Assembly in 2005. The Anti-Money Laundering decree has also been issued and the
authorities intend to amend the criminal code to criminalize the financing of terrorism and to
incorporate and implement the other requirements for Combating the Financing of Terrorism.

-5Conclusion
18.
With continuous support from the international community as well as the authorities’
efforts to implement structural reforms and pursue sound macroeconomic policies, Vietnam
has made considerable progress in 2005. While the road ahead is fraught with many
challenges, the authorities would like to reaffirm their determination to overcome these
challenges by continuing to pursue prudent macroeconomic policies as well as enhancing
reform implementation in a progressive and steady manner. The Vietnamese authorities look
forward to the continuation of the close and effective cooperation they have with the Fund
through constructive communication and effective consultation on macroeconomic policies.

