January 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/8

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month,
Day], 2001

August 2, 2001

January 29, 2001

The Gambia: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for The Gambia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with The Gambia, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 13, 2005, with the officials of The Gambia on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 1, 2005. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of July 18, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 18, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for The Gambia.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Ex Post Assessment of Longer-Term Program Engagement
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
THE GAMBIA
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with The Gambia
(In consultation with Finance, Legal, Policy Development and Review and
Statistics Department)
Approved by Benedicte Vibe Christensen and Carlo Cottarelli
July 1, 2005

•

Discussions for the 2005 Article IV consultation were held in Banjul during April 29-May 13,
2005. The mission met with the Honorable Mrs. Margaret Keita, Secretary of State, Department
of State for Finance and Economic Affairs (DoSFEA); Mr. Famara Jatta, Governor, Central
Bank of The Gambia (CBG); and other senior government officials of The Gambia. The mission
also met with representatives of the business community and donors.

•

Mission members were Mr. McDonald (head), Mrs. Randall, Mr. Sriram (all AFR), and Mr. Wu
(PDR).

•

The program supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) was approved by
the Executive Board on July 18, 2002 in an amount equivalent to SDR 20.22 million (65 percent
of quota), and is due to expire on July 17, 2005. It went off track shortly after the initial drawing
of SDR 2.89 million. No review under the arrangement was completed.

•

The political situation is stable. President Jammeh, who assumed power in a coup in 1994, was
reelected to a second five-year term in October 2001. Elections are due to be held in 2006. Early
in 2005, the president implemented a reshuffling of his cabinet and dismissed several
government officials, in response to the poor performance of groundnut exports and to a report
on corruption. Subsequent to the Article IV consultation mission, Mrs. Keita has been replaced
as Finance Minister by Mr. Ngum, the Secretary General in the Office of the President.

•

The Gambia has a de facto managed floating exchange rate system with no preannounced path
for the exchange rate. The country has been part of the exchange rate mechanism of the West
African Monetary Zone since April 2002. Appendix I discusses public and external debt
sustainability. Summaries of The Gambia’s relations with the Fund, World Bank Group, and
African Development Bank are contained in Appendix II, III, and IV, respectively. Statistical
issues are discussed in Appendix V, and Appendix VI contains a Public Information Notice.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I. Background.............................................................................................................................5
II. Recent Economic Developments ..........................................................................................6
III. Report on Policy Discussions ..............................................................................................9
A. The Authorities’ Response to the Ex post Assessment...........................................10
B. Future Fund Relations .............................................................................................10
C. Short-Term Outlook and Immediate Policy Priorities ............................................11
D. Medium-Term Macroeconomic and Structural Reform Strategy ...........................13
IV. Capacity Building and Data Issues....................................................................................18
V. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................19
Box
1. The Authorities' Response to Previous Article IV Recommendations ..................................7
Figures
1. Real Sector Developments, 1998–2004...............................................................................21
2. Fiscal Developments............................................................................................................22
3. Monetary Sector Developments, 1998–2004.......................................................................23
4. External Developments, 1998–2004....................................................................................24
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002–10 .......................................................25
2. Selected National Account Indicators, 2002–10..................................................................26
3. Central Government Operations, 2002–10 (in millions of dalasis) .....................................27
4. Central Government Operations, 2002–10 (in percent of GDP) .........................................28
5. Monetary Survey, Dec. 2002–Dec. 2006.............................................................................29
6. Summary Accounts of the Central Bank and Commercial Banks,
Dec. 2002–Dec. 2006...................................................................................................30
7. Balance of Payments, 2002–10............................................................................................31
8. Financial and External Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–04..................................................32
9. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002–10 ......................33
10. Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2005–10.....................................34

-3-

11. External Debt Sustainability Framework, Passive Scenario, 2002–25..............................35
12. Passive Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed
External Debt, 2005–25 ...............................................................................................36
13. External Debt Sustainability Framework, Active Scenario, 2002–25 ...............................37
14. Active Scenario Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly
Guaranteed External Debt, 2005–25............................................................................38
15. Millenium Development Goals, 1990–2003......................................................................39
Appendices
I. Public and External Debt Sustainability.............................................................................40
II. Relations with the Fund .....................................................................................................42
III. Relations with the World Bank Group ..............................................................................48
IV. Relations with the African Development Bank .................................................................52
V. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................54

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•

The Gambia’s economic performance since the mid-1980s has been uneven owing
to exogenous shocks, macroeconomic and structural policy slippages, poor
governance, and weak institutions. The economy’s vulnerability to shocks stems in
part from a lack of economic diversification; in addition, economic performance has
been constrained by policy distortions and by recurrent weaknesses in fiscal policy.
During 2002-03, excessive fiscal deficits, quasi-fiscal spending (including losses on
questionable foreign exchange transactions by the central bank), and accommodating
monetary policies led to rising inflation and a deteriorating external current account.

•

Macroeconomic performance has strengthened over the past 18 months,
particularly through end-2004, in response to strong financial policies. Real GDP
growth rebounded in 2003-04, and inflation, which had peaked at 18 percent at end2003, declined to about 5 percent by end-March 2005. The basic primary fiscal surplus
more than doubled to about 9½ percent of GDP in 2004 and could be maintained at this
level in 2005, and international reserves have recovered, reflecting increased official
transfers, remittances, and foreign direct investments. The exchange rate has stabilized
following a depreciation of over 30 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar in 2003, and
domestic interest rates have begun to decline.

•

Policies, however, weakened in the first quarter of 2005. This principally reflects
unbudgeted expenditures and the licensing of a quasi-public monopoly enterprise in the
groundnut sector, which has had a near-disastrous effect on the marketing and export of
processed groundnut. The government is determined to take corrective actions, and the
outlook for 2005 is conditional on the timeliness and effectiveness of these actions.

•

The main medium-term challenge for The Gambia is to make a decisive break
from the “stop-go” policies of the past and to institute policies that will establish
the conditions for sustainable growth and rising living standards. This assessment is
supported by the ex post assessment of The Gambia’s performance under Fundsupported programs. As part of a medium-term strategy, the authorities should
(1) consolidate recent gains in macroeconomic stability; (2) stabilize and reduce the
public debt burden, in part by ensuring that external flows are largely concessional or in
the form of grants; and (3) address remaining structural weaknesses in the economy to
foster private sector activity and improve competitiveness.

•

In the near and medium term, The Gambia also faces a critical need to strengthen
governance and the overall capacity of economic management. The core areas for
capacity building will continue to be public expenditure management, domestic debt
management, the statistical system, and governance at the CBG and its domestic and
foreign exchange operations. As for foreign exchange operations, an urgent task is to
accelerate the implementation of the action plan to strengthen internal controls of the
central bank, as recommended by the recent audit reports and the Fund’s Safeguard
Assessment.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND
1.
The Gambia’s economic performance since the mid-1980s has been uneven
owing to exogenous shocks, macroeconomic and structural policy slippages, poor
governance, and weak institutions. The economy’s vulnerability to shocks stems from a
lack of economic diversification; in addition, economic performance has been constrained by
policy distortions and by recurrent slippages in fiscal policy. Expansionary policies have
increased the government’s recourse to domestic bank financing, which, in turn, has raised
real interest rates, increased the domestic debt burden and tended to crowd out private
investment.

The Gambia and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA): Selected Economic Indicators
1981-84
The Gambia
SSA

1985-94
The Gambia
SSA

1995-2001
The Gambia
SSA

2002-04
The Gambia
SSA

(Percentage change)
Real GDP growth
Coefficient of variation
Real per capita GDP growth
Coefficient of variation
Inflation (average)
Broad money growth
Overall fiscal balance excluding grants 1/
Primary fiscal balance 1/

4.3
15.2
-0.1
15.3
12.2
17.9
-15.0
-12.2

1.6
1.9
n.a.
n.a.
18.4
n.a.
-9.5
-2.0

3.7
1.5
-0.5
1.2
15.7
17.6
-7.7
-3.7

1.7
1.7
-1.1
2.2
29.2
26.0
-6.1
-2.6

4.6
3.5
1.1
3.3
3.0
17.1
-8.9
-4.3

3.5
1.1
0.6
0.9
20.1
21.9
-4.3
0.4

3.7
6.1
1.1
5.9
13.4
32.6
-8.1
-2.0

4.2
0.8
1.2
0.7
11.8
22.5
-3.1
0.2

Source: IMF, African Department WETA tables.
1/ In percent of GDP.

2.
In 1998, the authorities entered into a three-year program under the ESAF,
which was converted into a PRGF arrangement. This was followed by a successor PRGF
arrangement in 2002, which quickly went off-track.1 In 2003, it was discovered that The
Gambia had misreported net international reserves to the Fund by US$38.8 million at endDecember 2001 and failed to record US$28.5 million in government expenditures.2 The
Executive Board concluded that The Gambia had received two noncomplying disbursements,
equivalent to SDR 3.435 million each in July and December 2001. The authorities repaid
For further details, see the ex post assessment of The Gambia’s performance under Fundsupported programs issued as a separate document.

1

2

See IMF, 2004, “The Gambia: 2003 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Report on
Noncomplying Disbursements and Recommendation for Corrective Action; Staff
Assessment; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board
Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for The Gambia,” IMF Country Report
No. 04/143 (Washington).

-6-

these disbursements in 2004 in four equal installments, making the last payment ahead of
schedule.
3.
During the 2003 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors urged the
authorities to commission a new audit of the CBG’s 2001 and 2002 financial statements
on terms of reference agreed with Fund staff. In addition, Directors stressed the need for a
special audit of foreign exchange transactions between 2000 and 2003. These audits have
now been completed and confirm the breakdown in internal controls at the central bank that
were observed during the Fund’s Safeguard Assessment, conducted in November 2003. The
audit reports restate general ledger balances for external reserves for various test dates
between end-December 2000 and end-September 2003, which are significantly lower than
the originally recorded balances.
4.
The auditors have issued a disclaimer indicating that they are unable to express
an opinion about the 2001 and 2002 accounts. The disclaimer relates to substantial
qualifications in the report, namely (1) the auditors’ inability to gain access to the files of the
previous auditors, (2) the impossibility of verifying opening balances as of January 1, 2001,
and (3) the lack of supporting documents for some of the recorded foreign exchange
transactions. The special audit of foreign exchange transactions also confirms that (1) there
were significant withdrawals of foreign currencies from the central bank’s reserves to
individuals who were not deposit holders, in contravention of the Central Bank Act; (2) the
provision of funds to various foreign exchange bureaus for the purchase of foreign exchange
was unsecured; and (3) advances made to the government violated the Central Bank Act.
5.
The authorities’ response to key policy challenges raised in previous Article IV
consultations has been mixed (Box 1). In the past few years, the Fund’s policy advice has
focused on The Gambia’s need to strengthen overall fiscal performance; refine poverty
reduction priorities; strengthen governance, both in public financial management and at the
central bank; implement key structural reforms; and improve macroeconomic and other
data.3
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
6.
Macroeconomic performance has strengthened over the past 18 months,
particularly through end-2004, in response to strong financial policies. Real GDP growth
rebounded in 2003-04 to an average annual rate of 6 percent following a contraction in 2002,
owing to the recovery of groundnut crop production, and inflation, which had peaked at
18 percent in 2003, declined to about 5 percent by end-March 2005 (Figure 1).

3

See the summings-up of the last two Article IV consultations at
http://www.imf.org/external/country/GMB/index.htm.

-7-

Box 1. The Authorities’ Response to Previous Article IV Recommendations
• The authorities’ response to policy recommendations in the last two Article IV
consultations has been mixed, although policies have decidedly strengthened in the
past 18 months. The macroeconomic environment deteriorated significantly through most
of 2003. Overall fiscal imbalances remained large, monetary growth accelerated, and
inflation reached 18 percent by end-2003, compared to 13 percent at end-2002. As a
consequence, the exchange rate depreciated by over 30 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar in
2003, and there was a loss in international reserves.
• The authorities did attempt some corrective fiscal measures as early as October 2002
with the introduction of the National Emergency Fiscal Committee (NEFCOM).
NEFCOM shifted budget execution to a cash system, which, although not ideal, has given
the authorities greater control over expenditures. NEFCOM’s effectiveness improved
further through 2004 with the result that expenditure allocations have now shifted from a
monthly to a quarterly basis. The improvement in domestic fiscal operations, coupled with
a tightening of monetary policy reversed the deterioration in the macroeconomic
environment in 2004 and through the first half of 2005.
• Steps are being taken to strengthen the public expenditure management system. A
new organic budget law has been passed, and the financial regulations are currently being
implemented. With Fund technical assistance, public expenditure management capacity is
also being enhanced. The authorities have generally sought to strengthen macroeconomic
management by improving collaboration between the central bank and the finance ministry.
Progress in finalizing and auditing the backlog of fiscal accounts has been slow, although
there has been some recent progress.
• The central bank has benefited from two recent Fund technical assistance missions on
domestic and foreign exchange operations. The authorities are seeking to strengthen
governance at the central bank by implementing the recommendations of the Fund’s
Safeguard Assessment and the report of the external auditors on strengthening internal
controls.
• Structural reforms have lagged. The authorities have fallen behind in their schedule to
privatize the Gambia Groundnut Corporation (GGC), and developments in the groundnut
sector discussed elsewhere in this report represent a step backward.
• After a long delay, the authorities recently completed the first annual progress report
of the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) covering the period July 2002December 2003. There is still substantial scope to refine priorities and improve monitoring
and evaluation of the poverty reduction strategy.
• In the area of macroeconomic statistics, the authorities are in the process of developing a
statistical strategy to present to donors. Basic macroeconomic statistics, however, remain
weak.

-8-

The overall fiscal deficit (including
grants and on a commitment basis) is
estimated at 5¾ percent of GDP in
2004 compared with 4¾ percent in
2003, largely reflecting much higher
externally financed capital
expenditures, and domestic interest
payments. However, the basic
primary surplus4 more than doubled
to about 9½ percent of GDP,
indicating a significant tightening in
domestic fiscal operations (Figure 2).

The Gambia: Recent Developments
2002

2003

2004

(Annual percentage changes)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
Groundnut production (mt)
Consumer prices (eop)
NEER (period average)
REER (period average)
Money and credit
Broad money (Percent change)
Treasury bill rate (in percent; eop)

-3.2
-52.6
13.0
-22.6
-17.6

6.9
25.8
17.6
-37.4
-28.5

5.1
22.2
8.0
-12.9
-0.5

35.3
20.0

43.4
31.0

18.3
30.0

(In percent of GDP)
Public finances
Domestic revenue
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance, including grants
Basic Primary Balance
Overall balance, excluding grants

16.3

15.7

20.9

25.4
22.9
31.2
7.
Broad money growth
-4.6
-4.7
-5.7
declined from a peak of 43 percent
2.7
3.6
9.6
-9.1
-7.2
-10.2
on a 12-month basis in 2003 to
18 percent in 2004. The successful
(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
Balance of payments
reduction in inflation and the
Exports, f.o.b. (in US$)
7.1
-7.1
25.8
Imports, f.o.b. (in US$)
12.8
-6.2
46.2
stabilization of the exchange rate (the
Current account balance 1/
-2.8
-5.1
-11.8
rate appreciated by 3 percent on a
Gross official reserves (in Mill. US$)
67.2
62.3
84.6
12-month basis through end-March
In months of imports, c.i.f.
4.5
4.4
4.1
2005) have paved the way for an
Source: Gambian authorities.
easing of monetary policy.
1/ Including official transfers. Ratio to GDP.
Consequently, treasury bill yields
declined to 26 percent at end-March 2005 from a peak of 31 percent in August 2003
(Figure 3).

8.
The relatively high real interest rates that were necessary to reverse the
deterioration in the macroeconomic environment have, however, placed a heavy burden
on domestic debt service and on credit markets. The total domestic debt stock increased
from about 25 percent of GDP in 2003 to 31 percent in 2004. Hence, domestic interest
payments rose from 4½ percent in 2003 to 5¼ percent of GDP in 2004. The tightening in
domestic financial policies has also severely depressed credit to the private sector. In 2004,
the stock of such credit is estimated to have declined by over 15 percent.
9.
The external current account deficit (including official transfers) deteriorated
from 5 percent of GDP in 2003 to 12 percent in 2004, partly reflecting the worsening in
the balance of trade as strong import growth was driven by the recovery in output, the surge
in donor-financed capital expenditures, foreign direct investment,5 and higher international
4

Defined as domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending, excluding interest
payments and externally financed capital expenditure.
5

Foreign direct investments in 2004 include the acquisition of a major hotel, reportedly for
US$20 million.

-9-

oil prices (Figure 4). Gross international reserves rose by more than US$22 million or over
30 percent in 2004 as increased foreign inflows and a stabilizing exchange rate allowed the
central bank to increase its purchases in the interbank market.
10.
Policies however, weakened in the first quarter of 2005. There have been
significant fiscal slippages owing primarily to unbudgeted expenditures of D 101 million
(¾ of 1 percent of GDP),6 which have led to a substantial increase in the government’s net
debt. Accommodating policies by the CBG led to excessive growth in monetary aggregates.
The CBG decided during its April Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting to maintain
its policy interest rate—the treasury bill rediscount rate—at 29 percent. This decision reflects
the CBG’s assessment that inflation risks have increased because of the weakened fiscal
position, as well as the possible “knock-on” effects of volatile international oil prices.
11.
Economic prospects for 2005 are further jeopardized by the decision to license a
quasi-public monopoly enterprise, the Gambian Agricultural Marketing Corporation
(GAMCO), to market and process groundnuts. This decision has had a near disastrous
effect on exports of processed groundnuts because GAMCO, which is undercapitalized, has
been unable to raise the finances to purchase groundnuts from farmers that would have been
further processed for exports. The mission estimates that up to 50 percent of groundnut
exports could be lost in the 2004/05 crop season; however the impact on GDP is projected to
be limited because of groundnut exports’ small output share.
III. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS
12.
The findings of the ex post assessment of The Gambia’s performance under
Fund-supported programs provided an important backdrop to the discussions. The
main focus was on future Fund relations, immediate policy priorities, and the medium-term
overall macroeconomic and structural reform strategy for establishing the conditions for
sustained growth and poverty reduction.
13.
The Gambia’s macroeconomic and structural reform strategy over the medium
term should be to implement policies that will raise growth rates and ensure fiscal and
external sustainability. Meeting this challenge requires a decisive break from previous
“stop-go” policies and a determination to maintain policy consistency in order to establish
credibility. To this end, the mission discussed (1) policies to stimulate growth and economic
diversification, (2) a medium-term fiscal path that would stabilize and reduce the ratio of
public debt to GDP, (3) an independent and prudent monetary and exchange rate policy, and
(4) the conditions that would ensure external debt sustainability.

6

The expenditures were for acquisition of two aircrafts to spray insecticides to combat the
spread of the locust plague, the provision of a loan to the Gambia International Airlines to
repatriate Gambian citizens stranded at the Hajj, and payments of arrears in membership dues
to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

- 10 -

A. The Authorities’ Response to the Ex post Assessment
14.
The authorities viewed the ex post assessment as generally balanced. They agreed
with the broad assessment of both the performance of The Gambia under the ESAF and
PRGF arrangements since 1998, and of the principal challenges it faces in the medium term.
They felt that such an assessment would also have been useful after the 1998 PRGF
arrangement.
15.
The authorities pointed to the strong measures they had taken over the past two
years to return to macroeconomic stability by improving financial management. In this
context, they acknowledged that past problems with “stop-go” implementation of economic
reforms were manifested in weak outcomes. They also noted the difficulties that resulted
from the Fund’s withdrawal of financial support and, more important, traditional donors’
budget support.
16.
The authorities concurred with the importance of improving the accountability
and transparency of public expenditures and strengthening the central bank’s internal
controls. However, they stressed that some of the accounting problems—long lags in the
closing and auditing of public accounts—dated back to the 1980s and emphasized that there
were ongoing efforts to audit all of the government’s outstanding fiscal accounts. They
agreed with the importance of improving the capacity of key public institutions, including
increasing the autonomy of the central bank in conducting its core functions.
17.
The government acknowledged the need to undertake ambitious structural
reforms. It conceded that various state interventions in the economy, particularly in the
groundnut sector, had hampered economic activity and undermined private sector
confidence. However, the government pointed to general weaknesses in the private sector,
including its concentration on trading activities, which have contributed to disappointing
outcomes with respect to economic diversification.
18.
The authorities noted that over ambitious targets may have contributed to
failures to meet quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks under Fund
arrangements. They expressed some apprehension over the use of prior actions to mark the
implementation of critical economic reforms in future Fund arrangements.
B. Future Fund Relations
19.
The mission emphasized that key requirements for a future Fund-supported
program in The Gambia would be continued strong macroeconomic policies and the
country’s commitment to the implementation of remedial measures and reforms at the
central bank to strengthen governance. Following the discovery of the misreporting of
data to the Fund, staff envisaged that a six month SMP would have been agreed with the
authorities as of July 2004. However, while the policies were discussed with the authorities,
the SMP did not become operational because of delays in completing the re-audits of the
CBG’s 2001 and 2002 accounts and the special audit of foreign exchange transactions. Given

- 11 -

that the audits have now confirmed the breakdown of internal controls at the CBG, clear
steps are needed before an SMP can be negotiated.
20.

Staff discussed the following conditions for an SMP with the authorities:

•

The adoption of an action plan to implement the external auditors’ recommendations,
designed to improve internal controls. The authorities indicated that such a plan was
being drafted and would be presented to the CBG board shortly.

•

The staff proposed that, for the foreseeable future and until the auditors were able to
issue unqualified reports on the accounts, the authorities continue to conduct
quarterly audits of the CBG’s foreign reserve balances to ensure that reforms at the
central bank were being implemented. The authorities resisted the idea, stressing that
it would be costly and impose an undue burden on the central bank. However, they
recognized its importance for a future SMP. If an SMP were to be agreed with the
authorities covering the period September 2005 to March 2006, then a new PRGF
arrangement could be negotiated for the second half of 2006. The Gambia could then
reach the HIPC Completion Point following a minimum of six months of satisfactory
performance under the PRGF in early 2007.

21.
The staff reviewed The Gambia’s progress in implementing the
recommendations of the Fund’s Safeguard Assessment. The authorities have
(1) completed the new audits of the 2001 and 2002 accounts as well as the special audit of
foreign exchange transactions, (2) established an audit committee to oversee the external
audit process, and (3) prepared formal guidelines for foreign exchange operations and
incorporation of the comments of the Monetary and Financial Systems Department (MFD)
technical assistance missions. Moreover, they will soon submit the revised CBG bill, which
strengthens the central bank’s operational independence of the central bank, to the National
Assembly. The CBG is also developing a timetable to initiate and complete the process of
adopting international accounting standards.
C. Short-Term Outlook and Immediate Policy Priorities
22.
The stability of The Gambian economy in the short-term will depend on how
quickly corrective policies can be put in place. The authorities agreed that corrective
actions in the second quarter of 2005 to offset the fiscal overruns of the first quarter were
absolutely critical to put budgetary projections back on track. Assuming that these measures
are taken, the mission forecasts that the budget deficit could be about 5½ percent of GDP for
2005. It would be higher than budgeted primarily because of larger-than-expected domestic
interest payments. However, the basic primary balance would be maintained at over
9 percent of GDP, somewhat higher than budgeted. Staff and the authorities agreed that this
fiscal target for 2005 was appropriate, as it would allow the authorities to meet their inflation
objectives so long as monetary policy remained prudent. Moreover, this target entails an
adjustment of 2.1 percent of GDP relative to unchanged policies in the remaining three
quarters of the year, Real GDP growth is projected at 4¾ percent in 2005 and end-period

- 12 -

inflation is likely to be about 5 percent. However, lower groundnut exports could lead to a
higher-than-expected current account deficit.
23.
The mission agreed with the authorities’ strategy of containing domestic
borrowing for the rest of the year by limiting quarterly discretionary expenditure
allocations to D 190 million (a compression of roughly 2 percent of GDP compared to
the Budget, by the end of the year). However, for this compression in expenditure to be
feasible, clear changes in policy will be required. The government is implementing the
following policy changes, which have been endorsed by the president and will be
implemented through the issuance of relevant circulars: (1) limits on government travel,
(2) new policies on the use of government vehicles, and (3) ceilings on expenditure on other
charges. In addition, the government is seeking to increase public enterprises’ repayments of
government loans.
24.
The mission recommended a review of current retail prices for petroleum
products, which the authorities concurred was long overdue. According to the current
mechanism, the government is expected to review domestic fuel prices in all categories on a
monthly basis and, to adjust them on a quarterly basis to avoid subsidies. However, the
government last adjusted retail prices for kerosene and gas oil in October 2004 and premium
gasoline prices in December 2003. The mission estimates that the cost to the budget of
subsidizing petroleum products was about D 17 million (0.1 percent of GDP) in 2004 and
that, if oil prices remain at current levels and retail prices are not adjusted, this subsidy could
reach D 70-80 million (½ of 1 percent of GDP) in 2005.
25.
While agreeing with the decision of the last central bank Monetary Policy
Committee meeting, the mission expressed the view that interest rate reductions could
resume in the near term if the recent slippage in fiscal policy could be reversed.
Although reserve money growth is currently above target, inflation has declined much faster
than previously envisioned. In addition, the dalasi has remained strong in the foreign
exchange market, while expansion in private sector credit remains weak. The CBG agreed
with this assessment, but emphasized that it stood ready to reverse course if conditions
changed.
26.
The mission urged the authorities to continue the reforms aimed at
strengthening public financial management in the near term. These include the issuance
of the financial regulations to make the new organic budget law operational, the formation of
the Cash Management Committee at the DOSFEA, and the finalization of the 2001 accounts
and their submission to the Auditor General. The authorities informed the mission of the
completion of the auditing of the 1991-99 accounts and the finalization of the 2000 accounts
and their submission to the Auditor General. The mission was also informed that the
Treasury Directorate plans to begin updating the general ledger for fiscal data for 2002-04
and staff encouraged the authorities to complete this task by end-2005.

- 13 -

D. Medium-Term Macroeconomic and Structural Reform Strategy
27.
A key medium-term challenge for The Gambia is to maintain GDP growth rates
at between 4 and 5 percent. The mission and the authorities agreed that past hopes of
economic diversification had not materialized and that the economy remained significantly
dependent on the agricultural sector as one of its main sources of growth. Moreover, the
volatility of GDP largely reflects the volatility of agriculture, and the effects can be lasting.
In 2002, for example, real agricultural output declined by 28 percent, but, by 2003, was still
well below its 2001 level.
28.
The mission emphasized that, although the authorities had little control over
exogenous shocks that affected agriculture, they did have control over policy-induced
shocks. Further, the staff’s own analysis shows that the volatility of growth in The Gambia
over the past 25 years declined substantially during periods of comprehensive reforms. The
staff and the authorities agreed that maintaining a good policy environment not only
encouraged growth but could also help mitigate the impact of shocks. To this end, the
discussion focused on creating an environment conducive to private sector activity.
29.
The mission stressed the importance of adopting an ambitious medium-term
structural reform program to address the costs and risks of doing business in The
Gambia. The authorities concurred that acceleration of the privatization of Track 17
enterprises would be essential for facilitating private investment, increasing efficiency, and
reducing the burden on the budget. In addition, the World Bank’s recent Diagnostic
Assessment of The Gambia’s Investment Climate identified several reform priority areas.
These include, for example, the centralization of business taxes, the granting of autonomy to
the courts to hire and staff themselves appropriately, the review of the legal framework to
ensure consistency of the laws and regulations, and the deregulation of the land market and
privatization of state land.
30.
The Gambia needs a comprehensive strategy to address structural problems in
the agricultural sector. Policy advice in this area is being led by the World Bank and other
donors and includes (1) privatization of the GGC;8 (2) promotion of private sector
7

These enterprises include: the National Water and Electricity, the Gambia Ports Authority,
the Gambia Telecommunications Company Ltd., the Gambia Public Transport Corporation,
the Gambia Civil Aviation Authority, the Social Security and Housing Finance Corporation,
the Gambia International Airline, the National Printing and Stationary Corporation and the
Gambia Groundnut Corporation, for which a feasibility study has already been conducted.
8

The privatization of the GCC is a HIPC completion point trigger. There has been little
progress made towards the attainment of HIPC completion point triggers in all 5 required
categories, namely: poverty reduction, macroeconomic stability, governance, social sector
reforms, and structural reforms. An exception is the establishment of the Public Utilities
Regulatory Agency (PURA); however, it still needs to be staffed and made operational.

- 14 -

participation in marketing and, extension services, as well as in providing seeds, fertilizer,
and other inputs; (3) delegation to the government the provision of basic infrastructural
facilities—including improvements in the irrigation system; and (4) development of
innovative approaches to ensure that smallholders and small and medium-sized enterprises
have better access to financing. The authorities acknowledged that recent policy shifts in the
groundnut sector had unintended consequences. They indicated that these policies were now
being reversed through the abolishment of GAMCO’s monopoly, and agreed that their main
objective was to enhance the efficiency of the sector.
31.
The government was urged to take into account the assessment of the Joint Staff
Advisory Note (JSAN) of the first annual PRSP progress report in future reviews of the
poverty reduction strategy.9 The authorities responded that a task force had been set up to
consider the JSAN. In the JSAN, the staff encouraged the authorities to allocate more
resources to poverty reduction and to improve monitoring and evaluation within the context
of strengthened macroeconomic and structural policies in order to improve The Gambia’s
chances of achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). There are indications that
the poverty rate has increased—the percentage of people living on less than US$1 a day
increased from 54 percent in 1992 to 59 percent in 1998—and the MDG target for 2015 is
27 percent. The most recent data on changes in the poverty rate based on the 2003 household
survey have not yet been processed. Nevertheless, The Gambia has made some progress in
health and education: the MDGs for net primary school enrollment and the ratio of girls to
boys in primary education are on track, as are most of the MDG health indicators (except for
the under-5 child mortality ratio). The authorities intend to complete the next annual (2004)
progress report of the PRSP during 2005 and begin the comprehensive review of the poverty
reduction strategy by end-2005.
32.
An overall fiscal deficit of 1 percent of GDP over the medium term is consistent
with a declining path for the ratio of public sector debt to GDP, in both nominal and
NPV terms. However, the threshold will still remain above the level deemed appropriate for
low income weak performers. The overall net present value (NPV) of public debt is projected
at 118 percent of GDP in 2005. Under the staff’s medium-term scenario (the “active”
scenario), which assumes that The Gambia reaches the HIPC completion point in 2007 and
includes average annual real GDP growth of 4½ percent, the NPV of the public debt/GDP
ratio would decline to 77.2 percent of GDP in 2010 and remain relatively stable in the face of
plausible shocks (Appendix I).
33.
Nevertheless, external debt sustainability will require that The Gambia’s future
external financing needs be met largely through non-debt-creating flows. Under the
scenario in which The Gambia borrows only on highly concessional terms and reaches the
HIPC completion point in 2007, the NPV of the external debt/GDP ratio is projected to
9

The JSAN was issued to the Executive Board for its information on April 22, 2005,
together with the authorities first annual progress report of the PRSP
(http://www.imf.org/external/country/GMB/index.htm).

- 15 -

decline from 89 percent in 2005 to 63 percent by 2010, and the NPV of the debt-to-exports
ratio10 is projected to decline from 312 percent in 2005 to 183 percent by 2010. Stress tests,
however, underscore that the impact of vulnerabilities, while declining, will remain
significant and that policies, and possibly external support, will have to respond rapidly to
unanticipated shocks (Appendix I).
34.
In this context, staff also considered additional scenarios in order to assess The
Gambia’s vulnerability to shocks, including unchanged fiscal policies from 2005 and an
adverse terms of trade shock. If fiscal policies were unchanged and the fiscal deficit were
to remain in the range of 8-8.5 percent of GDP over the medium term, the debt to GDP ratio
would decline to a much higher threshold in 2010 than under the baseline scenario (namely,
141.8 versus 121.2 percent) as will the NPV of public sector debt (namely 97.7 versus
77.2 percent). If there was a terms of trade shock comprised of a 30 percent decline in
groundnut export prices and a temporary 10 percent increase in import prices during 200608, the current account deficit would be about 3 percent higher, which could lead to
exchange rate depreciation, a lower accumulation of foreign reserves, or higher external
borrowing.
Fiscal policy
35.
The mission discussed possible fiscal policies over the medium term that would
allow The Gambia to make progress toward public debt sustainability. The authorities
agreed with a fiscal path that reflects modest capital expenditures over the medium term
given The Gambia’s limited absorptive capacity. While concurring with the need to lower the
fiscal deficit over the medium term, the authorities emphasized the importance of restoring
PRSP expenditures, which had been compressed in 2004. The mission agreed, but argued
that it was important to adhere to budgetary priorities during the fiscal year and to avoid
unbudgeted expenditures (such as those that arose during the first quarter of 2005) that may
crowd out these priorities.
36.
The authorities agreed that a decline in the fiscal deficit by 1 percent of GDP in
2006 would be realistic. This would reflect a reduction in externally-financed capital
expenditures, in line with The Gambia’s absorptive capacity, and the decline in domestic
interest payments following a resumption of interest rate reductions in the context of
macroeconomic stability. In 2007 the deficit is projected to contract by a further 2.3 percent
of GDP, reflecting further declines in domestic interest payments, owing to interest rate
reductions and the decline in the debt/GDP ratio; further reductions in capital expenditure to
more historical norms; and the resumption of HIPC grant inflows following The Gambia’s
attainment of the Completion Point.
37.
The shift in the composition of government spending to pro-poor areas is
expected to exert upward pressure on noninterest, nonwage recurrent expenditures. As
10

Following the practice in the decision point document, only the value added component of
reexports is included.

- 16 -

a result, the medium-term fiscal path assumes that these expenditures will gradually increase
by about 2 percentage points of GDP by 2010 after the severe compression in 2004 and the
expected tight ceilings on allocations in 2005. Over the medium term, the ratio of wages and
salaries to GDP is expected to rise to reflect both productivity gains and the catching up of
real wages after a period of compression.
38.
A key concern of the authorities is the high domestic debt-service burden on the
budget. In the medium-term scenario, the staff projects that the stock of domestic debt will
decline gradually from 29 percent of GDP in 2005 to about 15 percent by 2010. Domestic
interest payments in the budget are assumed to decline from 25 percent of domestic revenues
to about 7 percent by the end of the period. But this projection depends on continued strong
financial polices and the maintenance of low inflation.
39.
The revenue outlook reflects the maintenance of recent gains in revenue
mobilization. Domestic revenue is projected at roughly 21 percent of GDP in 2005, and the
underlying effort is assumed to be maintained over the medium term. The authorities
expressed an interest in receiving follow-up technical assistance from the Fund to study ways
of broadening the tax base. Possible changes in tax policy over the medium term could
include limiting exemptions and extending the sales tax to services such as electricity.
Significant improvements have been made in customs administration. For example, the
change in management has had a marked impact on revenue collections. Other changes, such
as the use of new scanning machines and the updating of the Automated System of Customs
Data Administration, should further strengthen revenue administration.
Monetary and financial sector policies
40.
The authorities have successfully reduced inflation and stabilized the exchange
rate, and, in doing so, they have enhanced the transparency of their operations through
an effective communications strategy. The MPC now meets every two months and issues a
comprehensive press release explaining its decisions, steps welcomed by the banking and
financial community. The staff and the authorities agreed that the money-based monetary
framework is appropriate given the CBG’s familiarity with the mechanics of monetary
targeting and the past evidence of a close relationship between money and inflation.
41.
The conduct of monetary policy is hampered by the underdevelopment of the
domestic capital market and the inadequacy of financial instruments. As recommended
by recent MFD technical assistance missions, the authorities are taking steps to introduce a
new 14-day instrument that will separate monetary operations from the financing of the
budget. Other recommendations the authorities are considering are the introduction of an
overnight instrument to manage liquidity on a day-to-day basis, a secured credit facility
designed to encourage banks to engage in interbank transactions, and the phasing out of the
rediscount facility.
42.
The financial sector in The Gambia is relatively sound. In 2004, the CBG
introduced new minimum capital standards for banks of D 60 million. All existing banks are
expected to meet this requirement by March 2006, while new entrants have to meet it

- 17 -

immediately. Profitability and liquidity ratios are high, and nonperforming loans fell from
about 25 percent of total loans in 1998 to about 10 percent in early 2005.
43.
Financial intermediation remains low, and the lack of access to credit constrains
the productive sector. The loan-to-deposit ratio is relatively low at 38 percent, which is
attributed to the high interest rate environment, the attractiveness of government securities to
the banking sector, and the weak legal environment—in particular, the lack of a wellfunctioning commercial court to enforce contracts. The government agreed that to deepen
financial intermediation it would have to pursue both sound macroeconomic policies, so as to
foster a lasting reduction in interest rates, and key medium-term structural reforms designed
to strengthen creditor rights.
External sector policies
44.
The Gambia’s current account deficit over the medium term reflects the
expected slow improvement in domestic savings and the continued strong inflows of
foreign direct investments and remittances. Although moderating somewhat in 2005,
imports are expected to remain high in subsequent years and would be financed from
expected foreign direct investment flows, mostly in the tourism sector. Thus, the current
account deficit (including official transfers) would remain above 6 percent of GDP and
decline only slowly over the medium term. However, strong remittance inflows that have
already been observed over the last two years are expected to grow and contribute to the
improvement in the current account. The prospects are also good for continued improvement
in tourism receipts.
45.
The economy’s overall external competitiveness can be improved. However,
whereas the real exchange rate has depreciated in recent years, the current account response
has been minimal. For example, between 1998 and 2004, the real effective exchange rate
depreciated by about 50 percent, while export volumes were volatile. Agricultural products
(especially groundnut-based), which are the Gambia’s major exports, are subject to weatherrelated and policy-induced shocks and are not particularly sensitive to exchange rate
developments. The high import component of most exports also limits the effectiveness of
the exchange rate in stimulating exports, although the tourism sector appears to be somewhat
sensitive to developments in the exchange rate. Imports have responded to changes in the
real exchange rate, but this effect has been more than offset by the impact of project-related
inflows and foreign direct investment. In general, the staff believes that the current level of
the real effective exchange rate is appropriate.
46.
The authorities concurred that raising productivity and improving external
competitiveness would require the removal of structural bottlenecks, so as to reduce the
agricultural sector’s vulnerability to exogenous shocks. The Gambia has maintained a
liberal trade regime with a simple average tariff of 12.7 percent (six bands ranging from zero
to 18 percent) and low nontariff barriers. Nevertheless, there are ongoing initiatives to further
identify bottlenecks to The Gambia’s external competitiveness. The Gambia has been
selected as one of the countries under the interagency initiative, the Integrated Framework
for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries. The first step under

- 18 -

the initiative, to be spearheaded by the Bank, would be to complete the Diagnostic Trade
Integration Studies, with the ultimate goal of mainstreaming trade into development
strategies. The authorities were urged to identify suitable local counterparts to participate in
this study.
47.
The authorities agreed with the staff’s view that the exchange rate should be
largely market-determined, with interventions limited to smoothing volatility and
maintaining a minimum international reserve cover. Gross international reserves are
projected to increase to about US$125 million (5.4 months of imports) over the medium
term, reflecting moderate purchases by the CBG of foreign exchange. Broad money is
expected to serve as the nominal anchor for prices, with the purchase and sale of government
securities and the level of interest rates as the principal policy instruments.
IV. CAPACITY BUILDING AND DATA ISSUES
48.
The mission discussed the critical need to strengthen the overall capacity of
economic management to improve The Gambia’s medium-term economic performance.
The authorities have been making progress in strengthening their economic management
capacity through the creation of the MPC, a high-level macroeconomic committee, and a
treasury bill committee. However, capacity remains weak. They agreed with the mission that
the core areas for capacity building would continue to be public financial management,
governance at the CBG and its domestic and foreign exchange monetary operations, public
debt management, and the statistical system.
49.
The authorities expressed appreciation for the wide-ranging technical assistance
being provided by FAD’s regional advisor, and recently requested that it continue
beyond 2005 to enable the advisor to finish developing a commitments control system.
They also requested additional training for government officials on a variety of public
expenditure management issues.
50.
The CBG has set up the Reforms Implementation Committee (RIC) to monitor
and report on the implementation of a variety of recommendations designed to
strengthen its operations. These include the recommendations of the two recent MFD
missions, the Fund’s Safeguard Assessment mission, and the external auditors to strengthen
internal controls. The RIC produces monthly reports for the CBG’s management that, in
addition to monitoring progress in the implementation of the reform agenda, identify
problems or capacity constraints that need to be addressed.
51.
The mission stressed the urgent need to address the weaknesses in the quality
and timeliness of economic and financial statistics. In particular, staff expressed concerns
over (1) the use of 1976/77 as the base year and the narrow scope of the CPI, which is
limited to the low income population of the greater Banjul area; (2) persistent discrepancies
between the fiscal deficit measured from above- and below-the-line; (3) the poor reliability
of external debt data; and (4) the absence of comprehensive balance of payments statistics.
The authorities concurred and have begun to implement the recommendations of the Fund’s
recent data ROSC mission, including by preparing a comprehensive statistics reform package

- 19 -

that could be presented to donors for funding. The mission informed the authorities of the
Fund’s readiness to assist the government in its core areas of expertise.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
52.
The Gambia’s economic performance in recent years has been characterized by
inconsistent implementation of sound macroeconomic policies and poor economic
governance. These policy-induced shocks have exacerbated the negative effects of weatherrelated shocks to agricultural output, which, in 2003, culminated in a surge in inflation rates,
a significant depreciation of the dalasi, and a drop in international reserves. The poor policy
environment and the country’s inability to complete a review under the Fund-supported
program led to a marked reduction in donor support.
53.
Since mid-2003, the authorities have been implementing strong financial
policies. They significantly raised domestic interest rates, and the central government
strengthened domestic fiscal operations and reduced its domestic financing requirement. In
2004, these steps led to a marked reduction in inflation, the stabilization of the dalasi, and the
rebuilding of international reserves. Tight financial conditions, however, hurt credit markets
by reducing private sector credit demand and made treasury bills more attractive than loans
and advances.
54.
In the staff’s assessment, these tightened policies were necessary. With the
stabilization of the exchange rate, the improvement in the government’s basic fiscal balance,
and the fall in the inflation rate, the staff welcomes the recent shift in monetary policy toward
interest rate reductions. The authorities should also persevere with efforts to strengthen
public debt management.
55.
The staff was disappointed by the fiscal policy slippage in the first quarter of
2005. It is, however, encouraged by the authorities’ early recognition of the problem and
determined efforts to take corrective actions during the rest of the year. In the staff’s view,
the central bank’s decision (reached during its April MPC meeting) to defer further
reductions in interest rates was appropriate. Nevertheless, since the short-term outlook for
the economy remains stable, the central bank should be able to lower interest rates in the nottoo-distant future. But sustaining recent interest rate reductions will depend on the success of
the government’s fiscal actions—in particular, the effectiveness of the cap on discretionary
expenditures in 2005. With the proposed corrective actions for 2005, staff believes the fiscal
target is consistent with maintaining macroeconomic stability.
56.
The Gambia’s main medium-term challenge is to make a decisive break from its
past “stop-go” policies—a view supported by the findings of the ex post assessment of
The Gambia’s performance under Fund-supported programs. It needs to implement
clear, consistent macroeconomic policies and key structural reforms to encourage growth and
economic diversification. The authorities’ medium-term macroeconomic strategy should
focus on achieving domestic and external debt sustainability. To contain domestic debt
growth, a reduction in the overall deficit will be necessary, and external debt sustainability
hinges on ensuring that foreign resource flows are highly concessional and largely in the

- 20 -

form of grants. However, The Gambia’s external current account deficit is likely to remain
significant because its domestic savings are expected to rise only slowly. At the same time,
the country’s development needs are expected to be met largely through foreign direct
investments and concessional external loans and grants, which would finance significant
imports.
57.
The staff believes that the current level of the real effective exchange rate is
appropriate, and that improvements in external competitiveness should be addressed
through the removal of structural bottlenecks, which currently constrain productivity.
The authorities need to announce a consistent policy of private sector participation in the
groundnut sector. They should avoid their past practice of intervening in the sector and
accelerate implementation of the sectoral reform strategy agreed with major donors,
including the privatization of the GGC. Improving the overall competitiveness of the
economy should also include removal of administrative and other bottlenecks that deter
investment and strengthening of creditor rights to spur a deepening of credit markets.
58.
The Gambia’s medium-term prospects also hinge on a further strengthening of
macroeconomic management capacity and on improvements in economic governance.
The authorities are making good use of recent Fund technical assistance in public
expenditure management and in the domestic and foreign operations of the central bank,
which should be continued. A top priority should also be to strengthen the statistical data
whose weaknesses significantly constraint the effectiveness of macroeconomic management,
as well as Fund surveillance. Capacity building should be stressed in the upcoming annual
report on the PRSP implementation and in the comprehensive review of the strategy expected
to start by year-end.
59.
A future Fund-supported program in The Gambia should depend on the
continued implementation of strong macroeconomic policies and clear steps to address
the breakdown in internal controls at the Central Bank. The staff looks forward to the
implementation of an action plan reflecting the recommendations of the Fund’s Safeguard
Assessment and the Review of Selected Internal Controls prepared by the external auditors.
The staff also proposes that, until the auditors are able to issue unqualified reports on the
CBG’s accounts, the authorities continue to conduct quarterly audits. These would be
essential steps for agreeing on an SMP, which could pave the way for a new PRGF.
60.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 21 -

Figure 1. The Gambia: Real Sector Developments, 1998-2004

Despite an increase in groundnut production, real GDP growth
slowed in 2004 because of lower growth in industry and services.
(In Percent)

75

30
25

60

20
Real GDP growth (left scale)
Contribution of agriculture to real GDP (left scale)
Contribution of industry and services to real GDP (right scale)

15

45

10

30

5
15

0

0

-5
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Gross investment increased with foreign inflows in 2004; the rise in
savings was more modest.
(In percent of GDP)

30

30
Gross investment
Gross domestic savings

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

2002

2003

2004

- 22 -

Figure 2. The Gambia: Fiscal Developments
The overall fiscal deficit increased in 2004
because of higher-than-projected
externally financed capital expenditures.

However, the basic primary surplus more
than doubled.

6
Overall fiscal deficit, excluding
grants
Overall fiscal deficit, including
grants

12
10
8
6
In percent of GDP

In percent of GDP

0

-6

4
2
0
-2
-4

-12

-6
-8
-10

-18
2000

2002

2004

1998

Notwithstanding the decline in net
domestic financing of the budget in 2004,
the domestic debt stock increased, as the
central bank issued large amounts of
treasury bills to mop up excess liquidity.

2002

2004

With fiscal consolidation, the NPV of
public debt and debt service-to-revenue
expected to fall over the medium term.
140

40

60

120

35

50

100

40

80

30

60

20

40

15

10

20

10

0

In percent

70

30
In percent of GDP

2000

25
Stock of domestic debt
Net domestic financing

20

0
1998

2002

2006

2010

5
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (left scale)

0
1998

2000

2002

2004

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Net present value of public sector debt
(right scale)

In percent of GDP

1998

- 23 -

Figure 3. The Gambia: Monetary Sector Developments, 1998-2004

Growth in both reserve and broad money declined in 2004, and there
was a marked reduction in inflation.
In percent
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

20

Broad money (left scale)
Reserve money (left scale)
Inflation (right scale)

15
10
5
0

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Interest rates were raised in 2003 to stabilize the macroconomic
environment and then subsequently reduced in late 2004.
In percent
40
35

Rediscount rate
Bank rate
Treasury bill rate

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Credit to the private sector declined in 2004, while the outstanding
amount of treasury bills increased.
In millions of Dalasi
3,500

Credit to private sector
Outstanding amount of treasury bills

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

2002

2003

2004

- 24 -

Figure 4. The Gambia: External Developments, 1998-2004

The current account deficit deteriorated in
2004 as imports surged in response to
increased foreign direct investment...
-120

...financed largely by an increase in projectrelated inflows and foreign direct
investment.
60

-100

50

-80

40

-60

30

-40

20

-20

10

0
2000

2002

0

2004

1998

T rade balance (in millions of U.S. dollars)

2002

The nominal exchange rate stabilized in
dollar terms in 2004, and appreciated
slightly in early 2005.

Gross official reserves increased in
nominal terms in 2004, but declined in
terms of months of imports.
120

7.5

120

35

110

7.0

30

100

6.0
5.5

90

5.0
4.5

80

In months of imports

6.5

4.0

70

3.5
3.0

60
2000

2002

2004

Gross official reserves (left axis)

100
90

25

Dalasi per U.S. dollar

110

1998

2004

Project-related disbursements (in millions of
U.S. dollars)
Foreign direct investment (in millions of U.S.
dollars)

Current account balance, excluding official
transfers (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance, including official
transfers (in millions of U.S. dollars)

In millions of U.S. dollars

2000

80
70

20

60

15

50

Index, 2000=100

1998

40

10

30
20

5
1998M 1 2000M 1 2002M 1 2004M 1

Gross official reserves in months of imports
(right axis)

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Exchange rates, period average (left scale)
Nominal effective exchange rate (right scale)
Real effective exchange rate (right scale)

- 25 Table 1. The Gambia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002-10
2002

2003

2004

2005
Proj.

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (period average)
Consumer price index (end of period)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b. (in U.S. dollars)
Imports, f.o.b. (in U.S. dollars)
Terms of trade 1/
Nominal effective exchange rate (period ave
Real effective exchange rate (period average

-3.2
16.1
8.6
13.0

6.9
27.3
17.0
17.6

5.1
14.2
14.2
8.0

4.7
5.0
5.0
5.4

4.7
5.2
5.2
5.0

4.5
4.2
4.2
3.5

4.6
3.2
3.2
3.0

4.6
3.0
3.0
3.0

4.6
3.0
3.0
3.0

7.1
12.8
8.3
-22.6
-17.6

-7.6
-6.2
18.2
-37.4
-28.5

25.8
46.2
-7.0
-12.9
-0.5

-2.0
2.3
...
...
...

7.3
1.7
...
...
...

3.8
1.6
...
...
...

4.7
3.8
...
...
...

4.3
4.0
...
...
...

4.4
3.9
...
...
...

(Change in percent of beginning-of-year broad money)
Money and credit
Broad money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Credit to the government (net)
Advances to the government in forei
Credit to the private sector and publ
Claims on foreign exchange bureaus
Other items net

35.3
13.0
22.3
1.0
0.0
23.7
4.0
-6.4

43.4
28.2
15.2
12.5
0.0
20.0
-1.0
-16.3

18.3
29.2
-10.9
-12.6
2.0
-6.5
-1.2
7.3

9.9
8.1
1.8
0.3
0.0
6.8
0.0
-5.2

10.2
10.0
0.2
1.3
-1.9
1.7
-0.6
-0.2

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Velocity (GDP/end-of-period broad money)
Treasury bill rate (in percent; end of period)

2.3
20.0

2.2
31.0

2.2
30.0

2.2
...

2.2
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

(In percent of GDP)
Gross domestic investment and savings
Gross investment
Gross national savings

21.2
18.4

19.5
14.4

27.1
15.3

26.1
14.0

23.4
15.0

23.0
15.5

23.0
16.4

23.1
16.6

23.1
16.8

Central government budget
Balance, excluding grants 3/
Balance, including grants
Basic primary balance
Current balance
Total expenditure and net lending
Domestic revenue
Net foreign financing
Net domestic financing
Stock of domestic debt

-9.1
-4.6
2.7
-1.6
25.4
16.3
1.9
2.5
36.6

-7.2
-4.7
3.6
-1.3
22.9
15.7
0.6
5.4
25.2

-10.2
-5.7
9.6
4.0
31.2
20.9
5.7
0.5
30.7

-7.4
-5.6
9.4
2.7
28.3
20.8
2.7
2.9
28.9

-5.9
-4.5
9.5
3.1
26.3
20.4
3.3
1.1
27.6

-4.8
-2.2
7.8
3.5
25.1
20.4
3.0
-0.8
24.6

-4.3
-1.6
7.2
4.3
25.3
21.0
3.2
-1.5
21.2

-4.0
-1.4
6.5
4.6
24.8
20.9
3.1
-1.7
18.0

-3.9
-1.3
5.7
4.8
24.7
20.9
3.3
-2.0
14.7

-13.4
-2.8

-13.6
-5.1

-21.6
-11.8

-18.8
-12.1

-14.3
-8.4

-14.2
-7.5

-13.3
-6.6

-12.8
-6.5

-12.4
-6.3

External sector
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Overall balance of payments
Gross official reserves
In months of imports, c.i.f.

-49.6
-10.4

-48.0
-18.0

-86.7
-47.1

-83.1
-53.5

-68.1
-39.9

-72.4
-38.1

-71.5
-35.7

-72.9
-37.0

-74.4
-37.9

0.1
67.2
4.5

-4.9
62.3
4.4

33.5
84.6
4.1

7.9
90.9
4.5

12.5
99.2
4.9

5.5
106.0
5.1

5.8
112.3
5.2

5.0
118.5
5.3

6.1
125.2
5.4

2.9
0.0
23.5

0.0
0.0
23.5

0.0
7.6
15.9

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

(In millions of SDRs)

Use of Fund resources
Purchases/disbursements
Repurchases/repayments
Credit outstanding

…
…
…

…
…
…

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding reexports and imports for reexport.
2/ Includes public enterprises.
3/ Excluding heavily indebted poor countries initiative and expenditure under poverty reduction strategy paper.

- 26 Table 2. The Gambia: Selected National Accounts Indicators, 2002-10
(Annual percentage change; in constant prices)

2002

Agriculture

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

-28.2

20.5

11.4

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.4

4.4

Groundnuts

-52.6

29.9

29.6

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Other crops

-32.0

30.0

8.5

6.6

5.0

5.0

4.8

4.6

4.6

Livestock

5.0

5.0

3.2

2.3

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Forestry

5.0

5.0

3.1

3.7

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Fishing

5.0

7.0

10.0

3.8

3.8

3.8

5.0

5.0

5.0

9.8

6.4

3.3

2.7

5.9

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

4.5

2.6

5.7

1.2

6.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Large and medium manufacturing

5.0

2.0

6.0

1.1

6.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Small manufacturing

3.5

4.0

5.0

1.3

6.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Construction and mining

15.0

10.0

3.5

3.8

6.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Electricity and water supply

10.0

5.0

-13.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Services

4.3

4.1

3.2

5.1

4.6

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.6

Trade

4.1

0.4

0.4

2.4

5.5

4.7

4.7

4.7

4.7

Groundnuts

5.0

3.0

2.5

-1.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Others

Industry
Manufacturing

4.0

0.0

0.0

3.0

6.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Hotels and restaurants

7.0

15.0

8.4

3.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

Transport and communications

4.6

5.0

5.1

9.2

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Transport

4.0

5.0

3.0

2.8

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Communications

5.0

5.0

6.5

13.5

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

5.0

Real estate and business services

4.0

3.0

2.2

2.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

3.0

Public administration

3.0

2.0

0.0

2.3

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

Other services

3.0

3.0

2.2

0.0

3.0

3.0

8.0

8.0

8.0

GDP at factor cost

-3.8

7.7

5.1

4.7

4.7

4.5

4.6

4.6

4.6

1.7

0.2

5.1

4.7

4.7

4.5

4.6

4.6

4.6

GDP at market prices

-3.2

6.9

5.1

4.7

4.7

4.5

4.6

4.6

4.6

GDP deflator

16.1

27.4

14.2

5.0

5.2

4.2

3.2

3.0

3.0

Indirect tax (net)

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

- 27 Table 3. The Gambia: Central Government Operations, 2002-10
(In millions of dalasis)
2002

2003

2004

2005
Budget

2005
Passive

2005
Active

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

1,528.7
1,201.8
1,040.2
318.0
122.4
176.8
722.2
124.9
597.3
161.5
326.9
94.9
109.9
122.1

1,820.4
1,574.2
1,380.7
441.0
154.2
265.8
939.7
205.7
734.0
193.5
246.2
0.0
132.0
114.2

3,065.0
2,517.8
2,244.7
606.3
207.2
367.1
1,638.4
291.4
1,347.0
273.1
547.2
0.0
395.7
151.4

3,064.3
2,818.1
2,412.7
676.7
227.2
399.4
1,736.1
333.9
1,402.1
405.4
246.2
0.0
203.0
43.2

3,002.4
2,756.2
2,359.8
672.6
226.4
395.8
1,687.2
365.6
1,321.7
396.4
246.2
0.0
203.0
43.2

3,002.4
2,756.2
2,359.8
672.6
226.4
395.8
1,687.2
365.6
1,321.7
396.4
246.2
0.0
203.0
43.2

3,177.3
2,970.3
2,594.5
736.0
249.4
436.0
1,858.5
402.7
1,455.8
375.8
207.1
0.0
207.1
0.0

3,636.9
3,233.0
2,827.3
802.0
271.7
475.1
2,025.3
438.8
1,586.5
405.8
403.9
0.0
211.2
192.7

4,059.5
3,599.2
3,052.1
865.8
293.3
512.8
2,186.3
473.7
1,712.6
547.1
460.4
0.0
215.4
244.9

4,324.3
3,850.7
3,284.4
930.2
315.9
552.2
2,354.1
510.1
1,844.1
566.3
473.6
0.0
219.7
253.8

4,647.8
4,146.5
3,536.9
1,001.8
340.2
594.7
2,535.2
549.3
1,985.9
609.6
501.2
0.0
224.1
277.1

1,870.7
1,318.2
395.2
512.5
370.5
84.0
286.6
39.9
552.5
585.3
495.2
368.4
126.8
57.7
32.4
0.0
-32.8

2,292.7
1,707.0
452.6
594.5
607.6
163.4
444.2
52.3
585.7
608.3
472.7
340.7
132.0
57.2
78.4
0.0
-22.6

3,750.4
2,035.8
517.5
583.8
867.9
234.6
633.3
66.6
1,714.6
1,733.5
1,517.0
1,121.3
395.7
88.8
127.7
4.5
-23.4

3,686.8
2,369.0
541.6
860.4
949.7
226.9
722.8
17.3
1,317.8
1,347.1
1,071.2
868.2
203.0
250.0
25.9
0.0
-29.3

4,044.8
2,629.4
551.2
895.6
1,157.2
226.9
930.3
25.4
1,415.4
1,295.9
1,071.2
868.2
203.0
198.8
25.9
101.5
18.0

3,739.4
2,394.6
551.2
660.8
1,157.2
226.9
930.3
25.4
1,344.8
1,239.6
1,071.2
868.2
203.0
142.5
25.9
101.5
3.7

3,826.5
2,517.6
661.8
782.6
1,073.2
208.0
865.2
0.0
1,308.9
1,345.8
1,170.3
963.2
207.1
175.5
0.0
0.0
-36.9

3,993.8
2,670.7
771.6
900.6
921.5
214.0
707.4
77.1
1,323.1
1,360.7
1,082.7
871.5
211.2
162.4
115.6
0.0
-37.6

4,336.0
2,867.0
891.3
1,081.8
796.0
218.7
577.3
98.0
1,469.0
1,505.9
1,181.7
966.3
215.4
177.3
147.0
0.0
-36.9

4,585.4
2,999.2
1,007.7
1,228.2
661.9
223.8
438.0
101.5
1,586.2
1,623.4
1,279.2
1,059.4
219.7
191.9
152.3
0.0
-37.2

4,915.2
3,185.7
1,150.3
1,407.4
517.1
228.8
288.4
110.8
1,729.6
1,769.6
1,394.2
1,170.1
224.1
209.1
166.3
0.0
-40.1

-342.0
-668.9

-472.3
-718.5

-685.5
-1,232.6

-622.5
-868.7

-1,042.4
-1,288.6

-737.0
-983.2

-649.1
-856.2

-356.9
-760.8

-276.4
-736.8

-261.1
-734.7

-267.5
-768.7

17.8

-123.6

-62.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance (cash basis)
Including grants
Excluding grants

-324.2
-651.1

-595.9
-842.1

-748.0
-1295.2

-622.5
-868.7

-1,042.4
-1288.6

-737.0
-983.2

-649.1
-856.2

-356.9
-760.8

-276.4
-736.8

-261.1
-734.7

-267.5
-768.7

Financing
External (net)
Borrowing
Project
Program
Other loans 2/
Amortization
HIPC Initiative debt relief
Change in arrears (+ increase)

324.2
140.9
725.8
368.4
0.0
357.4
-591.9
7.0
...

596.0
59.7
340.7
340.7
0.0
0.0
-293.6
12.6
...

748.0
690.3
1,121.3
1,121.3
0.0
0.0
-431.0
0.0
...

622.5
351.7
868.2
868.2
0.0
0.0
-516.5
0.0
0.0

575.7
351.7
868.2
868.2
0.0
0.0
-516.5
0.0
46.8

690.2
351.7
868.2
868.2
0.0
0.0
-516.5
0.0
46.8

649.1
486.9
963.2
963.2
0.0
0.0
-476.3
0.0
0.0

356.9
482.2
871.5
871.5
0.0
0.0
-559.6
170.3
0.0

276.4
541.1
966.3
966.3
0.0
0.0
-599.7
174.6
0.0

261.1
580.1
1,059.4
1,059.4
0.0
0.0
-652.3
173.0
0.0

267.5
663.9
1,170.1
1,170.1
0.0
0.0
-656.7
150.6
0.0

183.3
22.9
197.0
-36.7
0.0
0.0
...

536.3
401.2
95.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
40.0

57.7
-578.0
635.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

270.8
65.8
205.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

224.0
65.8
158.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

338.5
65.8
272.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

162.2
72.9
621.6
0.0
0.0
-532.3
0.0

-125.3
79.4
274.4
0.0
0.0
-479.1
0.0

-264.7
85.7
201.6
0.0
0.0
-552.0
0.0

-319.0
92.3
165.3
0.0
0.0
-576.6
0.0

-396.5
99.4
-88.5
0.0
0.0
-407.4
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

466.7

46.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

196.8

361.8

1,152.3

1,152.1

939.8

1,245.2

1,387.3

1,243.4

1,240.9

1,206.3

1,142.7

2,694.2

2,513.5

3,697.4

3,697.4

3,662.0

3,776.5

3,980.7

3,855.4

3,590.7

3,271.7

2,875.2

Revenue and grants
Domestic revenue
Tax revenue
Direct tax
Of which : personal
corporate
Indirect tax
Domestic tax on goods and services
Tax on international trade
Nontax revenue
Grants
Program
Projects
HIPC
Expenditure and net lending 1/
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Other charges
Interest
External
Domestic
HIPC Initiative funded expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending 1/
Capital expenditure
External
Loans
Grants
Gambia Local Fund
HIPC Initiative funded expenditure
Extrabudgetary expenditure 1/
Net lending
Overall balance (commitment basis), Including grant
Excluding grants
Adjustment to cash basis (float)

Domestic
Bank 1/
Nonbank
Accumulation / repayment (minus) of arrears
Privatization proceeds
Repayment of domestic debt
CBG (unrealized profits)
Financing gap
Basic primary balance 3/
Memorandum items:
Stock of domestic debt

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data for 2001 include US$28.5 million capital expenditure financed from a retroactive loan from the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG), which the authorities indicated
in October 2003 had not been recorded in official accounts.
2/ Includes loan disbursements (D 287.8 million in January and D 94.7 million in April) from Taiwan Province of China for electricity generators and improvement of
distribution network. The generators were delivered to the National Water and Electricity Corporation in October 2001. The inflows were used to pay the suppliers.
3/ Domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending, excluding interest payments and externally financed capital expenditure.

- 28 Table 4. The Gambia: Central Government Operations, 2002-10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2002

2003

2004

2005
Budget

2005
Passive

2005
Active

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

Revenue and grants
Domestic revenue
Tax revenue
Direct tax
Of which: personal
corporate
Indirect tax
Domestic tax on goods and services
Tax on international trade
Nontax revenue
Grants
Program
Projects
HIPC Initiative

20.8
16.3
14.1
4.3
1.7
2.4
9.8
1.7
8.1
2.2
4.4
1.3
1.5
1.7

18.2
15.7
13.8
4.4
1.5
2.7
9.4
2.1
7.3
1.9
2.5
0.0
1.3
1.1

25.5
20.9
18.6
5.0
1.7
3.0
13.6
2.4
11.2
2.3
4.5
0.0
3.3
1.3

23.2
21.3
18.2
5.1
1.7
3.0
13.1
2.5
10.6
3.1
1.9
0.0
1.5
0.3

22.7
20.8
17.8
5.1
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
3.0
1.9
0.0
1.5
0.3

22.7
20.8
17.8
5.1
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
3.0
1.9
0.0
1.5
0.3

21.8
20.4
17.8
5.1
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
2.6
1.4
0.0
1.4
0.0

22.9
20.4
17.8
5.1
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
2.6
2.5
0.0
1.3
1.2

23.7
21.0
17.8
5.1
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
3.2
2.7
0.0
1.3
1.4

23.4
20.9
17.8
5.0
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
3.1
2.6
0.0
1.2
1.4

23.4
20.9
17.8
5.0
1.7
3.0
12.8
2.8
10.0
3.1
2.5
0.0
1.1
1.4

Expenditure and net lending 1/
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Other charges
Interest
External
Domestic
HIPC Initiative funded expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending 1/
Capital expenditure
External
Loans
Grants
Gambia Local Fund
HIPC Initiative funded expenditure
Extrabudgetary expenditure 1/
Net lending

25.4
17.9
5.4
7.0
5.0
1.1
3.9
0.5
7.5
7.9
6.7
5.0
1.7
0.8
0.4
0.0
-0.4

22.9
17.0
4.5
5.9
6.1
1.6
4.4
0.5
5.8
6.1
4.7
3.4
1.3
0.6
0.8
0.0
-0.2

31.2
16.9
4.3
4.9
7.2
1.9
5.3
0.6
14.2
14.4
12.6
9.3
3.3
0.7
1.1
0.0
-0.2

27.9
17.9
4.1
6.5
7.2
1.7
5.5
0.1
10.0
10.2
8.1
6.6
1.5
1.9
0.2
0.0
-0.2

30.6
19.9
4.2
6.8
8.7
1.7
7.0
0.2
10.7
9.8
8.1
6.6
1.5
1.5
0.2
0.8
0.1

28.3
18.1
4.2
5.0
8.7
1.7
7.0
0.2
10.2
9.4
8.1
6.6
1.5
1.1
0.2
0.8
0.0

26.3
17.3
4.5
5.4
7.4
1.4
5.9
0.0
9.0
9.2
8.0
6.6
1.4
1.2
0.0
0.0
-0.3

25.1
16.8
4.9
5.7
5.8
1.3
4.5
0.5
8.3
8.6
6.8
5.5
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0
-0.2

25.3
16.7
5.2
6.3
4.6
1.3
3.4
0.6
8.6
8.8
6.9
5.6
1.3
1.0
0.9
0.0
-0.2

24.8
16.2
5.5
6.7
3.6
1.2
2.4
0.5
8.6
8.8
6.9
5.7
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.0
-0.2

24.7
16.0
5.8
7.1
2.6
1.2
1.5
0.6
8.7
8.9
7.0
5.9
1.1
1.1
0.8
0.0
-0.2

Overall balance (commitment basis), Including grant
Excluding grants

-4.6
-9.1

-4.7
-7.2

-5.7
-10.2

-4.7
-6.6

-7.9
-9.7

-5.6
-7.4

-4.5
-5.9

-2.2
-4.8

-1.6
-4.3

-1.4
-4.0

-1.3
-3.9

0.2

-1.2

-0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance (cash basis), including grants
Excluding grants

-4.4
-8.8

-5.9
-8.4

-6.2
-10.8

-4.7
-6.6

-7.9
-9.7

-5.6
-7.4

-4.5
-5.9

-2.2
-4.8

-1.6
-4.3

-1.4
-4.0

-1.3
-3.9

Financing
External (net)
Borrowing
Project
Program
Other loans 2/
Amortization
HIPC Initiative debt relief
Change in arrears (+ increase)

4.4
1.9
9.9
5.0
0.0
4.9
-8.0
0.1
...

5.9
0.6
3.4
3.4
0.0
0.0
-2.9
0.1
...

6.2
5.7
9.3
9.3
0.0
0.0
-3.6
0.0
...

4.7
2.7
6.6
6.6
0.0
0.0
-3.9
0.0
0.0

4.7
2.7
6.6
6.6
0.0
0.0
-3.9
0.0
0.4

5.6
2.7
6.6
6.6
0.0
0.0
-3.9
0.0
0.4

4.5
3.3
6.6
6.6
0.0
0.0
-3.3
0.0
0.0

2.2
3.0
5.5
5.5
0.0
0.0
-3.5
1.1
0.0

1.6
3.2
5.6
5.6
0.0
0.0
-3.5
1.0
0.0

1.4
3.1
5.7
5.7
0.0
0.0
-3.5
0.9
0.0

1.3
3.3
5.9
5.9
0.0
0.0
-3.3
0.8
0.0

2.5
0.3
2.7
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

5.3
4.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4

0.5
-4.8
5.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
0.5
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.0
0.5
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.9
0.5
2.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.1
0.5
4.3
0.0
0.0
-3.7
0.0

-0.8
0.5
1.7
0.0
0.0
-3.0
0.0

-1.5
0.5
1.2
0.0
0.0
-3.2
0.0

-1.7
0.5
0.9
0.0
0.0
-3.1
0.0

-2.0
0.5
-0.4
0.0
0.0
-2.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.7

3.6

9.6

8.7

7.1

9.4

9.5

7.8

7.2

6.5

5.7

36.6

25.1

30.7

27.9

28.0

28.9

27.6

24.6

21.2

18.0

14.7

Adjustment to cash basis (float)

Domestic
Bank 1/
Nonbank
Accumulation / repayment (minus) of arrears
Privatization proceeds
Repayment of domestic debt
CBG (unrealized profits)
Financing gap
Basic primary balance 3/
Memorandum item:
Stock of domestic debt

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data for 2001 include US$28.5 million capital expenditure financed by a retroactive loan by the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG), which the authorities
indicated in October 2003 had not been recorded in official accounts.
2/ Includes loan disbursements (D 287.8 million in January and D 94.7 million in April) from Taiwan Province of China for electricity generators and improvement
of distribution network. The generators were delivered to the National Water and Electricity Corporation in October 2001. The inflows were used to pay the suppliers.
3/ Domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending, excluding interest payments and externally financed capital expenditure.

- 29 Table 5. The Gambia: Monetary Survey, December 2002-December 2006
2002
Dec.

2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

2005
Mar.

2005
Jun.
Proj.

2005
Sep.
Proj.

2005
Dec.
Proj.

2006
Dec.
Proj.

(In millions of dalasis, unless otherwise indicated; end of period)
Monetary survey
Net foreign assets 1/
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 2/
Advances to the gov. in foreign currencies 3/
Claims on the private sector and public enterprises 4/
Claims on foreign exchange bureaus 5/
Other items (net)
Broad money
Currency outside banks
Deposits

958
2,244
2,699
612
483
1,335
269
-454
3,203
797
2,405

1,861
2,732
3,709
1,012
483
1,977
238
-977
4,593
1,183
3,410

3,202
2,230
2,870
434
575
1,677
183
-640
5,432
1,416
4,016

3,442
2,506
3,088
540
575
1,790
183
-582
5,948
1,535
4,412

3,570
2,099
2,995
495
575
1,742
183
-897
5,668
1,446
4,222

3,378
2,454
3,363
450
575
2,155
183
-909
5,831
1,801
4,030

3,641
2,330
3,253
450
575
2,045
183
-923
5,971
1,557
4,414

4,236
2,341
3,279
525
460
2,148
147
-938
6,577
1,715
4,862

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (calendar year)
(percentage change)
Velocity (calendar-year GDP/end-of-period broad money)

7,364
12.3
2.3

10,026
36.1
2.2

12,037
20.1
2.2

12,501
3.9
2.1

12,560
4.3
2.2

12,922
7.4
2.2

13,231
9.9
2.2

14,574
10.2
2.2

9.9
14.1
9.9

10.2
10.2
10.2

(Change, in percent of beginning-of-year stocks)
Broad money
Reserve money
Total deposits

35.3
34.1
36.2

43.4
62.7
41.8

18.3
11.0
17.8

9.5
9.4
9.9

4.3
7.0
5.1

7.4
22.6
0.4

(In percent of beginning-of-year broad money, unless otherwise indicated)
Contribution to growth of broad money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 2/
Advances to the government in foreign currencies 3/
Claims on the private sector and public enterprises 4/
Claims on foreign exchange bureaus 5/
Other items (net)

13.0
22.3
28.6
1.0
0.0
23.7
4.0
-6.4

28.2
15.2
31.5
12.5
0.0
20.0
-1.0
-16.3

29.2
-10.9
-18.3
-12.6
2.0
-6.5
-1.2
7.3

4.4
5.1
4.0
2.0
0.0
2.1
0.0
1.1

6.8
-2.4
2.3
1.1
0.0
1.2
0.0
-4.7

3.2
4.1
9.1
0.3
0.0
8.8
0.0
-4.9

8.1
1.8
7.1
0.3
0.0
6.8
0.0
-5.2

10.0
0.2
0.4
1.3
-1.9
1.7
-0.6
-0.2

Credit to the private sector and public enterprises (excl. foreign exchange bureaus)
Twelve-month change in percent
72.3
In percent of GDP
18.1

48.0
19.7

-15.1
13.9

3.4
14.3

14.5
13.9

36.9
16.7

21.9
15.5

5.0
14.7

Percent ratios
Currency/broad money
Currency/deposits
Deposits/broad money

25.8
34.7
74.2

26.1
35.3
73.9

25.8
34.8
74.2

25.5
34.2
74.5

30.9
44.7
69.1

26.1
35.3
73.9

26.1
35.3
73.9

24.9
33.2
75.1

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Valued at current exchange rates.
2/ Excluding advances to the government in foreign currencies.
3/ These advances reflect previously unrecorded public spending and borrowing in 2001, financed by the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG),
and the previously unrecorded depletion of foreign exchange reserves in 2001-03 as reported by the authorities on October 28, 2003.
4/ In March 2003, the government instructed the CBG to lend the equivalent of D 137 million in U.S. dollars to a newly created public enterprise
for a seismic survey of offshore oil deposits.
5/ Claims on foreign exchange bureaus reflect the delayed delivery of foreign currency purchased on a spot basis.

- 30 Table 6. The Gambia: Summary Accounts of the Central Bank and Commercial Banks, December 2002-December 2006
(In millions of dalasis, unless otherwise indicated; end of period)
2002
Dec

2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

2005
Mar.

2005
Jun.
Proj.

2005
Sep.
Proj.

2005
Dec.
Proj.

2006
Dec.
Proj.

816.2
1,563.7
-747.4

847.5
1,928.6
-1,081.1

1,775.6
2,510.3
-734.7

1,871.2
2,559.9
-688.7

1,924.5
2,623.3
-698.8

2,021.0
2,714.3
-693.3

2,072.9
2,752.5
-679.6

2,508.7
3,063.3
-554.6

324.3
381.1
-297.6
482.5
23.7
-96.3
0.0
268.8

1,008.4
1,229.8
358.0
482.5
24.8
-10.3
136.9
237.9

285.2
195.9
-761.6
574.8
28.8
33.6
136.9
183.3

382.2
214.1
-742.1
574.8
29.5
31.8
136.9
183.3

281.3
451.0
-767.1
574.8
29.7
293.4
136.9
183.3

505.5
702.1
-792.1
574.8
29.7
569.5
136.9
183.3

278.5
503.7
-792.1
574.8
29.7
371.1
136.9
183.3

81.4
354.8
-717.2
459.8
29.7
299.0
136.9
146.6

Central Bank of The Gambia
Net foreign assets 1/
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net) 2/
Advances to the gov. in foreign currencies 3/
Claims on private sector
Claims on banks (net)
Claims on public enterprises 4/
Claims on foreign exchange bureaus 5/
Other items (net)

-56.8

-221.4

89.3

168.1

-169.7

-196.6

-225.2

-273.5

1,140.5
797.4
343.2
52.0
291.2

1,855.9
1,182.9
673.0
68.0
605.0

2,060.7
1,416.3
644.5
69.3
575.2

2,253.5
1,535.2
718.3
98.1
620.2

2,205.8
1,445.7
760.0
84.4
675.6

2,526.5
1,801.1
725.5
80.6
644.9

2,351.4
1,556.8
794.6
88.3
706.3

2,590.1
1,714.9
875.2
97.2
778.0

336.7
6.4

613.8
59.2

722.8
-78.4

794.2
-76.0

760.0
0.0

725.5
0.0

794.6
0.0

875.2
0.0

Net foreign assets 1/
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on government (net)
Claims on private sector and public enterprises
Of which: in foreign currency
claims on public enterprises
Reserves
Cash
Deposits at the central bank
Net claims on central bank
Other items (net)

142.0
568.1
-426.1
2,263.2
2,221.2
909.7
1,311.5
94.6
86.7
343.2
52.0
291.2
96.3
-397.5

1,013.9
1,055.6
-41.7
2,396.3
2,468.9
654.0
1,814.9
...
205.9
673.0
68.0
605.0
10.3
-755.9

1,426.7
1,507.2
-80.5
2,589.0
2,707.3
1,195.6
1,511.7
...
86.5
644.5
69.3
575.2
-33.6
-729.2

1,570.7
1,729.1
-158.4
2,841.6
2,905.6
1,282.3
1,623.3
...
89.7
718.3
98.1
620.2
-31.8
-750.5

1,645.1
1,689.8
-44.7
2,577.4
2,837.9
1,262.3
1,575.6
...
64.8
760.0
84.4
675.6
-293.4
-727.2

1,356.6
1,424.1
-67.5
2,673.7
3,229.9
1,241.9
1,988.0
...
78.0
725.5
80.6
644.9
-569.5
-712.1

1,568.3
1,656.8
-88.5
2,845.9
3,120.4
1,241.9
1,878.5
...
95.0
794.6
88.3
706.3
-371.1
-698.0

1,727.5
1,825.0
-97.5
3,134.8
3,223.2
1,241.9
1,981.3
...
104.7
875.2
97.2
778.0
-299.0
-664.7

Total deposit liabilities
Of which : foreign currency deposits
Demand deposits
Savings deposits
Time deposits

2,405.2
273.4
959.4
1,084.2
361.6

3,410.2
895.2
1,690.1
1,374.6
345.4

4,015.7
...
1,691.4
1,786.0
538.3

4,412.3
...
1,874.3
1,878.4
659.6

4,222.5
...
1,952.8
1,796.8
472.8

4,030.3
...
1,706.5
1,813.8
510.1

4,414.2
...
1,859.2
1,963.3
591.7

4,862.3
…
2,047.9
2,162.6
651.8

22.2

46.0

46.0

46.0

46.0

46.0

46.0

46.0

562.7
25.3

847.4
18.4
17.0
1,928.4
41.9
-1,081.0
-23.5
1,008.5
1,229.8
-221.3

1,794.1
39.0
36.4
2,527.5
54.9
-733.4
-15.9
266.6
195.9
70.7

1,982.3
43.1
40.5
2,699.9
58.7
-717.6
-15.6
271.1
214.1
57.0

1,976.2
43.0
40.4
2,693.8
58.6
-717.6
-15.6
229.6
451.0
-221.4

2,045.8
44.5
41.9
2,747.6
59.7
-701.8
-15.3
480.8
702.1
-221.4

2,069.1
45.0
42.4
2,747.4
59.7
-678.3
-14.7
282.3
503.7
-221.4

2,456.6
53.4
50.8
2,999.7
65.2
-543.1
-11.8
133.5
354.8
-221.4

Reserve money
Currency outside banks
Bank reserves
Cash
Deposits at the central bank
Required reserves
Excess reserves
Commercial banks

Memorandum items: 6/
TMU exchange rate (dalasis per SDR)
Central Bank of The Gambia
Net foreign assets
Net foreign assets (in millions of SDRs)
Net usable reserves (in millions of SDRs) 7/
Foreign assets
(In millions of SDRs)
Foreign liabilities
(In millions of SDRs)
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Other items (net)

1,084.8
48.8
-522.2
-23.5
577.9
381.1
196.8

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Valued at current exchange rates.
2/ Excluding advances to the government in foreign currencies.
3/ These advances reflect previously unrecorded public spending and borrowing in 2001, financed by the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG),
and previously unrecorded depletion of foreign exchange reserves in 2001-03 as reported by the authorities on October 28, 2003.
4/ In March 2003, the government instructed the CBG to lend the equivalent of D 137 million in U.S. dollars to a newly created public enterprise
for a seismic survey of offshore oil deposits.
5/ Claims on foreign exchange bureaus reflect the delayed delivery of foreign currency purchased on a spot basis.
6/ Using exchange rates as specified in 2004 technical memorandum of understanding (TMU).
7/ Basis for net international reserves targets. Net usable reserves do not include capital shares at West African Monetary Union, African
Development Bank, etc.

- 31 Table 7. The Gambia: Balance of Payments, 2002–10
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2002

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Groundnuts/groundnut products
Other domestic exports
Reexports
Imports, c.i.f.
For domestic use
Of which: oil products
For reexport
Factor services (net)
Net interest income
Net remittances
Nonfactor services
Of which: travel income

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Prel.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2010
Proj.

-62.4
109.3
24.0
7.1
78.2
-171.6
-114.0
-16.7
-57.7

-60.0
101.0
9.1
8.4
83.5
-161.0
-100.2
-16.0
-60.7

-108.4
127.0
16.9
9.0
101.2
-235.4
-165.7
-33.8
-69.7

-116.4
124.5
11.2
9.4
103.8
-240.9
-165.5
-39.8
-75.4

-111.5
133.6
15.7
10.1
107.8
-245.1
-166.1
-41.0
-78.9

-110.4
138.6
16.9
10.7
111.1
-249.0
-167.1
-40.9
-81.9

-113.4
145.1
18.0
11.4
115.6
-258.6
-173.3
-41.6
-85.3

-117.6
151.4
18.5
12.3
120.6
-268.9
-180.0
-42.8
-88.9

-121.4
158.0
18.9
13.3
125.7
-279.4
-186.7
-44.2
-92.7

-22.4
-33.6
11.2

-19.1
-31.3
12.2

-19.9
-38.9
19.0

-17.7
-45.2
27.5

-21.3
-53.0
31.6

-36.3
-70.1
33.8

-41.3
-77.4
36.2

-46.4
-85.0
38.6

-47.7
-88.9
41.2

31.6
47.7

27.4
51.1

37.7
57.5

47.0
69.2

60.5
85.1

69.8
96.7

78.7
107.6

86.5
117.2

90.2
122.9

Private unrequited transfers (net)

3.6

3.7

3.9

4.1

4.3

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

Official unrequited transfers (net)

39.2

30.0

39.6

29.6

28.1

34.3

35.8

35.9

36.5

-49.6
-10.4

-48.0
-18.0

-86.7
-47.1

-83.1
-53.5

-68.1
-39.9

-72.4
-38.1

-71.5
-35.7

-72.9
-37.0

-74.4
-37.9

9.9
18.9
47.4
1.3
-29.7

6.7
16.1
26.5
0.0
-10.3

68.0
24.9
39.2
0.0
-14.4

59.9
13.2
30.4
0.0
-17.2

52.4
17.5
33.1
0.0
-15.6

43.6
11.4
29.3
0.0
-17.9

41.5
13.0
31.9
0.0
-18.9

42.0
14.1
34.2
0.0
-20.1

44.0
17.2
37.1
0.0
-19.8

-9.0
12.9
-22.0
-12.3

-9.4
12.7
-22.1
4.3

43.2
49.7
-6.5
6.3

46.7
49.7
-3.1
6.4

34.9
36.5
-1.6
6.6

32.2
33.5
-1.3
6.7

28.4
30.4
-2.0
6.9

27.8
30.4
-2.6
7.2

26.8
30.4
-3.6
7.5

Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Capital account
Official loans (net)
Project-related
Program loans
Amortization
Private capital inflow
Foreign direct investment (net)
Other investment (net)
Of which : supplier's credits

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Errors and omissions

-0.1

6.3

12.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

-0.1

-4.9

33.5

6.3

12.5

5.5

5.8

5.0

6.1

0.1

4.9

-33.5

-6.3

-12.5

-5.5

-5.8

-5.0

-6.1

-4.2

4.9

-22.3

-6.3

-8.3

-6.8

-6.2

-6.3

-6.6

0.0
3.7

0.0
0.0

-11.2
0.0

-1.6
0.0

-4.2
0.0

-4.2
0.0

-5.1
0.0

-4.0
0.0

-4.0
0.0

0.6
0.6
..

0.0
0.0
..

0.0
0.0
..

1.6
0.0
1.6

0.0
0.0
0.0

5.5
5.5
0.0

5.5
5.5
0.0

5.3
5.3
0.0

4.5
4.5
0.0

-13.4
-2.8

-13.6
-5.1

-21.6
-11.8

-18.8
-12.1

-14.3
-8.4

-14.2
-7.5

-13.3
-6.6

-12.8
-6.5

-12.4
-6.3

Gross official reserves (end of period)
In millions of U.S. dollars
In months of imports, c.i.f.

67.2
4.5

62.3
4.4

84.6
4.1

90.9
4.5

99.2
4.9

106.0
5.1

112.3
5.2

118.5
5.3

125.2
5.4

External debt-service ratio 2/
Including the Fund
Excluding the Fund

16.9
16.8

8.5
8.4

15.9
9.7

13.5
12.5

12.7
10.6

7.7
5.8

7.3
5.2

6.9
5.4

6.6
5.1

Unaccounted-for loss in official reserves

Financing
Change in gross official reserves (increase = -)
Use of IMF resources
Repayments
Disbursements
Exceptional financing 1/
Debt relief
Change in arrears (+ increase)
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes debt relief from Paris Club; interim relief from multilaterals is treated as grants.
2/ As a percentage of exports and travel income. After interim debt relief and HIPC Initiative grants. Excludes any accumulation of external arrears.

- 32 Table 8. The Gambia: Financial and External Vulnerability Indicators, 2000-04
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Financial indicators
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)
Three-month treasury bill rate (end of period)
Three-month treasury bill rate (real)
External indicators
Exports of goods and services (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Imports of goods and services (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)
Current account balance (including official transfers)
Capital account balance
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars, end of period)
External debt (nominal)
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, end of period)
Real effective exchange rate (period average)
Sources: Central Bank of The Gambia; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

34.8
10.0
12.0
11.8

19.4
3.6
15.0
6.9

35.3
78.6
20.0
7.0

43.4
30.9
31.0
13.4

18.3
-11.0
30.0
22.0

-4.8
0.0
-3.1
1.4
111.4
107.9
14.9
-4.9

-13.8
-17.0
-2.6
5.5
63.0
109.7
16.9
-12.2

4.6
8.4
-2.8
2.7
67.2
130.1
23.4
-17.6

-2.1
-0.8
-5.1
1.9
62.3
144.9
31.0
-28.5

21.1
36.7
-11.8
17.0
84.6
144.9
29.7
-0.5

-3.2
1.2
-4.0
21.0
16.1
-25.9

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

22.9
24.4
-0.4
20.8
4.4
20.4
24.9
2.7
-2.0
4.7
22.2
-0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
0.0
-1.6

163.8
127.2

6.9
1.7
-8.6
5.9
27.4
-11.8

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

4.8
-9.1
-1.3
18.2
2.5
16.8
-6.5
-13.6
-3.0
-10.5
7.1
-1.3
0.0
0.0
-1.3
0.0
13.9

168.6
143.4

2003

5.1
1.6
9.5
-14.5
14.3
49.7

120.4
97.5
97.5
...
9.3
472.8
383.0
42.4
-0.7

-0.8
-28.9
-1.5
25.5
4.5
23.9
-26.1
-6.5
1.6
-8.1
-19.7
-1.3
0.0
0.0
-1.3
0.0
28.1

167.8
144.9

2004

3.9
1.5
6.7
4.9
9.6
8.4

1.3

Historical
Average 5/

3.2
0.2
8.4
11.7
8.4
29.7

4.5

Standard
Deviation 5/

1/ Pertains to the central government accounts. Gross debt concept is used.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues including grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium- and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on foreign exchange debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in perce

Other Sustainability Indicators
Net present value of public sector debt
Of which: foreign-currency-denominated
external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/
Of which: external
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/ 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which: contribution from average real interest rate
contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC Initiative and other)
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

Public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency-denominated

2002

Actual

4.7
1.3
27.4
-0.7
5.0
-14.7

118.0
89.1
89.1
...
9.5
520.1
392.7
55.7
1.7

-4.9
-7.2
-3.2
22.7
1.9
19.5
-3.7
-2.8
4.7
-7.5
-0.9
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3
0.0
2.3

162.9
134.0

2005

Estimate

Table 9. The Gambia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2002-10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

4.7
1.2
16.6
-1.0
5.2
1.4

111.7
84.0
84.0
...
7.7
512.2
385.5
48.8
5.6

-8.5
-8.1
-2.9
21.8
1.4
18.9
-5.2
-3.9
3.5
-7.4
-1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

154.4
126.8

2006

2008

-8.6
-9.2
-3.0
23.7
2.7
20.6
-3.8
-4.6
1.7
-6.3
0.9
-2.4
0.0
0.0
-2.4
0.0
0.7

4.5
1.2
12.8
-0.2
4.3
7.0

4.6
1.1
11.2
0.8
3.2
11.6

89.9 85.4
65.4 64.2
65.4 64.2
...
...
5.8
5.1
392.8 360.6
285.5 271.0
40.7 34.4
6.3
5.5

-9.8
-10.4
-3.6
22.9
2.5
19.3
-4.6
-4.3
2.4
-6.7
-0.2
-2.3
0.0
0.0
-2.3
0.0
0.6

144.6 136.0
120.0 114.8

2007

4.6
1.1
8.8
1.0
3.0
7.6

81.3
63.3
63.3
...
4.9
347.0
270.3
30.4
5.4

-7.6
-8.4
-2.2
23.4
2.6
21.3
-4.0
-5.1
0.9
-5.9
1.1
-2.3
0.0
0.0
-2.3
0.0
0.9

128.4
110.5

2009

Projections

4.6
1.1
5.5
1.6
3.0
8.8

77.4
62.7
62.7
...
4.6
331.0
268.2
25.3
5.7

-7.0
-7.3
-1.3
23.4
2.5
22.1
-3.9
-5.6
0.0
-5.6
1.7
-2.2
0.0
0.0
-2.2
0.0
0.3

121.5
106.8

2010

- 33 -

- 34 Table 10. The Gambia: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2005-10
Estimate
2005

2006

Projections
2007 2008 2009

2010

Net present value of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline

118

112

90

85

81

77

118
120
118
120

117
114
113
111

100
95
92
93

100
91
88
93

99
88
85
95

98
84
82
98

118
118
118
118
118

117
120
120
149
121

99
106
107
119
99

96
102
102
114
94

93
97
97
109
90

90
93
93
105
86

520

512

393

361

347

331

520
527
520
530

534
525
516
508

434
413
399
427

419
385
371
418

421
374
361
429

417
357
350
445

520
520
520
520
520

535
549
552
682
555

431
465
464
518
432

402
429
428
479
398

394
415
414
465
384

383
399
397
448
368

56

49

41

34

30

25

56
56
56
56

49
51
49
50

47
44
41
48

44
38
35
48

41
35
32
50

36
28
27
53

56
56
56
56
56

51
49
50
50
49

45
53
52
44
55

40
52
49
38
40

36
38
38
34
34

31
30
30
29
28

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Non-adjustment scenario 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. Ten percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Net present value of debt-to-revenue ratio 3/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Non-adjustment scenario 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. Onetime 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. Ten percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Debt-service-to-revenue ratio 3/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2004
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Non-adjustment scenario 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B4. Onetime 30 percent real depreciation in 2006
B5. Ten percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006
Sources: Gambian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection
period).
2/ Extends the passive scenario over the medium term
3/ Definition of revenues includes grants; debt service is commitment based.

369.7

353.0

6.9
-10.7
1.2
-7.0
-3.3
...

...
...
...
...
12.2
12.2
11.7
-11.4

144.9
144.9
14.8
7.6
3.4
10.6
28.8
39.3
-9.6
2.4
-3.6
7.8
1.7
-9.4
15.5
7.2
0.0

2003

400.8

4.7
8.4
1.4
19.8
46.3
...

97.5
321.3
97.5
321.3
24.1
24.1
19.6
10.0

144.9
144.9
-0.1
-17.9
10.0
20.3
30.4
50.6
-10.9
0.5
-12.4
-15.5
1.8
-6.0
-11.2
17.9
0.0

2004

3.6

-3.9

3.6
6.3
0.2
11.9
19.9
...

1.4

-9.4

4.6
-4.5
1.2
1.9
7.5
...

3.2

Standard
Deviation 2/

2.5

Historical
Average 2/

441.5

4.9
5.0
1.1
3.5
1.8
54.6

89.1
312.3
89.1
312.3
19.5
19.5
22.2
21.6

134.0
134.0
-10.9
-5.6
10.7
18.3
28.5
46.8
-7.6
0.1
-11.3
-5.1
1.4
-6.5
…
-5.3
0.0

2005

Estimate

476.8

4.7
3.1
1.2
17.7
1.9
54.6

84.0
270.3
84.0
270.3
18.5
18.5
23.7
14.1

126.8
126.8
-7.2
-5.1
6.9
13.1
31.1
44.2
-6.8
0.6
-7.7
-4.4
1.5
-5.9
…
-2.1
0.0

2006

509.3

4.5
2.2
1.2
9.8
1.9
54.6

79.4
248.4
79.4
248.4
18.2
18.2
27.1
12.8

120.0
120.0
-6.8
-4.5
6.1
10.2
32.0
42.1
-7.6
3.5
-6.6
-4.0
1.4
-5.4
…
-2.3
-1.1

2007

539.1

4.6
1.2
1.2
8.8
4.2
54.6

75.6
230.2
75.6
230.2
17.7
17.7
29.5
10.5

114.8
114.8
-5.2
-4.2
5.3
8.6
32.8
41.5
-7.5
4.2
-5.6
-3.8
1.3
-5.2
…
-1.0
-1.0

2008

569.1

4.5
1.0
1.2
7.1
4.3
54.6

72.4
217.2
72.4
217.2
16.7
16.7
31.1
9.6

110.5
110.5
-4.3
-3.8
5.2
7.6
33.3
40.9
-7.1
4.7
-5.3
-3.7
1.3
-4.9
…
-0.5
-0.9

2009

600.8

4.6
1.0
1.1
8.4
4.1
54.6

69.6
203.3
69.6
203.3
15.2
15.2
31.8
8.8

106.8
106.8
-3.7
-3.5
5.1
6.1
34.2
40.4
-6.8
5.8
-5.1
-3.6
1.2
-4.8
…
-0.2
-0.8

2010

Projections

4.6
2.2
1.2
9.2
3.0
54.6

2005-10
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
3/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
4/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections, also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
5/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
6/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous/period debt stock.

Source: IMF staff simulations, no assumption of HIPC completion point incorporated.

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (millions of U.S. dollars)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 6/
Growth of exports of goods and services (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of goods and services (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

-3.2
-8.6
1.0
5.4
10.8
...

...
...
...
...
24.6
24.6
23.6
-18.9

Net present value of external debt 5/
In percent of exports
Net present value of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt-service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt-service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (millions of U.S. dollars)
Noninterest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions

130.1
130.1
20.5
14.7
1.6
9.3
29.5
38.8
-11.6
3.8
-2.5
15.5
1.2
4.0
10.3
5.8
-0.1

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net foreign direct investment (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 3/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 4/
Of which: exceptional financing

2002

Actual

Table 11. The Gambia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Passive Scenario, 2002-25 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

825.4

4.6
1.9
1.0
7.0
5.5
54.6

54.4
161.0
54.4
161.0
11.2
11.2
33.0
8.5

83.2
83.2
-4.3
-2.7
4.3
3.6
33.8
37.4
-4.1
4.8
-4.1
-2.9
0.8
-3.7
…
-1.6
-0.4

2015

1557.7

4.6
1.9
0.9
6.0
5.7
54.6

33.8
99.8
33.8
99.8
7.5
7.5
26.5
4.3

51.8
51.8
-2.5
-2.7
1.8
0.4
33.8
34.2
-2.1
3.4
-2.6
-1.9
0.5
-2.3
…
0.2
0.0

2025

4.6
1.9
1.0
6.5
5.4
54.6

-3.6

-3.6

3.3

2011-25
Average

- 35 -

- 36 -

Table 12. The Gambia: Passive Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2005-25
(In percent)
Estimate

Projections

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2015

2025

89

84

79

76

72

70

54

34

89

86

83

81

79

78

67

51

89
89
89
89
89
89

87
87
97
87
98
119

85
88
105
85
110
112

81
84
100
81
105
107

78
81
96
78
101
102

75
78
92
75
97
98

58
62
72
59
77
77

36
37
45
36
46
48

312

270

248

230

217

203

161

100

312

276

259

245

237

227

198

150

312
312
312

368
280
341

441
266
379

410
247
352

388
233
333

364
219
312

292
175
250

175
106
151

19

19

18

18

17

15

11

8

19

19

18

18

18

16

13

11

19
19
19

24
19
23

29
18
26

29
18
25

27
17
24

25
16
22

19
12
16

13
8
11

53
352

53
316

53
288

53
260

53
241

53
226

53
175

53
100

Net present value of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt-creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. Onetime 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 4/

Net present value of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B4. Net non-debt-creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B5. Combination of B2 and B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks

Debt-service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B4. Net non-debt-creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 3/
B5. Combination of B2 and B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 5/
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio using HIPC Initiative rules 6/
Source: IMF staff projections and simulations, no assumption of HIPC completion point incorporated.
1/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline, while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
2/ Export values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
3/ Includes official and private transfers and foreign direct investment.
4/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
5/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing), in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.
6/ Uses currency-specific discount and exchange rates and three-year averages of exports.

...
...
...
...
24.6
24.6
23.6
-18.9

Net present value of external debt 5/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt-service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt-service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (millions of U.S. dollars)
Noninterest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

369.7

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (millions of U.S. dollars)
353.0

6.9
-10.7
1.2
-7.0
-3.3
...

...
...
...
...
12.2
12.2
11.7
-11.4

144.9
144.9
14.8
7.6
3.4
10.6
28.8
39.3
-9.6
2.4
-3.6
7.8
1.7
-9.4
15.5
7.2
0.0

2003

400.8

5.1
8.4
1.4
19.8
46.3
...

97.5
321.3
97.5
321.3
24.1
24.1
19.6
10.0

144.9
144.9
-0.1
-17.9
10.0
20.3
30.4
50.6
-10.9
0.5
-12.4
-15.5
1.8
-6.0
-11.2
17.9
0.0

2004

3.6

-3.9

3.6
6.3
0.2
11.9
19.9
...

1.4

-9.4

4.6
-4.5
1.2
1.9
7.5
...

3.2

Deviation 2/

Standard

2.5

Historical
Average 2/

441.5

4.7
5.0
1.1
3.5
1.8
54.6

89.1
312.3
89.1
312.3
19.5
19.5
22.2
21.6

134.0
134.0
-10.9
-5.6
10.7
18.3
28.5
46.8
-7.6
0.1
-11.3
-5.1
1.4
-6.5
…
-5.3
0.0

2005

Estimate

476.8

4.7
3.1
1.2
17.7
1.9
54.6

84.0
270.3
84.0
270.3
18.5
18.5
23.7
14.1

126.8
126.8
-7.2
-5.1
6.9
13.1
31.1
44.2
-6.8
0.6
-7.7
-4.4
1.5
-5.9
…
-2.1
0.0

2006

509.3

4.5
2.2
0.9
9.8
1.9
54.6

65.4
204.5
65.4
204.5
12.6
12.6
19.5
13.1

120.0
120.0
-6.8
-4.5
6.4
10.2
32.0
42.1
-7.6
3.8
-6.6
-4.3
1.1
-5.4
…
-2.3
-1.1

2007

539.1

4.6
1.2
0.9
8.8
4.2
54.6

64.2
195.3
64.2
195.3
10.3
10.3
18.1
10.8

114.8
114.8
-5.2
-4.2
5.6
8.6
32.8
41.5
-7.5
4.5
-5.6
-4.2
1.0
-5.2
…
-1.0
-1.0

2008

569.1

4.6
1.0
0.9
7.1
4.3
54.6

63.3
189.9
63.3
189.9
9.7
9.7
19.6
9.9

110.5
110.5
-4.3
-3.8
5.6
7.6
33.3
40.9
-7.1
5.1
-5.3
-4.0
1.0
-4.9
…
-0.5
-0.9

2009

600.8

4.6
1.0
0.8
8.4
4.1
54.6

62.7
183.1
62.7
183.1
9.0
9.0
20.6
9.1

106.8
106.8
-3.7
-3.5
5.4
6.1
34.2
40.4
-6.8
6.1
-5.1
-3.9
0.9
-4.8
…
-0.2
-0.8

2010

Projections

4.6
2.2
1.0
9.2
3.0
54.6

Average

2005-10

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
3/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
4/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
5/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
6/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous/period debt stock.

Source: IMF staff simulations, assumed HIPC completion point in 2007, but did not reflect any of the recent G-8 proposals on debt cancellation.

-3.2
-8.6
1.0
5.4
10.8
...

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 6/
Growth of exports of goods and services (US dollar terms, in percent
Growth of imports of goods and services (US dollar terms, in percent
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

Key macroeconomic assumptions

130.1
130.1
20.5
14.7
1.6
9.3
29.5
38.8
-11.6
3.8
-2.5
15.5
1.2
4.0
10.3
5.8
-0.1

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which: public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Noninterest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net foreign direct investment (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 3/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 4/
Of which: exceptional financing

2002

Actual

Table 13. The Gambia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Active Scenario, 2002-25 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

825.4

4.6
1.9
1.0
7.0
5.5
54.6

54.3
160.6
54.3
160.6
9.6
9.6
28.7
8.6

83.2
83.2
-4.3
-2.7
4.3
3.6
33.8
37.4
-4.1
4.8
-4.1
-2.9
0.8
-3.7
…
-1.6
-0.4

2015

1557.7

4.6
1.9
0.9
6.0
5.7
54.6

33.7
99.8
33.7
99.8
7.5
7.5
26.3
4.3

51.8
51.8
-2.5
-2.7
1.8
0.4
33.8
34.2
-2.1
3.4
-2.6
-1.9
0.5
-2.3
…
0.2
0.0

2025

4.6
1.9
1.0
6.5
5.4
54.6

-3.6

-3.6

3.3

Average

2011-25

- 37 -

- 38 Table 14. The Gambia: Active Scenario Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2005-25
(In percent)
Estimate
2005

2006

2007

2008

89

84

65

64

89

86

69

89
89
89
89
89
89

87
87
97
87
98
119

312

Projections
2009

2010

2015

2025

63

63

54

34

69

70

71

67

51

70
74
87
71
92
92

69
73
85
70
91
90

68
72
84
69
90
89

67
71
83
68
89
88

58
62
72
59
77
77

36
37
45
36
46
48

270

205

195

190

183

161

100

312

276

215

210

209

207

197

150

312
312
312

368
280
341

371
222
318

354
212
303

344
206
295

332
199
284

292
174
250

175
106
151

19

19

13

10

10

9

10

8

19

19

13

11

11

10

12

11

19
19
19

24
19
23

20
13
18

17
11
15

16
10
14

15
9
13

17
10
14

13
8
11

53
352

53
316

53
242

53
224

53
214

53
206

53
176

53
100

Net present value of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B3. U.S. dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07
B4. Net non-debt-creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-0
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. Onetime 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2006 4/

Net present value of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B4. Net non-debt-creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-0
B5. Combination of B2 and B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks

Debt-service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2006-25 1/
B. Bound tests
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-07 2/
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2006-0
B5. Combination of B2 and B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 5/
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio using HIPC Initiative rules 6/

Source: IMF staff simulations, assumed HIPC completion point in 2007, but did not reflect any of the recent G-8 proposals on debt cancellation.
1/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline, while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
2/ Export values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
3/ Includes official and private transfers and foreign direct investment.
4/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
5/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing), in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.
6/ Uses currency-specific discount and exchange rates and three-year averages of exports.

- 39 Table 15. The Gambia: Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2003

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%
Population below $1 a day (%)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)
Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (incidence x depth of poverty)
Poverty headcount, national (% of population)
Prevalence of underweight in children (under 5 years of age)
Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)
Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population aged 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation (% of population)
Access to secure tenure (% of population)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (% of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (% of exports)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Unemployment, youth female (% of female labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth male (% of male labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth total (% of total labor force ages 15-24)
Other
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
Gross national investment per capita, atlas method (current US$)
Gross national investment, atlas method (current US$) (billions)
Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)
Trade (% of GDP)

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators database, April 2005.
Note: Figures in italics refer to periods other than those specified.

1990

1994

1997

2000

2003

..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..
..

4.8
..
31
..
57.6
26.2

..
..
..
..
..
17.2

..
..
27
..
..
..

48
45
..
..

..
46
..
..

66.7
57
..
..

72.9
70
..
..

78.8
..
..
..

8
64
67.6
24

..
..
70.8
..

2
79.5
73.2
..

2
85.4
75.6
..

13
89.6
77.3
..

86
103
154

89
96
137

92
..
..

85
92
128

90
90
123

44.1
..

..
..

..
..

54.6
540

..
..

..
190.5
..
..
..

..
202.7
..
..
75.9

..
212.4
..
..
72.5

18
222.6
1500
1.2
..

..
233.2
2000
1.2
70.1

..
..
..
0.2
43.6
..
..

..
..
..
0.2
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.2
..
..
..

..
..
..
0.2
48.1
..
..

82
53
..
..
..
..
2.3

106.8
22
6.7
..
..
..
..
..

64.5
13
18
0.1
0.3
..
..
..

32.7
11
25.3
0.5
2.6
..
..
..

37.4
19
29.9
9.2
11.5
..
..
..

42.1
14
100.8
..
13.8
..
..
..

5.9
310
0.3
22.3
49.3
..
0.9
131.5

..
340
0.4
18.1
..
..
1.1
102.7

5.2
340
0.4
17.2
53.2
..
1.2
95

..
320
0.4
17
..
..
1.3
104.8

4.8
270
0.4
19.2
53.4
..
1.4
85.9

- 40 -

APPENDIX I

The Gambia: Public and External Debt Sustainability
1.
Under the staff’s medium-term projections, where the overall fiscal deficit is reduced
to 1.3 percent of GDP by 2010, and The Gambia is assumed to reach the HIPC completion
point in 2007 (the active scenario), the country’s public sector debt ratio is projected to
decline, in both nominal and NPV terms (Table 9). The public sector debt ratio is projected
to decline from about 175.6 percent of GDP in 2004 to 121.2 percent in 2010, and the NPV
of public sector debt declines from 128.2 percent of GDP in 2004 to 77.2 percent in 2010.
2.
Although the public sector debt is falling in the medium term, it remains well
above the level deemed appropriate for low-income poor performers. The decline in the
NPV of public sector debt to GDP proves to be robust to alternative scenarios and bound
tests (Table 10). In particular, the NPV of public sector debt/GDP ratio declines between
2005 and 2010 when growth and the primary balance are at the historical averages minus one
standard deviation in 2006-07, under the assumption of a combination of historical averages
minus one-half a standard deviation in 2006-07 for growth and the primary balance, the
assumption of a 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2006, and to the
most extreme assumption of a one-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006. The level of
public sector debt, however, is still well above the desirable debt-burden threshold even
under the baseline scenario. This suggests debt sustainability will be a main challenge for
The Gambia over the medium term.
3.
External debt sustainability1 will require that The Gambia’s future external
financing needs be met largely through non-debt-creating flows. Under a passive
scenario, which assumes that The Gambia does not reach the HIPC completion point but
borrows only on highly concessional terms, the NPV of debt to GDP declines from 89
percent in 2005 to 70 percent in 2010, while the NPV of debt to exports declines from 312 in
2005 percent to 203 percent in 2010. By contrast, under the active scenario, which also
assumes borrowing only on highly concessional terms, but includes an assumption that The
Gambia reaches the HIPC Initiative completion point in 2007, the NPV of the ratio of
external debt to GDP is projected to decline from 89 percent in 2005 to 63 percent by 2010.
However, under a combined scenario of one-half standard deviation shocks to real GDP and
export growth and net non-debt-creating flows, the NPV of the ratio of external debt to GDP
will increase to 89 percent by 2010. Similarly, the NPV of the debt-to-exports ratio is
projected to decline from 312 percent in 2005 to 183 percent by 2010. Stress tests indicate
that combined negative shocks as described above could raise the NPV of the debt-to-exports
ratio to 284 percent in 2010. This projection is also not robust to the assumption that export
values grow at historical averages minus one standard deviation in 2006-07.

1

The external debt sustainability assessment has been undertaken by the Fund only, but has
incorporated comments from the World Bank.

- 41 -

APPENDIX I

4.
In short, the stress tests underscore that vulnerabilities, while declining, will
remain significant and that policies, and possibly external support, will have to respond
rapidly to unanticipated shocks. The substantially higher NPV of debt to exports ratios
compared with what were projected at the time of decision point is mainly due to (1) lower
exports of goods and nonfactor services, (2) lower discount rates and the depreciation of
U.S. dollar, and (3) higher disbursements (in U.S. dollar term) during 2000-2004. In
particular, the 2004 exports were 26 percent lower than what was envisaged at the decision
point due to lower tourism receipts and reexports, while discount and exchange rate changes
caused a 28 percent increase of NPV of end-1999 debt stock.2 This suggests that more grant
financing would be needed in the future to reach the more desirable NPV of debt-to-exports
ratio of 100 percent for The Gambia.

2

Decision point simulations were run using the end-2004 discount and exchange rates.

- 42 -

APPENDIX II

The Gambia: Relations with the Fund
(As of May 31, 2005)
Membership status. Joined September 21, 1967. The Gambia accepted the obligations under
Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4, of the Fund’s Articles of Agreements on January 21, 1993.
SDR Million
31.10
29.62
1.48

% Quota
100.0
95.23
4.77

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
5.12
0.14

% Allocation
100.0
2.72

Outstanding Purchases and Loans

SDR Million

% Quota

15.26

49.05

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Department

Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)
arrangements

Latest Financial Arrangements
Type
PRGF
PRGF
PRGF

Approval Date
Jul 18, 2002
Jun 29, 1998
Nov 23, 1988

Expiration Date
Jul 17, 2005
Dec. 31, 2001
Nov 25, 1991

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)

20.22
20.61
20.52

2.89
20.61
18.02

Projected Obligations to the Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present
holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Principal

0.69

2.75

2.75

3.33

2.64

Charges/interest

0.14

0.19

0.18

0.16

0.15

0.83

2.94

2.92

3.49

2.79

Total

- 43 -

APPENDIX II

Implementation of HIPC Initiative
Enhanced
Framework
Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date1
Assistance committed (end-2000 NPV terms)2

Dec 11, 2000

Total assistance (US$ million)
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
SDR equivalent, million
Completion point date

66.6
2.3
1.8
Floating

Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR million)
Assistance disbursed
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income 3

0.08
0.08
…
…

Safeguards assessments
The safeguards assessment of the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG) was completed on
February 3, 2004. A summary of the findings and recommendations of the safeguards
assessment is outlined in Box 3 of the 2003 Article IV consultation report (Country Report
No. 04/143).4
1

Decision was approved by the Fund on 12/15/2000 through Decision 12365-(00/126).
World Bank Board decision was taken on 12/14/00.
2
Assistance committed under the enhanced HIPC Initiative is expressed in net present value
(NPV) terms at the decision point.
3
Under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, additional disbursements corresponding to interest on
amounts committed but not disbursed during the interim period are made after the
completion point.
4
IMF, 2004, “The Gambia: 2003 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Report on
Noncomplying Disbursements and Recommendations for Corrective Action; Staff
Assessment; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board
Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for The Gambia,” IMF Country Report
No. 04/143 (Washington).

- 44 -

APPENDIX II

Exchange rate arrangement
Prior to January 20, 1986, the Gambian currency, the dalasi, was pegged to the pound
sterling at a rate of D 5 = £1. On January 20, 1986, an interbank market for foreign exchange
was introduced, and since then the exchange rate has been determined by market forces.
Effective June 30, 2002, the exchange arrangement of The Gambia was reclassified to
managed float with no preannounced path for the exchange rate from independently floating.
At end-April 2005, the midpoint exchange rate in the interbank market was D 28.70 per U.S.
dollar.
The Gambia has been part of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the West African Monetary
Zone (WAMZ) since April 2002.
Last Article IV consultation
The 2003 Article IV consultation (Country Report No. 04/143) was concluded by the
Executive Board on March 8, 2004.
Technical assistance
Recent technical assistance projects:
•

An FAD peripatetic regional advisor is assisting the authorities in putting the new
organic budget law into effect, strengthening the cash-management system, and
improving the reporting of budget execution.

•

An MFD advisory mission visited The Gambia in October 2004 and made
recommendations for improving monetary and foreign exchange operations and for
reorganizing the central bank. A follow-up mission took place in March 2005.

•

A Data ROSC mission took place in February 2005 to assess data quality in four main
areas of macroeconomic statistics (national accounts, government finance, monetary, and
balance of payments) based on the Fund’s Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF,
July 2003). The mission assessed The Gambia’s dissemination practices against the
recommendations of the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).

A long-term Fund resident macroeconomic advisor’s assignment was extended by another
year through April 2004.
An STA peripatetic statistical advisor assisted the Central Statistics Department in updating
the consumer price index (CPI) data and improving national accounts statistics from 2002 to
2004.
An FAD peripatetic advisor assisted the Department of State for Finance and Economic
Affairs with revenue administration reforms, including customs, implementation of a large

- 45 -

APPENDIX II

taxpayer unit, and establishment of a central revenue authority from November 2001 to
October 2003.
The long-term Fund (FAD) resident budget expert’s assignment was extended until October
2003.
An FAD mission visited The Gambia in January 2004 to work jointly with the World Bank
on the Assessment and Action Plan (AAP).
A FIN Safeguards Assessment mission visited The Gambia in November 2003 and in March
2003 to conduct the Stage 1 on-site assessment.
An STA monetary and banking statistics mission visited The Gambia in May 2003 and
successfully developed an integrated database to link automatically data sheets used for all
IMF data submissions.
An FAD technical assistance advisor visited The Gambia in December 2002 to assist the
authorities in drafting an organic budget bill.
An FAD technical assistance advisor visited The Gambia in October 2002 and April 2003 to
review the reform in public expenditure management.
A technical assistance diagnostic mission from MAE visited The Gambia in July 2002 with a
focus on financial supervision and the insurance sector. Further assistance was provided in
reviewing the Central Bank Act and in drafting the Financial Institutions and Insurance Act.
A long-term Fund resident macroeconomic advisor arrived in Banjul in April 2002, initially
for a one-year assignment.
The long-term Fund resident budget expert assisting the authorities in strengthening
budgetary expenditure reporting and control returned to The Gambia in March 2002, initially
for another one-year term.
A technical assistance diagnostic mission from MAE visited The Gambia in December 2001
with a focus on strengthening the central bank, including monetary policy formulation and
implementation and its foreign exchange operations, and the financial system.
A technical assistance mission from STA on monetary and financial statistics visited Banjul
in August 2001.
A technical assistance mission from FAD visited Banjul in July 2001 to assess the
authorities’ capacity to track poverty-related spending.
An MAE short-term expert visited Banjul in May 2001 to assist the authorities in designing
appropriate operational, prudential, and policy safeguards (including assessing the adequacy
of existing legislation) for the introduction of foreign-currency-denominated accounts.

- 46 -

APPENDIX II

An MAE short-term expert visited Banjul in April 2001 to assist the authorities in setting up
a book-entry system.
A technical assistance mission from STA on balance of payments statistics visited The
Gambia in September 2000.
An MAE short-term expert visited Banjul in May 2000 to assist the authorities in setting up a
short-term liquidity forecasting system.
A long-term Fund resident budget expert to assist the authorities in strengthening budgetary
expenditure reporting and control was in Banjul from August 2000 through August 2001.
An STA mission visited The Gambia in November 1999 to review the statistical collection in
order to develop GDDS metadata for The Gambia.
An FAD technical assistance mission—aimed at assisting the authorities in expenditure
management, budget execution issues, cash and debt management, short-term financial
planning, fiscal reporting, and information systems—visited The Gambia in early September
1999.
An MAE short-term expert visited Banjul in November 1999 to assist the authorities in
designing appropriate operational, prudential, and policy safeguards (including assessing the
adequacy of existing legislation) for the introduction of foreign-currency-denominated
accounts in the banking system.
A technical assistance mission from STA on the balance of payments statistics visited The
Gambia in June-July 1999.
A technical assistance mission from STA on the national accounts visited The Gambia in
November-December 1998.
An MAE technical assistance mission took place in August 1998 to assist the Central Bank
of The Gambia in developing market-based monetary policy instruments and to review its
program for strengthening banking supervision.
An MAE technical expert provided assistance to the central bank in foreign exchange
operations in December 1996.
A joint FAD/United Nations Development Program (UNDP) technical assistance mission
took place in January/February 1996 to help establish a system for monitoring the financial
operations of public enterprises.
An MAE technical assistance mission on monetary management and bank supervision visited
The Gambia in January/February 1994.

- 47 -

APPENDIX II

Resident representative
Provision of a resident representative in The Gambia is currently being discussed with the
authorities.

- 48 -

APPENDIX III

The Gambia: Relations with the World Bank Group
(As of June 3, 2005)
1.
The Bank and the Fund has continued to closely cooperate in providing support for
the implementation of the country’s development strategy. The development strategy is set
forth in country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), called the “Strategy for Poverty
Alleviation II,” which was finalized in April 2002 and approved by the Boards of the World
Bank and IMF in July 2002. It outlines a medium-term development strategy to reduce
poverty through the following five key objectives: (1) macroeconomic stability and effective
public resource management; (2) promotion of pro-poor growth and employment through
private sector development, particularly in the rural agricultural sector; (3) improved basic
social services and infrastructure; (4) capacity building of local communities and civil
society organizations (CSOs); and (5) strengthened multisectoral programs to reduce
population growth, gender inequality, HIV/AIDS, malnutrition, and environmental
degradation. The strategy covers the period from 2003 to 2005. The PRSP included a
multidimensional poverty analysis, an outline of a monitoring and evaluation framework,
preliminary key performance indicators and targets, cost estimates of implementation, and an
indicative financing gap. The authorities finalized its first annual progress report in
December 2004, covering the period mid-2002 to end-2003, and the Joint Staff Advisory
Note was submitted to the Boards in April 2005.
2.
As outlined in its Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), the Bank focuses its support
for the implementation of the PRSP in the following areas: (1) establishment of a
macroeconomic and sectoral environment conducive to economic growth; (2) rehabilitation
and development of infrastructure; (3) development of human capital through the provision
of more efficient social services; and (4) capacity building in departments that have a key
role in economic management. The Fund has traditionally led the policy dialogue on
macroeconomic policy, including fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies. Areas of close
collaboration include public expenditure management reform and government statistics. In
the near future, collaboration on trade issues should increase with the planned Integrated
Framework analysis by the Bank.
3.
Instruments used in supporting these objectives have been sector-based investment
projects. Currently, there are no adjustment credits, although there were two structural
adjustment credits in the past, Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL) I and SAL II. In February
2003, the Bank’s Board approved the CAS for The Gambia for fiscal-years (FY) 2003–05,
which is currently under implementation.
4.
As of April 7, 2005, IDA had approved 30 credits worth a total of about
US$271 million, of which about US$33 million remain undisbursed. The current portfolio
consists of six projects in health, HIV/AIDS, education, poverty alleviation (infrastructure),
capacity building for economic management, and private sector development (trade
gateway), totaling US$99 million.

- 49 -

APPENDIX III

5.
In health, the Participatory Health/Population/Nutrition operation was approved in
March 1998. It aims at improving the quality of services related to reproductive health, infant
and child health, and nutrition for infants, children, and women of reproductive age. It also
aims at improving the quality of management and implementation of a family health
program. An HIV/AIDS rapid response operation was approved in January 2001. The project
aims at (1) containing the HIV/AIDS pandemic, (2) reducing the spread of the pandemic and
mitigating its effects, and (3) increasing access to prevention services, as well as treatment,
care, and support for those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS.
6.
In education, the Third Education Sector Project was approved in September 1998 to
support the implementation of the second half of the government's Education Sector Policy
Framework, 1988–2005, and its accompanying investment program.
7.
A Poverty Alleviation and Municipal Development operation was approved in
March 1999, with the following objectives: (1) to reduce the backlog in public infrastructure
development and improve the maintenance of public assets; (2) to alleviate poverty through
the creation of temporary jobs and improvements in the selection of small- and medium-sized
investments, which should aim at upgrading the living environment of the poor; and (3) to
strengthen the technical and managerial capacity of local authorities (with an emphasis on
their financial situation), local private firms (namely, consultants and contractors), and
Gamworks (a procurement agency). In addition to the original credit amount of
SDR10.7 million (approximately US$15 million), the Bank has recently approved a
supplemental credit of SDR2.7 million (US$4.0 million equivalent) to upgrade the
infrastructure in water supply, roads and sanitation facilities.
8.
A Capacity Building for Economic Management Project was approved in July
2001 to help (1) build government capacity for economic planning, policy formulation, and
execution, and (2) build the capacity of the judicial and financial systems to facilitate private
sector development. Key reforms supported by the project include the establishment of the
Revenue Authority, the implementation of the Integrated Financial Management Information
System (IFMIS), capacity building of the Central Statistics Department (CSD), and the
establishment of an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) court system.
9.
The Trade Gateway Project was approved in February 2002 to help the country
establish itself as a globally competitive export and processing center by laying the
foundations for expanded private investment, export-oriented production, and employment
through the establishment of a free zone and an improved institutional environment.
10.
The next education project and a combined community-based rural development and
health project are currently being prepared, with expected Board approval in FY 2006.
11.
As of April 30, 2002, the IFC’s portfolio had two investments with a balance of about
US$0.6 million. The current portfolio includes investments for a medical clinic (Ndebaan)
and commercial fishing (Lyefish).

- 50 -

APPENDIX III

IDA, MIGA, and the IFC will continue to coordinate their respective roles to support
development activities in The Gambia. These activities are being enhanced by the IFC’s
office in Dakar, which also oversees the IFC’s activities in The Gambia.

Summary of Statement of IDA Credits in The Gambia
(As of April 7, 2005; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Projects

Commitment

Disbursed

Undisbursed

171.8

172.8

0.0

16.0
15.0
15.0
18.0
20.0
15.0

6.1
6.7
11.2
16.3
19.8
13.3

12.2
10.7
6.1
2.4
0.4
1.6

99.0

73.4

33.4

270.8

246.2

33.4

Twenty four credits closed
Ongoing projects
Gateway
CB for Economic Mgmt Project
HIV/AIDS Rapid Response
Participatory Health/Pop./Nutrition
Third Education
Poverty Alleviation and Municipal Dev.
Subtotal
Total
Source: The World Bank Integrated Controller’s System.

The Gambia—Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
(As of April 30, 2002; in millions of U.S. dollars)

FY
Approval
1993
1994

Company

Partic

Disbursed
------------IFC------------Loan Equity
Quasi

Partic

AEF Ndebaan
(Medical Clinic)
AEF Lyefish
(Commercial Fishing)

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total portfolio

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Pending commitments
Source: IFC.

Committed/Held
------------IFC-----------Loan
Equity
Quasi

- 51 -

APPENDIX III

Bank-Fund Structural Priorities

Measures
Fiscal sector
Establish a donor coordination unit in the Department of State for Finance and
Economic Affairs (DOSFEA) to follow up on pledges made at roundtable,
access requirements against millennium development goals (MDGs), monitor
disbursements, and coordinate with debt unit to ensure maintenance of debt
database
Update government accounts to 2001
Expand and fully operationalize ASYCUDA, the customs information technology
(IT) system
Revitalize tax administration IT system
Establish a national Revenue Authority
Complete phase I of Integrated Financial Management Information
System (IFMIS)
Monetary sector
Submit CBG Law to National Assembly
Receipt by the Fund of the 2003 audited financial statements of the CBG
External sector
Provide monthly data on imports (cif) by tariff band, exemptions, and duty
collected to enable analysis of revenue-collection performance of customs
department
Macroeconomic statistics
Publish analytical reports on 2003/04 integrated household survey
Publish analytical reports on 2003 population census
Enact new Statistics Bill to establish a semi-autonomous Statistics agency
Publish results of 2005 economic census
Publish new national accounts in line with 1993 System of National Accounts
Establish new semi-autonomous Statistics agency
Legal sector
Finalize legal sector reform strategy and submit cabinet paper
Operationalize alternative dispute resolution system
Prepare registries restructuring strategy
Operationalize court case management system
Enterprises
Operationalize business park/free trade zone
Divest several Track II enterprises of government’s divestiture plan and complete
divestiture action plans for Track I enterprises

Lead
Institution

Target
Date

IMF

Aug. 2004

IMF, Bank
Bank

Oct. 2004
Nov. 2005

Bank
Bank
Bank

Apr. 2006
Sep. 2006
Dec. 2006

IMF
IMF

Dec. 2004
Dec. 2004

IMF

Oct. 2004

Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank

Nov. 2005
Dec. 2005
Dec. 2005
Feb. 2006
Sep. 2006
Dec. 2006

Bank
Bank
Bank
Bank

Jun. 2005
Oct. 2005
Dec. 2005
Aug. 2006

Bank
Bank

Jun. 2006
Early 2007

Questions may be referred to Mr. Soh Hoon (email: hsoh@worldbank.org).

- 52 -

APPENDIX IV

The Gambia: Relations with the African Development Bank
(As of May 23, 2005)
The African Development Bank (AfDB) Group began lending operations in The Gambia in
1974 and has since approved as of end-2004, 56 projects for a total amount of
UA 201.1 million (US$302.6 million), (11 of which were financed by grants) in the
transport, social, public utilities, agricultural, and industrial sectors. As of December 31,
2004, 33 projects had been completed while 19 projects were ongoing, amounting to total
commitments of UA 56.8 million (US$85.5 million), and 4 operations have been cancelled at
the government’s request.1 The portfolio has a relatively low project at risk (PAR) rate,
though the disbursement rates continue to remain low, with only UA 13.52 million
(US$20.34 million) or 23.8 percent of the active portfolio having been disbursed as of
December 31, 2004. The AfDB is also a major participant in The Gambia’s enhanced
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative program, under which it is due to grant
debt relief of US$15.7 million in net present value (NPV) terms (23.6 percent of the total
debt relief under the program).
The AfDB’s most recent strategy for The Gambia covers the period 2002–04 and aims at
assisting the country in its efforts to meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by
addressing specific institutional and human capacity constraints. The plan is based on The
Gambia’s poverty reduction strategy (SPA-II), and the base-case scenario focuses on the
following lending and nonlending (grant) interventions.
AfDB Country Strategy 2002–04 for The Gambia
Objective

Instrument and
Amount

Focus

Meet the MDGs

Third education project
(UA 10.0 million)

Increase access to quality education and skills
development, particularly for girls and pupils in the
poorest areas of the country.

Improve macroeconomic
environment

Budgetary support
(UA 4.38 million)

Complement efforts of other donors in
consolidating the fragile macroeconomic
environment and in meeting The Gambia’s
exceptional financing needs during 2002–04.

Implement multisector
capacity building

Capacity-building project
(Grant of UA 2.0 million)

Strengthen capacity of key departments and
institutions involved in the preparation and
implementation of the PRSP/SPA-II. Support to be

1

On April 27, 2005, the Executive Board of the AfDB approved the farmer-managed rice
irrigation project for an amount of UA 5.5 million. UA stands for unit of account (equivalent
to US$1.5).

- 53 -

APPENDIX IV

extended to institutions dealing in economic and
political governance, including the Department of
Justice, Auditor General’s Department, Public
Divestiture Agency, parliament, and the Public
Procurement Agency.

If the current policy and institutional framework for The Gambia improves—as
proxied by the country’s performance in implementing the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement, the fulfillment of some required conditions for
reaching the completion point of its HIPC Initiative program, and improvement in the
implementation of the AfDB Group portfolio—the country will move to a higher-case
scenario, and an additional UA 4.38 million will be allocated to the country to finance an
agricultural-related project. Conversely, the low-case scenario will apply if there is a
deterioration in the current policy and institutional framework, in which case The Gambia
will qualify for only UA 1.74 million of its basic allocation. Under this scenario, the already
appraised policy-based operation will not be granted. The Gambia’s AfDB strategy for 2005–
07 will be prepared in early 2005.
Implementation of the AfDB’s strategy is achieved through lending and nonlending
activities. The extent of the former is dependent on a satisfactory performance under the
IMF-supported PRGF, progress made toward reaching the HIPC Initiative completion point,
advances in strengthening public expenditure management, and improved performance of the
AfDB-sponsored projects themselves. Intervention through the nonlending program aims at
strengthening policy dialogue with the government and stakeholders and focuses mainly on
studies, funded through grants, to improve governance, mainstream gender, fight HIV/AIDS
and communicable diseases, and improve the energy supply.

- 54 -

APPENDIX V

The Gambia: Statistical Issues
There are substantial weaknesses in The Gambia's economic and financial statistics,
especially in the national accounts, balance of payments, and external debt statistics. The
poor quality of certain data and complete lack of others have hampered recent analysis of
economic developments. Data reporting by the authorities to the Fund is somewhat irregular.
The Gambia participates in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and its
metadata have been posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB)
since May 2000. A data ROSC mission visited The Gambia in February 2005 to assess data
quality in four main areas of macroeconomic statistics (national accounts, government
finance, monetary, and balance of payments) based on the Fund’s Data Quality Assessment
Framework (DQAF, July 2003). The Gambia’s dissemination practices were also assessed
against the recommendations of the GDDS. The mission recommended the establishment of
an interim Statistics Council to spearhead the passage of the Statistics Act and eventual
creation of an autonomous Bureau of Statistics and preparation of a comprehensive statistics
reform package, to be costed and presented to a donor roundtable meeting later in 2005.
Real sector
Annual national accounts estimates are compiled using only the production approach and
rely heavily on indicators in the absence of more comprehensive information. Accordingly,
following STA assistance on national accounts since 1998, a program has been prepared by
the Central Statistics Department (CSD) focusing on (i) improving the quality of source
statistics by improving and expanding existing surveys; (ii) improving the coverage and
methodology of the GDP estimates, including the implementation of the System of National
Accounts (1993 SNA); (iii) rebasing the constant price estimates—currently 1976/77—to a
more recent period; and (iv) developing independent estimates of the expenditure aggregates.
STA assistance has been followed by regular visits by a peripatetic adviser who is also
assisting with price statistics. Currently, the CSD produces data on consumer price index
(CPI) based on the 1976/77 weights for the low income population of the greater Banjul area
only. As with the national accounts, improvements in the CPI will require that the CSD—
which is particularly weak—is provided adequate high quality resources.
Government finance
The authorities provide data central government transactions with a lag of about eight weeks
for both revenue and expenditure, based on “flash” reporting. Reporting in the treasury
ledger is subject to considerable delay; the central government accounts for 1991–99 have
not been audited and those for later period have yet to be closed. Particular weaknesses
persist in compiling data on an economic basis and in tracking foreign-financed expenditure,
including HIPC debt relief. Data on domestic government financing are available on a
monthly basis with a delay of some six to eight weeks. The three-year rolling public
investment program has not been updated for some time, and the execution of public
investment needs closer monitoring. The authorities have also acknowledged that substantial

- 55 -

APPENDIX V

payments were made in 2001 and 2002 but were not recorded in the government accounts;
current fiscal data have been revised accordingly.
Monetary data
Data reporting by the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG) remains slightly irregular. Its
monthly balance sheet data should be available within two weeks following after the
reference month, and data for the monetary survey should be provided with a delay of about
three weeks. The coverage of commercial banks in the monetary survey is comprehensive,
although there has been no follow-up on the recommendations of the August 2001 STA
mission regarding the inclusion of noncommercial bank depository corporations (the Postal
Savings Bank and Village Savings and Credit Associations) in the monetary survey. The
commercial banks follow a uniform chart of accounts to report financial data to the CBG.
Flash reports of key monetary data are also sent from the banks to the CBG on a weekly
basis. Over the past two years, the CBG has introduced several reclassifications of the
monetary accounts in an attempt to improve sectorization and coverage, as well as to
harmonize the data reported to STA and AFR. In particular, there were substantial revisions
to data on foreign exchange transactions and lending to the central government for the period
2001–03.
Balance of payments
A significant proportion of The Gambia's external transactions, including reexports, are
conducted through informal channels. Inclusion of these activities in the balance of payments
assuming that reexports are a fixed share of total imports, and tourism revenue is a simple
function of tourist arrivals. Data on trade, customs collection, and tourist arrivals are
available with long delays. Data on private capital flows are poor. Official grant and loan
disbursements and repayments are relatively well recorded (but there are some gaps in
project disbursements). Data on the gross and net international reserves of the central bank
are available with a short lag, but were substantially revised for 2001–03.
The Fund provided technical assistance on balance of payment statistics in June-July 1999
and September 2000. In reviewing progress, the 2000 mission noted that some progress had
been made in the compilation of balance of payments statistics in that several of the previous
mission’s recommendations had been implemented. Based largely on the mission’s
recommendations, the CBG established a balance of payments unit, equipped with computer
resources, and initiated surveys of the banking sector, insurance companies, travel and
shipping agents, hotels, and foreign embassies. However, this unit is currently understaffed
and most trained balance of payments statisticians have either left or are away on long-term
study leave. As a result, the unit has not produced reliable and timely balance of payments
data. With assistance from the U.K. Department for International Development, the CBG
conducted an enterprise survey to collect data for the International Investment Position.
However, several other STA recommendations remain outstanding including, the
implementation of a survey of major importers and exporters, collection of data on foreign-

- 56 -

APPENDIX V

owned construction enterprises, and the conduct of periodic surveys of Gambians traveling
abroad.
Following recommendation of the February 2005 data ROSC mission, CBG revamped the
balance of payments unit by elevating it to a full section with additional staff. To strengthen
capacity for balance of payments compilation a CBG staff member attended STA’s Balance
of Payments Statistics course in May-June 2005 through the IMF Institute. STA is also
planning a balance of payments statistics mission early in 2006.
The government has recently installed the Commonwealth Secretariat’s debt-reporting and
management system with the assistance of the World Bank.
Publication
The only regular provision of macroeconomic data to the public is through references in the
annual budget speech. The CBG's annual report and quarterly bulletins, which serve to
disseminate y much of the nation’s macroeconomic data, have not been published since
2000; in addition, the CSD’s publications are not being issued regularly.
There has been no reporting of data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook since 1993 or in the Balance of Payments Statistics and International Financial
Statistic (IFS), other than monetary and CPI data, since 1997.

- 57 -

APPENDIX V

The Gambia: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of January 31June 176, 2005)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency of
6
publication

4/30/05

5/12/05

W

W

W

3/31/05

4/29/05

W

W

A

Reserve/Base Money

Mar 2005

4/29/05

M

M

A

Broad Money

Mar 2005

4/29/05

M

M

A

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Mar 2005

4/29/05

M

M

A

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

Mar 2005

4/29/05

M

M

A

3/31/05

4/29/05

W

W

W

3/31/05

5/05/05

M

M

M

12/04

4/29/05

M

M

A

Dec 2004

4/29/05

A

A

A

2004

4/29/05

M

M

A

Dec 2004

4/29/05

M

Q

A

Exchange Rates
International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Interest Rates

1

2

Consumer Price Index
3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General
4
Government
3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government
5

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt
External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods and Services
GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)
2

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on The Gambia
July 18, 2005

This statement provides additional information on developments since the issuance of the
staff report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation for The Gambia. This information does not
materially change the staff appraisal.
Recent Macroeconomic Developments
1.
Macroeconomic conditions continued to improve in the second quarter of 2005.
Inflation continued to trend downwards, with the 12-month increase in consumer prices
registering just 4 percent at end-April compared with 15.8 percent in April 2004. The growth
in broad money abated slightly and rose by 22 percent on a 12-month basis at end-May 2005
compared to 24.3 percent at end-April 2005 and 30.3 percent at end-May 2004. The
preliminary fiscal outturn through May suggests a significant compression in
nondiscretionary spending vis-à-vis the 2005 budget, in line with the quarterly ceilings of
D 190 million that were recently established. The overall budget deficit on a commitment
basis through May was 50 percent lower than that which underlies the projection in the staff
report.
2.
At its last meeting held on July 7, 2005, the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Central Bank decided to reduce the Rediscount Rate (its policy rate), by 4 percentage points
to 25 percent. Staff believes that this interest rate reduction is appropriate given the continued
decline in inflation, the strength of the dalasi in the foreign exchange market, and
improvements in fiscal performance.
Action Plan for Strengthening Internal Controls at the Central Bank
3.
The Central Bank has adopted an Action Plan to strengthen internal controls drawing
on the report of the new external auditors and the Fund’s Safeguard Assessment
recommendations. The Action Plan establishes a timetable and identifies the additional
resource requirements necessary for helping the Central Bank to develop international best
practices in accounting and auditing. In particular, the plan seeks to address weaknesses with
respect to the following Central Bank functions: (1) custodian of foreign reserves;
(2) banking services to the government; (3) public debt management and open market
operations; (4) custodian of banks’ cash reserves; and (5) issuance of banknotes and coins.
4.
The Action Plan contains provisions for the establishment of an Audit Committee, in
charge of overseeing internal and external audit arrangements, and for the implementation of
foreign exchange reserve management guidelines designed to address procedural
responsibilities and ensure a proper separation of duties in foreign reserve operations. In
staff’s view, the Action Plan is comprehensive. Additional work is needed to spell out more
clearly the reform priorities (in particular to address the findings of the reaudits of the 200102 accounts and the special audit on foreign reserves), the timeline for certain actions, and
the specific technical assistance needs.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/121
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 8, 2005
Revised: 9/28/05

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation
with The Gambia
On July 18, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with The Gambia.1
Background
The Gambia’s economic performance since the mid-1980s has been uneven owing to
exogenous shocks, macroeconomic and structural policy slippage, poor governance, and
weak institutions. The economy’s vulnerability to shocks stems from a lack of economic
diversification. In addition, economic performance has been constrained by policy distortions
and by recurrent weaknesses in fiscal policy. Expansionary policies have increased the
government’s recourse to domestic bank financing, which, in turn, has raised real interest
rates, increased the domestic debt burden, and tended to crowd out private investment.
In 1998, the authorities entered into a three-year program under the Enhanced Structural
Adjustment Facility (ESAF), which was converted into a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. In July 2002, the Board approved a new three-year PRGF arrangement
(See News Brief No. 02/74 and Press Release No. 02/32), but the first review was not
completed because of weak policy implementation and governance problems. It was
discovered in 2003 that The Gambia had misreported to the Fund net international reserves by
US$38.8 million at end-December 2001 and failed to record US$28.5 million in government
expenditures. The Executive Board concluded that The Gambia had received two
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2noncomplying disbursements, equivalent to SDR 3.435 million each in July and December
2001 (See Press Release No. 04/49). The authorities repaid these disbursements in 2004 in
four equal installments, with the last payment made ahead of schedule.
The Executive Directors urged the authorities, during the Article IV consultation in 2004, to
commission a reaudit of the Central Bank of The Gambia’s (CBG’s) 2001 and 2002 financial
statements on terms of reference agreed with Fund staff. The Directors also stressed the need
for a special audit of foreign exchange transactions between 2000 and 2003. These audits
have now been completed and confirm the breakdown of internal controls at the central bank
that were observed during the IMF’s Safeguard Assessment mission conducted in November
2003. The audit reports restate general ledger balances for external reserves for various test
dates between end-December 2000 and end-December 2003, which are significantly lower
than the originally recorded balances. The auditors have issued a disclaimer indicating that
they were unable to express an opinion on the 2001 and 2002 accounts largely because of the
lack of documentation supporting several foreign exchange transactions.
Macroeconomic performance has strengthened over the past 18 months, particularly through
end-2004, in response to strong financial policies. Despite an increase in groundnut
production, real GDP growth slowed in 2004 to 5.1 percent (from 6.9 percent in 2003) due to
lower growth in industry and services. Inflation reached 18 percent at end-2003 and declined
to 5 percent by March 2005. The central bank’s rediscount rate (policy rate) was reduced by
5 percentage points from September 2004 to 29 percent in March 2005.
The overall fiscal deficit (including grants and on a commitment basis) increased to 5¾ percent
of GDP in 2004 from 4¾ percent in 2003, mainly due to much higher externally-financed
capital expenditures. However, the basic primary surplus more than doubled to 9½ percent of
GDP, indicating a significant tightening in domestic fiscal operations. Broad money growth
declined from a peak of 43 percent on a 12-month basis in 2003 to 18 percent in 2004.
The nominal exchange rate has been stable since 2003 when it depreciated by 25 percent in
U.S. dollar terms.
The relatively high interest rates that were necessary to reverse the deterioration in the
macroeconomic environment have, however, placed a heavy burden on domestic debt service,
and on credit markets. The total domestic debt stock increased from around 25 percent of
GDP in 2003 to 31 percent in 2004 and domestic interest payments have risen from
4½ percent in 2003 to 5¼ percent of GDP in 2004. The tightening in domestic financial policies
has also severely depressed credit to the private sector. In 2004, the stock of such credit is
estimated to have fallen by 6 percent.
The external current account deficit (including official transfers) deteriorated from 5 percent of
GDP in 2003 to 12 percent in 2004, partly reflecting the worsening in the balance of trade, as
strong import growth was driven by the recovery in output, the surge in donor-financed capital
expenditures, foreign direct investment, and higher international oil prices. Gross international
reserves rose by more than US$22 million or by over 30 percent in 2004 as increased foreign
inflows and a stabilizing exchange rate allowed the central bank to increase its purchases in
the interbank market.

-3Policies, however, weakened in the first quarter of 2005. There have been significant fiscal
slippages owing primarily to unbudgeted expenditures of D 101 million (¾ percent of GDP).
These expenditures have led to a substantial increase in the net debt of the government.
Accommodating policies by the central bank led to excessive growth in monetary aggregates.
Prospects for 2005 are further jeopardized by the decision to license a monopoly quasi-public
enterprise, the Gambian Agricultural Marketing Corporation (GAMCO), to market and process
groundnuts. This has had a near disastrous effect on exports of processed groundnuts, as
GAMCO has been unable to raise the finances to purchase what was a bumper harvest for
groundnuts. The mission estimates that a substantial proportion of groundnut exports could be
lost in the 2004/05 crop season.
After a long delay, the authorities recently completed the first annual progress report of the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper covering the period July 2002–December 2003. Progress
on structural reforms has been mixed. The authorities have fallen behind in their schedule to
privatize the Gambia Groundnut Corporation. On the fiscal side, the National Emergency
Fiscal Committee (NEFCOM) had some positive effects in ensuring greater control over
expenditures. Further, steps are being taken to strengthen the public expenditure management
system. A new organic budget law has been passed and the financial regulations are currently
being implemented. The authorities are in the process of developing a statistical strategy to be
presented to donors. However, basic macroeconomic statistics remain weak.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors observed that The Gambia’s economic performance in recent years was
marked by inconsistent implementation of sound macroeconomic policies, poor governance,
exogenous and policy-induced shocks, and inappropriate policy responses to those shocks.
Directors concurred that the main medium-term challenge for The Gambia is to make a
decisive break from the past “stop-go” policies, and embark on a comprehensive economic
program that would establish the conditions for sustainable growth and poverty reduction. Key
elements of such a program should include measures to preserve macroeconomic stability and
to achieve debt sustainability. The program should also incorporate reforms aimed at
promoting faster growth and poverty reduction through improvements in the investment
climate, and the strengthening of public expenditure management, governance, and
accountability.
In this context, Directors commended the authorities for their implementation of strong financial
policies over the past 18 months, which has led to an improvement in the basic primary fiscal
surplus, a reduction in inflation, the stabilization of the exchange rate, and the rebuilding of
international reserves. Directors noted that the improved macroeconomic conditions had
paved the way for the recent easing in interest rates.
While welcoming this progress, Directors expressed disappointment with the fiscal slippage—
stemming from extrabudgetary expenditures—that occurred in the first quarter of 2005. They
urged the authorities to address it by fully implementing the proposed quarterly ceilings on
discretionary expenditure, improving cash management, and enforcing the public enterprises’
repayment of government loans. In this process, it will be important to avoid adverse effects on
pro-poor spending. Directors also urged the authorities to phase out the subsidization of
petroleum products by adjusting prices and enforcing the terms of the petroleum price

-4mechanism, bearing in mind the social implications of the adjustment. In addition, they
recommended strengthening revenues by improving tax administration, and broadening the
tax base by phasing out tax exemptions.
Directors were encouraged by the recent implementation of reforms to promote enhanced
fiscal transparency. They welcomed the passage of the organic budget law and encouraged
the authorities to finalize implementation of the supporting financial regulations. They also
noted the progress being made in auditing the government accounts, and urged the authorities
to intensify efforts to bring the accounts up to date.
Directors commended the progress made in reducing inflation, and stressed that further fiscal
consolidation would provide room for easing monetary policy and permit further reductions in
interest rates. Directors concurred with the use of broad money as a nominal anchor for prices.
They welcomed the progress made to enhance the conduct of monetary policy, and
encouraged the authorities to move ahead with the introduction of new instruments designed
to separate monetary operations from the financing of the budget, and by adopting other key
recommendations made by recent Fund technical assistance missions. Also, Directors
welcomed the increased attention being paid to better coordination of fiscal and monetary
management, and saw the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee and Treasury Bill
Committee as important first steps in this regard. Efficient use of Fund technical assistance in
public expenditure management and in the domestic and foreign operations of the central
bank, together with the strengthening of the authorities’ statistical capacity, should help to
further improve The Gambia’s macroeconomic management capacity.
Directors expressed disappointment with the continued weaknesses in internal controls at the
Central Bank, and stressed the need for the prompt and effective implementation of
appropriate remedial measures. In this regard, they welcomed the recent adoption by the
Central Bank of an Action Plan to strengthen internal controls drawing on the report of the new
external auditors. The establishment of an Audit Committee, drafting of guidelines for foreign
reserves management, as well as the recent reorganization of the Bank were also welcomed.
In addition, Directors encouraged the authorities to fully implement the recommendations from
the recent Safeguards Assessment, including the passage of the revised Central Bank Act
designed to strengthen the Bank’s operational independence.
Directors observed that the fundamentals of the financial sector appear sound with adequate
capitalization and high profitability and liquidity ratios. They welcomed the reduction in
nonperforming loans, and urged the authorities to pursue the further deepening of the financial
sector, including by enhancing the legal framework and reinforcing creditor rights.
Directors agreed that the current level of the real effective exchange rate is appropriate, and
that improvements in external competitiveness should be addressed through the removal of
structural bottlenecks, which currently constrain productivity.
Directors concurred that The Gambia’s external competitiveness and growth prospects would
be enhanced by the adoption of a comprehensive structural reform strategy designed to
reduce the costs and risks of doing business in the country, and removing key structural
bottlenecks in the agricultural sector. They encouraged the authorities to accelerate the
privatization program, and enhance the investment climate through fiscal, judicial, and

-5legislative reforms, as recommended by the Foreign Investment Advisory Service and the
World Bank’s Diagnostic Assessment of the Investment Climate in The Gambia. In this
connection, strengthening institutions and improving governance would be major priorities. In
the groundnut sector, Directors expressed disappointment with the decision to license a public
monopoly, The Gambia Agricultural Marketing Corporation to market and process groundnuts.
They noted that the authorities had agreed to license firms to compete with the Gambia
Agricultural Marketing Corporation, but emphasized that it will be essential to avoid further
government intervention and accelerate implementation of the sectoral strategy agreed with
major donors. including the privatization of the Gambia Groundnut Corporation.
Directors concurred that clear steps would be needed as part of a staff-monitored program
(SMP). Directors agreed with staff that the main elements of an SMP should include
implementation of an action plan to address the external auditor’s recommendations to
improve internal controls, and in that regard they welcomed the authorities’ intention to
conduct quarterly audits of the Central Bank’s foreign reserve balances. They also agreed that
emphasis will need to be placed on public financial management and accountability.
Successful performance under an SMP could be expected to lead to a new PRGF
arrangement and debt relief under the HIPC Initiative.
Directors welcomed the ex post assessment report and generally agreed with its main findings.
They identified as key lessons to be learned for future program design the importance of
structuring conditionality so as to give greater emphasis to the resolution of problems in public
expenditure management and in the internal controls at the central bank. A few Directors
noted the authorities’ view that over ambitious targets may have contributed to program
failures, and they saw a possible need for greater realism and streamlining of program
conditionality. Directors also observed that governance problems and insufficient commitment
to reforms had hampered program implementation over the course of the last two
arrangements with the Fund and emphasized the need to continue strengthening transparency
in the use of public resources.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country (or countries)
concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations with member
countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex
post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after
Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive Board in
a particular case. The staff report for the Article IV consultation with The Gambia may be made available at
a later stage if the authorities consent.

-6The Gambia: Selected Economic Indicators
2001

2002

2003

2004

(Annual Percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated)
Domestic economy
Real GDP
Nominal GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer price index (period average)
Groundnut production (in thousands of metric tons)

5.8
21.8
15.2
4.5
151.0

-3.2
12.3
16.1
8.6
71.5

6.9
36.1
27.4
17.0
92.9

5.1
20.1
14.3
14.2
120.5

-13.6
-5.1

-21.6
-11.8

(In percent of GDP)
External sector
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers

-10.1
-2.6

-13.4
-2.8

(Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise) indicated)
Exports, f.o.b. (in U.S. dollars)
Imports, c.i.f. (in U.S. dollars)
Money and credit (end-of-period stocks)
Broad money
Credit to the private sector and public enterprises
Reserve money
Treasury Bill rate (in percent; end-of-period)

-19.4
-19.9

7.1
12.8

-7.6
-6.2

25.8
46.2

19.4
12.8
21.0
15.0

35.3
72.3
34.1
20.0

43.4
48.0
62.7
31.0

18.3
-15.1
11.0
30.0

-7.2
-4.7
22.9
15.7
25.2

-10.2
-5.7
31.2
20.9
30.7

(In percent of GDP)
Central government budget 1/
Balance, excluding grants
Balance, including grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Domestic revenue
Stock of domesti debt

-16.0
-13.9
31.1
15.1
38.1

-9.1
-4.6
25.4
16.3
36.6

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross official reserves 2/
In months of imports, c.i.f.

-42.2
-10.8

-49.6
-10.4

-48.0
-18.0

-86.7
-47.1

63.0
5.0

67.2
4.5

62.3
4.4

84.6
4.1

(In percent of exports and travel income)
External debt service 3/

16.4

16.9

8.5

Sources: The Gambian authorities; and IMF Staff estimates.
1/ Adjustment have been incorporated for previously unrecorded public spending and borrowing in 2001, financed by
the Central Bank of The Gambia.
2/ Adjustments have been incorporated for previously unrecorded depletion of foreign exchange reserves in 2001-03,
as reported by the authorities on October 28, 2003.
3/ Servicing of public external debt after HIPC grants in percent of exports and travel income. In 2001, the increase
in debt service reflects in part payments to Alimenta. Any accumulation of arrears is excluded.

15.9

Statement by Peter Gakunu, Alternate Executive Director, and
John Steytler, Advisor to the Executive Director, on The Gambia
July 18, 2005
1.
The Gambian authorities appreciate the candid exchange of views during the 2005
Article IV Consultation and Ex-Post Assessment (EPA) discussions. They agree with the
thrust of the staff assessments, which give a fair account of recent economic developments in
The Gambia and the challenges ahead.
Background
2.
The Gambia is a small open economy, dominated by agricultural production and is
highly vulnerable to external shocks. This notwithstanding, The Gambia was considered one
of the best performers in Sub-Saharan Africa during the past 25 years, owing mainly to the
pursuit of prudent policies. Real GDP growth has been higher than the average for SubSaharan Africa and inflation consistently lower than the Sub-Saharan African average. The
Growth Competitiveness Index (GCI) of the 2004 Global Competitiveness Report, ranked
The Gambia number 52 out of 102 countries and number 6 in Africa. In the sub index on
public institutions, The Gambia was ranked number 39 in the world and 4 in Africa.
3.
Notwithstanding this excellent record of accomplishment, the authorities recognize
that the country continues to face enormous developmental challenges, including a narrow
economic base and one of the highest incidences of poverty on the continent and indeed in
the world. Against this backdrop, my authorities’ strategy in going forward rest on three
pillars, namely to (i) consolidate recent gains in macroeconomic stability; (ii) to stabilize and
reduce the public debt burden; (iii) and to address remaining structural weaknesses in the
economy to support private sector driven growth.
4.
Recently, in 2002 the authorities’ PRGF arrangement went off track due to
misreporting on net international reserves and government expenditure. The authorities
reacted quickly to repay the resultant non-complying disbursements, making the last payment
ahead of schedule. Moreover, the authorities have implemented a number of remedial
measures and reforms to strengthen external controls of the central bank as recommended by
the Fund Safe Guard Assessments and the independent audit report, as well as to strengthen
the public expenditure management system to prevent similar situations from occurring
again. These actions attest to the importance that the authorities attach to their relationship
with the Fund.
5.
However, the absence of a Fund program has put a tremendous burden on the
authorities in terms of domestic debt servicing and their pursuit of reaching the MDGs. They,

-2therefore, request the support of Executive Directors for a staff monitored program leading to
a new PRGF program to enable them to reach the HIPC completion point as soon as possible.
6.
Notwithstanding lack of external support, The Gambia’s macroeconomic
performance has strengthened significantly since 2003. Thanks to improved fiscal operations,
coupled with tight monetary policy, the authorities have managed to successfully stabilize the
economy, following the slippages of 2002. Real GDP rebounded to an average annual rate of
6 percent in 2003-04 following a contraction of 3.2 percent in 2002. Inflation decelerated to
4.0 percent in April 2005 from a peak of 17 percent in 2003 and net international reserves
rose by more than US$22 million or over 30 percent in 2004. The overall fiscal balance
deteriorated slightly in the first 5 months of 2005, due to additional expenditure needs related
to external shocks, as well as a one off expenditure to clear arrears in membership dues to the
Economic Community of West African States. However, it should be noted that the basic
primary surplus more than doubled to about 9½ percent of GDP, indicating an improved
fiscal performance.
Issues in 2005
7.
Looking ahead, real GDP is estimated at a robust 5.0 percent in 2005, and inflation is
expected to remain at a low rate.
Fiscal Policy
8.
Key to the stabilization of economic conditions in The Gambia, has been tight fiscal
policy, as reflected in the primary fiscal surplus as a ratio of GDP, which more than doubled
in the current fiscal year. The authorities remain committed to prudent fiscal policies and will
contain domestic borrowing for the rest of the year by limiting discretionary expenditure
allocations to D 190 million (a compression of roughly 2 percent of GDP compared to the
Budget), by the end of the year. The authorities will not entertain any extra-budgetary
spending or central bank borrowing during the remainder of the year.
9.
Although the authorities are committed to prudent fiscal policies aimed at attaining
debt sustainability, they are equally concerned about the importance of restoring the level of
poverty related expenditure, which was severely compressed in 2004. In this connection, a
key concern of my authorities is the high domestic debt service burden on the budget, which
leaves very little fiscal space for pro-poor expenditure. The recent downward trend in interest
rates will, provide additional fiscal space for pro-poor expenditure, but this will not be
enough. The authorities, therefore, request the assistance of the international community,
including the IMF, to provide additional resources to enable them to implement their PRSP
agenda. Moreover, additional resources would also be necessary to implement capital
projects crucial to put the country on a higher and sustainable growth path.
10.
Learning from past mistakes, my authorities have started to implement a number of
measures to strengthen public financial management, including the issuance of financial
regulations to make their new organic budget operational, the formation of a Cash
Management Committee at the DOSFEA, and the 2001 public accounts has been finalized

-3and adopted by the National Assembly. In addition, they have also completed the auditing of
the 1991-99 accounts, and have finalized and submitted the 2000 accounts to the Auditor
General. At the same time, the authorities have started to update the general ledger for fiscal
data for 2002-05, and intend to finalize it by year-end.
Monetary and Financial Sector Issues
11.
The authorities have implemented a number of measures to strengthen governance of
the Central Bank of The Gambia. Most notable measures include completion of the new
audits for the 2001 and 2002 accounts, as well as the special audit of foreign transactions;
establishment of an audit committee to oversee the external audit process; preparation of
formal guidelines for foreign exchange operations; and development of a timetable to initiate
and complete the process of adopting international accounting standards. Moreover, the
authorities will soon submit to the National Assembly, the revised CBG bill, which will
significantly strengthen the operational independence of the central bank. In addition, at its
latest meeting on July 13, 2005, the Board of the Bank of The Gambia adopted a
comprehensive action plan to implement the external auditors’ recommendation to further
strengthen internal controls. The Board also approved operating guidelines for the currency
office, the internal audit department and foreign currency operations, and adopted the audited
financial statements for 2003.
12.
The Central Bank of The Gambia has successfully managed to reduce inflation to
single digit level and to stabilize the exchange rate, while at the same time enhancing the
transparency of their operations through an effective communications strategy. The
authorities believe that the current money-based monetary framework has served them well,
given the close relationship between money and inflation in The Gambia. To further enhance
and strengthen the monetary framework, they are taking steps to introduce a new 14-day
instrument that will separate monetary operations from the financing of the budget. The
authorities are also considering the introduction of an overnight instrument to manage
liquidity on a day-to-day basis, a secured credit facility aimed at encouraging banks to
engage in interbank transactions, and the phasing out of the rediscount facility.
13.
The authorities broadly agree with the staff’s overall assessment of The Gambia’s
financial system. According to the latest Monetary Policy Statement of July 07, 2005, the
fundamentals of the banking system remain solid. The industry average risk weighted capital
adequacy ratio was 82.8 percent at end March 2005, and all banks observed the minimum
capital requirement of 8.0 percent. In addition, the quality of banks’ assets improved. Nonperforming loans fell from about 25 percent in 1998 to about 10 percent in early 2005, and
were adequately provisioned for.
14.
The low level of financial intermediation remains an issue of concern for the
authorities. To deepen financial intermediation, the authorities will continue to pursue sound
macroeconomic policies to further bring down and ensure lasting low interest rates, as well
as design medium-term structural reforms to strengthen creditor rights, which have been
identified as a key constraint for the development of the financial system. Recently the CBG

-4lowered its lead interest rate by 4.0 percent, which should assist in attainment of this
objective.
Structural Issues
15.
The Gambian authorities agree with staff that structural reforms are critical to
promoting private sector development, reducing the costs and risks of doing business,
generating employment and putting the economy on a higher and sustainable growth path. In
this regard, they will carefully study the World Bank’s recent Diagnostic Assessment of The
Gambia’s Investment Climate, with a view to coming up with an appropriate action plan.
16.
Progress on the trade liberalization front has been significant and The Gambia has
one of the most open and liberal trade regimes in sub-Saharan Africa, with a simple average
tariff of only 12.7 percent compared to the sub-Saharan average of 20 percent, and low nontariff barriers. The authorities are committed to further trade liberalization, and there are
ongoing initiatives to further identify bottlenecks to the country’s competitiveness. For
instance, The Gambia has been selected as one of the countries under the interagency
initiative, the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least
Developed Countries.
Ex-Post Assessment
17.
The Authorities concur broadly with the findings of the Ex-Post Assessment. They,
however, feel that such an assessment could have been more valuable if it was done at an
earlier stage. They also concur with the importance of improving accountability and
transparency of public expenditures and strengthening of the central bank’s internal controls.
They want to stress, however, that some of the accounting problems dated back to the 1980s
and would like to emphasize that there are ongoing efforts to audit all of the government’s
outstanding fiscal accounts.
18.
The authorities recognize that slow progress was made in implementing structural
reforms and diversifying the economy. Their intention is to create an environment conducive
for private sector activities, which at this stage is mainly concentrated on trading activities. In
addition, the authorities are of the view that over ambitious targets may have contributed to
failures to meet quantitative criteria and benchmarks under Fund arrangements.
Other Issues
19.
The authorities realize the importance of timely, accurate and reliable macroeconomic
statistics for policy formulation and are committed to strengthening the statistical system.
Attesting to this is the fact that the authorities have voluntarily subscribed to the Fund’s
General Data Dissemination Standard (GDDS), and have already posted its meta data, which
describes the current data practices, weaknesses, as well as improvement plans on the Fund
Data Dissemination Bulletin Board. In addition, the authorities have in all earnest, started to
implement the recommendations of the Fund’s recent data ROSC mission, including
preparation of a comprehensive statistics reform package that they intend to present to donors

-5for funding. They hope that they can continue to count on Fund TA in its core areas of
expertise to strengthen the statistical system.
20.
In conclusion, we believe that the continued dialogue between the authorities and the
staff has been fruitful. We want to reiterate the strong commitment of the authorities on the
reforms and in addressing the economic challenges ahead. We believe that the authorities
have done enough to demonstrate their commitment towards sound policies, and shown their
eagerness to engage with the Fund again under a PRGF-supported program. This will enable
the authorities to reach the HIPC completion point, which is essential to alleviate the high
debt overhang, and to benefit from the much needed donor support to enable The Gambia to
reach the MDGs by 2015. This is critical because as evidenced by the experience of The
Gambia’s economic performance without access to resources is clearly not sufficient to
effectively combat poverty.

