© 2009 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 201

June 2009
IMF Country Report No. 09/187
August 2, 2001

India: 2008 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
India
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2008 Article IV consultation with India, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the 2008 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on December 20, 2008, with the officials of India on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on January 22, 2009. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A staff statement of February 6, 2009, updating information on recent developments.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its February 6, 2009, discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for India.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
INDIA
Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2008 Consultation with India
Approved by Kalpana Kochhar and Tamim Bayoumi
January 22, 2009

•

Discussions: Delhi, December 8–14 and 18–20, 2008; Mumbai, December 14–18,
2008.

•

Staff team: K. Kochhar (head), H. Oura, L. Papi, M. Saxegaard, P. Topalova (all
APD), S. Peiris (MCM), and S. Panth (Senior Resident Representative). A. Simone
(FAD) joined the first half of the mission in Delhi and A. Richter Hume contributed
from headquarters.

•

Past advice: The 2007 Article IV consultation was concluded on January 23, 2008. In
recent years, the IMF and the authorities have generally agreed on policy priorities
needed to sustain rapid, inclusive growth, with an emphasis on broader and deeper
financial markets, fiscal consolidation, an enhanced monetary framework, and the
removal of structural bottlenecks.

•

Focus of the consultation: Implications of and policy response to the global crisis.

•

Selected Issues Paper: corporate vulnerabilities; causes and consequences of capital
flows to India; nonlinearities in exchange rate pass-through; and India's experience
with fiscal rules.

•

Exchange rate regime: Managed float. India is an Article VIII country, but maintains
restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII.

•

Outreach: Staff seminars at the Reserve Bank of India, the Ministry of Finance, and
think tanks.

•

Economic statistics: Adequate for surveillance purposes, but weaknesses remain.

2
Contents

Page

I. Staff Appraisal and Summary..............................................................................................3
II. Context: First International Financial Crisis Since India Went Global ...............................7
III. Recent Developments: Global Headwinds Exacerbate Domestic Weaknesses...................7
IV. Outlook: A Marked Slowdown with High Uncertainty and Downside Risks ...................12
V. Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................17
A. Keeping Credit Flowing While Maintaining Financial Stability:
the Role of Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ...................................................18
B. Keeping Credit Flowing While Maintaining Financial Stability:
the Role of Financial Sector Policy.........................................................................23
C. India’s Corporate Sector: A Challenging Outlook.......................................................32
D. Fiscal Policy: Limited Room for Further Stimulus......................................................34
Boxes
1. Measures Adopted in Response to the Crisis since September 2008 ................................10
2. Spillover Channels of the Global Financial Crisis to India ...............................................14
3. Select Cross-Country Comparisons of Financial Measures...............................................21
3. Financial Stability Risks ....................................................................................................24
Figures
1. A Long-Term Perspective ..................................................................................................39
2. Conjunctural Developments...............................................................................................40
3. Impact of the Global Financial Crisis ................................................................................41
4. Fiscal Indicators .................................................................................................................42
Tables
1. India: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2006..........................................................43
2. India: Selected Social and Economic Indicators, 2004/05–2009/10..................................44
3. India: Balance of Payments, 2004/05–2008/09 .................................................................45
4. India: Reserve Money and Monetary Survey, 2004/05–2008/09.......................................46
5. India: Central Government Operations, 2004/05–2008/09................................................47
6. India: General Government Operations, 2004/05–2008/09 ...............................................48
7. India: Macroeconomic Framework, 2004/05–2012/13......................................................49
8. India: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2004/05–2008/09 ..........................................50
9. India: Indicators of Financial System Soundness, 2004/05–2008/09 ...............................51

3
I. STAFF APPRAISAL AND SUMMARY
Like most countries in the world, an increasingly globally integrated India will not be
spared significant spillover effects from the present crisis. Its financial markets have sold
off considerably and external funding for banks and corporates, which has risen in
importance in recent years, has been sharply curtailed, thus jeopardizing investment and
growth. The global crisis also coincides with a turning of the growth and credit cycles in
India.
India’s growth is likely to slow sharply. High frequency indicators already signal a broadbased and marked slowdown in activity. From an average of 8¾ percent in the past five years,
growth is projected to fall to 6¼ percent in 2008/09 and 5¼ percent in 2009/10, with
investment driving the slowdown. Stimulus measures and a good harvest should support
consumption somewhat. Weaker domestic demand should reduce import growth, partly
offsetting contracting exports. The current account deficit is projected at about 3 percent of
GDP in 2008/09 before narrowing to 1½ percent of GDP the following year aided by lower
oil prices. Inflation is anticipated to drop to below 3 percent by March 2009 and to an average
of 2 percent in 2009/10 due to the collapse in commodity prices and softer domestic demand.
Reflecting the global economic situation, the uncertainty surrounding the forecasts is
unusually large with still significant downside risks. The latter stem mainly from a
protracted drought of credit and anemic world growth, as well as uncertainty of the outlook.
Negative feedback loops between external shocks and domestic vulnerabilities and between
the deteriorating corporate sector and the financial system could be strong. The main source
of upside risk would be from a larger impact on growth of the stimulus measures.
Policy Response
The authorities have already taken numerous welcome measures in response to the
crisis. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was quick in reversing its policy stance and the
reductions in interest rates, the cash reserve ratio (CRR), and the statutory liquidity
requirement (SLR) together with stepped up open market operations were fully warranted.
The authorities should also be commended for continuing to liberalize the capital account and
for reiterating their commitment to financial sector reforms.
Given the uncertainty and downside risks, the policy response needs to continue to be
flexible, but disciplined. With public debt at 80 percent of GDP, monetary and structural
policies will need to carry the weight of the policy response, and the limited fiscal room
focused on high priority infrastructure investment and on banking system recapitalization.
The priorities are (i) ensuring adequate financing to the real economy while protecting
financial stability; and (ii) facilitating corporate restructuring to ensure viable firms can

4
emerge stronger and unviable ones are quickly dealt with. Recognizing that some painful
adjustment is inevitable, priorities already identified in the medium-term reform agenda
should determine the focus of policies. Such a strategy will give India—whose medium- and
long-term advantages remain intact—the best chance to benefit from an eventual return of
capital flows. As in all countries, protectionist trade measures should be resisted, as the
global economy, including India, will bear the cost of the resulting decline in global trade.
Keeping Credit Flowing While Preserving Financial Stability
With the balance of risks having shifted decisively from inflation to growth, there is
more room for interest rate cuts and liquidity provision. Even after the most recent
reduction in policy rates, real interest rates based on expected inflation remain higher than a
few months ago. Hence, policy rates could be cut further. Although interest rates may have a
limited impact as long as the policy transmission mechanism is muted, they would still
provide a powerful signal and contribute to easing credit conditions. The RBI’s measures
have addressed the acute liquidity shortage that occurred in late 2008. If a liquidity crunch
were to resurface, further reductions in the CRR and repurchasing market stabilization bonds
can be relied upon. If these steps were to prove insufficient, consideration could be given to
broadening collateral accepted at the RBI’s repo window and providing liquidity over longer
horizons as done by several countries.
Exchange rate policy needs to be consistent with ensuring sufficient liquidity in the
system. The exchange rate has been managed flexibly in recent months. However, as reserves
have fallen substantially, they would be best conserved for limited provision of foreign
exchange to relieve concerns about external financing, for example along the lines of what
Brazil and Korea have put in place, while letting the exchange rate take the brunt of the
adjustment. Banks’ and corporates’ balance sheets appear more sensitive to interest rate than
exchange rate risk.
Based on headline indicators India’s financial system compares favorably
internationally, but rising credit risk and liquidity pressures are putting it under strain
(though information gaps make a definitive assessment difficult). Banks are well
capitalized and have low nonperforming assets (NPAs). Nevertheless, the current downturn is
likely to lead to a substantial increase in NPAs, and liquidity pressures could re-emerge.
Nonbank financial institutions have already shown signs of stress.
International experience suggests that loss recognition and bank recapitalization are the
measures most likely to be effective in restoring the flow of credit to the economy. A
priority for India in the current circumstances is to identify the capital needs of the banking
system by subjecting it to multifactor stress tests that take account of feedback loops between
the real and financial sectors—the extent of which have been greatly underestimated in

5
several countries. Key steps include (i) avoiding masking the true extent of the bad asset
problem and the underlying capital position of financial institutions; (ii) providing incentives
for early loss recognition; (iii) identifying capital needs and recapitalizing banks early; and
(iv) enhancing existing frameworks to dispose efficiently of impaired assets and to promote
corporate restructuring. Information on unhedged foreign exchange exposures and derivatives
should be disclosed to allay market concerns, as done by Mexico recently.
Government-assisted refinance and credit guarantees could be an additional option to
spur bank lending. Building on the refinance schemes already existing in India, especially
those aimed at funding infrastructure, the government could expand such activities, provided
transparency and appropriate assessment and pricing of risks are ensured. Examples of
explicit risk sharing mechanisms are offered by the Hong Kong SAR and the U.K. credit
guarantee programs.
In addition, the authorities’ own financial reform agenda needs to be rapidly advanced
to ensure adequate credit to corporates from sources other than the banking system.
The domestic banking system should not be expected to fully compensate for the decline in
other sources of corporate funding and to finance the needed higher infrastructure investment.
Instead, developing the corporate bond market—as recommended by the Parekh, Patil and
Rajan committees—and, further capital account liberalization (e.g. lifting all interest rate
caps and minimum maturity requirements) could help ease the current funding crunch for
corporates and position India well for when capital inflows pick up. Improving banking
system efficiency also remains an important objective.
Finally, preparing for a possible deterioration in financial conditions would be
advisable. These exercises should aim especially at strengthening cross-institutional
coordination and reviewing intervention frameworks. Facilities to supplement international
reserves could also be considered.
Corporate Sector Restructuring Is a High Priority
The potential substantial rise in corporate distress would be better addressed through
corporate debt and operational restructuring, rather than direct public sector
intervention in specific firms or sectors. Although corporate balance sheets seem healthy,
the sharp changes in financial and economic conditions are likely to put them under
considerable strain. Implementing the Rajan Report recommendations to improve the
bankruptcy law and enhance out-of-court restructuring mechanisms, and passing the
Companies Bill, would represent major positive steps in dealing with corporate distress.

6
Limited Role for Fiscal Policy
High government debt and deficits limit the room for maneuver: if further stimulus is
deemed necessary, it should be combined with reforms that ensure medium-term debt
sustainability. The stimulus implemented this year is already sizable, and with public debt at
about 80 percent of GDP, further substantial expansion in the deficit risks backfiring, as
concerns about debt sustainability could raise interest rates. The limited room should be
conserved for high quality infrastructure investment and bank recapitalization if needed. In
addition, lower commodity prices offer an opportunity to reform the fuel subsidy system,
which would clearly signal the government’s commitment to fiscal discipline.
Beyond the current downturn, fiscal consolidation continues to be a key priority as
public finances remain India’s Achilles’ heel. The medium-term fiscal adjustment should
be anchored in a fiscal rules framework centered on a debt target and buttressed by
comprehensive expenditure reforms, which could play an important role in promoting fiscal
consolidation.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with India take place on the
standard 12-month cycle.

7
II. CONTEXT: FIRST INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISIS SINCE INDIA WENT GLOBAL
1.
India faces the first global economic crisis since emerging as an economic
powerhouse. Reaping the benefits of reforms, macroeconomic stability, and a
supportive external environment, India achieved growth of 8¾ percent on average during
2003/04-2007/08, with a significant reduction in poverty. 1 The surge in investment, the key
driver of growth, was financed by rising private and public savings, but increasingly also by
foreign capital as links with the rest of the world grew (Figure 1). Now the global crisis is
hitting India’s financial markets and is sharply curtailing external funding, jeopardizing
investment and growth.
2.
The consultation focused on the implications of the global crisis for India and
the needed policy response. While the response needs inevitably to be focused on dealing
with short-term pressures, these should be set in the context of the longer-term challenges
and reforms that India needs to support strong and inclusive growth. In particular, given the
country’s massive investment needs, it is essential that scarce fiscal resources be focused on
jumpstarting infrastructure investment, together with further opening up to foreign inflows
and developing the domestic corporate bond market to augment the needed financing. At the
same time, reforms to reduce subsidies and other unproductive expenditure will go a long
way to provide assurances of the government’s commitment to fiscal consolidation.
III. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS:
GLOBAL HEADWINDS EXACERBATE DOMESTIC WEAKNESSES
3.
The global financial crisis is exacerbating a cyclical downturn that was already
Growth is moderating
underway. GDP growth softened to
900
20
(Year-on-year growth, in percent)
7.8 percent (y/y) in April–September, pulled
800
Investment shelved (4qma; in billions of rupees; right axis)
down mainly by weaker investment and
15
Real GDP, market prices
700
Industrial production (quarterly average)
600
private consumption (Figure 2). Data for the
10
500
October–December quarter (including trade,
400
5
industrial production, vehicle sales, and
300
business confidence) suggest that growth
200
0
100
has already slowed sharply, and leading
-5
0
indicators signal deeper and broader-based
Mar-00 Mar-01 Mar-02 Mar-03 Mar-04 Mar-05 Mar-06 Mar-07 Mar-08
weaknesses ahead.
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; CMIE; and Fund staff calculation.
4.
Inflation is decelerating rapidly after rising markedly in mid-2008. Headline
inflation (WPI) surged to almost 13 percent (y/y) in August 2008, but dropped to below
6 percent by December. Commodity prices were the drivers of the initial inflation spike, with
1

The fiscal year starts in April.

8
considerable second-round effects on other
goods. However, the inflation momentum—
measured by core inflation—is now
dissipating rapidly.

35

Inflation has peaked; core measures indicate likely further
deceleration

35

(Year-on-year change, end of period, in percent)
Range of core inflation measures
Headline WPI
Headline (sa 3mma, annualized)
Headline (excl. food & energy, sa 3mma, annualized)

25
15

25
15

6.
Like in most countries around the world, the global financial crisis has hit
Indian assets hard. Amid heightened volatility, the stock market decline was led by foreign
investors’ sales, which brought price-to-earnings (P/E) ratios broadly in line with the average
for emerging markets (Figure 3). Financials and real estate suffered the steepest sell-offs,
reflecting earlier sharp increases in leverage and asset prices. Property prices are reported to
be falling, especially in the commercial and high-end segments. The 23 percent depreciation
of the currency versus the U.S. dollar in 2008 (11 percent since end-August) was one of the
largest in Asia, despite RBI intervention. 2 From a historical peak of US$315 billion in May
2008, foreign exchange (FX) reserves have declined to US$255 billion (January 2, 2008),

2

The nominal effective exchange rate depreciated by over 14 percent in 2008.

5
-5
-15

Dec-08

Aug-08

Apr-08

Dec-07

Aug-07

Apr-07

Dec-06

Aug-06

Apr-06

5
5.
High commodity prices and the
global turmoil have weakened India’s
-5
external position. With the oil import bill
-15
rising by over 50 percent (y/y), the current
account deficit widened to 3¾ percent of
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and Fund staff estimates.
GDP in April–September compared to
1½ percent of GDP in 2007/08 even though
Capital flows have fallen sharply
exports of goods and services held up well.
50
Net capital inflows (in billions of U.S. dollars, left axis)
October and November saw exports
In percent of GDP (right axis)
40
contracting by over 10 percent, partly owing
30
to disruptions in trade credit, but softer
import growth kept the trade deficit in check. 20
Capital inflows in H1 2008/09 fell to
10
US$20 billion (3½ percent of GDP), less
than half of those in the same period a year
0
2000Q1
2002Q1
2004Q1
2006Q1
2008Q1
earlier. While foreign direct investment
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund staff calculation.
(FDI) has been strong possibly owing to
projects launched before the onset of the crisis, external commercial borrowing (ECB)
disbursements in April–September were less than half of their 2007/08 levels and external
funding became significantly more expensive (Figure 3). Portfolio outflows amounted to
US$9 billion in April–December, with an outflow of over $4 billion in October alone and a
mild recovery since then.

15
12
9
6
3
0

9
with a US$39 billion drop in October alone (half of which was due to valuation losses).
Equity prices have recovered marginally since October.
The rupee has depreciated despite heavy central bank intervention

The global crisis has hit India's currency and equity markets
20

20

38

(Change in 2008, in percent)

40

10

0

42
0

-20

44
46

-10

-40
-20

-60
Change in exchange rate 1/

-30

Change in stock market index

-80
KOR BRA

IND

IDN

48
Spot market intervention (in billions of U.S. dollars, left axis)

50

Forward market intervention (in billions of U.S. dollars, left axis)

52

Rupees per U.S. dollar (right axis, inverted)

54

-40

MEX PHL RUS MYS VNM THA CHN

Jan-08

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and CEIC Data Company Ltd.

Mar-08

May-08

Jul-08

Sep-08

Nov-08

Sources: Reserve Bank of India; Bloomberg L.P.; and Fund staff estimates.

1/ Exchange rate is defined as national currency per U.S. dollar. Data as of December 30, 2008.

7.
In response to central bank measures liquidity pressures in the domestic money
market have eased since October, but
The call rate has been volatile, but has remained within the policy
rate band since early November
credit conditions remain tight (Box 1).
20
20
RBI repo rate
While overnight rates have come down in
Overnight interbank rate
17
17
RBI reverse repo rate
line with policy rates, TED, overnight index
14
14
swaps, and commercial paper spreads have
11
11
eased only slightly. Moreover, credit
8
8
availability is constrained. Bank credit
5
5
growth accelerated through October,
(In
percent)
2
2
reflecting in part the shift in corporate
Jan-08
Mar-08
May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08
Nov-08
Jan-09
demand to domestic banks following the
Source: Bloomberg L.P.
drying up of other sources of financing.
However, since then it has decelerated sharply, in particular in momentum terms (with
growth negative on a month-on-month, seasonally adjusted basis). Financing from nonbank
financial institutions is constrained by
redemption pressures and poor asset
Corporate profit growth has weakened as costs have risen
performance.
60
22
(Year-on-year change for the average company, in percent)
8.
After several years of rapid
expansion, buoyant profits, and improving
balance sheets, India’s corporate
performance is deteriorating appreciably.
Indian corporates’ balance sheets were
healthy as of March 2008. 3 However, high

50

20

Profit after tax (left axis)
Interest expense to gross profit (right axis)

40
30

16

20

14

10

12

0

10
Mar-07

Jun-07

Sep-07

Dec-07

Mar-08

Source: CEIC Data Company Ltd.

3

18

See Chapter I of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper for an analysis of corporate vulnerabilities.

Jun-08

10
Box 1. Measures Adopted in Response to the Crisis since September 2008
Measures to increase rupee liquidity
•

Cut in policy rates. Repo rate by 350 bps to 5½ percent and reverse repo rate by 200 bps to
4 percent.

•

Cut in cash reserve ratio (CRR). By 400 bps to 5 percent.

•

Cut in statutory liquidity requirement (SLR). By 100 bps to 24 percent of net demand and time
liabilities (NDTL).

•

Repurchase of market stabilization bonds. About 0.3 percent of GDP re-purchased since endSeptember.

•

Term repo facility. 14-day repo facility for banks to onlend to mutual funds, NBFCs, and housing
financing companies (HFCs). Rs 600 billion (1.1 percent of GDP) available, at the repo rate, through
June 2009. SLR reduced by 1½ percentage points for banks using this facility.

•

Refinance facilities. For banks up to 1 percent of NDTL (0.6 percent of GDP), at repo rate, up to
90 days, through June 2009. Additional facilities (0.3 percent of GDP, terms as above, through
March 2010) for the Small Industries Development Bank, the National Housing Bank, and the
Export and Import Bank. Limit on the RBI’s export credit refinance facility (at repo rate) raised from
15 to 50 percent of bank’s outstanding export credit.

•

Other measures. Select oil bonds allowed as collateral in RBI repos. Special purpose vehicle to buy
up to Rs 250 billion (0.5 percent of GDP) in investment grade paper from NBFCs.

Measures to increase FX liquidity
•

FX swaps. For Indian banks with foreign branches or subsidiaries to access FX swaps, up to three
months, through June 2009; for entities with bulk FX requirements through their banks. Reactivation
of RBI’s special facility for conversion of oil bonds into FX.

Measures to increase credit delivery
•

Trade credit. Period of entitlement for concessional rates on rupee export credits increased.

•

Priority sector lending. Bank loans to HFCs for small housing loans classified as priority. Benefits
for SMEs under the Credit Guarantee Scheme enhanced (coverage amount doubled, and guarantee
cover increased from to 50-85 percent).

•

Regulatory forbearance. Extension of existing special regulatory regime on asset classification
(which allows loan assets in high-priority sectors that have been restructured quickly to remain in the
pre-restructuring asset classification category) to commercial real estate and to undersecured
working capital term loans. Special regime also extended to second restructuring of all qualifying
loans (though not to commercial real estate), and to housing loans with a maturity above 10 years
(although additional risk weight of 25 percentage points introduced at time of restructuring).

•

Provisioning requirements. For standard assets reduced to a standard level of 0.4 percent for real
estate, personal loans, capital markets, and select NBFCs.

•

Risk weights. Reduced to 100 percent for commercial real estate assets, claims on select NBFCs,
and asset financing companies.

•

Other measures. Credit targets for public sector banks increased for January-March 2009. Public
sector banks to provide a line of credit to NBFCs for purchase of commercial vehicles.

11
Box 1. Measures Adopted in Response to the Crisis since September 2008, Concluded
Measures to encourage capital inflows
•

Trade credit. All-in-cost ceiling raised by 75–125 bps, depending on maturity.

•

Portfolio investment. Removal of curbs on foreign issuance of equity derivatives (so-called
P-notes) imposed in October 2007. Limit on FII holdings of corporate bonds raised from $3 billion
to $15 billion, and of government bonds from $3 billion to $5 billion. Restriction on allocation of FII
investments across equity and debt lifted.

•

External commercial borrowing (ECB). Increase in borrowing limits per company and for the
economy as a whole (from $22 billion to $35 billion). All-in cost ceiling removed for ECBs under
the approval route (through June 2009) and raised for ECBs under the automatic route. Sectoral
restrictions on ECBs relaxed.

•

Nonresident Indian deposits. Cap on interest rates increased by 175 bps.

•

Other measures. Limit on bank borrowing from overseas branches raised from 25 percent to
50 percent of unimpaired Tier I capital or US$10 mn, whichever is higher.

Fiscal measures
•

Tax. Central VAT cut by 4 ppts (excluding petroleum products; cost of 0.2 percent of GDP).
Reinstatement of import duties on selected products. Accelerated depreciation of 50 percent for
vehicles purchased in January-March 2009.

•

Spending. 0.4 percent of GDP for housing, infrastructure, irrigation, textiles, rural employment, and
social assistance schemes. Limit on market borrowing by states to finance capital expenditure raised
by 0.5 percent of states’ GDP.

•

Promotion of exports. Interest subsidy of 2 percent introduced for export credit for labor intensive
exports (until March 2009). Enhancement of duty drawback benefits.

•

Public sector bank recapitalization: over next two years, 0.4 percent of GDP.

•

Off-budgetary measures. India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited authorized to raise (in
debt financing) Rs 400 billion (0.8 percent of GDP) over the next 18 months.

12
commodity prices and interest rates pushed up firms’ costs and squeezed margins in 2008.
Some importers and firms with large foreign exchange liabilities, incurred partly to finance
overseas acquisitions, are also suffering losses from the rupee depreciation. Corporate profit
growth fell to 9 percent (y/y) in the April–June quarter from about 25 percent in 2007.
Preliminary results for the July–September quarter were weaker, and the 22 percent fall in the
December advance corporate tax payments does not bode well for the profit outlook.
9.
Mirroring global trends, markets are taking a negative view of India’s financial
institutions’ health. Banks, which dominate the financial system, have seen their share
prices fall sharply. Their credit default swap (CDS) spreads and default probabilities have
risen dramatically despite a more positive assessment by bank analysts and credit rating
agencies. A large private bank suffered a modest deposit run in late September that was
quickly contained after official reassurances that the bank was sound. Third quarter results
still point to relatively robust profit growth for most banks, but NPAs are rising. Furthermore,
mutual funds (MFs) have faced significant redemptions (nearly 15 percent of assets in
September) mainly due to corporates’ withdrawals, but the situation has stabilized recently.
Finally, nonbank finance companies (NBFCs) are reported to have seen a dramatic increase
in borrowing costs.
10.
The budget performance has deteriorated substantially this year. During April–
November 2008, tax revenues grew by 15 percent (y/y), but collections slowed significantly
in recent months as economic activity weakened and stimulus measures, notably a
4 percentage point cut in the central VAT, took effect (Figure 4). In the same period,
spending also rose rapidly driven by a soaring subsidy bill, an agricultural loan write off, a
21 percent civil servant wage increase, and the strong off-take of a rural employment scheme
(NREG). With the two supplementary budgets (announced in October and December)
approving additional on-budget spending of 2.7 percent of GDP including to fund the
stimulus packages (0.6 percent of GDP), and subsidy-related bonds of 1.6 percent of GDP,
the deficit is set to exceed the budget target by a substantial amount. As of March 2008,
public debt was 80 percent of GDP, roughly unchanged from end-2007 (see Annex I). 4
IV. OUTLOOK: A MARKED SLOWDOWN WITH HIGH UNCERTAINTY AND DOWNSIDE RISKS
11.
Growth is set to slow markedly in this fiscal year and next. From 9 percent in
2007/08, growth is projected at 6¼ percent in 2008/09 and 5¼ percent in 2009/10, slightly
below market forecasts. 5 With nonagricultural growth falling by 4 percentage points, the
4

These subsidy-related bonds are not included in the authorities’s definition of the central government budget
deficit, while they are included in the staff’s definition.

5

While the Mumbai attacks, which took place in November 2008, might reduce tourism, it is difficult to
disentangle their impact from the broader slowdown.

13

2006/07

2005/06

2004/05

2003/04

2002/03

2001/02

2000/01

1999/00

1998/99

1997/98

1996/97

1995/96

1994/95

1993/94

1992/93

1991/92

1990/91

envisaged slowdown is sharper than that at the time of the 2001 global recession when
nonagricultural growth slowed from 7.8 percent in 1999/2000 to 5.9 percent in 2000/01. The
current global crisis far exceeds the extent
India: Saving-Investment Balance
(In percent of GDP)
of past recessions and India is significantly 25
25
more integrated with the rest of the world. 20
20
Corporate saving
As in 2001, investment is likely to weaken 15
Corporate investment
15
Public saving
substantially via the financing and
Household saving
10
10
confidence channels combined with softer
5
5
demand (Box 2). Moreover, declining
0
0
corporate profitability and savings will
-5
-5
likely reverse the past years’ upward trend
in domestic savings that enabled
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd.
investment-led growth to take off.
Stimulus measures and a good harvest should support consumption somewhat, but the growth
impact of the recently approved fiscal measures could be limited by implementation capacity
constraints and only partial pass through of tax reductions to prices. Export growth is
projected to fall, but weaker domestic demand should also reduce import growth, keeping net
exports’ contribution to growth broadly stable.
12.
Inflation is expected to fall sharply. With commodity prices receding and
slackening demand curbing wage growth and pricing power, inflation is anticipated to drop to
below 3 percent y/y by March 2009 and to an average 2 percent in 2009/10.
13.
The overall balance of payments is projected to be in deficit this year and next.
The current account deficit is projected at below 3 percent of GDP in 2008/09, before
narrowing to 1½ percent of GDP next fiscal year due to lower oil prices and softer domestic
demand, and as the rupee depreciation buffers the effect of slowing external demand on
exports. Although it is difficult to predict when investor risk appetite will return, portfolio
and debt capital flows are unlikely to recover appreciably at least until late 2009.6 FDI flows,
beyond projects already in the pipeline, are also expected to slow and are unlikely to pick up
before the recovery in advanced economies materializes. 7
14.
Reflecting the global economic situation, the margin of uncertainty surrounding
the forecasts is unusually large with still significant downside risks. The main risks stem
from global spillovers. A protracted drought of credit and anemic world growth would stunt

6

See Chapter II of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper, which discusses the determinants of capital flows to
emerging markets and India in particular.

7

The recently disclosed accounting scandal involving Satyam, one of India’s largest IT companies, adds to the
uncertainty of the outlook for foreign direct investment and for the IT and outsourcing sector.

14

Box 2. India—Spillover Channels of the Global Financial Crisis to India
The global crisis is affecting India mainly through the following channels.
•

Lower investment and growth
The contribution from foreign financing has risen significantly
resulting from reduced availability of
In percent of total funds
financing, higher funding costs, and
Foreign Direct Foreign
Equity
Bank
Retained
deteriorating sentiment. By 2007/08,
Investment Borrowing Issuance
Credit
Earnings
the share of Indian corporates’ funding
2003–04
11.8
-7.9
13.8
10.4
71.8
from external sources had risen to 25
2004–05
6.8
5.9
7.2
27.9
52.3
2005–06
8.3
2.4
5.8
26.9
56.6
percent, while equity issuance accounted
2006–07
14.7
10.8
5.0
21.8
47.7
2007–08
15.4
10.5
10.2
20.6
43.3
for an additional 10 percent. Corporate
Sources: Securities and Exchange Board of India, Reserve Bank of India
profitability is expected to deteriorate
and Central Statistical Organization, India.
considerably, thus reducing firms’
internal sources of funding. Weaker demand and uncertainty about the outlook are also depressing
investment.

•

Some firms and sectors could face dollar
India's refinancing needs are high among EMs
45
funding problems. India’s private sector is
Refinancing need in 2009, in billions of U.S. dollars
40
exposed to a deterioration in investor
35
sentiment mainly in the equity market,
30
where foreigners hold about US$53 billion
25
in shares, a third of the free float. In
20
addition, some large Indian firms are facing
15
significant near-term FX refinancing
pressures. The amount of foreign borrowing 10
5
(bonds and loans) by Indian banks and
0
corporates falling due in 2009 is the third
RUS
KOR
IND
MEX
CHN
BRA
PHL
THA
ARG
largest among emerging markets. Moreover,
Source: J.P. Morgan.
the net asset position of Indian banks and
corporates vis-à-vis BIS reporting banks has deteriorated
India's international investment position
has turned negative 1/
rapidly over the last two years, and has become negative.
The availability of trade credits was also sharply reduced in In billions of U.S. dollars
Assets
378
the fall of 2008 in line with global developments.

•

Credit quality could deteriorate substantially, which
could lead financial institutions to cut credit. India’s
credit expansion has been fairly strong compared to other
emerging markets. Maturation of the domestic credit cycle
and an expected deterioration of corporates’ financial
situation (especially SMEs and real estate firms) are
expected to affect banks’ performance adversely.

•

A weaker rupee. FX debt is estimated to amount to 20–
30 percent of total corporate debt. Continued depreciation
would especially affect those firms that have borrowed in
FX without hedging, with banks in turn exposed to the
deterioration in the financial health of their borrowers. It
could also entail higher cost of finance externally and
domestically. A depreciation would also increase the
current account deficit in the short run.

Direct
Portfolio
Other
Reserve
Liabilities
Direct
Portfolio
Equity
Debt
Other
Trade credits
Loans
Currency & deposit
Other

48.2
0.7
16.6
312
427
120
108
87
21
199
47.3
107
43.6
1.85

Memo items
External commercial borrowings 62
Multi- and bilateral loans
58
Total external debt
220
Source: Reserve Bank of India.
1/ As of June 2008.

15

Box 2. India—Spillover Channels of the Global Financial Crisis to India, Concluded
Despite these spillovers and vulnerabilities,
there are risk-mitigating factors.
•

Low levels of external debt and strong
reserve coverage. India’s gross external
financing requirement and total external
debt are low1 and more than covered by
reserves (50 and 75 percent of reserves,
respectively). Although it has increased
recently, the leverage of nonfinancial
firms is in line with regional peers.

•

India's credit growth has been strong
25

200

20

160

15

120

10

80

5

40

0

0
-40

-5
VNM RUS BRA

CHN KOR MYS

THA

PHL

Private sector credit growth in real terms in 2008Q2 (y/y, left axis) 1/
Private sector credit in percent of GDP in 2008Q2 (right axis)
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund, World Economic Outlook , International Financial Statistics and staff
calculations.
1/ Data for the Philippines pertain to end-2007. Except for China nominal credit to the private sector is deflated by the quarterly
GDP deflator. For China, the consumer price index is used.

India's corporate leverage is in line with regional peers

India's reserve cover is high
300

Debt-to-Equity ratio
Market capitalization weighted mean

In billions of U.S. dollars

Emerging Asia

250

India

2.5

200

2.0

150

1.5

MLT amortization in 2009
NRI deposits 1/
Trade credit 1/
CA deficit in 2009

100

1.0

50

0.5

0

0.0

GFR

1995

1997

1999

Source: Fund, Corporate Vulnerability Utility.

1

IDN

Limited spillovers through trade.
A 1 percent slowdown in global growth is
estimated to trim only 0.3 percentage point from India’s growth. In addition, domestic demand
explains almost all of India’s recent growth.

3.0

•

IND

2001

2003

2005

2007

External debt 1/

Reserves 2/

Source: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ As of September 2008
2/ As of December 2008

Declining commodity prices should further lower inflation, narrow the current account
deficit, and limit the fiscal burden of oil subsidies. Declines in nonadministered oil prices
should contribute to the moderation in inflation, leaving room for monetary easing. A
US$10 decline in the oil price reduces the current account deficit by 0.4 percent of GDP and the
cost of oil subsidies by 0.6 percent of GDP.

The expected near-term refinancing need of Indian corporations is estimated at US$14 billion in 2009 (JP Morgan,
based on international bond and loan issuance data).

16
investment, exports, and growth. Consumption could also be hit more, especially if job losses
mount and consumer credit dries up. Also, given the high degree of uncertainty, policy tradeoffs could become difficult to manage. Finally, the elections, due to take place by May 2009,
could add to the policy uncertainty. The main source of upside risk would be from a larger
than expected impact of the stimulus measures.
15.
Feedback loops between the financial and real sectors and between external
shocks and domestic vulnerabilities could be strong. As already unfolding in several
countries, corporate difficulties will lead to increased delinquencies on bank loans,
undermining financial stability and leading to capital deficiencies and lower credit growth,
and in turn causing further difficulties for corporates. Slower growth would further depress
foreign investor sentiment and capital flows. Flagging corporate profitability will lower tax
revenues and worsen the fiscal position, which could drive up interest rates and India’s risk
premium, in turn squeezing corporate profits.
16.
Once the current downturn is overcome, India’s inherent strong long-term
fundamentals should prevail once again. As the current risk aversion recedes, investors are
expected to become more discriminating, which together with a reduced pool of investable
funds entails much greater competition among emerging market countries to attract foreign
capital. Against this, India’s fundamental strengths—arising from its demographic advantage,
well-developed institutions, and large potential domestic demand—remain intact and will
likely be seen favorably by investors relative to countries more dependent on external
demand.
Authorities’ Views
17.
The authorities agreed that India is experiencing knock-on effects of the global
crisis, but considered the staff’s outlook too pessimistic. They noted that like other
developing countries, India is being affected mainly via the trade channels. They contrasted
India’s experience with that of advanced economies where “the contagion spread from the
financial to the real sector, while in India, the slowdown in the real sector was affecting the
financial sector, which in turn has a second-order impact on the real sector”. 8 The authorities
contended that the effects were mainly indirect and have been addressed by the measures
taken, while noting that they stood ready to act swiftly in response to evolving circumstances,
employing both conventional and unconventional measures. They expected 2008/09 growth
at 7 percent. They emphasized the overall strength of domestic demand boosted by fiscal
stimulus and substantial investment in infrastructure and argued that investment had been
financed predominantly via domestic savings. While acknowledging the high uncertainty
surrounding next year’s outlook, they remained confident that once the situation stabilizes,
8

Governor Subbarao’s speech at the Bankers’ Club, Kolkata on December 10, 2008.

17
growth would return to the high trajectory of recent years. Overall, the authorities were
cautiously optimistic, while agreeing that the main sources of risks were external.
V. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
18.
The policy discussions were conducted recognizing that policymaking the world
over is in uncharted territory, and that, policy responses therefore should continue to
be flexible, but disciplined. The authorities have already taken numerous measures to
address the crisis. Particularly noteworthy are the continued liberalization of the capital
account and the renewed commitment to financial sector reforms exemplified by the decision
not to ban shortselling of stocks and by the introduction of exchange-traded currency and
interest rate futures. As the crisis spreads and deepens, priorities already identified in the
medium-term reform agenda should determine the focus of policies, recognizing that some
painful adjustment is inevitable. In addition, whenever government involvement is deemed
necessary, it would be most effective in partnership with the private sector. If extraordinary
measures are needed, an upfront announcement of an exit strategy would help avoid the
perception that medium-term sustainability could be at risk. Reforms that would poise the
economy for a stronger recovery should be implemented without delay, even if the near-term
payoff may not seem large. With competition among emerging markets to attract foreign
capital likely to be fierce when global capital markets normalize, strong fundamentals and
policies will play a key differentiating role. With little fiscal room for further maneuver, the
priorities are: (i) ensuring adequate financing to the real economy while protecting financial
stability; and (ii) facilitating corporate restructuring so that viable companies can emerge
stronger and unviable companies can be quickly and efficiently resolved.
Authorities’ Views
19.
The authorities emphasized that in the current circumstances it is not possible to
have a precise roadmap for the policy response. There were simply too many “unknown
unknowns” and the measures necessarily needed to be partly reactive. They underlined their
commitment to respond flexibly and pragmatically to the evolving situation to mitigate the
impact of the crisis. While they did not share the staff’s view of the centrality of enhancing
corporate restructuring mechanisms at this juncture and saw greater room for fiscal stimulus,
they agreed that the major challenge was to maintain the flow of credit to the economy while
maintaining credit quality.

18
A. Keeping Credit Flowing While Maintaining Financial Stability:
The Role of Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
Background
Until October, large-scale foreign exchange intervention

20.
In the wake of the global financial
offset RBI liquidity injections
2000
2000
(In billions of rupees)
crisis, the RBI quickly turned its focus to
1000
1000
supporting growth and maintaining
financial stability. Until early September,
0
0
monetary policy had been geared towards
-1000
-1000
Impact on liquidity (positive = injection)
reducing inflation, with the policy rate and
Liquidity operations (positive = injection) 1/
FX intervention (positive = rupee sales)
the CRR each raised by 125 bps between
-2000
-2000
Jan-08
Apr-08
Jul-08
Oct-08
May and July. But as financial market
Sources: Reserve Bank of India; CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes repo and open market operations (including in market stabilization bonds), change in
conditions tightened, the RBI changed
central government deposits at the RBI, and impacts of changes in the cash reserve ratio and the
statutory liquidity ratio.
gears, implementing measures to ease
liquidity—notably by cutting the CRR by 400 bps, the policy rate by 350 bps beginning in
late October, and the SLR (see Box 1). However, because the RBI intervened aggressively,
liquidity pressures persisted until early November. Since then, the decline in intervention,
combined with additional liquidity measures, have eased these pressures significantly.
Nevertheless, as the staff’s outlook for the balance of payments suggests further outflows,
liquidity strains could reemerge, and in turn could quickly threaten solvency. Markets expect
the RBI to ease monetary policy further in the coming months.
21.
Financing conditions remain tight. Overall financing to firms appears to have
contracted, despite the substitution of domestic credit for other sources of corporate funding.
Banks have become more reluctant to extend credit, especially to sectors to which lending
had expanded rapidly in recent years, such as real estate, small- and medium-sized enterprises
Nonbank financing for industry has fallen sharply
(SMEs), nonbank financial
Change
Change
H1
H1
corporations, and consumers. The
2007/08 2008/09 (year-on-year) (year-on-year)
decline in credit supply reflects
(In billions of rupees)
(In percent)
Bank credit
442
604
162
36.8
concerns about the outlook for the
Flow from nonbanks to corporates
1,198
667
-531
-44.3
Domestic capital issues (bond and equity)
200
119
-81
-40.5
real economy, an uncertain funding
Issues of commercial paper
159
216
57
35.6
ADR/GDR
112
47
-65
-58.3
environment, and the increased
External commercial borrowing
727
286
-442
-60.7
attractiveness of government
Total
1,640
1,272
-368
-22.5
Source: Reserve Bank of India, "Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments: Mid-Term
securities due to the expectation of
Review 2008¬09".
capital gains (on the back of further
monetary easing). In light of these pressures, commercial lending rates have not fallen in line
with the policy rate, and prime lending rates (PLR) are now in the range of 8–10 percent in

19
real terms based on expected inflation. 9 Although demand for credit is likely to decline, tight
financing conditions are expected to persist into 2009: the slowing economy will further
decelerate deposit growth, thus constraining the supply of bank credit, while nonbank
financing, foreign financing, and domestic capital market activity are unlikely to revive any
time soon. In addition, rising concerns about corporate sector health are likely to keep the
cost of credit high.
Policy Response
22.
With the continued very sharp decline in inflation, there is room for further
interest rate cuts. Despite having reduced the policy rate by 350 bps since October, the real
policy rate (based on projected inflation) has risen. While interest rates may have only a
limited impact on credit growth in this uncertain environment, further rate cuts could act as
an important signal to the market about the outlook for inflation. They would also reduce the
cost of funds for financial institutions and their customers (to the extent that they are passed
on) and reduce debt service costs for the government. 10 In addition, lowering the reverse repo
rate would reduce incentives for banks to deposit funds at the RBI. Moreover, the impact of
further rate cuts on capital flows and the exchange rate would likely be limited: the risk that
lower interest rates may prompt outflows is small––interest rate differentials have actually
widened in favor of India and an improved financing (and growth) outlook could spur
inflows. In any case, the exchange rate pass through would likely be quite small given soft
demand conditions. 11
23.
The numerous measures taken by the RBI to boost liquidity and its
preparedness to do more in the event of renewed pressure are welcome. The reductions
in the policy rates, the CRR, and the SLR were fully warranted. If liquidity were to tighten
again, the RBI has a significant stock of “captured” liquidity that could be released: market
stabilization bonds could be repurchased; the CRR and SLR could be lowered further; and all
subsidy-related bonds issued by the government could be made eligible for repos with the
RBI. 12 In addition, to ensure the availability of liquidity over the longer horizon, the RBI
9

The PLR reported by the RBI averaged 12–14 percent in November, but some private banks have reported
PLRs of 14–17 percent.

10

Banks have to compete for funds with small savings schemes, whose administered interest rates are not linked
to market rates and act as a floor for commercial bank deposit rates. Linking these rates to market rates, as
proposed by the Reddy and Mohan committees in the early 2000s, would facilitate monetary policy
transmission.
11

As discussed in Chapter III of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper, the exchange rate pass through is
likely to be relatively weak in an economic downturn and in an environment of volatile exchange rates.

12

In this connection, staff noted that the government should fund its entire borrowing requirement through
regular government securities, rather than issuing special-purpose bonds.

20
could (i) introduce a longer-term (say 1 month) repo facility available to all counterparties,
and (ii) increase the amounts available under the 90-day special refinance facility and
announce its extension until at least end-2009. 13 If these steps should still prove insufficient,
the RBI could consider extending eligibility of collateral accepted at its repo window to
corporate bonds and commercial paper, but with adequate safeguards regarding a minimum
credit rating and appropriate discount. The latter measure would also boost the liquidity of
corporate bonds, aiding market development and the monetary policy transmission
mechanism. Measures along these lines have been taken by numerous countries (Box 3).
Markets expect further depreciation
24.
Exchange rate policy needs to be
18
60
3M risk reversal (left axis)
consistent with ensuring sufficient
15
50
3M NDF premium/discount (annualized, right axis) 1/
liquidity in the system. Until November,
12
40
the large foreign exchange intervention
9
30
undertaken in the wake of large capital
6
20
outflows exacerbated pressures on
3
10
0
0
domestic liquidity and resulted in a large
(In percent)
-3
-10
loss in reserves. If pressures on the rupee
Jan-07 Apr-07 Jul-07 Oct-07 Jan-08 Apr-08 Jul-08 Oct-08
were to re-emerge, letting the exchange rate Source: Bloomberg L.P.
find a floor would create the conditions
1/ Positive implies expectation of a rupee depreciation.
under which exchange rate expectations
provide incentives for capital inflows. The downside risks of such an approach for banks and
corporates would likely be limited, as banks’ foreign exchange exposure is subject to strict
limits and corporates’ exposure to exchange rate risk appears low. 14 Collecting data on and
disclosing the overall unhedged foreign exchange exposure of the corporate sector would
help reduce uncertainty about its financial
The real exchange rate has depreciated, reversing last year's
appreciation
health.
120
120
REER

25.
The rupee appears broadly in line
with its equilibrium level. In 2008, the
rupee depreciated over 14 percent in
nominal effective terms and 11 percent in
real effective terms, and is broadly in line
with its long-term average. The latest IMF
Consultative Group on Exchange

NEER

110

110

100

100

90

90

80

80
Index, 2000=100

70
Jan-00

Apr-01

Jul-02

Oct-03

Jan-05

Apr-06

Jul-07

70
Oct-08

Source: IMF, Asia and Pacific Department database.

13

By increasing the availability of term money, these steps would be of more general benefit to the development
of India’s financial markets.
14

As discussed in Chapter I of the Selected Issues Paper, foreign exchange debt is estimated at 20–30 percent of
corporate debt and stress tests indicate that corporate balance sheets are more sensitive to interest rate risk than
exchange rate risk.

21
Box 3: Select Cross-Country Comparisons of Financial Measures
This box provides a selective list of financial market measures taken by other emerging market countries in
the past few months.
Domestic Liquidity Provision
• Hong Kong SAR: Longer-term liquidity (collateralized lending raised from 1 to 3 months).
•

Korea: Expanded collateral for repos (bank bonds, guaranteed mortgage-backed securities, MBS).

•

Philippines: Expanded collateral for domestic repos (to include FX sovereign debt).

•

Russia: Expanded collateral for repos (stocks, government guaranteed MBS); expansion of
counterparties to repo operations (low-rated banks); provision of long-term liquidity (up to 1 year,
no collateral).

•

Japan: Expanded collateral for repos (additional government bonds; guaranteed asset-backed
commercial paper; lower quality corporate debt).
FX Liquidity Provision
• Brazil: $20 bn central bank credit line for corporates with FX debt and $10 bn for exporters;
auctions of 1-month USD liquidity lines; allow BRZ sovereign debt as collateral for FX repos.
•

Hong Kong SAR: the HKMA to conduct FX swaps with banks on an as-needed basis.

•

Hungary: overnight FX swap facility for domestic banks, facilitated by an agreement between the
Central Bank and the ECB.

•

Korea: $5 billion Ex-Im Bank credit line (banks); $55 billion BOK credit line for trade finance.

• Turkey: daily dollar auctions to inject FX; limit on export rediscount loans raised.
Facilities to Supplement International Reserves
• Korea, Brazil, Mexico, Singapore: FX swaps with US Fed.
•

Korea: FX swaps with Japan ($20bn) and China ($28 bn).

•

Hungary: FX swap with the ECB (€5 bn).

• Iceland: FX swaps with Nordic central banks (€1.5 bn).
Credit Guarantees
• Hong Kong SAR: loan guarantee fund for non-listed companies with risk sharing up provisions.
•

Korea: Expansion of government credit guarantee program for SMEs.

•

Russia: Government to provide corporate loan guarantees to improve liquidity conditions.

•

Japan: Expanded guarantees on new SME lending up to 6 percent of GDP.

•

UK: Government guarantee for half of up to $30 bn of new and existing SME bank loans with risk
sharing provisions.
Bank Recapitalization
• Brazil: Two largest state banks allowed to purchase stakes in private banks.
•

Hong Kong SAR: Contingent Bank Capital Facility (HKMA).

•

Korea: Bank Capital Expansion Fund ($15.5 billion), financed by the Bank of Korea, the Korea
Development Bank, and outside investors.

•

Russia: Long-term subordinated debt financing ($30 bn), primarily to state-owned banks, from
central bank and government.

22
Rate (CGER) exercise also continued to show that the rupee is close to its equilibrium level,
although considerable uncertainty surrounds the impact of the crisis on the current account
and capital flows. Even though there were large sales of FX during the recent market turmoil,
there was sizable two-way intervention during 2008.
26.
A limited amount of foreign exchange could be made available in the form of
swaps to relieve foreign exchange shortages and allay concerns about external
financing. The RBI’s recent introduction of foreign exchange swaps for banks with foreign
branches or subsidiaries is welcome. If broader foreign exchange shortages should
materialize, the RBI could hold regular foreign exchange auctions, open to all RBI
counterparties and with the total amount available (over a specified period of time)
announced at the outset. Brazil, for example, has introduced such FX swap facilities and
direct FX loans to corporates, announcing a sizable amount up front. The amount committed
would need to be meaningfully large, within the constraints posed by reserve adequacy.
India’s reserves remain comfortable compared to imports, short-term external debt, and the
external gross financing requirement, and cover more than 70 percent of non-FDI external
liabilities. However, they represent only about 30 percent of domestic financial liabilities
(M3), which might become the more relevant metric if financial stability conditions were to
deteriorate markedly. 15
Authorities’ Views and Plans
27.
The RBI stated that the steps they had already taken to boost liquidity had
proven effective, as evidenced by the decline in the interbank rate to within the policy
rate corridor. In addition, the introduction of new refinance facilities for certain sectors of
the economy (e.g., exporters, housing finance companies, and small and medium-sized
enterprises) were helping to alleviate stress on these sectors and obviating the need to expand
repoable collateral. The authorities noted that several of the RBI’s new and expanded
liquidity facilities (including those for foreign exchange) had not been fully utilized, and that
banks were depositing excess liquidity in the RBI’s overnight facility and still had unused
collateral with which to access the RBI’s repo facility, especially after the build-up in their
government securities’ holdings in recent weeks. These factors indicated that liquidity
pressures had been addressed successfully.
28.
The authorities saw little evidence of unmet credit demand, but expressed
concerns about slowing credit growth which they viewed as primarily demand-driven.

15

Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (“Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and International Reserves,” NBER
Working Paper No. 14217, 2008) notes that concerns about domestic financial stability were a key motive for
emerging markets’ massive reserve accumulation in recent years.

23
RBI officials noted that banks continued to lend vigorously and that credit growth net of the
additional demand for credit resulting from reduced external financing remained around
20 percent (y/y) until end-October. While they acknowledged that with deposit growth
slowing it would be difficult for banks to reduce deposit rates and hence lending rates
markedly, the RBI expected the cost of credit to moderate as the measures to improve the
flow of credit took effect. However, they expressed concern about the slow pace of
transmission from policy to market interest rates and about what appeared to be a noticeable
decline in credit demand since October.
29.
The RBI indicated its willingness to consider adopting additional policy
measures if needed, and they have since reduced interest rates and the CRR. The RBI
intended to continue coordinating its repurchase of market stabilization bonds closely with
the issuance of government securities to minimize the net liquidity impact. Additional
options if needed included lowering the CRR, lowering the SLR but with due consideration
for its prudential importance, and possibly, increasing the amount of refinance available to
financial institutions. Since India’s banks remain financially robust, the RBI intended to keep
relying on them as the primary channels of credit intermediation, including to nonbank
financial institutions. Broadening the types of collateral accepted at the RBI’s repo window
might also be an option, though the RBI noted that in the case of corporate bonds, the
absence of a robust secondary market (and hence of reliable pricing information) would make
it difficult to accept them. Finally, the authorities highlighted the importance of an exit
strategy from the exceptional policy measures adopted in the wake of the crisis, and noted
that many of these measures included explicit sunset provisions.
30.
The RBI reaffirmed that India pursues a flexible exchange rate policy,
intervening only to smooth volatility. In this connection, they pointed to the large
depreciation of the rupee against the U.S. dollar in recent months. However, the authorities
were skeptical about the staff’s recommendation of letting the exchange rate find a floor,
since in times of financial volatility, the floor has no significance.
B. Keeping Credit Flowing While Maintaining Financial Stability:
The Role of Financial Sector Policy
Context
31.
Based on headline indicators India’s financial system compares favorably
internationally, but rising credit risk and liquidity pressures are putting it under strain
(Box 4). Indian banks appear well-capitalized, relatively liquid, and have low NPA ratios and
only limited exposure to structured credit products and troubled financial institutions.
However, over the last few years, a rapid domestic credit expansion, combined with a sharp
increase in foreign liabilities, has increased banks’ vulnerability to slowing economic activity
and global deleveraging. The downturn in the corporate sector (including in real estate) is of

24

Box 4. India: Financial Stability Risks
Financial stability risks in India have risen in line with global developments. CDS spreads for Indian banks jumped
sharply in mid-September and although they have eased since November, the remain elevated and are comparable to
those of Indonesian and Korean banks, which are perceived to be vulnerable countries. The Moody’s KMV one-year
expected default frequencies (EDFs) have also spiked, but are lower than default probabilities implied by CDS spreads.
The credit ratings of major Indian banks have also been affirmed with only ICICI’s U.K. subsidiary being revised
downward to the same level as the parent company and three other small banks downgraded since the global financial
crisis began. Some market analysts note that current CDS spreads overstate the risk of default of Indian banks, and reflect
instead the severe dislocation and illiquidity of Indian CDS.

India’s banking system, however, remains vulnerable,
especially to credit and liquidity risks.

CAR and liquidity appear adequate
20

In percent
IDN

KAZ

18
US Broker Dealer
SAF

16

CAR

Indian banks compare favorably internationally in terms
of capitalization and wholesale funding risks. Their
average capital adequacy ratio (CAR) is 12½ percent, with
tier 1 capital close to 9 percent.1 Their credit-to-deposits (CD)
ratio at 74 percent is relatively low, particularly compared to
those countries bearing the brunt of the global crisis.1 The CD
ratio of Indian banks is affected by a 24 percent SLR held
mostly in cash and government securities, which provides a
cushion against liquidity shocks.

PHL

14

EMEA
Latin Am erica

Em erging
MYS
CHN

12

RUS
Asia
ex. Japan, China

INDIA

KO R

JPN

10

ICE

BRA
Europe
AUS
Nordic

USA

8
50

100

150

200

250

Credit-to-deposit ratio
Source: U BS.

Banks' capital should be able to withstand a doubling of NPAs

Credit risk. Staff’s stress tests indicate that the
In percentage points
capitalization of systemically important banks does
Foreign
not drop below the regulatory CAR minimum
Private
(9 percent) if impaired loans rise to twice the current
gross NPA ratio of 2½ percent. This provides some
Public
comfort. However, spillovers from the global
financial crisis coinciding with the turning of the
Top 30 banks
domestic credit cycle could result in a substantial
increase in NPAs. For example, some countries
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
during the Asian crisis saw NPAs increase as much as
Change in CAR
Change in NPAs
200-300 percent. In such an extreme scenario, the
Sources: Bankscope; and Fund staff estimates.
capital position of a number of Indian systemically
1/ Based on staff's stress test estimates of top thirty banks by asset size as of March 2008.
important banks would fall below the minimum CAR.
In addition, while banks’ interest rate risk is relatively low as most loans (including mortgages) are at floating
rates, indirect credit risks related to an interest rate spike could be significant. In terms of sectoral exposure,
industry accounts for about 40 percent of total bank credit (of which roughly a quarter is to small firms). The
property sector, which has come under considerable stress with real estate prices already down sharply and likely
to fall further, accounts for about 19 percent of bank credit (with the majority accounted for by housing loans),
although this does not include the indirect exposure via nonbank financing institutions and collateral.

1

These data refer to September 2008.

25

Box 4. India: Financial Stability Risks, Concluded
•

Liquidity risk. Even before the onset of the recent crisis, Indian banks had seen much more rapid credit than
deposit growth. This had been accompanied by a sharp rise in external liabilities to BIS reporting banks (with
liabilities at US$51billion at end-June 2008 or about 5 percent of total assets, double their end-2006 level)
financing a growing share of foreign currency loans to residents (from 16.2 percent of total foreign assets in
March 2001 to 47.8 percent in December 2007), suggesting a potential maturity mismatch in their FX book. The
largest share of external liabilities is accounted for by
Credit growth has outpaced deposit mobilization
nonresident deposits (27 percent), a relatively stable
35
y/y change, in percent
Non-food credit
source of finance, although in the past they have
Total deposits
declined at times of stress. Starting in September, the
30
withdrawal of foreign credit lines to banks in India
and Indian bank branches abroad increased dollar
25
funding risks. While banks responded by borrowing in
the domestic interbank market, the spike in interest
rates demonstrated the link between domestic and
20
global liquidity.

•

15
Exposure to structured credit products, troubled
Jan-07 Apr-07 Jul-07 Oct-07 Jan-08 Apr-08 Jul-08 Oct-08
financial institutions, and derivatives. According to
Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund staff calculations.
the RBI, India has virtually no exposure to
U.S. subprime mortgage assets or to other structured credit products. The total exposure to five troubled global
institutions is reported at US$1 billion (0.1 percent of system’s assets). While these exposures are small compared
to earnings and capital, they are fairly concentrated. As in Korea, Indian banks also face an earnings shock from
FX derivatives losses (the authorities estimate mark-to-market losses at $5.5 billion).

•

Foreign exchange risk. Stringent daily limits on net foreign exchange open position limits and restrictions on
foreign borrowing by banks are deemed to have limited their exposure to FX risks. Nevertheless, it is not clear to
what extent banks may be affected indirectly by corporations’ unhedged FX exposures and/or FX derivative losses.
Also, within their FX book, banks may have maturity mismatches, which have not been publicly disclosed.

•

Equity risk: banks’ overall exposure to equity is limited to less than 40 percent of net worth and if loans are
secured against shares, the margin has to be 50 percent: nevertheless, the latter may be insufficient in some cases
when equity volatility is as high as in recent months.

•

There are also several information gaps (e.g. off-balance sheet derivative positions, and foreign borrowing
mismatches and covenants) that make a conclusive assessment of financial stability risks difficult. These gaps
call for further data dissemination, analysis of asset quality, and stress testing of banks allowing for extreme events,
multiple factors and feedback loops from the corporate sector.

26
particular concern, as is the fact that risks
Indian banks had recently increased funding from foreign sources
180
appear to be concentrated in a few
Liabilities of Banks Vis-à-Vis BIS Reporting Banks, June 2008
(In billions of U.S. dollar)
institutions. Information gaps, especially
150
related to derivatives positions and data for
120
detailed stress tests, cloud the staff’s
90
assessment. In addition, significant duration
Change since December 2006
60
mismatches and deteriorating asset quality
Outstanding in December 2006
30
in NBFCs are worrisome. These problems
0
have in turn affected MFs, which are some
KOR CHN RUS IND BRA MYS MEX THA PHL IDN VNM
of the main investors in the securities issued Source: Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics, October 2008.
by NBFCs. While MFs and NBFCs have
combined assets equivalent to only 14 percent of banking assets, they are linked to banks
through funding relationships and the combined impact of their stress on the cost of working
capital as witnessed by the spike in commercial paper rates make them systemically
important.
32.
In light of the deterioration in economic conditions, the RBI has eased
prudential guidelines for loans. Provisioning norms for lending to sectors that had
previously been subject to higher standards (such as real estate, personal loans, and exposures
to capital markets) have been reduced to the rate prevailing for most other loans. Similarly,
risk weights on exposures previously subject to a higher risk weight have also been reduced.
Commercial real estate loans have been made eligible for special treatment under the RBI's
prudential regulations for restructured loans, such that even after restructuring loans can
continue to be classified as "standard". In addition, standard accounts (except exposures to
commercial real estate, capital markets, and personal loans) that have to undergo a second
restructuring no longer need to have their loan classification downgraded.
Policy Response
33.
These circumstances call for careful identification and disclosure of systemic
risks in the financial system. Detailed analysis of bank asset quality and off-balance sheet
structures is essential, with mark-to-market accounting important to ensure that asset quality
problems are not masked. 16 Multifactor stress tests for extreme events, particularly credit and
liquidity shocks and allowing for feedback loops between the financial and nonfinancial
sectors, which have tended to be greatly underestimated in a number of countries, would be

16

The insurance regulator’s decision to direct life insurers to furnish data on the performance of their funds is a
step in the right direction.

27
advisable. 17 Stepped-up efforts of this type have been adopted by the Hong Kong Monetary
Authority, which has intensified stress testing of banks and brokers and issued additional
guidance to them. Data on critical variables such as open foreign exchange exposures and
derivative positions of financial institutions and corporates should be disseminated and
monitoring mechanisms for foreign and other wholesale borrowing could be strengthened.
(For example, Mexico recently required corporations to report the losses that would result
from their derivative exposures for given changes in market variables.) The information
gathered could then be disseminated through a regular financial stability report.
34.
International experience suggests that early loss recognition and bank
recapitalization (where necessary) are the measures most likely to be effective in
restoring the flow of credit. Key steps in this process would include the following:
•

Avoiding masking the underlying capital position of financial institutions. Recent
reductions in provisioning requirements are consistent with countercyclical prudential
regulation and cuts in risk weights can also be viewed in this light, particularly since
they still meet the minimum Basel standards. However, measures that permit
regulatory forbearance on asset classification—for example, allowing restructured
assets not to be classified as NPAs—obscure banks’ true asset quality and undermine
confidence in the accuracy of their accounts in the absence of disclosure. These
measures could defer the recognition of bad assets, encourage adverse selection of
borrowers, and undermine risk management practices.

•

Providing incentives for early loss recognition. Banks could be given the right to
absorb the losses arising from the difference between the book and new net present
value of restructured assets in a special account limited in size (say up to 1 percent of
risk-weighted assets), not immediately set off against regulatory capital. The
accounting losses in this account could be amortized over time or through capital
raised when markets become vibrant again. Also, consideration could be given to
making public money available to banks for recapitalization conditional on certain
restructuring targets.

•

Identifying capital needs and recapitalizing banks. The RBI should move quickly
to estimate the likely increase in NPAs, and hence the possible need for additional
capital. The authorities have announced their intention to raise the capital of some
public banks to 12 percent of risk weighted assets, and have pledged spending of
0.4 percent of GDP for this purpose. This proposed increase in capital should be

17

The BIS notes that the current crisis was possibly compounded by weaknesses in stress testing practices. See
Bank for International Settlements, "Principles for sound stress testing practices and supervision" (January
2009), http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs147.htm.

28
adequate to face an increase in NPAs of up to 200 percent, which is in line with
India’s past experience in the 2002–03 downturn, but may not be sufficient to
withstand a more severe deterioration in asset quality. 18 If additional recapitalization
were needed, private money should be the first option, given the limited fiscal space.
With public banks accounting for about 70 percent of system assets, removing the
10 percent cap on single investors’ voting rights and reducing the 51 percent
minimum state ownership in public banks would be instrumental. If public
recapitalization becomes necessary, high standards of transparency should be upheld,
and a clear exit strategy announced. Given constraints on funding for recapitalization,
it may be necessary to exercise regulatory forbearance on the minimum capital asset
ratio (CAR) during the transition period of recapitalization.
•

Facilitating the disposal of impaired assets. To bolster the market for NPAs,
restrictions on foreign investment in asset reconstruction companies (ARCs) should
be eased. Also to expand the participants in the NPA market, nonbank financial
secured creditors should be given the same rights as bank secured creditors under the
Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest (SARFAESI) Act.

35.
Cyclical and structural limitations on the banking system underscore the
importance of advancing the authorities’ financial reform agenda. Besides cyclical
factors, such as moderating deposit growth and high credit to deposit ratios, expansion of
bank credit is also constrained by structural factors, including the high government borrowing
requirement and priority sector lending. This highlights the importance of implementing
recommendations to develop nonbank financing in line with the Rajan Report and accelerate
capital account liberalization, as in the Tarapore II Report. Advances in these areas are
essential to ensure that sufficient financing is available to support India’s ambitious growth
trajectory. 19 The priorities are as follows:
•

Developing the corporate bond market. To build the institutional investor base,
insurance companies and pension funds should be allowed to invest a greater share of
their assets in corporate bonds. The enactment of the insurance and pension reform
bills now in parliament would also be important. Foreign participation remains

18

International evidence suggests that bank recapitalizations during times of financial distress have cost on
average 6 percent of GDP (Laeven and Valencia, 2008, "Systemic Banking Crises: A New Database" IMF
Working Paper No. 08/224). The capital of the whole Indian banking system stood at about 7 percent of GDP as
of March 2008. However, it should be noted that the latter is not the upper limit of potential recapitalization
costs, which depend on the amount of impaired assets.

19

Without this, financing India’s ambitious target of $500 billion in infrastructure investment by 2012 would
require more than doubling bank credit to infrastructure over the next four years.

29
instrumental to promote market liquidity, which will require raising the limits on FII
investment in corporate bonds considerably. 20
•

Further capital account liberalization. The authorities have already taken numerous
measures, some since the conclusion of the mission (see Box 1). 21 To sustain access
of Indian borrowers to foreign capital and ensure smooth refinancing of external debt,
all interest rate caps and minimum maturity requirements on foreign borrowing,
including trade credits, should be lifted. To position India well for when the tide of
capital flows turns, the authorities should (i) liberalize FDI, especially in the financial
sector; (ii) ease restrictions on foreign borrowing and foreign participation in local
debt securities markets; 22 and (iii) expand the range of contracts and participants in
the derivatives markets. Consideration could be given to tapping multilateral
development banks’ trade credits. Rediscount facilities for trade credits could be
expanded and foreign exchange auctions for this specific purpose (as part of the
foreign exchange swaps proposed above or separately as outright sales) could be
carried out.

•

Improving banking system efficiency and reach. When credit is less readily
available, the premium on its efficient allocation becomes greater. Efficiency could be
improved by (i) lowering the minimum government ownership in public banks and
increasing managerial autonomy; (ii) liberalizing interest rates on priority-sector loans
and introducing priority-sector loan certificates; (iii) allowing greater foreign
investment in banks; and (iv) allowing more consolidation in the banking sector,
including by domestically incorporated subsidiaries of foreign banks.

36.
Government-assisted refinance and credit guarantees could also be an option to
encourage banks to extend credit, but transparency and appropriate assessment and
pricing of risks should be ensured. In case unconventional measures entailing greater
government intervention become necessary, government refinance and credit guarantees can
be a timely and largely market-based means of alleviating a credit crunch. The advantage of
these programs is that they involve sharing of risk and reward, while loans would be
administered by the banks, thus exploiting their technical expertise. There are a number of
20

The limit on FII investment in corporate bonds was raised to $15 billion from $6 billion on January 2, 2009.

21

Portfolio equity investment is highly liberalized and restrictions on ECBs have been gradually eased.
Nevertheless, ECBs are still subject to a number of restrictions, and FDI to sector-specific limits and exclusions.
22

For example, market participants indicated that there is good appetite for mezzanine financing—a hybrid
product of equity and debt financing, which is considered external commercial borrowing—and investing in
distressed assets, but current restrictions are binding.

30
these programs in India, for example, via the EXIM Bank, the National Housing Bank, and
the Small Industries Development Bank of India, where the RBI provides refinancing, and
more recently via the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL), which will
issue government-guaranteed bonds to provide refinancing for infrastructure. The
government could allow the IIFCL to ratchet-up its refinancing activities and expand the
scope of its support for public-private partnerships (PPPs) by permitting further debt
issuance. However, due regard would need to be paid to transparency by disclosing the
contingent liabilities and managing the resulting fiscal risks. Recently, Hong Kong SAR and
the U.K. introduced credit guarantees for nonlisted companies and SMEs, respectively, with
explicit risk sharing mechanisms. Consideration would also need to be given to lifting
interest rate ceilings on on-lending to reflect the true credit risks of borrowers or to providing
explicit partial guarantees for excess risk held by financial institutions.
37.
Crisis preparedness exercises would enhance the authorities’ ability to intervene
quickly if financial conditions were to deteriorate significantly. These exercises should
aim especially at strengthening cross-institutional coordination, speeding up decision making
processes, and reviewing intervention frameworks. An interagency task force may be helpful
in this regard. For example, Hong Kong SAR has established a Task Force on Economic
Challenges and Korea has set up a high level committee to prepare contingency plans. Also,
should concerns about financial stability intensify, possibly as a result of financial contagion,
the authorities could consider arranging foreign exchange swaps with other central banks and
availing themselves of the IMF’s Short-Term Liquidity Facility (SLF) to allay concerns about
the availability of external financing. 23 If the funding situation of banks deteriorated
substantially, a guarantee on banks’ new debt could be considered such as in Korea, given
that capital controls limit the scope for residents’ outflows. An explicit blanket guarantee to
all banks’ creditors should be reserved for more extreme events.
Authorities’ Views
38.
The RBI reiterated that the financial system is well capitalized and that the
policy stance has consistently balanced growth, inflation, and financial stability
concerns. They noted that the RBI’s Financial Self Assessment, which will be published in
early 2009, confirmed this assessment. With the average regulatory CAR at about 13 percent,
well above the 9 percent minimum (which in turn is 1 percentage point above the minimum
under Basel II), the authorities did not expect that a major bank recapitalization program
would be needed although a few smaller public banks may require additional capital. In the
medium term, banks generally were deemed to have sufficient headroom to maintain a
12 percent CAR, despite the increase in bank assets and the new requirements under

23

India would have access of up to SDR20.8 billion under the SLF.

31
Basel II. 24 Derivatives exposures were largely concentrated in foreign banks operating in
India, while daily net foreign exchange open positions limits were strictly enforced. Detailed
analysis of institutions’ assets and off-balance sheet items was already underway through
periodic off-site and on-site inspections. 25 With regards to the sharp deterioration of banks’
market performance (e.g., equity prices and CDS spreads), the RBI noted that these were
poor indicators of credit risk perception of financial institutions, and that in any case such
market information was only available for a few banks.
39.
The authorities did not yet see any evidence of a turn in the credit cycle and
maintained that banks were well-positioned to weather a deterioration in market
conditions. Instead of banks’ reluctance to lend, the problem was more that high economic
growth witnessed in the last few years had resulted in a sharp rise in demand for bank credit
and the onset of the global financial turmoil had further raised this demand due to the drying
up of external funding sources. Moreover, India’s banks have sufficient margins (loan to
value ratio) and capital to absorb loan losses should they materialize, although at present
there was no reason to expect a substantial increase in NPAs. Indeed, RBI officials stated that
the stress tests carried out in the RBI’s self assessment—which is yet to be published—had
not revealed significant risks in this respect.
40.
The RBI emphasized that appropriate regulatory and supervisory measures had
already been undertaken to maintain financial stability and keep credit flowing. RBI
officials noted that systematic stress testing was being done and that reporting of banks’
exposure to sensitive sectors (such as real estate, unsecured consumer lending, SMEs, and
equities) and their liquidity positions had recently been enhanced: a new liquidity monitoring
framework had just been established for rupee funds and a similar one was being developed
for FX liquidity. Recent reductions in provisioning requirements and risk weights to
particular sectors were counter-cyclical prudential measures. Moreover, allowing restructured
assets not to be classified as NPAs was seen as a temporary measure to encourage banks to
restructure their assets during the current slowdown as it is always better to go for
restructuring rather than allow the impaired assets to turn into NPAs. They noted that
coordination among agencies was already effective and that the Prime Minister himself
headed a committee tasked with sustaining growth and safeguarding financial stability.
Finally, the deposit insurance coverage was judged to be adequate covering 93 percent of the
total number of accounts as against international benchmarks of 80 percent.

24

Apart from equity, banks have been provided with a variety of capital raising options for Tier I and II capital,
such as innovative perpetual debt instruments, upper Tier -II debt, preference shares, and subordinated debt.
25

In India, off-balance sheet vehicles in the form of SPVs for securitization exist, but extensive guidelines, in
line with the international best practices, have been issued and liquidity facilities to SPVs are subject to a capital
charge.

32
41.
The authorities were satisfied with the functioning of India’s insolvency
framework. The corporate debt restructuring framework (for out-of-court workouts) and the
SARFAESI Act (which strengthens the hand of secured creditors) have worked well,
facilitating debt restructuring and improving recovery rates by creditors. In addition, during
2008, the RBI has granted certificates of registration to five new ARCs, bringing the total to
eleven.
42.
The authorities noted that financial sector reforms were proceeding as planned.
Banking system efficiency had improved since the beginning of the financial sector reforms
in the 1990s and the government would review the role of public and foreign ownership of
banks as planned in mid-2009. Listing procedures for corporate bonds had been streamlined,
and a state-of-the-art trading platform and settlement system would be implemented soon,
guaranteeing delivery versus payment. However, the RBI was of the view that corporates
have little interest in issuing bonds, preferring instead private placements. They
acknowledged the importance of a healthy domestic institutional investor base, but noted that
in the current environment, investors preferred the safety of government securities. Easing
prudential restrictions on the corporate bond holdings of pension funds and insurance
companies was therefore unlikely to be effective.
43.
The authorities argued that capital account liberalization has been in line with
the country’s long-term strategy as outlined in the Tarapore II Report. As for
accelerating liberalization, the RBI noted that with prospects for capital inflows quite low,
liberalization at this time would not have any notable impact on raising external financing.
Moreover, the RBI maintained that easing restrictions on foreign investment in corporate
bonds would expose India to risks associated with volatile capital flows while offering excess
returns to foreign investors. Finally, the authorities considered that interest rate caps on
foreign borrowing were advisable from a prudential point of view to prevent exposing
domestic borrowers to extremely high rates of interest which could result in systemic stress. 26
C. India’s Corporate Sector: A Challenging Outlook
Background
44.
While corporate balance sheets appeared healthy through early 2008, the recent
sharp deterioration in financial and economic conditions is likely to have heightened
vulnerabilities. Staff’s analysis suggested that such a deterioration is likely to have more
than doubled the share of companies facing difficulties in servicing their debt (defined as

26

Nevertheless, on January 2, 2009, the authorities abolished the interest rate cap on ECBs on a temporary basis.

33
firms with earnings below interest expenses). 27 Moreover, the exceptional equity volatility
and the steep fall in equity prices have increased the probability of distress.
Policy Response
45.
Problems in the corporate sector may give rise to demands for support, but
direct government intervention in specific companies or sectors is fraught with risks.
From an efficiency standpoint, the financial sector, with much greater ability to assess firms’
earnings potential, is in a significantly better position to allocate scarce financial resources.
Direct government support for specific sectors and companies is also likely to pose
governance challenges. Similarly, while pressures for increased trade protection will
intensify, trade restrictions would be highly counterproductive. 28 Hence, public financial
support would be best concentrated on providing financial institutions with the resources they
need to keep credit flowing.
46.
Ensuring that the insolvency framework is ready to handle a potentially large
rise in corporate distress is a high priority. As companies run down their liquidity
cushions, India may face a significant rise in corporate distress. In this regard, staff noted that
implementation of Rajan Report recommendations to improve the bankruptcy law and
enhance out-of-court restructuring mechanisms, as well as passage of the Companies Bill,
would represent major steps forward. They also encouraged the authorities to consider
strengthening incentives for operational restructuring (and reducing incentives for pure
rescheduling of debt) under India’s Corporate Debt Restructuring framework. As mentioned
above, better functioning of ARCs and enhanced incentives to renegotiate debts for financial
institutions would also facilitate a speedier resolution and higher recovery rates.
Authorities’ Views
47.
The authorities expressed a more sanguine outlook for the corporate sector.
While India’s firms may experience rising difficulties, they expected them to be contained at
the level of a normal business cycle, as their performance had been very strong in recent years
and hence firms were well-positioned to weather the downturn. With regards to restructuring
mechanisms, they emphasized that India’s existing framework for resolving corporate
distress was already working well. Finally, the authorities reiterated that they did not plan to
introduce trade restrictions.

27
28

See Chapter I of the Selected Issues Paper for details.

Since the onset of the crisis, India has increased import duties on selected steel products and reduced exemptions
from countervailing duties on cement and from custom duties on zinc and alloys, reversing measures that had been
taken earlier in 2008. Export taxes have also been cut.

34
D. Fiscal Policy: Limited Room for Further Stimulus
Background
48.
After five years of fiscal consolidation, India’s public finances deteriorated
markedly in 2008/09. Between 2003, when the Financial Responsibility and Budget
Management Act (FRBMA) was passed, and 2007/08, strong revenue performance driven
by rapid growth and enhanced tax administration lowered the deficit and public debt
(see Figure 4). The 2008/09 Budget envisaged continued consolidation targeting a 2.5 percent
of GDP central government deficit compared to 2.8 percent in 2007/08. But with elections
approaching, and the sharp rise in international oil prices in an unreformed subsidy regime,
the government’s ability to maintain fiscal discipline was severely tested. A soaring subsidy
bill and a number of schemes that were not fully provisioned in the budget (e.g. the
agricultural debt write-off, the NREG, and the wage hike) led to a substantial widening of the
deficit. The 2008/09 central government budget deficit is now projected to reach 7 percent of
GDP, including subsidy-related bonds. The states’ deficit is projected to widen to about
2¾ percent of GDP, resulting in a general government deficit of almost 10 percent of GDP.
Weaker corporate profits, lower imports, and a deeper downturn in economic activity, which
have started to weigh on both direct and indirect tax collections, are the main downside risks.
On the upside, lower commodity prices could lighten the subsidy bill.
Near-Term Policy Response
Major Discretionaly Fiscal Measures in 2008/09 will contribute to a
49.
High government debt
substantial widening of the deficit
and deficits limit room for
(In percent of GDP)
further fiscal stimulus. Staff’s
Budget (and Supplementary Budgets) 2008/09
Tax measures 1/
1.1
estimate of the discretionary
Spending 2/
1.8
fiscal measures provided in the
Fiscal Stimulus Packages (Dec 2008, Jan 2009) 3/
Tax measures
0.2
budget and the two
Spending
0.4
supplementary budgets is sizable,
Total
3.5
amounting to about 3 percent of
Other (off-budgetary) measures 3/
1.7
Within 2008/09
0.7
29
GDP. In addition, the IIFCL
Beyond 2008/09
0.9
was allowed to issue bonds fully
1/ Includes post-budget, inflation-related cuts in customs duties.
2/ Reflects full amount of agricultural debt relief (Rs 600bn). The related net cash
backed by a sovereign guarantee
outgo in 2008/09 is Rs 150bn.
3/ For details, see Box 1.
and the ceiling for states’ market
borrowing was raised. With a
high deficit and debt close to 80 percent of GDP, among the highest in emerging markets,
expanding the deficit further could turn out to be contractionary, through its impact on India’s

29

This excludes the impact of tax cuts implemented earlier in the year to contain inflation.

35
risk premium, interest rates, and credit rating. 30 In this context, the limited fiscal space would
best be reserved for measures to jumpstart high quality infrastructure investment and
strengthen the financial system.
50.
If the authorities deem further fiscal stimulus necessary to support demand, it
should be accompanied by reforms that ensure medium-term fiscal sustainability.
Setting out a medium-term debt target and announcing credible accompanying reforms will
boost confidence in the government’s commitment to fiscal discipline when market
conditions stabilize. If implemented, the fiscal stimulus should be timely and take into
account implementation constraints to avoid governance lapses. Additional spending could
focus on accelerating already planned infrastructure projects or increasing the public
component of PPPs. Expanding well-targeted social programs that would raise the purchasing
power of the poor, who have a high propensity to consume, could also be a valid alternative.
Tax cuts, however, would likely be ineffective. The personal income tax base is very narrow,
while for corporates, the impact would be small given the anticipated decline in profits;
moreover, tax changes may be difficult to reverse.
51.
Although getting back to the FRBMA targets is not feasible, next year’s budget
should strive to achieve a reduction in the central government deficit. Lower oil prices
are estimated to reduce the 2009/10 subsidy bill by 2 percentage points of GDP, but revenue
growth could decline as automatic stabilizers are triggered by slower economic activity.
Thus, it would be inadvisable to offset fully the savings on the subsidy bill with additional
discretionary spending measures. Moreover, the fiscal position of the states will likely
deteriorate as growth in own revenues and resources transferred from the center decelerates,
while spending pressures from the implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission public
sector pay award persist. Next year’s budget should also bring all spending on-budget to
improve transparency and outline a concrete strategy for returning to a sustainable fiscal
position in the Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Statement.
52.
Lower commodity prices offer an opportunity to reform the subsidy system,
which would provide a powerful signal of the government’s commitment to expenditure
reform, and thus fiscal discipline. The 2008/09 subsidy bill at 3⅔ percent of GDP (roughly
equal to general government education and health outlays) highlights the centrality of
subsidies in rationalizing spending. As suggested by the recent Chaturvedi Committee
Report, a subsidy reform should eliminate regressive subsidies, namely on petroleum and
diesel, phase out the LPG subsidy, and introduce a market-based pricing mechanism that
aligns domestic prices to international levels. Carrying out this reform at a time of weak
30

See Giavazzi and others (2000) “Searching for Nonlinear Effects of Fiscal Policy: Evidence from Industrial
and Developing Countries,” European Economic Review 44, pp. 1259–1289 and Scott and others (2008) “Fiscal
Policy as a Countercyclical Tool” in IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2008.

36
commodity prices would minimize the impact on domestic demand and inflation. Improved
targeting for subsidies on kerosene, food and fertilizers and strengthening the delivery
mechanism would enhance subsidies’ efficiency and lower costs with minimal disruptions to
the poor. In this regard, this year’s pilot introduction of smart cards, as well as the plans to
allot unique identification numbers to India’s residents, are welcome steps.
Medium-Term Reform Agenda
53.
Beyond the current downturn, fiscal consolidation continues to be a key priority
as public finances remain India’s Achilles heel. As emerging market investors are expected
to be far more discriminating in the coming period, addressing this key vulnerability will be
important to attract inflows, boost confidence, and buttress the credibility of measures that
might be needed to strengthen the financial system. Also, fiscal consolidation remains
necessary to gain room for countercyclical measures and expenditures related to the financial
sector if needed. As credit markets thaw, consolidation will also be necessary to reduce the
risks of crowding out.
54.
The medium-term fiscal adjustment should be anchored in a fiscal rules
framework centered on a debt target. With the current fiscal responsibility law setting
targets through 2009/10, a new fiscal rule that addresses the weaknesses in the current
FRBMA framework and is buttressed by comprehensive expenditure reforms, could play an
important role in promoting fiscal consolidation. 31 An eventual successor to the FRBMA
could entail a significant expansion of the coverage of the fiscal operations of the public
sector and include an explicit medium-term debt target, combined with consistent annual
nominal expenditure growth rules. These rules would squarely put the focus of fiscal policy
on debt sustainability, tackle the deficit bias at its very core (expenditure overruns), and allow
for a more countercyclical fiscal policy by letting the automatic stabilizers operate. Subsidy
reform should be complemented by ongoing efforts to improve spending efficiency, such as
output-based budgeting and improved service delivery. The introduction of a goods and
service tax will be an important milestone for strengthening the revenue collection efforts and
streamlining indirect taxes.
Authorities’ Views and Plans
55.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to the process of fiscal consolidation
as a prerequisite for sustained growth: however, they underscored that this is not the
time for fiscal rectitude. They acknowledged that the overall central government fiscal and
current deficit for 2008/09 will exceed the budget estimates due to the rise in commodity
31

Chapter IV of the accompanying Selected Issues Paper discusses India’s experience with fiscal rules and proposes
possible changes.

37
prices in the first half of the year as well as the fiscal measures taken in December and
January to support growth. However, the authorities disagreed with staff’s projected
2008/09 fiscal outturn for the states, arguing that states’ revenue has remained buoyant and
that the usual lag in the introduction of the pay increases at the state level would limit
expenditure pressures. For the remainder of the year, the government will focus on pruning
unproductive expenditure and monitoring the FRBMA targets closely. The authorities do not
envisage the need for further measures in the current fiscal year.
56.
They argued that the fiscal consolidation of the last five years, and the
concomitant reduction in public debt, have created room for the current fiscal
expansion. Also, the increase in government borrowing was being largely offset by the
repurchase of market stabilization bonds, such that the impact of government spending on
overall liquidity and credit available to the private sector has been minimized. The authorities
were in agreement with staff’s suggestions on the form that any further fiscal stimulus should
take, namely an acceleration of spending on infrastructure projects that have already been
launched, higher spending on easily scalable targeted social programs (such as NREG,
housing for the poor, social assistance programs) and a limited role for tax measures. They
also agreed that implementation capacity constraints had to be taken into account.
57.
The authorities concurred that a return to the FRBMA targets was unrealistic
for next year’s budget. The slowdown in economic growth will likely necessitate continued
fiscal stimulus. In addition, a significant ramp up in priority spending is in the works. The
plan spending for next year will also include funds for the recapitalization of public sector
banks. However, details on the broad outline of the 2009/10 Budget and the expected fiscal
stance were not available as a full budget, which would reflect the policy agenda of the newly
elected government, will be prepared only after the government is formed, likely as late as
July.
58.
The authorities agreed that reforms are necessary to secure lasting consolidation
and signal the government’s commitment to fiscal discipline. The government remains
committed to reducing the subsidy bill and is exploring reform options, as evidenced by the
introduction of a pilot smart card scheme. While there are signs that the fuel subsidy reform
might be gaining support, the timing of such a politically difficult reform is unclear.
Regarding plan spending, the authorities emphasized their increased focus on judicious
spending of funds and expenditure management, as well as the limited scope for further
rationalization of centrally sponsored schemes. On the revenue front, they argued that there
are still substantial gains to be achieved on both direct and indirect taxes through ongoing
compliance improvements and base-broadening.
59.
The authorities viewed the FRBMA as having been very useful in instilling fiscal
discipline. They pointed to its role in sensitizing ministries and departments and acting as a
catalyst for fiscal consolidation at the state level. However, as the Thirteenth Finance

38
Commission, tasked with assessing the need for a successor to the FRBMA, has not yet
issued its recommendations, the authorities were noncommittal on the staff’s proposal for a
potential successor rule which includes an explicit debt target and nominal expenditure
growth rules.

39
Figure 1. India: A Long-Term Perspective
India is one of the fastest growing economies,
with growth driven mostly by domestic demand.

The fast economic expansion has led to a
substantial reduction in poverty.

In percent, y/y
20

20

10

10

0

0
India: external demand
India: domestic demand
China
Other emerging A sia 1/

-10

-20
1991 1993 1995

A ll India po verty 2/
Rural India po verty 2/
P er capita GDP growth (right axis)

40

-10

-20

10

50

30

6

20

4

10

2
0

0
1991 1993

1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007

India has emerged as an important global player,
capturing a rising share of world exports...
Share in total world expo rts o f go o ds and services, in percent

8

1995

1997

1999

2001 2003 2005 2007

...and becoming increasingly financially open.

Gross fo reign assets and liabilities, in percent o f GDP
80

80

70

70

0.9

60

60

0.6

50

50

0.3

40

40

1.5
Goo ds expo rts
So ftware services expo rts 3/

1.2

Other services expo rts

0.0

30

30
1991 1993

1995 1997

1999

2001 2003 2005 2007

1997/98

India is lik ely in the beginning phase of a longrun growth tak eoff...
Growth in output, in lo g (index at perio d t)
5
Japan (1955-2007)
China (1979-2007)
NIE (1967-2007)
A SEA N (1973-2007)
India (1995-2007)

3

2001/02

2003/04 2005/06 2007/08

…provided investment to remove structural
constraints to growth remains strong.
Infrastructure sto ck

5
4

1999/00

4

300
India
China

240
180

3

2

2

1

1

120
60
0

0

0
t

t+6

t+12

t+18

t+24

t+30

t+36

t+42

t+48

1998
2004
Electricity
generatio n, per 10
people (kw)

1998
2002
1998
2005
P aved roads per Number o f fixed
lines per 1,000
100,000
inhabitants (km) peo ple

Sources:CEIC Data Company Ltd.; World Development Indicators; and Fund, World Economic
Outlook and staff calculations.
1/ Simple average of GDP growth in Hong Kong SAR, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand.
2/ Defined as percentage of people below the poverty line.
3/ Data for the full year available from 2001. Prior to 2000 India's software exports were not
significant.

40
Figure 2. India: Conjunctural Developments
Despite fiscal stimulus supporting consumption,
growth is slowing driven by investment.
Industrial pro ductio n, 3mma y/y in percent

In percent, no n-fo o d credit fro m the banking secto r
30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
Capital go o ds
Co nsumer go o ds
Overall

-10

-10
-20

-20
Jan-00

Jan-02

Jan-04

Jan-06

With credit growth decelerating and having to
substitute for other funding sources...

Jan-08

90

90

80

80

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0
Jan-00

…activity is lik ely to weak en, as shown by
forward look ing indicators

Jan-04

Jan-06

Jan-08

Inflation has fallen sharply from its 16-year high
in mid-2008.

In percent (left axis); index (1994=100, right axis)

Co ntributio n in percentage po ints (left axis); in percent (right axis)

100

175

90

150

24
20
16

80

125
12

70

100

60

0
Jan-02

Capacity utilizatio n (left axis) 1/

75

50

M anufacturing (Ex. fo o d and metals)
No n-fo o d primary
M etals
Energy
Foo d
Overall (3mma, SA A R)

40
30
20
10
0

8

-10
4

-20

B usiness co nfidence (right axis) 2/
50
2000Q1

50
2002Q1

2004Q1

2006Q1

0
Jan-07

2008Q1

Exports contracted lately, but lower imports k ept
trade deficit in check ...
P er mo nth average in billio ns o f U.S. do llars (left axis); y/y change
in percent (right axis)
5
160

-10

-15
2000Q1

320

36

24
40

Oct-08

In billions o f U.S. do llars

80

-5

M ar-08

…which, together with a sharp drop in capital
inflows, has pushed the overall BoP into deficit.

120
0

-30
A ug-07

Debt flo ws
Po rtfo lio
FDI
Fo rex reserves (right axis)

240

12

160

0

80

0
Trade balance (left axis)

-40

Petro leum impo rts (right axis)

-80

Go o ds expo rts (right axis)
2002Q1

2004Q1

2006Q1

-120
2008Q1

0

-12
2000Q1

2001Q4

2003Q3

2005Q2

2007Q1

2008Q4

Sources: Reserve Bank of India; National Council of Applied Economic Research, India; CEIC
Data Company Ltd.; Bloomberg L.P.; and Fund staff calculations.
1/ Percent of NCAER survey respondents operating at or close to capacity.
2/ NCAER index.

41
Figure 3. India: Impact of the Global Financial Crisis
Tak ing the cue from global mark ets, equity
mark ets in India have declined...

…driven by heavy portfoilo outflows.

Index (Jan 2, 2008=100)

In billio ns o f U.S. do llars (left axis); Jan 06=100 (right axis)

140

140
Sensex
M SCI EM (lo cal currency)
S&P 500

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40
20

9
6

170

0

140

40

-3

110

20

-6

80

Jan-06

Credit conditions have tightened in line with
rising global risk aversion...

Dec-06

No v-07

Oct-08

…resulting in lower appetite for Indian bonds.

So vereign credit default swap spread, 5Y, in basis po ints

In basis po ints (left axis); in millio ns o f U.S. do llars (right axis)
1000

Ko rea
Thailand
Vietnam
State Bank o f India

200

Sensex (right axis)

3

Jan-08 M ar-08 M ay-08 Jul-08 Sep-08 No v-08 Jan-09

1000

230
Net FII inflo ws (left axis)

15000

1500
External private issuance (right axis)

800

1200

600

900

9000

400

400

600

6000

200

200

300

3000

800
600

M ar-08

M ay-08

Jul-08

Sep-08

2004

No v-08

Dollar funding has been under pressure...

0

0

0

0
Jan-08

12000

CEM BI B ro ad India blended spread

2005

2006

2007

2008

…and domestic liquidity conditions are tight.

B asis spread; in basis po ints 1/
200

8

8
3M OIS spread 2/
3M CP spread
TED spread 2/

0

6

-200

4

4

-400

2

2

-600
Jul-07

6

0
No v-07

M ar-08

Jul-08

No v-08

Jan-08

0
M ar-08

M ay-08

Jul-08

Sep-08

No v-08

Sources: Reserve Bank of India; Bloomberg L.P.; Dealogic; and Fund staff calculations.
1/ Priced from 3-month currency forwards and computed from 20-day moving average.
2/ Difference from 3-month National Stock Exchange Mumbai Interbank Offer Rate (MIBOR).

42

Figure 4. India: Fiscal Indicators
The trend of fiscal consolidation will be
reversed in FY 2008/09...

…as fiscal measures and a soaring subsidy
bill weigh on government finances.

In percent o f GDP 1/

In percent o f GDP
30

15
State go vernments
12

18
Capital expenditure & net lending
Subsidies 1/
Other current expenditure
To tal revenue and grants (right axis)

25

Central go vernment

20

16
14

9
6
3
0

15

12

10

10

5

8

0
1998/99

2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09
(P ro j.)

India's fiscal position is one of the weak est
among the emerging economies.

IND

60

B RA

M EX
VNM

0

M YS

-2

P HL
THA

TUR

20

KOR

IDN

CHN

-5

0

Current budget path
FRB M A ro admap
Staff baseline 1/

-4
RUS

0
-10

5

CLE

-6
2003/04

10

2005/06

2007/08

2009/10
P ro jectio ns

Fiscal balance, 2008

Public debt remains high.

Under the baseline scenario, debt reduction would
resume only in 2010/11.

In percent o f GDP

In percent o f GDP

100

120

12

External
90

2008/09
(P ro j.)

2

A RG

PAK

40

2004/05 2006/07

Current deficit, in percent o f GDP

P ublic debt, 2007 (left axis)

80

2000/01 2002/03

Achieving the FRBMA target of no current deficit in
2009/10 will lik ely be infeasible.

In percent o f GDP
100

6
1998/99

Gro ss financing need (right axis)

Do mestic

100

9

B aseline

80
80

6

60

3

70
60
50

40
1998/99

2000/01

2002/03

2004/05

2006/07

2008/09
(P ro j.)

0
2003

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff calculations.
1/ Includes subsidy-related bond issuance.

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

43
Table 1. India: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2006 1/
1990

1995

1998

2001

2004

2006

...
…
...
…

...
...
36.0
25.0

...
44.4
...
21.0

…
...
28.6
...

8.1
43.5
27.5
20.0

…
…
…
…

Achieve universal primary education 3/
Literacy rate, youth total (% of people ages 15-24)
Persistence to grade 5, total (% of cohort)
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)
School enrollment, primary (% net)

61.9
...
63.8
...

...
...
77.1
...

...
59.7
69.7
...

76.4
61.4
72.4
78.5

…
73.0
83.8
89.4

…
…
85.7
88.7

Promote gender equality 4/
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of total nonagricultural employment)

5.0
70.3
67.1
12.7

...
...
...
14.4

7.0
82.1
...
16.0

9.0
79.8
80.5
16.8

9.0
90.3
…
17.9

8.3
91.4
…
…

56.0
80.0
114.9

72.0
74.0
101.5

51.0
72.0
...

53.0
66.0
89.3

58.0
61.6
…

59.0
58.7
78.4

...
...

34.2
...

42.3
...

42.5
…

...
...

46.6
…

...
43.0
167.8
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
0.3

...
…
...
...
...
1.6

...
46.9
...
…
…
23.1

...
...
…
…
…
55.3

…
56.3
…
…
0.3
63.8

Ensure environmental sustainability 8/
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (% of land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)
Improved water source (% of population with access)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)

0.8
21.5
3.2
14.0
71.0
...

1.0
...
3.4
...
77.0
...

1.1
...
3.7
...
...
...

1.1
22.7
3.9
23.0
82.0
...

1.2
…
4.3
…
…
…

…
22.8
4.5
28.0
89.0
…

Develop a global partnership for development 9/
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports of G&S, excl. workers' remittances)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Total debt service (% of exports of goods, services and income)
Unemployment, youth female (% of female labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth male (% of male labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth total (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

1.6
…
0.6
…
31.9
...
...
...

1.9
…
1.3
…
29.7
8.0
8.4
8.3

1.6
…
…
…
21.2
...
...
...

1.6
…
3.6
0.5
14.7
10.2
10.1
10.1

0.6
…
…
…
13.8
10.8
10.4
10.5

1.2
…
24.3
17.8
7.7
…
…
…

3.8
390.0
330.9
24.2
59.1
48.2
849.5
15.7

3.4
380.0
350.2
26.6
61.4
...
932.2
23.1

3.3
420.0
415.1
22.6
62.2
...
982.2
24.0

3.1
460.0
478.6
24.2
62.9
61.0
1,032.5
26.4

2.7
630.0
680.6
31.6
63.4
…
1,079.7
37.9

2.5
820.0
914.7
36.0
64.5
…
1,109.8
47.2

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 2/
Income share held by lowest 20%
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population)

Reduce child mortality 5/
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Improved maternal health 6/
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 7/
Children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

General indicators
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)
Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)
Trade (% of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators database, September 2008.

1/ In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
2/ Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day.
3/ Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
4/ Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
5/ Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
6/ Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
7/ Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS. Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
8/ Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve, by 2015, the proportion of
people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.
9/ Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the Special Needs of the Least Developed Countries. Address
the Special Needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states. Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and
international measures in order to make debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent and
productive work for youth. In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs in developing countries. In cooperation with the private
sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.

44
Table 2. India: Selected Social and Economic Indicators, 2004/05–2009/10 1/
I. Social Indicators
GDP (2007/08)
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars):
GDP per capita (U.S. dollars):

Poverty (Percent of population)
Headcount ratio (2003/04):
Undernourished (2000):

1,173
999

Population characteristics (2007)
Total (in billions):
Urban population (percent of total):
Life expectancy at birth (years):

27.5
21.0

Income distribution (2004, WDI)
1.2
29.3
64.5

Richest 10 percent of households:
Poorest 20 percent of households:
Gini index:

31.1
8.1
36.8

II. Economic Indicators
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

Growth (y/y percent change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Non-agricultural sector
Industrial production

7.5
9.5
8.4

9.4
10.3
8.2

9.6
11.0
11.5

9.0
10.0
8.5

6.3
7.1
...

5.3
5.9
...

Prices (y/y percent change, period average for annual data)
Wholesale prices (1993/94 weights)
Consumer prices - industrial workers (2001 weights)

6.5
3.8

4.4
4.4

5.4
6.7

4.7
6.2

8.8
7.8

1.9
3.4

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross saving 3/
Gross investment 3/

31.8
32.2

34.3
35.5

34.8
35.9

36.0
37.5

34.6
37.6

34.9
36.4

Fiscal position (percent of GDP) 4/ 5/
Central government deficit
General government deficit
General government debt

-4.1
-7.3
86.5

-4.7
-7.3
84.2

-4.4
-6.3
80.6

-3.4
-5.8
80.1

-7.1
-9.9
80.7

-5.7
-8.8
82.9

Money and credit (y/y percent change, end-period)
Broad money
Credit to commercial sector

12.3
26.0

21.2
32.2

21.5
25.8

20.8
20.6

…
…

…
…

Financial indicators (percent, end-period)
91-day treasury bill yield
10-year government bond yield
Stock market (y/y percent change, end-period)

5.3
6.7
16.1

6.1
7.5
73.7

8.0
8.0
15.9

7.2
7.9
19.7

…
…
…

…
…
…

85.2
28.5
118.9
48.6
22.9

105.2
23.4
157.1
32.1
32.3

128.9
22.6
190.7
21.4
38.3

166.2
28.9
257.8
35.2
52.2

186.4
12.2
298.0
15.6
60.0

169.0
-9.4
265.5
-10.9
38.6

-2.5
-0.4
3.7
9.3
26.2

-9.9
-1.2
3.0
12.5
15.1

-9.6
-1.0
7.7
7.1
36.6

-17.0
-1.5
15.4
29.6
92.2

-35.1
-3.0
19.9
-11.7
-27.9

-18.6
-1.5
14.0
-2.5
-3.3

141.5
8.9
133.0
19.0
4.6
4.4
27.5
6.0

151.6
7.7
138.1
17.1
3.3
5.6
24.8
10.1

199.2
7.7
171.4
18.7
3.8
5.7
26.1
4.9

309.7
10.5
224.8
19.2
7.3
3.6
31.0
5.3

246.8
9.1
229.0
19.5
7.6
2.8
28.9
5.5

243.5
8.0
238.0
18.7
7.9
2.4
...
5.7

2.2
43.7

4.4
44.6

-2.2
43.5

8.2
40.1

…
…

…
…

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.6

1.3

0.3

External trade 6/
Merchandise exports (US$ billions)
y/y percent change
Merchandise imports (US$ billions)
y/y percent change
Net oil imports (US$ billions)
Balance of payments (US$ billions)
Current account balance
(in percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment, net
Portfolio investment, net (equity and debt)
Overall balance
External indicators
Gross reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period)
(In months of imports) 7/
External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period) 8/
External debt (percent of GDP, end-period) 8/
Of which : short-term debt 9/
Ratio of gross reserves to short-term debt (end-period) 9/
Gross reserves to broad money (percent; end-period)
Debt service ratio 10/
Real effective exchange rate 11/
(y/y percent change, period average for annual data)
Exchange rate (rupee/US$, end-period)
Memorandum items (in percent of GDP):
Subsidy-related bond issuance 12/

2008/09 2/
Proj.

2009/10 2/
Proj.

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; CEIC Data Company Ltd; Bloomberg L.P.; World Development Indicators ;and Fund staff
estimates and projections.
1/ Data are for April-March fiscal years.
2/ Current staff projections.
3/ Differs from official data, calculated with gross investment and current account. Gross investment includes errors and omissions.
4/ Divestment proceeds treated as below-the-line financing.
5/ Subsidy-related bond issuance included in total expenditure.
6/ Annual data are on balance of payments basis.
7/ Imports of goods and services projected over the following twelve months.
8/ For projection, data are reported relative to staff's estimated annual GDP.
9/ Including short-term debt on contracted maturity basis, NRI deposits due within one year, and medium and long-term debt on residual maturity
basis.
10/ In percent of current account receipts excluding grants.
11/ IMF INS calculation.
12/ Issued by the central government to FCI, the state-owned oil refining/distribution companies, and fertilizer companies as compensation for
losses incurred from the provision of subsidies.

45
Table 3. India: Balance of Payments, 2004/05–2009/10 1/
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

-2.5
-33.7
85.2
118.9
29.9
89.0
15.4
43.2
17.2
27.8
-5.0
20.8

-9.9
-51.9
105.2
157.1
44.0
113.1
23.2
57.7
23.6
34.5
-5.9
24.7

-9.6
-61.8
128.9
190.7
56.9
133.7
29.5
73.8
31.3
44.3
-7.3
30.1

-17.0
-91.6
166.2
257.8
77.0
180.8
37.6
90.1
40.3
52.5
-4.9
41.9

-35.1
-111.6
186.4
298.0
90.7
207.3
40.3
96.8
...
56.5
-10.1
46.3

-18.6
-96.5
169.0
265.5
59.9
205.6
41.5
100.6
...
59.1
-13.3
49.6

28.0
3.7
6.0
9.3
1.9
5.2
3.8
-1.0
-0.4
5.5

25.5
3.0
8.9
12.5
1.7
2.5
3.7
2.8
-0.6
-0.2

45.2
7.7
22.7
7.1
1.8
16.1
6.6
4.3
-0.2
1.8

108.0
15.4
34.2
29.6
2.1
22.6
17.2
0.2
-0.1
21.0

6.9
19.9
25.8
-11.7
2.4
0.8
-3.0
3.5
-0.1
-5.0

15.3
14.0
19.1
-2.5
2.0
-3.2
1.3
3.8
-0.1
0.0

0.6

-0.5

1.0

1.2

0.3

0.0

26.2

15.1

36.6

92.2

-27.9

-3.3

2.4

-4.9

11.0

18.4

-35.0

26.7

Increase in gross reserve stock (-, including valuation changes)

-28.6

-10.1

-47.6

-110.5

62.9

-23.4

Memorandum items:
Foreign exchange reserves
In months of next year's imports (goods and services)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Merchandise trade balance (percent of GDP)
Overall balance (percent of GDP)

141.5
8.9
-0.4
-4.8
3.7

151.6
7.7
-1.2
-6.4
1.9

199.2
7.7
-1.0
-6.7
4.0

309.7
10.5
-1.5
-7.8
7.9

246.8
9.1
-3.0
-9.5
-2.4

295.1
8.0
-2.1
-8.6
-0.3

Current account balance
Merchandise trade balance
Merchandise exports
Merchandise imports
Oil
Non-oil
Non-factor services balance
Receipts
Of which : software services
Payments
Income, net
Transfers, net
Capital account balance
Direct investment, net
Of which : direct investment in India
Portfolio investment, net
Government borrowing, net
Commercial borrowing, net
Short-term credit, net
NRI deposits, net
Rupee debt
Other capital, net 2/
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Valuation changes 3/

2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Proj.
Proj.

Sources: CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data are for April-March fiscal years. Indian authorities' presentation.
2/ Net other capital is sum of net banking capital (RBI format) and net other capital (RBI format) less net NRI deposits.
3/ Calculated as difference between the stock of reserves and the overall balance of BOP.

46
Table 4. India: Reserve Money and Monetary Survey, 2004/05–2008/09 1/
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

Jun.

2008/09
Sep.

Dec.

9,316
-4,084
-1,132
-1,132
0
14
16
-2,982
13,401

9,569
-3,935
-619
-618
0
19
61
-3,397
13,504

8,863
-3,078
-316
-319
3
14
116
-2,892
11,941

22.5
-24.6
1.6
47.0

9.7
-4.7
13.4
14.4

2007/08

(In billions of rupees, end-period)

Reserve money
Reserve money
Net domestic assets of RBI
Claims on government (net)
Center
States
Claims on commercial sector
Claims on banks
Other items (net)
Net foreign assets of RBI

4,891
-1,237
-180
-233
53
14
53
-1,123
6,128

5,731
-999
66
52
14
14
58
-1,152
6,730

7,090
-1,572
24
21
3
15
76
-1,721
8,662

9,284
-3,077
-1,132
-1,146
14
18
46
-2,009
12,361

Reserve money
Net domestic assets of RBI
Claims on government (net)
Net foreign assets of RBI

12.1
-17.4
-14.4
29.4

17.2
4.9
5.0
12.3

22,514
3,559
18,891
65
16,022
20,370
7,568
-180
12,802

27,295
4,131
23,096
69
20,034
24,596
7,666
81
16,930

33,161
4,829
28,257
75
24,029
29,676
8,376
58
21,301

40,067
5,675
34,302
91
29,864
34,770
9,071
-1,132
25,699

40,944
6,038
34,857
49
30,383
35,497
9,429
-1,132
26,069

42,711
5,870
36,787
54
28,988
37,348
9,686
-619
27,662

44,302
6,266
37,911
126
31,351
39,684
10,996
-316
28,687

11,004
10,593
-4,348
6,493

15,071
14,664
-4,562
7,262

19,312
18,847
-5,647
9,132

23,619
23,175
-4,906
10,203

24,140
23,634
-5,114
10,561

25,510
25,059
-8,360
13,723

26,445
25,924
-8,332
12,951

12.3
8.3
15.8
1.9
26.0

21.2
25.0
20.7
1.3
32.2

21.5
19.9
20.7
9.3
25.8

20.8
12.8
17.2
8.3
20.6

20.8
9.5
19.8
9.3
24.2

19.0
12.5
19.6
10.3
23.2

19.8
24.2
25.2
30.5
23.2

30.9
31.6
23.3

37.0
38.4
11.9

28.1
28.5
25.7

22.3
23.0
41.8

25.9
26.1
52.1

25.2
25.3
35.4

23.0
23.0
9.5

6.1
0.7
-3.1
13.2
6.1

17.8
0.4
1.2
18.3
3.4

9.0
2.5
0.4
14.5
10.0

16.9
7.0
2.9
14.6
2.8

(Contribution to reserve money growth)

Monetary survey
Broad money (M3)
Currency with public
Deposits
Non-bank deposits at RBI
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to government
Of which: RBI
Credit to commercial sector
Of which: commercial bank lending
Nonfood
Other items (net)
Net foreign assets

23.7
-10.0
-0.7
33.7

30.9
-21.2
-16.8
52.2

29.3
-36.9
-13.0
66.1

(In billions of rupees, end-period)

(Twelve-month percent change)
Broad money (M3)
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to government
Credit to commercial sector
Of which: commercial bank lending
Nonfood
Net foreign assets

(Contribution to broad money growth)
Net domestic assets
Net credit to government
Of which: RBI
Credit to commercial sector
Net foreign assets

Sources: Reserve Bank of India; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; and Fund staff calculations.
1/ Data are for April - March fiscal years.

14.6
2.6
-0.1
16.0
6.9

9.3
2.1
-3.6
13.3
11.5

7.0
2.4
-2.8
15.0
13.8

47
Table 5. India: Central Government Operations, 2004/05–2008/09 1/
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08
Budget
Prov.

2008/09
Budget
Staff
proj.

(In billions of rupees)
Total revenue and grants
Net tax revenue
Gross tax revenue
Of which: corporate tax
income tax
excise taxes
customs duties
other taxes
Less: States' share
Nontax revenue 2/
Grants

3,204
2,264
3,050
827
493
991
576
163
786
915
26

3,622
2,718
3,662
1,013
560
1,112
651
326
944
874
30

4,500
3,532
4,735
1,443
751
1,176
863
502
1,203
943
25

5,424
4,057
5,481
1,684
988
1,302
988
520
1,425
1,346
21

5,912
4,393
5,911
1,895
1,057
1,233
1,029
697
1,518
1,492
27

6,214
5,090
6,877
2,264
1,383
1,379
1,189
662
1,788
1,106
18

5,961
4,859
6,566
2,265
1,276
1,190
1,105
730
1,707
1,085
18

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure 3/
Of which: interest payments
wages and salaries
subsidies 4/
Capital expenditure and net lending 5/ 6/

4,506
3,987
1,269
352
460
519

5,102
4,545
1,326
373
475
557

5,926
5,302
1,503
398
571
624

6,934
5,739
1,590
448
543
1,195

7,210
6,122
1,715
441
711
1,089

7,637
6,766
1,908
518
714
871

9,122
8,114
1,912
778
1,279
1,008

-1,302
-1,258
...

-1,480
-1,464
-1,653

-1,426
-1,426
-1,829

-1,509
-1,509
...

-1,298
-1,298
-1,586

-1,423
-1,333
...

-3,160
-3,070
-3,880

1,302
148
1,155

1,480
75
1,405

1,426
85
1,341

1,509
91
1,418

1,298
93
1,205

1,423
110
1,313

3,160
110
3,051

Total revenue and grants
Net tax revenue
Gross tax revenue
Of which: corporate tax
income tax
excise taxes
customs duties
other taxes
Less: States' share
Nontax revenue 2/
Grants

10.2
7.2
9.7
2.6
1.6
3.1
1.8
0.5
2.5
2.9
0.1

10.1
7.6
10.2
2.8
1.6
3.1
1.8
0.9
2.6
2.4
0.1

10.9
8.5
11.4
3.5
1.8
2.8
2.1
1.2
2.9
2.3
0.1

11.7
8.8
11.8
3.6
2.1
2.8
2.1
1.1
3.1
2.9
0.0

12.5
9.3
12.5
4.0
2.2
2.6
2.2
1.5
3.2
3.2
0.1

11.7
9.6
13.0
4.3
2.6
2.6
2.2
1.2
3.4
2.1
0.0

11.0
8.9
12.1
4.2
2.3
2.2
2.0
1.3
3.1
2.0
0.0

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure 3/
Of which: interest payments
wages and salaries
subsidies 4/
Capital expenditure and net lending 5/ 6/

14.3
12.7
4.0
1.1
1.5
1.6

14.3
12.7
3.7
1.0
1.3
1.6

14.3
12.8
3.6
1.0
1.4
1.5

15.0
12.4
3.4
1.0
1.2
2.6

15.3
13.0
3.6
0.9
1.5
2.3

14.4
12.8
3.6
1.0
1.3
1.6

16.8
14.9
3.5
1.4
2.4
1.9

Overall balance
Overall balance (authorities' definition) 7/
Overall balance (augmented) 8/

-4.1
-4.0
-4.1

-4.1
-4.1
-4.6

-3.4
-3.4
-4.4

-3.3
-3.3
...

-2.8
-2.8
-3.4

-2.7
-2.5
...

-5.8
-5.7
-7.1

4.1
0.5
3.7
1.5
0.1
0.1

4.1
0.2
3.9
2.7
0.2
0.0

3.4
0.2
3.2
2.7
0.1
0.0

3.3
0.2
3.1
2.4
0.3
0.0

2.8
0.2
2.6
2.7
-0.1
0.1

2.7
0.2
2.5
1.9
0.3
0.2

5.8
0.2
5.6
1.9
0.3
0.2

-0.1
-2.5
...
63.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
-2.6
-3.1
63.1
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0

0.2
-1.9
-2.9
61.2
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.0

0.2
-0.7
…
59.2
0.0
…
…
…

0.9
-0.4
-1.1
59.7
0.6
0.0
0.5
0.2

0.9
-1.0
…
57.7
0.0
…
…
…

-2.3
-4.0
-5.3
59.5
1.3
0.0
1.0
0.4

35,803

41,458

Overall balance
Overall balance (authorities' definition) 7/
Overall balance (augmented) 8/
Financing
External (net)
Domestic (net)

(In percent of GDP)

Financing
External (net)
Domestic (net)
Of which : market borrowing
small savings (net of states' share)
divestment receipts
Memorandum items:
Primary balance
Current balance 7/ 9/
Current balance (augmented) 8/
Central government debt 10/
Subsidy-related bonds 11/
Of which: Food Corporation of India bonds
Oil bonds
Fertilizer bonds
Nominal GDP (in Rs. billion)

31,494

46,337

47,131

53,038

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data for April - March fiscal year.
2/ In 2007/08, includes a special dividend payment from the RBI amounting to 0.7 percent of GDP. The authorities include this item under
other capital receipts rather than non-tax revenue.
3/ Includes the surcharge on Union duties transferred to the National Calamity Contingency Fund.
4/ Excludes subsidy-related bond issuance.
5/ Authorities' treatment of state debt swap scheme (DSS) in 2002-05 shows the prepayment by States of on-lent funds to the center as net
lending. The Center's prepayment of its debt to the National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) is treated as a capital expenditure.
6/ In 2007/08, includes roughly 0.7 percent of GDP for the government's purchase of SBI shares from the RBI.
7/ Authorities' definition treats divestment as a revenue item until 2005/06 (included). In 2008/09, authorities treat proceeds from selling
shares vested with SUTI (estimated at 0.2 percent of GDP) as revenue.
8/ Staff's definition treats divestment receipts as a below-the-line financing item. Includes subsidy-related bond issuance
as current expenditure.
9/ In 2007/08, under the authorities' definition of the current deficit (which classifies the special dividend from the RBI as "other capital
receipts"), the budget target for the current deficit is 1.5 percent of GDP. Staff includes this item under non-tax revenue.
10/ External debt measured at historical exchange rates.
11/ Issued by the central government to the Food Corporation of India, fertilizer producers, and the state-owned oil refining/distribution
companies as compensation for losses incurred from the subsidized provision of commodities.

54,304

48

Table 6. India: General Government Operations, 2004/05–2008/09 1/
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07
Prov 2/

2007/08
Budget
Prov. 3/

2008/09
Budget
Staff proj.

(In billions of rupees)
Total revenue and grants
Tax revenue 4/
Nontax revenue 5/ 6/
Grants

6,127
4,941
1,160
26

7,040
5,785
1,226
30

8,735
7,261
1,449
25

10,265
8,422
1,822
21

10,878
8,845
2,005
27

11,920
10,245
1,657
18

11,552
9,899
1,635
18

Total expenditure and net lending 7/ 8/

8,410

9,457

10,935

12,928

13,306

14,604

16,189

-2,283

-2,417

-2,200

-2,663

-2,428

-2,684

-4,637

2,283
148
2,136
44

2,417
75
2,342
16

2,200
85
2,116
24

2,663
91
2,572
118

2,428
93
2,335
126

2,684
110
2,574
252

4,637
110
4,528
252

General government balance
Financing
External (net)
Domestic (net)
Disinvestment receipts

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Tax revenue 4/
Nontax revenue 5/ 6/
Grants

19.5
15.7
3.7

19.7
16.2
3.4

21.1
17.5
3.5

22.2
18.2
3.9

23.1
18.8
4.3

22.5
19.3
3.1

21.3
18.2
3.0

Total expenditure and net lending 7/ 8/

26.7

26.4

26.4

27.9

28.2

27.5

29.8

General government balance
(including divestment receipts)
(augmented with subsidy-related bonds)

-7.3
-7.1
...

-6.7
-6.7
-7.2

-5.3
-5.2
-6.3

-5.7
-5.5
…

-5.2
-4.9
-5.8

-5.1
-4.6
…

-8.5
-8.1
-9.9

6.8

6.5

5.1

5.6

5.0

4.9

8.3

-1.2
2.9
6.1
-4.1
-3.5
0.4
...
86.5

-1.1
3.0
5.7
-4.1
-2.5
-0.1
0.5
84.2

0.3
3.2
5.6
-3.4
-1.9
0.0
1.0
80.6

-0.4
4.5
5.4
-3.3
-2.6
0.1
…
78.6

0.4
4.5
5.6
-2.8
-2.5
0.1
0.6
80.1

0.4
3.7
5.4
-2.7
-2.4
0.0
…
75.9

-3.2
3.8
5.3
-5.8
-2.7
0.0
1.3
80.7

Domestic financing (net)
Memorandum items:
Primary balance
Nondefense capital expenditure
Net interest payments
Central government balance
State and union territory governments' balance 9/
Consolidation items 10/
Subsidy-related bond issuance
General government debt

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; state level data from the RBI Study on State Finances; and Fund staff amalgamate and
prepare projections.
1/ The consolidated general government comprises the central government (CG) and state governments. Data for April - March fiscal year.
2/ Based on RBI's estimate of provisional outturn for state finances.
3/ Based on RBI's revised estimates of state finances.
4/ Tax revenue equals tax revenue of central government (CG), including NCCF and states' share, plus state tax revenue.
5/ Nontax revenue equals nontax revenue of CG, less interest payments by states on CG loans, plus nontax revenue of states.
6/ In 2007/08, includes a special dividend payment from the RBI amounting to roughly 0.7 percent of GDP. The authorities include this item under
"other capital receipts".
7/ Expenditure and net lending equals total expenditure and net lending of CG (authorities' definition excluding subsidy-related bonds), less net loans
and grants to states and union territories, plus total expenditure of states (excluding interest payments on CG loans).
8/ In 2007/08, includes 0.7 percent of GDP for the government's purchase of SBI shares from the RBI.
9/ The authorities treat states' divestment proceeds, including land sales, above-the-line as miscellaneous capital receipts. Staff's definition treats
divestment receipts as a below-the-line financing item. Asset sales amount to 0.2 percent of GDP in 2007/08 and are budgeted at 0.3 percent
of GDP in 2008/09.
10/ Above-the-line items in the CGA, which cancel out in the consolidation (e.g., loans to states).

49
Table 7. India: Macroeconomic Framework, 2004/05–2012/13 1/
Projections
2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08

2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13

Growth (percent change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Non-agricultural sector
Real GDP (at factor cost, on calendar year basis)

7.5
9.5
7.2

9.4
10.3
9.1

9.6
11.0
9.8

9.0
10.0
9.3

6.3
7.1
7.3

5.3
5.9
5.1

7.0
7.8
6.5

7.6
8.6
7.5

7.9
8.8
7.8

Prices (percent change, period average)
Wholesale prices (1993/94 weights)
Consumer prices

6.5
3.8

4.4
4.4

5.4
6.7

4.7
6.2

8.8
7.8

1.9
3.4

4.0
4.0

3.9
3.9

3.9
3.9

Interest rate on general government domestic debt (percent)

8.4

7.8

7.9

7.1

7.5

6.3

8.0

8.0

8.0

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross saving 2/
Gross investment 3/

31.8
32.2

34.3
35.5

34.8
35.9

36.0
37.5

34.6
37.6

34.9
36.4

34.5
36.7

34.7
37.0

35.2
37.6

Fiscal position (percent of GDP)
Central government balance - authorities 4/
Central government balance - augmented 5/
General government balance - augmented 5/
General government debt

-4.0
-4.1
-7.3
86.5

-4.1
-4.7
-7.3
84.2

-3.4
-4.4
-6.3
80.6

-2.8
-3.4
-5.8
80.1

-5.8
-7.1
-9.9
80.7

-5.4
-5.7
-8.8
82.9

-4.1
-4.3
-7.3
82.5

-3.3
-3.5
-6.1
80.2

-3.0
-3.2
-5.6
77.3

External trade (percent change, BOP basis)
Merchandise exports (in U.S. dollar terms)
Merchandise imports (in U.S. dollar terms)

28.5
48.6

23.4
32.1

22.6
21.4

28.9
35.2

12.2
15.6

-9.4
-10.9

10.2
13.3

12.5
12.6

12.7
12.3

Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
(in percent of GDP)
(in percent of GDP, calendar year basis)
Foreign direct investment, net
Portfolio investment, net (equity and debt)
Overall balance

-2.5
-0.4
0.1
3.7
9.3
26.2

-9.9
-1.2
-1.3
3.0
12.5
15.1

-9.6
-1.1
-1.1
8.4
7.1
36.6

-17.0
-1.5
-1.0
15.4
29.6
92.2

-35.1
-3.0
-2.5
19.9
-11.7
-27.9

-18.6
-1.5
-1.8
14.0
-2.5
-3.3

-29.6
-2.1
-2.0
20.7
15.1
23.9

-35.3
-2.3
-2.3
19.6
19.6
24.3

-40.1
-2.4
-2.4
19.9
21.6
24.0

141.5
8.9
133.0
19.0
4.6
4.4
6.0

151.6
7.7
138.1
17.1
3.3
5.6
10.1

199.2
7.7
171.4
18.7
3.8
5.7
4.9

309.7
10.5
224.8
19.2
7.3
3.6
5.3

246.8
9.1
229.0
19.5
7.6
2.8
5.5

243.5
8.0
238.0
18.7
7.9
2.4
5.7

267.4
7.8
268.8
19.5
8.8
2.2
7.0

291.6
7.3
303.8
20.1
9.3
2.1
8.5

315.7
7.0
342.8
20.7
9.7
2.0
8.4

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.6

1.3

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

External indicators
Gross reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period)
(in months of imports) 6/
External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period)
External debt (percent of GDP, end-period)
Of which : short-term debt 7/
Ratio of gross reserves to short-term debt (end-period) 7/
Debt service (percent of current account receipts)
Memorandum items (in percent of GDP):
Subsidy-related bond issuance 8/

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; CEIC Data Company Ltd; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data are for April-March fiscal years unless otherwise mentioned. Calendar year data in 2008/09 column indicate data for 2008, for instance.
2/ Differs from official data, calculated with gross investment and current account.
3/ Statistical discrepancy adjusted.
4/ Divestment proceeds are treated as revenue until 2005/06 (included); excludes subsidy-related bond issuance.
5/ Divestment is treated as financing; includes subsidy-related bond issuance.
6/ Imports of goods and services projected over the following twelve months.
7/ Including short-term debt on contracted maturity basis, NRI deposits due within one year, and medium and long-term debt on residual maturity basis.
8/ Issued by the central government to FCI, the state-owned oil refining/distribution companies, and fertilizer companies as compensation for losses
incurred from the provision of subsidies.

50
Table 8. India: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2004/05–2008/09 1/
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09 2/

Financial indicators
General government debt (percent of GDP)

86.5

84.2

80.6

80.1

80.7 (Projection)

Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)

12.3

21.2

21.5

20.8

19.8 (December 2008)

Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)

26.0

32.2

25.8

20.6

23.2 (December 2008)

5.3

6.1

8.0

7.2

4.8 (December 2008)

-1.1

1.6

2.4

2.5

-1.0 (December 2008)

91 day T-bill yield (percent; end-period)
91 day T-bill yield (real, percent; end-period) 3/
External indicators
Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$) 4/ 5/

28.5

23.4

22.6

28.9

(9.9) (November 2008)

Export volume (percent change, 12-month basis) 5/

11.7

15.5

16.5

15.3

14.9 (Projection)

Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$) 4/ 5/

48.6

32.1

21.4

35.2

Import volume (percent change, 12-month basis) 5/

28.0

20.0

13.5

13.2

Terms of trade (percent change, 12 month basis) 5/

-3.5

-4.8

-2.3

-3.1

-0.1 (Projection)

-0.4

-1.2

-1.0

-1.5

-3.0 (Projection)

Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP)

4.0

3.1

4.9

9.2

0.6 (Projection)

Of which : Net portfolio investment (debt and equity)

1.3

1.5

0.8

2.5

-1.0 (Projection)

Current account balance (percent of GDP)

6.1 (November 2008)
12.8 (Projection)

Other investment (loans, trade credits, etc.)

1.4

1.3

3.1

3.6

0.3 (Projection)

Net foreign direct investment

0.5

0.4

0.8

1.3

1.7 (Projection)

Foreign currency reserves (billions of US$)

141.5

151.6

199.2

309.7

254.6 (December 2008)

RBI forward liabilities (billions of US$)

0.0

0.0

0.0

-14.7

-0.1 (October 2008)

Official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services)

8.9

7.7

7.7

10.5

27.5

24.8

26.1

31.0

Ratio of foreign currency reserves to broad money (percent)

9.1 (Projection)
28.0 (December 2008)

Total short-term external debt to reserves (percent) 6/

22.7

17.7

17.6

27.6

36.2 (Projection)

Total external debt (percent of GDP)

19.0

17.1

18.7

19.2

19.5 (Projection)

Of which: public sector debt
Total external debt to exports of goods and services (percent)

8.9

7.3

6.7

6.1

6.3 (Projection)

103.5

84.8

84.5

87.7

80.9 (Projection)

External interest payments to exports of goods and services (percent)

2.4

3.2

2.7

3.2

3.2 (Projection)

External amortization payments to exports of goods and services (percent)

4.8

8.8

3.1

3.3

3.4 (Projection)

Exchange rate (per US$, period average)

44.9

44.3

45.2

40.3

48.7 (December 2008)

REER (y/y change in percent; end-period)

1.4

4.2

0.1

5.2

-11.6 (December 2008)

6,493

11,280

13,072

15,644

9,647 (December 2008)

Financial market indicators
Stock market index (end-period)
Foreign currency debt rating
Moody's Investor Services

Baa3

Baa3

Baa3

Baa2

Baa2 (December 2008)

Standard and Poor's

BB+

BB+

BBB-

BBB-

BBB- (December 2008)

Fitch Ratings

BB+

BB+

BBB-

BBB-

BBB- (December 2008)

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; CEIC Data Company Ltd.; Bloomberg L.P.; and Fund, Information Notice System and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data for April-March fiscal year.
2/ Latest date available or staff estimate, as noted.
3/ Equals nominal yield minus actual WPI inflation.
4/ Data for 2008/09 are on a customs basis, whereas data for previous years are on a BOP basis.
5/ Terms of trade including goods and services. Goods volumes are derived from partner country trade price deflators, and services volumes are derived using
U.S. CPI from the WEO database.
6/ Including short-term debt on contracted maturity basis, NRI deposits due within one year, and medium and long-term debt on residual maturity basis.

51
Table 9. India: Indicators of Financial System Soundness, 2004/05–2008/09
2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 Q1
Measures of financial strength and performance 1/
Risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio (CAR)
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks

12.8
12.9
12.5
12.1
14.0

12.3
12.2
11.7
12.6
13.0

12.3
12.4
12.1
12.0
12.4

13.0
12.5
14.1
14.4
13.1

12.7
12.3
13.9
14.1
12.2

0
0
0
0
0

1
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

…
…
…
…
…

Net nonperforming loans (percent of outstanding net loans) 2/ 3/
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks

2.0
2.1
2.7
1.9
0.9

1.2
1.3
1.7
0.8
0.8

1.0
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0
0.7
1.2
1.2

1.1
1.0
0.8
1.5
0.7

Gross nonperforming loans (percent of outstanding loans) 3/
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks

5.2
5.5
6.0
3.6
2.9

3.3
3.6
4.4
1.7
2.0

2.5
2.7
3.0
1.9
1.8

2.3
2.2
2.3
2.5
1.8

2.4
2.2
2.4
3.2
1.9

4
0
0
0
4

3
0
0
0
3

1
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0

…
…
…
…
…

0.9
0.9
0.3
1.1
1.3

0.9
0.8
0.6
1.0
1.5

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.9
1.7

1.0
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.8

0.9
0.6
0.8
0.6
2.7

Balance sheet structure of all scheduled banks
Loan/deposit ratio
Investment in government securities/deposit ratio

65.5
43.5

72.0
34.3

74.5
30.5

71.5
32.7

73.9
30.3

Lending to sensitive sectors (in percent of loans and advances)
Real estate
Capital market
Commodities

12.7
1.4
0.2

17.2
1.5
0.3

18.8
1.8
0.0

18.0
2.5
0.1

…
…
…

Number of institutions not meeting 9 percent CAR
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks

Number of institutions with net NPLs above 10 percent of advances
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks
Net profit (+)/loss (-) of commercial banks 4/
Public sector banks
Old Private Sector Banks
New Private Sector Banks
Foreign banks

Source: Reserve Bank of India: Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2007-08.
1/ Some loan classification and provisioning standards do not meet international standards.
2/ Gross nonperforming loans less provisions.
3/ Starting in 2001/02, figure includes ICICI, formerly a large development finance institution, which merged with ICICI Bank Ltd.
in 2002.
4/ In percent of total assets.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
INDIA
Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
January 22, 2009

Contents

Page

I.

Medium-Term Public Debt Sustainability Analysis .....................................................2

II.

Medium-Term External Debt Sustainability Analysis..................................................5

III.

Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................7

IV.

Relations with the World Bank Group..........................................................................9

V.

Relations with the Asian Development Bank .............................................................11

VI.

Statistical Issues ..........................................................................................................12

2
ANNEX I: INDIA—MEDIUM-TERM PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
A. The Baseline Scenario
Staff assumptions. After a significant dip in 2009/10, economic growth is forecast to rise
gradually to potential (8 percent) as global conditions improve and progress is made on
structural reforms (see Table 6). Inflation is projected to remain contained. Despite continued
fiscal stimulus, the general government deficit is expected to decline marginally in
2009/10 as lower commodity prices lighten the subsidy bill and the effect of the Sixth Pay
Commission wage hike wears off. Other working assumptions include:
•

Oil bonds. After 2008/09, the government is assumed to issue oil bonds to the stateowned petroleum companies only to cover the subsidy cost of kerosene.

•

Other off-budget bond issuance. After 2008/09, the government is assumed not to
issue further bonds to the Food Corporation of India or the fertilizer companies as
these expenses are brought on-budget.

Debt path. Under the baseline scenario, the general government deficit would fall to
5.1 percent of GDP by 2013/14 from nearly 10 percent of GDP in 2008/09. Over the same
period, gross public debt would decline to 74 percent of GDP from 80 percent of GDP in
2007/08, although it is projected to rise in 2008/09 and 2009/10 to a peak of 83 percent of
GDP.
FRBMA targets. However, achievement of current balance by the central government,
targeted for 2009/10 under the FRBMA, is not expected within the next 5 years, due to the
expected ramp-up of plan spending to support growth in 2009/10, and the government’s
commitments on account of the agricultural debt write-off.
B. Sensitivity Analysis
After an initial rise, a gradual decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio would occur under various
shocks, including in a scenario where the growth-interest rate differential rises above its
historical average or the currency experiences a sharp depreciation (Figure I.1 and Table I.1).
However, in the case of a return to historical averages for the primary balance, real GDP
growth, and real interest rates, the debt ratio would rise over the medium term. The path of
the debt-to-GDP ratio is also highly sensitive to the growth assumptions. In the case of a
protracted slowdown, with real GDP growth averaging 5 percent, the ratio of debt to GDP
would rise over the medium term. A 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities would
sharply raise the debt ratio to 93 percent of GDP, though it would resume its decline after the
initial spike.

3
Figure I.1. India: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt, in percent of GDP)
Baseline and historical scenarios

Interest rate shock (in percent)

11
110
Gross financing need
105
under baseline (right
10
100
scale)
95
9
Historical
90
85
82 8
80
Baseline
7
75
75
70
6
65
60
5
55
50
4
45
3
40
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

100
95

Growth
shock

90
85
80

75

70
65
60
55
50

82

Baseline

75

Baseline: 7.0
Scenario: 6.0
Historical: 7.0

45
40
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

Combined
shock

80

Baseline
75

2005

2007

2009

78
Baseline
75

2007

2009

2011

2013

110
105
100
95
90
PB shock
78
85
80
75
75
70
No policy change
65
Baseline: -1.3
Baseline
60
Scenario: -2.0
55
Historical: -2.6
50
45
40
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
2003

Interest rate
shock

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and no
policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock (in percent per year)

110
105

110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
Baseline: 3.7
Scenario: 4.5
60
Historical: 3.7
55
50
45
40
2003
2005

2011

2013

110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
2003

Contingent
liabilities shock
84
77

30%
depreciation
Baseline

2005

2007

2009

2011

75

2013

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2009, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Table I.1. India: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2003–2013
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2003

2004

2005

Projections
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

87.3
7.4

87.2
6.7

85.2
5.9

82.0
5.3

80.5
5.1

80.6
5.3

82.7
5.3

82.9
5.1

81.0
4.9

78.2
4.7

75.0
4.4

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

2.4
0.3
3.0
18.7
21.7
-2.4
-1.9
3.3
-5.2
-0.4
-0.4
-0.5
0.1
0.0
2.2

-0.1
-3.0
1.5
19.4
20.9
-4.6
-4.3
1.8
-6.1
-0.3
0.0
-0.2
0.3
0.0
2.9

-2.1
-2.6
1.6
19.7
21.3
-4.6
-4.8
2.2
-7.0
0.2
0.4
-0.1
0.5
0.0
0.5

-3.2
-3.8
1.1
20.9
22.0
-5.7
-5.6
1.7
-7.3
-0.1
0.9
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.6

-1.4
-4.2
0.2
22.7
23.0
-5.3
-4.8
1.9
-6.7
-0.5
0.9
-0.1
0.9
0.0
2.8

0.0
0.1
3.8
21.7
25.5
-5.4
-5.4
-0.3
-5.1
...
1.7
-0.1
1.7
0.0
0.0

2.1
1.5
3.5
21.2
24.7
-2.0
-2.0
1.7
-3.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6

0.2
0.1
2.1
21.5
23.6
-2.0
-2.0
2.9
-4.9
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-1.9
-2.0
0.7
22.0
22.8
-2.8
-2.8
2.8
-5.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-2.8
-2.9
0.2
22.6
22.7
-3.1
-3.1
2.6
-5.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

-3.2
-3.3
-0.2
23.0
22.9
-3.1
-3.1
2.5
-5.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

466.2

449.3

431.7

392.2

354.6

371.8

390.4

385.7

367.7

346.3

325.4

9.4
53.8

7.7
51.9

7.3
57.2

6.5
57.5

5.9
65.0

8.9
107.9

9.1
113.1

7.7
103.9

6.4
94.7

5.7
92.6

5.2
92.6

80.6
80.6

81.2
80.2

81.4
80.8

81.5
80.6

81.7
80.1

81.8
79.4

7.3
7.7
0.2
...
7.5
19.0
3.8

5.1
7.2
2.6
...
4.7
2.0
3.5

6.5
7.5
4.1
...
3.3
1.7
2.1

7.5
7.7
4.1
...
3.6
3.7
0.7

7.8
7.7
3.9
...
3.8
7.7
0.2

8.0
7.7
3.9
...
3.8
8.7
-0.2

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2008-2013
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

6.9
8.4
4.6
5.3
3.8
7.5
3.0

7.9
8.1
2.8
4.6
5.3
4.0
1.5

9.1
7.6
3.2
-3.3
4.4
11.2
1.6

9.8
7.6
2.7
1.9
4.9
13.1
1.1

9.3
7.8
3.1
12.3
4.7
14.3
0.2

Source: Fund staff estimates, calendar year data.
1/ General government debt covers central and state governments.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of
foreign-currency denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

4

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

5

Figure II.1. India: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt, in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

Interest Rate Shock (in percent)
16

30
Gross financing need under
baseline (right axis)

Historical

Baseline

14

25

12

20

30

10

21

25

interest rate
shock

20

21

8
15

6

10

4

8

Baseline
15

10

2
5
03/04

05/06

07/08

09/10

0
13/14

11/12

5
03/04

Baseline: 5.0
Scenario: 5.2
Historical: 4.3

05/06

09/10

Growth shock

20
Baseline

CA shock

25

22

20

21

13/14

25

21
Baseline

15

15
Baseline: 7.4
Scenario: 6.3
Historical: 7.1

05/06

10

07/08

09/10

11/12

13/14

5
03/04

Baseline: -1.1
Scenario: -1.7
Historical: 0.6

05/06

Combined Shock 2/

07/08

09/10

11/12

13/14

Real Depreciation Shock 3/
30

30
Combined
shock

25

20

23

25

21

20

30 %
depreciation

Baseline

15

15

10

10

05/06

07/08

09/10

11/12

26

21

Baseline

5
03/04

11/12

30

25

5
03/04

07/08

Non-Interest Current Account Shock
(In percent of GDP)

Growth Shock (in percent per year)
30

10

21

13/14

5
03/04

05/06

07/08

09/10

11/12

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2007/08.

13/14

Table II.1. India: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004/05–2013/14
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
04/05

Actual
05/06 06/07

07/08

08/09

09/10

Projections
10/11 11/12

12/13

13/14

19.0

17.1

18.7

19.2

19.5

18.7

19.5

20.1

20.6

21.1

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net nondebt creating capital inflows (negative)
Net foreign direct investment, equity
Net portfolio investment,equity
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Denominator: 1+g+r+gr
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, including change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

0.4
-4.1
-0.3
2.6
18.3
20.9
-1.9
0.5
1.3
-1.9
1.2
0.7
-1.3
-1.3
4.5

-1.9
-3.2
0.6
3.6
20.1
23.7
-1.9
0.4
1.5
-1.8
1.2
0.6
-1.5
-1.0
1.3

1.6
-2.7
0.5
3.4
22.3
25.7
-1.7
0.9
0.8
-1.5
1.1
0.6
-1.5
-0.6
4.3

0.5
-6.1
0.7
4.4
21.2
25.7
-3.8
1.3
2.5
-3.0
1.3
0.7
-1.3
-2.4
6.6

0.3
1.0
2.1
5.9
23.4
29.3
-0.7
1.7
-1.0
-0.4
1.0
0.8
-1.2
...
-0.7

-0.9
-0.4
0.8
4.2
20.5
24.7
-0.9
1.1
-0.2
-0.3
1.1
0.6
-1.0
...
-0.4

0.8
-1.7
1.4
4.9
20.9
25.8
-2.6
1.5
1.1
-0.4
1.1
0.8
-1.2
...
2.5

0.6
-1.6
1.3
5.0
21.5
26.6
-2.6
1.3
1.3
-0.3
1.1
1.0
-1.4
...
2.2

0.5
-1.5
1.3
5.0
22.3
27.2
-2.5
1.2
1.3
-0.3
1.1
1.1
-1.4
...
2.1

0.5
-1.6
1.3
4.8
23.0
27.9
-2.5
1.2
1.3
-0.3
1.1
1.2
-1.5
...
2.1

103.5

84.8

83.9

90.5

83.6

91.2

93.4

93.3

92.4

91.7

44.2
6.3

74.7
9.2

71.9
7.8

94.5
8.1

134.6
11.5

120.3
9.4

140.7
10.2

163.6
10.8

184.3
11.1

205.7
11.2

14.1

11.1

10.5

9.8

9.0

8.3

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Gross external financing need (in billions of U.S. dollars) 4/
In percent of GDP
Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/
Key macroeconomic assumptions underlying baseline
Real GDP growth at market prices (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports goods and services (U.S. dollar terms, in perc
Growth of imports goods and services (U.S. dollar terms, in perc
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

8.3
8.0
4.2
37.9
51.7
0.3
1.9

9.2
5.6
3.9
26.7
30.5
-0.6
1.9

9.7
3.3
4.0
25.5
23.0
-0.5
1.7

9.0
17.1
4.8
21.6
27.5
-0.7
3.8

6.3
-5.7
4.1
10.3
14.4
-2.1
0.7

5.3
3.1
3.5
-4.7
-8.4
-0.8
0.9

7.0
1.0
4.4
10.2
13.1
-1.4
2.6

7.6
1.8
5.9
13.0
12.7
-1.3
2.6

7.9
1.9
6.1
13.8
12.7
-1.3
2.5

19.6
19.7
20.2
20.0
25.7

18.7
19.0
19.9
19.5
24.2

19.6
20.0
21.3
20.7
24.9

20.2
20.8
22.5
21.7
25.3

20.8
21.5
23.5
22.6
25.6

0.0
0.0
3.3

-2.5
-0.8
1.1
1.2
-1.5
-0.4
0.0

6

Baseline: external debt

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-3.3

-2.2

For debt
stabilization
8.0
8.0
2.0
2.0
6.2
6.2
13.7
12.6
-1.3
2.5

B. Bound Tests
B1. Nominal interest rate is at historical average plus one standard deviation
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations
B3. Non-interest current account is at historical average minus one standard deviations
B4. Combination of B1-B3 using 1/2 standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2006

-3.3
-3.3
-3.4
-3.3
-4.5

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; ρ = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, g = real GDP
growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-ρ(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt stock. ρ increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0) and rising inflation
(based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period. Short-term debt includes all the outstanding non-resident deposit accounts.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both noninterest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels of
the last projection year.

7
ANNEX III: INDIA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of December 31, 2008)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 12/27/45; Article VIII.

II.

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

SDR Department:

4,158.20
3,630.29
527.94

100.00
87.30
12.70

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Approval
Date
10/31/1991
01/18/1991
11/09/1981

% Allocation

681.17
1.78

IV.

Stand-By
Stand-By
EFF

% Quota

SDR Million

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

Type

SDR Million

Expiration
Date
06/30/1993
04/17/1991
05/01/1984

Amount
Approved
(SDR million)
1,656.00
551.93
5,000.00

100.00
0.26

Amount
Drawn
(SDR million)
1,656.00
551.93
3,900.00

VI.
Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):
2009
Charges/interest
Total
VII.

5.98
5.98

2010

Forthcoming
2011
2012

5.62
5.62

5.62
5.62

5.62
5.62

2013
5.62
5.62

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Since March 1, 1993, the Indian rupee has floated against other currencies, although the Reserve
Bank of India intervenes in the market periodically. As per the Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER), the exchange rate in India is classified as
managed floating with no pre-announced path for the exchange rate. On August 20, 1994, India
accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the IMF Articles of Agreement.
India maintains the following restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions, which are subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a):
restrictions related to the nontransferability of balances under the India-Russia debt agreement;
restrictions arising from unsettled balances under inoperative bilateral payments arrangements
with two Eastern European countries; and a restriction on the transfer of amortization payments
on loans by non-resident relatives. The Executive Board has not approved these restrictions.
VIII.

Article IV Consultation:

The previous Article IV consultation discussions were held in November 2007. The staff report
(IMF Country Report No. 07/402) was discussed by the Executive Board on January 23, 2008.

8
IX.

FSAP Participation and ROSCs:

The data model of the ROSC was issued in April 2004; FSSA/FSAP report was issued in
January 2001; a fiscal transparency ROSC was issued in February 2001.
X.

Technical Assistance:

Department

Purpose

MAE
MAE
FAD
FAD
FAD
MAE
STA
STA
STA
FAD
FAD
STA
LEG
LEG

Government securities market
Foreign exchange market
Expenditure control
Public expenditure management
Public expenditure management (follow-up)
Government securities market (follow-up)
SDDS and statistics
Balance of payments statistics
SDDS and statistics
State level fiscal database and debt register
Pilot study on public private partnerships
Balance of payments statistics
AML/CFT
AML/CFT

XI.

Outreach and Other Activities:

Department

Purpose

OAP/APD/
NCAER
FAD
APD/FAD

Conference: A Tale of Two Giants: India’s and China’s Experience
with Reform and Growth
Conference: International Experiences with Fiscal Reform
Seminar: Decentralization: International Experiences with Subnational
Debt Controls
Training: Applying Debt Sustainability Templates to Indian States
Training: Revenue Forecasting
Seminar: Going Global: India’s Emerging Role in the World Economy
at Centro di Studi Internazionali sull’Economia e lo Sviluppo
Book: India Goes Global: Its Expanding Role in the World Economy
Brookings Institution Panel: Is India’s High Growth Sustainable?
Book: India: Managing Financial Integration and Growth
Seminar: “Have We Seen this Movie Before? Comparing The Crisis
of 2008 with East Asia 1998”, presented at ICRIER/IM-Welt conference
and Yale Initiative on Asian and International Relations

APD
APD
APD
APD
APD
APD
APD

XI.

Date of Delivery
2/94
2/95
5/95
8/95
5/96
7/96
12/96
12/97
2/98
11/04
12/04
9/05
5/08
10/08

Date of Delivery
11/03
1/04
1/04
3/04
5/05
6/06
8/06
4/07
6/08
11/08

Resident Representative:

A resident representative’s office was opened in November 1991. Mr. Sanjaya Panth has been
Senior Resident Representative since August 2008.

9
ANNEX IV: INDIA—RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
In Bank FY2008 (July 1-June 30), Bank lending totaled $2.15 billion, down from
$3.75 billion in FY2007. IFC also recorded a strong commitment in Bank FY2008 of
$1.05 billion. The new World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Strategy (CAS) for India for
2009-2012, discussed with the WBG's Board of Directors on December 11, 2008, focuses on
helping India to fast-track the development of much-needed infrastructure and to support the
seven poorest states achieve higher standards of living for their people. The strategy
envisages a total proposed lending program of US$14 billion for the next three years, of
which US$9.6 billion is from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) and US$4.4 billion (SDR 2.982 billion equivalent at the current exchange rate) from
the International Development Association (IDA).
The overarching objective of the new CAS is to scale up the development impact of Bank
Group assistance in order to help India move closer to achieving its development goals—
including the goal of halving poverty by 2015.
The key thrust of the Bank Group’s new CAS strategy will be to provide support to deal with
the challenges of achieving rapid, inclusive growth, ensuring sustainable development, and
improving service delivery. Scaling up impact will entail a substantially strengthened Bank
Group program directed to low-income states, offset by somewhat decreasing shares of
lending to the center and other non-lagging states, compared to the prior CAS period. For
state level lending, the strategy is to retain an essentially reform and performance-based
approach, seeking new opportunities for engagement with the largest and poorest states in
order to help strengthen the environment for reform. Through adjustment lending, expected
to remain at the current level of approximately 10 percent of total IBRD/IDA lending,
continued emphasis is also being placed on support to fiscal and governance reforms at the
state level. A major emphasis of the new CAS will be on strengthening weaknesses in
project implementation, with a cross-cutting focus on improving the effectiveness of public
spending and achieving demonstrable results to scale up the impact of World Bank
assistance. IFC’s FY09-11 strategy, centering on improving inclusion, managing the impact
of climate change, and promoting regional integration, is closely aligned to the Bank’s.
Financial operations since 2001/02 are summarized below.

10
India: World Bank Group Financial Operations
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Commitments 2/
IBRD
IDA
Disbursements
IBRD
IDA
Repayments
IBRD
IDA
Debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1/

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2,830
1,904
926
1,997
803
1,195
1,147
724
424
26,466
7,010
19,456

2,092
951
1,141
1,533
647
886
3,491
3,031
460
26,243
5,082
21,161

1,328
698
630
1,816
892
924
2,403
1,871
532
27,019
4,238
22,781

2,705
1,463
1,242
1,835
818
1,017
784
201
582
28,527
4,865
23,662

1,886
1,241
645
2,135
938
1,197
842
221
621
28,925
5,557
23,368

2,451
1,566
855
1,935
947
988
946
282
664
30,911
6,277
24,634

3,174
1,932
1,242
1,904
1,092
812
1,086
363
723
33,552
7,040
26,512

Source: World Bank.
1/ On a fiscal year basis beginning April 1.
2/ Based on loan approval date.

11
ANNEX V: INDIA—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) operations in India began in 1986. Cumulative public
sector loan commitments totaled $19.2 billion as of 31 December 2008 for 112 loans. With
an additional $1.6 billion in private sector loans (the latter without government guarantee),
total loan commitments on a cumulative basis amount to $20.8 billion. These funds have
been provided from the Bank’s ordinary capital resources (OCR). Also, AsDB has
approved equity investments amounting to $0.2 billion. AsDB’s lending and equity activities
are summarized below.
India: Asian Development Bank Financial Operations
(In millions of U.S. dollars, as of 31 December 2008)
Calendar
Year
1986–90
1991–95
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Total

OCR Loan
Commitments
2,317.6
3,364.0
763.0
563.0
250.0
625.0
1330.0
1,500.0
1,163.6
1,411.0
1,200.0
367.3
1,260.0
1,232.1
1,808.3
19,154.9

Private
Equity
10.9
59.5
-15.5
----25.0
0.7
29.7
15.0
67.6
-18.6
242.3

Disbursements
338.7
2,131.3
591.7
645.0
620.4
605.3
487.0
269.9
576.5
658.0
381.4
641.0
701.4
1,363.5
1509.9
11,521.0

Source: Asian Development Bank.

AsDB is currently preparing its India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009–12. The
proposed strategy will have four strategic pillars. These include: (i) Support for the process
of inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth; (ii) Catalyzing investment through the
use of innovative business and financing modalities; (iii) Strengthening the results orientation
of project design and implementation and emphasizing knowledge solutions; and (iv)
Support for regional cooperation. The proposed strategy will focus on key infrastructure
sectors such as transport (national highways, state roads, and rural roads), energy (power
sector reforms, strengthening transmission and distribution system, hydropower generation,
and improvement in energy efficiency), urban (water supply and sanitation, waste
management, urban transport, and municipal reforms), and agriculture and natural resource
management (irrigation). The proposed strategy will also support the key thematic concerns
of environmental sustainability, private sector development and private sector operations,
governance and capacity building, gender equity, knowledge solutions, and partnerships
during the CPS period.

12
ANNEX VI: INDIA––STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
Macroeconomic statistics are adequate for surveillance, but weaknesses remain in the
timeliness and coverage of certain statistical series. India has an elaborate system for
compiling economic and financial statistics and produces a vast quantity of data covering
virtually all sectors of the economy. India subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination
Standards (SDDS) on December 27, 1996 and started posting its metadata on the
Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board on October 30, 1997. It is currently in observance of
the SDDS, although it uses flexibility options for timeliness of data on general government
operations and on the periodicity and timeliness of labor market data.
2.
The data module of the Report on Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC, IMF
Country Report No. 04/96) was published in April 2004. It assesses India’s data
dissemination practices against the SDDS requirements and assesses the quality of six
datasets based on the Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF) developed by STA.
3.
National accounts: The Central Statistical Organization (CSO) has recently reduced
the dissemination lag for quarterly releases from three to two months and released a new
series of national accounts, with base year 1999–2000 in February 2006. Estimates of value
added in constant prices for public administration and defense may be biased upwards, as
they are based on the government’s wage bill (with arrears counted in the year that they are
paid) deflated by the Wholesale Price Index (WPI).
4.
Price statistics: The consumer price indices (CPIs) are based on weights that are over
ten years old and do not fully capture price developments in the economy. However, since
January 2006, the Labour Bureau has published a revised CPI for industrial workers with a
2001 base year and a Working Group is engaged in the revision of the current producer price
index to a new base. Presently, there are four CPIs, each based on the consumption basket of
a narrow category of consumers (namely industrial workers, urban and nonmanual
employees, agricultural laborers, and rural laborers). The CPIs are published with a lag of
about one month. A WPI (1993/94=100) is published weekly with a lag of two weeks and is
subject to large revisions, especially in periods of rising inflation. In addition, the
representativeness of the index may be undermined by the collection of prices from a
relatively small sample of products and the infrequent updating of weights.
5.
External sector statistics: While the concepts and definitions used to compile
balance of payments statistics are broadly in line with the fifth edition of the Balance of
Payments Manual (BPM5), the RBI presentation does not strictly follow the BPM5.
Furthermore, trade data have quality, valuation, timing, and coverage problems, and data on
trade prices, volumes, and composition are not regularly available on a timely basis. Only
trade credit extended for more than 180 days is included in the balance of payments (and the
IIP and external debt data); trade credit is often less than 180 days in most countries.
Bilateral data on services exports to the United States and other developed countries are

13
manifold higher than counterpart services imports published by these same countries.
External debt statistics are available on a quarterly basis with a one quarter lag. Estimates of
short-term external debt are presented in the debt statistics on an original maturity basis. The
short-term maturity attribution on a residual maturity basis is only available annually (and
excludes residual maturity of medium- and long-term nonresident Indian accounts). The
international investment position (IIP) statistics cover the sectors prescribed in the BPM5 and
these data are disseminated within six months of the reference period in respect of annual
data. Coverage of direct investment positions data is hampered by the absence of appropriate
legal or institutional authority. India began disseminating the Data Template on International
Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity as prescribed under the SDDS in December 2001.
The more up-to-date information on certain variables, such as total foreign reserves, foreign
currency assets, gold, and SDRs, are available on a weekly basis and are disseminated as part
of a weekly statistical supplement on the RBI web site.
6.
Monetary and financial statistics: The RBI web site and the RBI Bulletin publish a
wide array of monetary and financial statistics, including reserve money and its components,
RBI’s survey, monetary survey, liquidity aggregates (outstanding amounts), interest rates,
exchange rates, foreign reserves, and results of government securities auctions. The
frequency and quality of data dissemination have improved substantially in recent years.
7.
Concepts and definitions used by the RBI to compile monetary statistics are in broad
conformity with the guidelines provided in the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual
(MFSM). Nevertheless, the following concepts and principles deviate from the MFSM.
First, the resident sector data do not provide sufficient information on the sectoral
distribution of domestic credit. Specifically, under their present sectorization scheme, the
authorities subdivide the resident nonbank sector data by (i) central government; (ii) state
government; and (iii) the commercial sector (including other financial corporations, public
and other nonfinancial corporations, and other resident sectors). Second, commercial banks
add accrued interest to credit and deposit positions on a quarterly basis only (instead of the
prescribed monthly basis).
8.
The RBI reports monetary data for IFS on a regular basis. Since October 2006, the
RBI has initiated the electronic reporting of monetary data, which is a major improvement
from the previous paper-based reporting which was prone to errors and delays. India has also
submitted to STA test data (starting from December 2001 data) on the Standardized Report
Forms (SRFs) that have been developed to implement the methodology outlined in the
MFSM. STA is working with the authorities in resolving the outstanding data issues on the
development of the SRFs.
9.
Fiscal operations: The Ministry of Finance (MoF) posts selected central government
monthly fiscal data and quarterly debt data on its web site. However, no monthly data on
fiscal performance at the state level are available, and annual data are available only with an
8-month to 10-month lag. Consolidated information is unavailable on local government

14
operations. In addition, data on the functional and economic classification of expenditures are
available with considerable lag. There is also scope to improve the analytical usefulness of
the presentation of the fiscal accounts. For example, classification of government expenditure
between developmental/nondevelopmental and plan/nonplan obscures the economic nature
and impact of fiscal actions. The MoF reports central government data (on a cash basis) for
publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (latest reported data correspond
to 2006). Some limited general government data has been reported for 2002.

15
India—Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of January 7, 2009

Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data 1/

Frequency
of
Reporting 1/

Frequency
of Publication 1/

Exchange rates

01/7/09

01/7/09

D

D

D

International reserve assets and reserve
liabilities of the monetary authorities 4/

12/26/08

01/2/09

W

W

W

Reserve/base money

12/26/08

01/2/09

W

W

W

Broad money

12/19/08

01/2/09

BW

BW

W

Central bank balance sheet

Jun. 08

08/30/08

A

A

A

Consolidated balance sheet of the
banking system

Mar. 08

10/1/08

A

A

A

Interest rates 5/

01/7/09

01/7/09

D

D

D

Consumer price index

Nov. 08

01/2/09

M

M

Revenue, expenditure, balance and
composition of financing 6/
– General Government 7/

Mar. 08

10/01/08

A

Revenue, expenditure, balance and
composition of financing 6/
– Central Government

Nov. 08

01/2/09

Stocks of central government and
central government-guaranteed debt 8/

Mar. 08

External current account balance

Memo Items 2/
Data Quality–
Data Quality–
Methodological
Accuracy and
soundness 2/
reliability 3/

O, O, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

M

O, LNO, O, O

LNO, LO, O,
O, O

A

A

LNO, LO, O, O

O, O, O, O,
LO

M

M

M

10/01/08

A

A

A

Jul-Sep. 08

01/5/09

Q

Q

Q

LO, O, LO, O

LO, O, O, O,
LO

Exports and imports of goods and
services

Jul-Sep. 08

01/5/09

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

Jul-Sep. 08

12/18/08

Q

Q

Q

LO, LNO, LO,
LO

LNO, LNO,
O, O, LO

Gross external debt

Jul-Sep. 08

01/5/09

Q

Q

Q

1/ Daily (D), Weekly (W), Biweekly (BW), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A), Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2/ Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC (published on April 2, 2004, and based on the findings of the mission that took place during
May 13–30, 2002) for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning
concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not
observed (LNO), or not observed (NO).
3/ Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of
source data, assessment and validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies
4/ Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
5/ Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
6/ Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
7/ The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state
governments.
8/ Including currency and maturity composition.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on India
February 6, 2009
1.
This statement contains information that has become available since the staff report
was circulated to the Executive Board on January 23, 2009. This information does not alter
the thrust of the staff appraisal.
Economic and financial developments
2.
Indicators of economic activity have remained soft. While exports (in dollar terms)
contracted by 1 percent y/y in December, better than the 11 percent contraction recorded in
October-November, based on preliminary shipment data the government announced that
January exports will likely decline by 22 percent. Furthermore, the commerce ministry now
expects exports to fall in 2009/10. Finally, the manufacturing sector PMI (ABN Amro)
indicated continued contractions in output, new orders, and employment in January, although
at a slower pace than in December.
3.
Inflation continues to fall on the back of lower fuel prices. WPI inflation
decelerated to an average 5.5 percent (y/y) during the first three weeks of January compared
to 5.9 percent (y/y) in December. The three-month moving average of WPI changes
remained negative. Consumer price inflation (industrial workers) has also decelerated but
remains high at 9.7 percent (y/y) in December.
4.
Tax collections have continued to weaken. During April-December, they rose only
5 percent (y/y), compared to 26 percent (y/y) for the April-September period. With
expenditure also rising faster than projected, further market borrowing will likely be
announced in February. In its January review, the Prime Minister’s Economic Advisory
Council forecast that the 2008/09 general government fiscal deficit (including subsidy-related
bonds) at about 10 percent of GDP, the same as projected by staff.
5.
Overall credit growth is decelerating, but public banks’ credit has picked up and
lending rates have declined somewhat. The growth of non-food credit to the private sector
slowed to 23 percent y/y in mid-January and was negative in seasonally adjusted, month-onmonth terms. Recently published data show that lending has differed significantly by bank
ownership. While total lending during 2008 rose by 21 percent, that of private and foreign
banks slowed sharply to 12 percent and 17 percent, respectively, while that of public sector
banks rose to 29 percent. Commercial lending rates remain much higher than the policy rate,
though reductions are starting to occur, particular in state-owned banks.
6.
Recent financial results suggest that banks’ profits are holding up well, but
corporates performance is weakening. Earnings for the September-December 2008 quarter
held up reasonably well with SBI and ICICI reporting increases of 51 percent and 3.4 percent
in their consolidated profits. These results exceeded market expectations, but were less than
in the same period last year. Reflecting these results and in line with global trends, the CDS

2
spreads on these banks have declined by about 30-80 basis points compared to endDecember. In contrast, corporate profits have continued to decline: a sample of about 2,400
companies indicates that after-tax profits declined by 8 percent y/y in the June-September
quarter. Initial results for the October-December quarter and corporate tax revenue suggest
continued weak performance.
7.
Financial markets have stabilized, but remain volatile. The equity market declined
about 5 percent during January, while the rupee/U.S. dollar rate held steady at about 49. In
credit markets, commercial paper rates have eased somewhat. The yield curve for government
securities has steepened with long yields rising in recent weeks (by about 50-100 bps),
reflecting expectations of significant debt issuance. Portfolio investment registered net
outflows of about $1 billion in January, and reserves fell by $2.8 billion to US$248 billion as
of January 23, 2009 compared to end-December.
Policy developments
8.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) kept monetary policy on hold at its quarterly
policy meeting on January 27. The central bank cut its GDP growth forecast to 7 percent
for 2008/09 (from the 7½-8 percent range announced at the last quarterly meeting), noting
that downside risks have increased. It also reduced its forecast for headline inflation (WPI)
for end-March to below 3 percent (y/y), from 7 percent previously. In explaining its decision
to leave policy rates unchanged, the RBI noted that CPI inflation has yet to moderate and that
liquidity in the financial system is already ample. It also noted delays in the transmission
from policy to commercial bank rates. Looking ahead, the authorities expressed their desire
to keep some measures in reserve, while indicating its readiness to act if the situation
worsens. On the liquidity front, the RBI extended its facility for banks to onlend to mutual
funds, non-bank financial corporations, and housing finance companies from June to
September 2009.
9.
On January 29, the government reduced the prices of gasoline, diesel, and LPG
by an average 8 percent. The direct impact of these cuts on WPI inflation is estimated at
about 0.4 percentage point. At present gasoline and diesel prices are in line with international
comparators, while those for LPG and kerosene remain about 60 and 120 percent higher,
respectively, than international prices.
10.
The government has announced that it will not bail out private companies. In
contrast to financial institutions, which are subject to regulation, the authorities have
emphasized that a private company producing goods or services, competing in a competitive
market should not be treated on the same basis as banks.
11.
On January 23, 2009, the authorities announced a 6-month ban on imports of
toys from China.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 09/35
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 17, 2009

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2008 Article IV Consultation with India
On February 6, 2009, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with India. 1
Background
After five years with average growth of 8¾ percent, India’s economy is slowing. On February 9,
2009, the Central Statistical Organization released advanced estimates for 2008/09 (AprilMarch) real GDP growth of 7.1 percent. Partly reflecting the deteriorating global outlook, staff
project India’s growth to moderate to 6¼ percent in 2008/09 and further to 5¼ percent in
2009/10. Corporate investment—the major growth driver during recent years—is expected to
slow because of weakening profitability and confidence, and tightening of financing conditions
from foreign and nonbank sources. Policy measures to stimulate the economy and a good
harvest should support domestic demand. The uncertainty surrounding the forecast is unusually
large, with significant downside risks. The main upside risk stems from a larger-than-anticipated
impact of the stimulus measures that the authorities have already implemented.
After rising to nearly 13 percent (year-on-year) in August 2008, headline inflation (Wholesale
Price Index) dropped to 4.4 percent (y/y) at the end of January 2009. With commodity prices
waning and demand slackening, inflation is expected to fall further to 3 percent (y/y) by March
2009 and to 2 percent on average in 2009/10.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2

The current account deficit is projected at about 3 percent of GDP in 2008/09, primarily due to a
markedly higher oil import bill. While export performance has deteriorated sharply in recent
months, softer import growth is keeping the trade deficit in check. For 2009/10, the current
account deficit is forecast to narrow to 1½ percent of GDP, reflecting lower oil prices and
weaker domestic demand.
After last year’s record of 9.2 percent of GDP, capital inflows are expected to decline this fiscal
year; until December 2008 portfolio investment recorded a US$11 billion outflow and external
commercial borrowing has slowed considerably, though there has been a mild recovery
in portfolio investment since October 2009 and foreign direct investment (FDI) has held up
relatively well. While reserves have declined this fiscal year, from a historic peak of US$315
billion in May 2008 to US$252 billion as of February 6, 2009, they remain adequate compared
to the country’s gross financing requirement and imports.
As a result of the global crisis, the stock market index declined by over 50 percent in 2008 and
the rupee depreciated 23 percent versus the U.S. dollar and 13 percent in nominal effective
terms. The real effective exchange rate depreciated by 10 percent and is in line with its
equilibrium value. In early 2009, however, the rupee and the stock market have stabilized
somewhat.
The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI’s) measures—including cutting policy rates, lowering the cash
reserve ratio and the statutory liquidity ratio, and easing controls on capital inflows—have eased
the domestic liquidity pressures that appeared in September and October and brought down
interbank rates significantly. Nevertheless, the TED 2 and commercial paper spreads remain
elevated and commercial lending rates have fallen much less than policy rates. Given the rapid
decline in inflation, this means that real interest rates have actually increased over the past
months. Credit growth remains relatively high, though this in part reflects the switch of corporate
funding to banks as financing from other sources has declined.
Banks, which dominate the financial system, appear well-capitalized, relatively liquid, and have
low non-performing assets (NPA) ratios. However, over the last few years, an increase in
foreign liabilities, combined with rapid domestic credit expansion, has increased banks’
vulnerability to global deleveraging and slowing economic activity. Consequently, their share
prices have fallen sharply and their credit default swap (CDS) spreads and default probabilities
have risen. Mutual funds faced significant redemptions in September, and other nonbank
financial institutions face a marked increase in borrowing costs.
Although the 2008/09 budget targeted further consolidation in line with the previous five years,
spending rose sharply even before the onset of the crisis, reflecting a soaring subsidy bill,
2

The TED spread is the difference between the 3-month Mumbai interbank offer rate (MIBOR) and 3-month
Indian Government Treausury bill yield.

3
agricultural debt forgiveness, an expansion of a rural employment guarantee scheme, and a
21 percent civil service wage hike. In addition, tax revenue has slowed sharply as the economy
is losing steam. Staff project the central government deficit at about 7 percent of GDP this year,
including 1¼ percent of subsidy-related bond issuance. The general government deficit, which
includes the states’ deficit, is forecast to rise to nearly 10 percent of GDP. Public debt remains
elevated at about 80 percent of GDP. On February 16, 2009, the government issued the
2009/10 interim budget, which targets a reduction in the central government headline deficit of
½ percentage point of GDP.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended India’s strong economic performance in recent years, which
reflected sound macroeconomic policies and continued progress with structural reform. They
noted that India confronts the current global economic and financial crisis from a position of
strength.
Directors observed, however, that there have been spillovers from the global crisis. They
commended the authorities’ swift and comprehensive policy response, but underscored the
downside risks and called for maintenance of a flexible, pragmatic, and proactive policy stance.
Directors agreed that a key short-run policy objective should be to sustain liquidity and credit
flows. They believed that monetary and structural policies will have to continue to carry most of
the burden of adjustment, given the high public debt-GDP ratio.
Directors welcomed the central bank’s actions to ease monetary policy and stimulate bank
lending. A number of Directors saw scope for further monetary easing, in light of the projected
decline in inflationary pressures and the need to reinforce confidence and sustain bank credit.
However, a number of other Directors saw merit in the authorities’ wait-and-see approach, given
the highly uncertain economic environment.
Directors supported the authorities’ flexible exchange rate policy, which will help the economy to
adjust to the global downturn. They underscored that exchange market intervention should be
consistent with the goal of ensuring sufficient domestic liquidity, and concurred that international
reserves should be conserved to relieve concerns about external financing. At the same time, a
number of Directors were not in favor of letting the exchange rate find a floor if depreciation
pressures re-emerge, stressing the risk of overshooting in times of financial volatility and
uncertainty. Directors noted the staff’s conclusion that the exchange rate appears to be close to
its estimated equilibrium level.
Directors commended the strength and resilience of India’s financial system, reflected in
favorable financial soundness indicators. However, they stressed that rising credit risk and
liquidity pressures could put the financial system under strain, while negative feedback loops
between the real and financial sectors could turn out to be strong. Directors therefore
encouraged the authorities to take additional preventive action, including identification of

4
potential bank re-capitalization needs and measures to promote early loss recognition, full
disclosure of bad assets, and filling of information gaps. They underscored the importance of
persevering with reforms to deepen and further strengthen the financial sector, develop the
corporate bond market, and improve banking efficiency.
Directors broadly supported the authorities’ gradual and cautious approach to capital account
liberalization. They encouraged further progress, observing that liberalization could help to ease
external financing constraints. Directors also welcomed the authorities’ commitment to trade
liberalization.
Directors considered that, while corporate balance sheets have been strong in recent years,
slowing economic growth and tighter financing conditions could increase corporate distress.
They encouraged the implementation of reforms to strengthen corporate governance and the
regulatory framework for corporate restructuring. These measures are also important to improve
the investment climate.
Directors acknowledged that the sizeable fiscal stimulus undertaken in 2008-09 should help to
support economic growth. However, they stressed that, given the high ratio of public debt to
GDP, significant further expansion of the deficit could raise concerns about fiscal sustainability.
They encouraged the authorities to use the limited available fiscal space only for high-quality
infrastructure and poverty-related spending, and for bank recapitalization if needed. They
advised that any further short-term stimulus be combined with fiscal reforms to safeguard
medium-term debt sustainability. In this connection, they encouraged the authorities to take
advantage of falling international fuel prices by moving expeditiously with their fuel subsidy
reform plan, while ensuring that a well-targeted social safety net is in place.
Directors stressed that medium-term fiscal consolidation remains a priority, and should continue
to be anchored in a fiscal rules framework. They were encouraged that the authorities are
considering a strengthened successor fiscal framework to replace the existing one when it
expires in 2009-10. Directors called for the new framework to be backed by comprehensive
expenditure reforms and measures to broaden the tax base.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5
India: Selected Economic Indicators, 2004/05–2009/10 1/
2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09
Proj.

Growth (y/y percent change)
Real GDP (at factor cost)
Non-agricultural sector
Industrial production

7.5
9.5
8.4

9.4
10.3
8.2

9.6
11.0
11.5

9.0
10.0
8.5

6.3
7.1
...

5.3
5.9
...

Prices (y/y percent change, period average for annual data)
Wholesale prices (1993/94 weights)
Consumer prices - industrial workers (2001 weights)

6.5
3.8

4.4
4.4

5.4
6.7

4.7
6.2

8.8
7.8

1.9
3.4

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross saving 3/
Gross investment 3/

31.8
32.2

34.3
35.5

34.8
35.9

36.0
37.5

34.6
37.6

34.9
36.4

Fiscal position (percent of GDP) 4/ 5/
Central government deficit
General government deficit
General government debt

-4.1
-7.3
86.5

-4.7
-7.3
84.2

-4.4
-6.3
80.6

-3.4
-5.8
80.1

-7.1
-9.9
80.7

-5.7
-8.8
82.9

Money and credit (y/y percent change, end-period)
Broad money
Credit to commercial sector

12.3
26.0

21.2
32.2

21.5
25.8

20.8
20.6

…
…

…
…

Financial indicators (percent, end-period)
91-day treasury bill yield
10-year government bond yield
Stock market (y/y percent change, end-period)

5.3
6.7
16.1

6.1
7.5
73.7

8.0
8.0
15.9

7.2
7.9
19.7

…
…
…

…
…
…

85.2
28.5
118.9
48.6
22.9

105.2
23.4
157.1
32.1
32.3

128.9
22.6
190.7
21.4
38.3

166.2
28.9
257.8
35.2
52.2

186.4
12.2
298.0
15.6
60.0

169.0
-9.4
265.5
-10.9
38.6

-2.5
-0.4
3.7
9.3
26.2

-9.9
-1.2
3.0
12.5
15.1

-9.6
-1.0
7.7
7.1
36.6

-17.0
-1.5
15.4
29.6
92.2

-35.1
-3.0
19.9
-11.7
-27.9

-18.6
-1.5
14.0
-2.5
-3.3

141.5
8.9
133.0
19.0
4.6
4.4
27.5
6.0

151.6
7.7
138.1
17.1
3.3
5.6
24.8
10.1

199.2
7.7
171.4
18.7
3.8
5.7
26.1
4.9

309.7
10.5
224.8
19.2
7.3
3.6
31.0
5.3

246.8
9.1
229.0
19.5
7.6
2.8
28.9
5.5

243.5
8.0
238.0
18.7
7.9
2.4
...
5.7

2.2
43.7

4.4
44.6

-2.2
43.5

8.2
40.1

…
…

…
…

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.6

1.3

0.3

External trade 6/
Merchandise exports (US$ billions)
y/y percent change
Merchandise imports (US$ billions)
y/y percent change
Net oil imports (US$ billions)
Balance of payments (US$ billions)
Current account balance
(in percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment, net
Portfolio investment, net (equity and debt)
Overall balance
External indicators
Gross reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period)
(In months of imports) 7/
External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars, end-period) 8/
External debt (percent of GDP, end-period) 8/
Of which: short-term debt 9/
Ratio of gross reserves to short-term debt (end-period) 9/
Gross reserves to broad money (percent; end-period)
Debt service ratio 10/
Real effective exchange rate 11/
(y/y percent change, period average for annual data)
Exchange rate (rupee/US$, end-period)
Memorandum items (in percent of GDP):
Subsidy related bond issuance 12/

2/

2009/10
Proj.

Sources: Data provided by the Indian authorities; CEIC Data Company Ltd; Bloomberg L.P.; World Development Indicators; and Fund staff estimates and
projections.
1/ Data are for April-March fiscal years.
2/ Current staff projections.
3/ Differs from official data, calculated with gross investment and current account. Gross investment includes errors and omissions.
4/ Divestment proceeds treated as below-the-line financing.
5/ Subsidy related bond issuance included in total expenditure.
6/ Annual data are on balance of payments basis.
7/ Imports of goods and services projected over the following twelve months.
8/ For projection, data are reported relative to staff's estimated annual GDP.
9/ Including short-term debt on contracted maturity basis, NRI deposits due within one year, and medium- and long-term debt on residual maturity basis.
10/ In percent of current account receipts excluding grants.
11/ IMF INS calculation.
12/ Issued by the central government to FCI, the state-owned oil refining/distribution companies, and fertilizer companies as compensation for losses
incurred from the provision of subsidies.

2/

Statement by Adarsh Kishore, Executive Director for India, Michael D. Patra, Senior
Advisor to Executive Director and Partha Ray, Advisor to Executive Director
February 6, 2009
1. The set of staff papers gives an assessment of the outlook for the Indian economy and
also presents the views of the authorities on a number of important issues, including some on
which there are significant differences in perception and policy diagnosis. The authorities
consider the staff assessment to be unduly pessimistic on various fronts.
The Real Economy and the Outlook for Growth
2. The Indian economy has moved closer to its potential growth than ever before, clocking
8.8 per cent per annum on average over the last five years. This period is also characterized
by a rapid integration into the global economy. The recent growth experience has, however,
been driven largely by domestic consumption and investment, even as the share of net
exports rose. India cannot be expected to remain immune to the ongoing global crisis and just
like other economies, mature and emerging, the outlook is overcast by heightened
uncertainty. While the Indian authorities have consistently ruled out any decoupling, it is
important to recognize that there are some positive features that distinguish India’s
experience and should work as built-in stabilizers.
Lead Indicators
3. Lead indicators suggest that agricultural production during 2008-09 may be close to or
better than last year’s record production. Industrial production has slackened considerably
when compared with the ebullient performance a year ago but is still growing at close to 4
per cent on a year-on-year basis up to November 2008 (the latest period for which data are
available). In fact, sustained performance of the agricultural sector, fiscal stimulus, falling
global crude oil prices and softening of domestic input prices of energy, cement and steel are
likely to have a positive impact on industrial production in the coming months. Activity in
the Service sector appears to be moderating, but is likely to regain its momentum as the
upturn begins. Sub-sectors like railway freight traffic and communication have already
commenced their pick-up.
Outlook
4. There is some convergence of views between the staff and the authorities in the
assessment that the economy is undergoing a cyclical moderation accentuated by the
combined impact of the global downturn and the ongoing financial crisis. On the near-term
outlook, the difference between the ‘pessimism’ of the staff assessment and the ‘cautious
optimism’ of the authorities’ view is essentially one of degree and not of direction. At the
current juncture, the authorities expect real GDP during 2008-09 to grow at 7.0 per cent, with
a downward bias.
5. In the medium-term, there is near-unanimity – that inherent fundamentals are strong and
intact, and demographic dividend, institutional infrastructure, strength of domestic demand,
growing entrepreneurial spirit, rise in productivity and untapped growth potential would
return the Indian economy to its high growth trajectory. Indeed, the authorities believe that

2
once the global economy begins to recover, India’s turnaround will be sharper and swifter.
What India is facing today is not a loss of growth but merely a moderation of speed.
Corporate Sector
6. It is important to recognize that the corporate sector is dealing with the crisis from a
much stronger position than it was in earlier downturns. Since 2003, the corporate sector has
restructured and refocused its strategies, stood up to foreign direct investment and liberalized
imports including of technology and developed a competitive edge and a global scan.
Empirical studies show that from 2002-03 onwards, an improvement in productivity and
efficiency is taking hold. This has also been reflected in the steady and consistent jump in
profitability with growth in post-tax profits in the range of 20-40 per cent since the second
half of 2002-03 right up to March 2008 and the moderation in profitability growth thereafter
needs to be viewed as a cyclical ebb rather than a structural deterioration.
7. While the downside risk to corporate profitability may have increased in the current
global slowdown, this could be partly offset by falling input prices and a gradual reduction in
borrowing costs. Moreover, as noted earlier, improvements in industrial production could
have a conducive effect on corporate performance in the period ahead.
Monetary Policy
8. There has been a swift change in the monetary policy stance during 2008-09 – from
fighting the upsurge in inflation on the back of soaring international commodity prices in the
first half of the year to dealing with the combined impact of the global financial crisis and the
follow-on global economic downturn. In the second phase, the objectives have been: to
ensure orderly functioning of the domestic financial markets in contrast to the freezing up of
money and credit markets in the mature economies; to ensure that liquidity did not become a
binding constraint on financial institutions; to keep credit flowing to productive sectors of the
economy; and to preserve financial stability and ensure that confidence in the financial
system is maintained and the institutions themselves are able to intermediate the financing
requirements of the growth process.
9. By and large, the authorities have succeeded in these objectives. At a time when
international financial markets seized up and capital flows dwindled and even reversed, the
Indian banking sector showed resilience in accommodating both substitution effects and the
tightening of financing constraints in some sectors such as mutual funds and non-banking
finance companies. Thus, bank credit disbursement actually accelerated on a year-on-year
basis with the growth (yoy) in non-food bank credit at 23.1 percent as on January 16, 2009
being higher than that of 22.1 percent as on January 18, 2008. This acceleration of bank
credit made up for the drying up of other resources – so much so that during 2008-09 so far
(till January 2, 2009), the total flow of resources to the commercial sector from banks and
other sources was only marginally lower than in the previous year (Rs. 4847 billion this year
as against Rs. 4995 billion last year) and the gap was more than bridged by companies’
recourse to internal accruals. There has, however, been a noticeable variation in credit
expansion across bank groups. Credit expansion by foreign and private sector banks was
significantly lower than a year ago and has been more than compensated for by expansion of
credit by public sector banks.

3
Policy Measures
10. Measures aimed at expanding rupee liquidity have resulted in liquidity support of the
order of 7 per cent of GDP and the authorities stand ready to do more, if warranted, to
achieve the objectives indicated earlier. In January 2009, a special purpose vehicle (SPV)
was set up for addressing the temporary liquidity constraints of systemically important nondeposit taking non-banking financial companies. The policy rates i.e., the repo and reverse
repo rates under the LAF have been cut by 350 basis points and 200 basis points
respectively to historically lowest levels accompanied by appropriate forex intervention. It is
important to note that the authorities have undertaken these measures without diluting the
quality of collateral accepted by the Reserve Bank.
11. Managing forex liquidity included a firm reassurance by the Reserve Bank to meet any
demand supply gaps of foreign exchange in the domestic foreign exchange market,
introduction of a forex swap facility (of tenor up to three months) by the Reserve Bank for
Indian public and private sector banks with overseas branches or subsidiaries (for funding the
swap, banks were allowed to borrow under LAF for the corresponding tenor at the prevailing
repo rate), upward adjustment of the interest rate ceilings on the deposits of non-resident
Indians, substantial relaxation of the regime for external commercial borrowing, allowing
non-banking finance companies / housing finance companies access to foreign borrowing
and allowing corporates to buy back foreign currency borrowing to take advantage of the
discount in the prevailing depressed global markets.
12. These measures restored normalcy in the money and credit markets swiftly. Bank
deposit and lending rates, which had firmed up during the current financial year up to
October 2008, started easing from November 2008. In this context, the authorities remain
mindful of the dangers of getting locked into a liquidity trap and its consequences in some
countries. Thus further interest rate reductions may not be in the interest of ensuring the
effectiveness of monetary policy or of the long-term aspirations of growth.
Financial Sector Issues
13. The soundness of the financial sector is among the strengths with which India prepares
for the difficult and challenging period ahead. Underlying this favourable position is the
approach that has been followed over nearly two decades of reforms – instituting global
standards alongside country-specific norms. Also the pace of reform has been carefully
calibrated to the size of the change and preparedness of domestic institutions, and generally a
big-bang approach has been avoided. This approach has stood India in good stead through
two decades marked by financial crises in various parts of the world. While the level of
innovation in terms of exposure to structured products and complex derivatives may be low,
the overall soundness of the system has been preserved.
14. This approach has forewarned and equipped the financial system and the regulatory
authorities for dealing with the inevitable rise in non-performing assets and credit risks in
periods of economic downturn. In some sectors, counter-cyclical prudential measures –
increase in risk weights and provisioning - taken in the past periods when credit growth was
rapid, have been scaled back in view of the current macroeconomic, monetary and credit
conditions and consistent with the practice of dynamic provisioning. Where pockets of

4
financial stress have been indicated through early detection tools, the authorities have moved
swiftly and decisively to ease liquidity/funding stress and to initiate corrective processes for
duration and asset-liability mismatches, as in the case of non-banking financial companies
(NBFCs) and mutual funds (MFs).
15. The authorities have announced plans to recapitalize banks and have expressed a
readiness for further measures in case of emergence of any symptom of deterioration in asset
quality.
Development of Corporate Bond Market
16. The development of a corporate bond market is conditional upon reforms on the
demand and supply sides. On the demand side, reforms in the institutional investor base –
pension reforms – are awaiting legislative approval. Introduction of repo in corporate bonds
has been recommended by a High Level Expert Committee on Corporate Bonds and
Securitization to enhance market liquidity. The Reserve Bank has indicated that the
introduction of repos in corporate bonds would require greater public issuances and
secondary market trading. Another key ingredient is depth and liquidity and for this purpose,
further deepening of the government securities market is vital. It is in the context of these
prerequisites that corporate bond markets have not developed in many countries. It may be
mentioned that the limit on Foreign Intuitional Investment on corporate debt instruments has
been raised recently to US $ 15 billion. The limit has not been fully used by the FIIs.
External Sector
17. It may be noted that India’s modest current account deficit has not been contributing to
global imbalances. At the same time, external debt is sustainable and low. India’s current
account deficit (CAD) did widen in the first half of 2008-09 ($ 22.3 billion), but this was
episodic and reflecting high oil and commodity prices, even as private transfers and software
export earnings were sustained. As net capital flows declined in the wake of a global risk
aversion and perceived flight to safety, the overall balance of payments position turned
marginally negative during the first half of 2008-09 but was comfortably financed by
drawing from the large stock of international reserves. Import growth moderated during
October-November 2008 reflecting the fall in international oil prices. Going forward, it is
expected that imports may slow down faster than exports. Portfolio outflows have moderated
and intermittent inflows have been observed during December 2008 and January 2009.
Accretion to non-residents deposits are bolstering the capital account. Foreign direct
investment is higher than the level a year ago and there is no evidence so far of any
slackening of pace. The volume of proposals already received suggest, in fact, that a further
pick-up cannot be ruled out in 2009 if stability is restored in the global financial system. Net
capital flows were positive in 2008 largely financing the current account deficit and are
expected to continue to do so in 2009. Thus, the stress on the BoP seems to be temporary and
a return to normalcy is already underway. At the current juncture, the level of forex reserves
is holding at the level prevailing in October 2008 and there is ample cover for imports / debtservice payment for a full year. Looking ahead, the authorities fully recognize risks to the
BoP in 2009-10, emanating from weaker export growth and subdued capital flows. The
onset of global recovery and improvement in world trade will ease the pressure on the
external sector.

5
Exchange Rate
18. The rupee had appreciated against major currencies in 2007-08 due to large capital
inflows. It depreciated during September and October, 2008 reflecting extraordinary
developments in international financial markets and portfolio outflows by foreign
institutional investors (FIIs), and has remained range-bound since November 2008.
Movements in the exchange rate have been self-equilibrating and would continue to be so
under the current exchange rate regime. The exchange rate remains fairly valued giving a
fillip to competitiveness. The authorities are committed to managing volatility without
defending any level of the exchange rate, thereby promoting financial stability.
Approach to Capital account liberalization
19. Capital account liberalization is viewed by the authorities as a means of integrating the
Indian economy into the world and substantial progress has been made in this regard. Global
evidence does not support the case for full liberalization of the capital account. The
authorities hold that capital account liberalization is a process, not an event. The policy
approach is one of a hierarchy in which foreign investment flows have been virtually freed
except in strategic sectors while a more prudent approach has been adopted for debt-creating
flows. The benefits from reliance on debt flows are unclear. Past crises have clearly
demonstrated the vulnerability associated with volatile, short-term, foreign-currency
denominated debt flows. The Indian policy approach is based on this framework, and has
helped the country in the pursuit of growth acceleration while maintaining financial and
macroeconomic stability. In view of the lessons drawn from various international crises, a
need has been felt to retain some instruments for regulating the flow of capital in tune with
the absorptive capacity of the economy and the preparedness of financial markets and
intermediaries. The relevance of further opening up to foreign inflows needs to be considered
with a fuller appreciation of this approach, especially in the current context.
Fiscal policy
20. We broadly agree with the staff’s assessment of a deterioration in the fiscal position that
is turning out to be weaker than initially anticipated. The cyclically induced discretionary
fiscal measures – first in the context of the surge in inflation driven by international
commodity prices in the first half of 2008 and subsequently, the fiscal stimulus that became
common across countries as the global slowdown deepened – account for erosion in Central
public finances. In the event of the global downturn becoming deeper and more protracted as
prognosticated in the January 2009 update of the WEO, the burden on the fisc could increase
further and diffuse across general government.
21. There are significant downside risks associated with this scenario. First, as the
authorities world over mount fiscal policy action to defend their economies against the
headwinds of the global slowdown, the prospects of recovery could recede further in time as
the private sector and even the public sector in the emerging world face financial crowding
out. Second, the staff does well to cite the limited room for fiscal maneuver, given a general
government deficit of close to 10 per cent of GDP and a public debt of nearly 77 per cent of
GDP. This is unfortunately a situation which various countries, mature and emerging, may be
approaching more rapidly than planned, with due adjustments for country-specifics, as their
arsenal of monetary measures gets exhausted and the limits of monetary policy are reached.

6
Inevitably, in such a situation, fiscal policy will have to get overextended and issues of
medium-term sustainability of the fiscal stance will dominate the debate on global recovery.
It is in this context that the authorities remain firmly committed to deepening and broadening
the ambit of fiscal reforms, including efforts that secure lasting improvements in tax
buoyancy, expenditure containment and targeting, and rule-based deficit management as
embodied in the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003. It is important to
note that the public debt has virtually no external component.
Market Sensitivity
22. In the final analysis, the staff’s assessment of the outlook for the Indian economy
appears to be driven by model-based scenarios of possible but unlikely catastrophic risks
coming together. The robustness of the methodology is yet to be established. It is important
to recognize that the staff appears alarmist, perhaps unjustifiably so. In the backdrop of
heightened uncertainty in the global financial markets, when a confidence crisis could spread
contagiously, such analysis emanating from the Fund could run the risk of triggering further
financial instability. Therefore, a careful review may be required as to what portions of such
analyses should be placed in the public domain. We also expect that such an analytical
approach with appropriate and robust methodology will be applied evenhandedly across
countries and regions.
Epilogue
23. The unprecedented crisis gripping the global economy warrants unconventional policy
responses particularly in dealing with the “unknown unknowns” about the shape of things to
come in the immediate future, most of which emanate from global uncertainty. This is a
period of painful adjustment for all. Authorities across the world have been attempting to
minimize its impact on the economy. Our authorities will continue to maintain vigil, monitor
domestic and global developments and take swift and effective action to minimize the impact
of the crisis and restore the economy to its potential growth path.

