Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/80
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 7, 2002

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Sweden
On July 31, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Sweden.1
Background
Sweden’s strong macroeconomic performance of the past five years is rooted in a credible,
rule-based policy framework consisting of the Riksbank’s inflation targeting regime and a
sound medium-term fiscal framework. Strong public finances have enabled a process of
gradual reduction in the high tax burden to begin. Structural reforms reinforced by EU
membership have helped raise efficiency and mitigated distortions associated with Sweden’s
large welfare state. These policies paved the way for growth averaging over 4 percent per
annum during 1998–2000 driven by large productivity gains, especially in the technology
sector. A thorough pension reform has restored actuarial balance to the public pension
scheme in the face of the coming demographic challenge.
A cyclical slowdown in domestic demand coupled with global economic weakness led to
slower growth in 2001. Private consumption stagnated despite rising disposable income, owing
to adverse confidence and wealth effects from the continued plunge in stock prices. Exports
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.
1

