December 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/437

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

August 18, 2005
July 8, 2005

Septmber 19, 200
2005
September 19, 2005

Kingdom of Lesotho: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement;
Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the
Executive Director for Lesotho
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with the Kingdom of
Lesotho, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on July 8, 2005, with the officials of the Kingdom of
Lesotho on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time
of these discussions, the staff report was completed on August 18, 2005. The views expressed
in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of September 19, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its September 19, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Kingdom of Lesotho.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representative for the
2005 Consultation with Lesotho
Approved by Sharmini Coorey and Mark Plant
August 18, 2005
•

The 2005 Article IV discussions were held in Maseru during June 27–July 8, and in Washington D.C. on
July 11, 2005. The staff team met with Finance Minister Thahane, Central Bank Governor Matekane,
other senior officials, and representatives of the private sector and donor community.

•

The staff team comprised Messrs. Basu (Head), Wang, Gons, and Lledo (EP), Ms. Masha (all AFR), and
Mr. Martijn (PDR). Mr. Arora, the Senior Resident Representative for South Africa and Lesotho,
assisted the mission. Mr. Kanu (OED) participated in the discussions.

•

The last Article IV consultation was concluded in January 2004. At that time, Directors commended
Lesotho’s favorable economic performance, with moderate growth and declining inflation, despite
adverse weather conditions and a regional food shortage. They emphasized, however, that Lesotho must
address daunting medium-term challenges, such as falling agricultural productivity, HIV/AIDS-related
and other health problems, potential erosion in trade preferences, inadequate infrastructure, weak
enforcement of property rights, and insufficient access to credit.

•

Lesotho has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, of the Fund’s Articles of
Agreement and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions.

•

The Executive Board approved a three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) for Lesotho on March 9, 2001, in an amount equivalent to SDR 24.5 million. The sixth
and final review under the PRGF, together with an ex-post assessment of longer-term program
engagement, was completed on September 10, 2004.

•

The final version of Lesotho’s poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) became available on
July 18, 2005, and the joint staff advisory note (JSAN) is expected to be considered by the Executive
Boards of the World Bank and the IMF on September 8, 2005 and September 19, 2005, respectively.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................4
II. Recent Economic Developments ..........................................................................................5
III. Policy Discussions ...............................................................................................................8
A. Outlook, Future Challenges, and Strategy ................................................................8
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................10
C. External Policies and the Monetary Framework .....................................................14
D. Structural Reforms ..................................................................................................15
E. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance Issues ...............................................17
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................17
Tables
1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002/03-2009/10..........................................21
2. Central Government Operations, 2002/03-2009/10.............................................................22
3. Monetary Survey, 2002-2006 ..............................................................................................24
4. Commercial Banks’ Quarterly Performance Ratios, 2004-2005 .........................................25
5. Balance of Payments, 2002/03-2009/10 ..............................................................................26
6. Medium-Term Scenario, 2004/05-2009/10 .........................................................................27
7. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ......................................................................28
8. Millennium Development Goals..........................................................................................29
Figures
1. Macroeconomic Indicators...................................................................................................20
Boxes
1. Reforms of Public Resource Management ........................................................................13
2. Enhancing External Competitiveness Through Structural Reforms..................................16
Appendices
I. Relations with the Fund....................................................................................................30
II. Relations with the World Bank Group..............................................................................32
III. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................................39
IV. External Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) ..................................................................43

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Lesotho has made considerable gains in macroeconomic stability in the past two years. The
government’s fiscal position and the external current account have improved markedly, the
inflation rate has slowed, and net international reserves have increased. However, poverty,
aggravated by a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, remains widespread.
Growth has been weakened by the cumulative impact of several shocks: a substantial real
appreciation of the exchange rate of the rand, to which the loti is pegged; the removal of textile
quotas by industrial countries; a continuing decline in the terms of trade; and persistent drought.
Lesotho’s economic prospects could be affected by further trade preference erosion, a declining
trend in revenue receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), and falling
remittances from Lesotho workers in South Africa.
Lesotho is facing the challenge of restoring external competitiveness and promoting rapid
and broad-based growth to reduce poverty and achieve the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). Discussions focused on the policies required to address the immediate shocks,
consolidate macroeconomic stability, and promote private sector–led growth over the medium
term.
The authorities acknowledged that, under the exchange rate parity arrangement, the
burden of safeguarding macroeconomic stability would necessarily fall on fiscal policy. The
staff cautioned against any fiscal deficits in excess of available grants and concessional loans
because of the risks of widening the external current account deficit and depleting international
reserves.
Implementing the recently finalized PRSP will entail scaling up development and poverty
reduction expenditures. Informed by a debt sustainability analysis (DSA), the staff advised that
new expenditures be phased in based on a clear set of debt sustainability and absorptive capacity
criteria. The authorities will continue their efforts to increase domestic revenues and improve
public expenditure management and accountability, to attract donor funding for outlays related to
Lesotho’s poverty reduction strategy.
Given the authorities’ commitment to maintaining the exchange rate parity, the staff
emphasized the urgency of accelerating structural reforms to restore competitiveness. The
authorities are preparing an action plan, in collaboration with development partners, to improve
the business climate. Critical measures aim to increase labor productivity through training, reduce
domestic costs for the private sector by addressing infrastructure bottlenecks, remove regulatory
and administrative impediments, improve access to financial services, and promote product and
export market diversification.
The authorities expressed their strong interest in continued Fund involvement through
policy dialogue and technical assistance.

-4-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Lesotho is a small, open, low-income economy with very close financial and
commercial ties to South Africa. It is a member of the Southern African Customs Union
(SACU) and the Common Monetary Area (CMA), and its currency—the loti—is pegged at par to
the rand.1 There are no exchange controls between CMA countries. Trade among SACU
countries is free of tariffs and duties. Trade with South Africa accounts for about two-thirds of
Lesotho’s external trade, and foreign direct investment (stock) from South Africa is about onefifth of Lesotho’s GDP. Lesotho’s banking system comprises four banks, three of them South
African. Workers’ remittances from South Africa and receipts of Lesotho’s share of SACU
revenue constitute a significant part of national income.
2.
Lesotho enjoys a relatively stable political situation. Local government elections were
held for the first time in April 2005, in which the ruling party won over three-fourths of the seats.
It led to the establishment of 129 new councils to replace the Village Development Councils. The
new councils function in accordance with the Local Government Act.
3.
Lesotho has achieved moderate growth since the early 1990s. Growth was strongest
during 1991-95, mainly reflecting the impact of substantial public investment in the Lesotho
Highlands Water Project. During 1996-2000, growth weakened because of a political crisis and
the adverse effects of exogenous shocks. Since 2000, garment exports to the United States,
benefiting from preferences under the U.S. African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), have
become the main engine of growth. Nonetheless, overall real GDP growth has been driven
primarily by factor accumulation (mainly of capital), with a minimal contribution from total
factor productivity (TFP) growth. Per capita GDP in Lesotho was US$520 in 2004, and the
HIV/AIDS prevalence rate was about 29 percent of the adult working population.
4.
At the time of the recent ex-post assessment of Fund involvement in Lesotho and the
previous Article IV consultation, Directors noted that Lesotho had made progress in
achieving macroeconomic stability and implementing structural reforms during the last
PRGF-supported program. The authorities reformed public expenditure management and the
financial sector and privatized public enterprises. The introduction of the value-added tax (VAT)
and the creation of the Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA) helped to raise non-SACU revenue. In
addition, Lesotho has participated in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS)
since August 2003, and made progress in providing a broad range of statistics for program
monitoring under the PRGF arrangement.
5.
The authorities welcomed the Fund’s role in providing policy advice—through
surveillance, program design, and technical assistance. However, they also stated that the
policy advice would be more effective if the Fund were to focus more on identifying the
1

The SACU was established in 1910, with membership comprising Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South
Africa, and Swaziland. The CMA includes the same countries, except Botswana. The rand is legal tender
in all CMA countries.

-5-

beneficial linkages between macroeconomic policies and complementary microeconomic and
structural reforms. The authorities requested that the Fund assist them in developing such an
integrated policy package, through the timely provision of technical assistance and capacity
building support.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
6.
Real GDP growth weakened to about 2 percent in 2004/05 from over 3 percent in the
preceding two years, reflecting the adverse impact of external shocks on manufacturing and
the ongoing drought on agricultural output
Text Table: Sectoral breakdown of real GDP growth
(Text Table and Table 1). The slowdown in
2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06
manufacturing reflected the appreciation of the
(In percent )
real exchange rate since February 2002,
Primary sector
-4.3
-1.9
0.3
3.2
uncertainty about Lesotho’s duty–free access to
Crops
-11.3
-6.5
-3.3
1.7
2
the U.S. market, and the elimination of textile
Livestock
11.5
6.2
6.1
5.6
quotas in January 2005. The effects of these
Agric. services
-2.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
Secondary sector
6.2
4.9
1.1
-6.7
shocks in the garment sector were particularly
5.8
4.6
4.0
-1.9
Secondary sector (excl. LHWP)
pronounced in the second half of 2004/05,
Mining
3.6
43.3
127.3
63.7
resulting in factory closures and the loss of about
Manuf.&handicraft
6.1
5.1
0.9
-8.2
Construction
5.6
3.6
6.6
3.0
10,000 jobs (20 percent of jobs in the sector).
Tertiary sector
2.8
4.3
3.6
2.7
Agricultural output has declined, as a result of a
GDP at constant market prices
3.2
3.3
2.0
-0.7
three-year drought and such long–standing
Source : Bureau of Statistics, Central Bank and Fund Staff estimates
structural weaknesses as poor farming
techniques, soil erosion, lack of water in the lowlands, and a shortage of agro-financing.
According to a 2005 government estimate, 500,000-741,000 people (about 23–34 percent of the
population) need emergency food assistance.3
7.
The loti has appreciated substantially since early 2002, contributing to a decline in
consumer price inflation (CPI). Relative to the U.S. dollar, the loti’s nominal appreciation
reached 40 percent over the three years to end-March 2005 (Appendix Figure 1). In the second
quarter of 2005, however, the loti depreciated by about 7 percent, owing in part to the lowering of
interest rates by the South African Reserve Bank. In real effective terms, the appreciation during
the three-year period ending June 2005 amounted to 30 percent. In line with trends in South
Africa, the CPI-based annual inflation rate declined from 7.7 percent at end-March 2003 to
3.7 percent ending March 2005, notwithstanding increases in oil import prices.

2

Under AGOA, garment exporters in Lesotho can import fabric from the cheapest available suppliers
while enjoying duty-free access to the US market. This provision, which was due to expire in
December 2004, was extended until 2007.

3

In the first four months of 2005, the World Food Programme distributed about 19,000 metric tons of
cereal.

-6-

8.
Lesotho has a high unemployment rate (about 30 percent)4 partly because of
downward wage rigidity and upward wage pressure. There is a minimum wage, and wage
increases are determined through tripartite negotiations between the government (represented by
the Ministry of Labor), the unions, and representatives of the private sector. In an environment of
tense labor relations, productivity has remained low and wage costs have drifted up since the
mid-1990s.
9.
In the past two fiscal years, the
Figure 1. Lesotho: Fiscal Balance and Revenues, 2000/01-2004/05
(In percent of GDP)
overall fiscal balance (including grants)
25
SACU Revenue (left scale)
has turned from a deficit into a surplus
Non SACU tax revenue (left scale)
Nontax revenue (left scale)
Fiscal Balance (right scale)
(Table 2). The large fiscal surplus of
20
9.1 percent of GDP in 2004/05 reflected
15
mainly temporary factors, particularly a
10
6.1 percentage points of GDP5 windfall
increase in SACU receipts due to the
5
revision of the 2002 import data6.
0
Domestic (non-SACU) revenue collection
has improved since the launch of the LRA,
-5
although outturns in the last fiscal year
2000/2001
2001/2002
2002/2003
2003/2004
2004/2005
Sources: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates
were affected by the slowdown in
economic activity. Current expenditures,
particularly salaries and wages, were lower than projected because the new local government
administration did not take off during the fiscal year as envisaged.
10.
Monetary developments in
Lesotho have mirrored those in
South Africa. The discount rate has
held steady since August 2004; market
yields on treasury bills have moved
downward, influenced by the fall in
the government borrowing equirement;
and by end-March 2005 the interest
rate spread relative South Africa had
narrowed to less than 40 basis points.
Banks’ financial soundness indicators
remain strong (Table 4). Recently, two
new banks started operations, one of
4

Figure 2. Lesotho: Interest Rate Spread with South Africa, 2000/01 - 2004/05
(In percent)

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
2000/2001
2001/2002
2002/2003
Sources: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates

2003/2004

2004/2005

Based on data provided by the Lesotho Bureau of Statistics.

5

The data are from the Government of Lesotho Financial Information System (GOLFIS), and
differ from data reported by such agencies as the Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA).
6

See footnote 12 for additional explanation.

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

-7-

which is the Post Bank set up by the government with a focus at this stage on mobilizing savings
in rural areas. Draft anti-money-laundering legislation is expected to be presented to parliament
by end-2005. The authorities have also begun implementing the recommendations of the stageone safeguards assessment of 20017.
11.
Lesotho’s external current account deficit has narrowed significantly and net
international reserves increased during 2003/04 and 2004/05 (Table 5). Exports were boosted
by strong volume growth in the garment sector, especially during the first half of the year, as a
foreign-funded denim mill started
operations, and by the mid-2004
Figure 3. Lesotho: Foreign Trade and Grants (in millions of US dollars), 2000/01 - 2004/05
1600
reopening of a diamond mine.
Imports of goods and services
1400
SACU receipts rose sharply in
Exports of goods of goods and services,
including worker's remittances
2004/05, while remittances from
Official transfers
1200
South Africa also grew strongly
1000
despite ongoing layoffs8, owing to
800
increases in the wages of miners
600
working there. These positive
effects more than offset the adverse
400
impact of a worsening of the terms
200
of trade, which, since 2001, has
0
been exacerbated by the real
2000/2001
2001/2002
2002/2003
2003/2004
2004/2005
appreciation of the rand vis-à-vis the Sources: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates
U.S. dollar.9
12.
Lesotho’s debt indicators have improved markedly over the past two years (Table 1).
With the strengthening of the country’s fiscal position, the government reduced its domestic debt
and the stock of treasury bills fell from 17 percent of GDP in 2002/03 to 8 percent in 2004/05.
Lesotho’s external public debt as a share of GDP declined from 83 percent of GDP at endMarch 2003 to 53 percent in 2005, largely because of the exchange rate appreciation. In net
present value terms, the stock has fallen below 40 percent of GDP.
13.
The authorities have strengthened their efforts to tackle poverty and HIV/AIDS.
They have prepared a poverty reduction strategy, which identifies reforms that are important if
Lesotho is to make progress toward the MDGs. The government has begun aligning its budget
with the strategy, paying particular attention to strengthening institutional and implementation

7

See Appendix I for details.
The number of Basotho mine workers in South African mines fell from an average of 96,000 in 1997 to
62,000 in 2002 due to the scaling down of mining operations.
9
The terms of trade deterioration largely reflects the fact that Lesotho exports primarily to the U.S. market
and imports mainly from South Africa.
8

-8-

capacity, so that it can avail itself more quickly of funding, including from donors, in the fight
against poverty and the HIV/AIDS pandemic10.
14.
To promote private sector development, the authorities, with support from the
World Bank, organized a private sector development forum in April 2005. In line with plans
under preparation, several laws and business procedures will be reviewed and simplified,
products and markets will be diversified, physical infrastructure will be developed, and workers’
skills will be strengthened.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
A. Outlook, Future Challenges, and Strategy
15.
Lesotho is vulnerable to a range of potentially permanent adverse developments over
the medium term: the eventual elimination of the new restraints on textile imports in the United
States and other industrialized countries, the expected removal of the AGOA provision allowing
the use of third-country fabrics in 2007, the forecast decline in SACU tariff revenues as a result
of trade liberalization, and the likelihood of further decreases in inward remittances as Basotho
workers continue to be retrenched from South Africa’s mining sector. Even more worrisome is
the likely impact of HIV/AIDS. The high infection rate could, over time, contribute to higher
mortality rates, a loss of productivity and real income, mounting fiscal pressures, and deeper
social and humanitarian distress.
16.
The near-term economic outlook has also been affected by the cumulative impact of
several shocks, including the erosion of trade preferences and the real effective appreciation
of the exchange rate. Despite the recent weakening of the loti vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, garment
exporters expected their export earnings to stagnate or decline as export prices came under
downward pressure from low-cost producers in Asia. In the agricultural sector, although drought
conditions have recently eased somewhat in the highlands, the authorities expected farm output to
remain depressed because of the structural weaknesses noted earlier. On the upside, diamond
exports are projected to rise further with the opening of two more mines, supported by foreign
investment. On balance, GDP is forecast to decline in 2005/06 by about ¾ of 1 percent, the
average annual inflation is expected to be somewhat higher, and the external current account
deficit is projected to widen.
17.
The authorities agreed that the principal challenge facing Lesotho is to generate
more rapid and broad-based economic growth. To this end, policies need to (i) address the
immediate trade shocks, (ii) consolidate the gains in macroeconomic stability achieved so far, and
(iii) promote private sector development and foreign investment. Given Lesotho’s narrow export
base, characterized by heavy dependence on a few textile products, the authorities shared the
staff’s view that a strong export diversification strategy could be helpful in both generating higher
growth and reducing the country’s vulnerability to exogenous shocks.
10

See the Selected Issues Paper The Management of HIV/AIDS in Lesotho.

-9-

18.
While recognizing the urgent need to restore external competitiveness, the
authorities plan to maintain the exchange rate parity, given the benefits of the CMA and
Lesotho’s close trade and financial ties to South Africa.11 They noted that the currency peg
and the circulation of the rand as legal tender facilitated commercial ties with neighboring
countries. For these reasons, they plan to rely on structural reforms to strengthen competitiveness.
In view of this, and as a backdrop to the policy discussions, the staff explored two alternative
medium-term scenarios with the authorities. The first one illustrated the shortcomings of a policy
package with no acceleration of structural reforms and a weakening of the fiscal balance (baseline
scenario); the second one showed the benefits of policies that aimed to improve competitiveness
and the business climate through accelerated structural reforms and consolidation of
macroeconomic stability.
19.
Under the baseline scenario for 2005/06-2007/8, real GDP growth remains weak
because the dampening effect of the trade shock on growth is only partially offset by
increases in nongarment manufacturing and diamond mining (Table 6). With the
implementation of the PRSP, this scenario assumes that public investment and implementation
capacity improve beginning in
2005/06 and that private
Figure 4. Medium-Term Scenarios, 2004/05 - 2009/10
investment remains at about
Real GDP growth - Baseline (left scale)
24 percent of GDP. Taking into
4
Real GDP growth - Reform (left scale)
0.26
Inverse incremental capital - outupt ratio - Baseline (right scale)
account the impact of HIV/AIDS,
Inverse incremental capital - outupt ratio - Reform (right scale)
0.21
3
and assuming some improvement
in the marginal output–capital
0.16
2
ratio, annual real GDP growth is
0.11
projected to pick up to about
1
2 percent a year over the medium
0.06
term. The fiscal surplus (including
0
0.01
grants) is projected to decline in
2005/06 and switch to a deficit in
-1
-0.04
subsequent years. The fiscal
2004/05
2005/06
2006/07
2007/08
2008/09
2009/10
Sources: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates
weakening reflects both a
downward trend in revenues (after
2005/06) and a sharp rise in total expenditures in 2005/06 followed by gradual reductions
(relative to GDP) in subsequent years. The revenue decline is due to the anticipated drop in
SACU receipts precipitated by trade liberalization, which lowers import duties. The expenditure
pressures stem mainly from increases in current outlays on goods and services and transfers and
subsidies, and in domestically funded capital outlays in 2005/06. Reflecting these developments
and the adverse impact of the shocks mentioned above, the external current account deficit
(excluding official transfers) is expected to widen sharply in 2005/06 and deteriorate further in
subsequent years. Reserve coverage is projected to fall from 4.5 months of imports in 2004/05 to
3.1 months by 2010.
11

See the Selected Issues Paper The Institutional Arrangements of the Common Monetary Area.

- 10 -

20.
Given the importance of
Figure 5. Average Real GDP Growth Rates in percent
Historical: 1991-2004
continuing prudent debt
DSA Baseline: 2004 - 2023
management, the staff prepared,
5
jointly with the World Bank staff,
a Debt Sustainability Analysis
4
(DSA) and discussed its
implications with the authorities.
3
The baseline assumptions include an
annual net external borrowing
equivalent to about 2 percent of
2
GDP, and a gradual pick-up in the
real growth rate (reaching
1
1991-1995
1996-2000
1991-2003
2004-2009
2010-2013
2014-2023
4.5 percent after 2012/13). 12 Under
Sources: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates
this scenario, Lesotho’s external
debt drops well below the debtburden thresholds applicable to low-income countries with a policy and institutional environment
of median quality, as measured by the World Bank’s CPIA rating (Appendix IV). It thus appears
to be sustainable, although severe adverse shocks to the garment sector could alter this
assessment. A reversal of the large exchange rate appreciation of the past few years could also
substantially raise the debt-to-GDP ratio.
21.
Under the alternative accelerated reform scenario, comprehensive reforms to
improve the business climate and government operations would set in motion a virtuous
circle of increasing economic activity and fiscal resources—both domestic and donorprovided. The rate of economic growth (3-4 percent) would be somewhat higher over the
medium term, with a larger improvement in the marginal output-capital ratio and broad-based
increases in production that are supported by a higher volume of international trade (including
higher exports). Macroeconomic stability would be consolidated because the projected weakening
in the fiscal and external current account positions would be somewhat moderated and higher
inflows of foreign direct investment and concessional official financing would limit the loss of
international reserves.
B. Fiscal Policy
22.
The authorities recognized that under the exchange rate parity arrangement the
burden of safeguarding macroeconomic stability would necessarily fall on fiscal policy and
that, as a consequence, they would need to address the envisaged weakening of the fiscal
position in 2005/06 and later years. They explained that, for 2005/06, the government had
12

This delayed recovery of the growth rate allows for sufficient progress to be made in implementing the
necessary structural reforms and for an adequate time lag to yield the benefits of improved productivity
and higher output growth. The long-term growth projection also compares favorably with the average
growth rate achieved in the first half of the 1990s (4.4 percent), when the country was in a much earlier
stage of macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform.

- 11 -

budgeted a deficit of 3 percent of GDP before taking into account an expected one-time revenue
windfall from SACU. 13 Including this windfall, the overall fiscal balance after grants could turn
into a surplus of about 2 percent of GDP. The authorities noted that Lesotho’s underlying revenue
performance would be hurt by weaker economic growth and a 5 percent increase in the threshold
for the individual income tax, and that expenditure would rise mainly because of a 5 percent
increase in civil service wages. The staff noted that taking into account the updated estimates for
2004/05, the revenue and expenditure growth envisaged in the 2005/06 budget were much
stronger than past trends.14 Nonetheless, the authorities expected to maintain an overall fiscal
balance that would be consistent with macroeconomic stability and planned to prepay two highinterest loans (equivalent to 3 percent of GDP) to reduce future debt service. In view of these loan
repayments, and given the expected declining trend in SACU tariff revenue and the mounting
expenditure pressures, the authorities indicated that they may have to resort to domestic financing
over the medium term.
23.
The staff pointed out that any domestic financing of fiscal deficits in excess of
available grants and concessional loans could weaken the external current account and
worsen Lesotho’s international reserve position. This is because domestic money demand may
not be adequate to accommodate increased domestic government borrowing, and also because the
country’s import propensity is high. At a time when the economy is facing adverse shocks with
permanent effects, the staff suggested that it would be prudent to minimize the loss of foreign
reserves. In the same vein, the staff explained that if expenditures and the related deficit
(excluding grants) were scaled up in the context of the implementation of the PRSP, it would be
important to ensure that the increases were phased in, as foreign grants and concessional
financing became available on terms consistent with maintaining a sustainable debt burden. It
was noted that, given Lesotho’s relatively manageable debt situation, if somewhat larger
concessional financing than currently foreseen were to be offered, it could be accepted so long as
it did not seriously raise the risk of debt distress. Prudence would still require lowering the NPV
of external debt below the threshold level of 40 percent of GDP, which is the appropriate
indicative threshold for the debt/GDP ratio based on an assessment of the quality of Lesotho’s
policies and institutions.15 In light of this, the authorities indicated that they were prepared to
limit fiscal deficits (including grants) over the medium term to no more than 2-3 percent of GDP
and to periodically review their stance based on realistic assessments of the country’s prospects

13

Under current rules, SACU member countries receive an additional allocation if, after two years,
SACU’s actual revenue collection turns out to have been higher than the benchmarks used for the early
distributions.
14

On this basis, staff prepared revised projections for 2005/06 to correct for an over estimation of
corporate tax revenue collections, as well as for expenditure overestimation in the wage bill and transfers
and subsidies.
15

This assessment reflects the latest Country Policy and Institutional Assessment rating of the World
Bank.

- 12 -

of mobilizing foreign grants and concessional loans and of the potential domestic financing that
they could raise, if money demand strengthened.
24.
The authorities indicated their intention to strengthen revenue mobilization. The
LRA plans to improve tax administration by following up on donor commitments, which will be
used to finance the computerization at the tax offices and the planned ASYCUDA project.
Revenues should increase, if progress is made in reducing government entities’ noncompliance
with VAT payment and refund procedures. The authorities shared the staff’s view that increases
in tax rates were inadvisable because of their adverse impact on the poor, on overall incentives to
save and invest, and on Lesotho’s regional competitiveness. On SACU revenue, they stated that,
in cooperation with their SACU partner countries, they hoped to reform the allocation mechanism
of the development component of the SACU, taking into account the needs of the poorest
members.16
25.
The authorities stressed that they were strengthening the institutional framework for
the development, execution, monitoring, and evaluation of new programs for scaling up
poverty reduction expenditures (Box 1). While encouraging the authorities to continue their
ongoing efforts to restructure and realign expenditure priorities in line with their poverty
reduction strategy, the staff stressed the need to set expenditure priorities with reference to a
sustainable medium-term expenditure framework, taking into account fiscal sustainability and
absorptive capacity criteria. The recurrent cost of the planned scaling up of outlays related to the
poverty reduction strategy would have to be clearly identified, as well as the measures envisaged
to cover these outlays on a sustainable basis. The staff strongly recommended that the authorities
assess the impact of the new expenditures on the wage bill, materials and maintenance, other
current and capital outlays, and estimate the “headroom” created by the planned phasing out of
outlays not related to poverty reduction. Such an assessment would provide a basis for ensuring
an appropriate mix of recurrent and capital outlays, which is important for efficient and
sustainable public service delivery, and for the mobilization of donor funding. In this context, the
staff emphasized the importance of containing the government wage bill under the government’s
Public Sector Reform and Improvement Program, to provide the needed savings for social
spending.
26.
The authorities informed the staff that they were pursuing public-private
partnerships, with a focus on improving infrastructure and the delivery of public services in
the health and education sectors. They have started improving primary health services by
training health workers, building a network of clinics and medicine distribution centers, and
upgrading a major hospital with support from the International Finance Corporation. The
authorities noted that, using primarily their own resources, they were on target to provide free
primary education throughout Lesotho next year and that they would rely on public-private
partnerships to further improve education facilities. The staff expressed strong support for
improving services in the key social sectors but cautioned against incurring future liabilities that
16

Article 34 of the 2002 SACU Agreement states that distribution of the development component “shall
be weighted in favor of the less developed member states.”

- 13 -

would be inconsistent with the poverty reduction strategy and repayment capacity of the budget.
It noted that long-term financial leases were comparable to nonconconcessional debt.

Box 1. Reforms of Public Resource Management
The reform of public financial management aims to improve budget planning, execution,
and reporting, as well as transparency and financial accountability. As part of the reforms, a
medium-term expenditure framework was introduced, cash accounts were consolidated, and
audited accounts submitted in 2003. In addition, the authorities began to reorganize the
treasury’s top management and are at an advanced stage of improving GOLFIS, the
Government of Lesotho Financial Information System. The government is working to:
•
•
•
•
•

expand the coverage of the central government fiscal operations;
ensure that all revenues and grants, expenditures, donor-funded projects, and debt
data are fully captured in GOLFIS;
establish a single treasury account, and integrate all government accounts into it with
regular reconciliation;
strengthen the Accountant General’s office and train its staff in financial
management; and
review the classification of government expenditure, so as to better track povertyrelated spending.

The Public Sector Improvement and Reform Program is a multidonor-supported
program coordinated by the World Bank, which aims to increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of the public sector. A major component of the program is the public financial
management subprogram. The program will:
•
•
•
•
•
•

implement an integrated planning and budgeting process;
integrate the accounting, revenue, and expenditure management systems;
strengthen macroeconomic analysis and forecasting linked to fiscal policy
formulation and budget performance monitoring;
secure the effective participation of the Cabinet in the budget process;
strengthen the role of independent oversight; and
modernize the procurement system.

- 14 -

27.
The staff indicated that Lesotho’s public resource management was being hampered
by a lack of reliable, comprehensive, and timely data for fiscal analysis and budget
management, as evidenced in the significant differences between the fiscal and monetary
outturn data for 2004/05. The staff explained that the authorities could have avoided most of the
inconsistencies between the fiscal accounts, which show a surplus of 3.7 percent of GDP, and the
monetary accounts, which imply an additional 5.4 percentage points of GDP surplus in the last
fiscal year, as well as between these data and national accounts and balance of payments
statistics, by implementing the measures already formulated with Fund technical assistance. The
staff worked with the Lesotho representatives to address these data inconsistencies, and ensure an
adequate database through 2004/05 for surveillance purposes. In light of this, the authorities
expected to make further progress in improving the database, including those relating to fiscal
and monetary accounts, recognizing that it would help them strengthen the management of
treasury operations and better control their expenditure commitments.
C. External Policies and the Monetary Framework
28.
The authorities explained that under the current exchange rate parity, regional
trade was facilitated and progress was made in achieving fiscal and monetary discipline and
reducing inflationary pressures. However, they were concerned that the country’s external
competitiveness had been weakened by adverse exogenous exchange rate movements that were
large and could not be offset by wage adjustments. As this had a contractionary impact on output
and employment, they indicated that they were exploring with their CMA partners ways in which
the common exchange rate arrangement could be modified to promote long-term growth in the
smaller member countries. In the meantime, the authorities planned to rely on sound
macroeconomic policies, including prudent fiscal restraints and structural reforms to enhance
competitiveness. In the context of the latter, the staff noted that in view of the recent output and
job losses, consideration should be given, if feasible, to greater wage flexibility and avoiding a
rigid adherence to minimum wages. Nevertheless, the staff recognizes that the scope for
exercising wage flexibility was constrained because in the context of collaboration with the
International Labour Organization and major US garment importers, the authorities are abiding
by agreed minimum labor standards.17
29.
The authorities stated that they would continue to maintain an open trade and
exchange system. Lesotho’s trade policies are largely dictated by its SACU membership—
essentially implying free trade with its regional partners and common external trade policies. In
the context of the SACU and the SADC, Lesotho is actively pursuing free trade arrangements and
trade partnerships, including with the European Union and the United States, which would
compress customs revenues.
30.
With regard to a monetary framework, the authorities recognized that, with the
exchange rate fixed at par to the rand and the virtual absence of exchange controls-17

These implicitly include a wage floor, or a so-called “living wage.” Currently, this wage floor is 650
maloti (about US$100) per month in the garment sector.

- 15 -

including on capital movements to and from South Africa--Lesotho had no autonomy in
determining its monetary policy. Nevertheless, they explained that they considered it useful to
have an indicative monetary framework for 2005/06 that targeted net international reserves of
about four months of imports and included a realistic projection of money demand, taking into
account the projected slight decline in real GDP and the inflation rate projection. Such a
framework would indicate the limits to be observed with regard to two crucially important policy
variables, namely net domestic assets and the government’s net creditor position in the banking
system. On this basis, the staff estimates that after the government allows for a reasonable
increase in credit to the private sector, net domestic assets should decline by about 4 percent in
terms of the beginning-of-period money stock. This decrease is possible if the government builds
up deposits in the banking system of about 2 percent of GDP, consistent with the projected
overall fiscal surplus.
D. Structural Reforms
31.
The government’s structural reform agenda includes measures designed to increase
labor productivity and contain domestic cost pressures (Box 2). The staff strongly supports
the authorities’ efforts to expand training and skill enhancing programs in the manufacturing
sector. Given the high unemployment rate in that sector, the staff advised the authorities to
encourage the various parties participating in wage negotiations to take into account productivity
and terms of trade movements. In this context, it also emphasized the importance of exercising
adequate restraints on public sector wage increases to avoid triggering comparable wage demands
in the rest of the economy. The authorities stated that they would consider subsidies to the textile
sector to help avoid further declines in employment. The staff cautioned the authorities against
the risk of creating pressures for granting subsidies to other sectors, incurring large fiscal costs,
distorting incentives, and possibly weakening fiscal transparency and accountability. The
authorities indicated that any subsidy scheme would be designed carefully to protect against these
risks and launched only if it was likely to yield net benefits in terms of investment inflows, output
and employment.
32.
To attract foreign investment, the authorities are seeking to improve the investment
climate. They expressed their intention to accelerate the reforms designed to remove the legal
and regulatory impediments to private sector development. They also plan to improve
infrastructure facilities and expect to complete the privatization of the Lesotho Electricity
Company by the end of next year, which should make the electricity supply more regular. With
these measures, they hope to attract more foreign investment, including setting up a knitting mill
so that garment exporters will have a domestic source of fabric, thereby maintaining duty-free
access to the U.S. market after 2007.

- 16 Box 2. Enhancing External Competitiveness Through Structural Reforms
The government’s structural reform program includes the following key elements:
Raising labor productivity to strengthen competitiveness. Having identified lack of skills as
a key factor contributing to low labor productivity, the government is developing an industryled, demand-driven skills-development program, with the private sector and donors sharing the
cost. A donor-supported pilot training project has already yielded productivity gains of about
20 percent. Aside from the two priority sectors, garments and sandstone mining, training will
also be launched to promote growth in agriculture, agro processing, and tourism.
Reducing the costs of investing and doing business in Lesotho. Key measures aim to
(i) remove the obstacles to market entry by simplifying company registration and industrial
licensing procedures and requirements, and replacing trade licensing with a registration
process; (ii) improve immigration services by streamlining and simplifying the procedures to
issue basic documents such as visas and, work, residency, and import permits; (iii) establish a
one-stop window for customs clearance of imports and exports; (iv) strengthen the public
institutions supporting private sector development, including an investment promotion center,
the commercial and labor courts, and the anticorruption commission; and (v) amend trade and
investment laws (e.g., the 1969 Industrial Licensing Act, the Pioneer Industries Encouragement
Act, and the Aliens Control Act) in line with best international practices. In addition, the
bottlenecks in infrastructure are to be addressed, including in the provision of water, electricity,
and transport services, by increasing the efficiency and reliability of service delivery.
Improving access to credit and financial services. This would include developing leasing
facilties, collateralized lending, microfinancing and community-based financial institutions, as
well as implementing land tenure and mortgage legislation reforms. The Post Bank started
operations in February 2005 and has attracted about 5,000 depositors, mainly from rural areas,
as of end-June. In addition, the central bank has launched a rural credit guarantee scheme to
support bank lending to the agricultural sector. The banks are collaborating to set up a credit
registry that would contain relevant data on borrowers’ credit history. In addition the
authorities are finalizing an implementation plan focusing on the financial sector and
legislative reforms under a project supported by the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation.
Supporting economic diversification. The government is developing a program to (i) attract
new foreign investors; (ii) retain and expand the existing foreign direct investment base in the
garment industry, with a view to developing input sourcing and market linkages within Africa;
and (iii) support the local private sector in developing high value-added products and activities,
such as horticulture, mining, and tourism. Agricultural development is expected to be
supported by improved extension services and projects to supply water to the lowlands.

33.
On financial sector reform, the authorities focused on measures to increase
competition and improve the private sector’s access to bank credit. The measures include
developing a three-tier banking system consisting of (a) large foreign-owned banks, (b) locally
based cooperatives and mid-sized banks, and (c) microfinance institutions; strengthening banking
regulation through the introduction of risk-based supervision; amending the relevant laws to

- 17 -

remove obstacles to bank lending, notably the Matrimonial Act,18 and the Lands Act; and putting
in place a functioning payment system. The latter involves modernizing the payment system by
revising the outdated legislation that currently applies, and by moving from manual data entry
and clearing procedures (which are error prone) to electronic transfer payments.
34.
Product and market diversification is an essential part of the authorities’ strategy to
reduce Lesotho’s vulnerability to shocks. Key to the authorities’ diversification effort is the
development of agriculture and the agroprocessing sector. The authorities noted that the
construction of the Metolong Dam would provide much-needed water to the lowlands to help
Lesotho realize its agricultural potential. Discussions continue with the U.S. Millennium
Challenge Corporation to obtain grant financing for this project. As indicated in their poverty
reduction strategy, the authorities are also pursuing reforms to lower the cost of trading with their
SACU partner countries and the rest of the world, including through a duty-credit certificate
scheme that provides substantial incentives to exporters. These efforts are expected to foster the
development of new growth sectors, such as horticulture, sandstone products, mining, and
tourism.
E. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance Issues
35.
The authorities expressed strong interest in continued Fund involvement through
capacity building and technical assistance. They requested the staff’s assistance in fiscal and
public resource management, financial sector reform and prudential supervision, and design of
macroeconomic framework. Specifically, the authorities expressed strong interest in receiving
Fund staff assistance in drafting an appropriate law for electronic banking; reviewing their study
conducted to determine an adequate level of foreign reserves once it is completed and providing
field training to Lesotho officials in financial programming.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
36.
Over the past two fiscal years, Lesotho’s economic performance has been mixed: its
overall financial situation has improved, but real economic activity has remained sluggish.
The government’s fiscal position and the external current account improved markedly, the
inflation rate fell, and official net international reserves increased. The government succeeded in
containing its domestic and foreign debt at manageable levels. However, growth performance has
weakened, reflecting a substantial real appreciation of the exchange rate that has weakened
external competitiveness, the phasing out of textile quotas by industrial countries, a continuing
decline in Lesotho’s terms of trade, and persistent drought conditions. As a result of these
developments and the high incidence of HIV/AIDS, poverty remains widespread.
37.
The key challenge facing the Lesotho authorities is to generate more rapid and
broad-based economic growth, so that significant progress can be made toward achieving
18

Under current legislation, married women need their husbands’ agreement to engage in financial
transactions, including obtaining credit.

- 18 -

the MDGs and reducing poverty. These objectives will have to be achieved in the context of a
medium-term outlook that is clouded by the prospects of a further loss of trade preferences, a
declining trend in SACU revenue, and a contraction of inward remittances from migrant workers
in South Africa. There is therefore an urgent need for the country to broaden its production and
export base to reduce its vulnerability to future shocks.
38.
To address these challenges, the authorities will need to implement a growthoriented development strategy that focuses both on consolidating the recent gains in
macroeconomic stability and on accelerating structural reforms to strengthen
competitiveness and promote private sector development. With the exchange rate of the loti
pegged at par to the rand and the virtual absence of exchange controls on external current and
capital transactions under the CMA, the authorities will have to sustain their recent record of
fiscal prudence to cope with the anticipated adverse shocks. Moreover, structural reforms will
need to be implemented to enhance labor productivity and ensure wage restraint, address
bottlenecks in infrastructure and public service delivery, eliminate the legal and administrative
impediments to investment, increase domestic financial intermediation (including efforts to
broaden access to domestic credit facilities), and expand trade and investment links with the
regional markets.
39.
It will be important to limit future fiscal deficits to levels that can be financed largely
through available inflows of foreign grants and concessional loans. This would support the
continuation of a prudent public debt management policy and reduce the risk of weakening the
government’s net creditor position vis-à-vis the banking system and the country’s official net
international reserve position. It would also provide room to expand private sector credit without
pushing domestic interest rates much higher than those prevailing in South Africa. Such a
cautious stance of fiscal policy would be appropriate, given that the anticipated shocks are
expected to have permanent effects.
40.
To achieve the necessary fiscal restraint, the authorities need to take steps to
strengthen both revenue collection and public expenditure management. The expected
declining trend in SACU revenues as a result of trade liberalization makes it necessary to
strengthen efforts to broaden the tax base and improve tax administration. To contain revenue
losses, the authorities will need to press forward with their plans to upgrade the hardware and
provide appropriate training to the staff of the LRA. Moreover, they will also need to strengthen
revenue mobilization efforts by implementing the planned ASYCUDA project and addressing
government entities’ noncompliance with VAT payment and refund procedures.
41.
With regard to improving public expenditure management, the staff welcomes the
authorities’ efforts to accelerate the ongoing restructuring and realignment of expenditures
to reflect the priorities of the poverty reduction strategy and overall budgetary financing
constraints, and to strengthen the institutional framework for the execution, monitoring,
and evaluation of public expenditure programs. In preparing to scale up outlays for poverty
reduction measures, the authorities will need to ensure that any such scaling up is consistent with
a sustainable medium-term expenditure and fiscal framework and with the country’s absorptive
capacity. In view of the existing and anticipated constraints on budgetary resources, it will be
important to assess the recurrent cost implications of new outlays, implement measures to cover

- 19 -

these costs on a sustainable basis, create fiscal space by phasing out outlays in other categories,
and expedite the implementation of the Public Sector Reform and Improvement Program so as to
contain the wage bill and improve public service delivery.
42.
The staff welcomes Lesotho’s recent progress in strengthening efforts to address the
incidence of HIV/AIDS, especially the steps taken to strengthen the institutions involved in
managing related programs, coordinate and facilitate the extension of such programs across
the country, and set up appropriate monitoring and evaluation systems. It encourages the
authorities to accelerate similar efforts that are under way in the other priority areas related to
poverty reduction.
43.
The authorities recognize that under the current exchange rate regime of the CMA
countries, Lesotho’s official foreign reserve position will need to be protected through
appropriately tight fiscal and domestic credit policies. Accordingly, the staff welcomes the
authorities’ intention to maintain prudent limits on the expansion of net domestic assets and on
any weakening of the government’s net creditor position in the banking system.
44.
The staff encourages the authorities to intensify their ongoing efforts to promote
financial sector development and intermediation through improvements in the legal and
regulatory framework. In this connection, the authorities should press ahead with the planned
reforms to promote leasing and microfinance activities, and remove legal obstacles to bank
lending (especially those unfavorably affecting women, and land transfer procedures). The
authorities should support these efforts by taking steps to improve the payments system and
banking supervision, for which they are receiving technical assistance from the Fund.
45.
The authorities’ plans to strengthen regional trade and investment links, especially
with South Africa, are commendable. The envisaged structural reforms and the various sectoral
strategies to exploit Lesotho’s potential for expanding tourism, horticulture, diamond and
sandstone mining, and agro-industries could not only enhance the country’s opportunities for
strengthening regional trade and investment links, but also help it achieve the product and market
diversification that the authorities are seeking. In this context, the authorities are urged to avoid
fiscal subsidies that could distort incentives, entail large fiscal costs, and possibly weaken fiscal
transparency and accountability.
46.

It is proposed that Lesotho remain on the standard 12-month consultation cycle.

- 20 Appendix Figure 1. Lesotho: Macroeconomic Indicators
... as the real exchange rate appreciation continued to
hurt export competitiveness.

Growth weakened in 2004/05 ...
5

0

130
Exchange Rates

Real effective exchange rate index
(left scale)

GDP Growth (Annual percent change)
4

120

3

110

2

100

1

90

2
4
6
8
10
12

Nominal exchange rate (Loti per US$,
right scale)
0
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

80
2000

The inflation rate declined further.

14
2001

2004

2003

2005

The overall fiscal operations ended in a surplus.
10

11

2002

Consumer Price Index, Annual percent change

Overall Fiscal Balance (in percent of GDP)

8
6

9

4
2

7

0
-2

5

-4
-6

3
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2000/01

2004/05

The external current account improved markedly and
international reserves increased....
10

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

... and gross government debt in percent of GDP declined.

100
Reserves (In months of imports)

5

90

Government Debt (In percent of GDP)

80
0

External Debt

70
60

-5

50
-10

40

-15

30
20

-20

10

Current account balance (In percent of GDP)
-25
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

Source: Lesotho authorities and Fund staff estimates.

Domestic Debt

2004/05

0
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

- 21 Table 1. Lesotho: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2002/03-2009/10

1/

Est.
2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Projections
2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
National income and prices
Real GDP
Real GNP
Consumer price index (period average)
Consumer price index (end of period)
GDP (in millions of maloti)
GNP (in millions of maloti)

3.2
3.4
9.6
7.7
7,564
9,303

3.3
3.6
6.4
5.2
8,251
10,184

2.0
2.3
4.3
3.7
8,644
10,701

-0.7
0.3
5.0
5.0
8,771
10,965

2.2
1.8
5.0
5.0
9,361
11,661

1.7
1.1
5.0
5.0
9,969
12,355

2.1
1.5
5.0
5.0
10,688
13,170

2.5
1.6
5.0
5.0
11,538
14,104

External sector
Exports, f.o.b .2/
Imports, f.o.b. 2/
Net labor income 2/
Nominal effective exchange rate 3/
Real effective exchange rate 3/

29.8
22.6
25.3
13.0
12.0

32.0
27.2
27.1
15.0
12.0

36.4
24.9
26.0
...
...

-11.6
-2.0
0.1
...
...

3.5
1.5
1.5
...
...

-2.3
0.6
0.6
...
...

1.0
2.7
2.7
...
...

4.4
1.9
1.9
...
...

Government budget
Revenue (excluding grants)
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending

8.9
24.5
23.6
28.2

13.3
-2.9
2.5
-22.0

12.1
5.8
5.7
6.3

17.3
16.3
9.1
49.6

-6.9
5.3
3.9
10.3

5.9
5.8
5.3
7.6

4.4
5.6
5.4
6.2

4.9
5.5
5.2
6.6

Money and credit
Net foreign assets 4/
Net domestic assets 4/
Credit to the government 4/
Credit to the rest of the economy 5/
Broad money
Velocity (GNP/average broad money)
Interest rate 6/

-70.6
73.4
15.0
-45.8
2.7
4.3
12.1

-11.1
16.5
-5.8
16.0
5.3
4.5
12.0

34.1
-27.9
-27.8
8.8
6.2
4.5
9.0

6.9
-4.1
-7.4
4.3
2.8
4.4
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
Investment and saving
Investment
Public
Private
Lesotho Highlands Water Project
Gross national savings (including remittances)
Public
Private

42.9
11.0
24.5
7.4
24.3
9.2
15.1

40.5
7.7
27.2
5.6
29.8
11.0
18.8

34.9
7.5
24.0
3.4
32.1
13.2
18.9

35.4
11.4
24.0
0.0
28.9
18.0
10.9

35.8
11.7
24.1
0.0
26.7
12.0
14.7

36.0
11.8
24.2
0.0
26.8
12.3
14.5

36.0
11.7
24.3
0.0
25.6
11.8
13.8

36.0
11.6
24.4
0.0
26.5
11.5
15.0

Government budget
Revenue
Total grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance (including grants)
Domestic balance
Domestic primary balance

40.1
3.9
48.4
-8.3
-4.3
3.8
-2.9

41.7
2.2
43.1
-1.4
0.8
3.8
2.3

44.6
2.6
43.5
6.5
9.1
11.8
5.5

51.6
3.1
49.9
1.7
4.8
8.3
6.7

45.0
3.1
49.2
-4.3
-1.1
2.4
0.4

44.7
3.1
48.9
-4.2
-1.1
2.6
0.5

43.6
3.1
48.2
-4.6
-1.5
2.1
0.2

42.3
3.1
47.1
-4.8
-1.7
1.9
0.1

Government debt 7/
Domestic debt
External debt 7/
Domestic debt, net of deposits
External debt-service ratio 8/

99.4
16.9
82.5
0.8
11.8

76.0
13.3
62.7
-2.2
9.1

60.6
7.5
53.1
-3.7
7.3

64.9
9.6
55.2
-3.8
12.5

61.4
7.8
53.6
-2.3
7.9

57.1
5.4
51.7
-1.2
7.7

53.3
3.5
49.9
-0.2
6.9

51.4
2.9
48.5
0.2
5.3

Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers

-35.1
-18.6

-25.7
-10.8

-22.2
-2.8

-28.4
-6.6

-26.1
-9.1

-26.1
-9.3

-26.3
-10.4

-24.5
-9.5

Gross official reserves (end of period)
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
(In months of imports of goods and services)

408.4
4.3

436.9
3.8

507.7
4.5

474.4
4.1

442.6
3.8

418.7
3.5

384.3
3.2

379.4
3.1

Sources: Lesotho authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/
6/
7/
8/

Fiscal year beginning in April.
In U.S. dollars.
Based on partner-country data, new trade weights from 2004. A minus sign indicates depreciation.
Change in percent of broad money at the beginning of the period.
Credit to the rest of the economy affected by a write-off of bad loans in 2002/03.
The average effective rate on three-month treasury bills.
The appreciation of the loti had a significant effect on the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2003/04.
In percent of exports of goods and services.

- 22 Table 2. Lesotho: Central Government Operations, 2002/03-2009/10

2002/03

2003/04

Est.
2004/05

Budget
2005/06

1/

Staff Proj.
2005/06

2006/07

Projections
2007/08 2008/09

2009/10

(In millions of maloti)
Revenue
Tax revenue

3,034.7

3,439.3

3,856.0

4,680.6

4,524.4

4,211.2

4,460.9

4,658.4

4,884.8

2,575.9

2,887.5

3,376.3

4,120.0

3,963.8

3,612.9

3,823.7

3,975.3

4,147.4
2,103.0

Customs revenue (SACU) 2/

1,470.0

1,421.6

2,012.4

2,413.9

2,413.9

1,961.6

2,062.2

2,082.8

Noncustoms tax revenue

1,105.9

1,465.9

1,363.9

1,706.1

1,549.9

1,651.3

1,761.5

1,892.5

2,044.4

Income taxes

663.3

852.5

729.2

922.3

798.1

851.7

907.1

972.5

1,049.8

Sales tax / value-added tax (VAT)

343.7

519.3

541.7

688.2

656.2

697.8

746.4

804.6

870.7

86.3
12.6

80.6
13.5

35.8
57.2

61.4
34.2

61.4
34.2

65.3
36.5

69.2
38.9

73.7
41.6

79.0
44.9

458.8

551.8

479.7

560.6

560.6

598.3

637.2

683.1

737.5

296.3

177.8

224.3

272.6

272.6

290.9

309.8

332.2

358.6

3,659.1

3,554.7

3,762.3

4,780.7

4,375.3

4,609.2

4,877.8

5,150.8

5,436.5

2,856.9

2,929.3

3,097.7

3,746.4

3,381.1

3,512.8

3,697.9

3,898.3

4,101.9

1,082.1

1,123.2

1,176.9

1,325.9

1,271.1

1,334.6

1,401.3

1,471.4

1,545.0

219.7

216.4

156.2

170.3

170.3

141.5

158.0

181.4

199.2

109.5

90.5

91.1

83.6

83.6

62.2

58.2

57.7

58.0

110.2

125.9

65.1

86.7

86.7

79.3

99.8

123.8

141.3

1,555.1

1,589.7

1,764.6

2,250.2

1,939.7

2,036.7

2,138.5

2,245.5

2,357.7

1,045.7

958.4

985.5

1,260.5

1,034.8

1,086.5

1,140.8

1,197.9

1,257.8

696.3

728.5

708.3

...

...

...

...

...

...

509.4

631.3

779.1

989.7

904.9

950.2

997.7

1,047.6

1,099.9

...

118.9

194.5

291.1

291.1

305.7

320.9

337.0

353.8

...

0.0

45.0

135.0

135.0

141.8

148.8

156.3

164.1

Petrol levy
Other tax revenues
Nontax revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Interest payments
External
Domestic
Other expenditure
Goods and services
Other spending on goods and services
Transfer and subsidies
Pensions and gratuities
Of which: old age pensions
Subventions and transfers

...

512.4

584.6

698.6

613.8

644.5

676.7

710.6

746.1

Of which: scholarships

...

215.1

203.4

...

...

...

...

...

...
1,334.5

Capital expenditure

833.9

634.9

650.5

1,043.4

1,003.4

1,096.4

1,179.9

1,252.5

Domestically funded

322.0

314.3

298.7

495.8

495.8

520.6

566.6

595.0

624.7

Externally funded

511.9

320.6

351.8

547.6

507.6

575.8

613.3

657.5

709.8

Grant funded

235.9

140.2

168.5

272.6

272.6

290.9

309.8

332.2

358.6

Loan funded

276.0

180.4

183.3

275.0

235.0

284.9

303.5

325.4

351.2

-31.7

-9.5

14.1

-9.1

-9.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

...

470.1

...

...

...

...

...

...

Overall balance, before grants 3/

-624.4

-115.4

563.8

-100.1

149.1

-398.0

-417.0

-492.4

-551.6

Overall balance, after grants 3/

-328.1

62.4

788.1

172.5

421.7

-107.1

-107.1

-160.2

-193.0

-1.0

309.7

1,020.8

522.0

731.1

221.7

254.6

222.8

216.2

328.1

-62.4

-788.1

-172.5

-421.7

107.1

107.1

160.2

193.0

56.4

-25.7

-60.2

-158.2

-240.7

-13.9

11.0

59.3

145.3

Net lending
Unexplained net revenue 3/

Domestic balance 4/
Total financing
External financing
Loan drawings
Amortization
Domestic financing
Bank
Nonbank
Financing gap

276.0

180.4

183.3

275.0

235.0

284.9

303.5

325.4

351.2

-219.6

-206.1

-243.5

-433.2

-475.7

-298.8

-292.5

-266.0

-206.0

271.9

-37.3

-727.9

-14.3

-181.0

121.0

96.1

100.9

47.8

320.8
-48.9

-129.6
92.3

-638.6
-89.3

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

…
…

0.0

0.0

0.0

…

…

…

…

…

…

- 23 Table 2. Lesotho: Central Government Operations, 2002/03-2009/10

2002/03

2003/04

Est.

Budget

2004/05

2005/06

1/

(concluded)

Projections

Staff Proj.
2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Revenue

40.1

41.7

44.6

53.4

51.6

45.0

44.7

43.6

42.3

Customs revenue (SACU) 2/

19.4

17.2

23.3

27.5

27.5

21.0

20.7

19.5

18.2

Noncustoms tax revenue

14.6

17.8

15.8

19.5

17.7

17.6

17.7

17.7

17.7

6.1

6.7

5.5

6.4

6.4

6.4

6.4

6.4

6.4

3.9

2.2

2.6

3.1

3.1

3.1

3.1

3.1

3.1

48.4

43.1

43.5

54.5

49.9

49.2

48.9

48.2

47.1

37.8

35.5

35.8

42.7

38.5

37.5

37.1

36.5

35.6

14.3

13.6

13.6

15.1

14.5

14.3

14.1

13.8

13.4

2.9

2.6

1.8

1.9

1.9

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.7

1.4

1.1

1.1

1.0

1.0

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.5

Domestic

1.5

1.5

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.2

Other expenditure

20.6

19.3

20.4

25.7

22.1

21.8

21.5

21.0

20.4

13.8

11.6

11.4

14.4

11.8

11.6

11.4

11.2

10.9

Nontax revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Interest payments
External

Goods and services
Transfers and subsidies

6.7

7.7

9.0

11.3

10.3

10.2

10.0

9.8

9.5

Pensions and gratuities

...

1.4

2.3

3.3

3.3

3.3

3.2

3.2

3.1

Subventions and transfers

...

6.2

6.8

8.0

7.0

6.9

6.8

6.6

6.5

11.0

7.7

7.5

11.9

11.4

11.7

11.8

11.7

11.6

Capital expenditure
Of which: domestically funded
Net lending

...

3.8

3.5

5.7

5.7

5.6

5.7

5.6

5.4

-0.4

-0.1

0.2

-0.1

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

5.4

...

...

...

...

...

...
-4.8

Unexplained net revenue 3/
Overall balance, before grants 3/
Grants from abroad
Overall balance, after grants 3/

... .
-8.3

-1.4

6.5

-1.1

1.7

-4.3

-4.2

-4.6

3.2

1.7

2.1

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

-4.3

0.8

9.1

2.0

4.8

-1.1

-1.1

-1.5

-1.7
1.9

Domestic balance 4/

0.0

3.8

11.8

6.0

8.3

2.4

2.6

2.1

Total financing

4.3

-0.8

-9.1

-2.0

-4.8

1.1

1.1

1.5

1.7

External financing

0.7

-0.3

-0.7

-1.8

-2.7

-0.1

0.1

0.6

1.3

Domestic financing

3.6

-0.5

-8.4

-0.2

-2.1

1.3

1.0

0.9

0.4

Financing gap

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

...

...

...

...

...

(In millions of maloti, unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
GNP at current prices

9,303

10,184

10,701

10,965

10,965

11,661

12,355

13,170

14,104

GDP at current prices

7,564

8,251

8,644

8,771

8,771

9,361

9,969

10,688

11,538

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year from April to March.
2/ In 2005/06, M430 million in one-off windfall revenue was added to the trend SACU revenue
3/ The budget is on a cash basis. In 2004/05, net revenue was underrecorded in the authorities' fiscal accounts by M470.1 million. The amount has been added
to the overall balance to match Central Bank of Lesotho data (the domestic financing requirement)
4/ Domestic balance excludes grants, foreign-financed capital spending, foreign interest payments, and exceptional factors.

- 24 Table 3. Lesotho: Monetary Survey, 2002 - 2006
2002

Dec

2005
Mar.
Act.

2006
Mar.
Proj.

4,005.9
2,772.9
1,233.0

3,972.4
2,846.8
1,125.6

4,266.3
2,949.6
1,316.7

4,436.0
3,096.2
1,339.8

-1,504.7
74.6
-538.9
-1,205.0
666.1
613.5
-1,579.3

-1,531.6
30.5
-539.5
-1,066.1
526.6
570.0
-1,562.2

-1,599.4
-133.9
-742.7
-1,228.3
485.7
608.7
-1,465.4

-1,814.5
-312.4
-958.1
-1,143.8
185.7
645.7
-1,502.0

-1,916.2
-465.4
-1,139.1
-1,324.8
185.7
673.4
-1,450.5

2,353.5
1,588.8
189.7
1,230.3
764.6
764.6

2,474.3
1,662.6
219.6
1,272.7
811.7
811.7

2,373.0
1,589.4
204.5
1,197.5
783.6
783.6

2,451.8
1,698.4
212.6
1,296.9
753.4
753.4

2,519.8
1,745.4
218.5
1,332.8
774.3
774.3

2003
Mar.

Mar.

2004
Jun.

5,229.0
4,474.6
754.4

3,722.3
2,949.7
772.6

3,478.3
2,565.9
912.4

3,858.2
2,822.7
1,035.5

-3,095.9
432.3
-511.0
-1,297.0
786.0
943.3
-3,528.2

-1,530.9
321.4
-190.3
-792.2
602.0
511.6
-1,852.3

-1,169.9
275.9
-317.5
-1,018.9
701.5
593.4
-1,445.8

2,133.1
1,413.2
164.1
1,032.4
719.9
719.9

2,191.3
1,443.9
178.6
1,103.4
747.5
747.5

2,308.4
1,539.1
207.6
1,163.2
769.3
769.3

Sep

(In millions of maloti)
Net foreign assets
Central bank
Commercial banks
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Claims on central government (net)
Central bank
Commercial banks
Claims on the rest of the economy
Other items (net)
Money and quasi money (M2)
Money
Of which: currency outside deposit money banks
demand deposits
Quasi money
Of which: time and savings deposits

(Annual change in percent of beginning-of-year M2, unless otherwise specified)
Net foreign assets
Central bank
Commercial banks
Net domestic assets
Claims on central government (net)
Claims on the rest of the economy
Claims on the rest of the economy (yearly change)
Other items (net)
Money and quasi money (M2)
Quasi money (yearly change)
Memorandum item:
Money multiplier (M2/reserve money)

85.5
76.8
8.7

-70.6
-71.5
0.9

-11.1
-17.5
6.4

9.9
-10.5
20.4

25.7
3.9
21.8

22.3
0.4
21.9

34.1
16.6
17.5

6.9
6.0
0.9

-68.5
3.7
-3.3
-6.0
-68.9
17.0
6.2

73.4
15.0
-20.2
-45.8
78.6
2.7
3.8

16.5
-5.8
3.7
16.0
18.6
5.3
2.9

-5.5
-20.1
3.2
13.5
11.4
4.4
-10.9

-13.8
-15.1
0.3
1.1
1.1
11.9
2.9

-19.0
-25.1
2.7
11.1
3.4
3.3
3.1

-27.9
-27.8
2.3
8.8
-2.4
6.2
-2.1

-4.1
-7.4
1.1
4.3
2.1
2.8
2.8

7.8

7.0

7.7

8.2

7.1

6.4

5.6

5.6

Sources: Central Bank of Lesotho; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

- 25 Table 4. Lesotho: Commercial Banks' Quarterly Performance Ratios, 2004 - 2005

Performance ratios
Capital adequacy
Basel capital ratio
Nonperforming loans to total capital
Top 20 exposures to total capital
Asset quality
Loans to deposit ratio
Earning assets to total assets
Nonperforming loans to total loans
Reserve for losses to total loans
Reserve for losses to non-performing loans
Liquidity Ratios
Liquid assets to total deposits
Available reserves to total deposits
Liquid assets to total assets
Current assets to total current liabilities
Profitability ratios
Net Income to average total assets (return on assets) 1/
Net Income to average total equity (return on equity)
Total expenses to total income
Solvency ratios
Total debt ratio

1/

Source: Central Bank of Lesotho.
1/ In 2005, affected by the operations of two new banks.

2005
March

2004
Sept.
Dec.
(In percent)

June

24
5
128

22
1
115

22
1
72

26
1
70

19
95
2
4
148

20
95
1
4
682

22
94
1
3
449

23
92
1
3
545

100
4
69
76

86
5
61
67

100
6
65
73

129
8
82
97

1

2

3

1

14
70

20
72

27
69

3
80

6

6

10

10

- 26 Table 5. Lesotho: Balance of Payments, 2002/03 - 2009/10 1/
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2002/03

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
of which : garments
Imports, f.o.b.

2003/04

2004/05
Est.

2005/06
Proj.

2006/07

Proj.
2007/08
2008/09

2009/10

-433.5
381.1
269.3
-814.7

-533.5
503.0
350.5
-1,036.5

-607.9
686.2
520.9
-1,294.1

-661.1
606.5
416.1
-1,267.7

-658.6
627.7
416.1
-1,286.3

-680.2
613.4
378.6
-1,293.5

-708.6
619.7
359.7
-1,328.2

-706.9
646.7
359.7
-1,353.6

Services (net)
Receipts
Of which : water royalties (and power sales)
Payments

-22.3
38.6
11.6
-61.0

-39.2
51.1
15.3
-90.2

-36.9
65.9
17.6
-102.8

-37.4
62.1
19.4
-99.5

-37.2
64.9
20.3
-102.1

-36.9
67.2
21.2
-104.1

-37.6
69.8
22.3
-107.4

-37.7
72.6
23.6
-110.3

Income (net)
Labor income (net)
Receipts
Of which : miners' wages
Payments
Investment income (net)
Receipts
Payments
Of which : interest on debt

178.5
178.8
201.7
162.5
-22.9
-0.3
24.3
-24.6
-12.4

269.3
269.7
296.4
242.1
-26.7
-0.4
29.3
-29.7
-13.2

328.9
316.1
344.7
279.8
-28.6
12.8
43.8
-31.0
-12.0

323.0
294.1
308.9
245.2
-14.7
28.9
47.5
-18.7
-13.3

332.8
301.2
317.8
250.8
-16.6
31.6
47.9
-16.3
-10.8

338.5
308.2
325.6
255.2
-17.4
30.3
46.0
-15.8
-10.0

345.1
316.3
334.6
261.2
-18.3
28.8
44.6
-15.8
-9.7

349.9
323.3
342.6
266.3
-19.3
26.5
42.6
-16.0
-9.6

Unrequited transfers
Official
Southern African Customs Union nonduty receipts
Rand compensation
Other
Private

133.1
128.5
113.6
6.0
8.9
4.7

179.8
171.8
145.0
18.1
8.7
8.0

277.4
268.5
245.2
11.7
11.5 `
8.9

290.6
281.7
260.1
7.4
14.2
8.9

239.5
230.4
207.8
7.7
14.9
9.1

247.1
237.8
214.2
8.1
15.6
9.3

246.4
236.9
212.1
8.5
16.3
9.5

245.8
236.2
209.9
9.0
17.2
9.7

-144.2
-272.7
-42.7

-123.6
-295.4
-54.7

-38.6
-307.1
-36.0

-84.9
-366.6
18.4

-123.5
-353.9
19.6

-131.5
-369.3
20.6

-154.7
-391.6
22.1

-149.0
-385.1
23.6

Current account (including official transfers)
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Of which: LHWP 2/
Capital and financial account

98.2

60.1

-0.9

105.0

125.8

133.7

156.7

150.8

Capital account (transfers received)

17.8

16.5

21.5

26.7

28.1

29.3

30.8

32.6

Financial account

80.4

43.6

-22.3

78.3

97.7

104.4

125.9

118.2

Direct investment (excl. LHDA) 3/

30.2

45.1

56.0

72.2

68.8

79.7

83.8

94.1

Financing LHWP (net)

58.6

75.8

66.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.3
-33.4
33.7
0.2
0.6
24.2
-23.5
-0.4
33.5
31.7
1.8

-48.9
-62.8
14.0
-4.9
-4.9
23.7
-28.6
-0.1
18.9
1.5
17.3

-74.3
-58.4
-15.9
-8.5
-8.5
31.0
-39.5
0.0
-7.4
2.1
-9.5

-27.2
16.8
-44.1
-35.3
-35.4
34.6
-70.0
0.1
-8.8
-7.3
-1.5

-2.9
0.8
-3.6
-1.9
-2.0
41.2
-43.2
0.2
-1.8
-1.5
-0.3

0.8
0.8
0.1
1.8
1.6
43.1
-41.5
0.2
-1.7
-1.4
-0.3

7.6
0.8
6.8
8.5
8.3
45.3
-37.0
0.3
-1.7
-1.4
-0.3

19.3
0.7
18.5
20.2
19.8
47.9
-28.1
0.4
-1.7
-1.4
-0.3

-8.7

-28.5

-70.8

33.3

31.8

23.9

34.4

4.9

Valuation adjustment

21.6

46.0

11.3

-20.1

-2.4

-2.1

-2.0

-1.8

Errors and omissions

24.4

17.5

28.2

-47.7
-10.4
-26.3
3.2

-44.9
-9.5
-24.5
3.1

Other investment
Assets 4/
Liabilities
Loans
Public and publicly guaranteed
Disbursements
Repayments
Private (net)
Other liabilities
Central Bank liabilities
Commercial banks' liabilities
Change in reserve assets 4/

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Memorandum items:
Trade balance
Current account (including official transfers)
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Gross off. reserves (in months of imports GNFS)

-55.9
-18.6
-35.1
4.3

-46.4
-10.8
-25.7
3.8

-44.0
-2.8
-22.2
4.5

Sources: Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL); and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Financial year is April-March.
2/ Lesotho Highlands Water Project.
3/ Direct investment has been revised downwards owing to reclassification of some flows in the financial account.
3/ Lesotho Highlands Development Authority.
4/ Transaction based data, a minus sign indicates an increase in reserves.

-51.2
-6.6
-28.4
4.1

-48.6
-9.1
-26.1
3.8

-48.1
-9.3
-26.1
3.5

- 27 -

Table 6. Lesotho Medium-Term Scenarios, 2004/05-2009/10

2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

Projections
2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

Baseline Scenario:
(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator, percent change
Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)
Nominal GDP (millions of maloti)

2.0
2.2
1,382
8,644

-0.7
3.0
1,291
8,771

2.2
4.4
1,355
9,361

1.7
4.7
1,414
9,969

2.1
5.0
1,487
10,688

2.5
5.4
1,573
11,538

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Investment - Savings
Investment
Gross National Savings
Inverse incremental capital-output ratio (In US dollars)
External sector
Net textile exports (millions of US dollars)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)

34.9
32.1
0.13

35.4
28.9
0.04

293
-2.8

234
-6.6

35.8
26.7
0.18
234
-9.1

36.0
26.8
0.17
213
-9.3

36.0
25.6
0.19
202
-10.4

36.0
26.5
0.20
202
-9.5

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Central government finance
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending

47.2
43.5

54.7
49.9

44.7
49.2

47.9
48.9

46.7
48.2

45.4
47.1

Overall balance (including grants) 1/

9.1

4.8

-1.1

-1.1

-1.5

-1.7

Overall balance (excluding grants) 1/

6.5

1.7

-4.3

-4.2

-4.6

-4.8

11.8

8.3

2.4

2.6

2.1

1.9

Domestic balance 2/
Reform Scenario: 3/

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National income and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator, percent change

2.0

-0.6

2.8

2.6

3.4

4.1

2.2

3.0

4.5

4.8

5.0

5.8

Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)

1,382

1,271

1,322

1,393

1,482

1,633

Nominal GDP (millions of maloti)

8,644

8,771

9,422

10,125

10,992

12,110

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Investment - Savings
Investment
Gross National Savings

34.9
32.1

Inverse incremental capital-output ratio (In US dollars)

0.13

External sector
Net textile exports (millions of US dollars)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)

293.1
-2.8

35.5
29.2
0.04

234
-6.2

37.8
28.7
0.18

236
-9.1

37.7
28.6
0.18

219
-9.2

37.6
27.4
0.21

213
-10.3

37.7
28.2
0.24

220
-9.5

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Central government finance (fiscal year)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending

47.2
43.5

55.4
50.9

50.7
51.7

49.8
51.0

49.1
50.6

47.4
49.0

Overall balance (including grants) 1/

9.1

4.5

-1.0

-1.2

-1.5

-1.6

Overall balance (excluding grants) 1/

6.5

1.4

-5.0

-5.3

-6.0

-6.1

11.8

8.2

1.5

1.6

1.1

1.0

Domestic balance 2/
Sources: Lesotho authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1/ The budget is on a cash basis. In 2004/05, net revenue was underrecorded in the authorities' fiscal accounts by M 470.1 million. The amount
has been added to the overall balance to match Central Bank of Lesotho data (the domestic financing requirement)
2/ Domestic balance excludes grants, foreign-financed capital spending, foreign interest payments, and
exceptional factors.
3/ The reform scenario assumes the implementation of structural reform policies.

- 28 Table 7. Lesotho: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators
Population
Population (2002, in millions):
Annual rate of growth (2000-02):
Population 14 years and under (2002):

2.2
0.97
42 percent of total population

Density (2002):

59 people per square kilometer

Population characteristics (2002)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Male
Female
Infant mortality (per thousand)
Crude death rate (per thousand)
Crude birth rate (per thousand)
Fertility rate

53
49
56
81
23.3
33.1
4.3

Access to safe water (2000)

Health
Population per physician (1995)
Immunization rate
(percent of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles (2002)
DPT (2002)

18,519

70
79

Distribution of land

Percentage of population:
Urban
Rural

78
88
74

Education (2001)
Adult literacy rate (in percent)
Male
Female
Enrollment rate (in percent)

81
74
90

Primary school (net)
Male
Female
Secondary school (gross)
Pupil-teacher ratio in primary school

84
81
86
34
47

Percentage of arable land:
1960
2001

13.0
10.9

Labor force (2002)
Total (thousands)
Female (percent in total)

736
37.0

Sources: Lesotho Demographic Survey, 2001; Governement of Lesotho; and
World Development Indicaotrs, 2004; World Bank

- 29 Table 8. Lesotho: Millennium Development Goals
1990
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below US $1 a day (percent)
Poverty gap at US $1 a day (percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent)
2. Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (percent)
Youth literacy rate (percent of ages 15-24)

1995

2001

2002

2015 target = halve 1990 1 U.S. dollar a day poverty and malnutrition rates
..
36
..
..
..
19
..
..
..
2
..
..
16
21
18
..
27
26
25
..
73
71
87

2015 target = net enrollment to 100
71
84
63
67
89
91

..
..
..

3. Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (percent of ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (percent)

126
126
40
..

2005 target = education ratio to 100
118
105
122
119
..
..
5
..

..
..
..
..

4. Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)

2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
148
140
133
132
102
97
92
91
80
83
70
70

5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)

2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
..
..
550
..
..
50
60
..

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV, female (percent of ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (percent)

..
23
..
..
..

7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP U.S. dollar per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (percent of population)

2015 target = various (see notes at bottom of this page)
0.5
..
0.5
..
..
0.3
0.2
0.2
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
78
..
..
..
49
..
..
..
..
..

8. Develop a global partnership for development
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

2015 target = various (see notes at bottom of this page)
..
47
..
..
7
9
36
56
..
..
..
..

2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS.
..
38
..
..
..
..
..
73,000
..
..
655
726
47
64
61

Source: World Development Indicators database, April 2004.
Note: In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
Goal 1 targets: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
Goal 2 target: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Goal 3 target: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
Goal 4 target: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate.
Goal 5 target: Reduce by three-fourths between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
Goal 6 targets: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS. Have halted by 2015, and begun to
reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
Goal 7 targets: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve,
by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at
least 100 million slum dwellers.
Goal 8 targets: Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, nondiscriminatory trading and financial system. Address the special needs of the least
developed countries. Address the special needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states. Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of
developing countries through national and international measures in order to make debt sustainable in the long term. In cooperation with developing
countries, develop and implement strategies for decent and productive work for youth. In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to
affordable, essential drugs in developing countries. In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially
information and communications.

- 30 -

APPENDIX I

LESOTHO: RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of July 31, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 07/25/1968; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR million
34.90
31.34
3.56

Percent Quota
100.0
89.80
10.21

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR million
3.74
0.39

Percent Allocation
100.0
10.37

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
PRGF arrangements

SDR million
24.50

Percent Quota
70.20

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Type
PRGF
Stand-By
Stand-by

VI.

Approval
date
03/09/2001
09/23/1996
07/31/1995

Amount approved
(SDR million)
24.50
7.17
7.17

Amount drawn
(SDR million)
24.50
0.0
0.0

Projected obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

VII.

Expiration
date
10/31/2004
9/22/1997
7/30/1996

2005
0.00
0.10
0.10

2006
0.35
0.21
0.56

Forthcoming
2007
1.75
0.20
1.95

2008
3.15
0.19
3.34

2009
3.85
0.17
4.02

Safeguards Assessments:

An updated Safeguards Assessment of the Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) in July 2003
concluded that the CBL has made commendable progress in strengthening its safeguards, as
recommended in the previous Safeguards Assessment of July 2001. The assessment noted
that there are still some unresolved issues at various levels of the bank’s operations,
including the need for strengthened program data compilation procedures, timely payment of
PRGF obligations to the Fund, and rapid implementation of measures to enhance the internal
audit function.

- 31 VIII.

APPENDIX I

Exchange Arrangements:

Lesotho's currency, the loti (plural maloti), is pegged to the South African rand at par. The
Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) deals with commercial banks mainly in South African rand.
As of July 31, 2005, the rand (maloti) rate per U.S. dollar was M6.58.
IX.

Article IV Consultation:

The Executive Board concluded the last Article IV consultation (IMF Country Report No.
04/21, February 05, 2004) on January 21, 2004. Executive Directors noted that economic
performance had remained favorable, with moderate growth and declining inflation, despite a
regional food shortage. They endorsed the authorities’ medium-term strategy to achieve
higher and sustainable economic growth and reduce poverty by creating appropriate
conditions for private sector development and, in particular, labor-intensive industries.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to bring the fiscal deficit under control, with a
view to reducing reliance on domestic financing. They commended the reprioritization of
government spending to create room for investment in basic health care, education, and other
social services, as well as physical infrastructure. They stressed that reforms to the public
financial management system will be essential to bring spending in line with government
priorities. Directors supported the on-going reforms to Lesotho’s financial institutions and
regulations, noting that these reforms are crucial to increase access to credit for the private
sector, particularly for small- and medium-sized businesses.
X.

Technical Assistance:
Mission: money and banking statistics
Mission: taxation (VAT/tax administration)
Advisor: taxation (VAT/tax administration)
Mission: monetary policy implementation
Mission: public accounts
Mission: GDDS project for Anglophone Africa
Mission: balance of payments
Mission: safeguards assessment
Mission: monetary policy and AML/CFT
Mission: government finance statistics
Mission: national accounts
Mission: national accounts statistics
Mission: GDDS project for Anglophone Africa on
Private capital flows, stocks and investment income
Mission: legislative drafting/FIU
Mission: monetary operations / payments issues /
banking supervision
Mission: GDDS project for Anglophone Africa on
Private capital flows, stocks and investment income

XI.

STA
FAD
FAD
MAE
FAD
STA
STA
FIN
MFD
STA
STA
STA
STA

short-term
short-term
long-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term
short-term

2000
2000
2000-2001
2001
2002
2002
2002
2003
2003
2003
2003
2004
2004

LEG
MFD

Short-term
short-term

2005
2005

STA

short-term

2005

Resident Representatives:

The Senior Resident Representative posted in South Africa has been covering Lesotho since January
2004.

- 32 -

APPENDIX II

LESOTHO: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
A.

LESOTHO’S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

1.
Lesotho’s strategy for poverty reduction is laid out in the government’s Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS), which was formally transmitted to Bank Management in
March, 2005. A Board discussion of the Joint Staff Assessment Note (JSAN) is scheduled for
September 8, 2005 and September 19, 2005, at the Bank and Fund respectively.
2.
The PRS was developed through a highly participatory and consultative process
involving 200 communities and including a wide range of stakeholders. The PRS builds on a
number of government documents and initiatives, including the I-PRSP, National Vision 2020,
National Goals, and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). While Vision 2020 articulates
the level of development that Basotho aspire to attain by 2020, and the MDGs reflect long-term
goals and targets to be achieved by 2015, the PRS provides a framework for making progress
toward the attainment of those goals and targets within three years.
3.
Poverty diagnosis presented in the PRS is based on the analysis of quantitative data from
a variety of survey sources and is backed up by qualitative data and summaries of themes
emerging from the consultation process. The PRS has three interconnected goals: (i) create jobs
through the establishment of an environment that facilitates private sector-led economic growth;
(ii) empower the poor and the vulnerable and improve their access to health care and education;
and (iii) deepen democracy and improve public sector performance, to ensure that policies and
legal frameworks facilitate the full implementation of priorities. These reflect an appropriate
response to the national priorities identified during the consultation process.
4.
However, implementation of the PRS faces several limitations and risks related to its
translation into actual work plans, possible further shocks to the economy, weak governance, and
a lack of political will. These are identified in the Joint Staff Advisory Note (JSAN) and required
actions relate to the need to develop a supporting medium-term macroeconomic framework,
address Lesotho’s external vulnerability and competitiveness concerns, and improve the
monitoring and evaluation framework.
B.

BANK-FUND COLLABORATION IN SPECIFIC AREAS

5.
The World Bank and the IMF continue to cooperate closely in assisting the Government
of Lesotho to implement its poverty reduction and development strategy, with each institution
taking the lead in the policy dialogue in its areas of expertise. The IMF leads the dialogue on
macroeconomic policy (fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies) and the following areas of
structural reform: fiscal management and tax administration reform. The Bank will continue to
lead the policy dialogue on sectoral structural reforms including public expenditure management,
employment generation through private sector development, infrastructure development,
education, health including, HIV/AIDS and poverty monitoring and evaluation. Areas of close
collaboration include the PRSP, public sector reform, financial sector reform and the Integrated
Framework for Trade. The Bank and Fund also routinely exchange views on macroeconomic
policies, tax reform, and private sector development.

- 33 -

APPENDIX II

Poverty Reduction Strategy
6.
The World Bank is supporting government’s capacity building efforts to implement its
PRS through a PRSP Trust Fund and an Institutional Development Facility grant. The former is
aimed at strengthening capacity of the PRSP Secretariat and other identified agencies (including
in the private sector), to manage the PRSP process. The latter is aimed at strengthening the
capability of the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning to plan, manage, implement and
monitor policies and programs identified in the PRS to achieve intended results on the ground.
The Bank also prepared a Country Economic Memorandum as an analytical input into the
preparation of the PRS. The analysis has made a strong case for scaling up public investment in
infrastructure as well as seeking public private partnerships for improved service delivery.
7.
As mentioned above, the PRS does not include a comprehensive macroeconomic
framework, except for some fiscal projections. In the absence of a medium-term macroeconomic
framework, the targeted growth rate and other economic objectives do not appear to be properly
anchored. Considering the short-term risks to garment production and exports and the mediumterm structural challenges, the growth rate targeted in the PRS is unrealistic. In fact, the
authorities have revised the growth projections downwards for the short to medium term. Fund
staff is working with the authorities in developing the existing projections into a comprehensive
macroeconomic framework to underpin the PRS.
Public Sector Reform and Public Expenditure Management
8.
The Bank is continuing the work on the Public Expenditure Review (PER), in close
collaboration with the government, to inform and guide the reforms needed to improve the
efficiency and quality of public expenditures. The PER will strengthen the analytical base for
making decisions about the size and composition of public expenditure to have maximum impact
on growth and poverty reduction. It will also identify the issues in public expenditure and
financial management that need to be addressed subsequently to effectively implement public
policies and achieve development objectives. In collaboration with the government and key
donors, preparation of a program of public sector reform that will focus on public expenditure
management, including financial management and decentralization for improved service
delivery, is well advanced.
9.
With support from the World Bank through the PER exercise, the government has taken
important steps to begin aligning the budget with the priority programs identified in the PRS. To
deepen these links and to strengthen implementation of the priority programs, the authorities
have initiated a phased introduction of a medium-term expenditure framework starting with the
2005/06 budget19. Further, they are identifying activities in the budget that are included in the
PRS, as well as other poverty-reducing activities that are not necessarily included in the PRS.
Despite the limitations on the costing of the PRS, the results from the above exercises will
support the government’s efforts to align its budget with its PRS.

19

Fiscal year is from April to March.

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

Private Sector Development (PSD)
10.
The Government, with assistance of the World Bank, has developed a PSD Strategy,
which identifies areas and provides specific recommendations for action to achieve the
Government's objectives to increase the contribution of the private sector to GDP growth as
measured by private investment in GDP, diversify the economy away from garments industry,
progressively integrate Lesotho’s economy with South Africa’s economy and increase factor
productivity. In early April 2005, a three-day PSD Strategy Forum was organized jointly by the
Government of Lesotho and the World Bank and held in Maseru. The Forum facilitated the
discussion between the key partners and led to prioritization of the key binding constraints as
well as the development of a strategy to facilitate stronger private sector growth and support
export diversification. Discussions covered a wide range of areas, including ways to (i) improve
the business climate by reducing legal and administrative impediments to growth; (ii) strengthen
logistics, infrastructure, trade and investment facilitation, and institutions to support areas with
the highest potential for growth and exports; and (iii) strengthen domestic competitiveness
through improving skill levels and strengthening linkages between training and industrial needs.
To support the private sector, immediate actions need to be taken in a number of mutuallysupportive areas to create a minimum infrastructure platform (MIP) for private sector-led
growth. MIP consists of the combination of priority physical infrastructure investments with a
specific set of investments in supporting facilities, all aiming at enhancing economic
performance and productivity, attracting more private investment and diversifying the
economy.20
11.
To support the government’s efforts on the PSD front, the World Bank is preparing a
Private Sector Competitiveness project. The key objective of the project is to increase private
sector participation in the economy by increasing its productivity and competitiveness, and hence
its ability to compete. This goal will be achieved by improving the business environment and
reducing the costs of doing business; strengthening the linkages with the regional economy,
especially with South Africa; strengthening institutional support for employable skills and
business management; and improving productivity at the firm level.
Integrated Framework (IF)
12.
Recognizing the importance of the expansion of trade with other countries–especially in
the region–for achieving economic growth, the government seeks to better integrate trade issues
in the poverty reduction program. The framework for this integration is provided in the
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) for Lesotho. The goal is to lower the cost of trading
with South Africa and other Southern African Customs Union (SACU)21 partners and the rest of the
world by removing barriers to trade and to the movement of capital and labor. Priority actions for
the achievement of this goal, mostly structural policies, are set out in the DTIS matrix. The DTIS
has been carried out in close consultation with the Government and core agencies and donors,
20

MIP includes the following elements: (i) business environment; (ii) trade and investment facilitation
regulations and institutions; (iii) human capital; (iv) financial services and (v) physical and support
infrastructure.
21

Members of SACU are Lesotho, Swaziland, Namibia, Botswana, and South Africa.

- 35 -

APPENDIX II

and has benefited from several ongoing projects, including the Bank’s growth and employment
options study, UNCTAD’s Investment Policy Review and the Government’s PRSP and National
Vision documents. Background papers for the IF study were prepared by the IMF, ITC,
UNCTAD and WTO. The various donors have expressed interest in supporting key elements of
this actions matrix through technical assistance.
Infrastructure
13.
Bank support to the infrastructure sector is directed to institutional strengthening as well
as physical works. The Bank contributed to the financing of the Lesotho Highlands Water
Project. The objective is to put in place the physical and managerial capacity for Lesotho to
transform its principal natural resource of abundance – water – into export revenues and to
produce hydro power to reduce Lesotho’s dependence on imported energy. It helps to store and
transfer water through a series of dams and tunnels from Lesotho to South Africa. Phase 1A was
completed 1998 and phase 1B has been storing water since 2002. The entire project could
include five phases with a total capacity to transfer up to 70m3/ sec of water but reduced demand
in South Africa may delay future phases. The new Lesotho Water Sector Improvement Project
supports provision of water to the lowland areas, mainly Maseru, which at present faces
shortages of water. Improvement in reliability will be achieved through strengthening the main
urban utility, WASA, as well as increased access for urban and peri-urban water supply through
community based approaches. A key feature of the project is the strengthening of the sector’s
legal and regulatory framework which is seen as essential to increase the efficiency of expected
new investments.
14.
Under the Utility Sector Reform project, the concession of Lesotho Electricity
Corporation (LEC) is being prepared through a management contract until a strategic investor is
in place later this year. This transitional arrangement has brought about significant improvements
regarding new connections, collection rates, arrears reduction, global losses, etc. Additionally,
the bid process for the LEC concession contract is progressing. Simultaneously, the
establishment of the regulatory authority – Lesotho Electricity Authority – is taking place in a
highly satisfactory manner. In the telecommunication sector, the introduction of competition and
the early impact of privatization have resulted in a seven-fold increase in aggregate tele-density
and a diversification of services to the end users. Regarding regulation in the telecommunications
sector, the Lesotho Telecommunication Authority (LTA) has been established and is working
towards developing the set of skills and capabilities to discharge its duties. In the transport
sector, the Bank is supporting strategic policy and regulatory reforms; plus capacity building and
performance based contracting. Support is also being provided for restructuring roads
management and road and bridge rehabilitation and upgrading.

HIV/AIDS
15.
In response to the high adult HIV prevalence rate in Lesotho, the Government adopted a
mutli-sectoral National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan and the National AIDS Policy Framework in
2000. In 2002, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) awarded
US$29 million to Lesotho to fight HIV/AIDS (over a five year period). Due to weak institutional
capacity of the recipients and implementing agencies, implementation of activities financed

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

under the GFATM has been very slow. To support the Government’s efforts, the Bank is
providing a technical assistance grant to increase the capacity of government and nongovernmental institutions responsible for the national response to HIV and AIDS to utilize and
assess the impact of funds received for HIV/AIDS. Political commitment in the fight against
HIV/AIDS has increased and legislation to create a National AIDS Commission has been
enacted. Several other development partners and agencies are active in supporting the HIV/AIDS
program, including Development Corporation Ireland, the Clinton Foundation, and the Bristol
Myers Squibb company.
Human Development
16.
The Bank is supporting a Health Sector Reform Program with the objective of achieving
a sustainable increase in access to quality preventive, curative and rehabilitative health care
services. The Bank’ support to the health sector is structured in 3 Phases of an Adaptable
Program Loan. The Phase I of the APL focused on strengthening the institutional capacity of the
MOHSW to refine, implement and evaluate the comprehensive Sector Reform Program, and
expanding the capacity of the government to respond to HIV/AIDS. The Phase II APL, which is
planned for approval by the Board in September 2005, will focus on improving access to quality
health services through strengthening decentralized services delivery and improving human
resources management in the sector. The education sector is supported through an Adaptable
Program Loan (APL) spanning the 12 years from 1999 to 2011. Its objectives are to assist the
Government of Lesotho in its efforts to increase the equity of access to quality education and the
efficiency of the education system. The Development Objectives are: (a) to increase enrollment
and completion in primary education; (b) improve learning achievement in primary education;
(c) increase enrollment in secondary education; (d) build capacity in the education sector,
including for ECCD, TVET, higher education, Non-Formal Education, and MOET core
functions.
Poverty Monitoring and Evaluation
17.
The Bank recently concluded a review of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in Lesotho.
This review highlights cross-cutting issues across the World Bank portfolio and proposed
actions. It also contains an analysis of the findings on the national M&E system linked to the
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). It identifies three major issues that will have to be worked out
to establish a well-functioning national M&E system: (a) donors must agree among themselves
and with the government on a harmonized, unified support effort for a national M&E system;
(b) government must create a coordinated and transparent system that includes key data users
and data generators; and (c) government and donors must make long-term commitment to
enhance statistical capacity. The review and its recommendations will serve as a major input to
the results-based Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) that is currently under preparation.
18.
As part of the preparation of the proposed World Bank financed Water Sector
Improvement Project, a study was conducted using participatory processes, to examine issues
related to affordability and willingness to pay for urban water supply at different levels of
service. Key objectives included: establish factors affecting water consumption levels and
behaviors; assess changes in the extent and nature of water supply; consider the impacts of tariffs

- 37 -

APPENDIX II

on the very poor; establish the informal price of water; and determine how access can be
maintained for the poor without other income groups drawing free water. The findings22 suggest
that based purely on people’s ability to pay (for the currently connected customers); there is
room for an increase in tariffs in all bands. Further, the study finds that about two-thirds of the
non-connected households could afford to pay three times the average amounts currently paid by
the public utility’s lowest band. However, the full cost of private connections can only be borne
by a very small proportion of the peri-urban residents. In the context of the Utilities Sector
Reform project, a PSIA is being carried out to assess the impact of the proposed privatization of
the Lesotho Electricity Corporation. The specific objective of the proposed PSIA is to provide
guidance on the expected impact of changes in tariff policy on: (i) different residential consumer
and income groups in different locations which currently have access; (ii) industrial and business
consumers (especially SMEs) in terms of likely impact on economic performance
(competitiveness, profitability) leading to income effects through their job/employment creation
abilities; and (iii) different income groups which currently do not have access. A draft report is
currently being discussed with the Government. Also, the Bank and Fund are considering
reviewing closely the poverty and social impact of possible changes resulting from revisions in
the SACU revenue sharing formula in the context of their respective macroeconomic programs.
C.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

19.
The Bank Group’s assistance strategy for Lesotho for FY 06-09 is currently under
preparation. It is guided by the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and the Millennium
Development Goals. A joint CAS retreat with the government and several development partners
is planned for September 2005. The CAS will be informed by these consultations as well as other
related pieces of work that have been completed or are under preparation. These include the
Country Portfolio Performance Review (completed in April 2005) and the CAS completion
report (CASCR) of the 1998 CAS. The objective of the CASCR is to assess the effectiveness of
the 1998 CAS in achieving the expected results as well as highlight lessons learned during
implementation. A Client Survey has been launched. The results from the survey will provide an
assessment of the views of clients and partners, and help produce more effective strategies and
programs that support development in Lesotho. The two overarching objectives of achieving
sustainable growth and improving the country’s competitiveness in order to support employment
creation will remain in force in the CAS for the period FY2004-FY2007.
20.
As of June 30, 2005, IDA had approved 31 credits amounting to US$367.7 million, of
which US$276.1 million was disbursed; US$59.9 million was canceled; and US$40.9 million
remains undisbursed. An IBRD loan of US$110 million was approved for Phase IA of the
Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) in July 1991; of which US$68.9 million was
disbursed and US$41.1 million canceled (due to a lower loan uptake than projected). A second
IBRD loan of $45 million was approved in June 1998 for Phase IB of the Lesotho Highlands
Water Project, of which US$14.4 million is un-disbursed and the remainder US$9.0 million was
cancelled. The Bank Group's first operation in Lesotho was approved in February 1966. To date,
22

The full results can be found in “Ability & Willingness to Pay for Urban Water Supply: An Assessment
of Connected and Unconnected Households in Maseru, Lesotho” by David Hall and David Cownie
(available upon request from the World Bank).

- 38 -

APPENDIX II

the World Bank has financed six projects in education; five in roads and roads rehabilitation and
maintenance; four in agriculture, three in industry, three in water supply (including highland
water engineering), three in urban development, three in health, two in privatization and one in
community development.
21.
In July 2005, IFC signed an agreement with the Government of Lesotho to advise them
on designing and implementing a public-private partnership for a new public hospital. Located in
the capital city of Maseru, the new hospital will replace an existing facility, now over 50 years
old, and serve as the national referral hospital. The replacement of the hospital is central to the
ongoing reforms and improvements of health sector policy that the government is undertaking
with the support of the World Bank’s International Development Association and the donor
community, an effort led by Development Cooperation Ireland and the World Health
Organization. The project is a pioneering joint initiative by the World Bank and IFC in SubSaharan Africa. It is expected to be funded in part through International Development
Association (IDA) funds on concessional terms.
22.
The IFC African Project Development Facility (APDF) has completed two projects by
providing project appraisal and assistance in the mobilization of loan financing to (a) Maseru
Private Hospital, a US$3.4 million project to build and operate a 31-bed private general and
maternity hospital; and (b) Pioneer Plastics Limited, a US$0.5 million project to install facilities
to manufacture polyethylene film bags, the first of its kind to be established in Lesotho. In
addition, the IFC contributed to industrial reform in Lesotho through its Foreign Investment
Advisory Service (FIAS). Studies and technical advice by FIAS contributed to the design of the
ongoing IDA-assisted Industry and Agro-industry development project and to the Privatization
and Private Sector Development project.
Contact Persons
Questions may be addressed to Ms. Ritva Reinikka, Country Director, at 27-12-431 3100; or
Ms. Preeti Arora, Sr. Country Economist, at 202 473-8275.

- 39 -

APPENDIX III

LESOTHO: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Lesotho’s statistical database is adequate for surveillance purposes, although there are
some notable deficiencies in the quality and timeliness of core surveillance data. The staff
mission worked with the Lesotho representatives to address some of these deficiencies to ensure
an adequate database through 2004/05 for surveillance purposes. In light of this, it believes that
Lesotho is in compliance with its obligations under Article VIII, section 5. However, potential
areas of further improvements are identified below. The government should give high priority to
addressing these.
National accounts
GDP and economic growth are probably underestimated. Incomplete information about
external flows and value added in the Lesotho Highland Water Project (LHWP) has had
significant effects on the estimates of GDP and economic growth since 1998. In theory, the value
added of the water sector should include the full value of water exported, but current estimates
only include royalties received by LHWP. There are also concerns that data on manufacturing
activity from the Bureau of Statistics of Lesotho (BSL) is underestimated, when compared to
customs data on manufactured exports.
BSL is responsible for the national accounts and compiles current price estimates of GDP
economic activity, expenditure, and income. Estimates of GDP at constant prices are compiled
by economic activity and expenditure. Fund missions make estimates of current year national
accounts and projections of future years, in consultation with the authorities. Historical data are
sometimes adjusted. Other macroeconomic indicators, such as industrial production indices, are
used to monitor developments during the year.
The 1996 STA mission noted substantial shortcomings with the national accounts data,
including: the non-availability of basic underlying data in a number of areas and the need to
make extrapolations on partial coverage; the use of historical and outdated input/output
relationships in many instances; the use of old benchmarks estimates in deriving current series;
and the use of inappropriate trend indicators in a few instances. In terms of GDP by expenditure
categories, major problems included estimates of household expenditure on a residual basis, and
defects in the timeliness, coverage, and commodity detail on imports.
A resident advisor provided technical assistance from July 1998 to January 2000. The
expert updated the base year for the national accounts to 1995, improved the methods for
compiling imports at constant prices, incorporated new benchmark estimates for several
industries, initiated work on simplified institutional sector accounts, implemented a new
computer system for compiling the estimates, and documented the compilation methodology for
the national accounts. The expert also initiated several projects for improving BSL data
collection efforts, work programs, and working procedures, including improving the
manufacturing production index.
Since late 2003, a peripatetic expert has been assigned under the DFID project for
Anglophone Africa to advise on strengthening the national accounts methodology. The principal
reason for limited progress has been the lack of resources and issues with the quality of source
data.

- 40 -

APPENDIX III

Prices
BSL currently produces a consumer price index (CPI) only, largely due to staff shortages.
The CPI is based on the Laspeyres index formula and is compiled with weights from the 1994/95
Household Budget Survey; it is published with a base of April 1997=100. In addition to the
nationwide index, separate indices are compiled and published for high-income households
(i.e., households earning more than M500 per month according to the 1994/95 HBS) in Maseru
City and for low-income households (households earning less than M500) in all six lowland
towns. A 1996 STA mission found that the quality of the index was, in general good, and
compared favorably with the CPI for other countries in the region.
Government finance statistics
Data on government revenue and grants, current and capital expenditure, and financing
are now provided by the Ministry of Finance to AFR on a monthly basis, although
timeliness of reports remains problematic. There is scope for further improvement in the
reporting of fiscal data. Current and capital expenditure would benefit from more disaggregated
reporting, including for health and education spending; revenues should be classified according
to the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001); and the reporting lag of
about one year for the production of the functional breakdown of expenditure should be reduced.
It is also necessary to distinguish clearly between current and capital (project) grants and external
loan disbursements. The Government submitted the 2001/02 fiscal accounts to the Auditor
General in March 2003 and the 2002/03 fiscal accounts in December 2003. These are the first
accounts to be audited since those for the 1995/96 fiscal year.
A GDDS fiscal sector mission in December 2003 was followed by a technical assistance
mission in 2004, which assisted the authorities in implementing the reporting framework of
GFSM 2001. The mission identified several shortcomings in the fiscal data. Underreporting of
recurrent revenue and expenditure occurs as line ministries net revenue against unreported
expenditure. Reporting of acquisition of nonfinancial assets is incomplete due to line ministries
that do not fully report donor project outlays. These data are also insufficiently detailed to allow
appropriate economic classifications. The mission assisted the authorities in compiling a bridge
table to reclassify data according to GFSM 2001. This enabled the authorities to submit annual
data for the general government sector through 2003 for inclusion in the 2004 Government
Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook. The latest quarterly fiscal data reported for IFS was for June
2002 only. The mission established that the data coverage did not include the activities of the
National University of Lesotho, the Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Fund and the
Petroleum Fund. The mission recommended that the university be treated as an extra-budgetary
fund and that the other funds be adequately sectorized and classified to further enhance the
coverage of the general government.
Monetary statistics
Most TA recommendations have been adopted. Monthly reporting of data for IFS publication
is timely and has improved in terms of classification of instruments, sectorization of the domestic
economy, and compilation of the monetary aggregates. However, the recommended expansion of
institutional coverage, valuation of financial instruments at market value, and proper recording of
realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses are yet to be implemented.

- 41 -

APPENDIX III

Balance of payments and external debt
The Central Bank of Lesotho compiles quarterly balance of payments statistics, usually
with a lag of three months. However, these data are not reported to AFR or STA on a timely
basis for surveillance and for dissemination in the Fund’s statistical publications.
A STA mission in July-August 2002 concluded that the quality of Lesotho’s balance of
payments data is inadequate for policy purposes. The methodology underlying the
compilation of the balance of payments data suffers from the use of outdated benchmark surveys
and deterioration in the coverage and timeliness of some of the data sources needed. The main
recommendations of the mission were as follows:
•

It is urgent to resolve both the inadequate coverage and the delayed reporting of data
on exports and imports of goods. The Department of Customs and Excise (DCE) does not
provide data in a timely fashion. The CBL, therefore, generates its own estimates and there
are significant differences between these estimates and DCE’s data. For example, CBL
believes that DCE is underreporting total imports and has been adjusting the level of
imports upward by 30 percent. There are also differences between the trade data compiled
by the CBL and the BSL.

•

Closer cooperation and new statistical surveys are needed to improve the quality of
data on exports and imports of services. Most of the data on exports of services are based
on outdated benchmark estimates adjusted for movements in Lesotho’s consumer price
index. Data available at the line ministries and other organizations could also be of better
use for estimates of balance of payments variables. Government ministries and the CBL
should cooperate more and make better use of data sources in organizations like the Lesotho
Highlands Development Authority, the Lesotho National Development Corporation, the
South African Reserve Bank, and the Employment Bureau of South Africa.

In general, the authorities need to strengthen their institutional capacity. The CBL should
be given formal institutional responsibility for the compilation of balance of payments statistics.
This work is currently undertaken by the CBL but there is no legislation or official decree that
designates this responsibility. Together with other members of the Common Monetary Area
(CMA), Lesotho’s authorities also need to consider measures to harmonize concepts,
methodology, and data collection for regional balance of payments data. Lesotho participates in
the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and its metadata has been published on the IMF
website since August, 2003.
In connection with the GDDS project for Anglophone Africa, Lesotho has participated in a series
of regional workshops to assist the authorities to plan and implement surveys for the recording of
private capital flows and stocks.

4

3

Gross External Debt

Jan 2005

2003

Q3 2004

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

GDP/GNP

Q3 2004

Jun 2005

Jan 2005

Jan 2005

Jan 2005

Jan 2005

July 2005

July 2005

June 2005

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

5

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government

July 2005

July 2005

June 2005

May 2005

July 2005

July 2005

July 2005

July 2005

July 2005

July 2005

July 2005

Date
received

M

A

Q

Q

M

M

M

M

D

M

M

W

W

W

D

Frequency
of
6
Data

2

Q

A

Q

Q

I

I

I

M

M

M

M

W

W

W

W

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discounts rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)

1

3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General Government

Consumer Price Index

June 2005

June 2005

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

2

June 2005

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Interest Rates

June 2005

Broad Money

June 2005
June 2005

1

July 2005

Date of
latest
observation

Reserve/Base Money

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange Rates

AS OF JULY 25, 2005

LESOTHO: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE

Q

A

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

M

D

M

A

M

M

M

D

Frequency of
6
publication

- 42 APPENDIX III

- 43 -

APPENDIX IV

LESOTHO— EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS23
In the view of Fund and IDA staffs, Lesotho presents a moderate risk of debt distress. Lesotho’s
external debt burden does not appear excessive, as its external debt indicators are projected to
remain well below the relevant indicative thresholds. However, the debt sustainability analysis
highlights the sensitivity to changes in exchange rates and in the terms of new borrowing, as well as
to shocks affecting the country’s narrow export base. In particular, a potentially risky scenario could
emerge in the presence of persistent and severe shocks to garment exports.
The Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) focuses on external debt. Gross domestic public debt is
relatively low, and projected to decline further over the medium term, from 8 percent of GDP at endMarch 2005 to 3 percent by 2010. Moreover, net domestic debt is negative—at minus 4 percent of
GDP, reflecting sizable government deposits.
External debt situation as of end-March 200524
Lesotho’s public and publicly guaranteed external debt as of end-March 2005 stood at
US$721.6 million, equivalent to US$485 million in NPV terms (see Statistical Appendix Table 27.25
Almost 80 percent of this debt was owed to multilateral creditors, mainly IDA (37 percent) and the
African Development Bank (26 percent). The remainder of the debt is split between bilateral and
commercial creditors (13 percent and 9 percent, respectively). Virtually all public and publicly
guaranteed external debt is held by the Central Government, which has taken over the debt incurred
by public entities.
Concerning private sector debt, only the obligations towards countries outside the Common
Monetary Area (CMA) are recorded. At end-March 2005, these obligations were estimated at
US$2.2 million.
Lesotho’s nominal external debt as a share of GDP amounted to 53 percent at end 2004/05,
continuing the declining trend observed in recent years. The share of external debt to GDP declined
from 83 percent in 2002/03 to 63 percent in 2003/04. This reduction is owed to the combined effect
of strong GDP growth, very limited government borrowing, and exchange rate appreciation. The

23

This analysis has been prepared jointly by IDA and IMF staffs using the framework for low-income
countries approved by the Boards of both institutions. Debt figures for IDA, IMF and the African
Development Bank were calculated using loan-by-loan data provided by these creditors. For the remaining
creditors, aggregated data provided by the country authorities were used.

24

Lesotho’s fiscal year runs from April 1st to March 31st.

25

The implicit grant-element of Lesotho’s external debt (33 percent) evidences its highly concessional nature.

- 44 -

APPENDIX IV

latter factor alone accounted for a 20 percentage points decline, with a 50 percent (average)
appreciation relative to the U.S. dollar.
THE BASELINE SCENARIO

The macroeconomic assumptions underlying the baseline scenario are summarized in Box 1.
Box 1. Main assumptions under the baseline scenario
•

Annual real GDP growth is assumed to increase gradually from about 2 percent
during 2005/06-2009/10 to 4½ percent by the end of the projection period. The
latter rate would be above the 3 percent average growth rate recorded over the
past decade, reflecting the beneficial effects of implementation of the PRSP and
other planned structural reforms.

•

Inflation (as measured by the GDP deflator) is projected to stabilize slightly
above 5 percent, broadly in line with experience in recent years.

•

Following the slowdown in the growth of external trade during 2004/05-2007/8,
imports and exports of goods and services and (private and public) transfers are
assumed to grow in line with GDP (in dollar terms). FDI grows slightly more
rapidly.

•

The current account deficit (including official transfers) is determined by the
above trends, rising to about 10 percent of GDP by 2006/07 and broadly
remaining at this level thereafter.

•

Net external public sector financing is assumed to rise to about 2 percent of
GDP by the end of the current decade and then to stabilize at this level. Foreign
grants are assumed to remain stable at about 2 percent of GDP over the
projection period. New borrowing is projected to be contracted on highly
concessional terms during the first half of the projection period; however, as the
country reaches the threshold for eligibility under concessional windows of
financing, it is assumed that the average grant element of new borrowing
gradually decreases from 45 percent to 20 percent by the end of the projection
period.

Private sector debt is projected to increase only marginally in terms of GDP, to
0.6 percent by 2023/24.

- 45 -

APPENDIX IV

Lesotho is classified as a medium performer in terms of the quality of policies and institutions.26 The
indicative thresholds for the debt burden indicators for the countries falling into this category,
proposed under the framework for low-income countries, are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Lesotho: Relevant indicative thresholds for debt burden indicators
(percent)
Ratio
NPV of debt to GDP
NPV of debt to Exports
NPV of debt to Revenue
Debt Service to Exports
Debt Service to Revenue

Relevant
threshold
40
150
250
20
30

Under the baseline, all debt burden indicators remain below their relevant indicative thresholds. In
addition, they stabilize at very low levels despite the deterioration of the terms of new borrowing
assumed for the second half of the projection period. The NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to
decline by about 12 percentage points, from 37 percent as of end 2004/05 to 25 percent by 2023/24.
The significant drop of the ratio observed during the initial years reflects the schedule of repayment
of existing non-concessional obligations, most of which were contracted to finance the Lesotho
Highland Water Project (LWHP). This is mirrored in the evolution of the debt service-to-exports
ratio that increases sharply to 12 percent in 2005/06 and declines steadily thereafter to reach about
3 percent by the end of the projection period. Reflecting the adverse impact of the shocks to garment
exports, the NPV of debt-to-exports ratio increases from 67 percent in 2004/05 to 70 percent in
2005/6. The ratio then follows a gradual decline to 54 percent by 2023/24. Notwithstanding the
shock, the ratio remains well below the indicative threshold of 150 percent.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS

The standard stress tests illustrate Lesotho’s vulnerability to exchange rate changes and to changes in
the terms of financing. However, the debt burden indicators do not breach the relevant thresholds
under any of them. In modeling the standard historical scenario,27 the current account was set to
equal its past level excluding transactions relating to the LHWP, as this project had entailed large
imports that are not part of Lesotho’s regular trade pattern. The results under this scenario are

26

This classification is based on the latest World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment.

27

Where the key variables are assumed to remain at their historical average.

- 46 -

APPENDIX IV

somewhat more positive than the baseline, highlighting the prudence of the baseline assumptions
compared to the country’s historical performance. Under the financing scenario,28 all debt burden
indicators deteriorate without, however, showing an explosive behavior. The impact of a large
depreciation or devaluation is visible in the third and the sixth bound tests. In the latter scenario,
corresponding to a 30 percent nominal depreciation, the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio would exceed to
the 40 percent indicative threshold during most of the projection period (this exercise does not
assume any resultant boost to exports and growth, however).29
An additional test added to the standard battery of tests illustrates the vulnerability to shocks
affecting the country’s narrow export base.30 The additional test assumes that the expansion of textile
exports since 1999 based on the United States’ African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) would
be entirely reversed as of 2006/07. Under this scenario, the export to GDP ratio is assumed to return
to its 1999 level (falling from 60 to 22 percent), the test also incorporates the resultant decline in
GDP. In this—extreme—scenario, all debt indicators would climb to levels above the indicative
thresholds, with the NPV of debt-to-export ratio peaking at more than 200 percent in 2007/08.
STAFFS ASSESSMENT

Based on the findings of this DSA, staffs are of the view that Lesotho faces a moderate risk of debt
distress. Under the baseline scenario, all debt burden indicators are expected to remain below the
relevant policy-indicative thresholds. Stress tests, based on the country’s historical volatility, do not
indicate any breach of the thresholds. However, persistent and particularly severe shocks on the
country’s narrow export base could increase the country’s risk of debt distress to unacceptable levels.
The results of the DSA highlight the need for the authorities to implement sound macroeconomic
policies and structural reforms to materialize the assumptions predicated under the baseline.
Particular emphasis should be given to widening Lesotho’s export base, strengthening its repayment
capacity and reducing its vulnerability to shocks.

28

Which assumes less favorable terms for new borrowing relative to the baseline.

29

Standard bound tests under this framework have been calibrated to represent a 25 percent probability of
occurrence ten years after the shock on the variables is assumed.
30

Test B7 in Table 1b.

...
...
...
...
27.2
27.0
178.0
15.2

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

835.1

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)
709.6

2.8
-17.4
2.3
24.1
-6.5
...

...
...
...
...
12.4
12.3
101.2
4.3

78.4
78.1
7.8
22.9
12.2
4.0
54.0
46.4
100.4
-17.2
-24.6
-3.7
14.4
1.9
-2.4
14.8
-15.0
0.0

2001/02

776.2

3.2
6.0
2.2
27.4
22.9
...

69.3
128.1
69.1
127.8
8.7
8.5
138.1
12.7

82.7
82.5
4.3
8.0
17.0
11.9
58.7
54.1
112.8
-17.2
-24.6
-3.9
-5.1
1.6
-2.3
-4.4
-3.7
0.0

2002/03

1144.7

3.3
42.8
2.1
32.0
28.7
...

45.0
92.9
44.8
92.6
7.5
7.4
107.1
29.4

62.9
62.7
-19.8
-19.8
9.6
5.2
50.0
48.4
98.4
-15.7
-24.7
-3.9
-25.5
1.1
-1.8
-24.8
0.0
0.0

2003/04

1358.6

2.0
16.3
1.7
35.7
24.0
46.0

37.0
66.9
36.9
66.6
6.9
6.6
22.3
11.6

53.3
53.1
-9.6
-11.2
2.0
-0.4
47.5
55.4
102.8
-20.4
-25.1
-4.1
-9.0
0.9
-1.1
-8.8
1.6
0.0

2004/05

0.5

-3.5

3.5
17.5
0.5
16.6
17.0
...

2.3

-18.0

2.8
3.1
2.4
16.0
5.4
...

9.9
4.6

Standard
Deviation 6/

19.3
5.8

Historical
Average 6/

1265.5

-0.7
-6.2
1.8
-11.1
-2.1
50.1

36.9
69.9
36.8
69.6
12.5
12.2
83.1
4.4

54.6
54.4
1.3
1.4
5.7
7.2
55.3
52.8
108.1
-23.0
-26.6
-5.8
1.5
1.1
0.4
…
-0.1
0.0

2005/06

1329.0

2.2
2.8
1.6
3.6
1.6
49.5

34.6
66.3
34.4
66.0
7.9
7.5
98.9
11.0

52.1
51.9
-2.5
3.0
8.6
10.1
52.5
52.1
104.6
-18.0
-25.9
-5.2
-0.3
0.8
-1.1
…
-5.5
0.0

2006/07

1388.0

1.7
2.7
1.4
-1.7
0.6
49.5

32.8
66.9
32.6
66.5
7.6
7.3
94.4
10.6

50.3
50.1
-1.8
2.9
8.8
10.3
51.7
49.0
100.8
-17.8
-25.1
-5.8
-0.1
0.7
-0.8
…
-4.8
0.0

2007/08

1458.9

2.1
3.0
1.4
1.3
2.7
49.6

31.3
66.3
31.1
65.9
6.8
6.5
108.8
11.8

48.5
48.3
-1.8
3.9
10.0
11.5
51.2
47.3
98.4
-16.9
-24.3
-5.8
-0.3
0.7
-1.0
…
-5.7
0.0

2008/09

1544.1

2.5
3.3
1.4
4.3
2.0
49.5

30.2
64.9
30.0
64.5
5.3
5.0
84.0
10.4

47.2
47.0
-1.3
2.5
9.1
10.6
48.3
46.6
94.9
-15.9
-23.3
-6.1
-0.5
0.6
-1.1
…
-3.8
0.0

2009/10

Projections

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Source: Staff simulations.

1.6
-10.5
3.3
13.5
-9.7
...

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

Key macroeconomic assumptions

70.5
70.2
1.1
22.1
16.3
8.4
59.4
31.8
91.2
-15.3
-27.8
-3.7
9.5
2.5
-1.2
8.2
-21.0
0.0

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Excl. LHWP
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2000/01

Actual

Table 1a. Lesotho External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2000-2023 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

1.5
1.1
1.5
-0.7
1.0
49.6

2005-10
Average

2047.4

4.5
3.4
1.3
8.1
8.1
44.1

26.1
56.0
25.9
55.5
4.1
3.8
96.8
10.6

41.3
41.0
-1.4
1.6
9.2
10.7
48.3
46.6
94.9
-15.9
-23.2
-6.4
-1.2
0.5
-1.8
…
-3.0
0.0

2013/14

4455.5

4.5
3.4
2.0
8.1
8.1
14.9

25.3
54.4
25.0
53.6
3.6
3.0
169.1
9.5

34.6
34.2
-0.5
1.3
9.1
10.6
48.3
46.6
94.9
-15.9
-23.3
-7.0
-0.8
0.6
-1.5
…
-1.7
0.0

2023/24

4.3
3.4
1.5
7.9
7.9
33.8

-6.6

-15.9

9.2
10.7

2010-24
Average

- 47 APPENDIX IV

- 48 -

APPENDIX IV

DSA Figure 1. Lesotho Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2003-2023
(In percent)
60

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
50
40
30
20
Baseline
Historical scenario

10

Most extreme stress test

0
2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

2009/10

2011/12

2013/14

2015/16

2017/18

2019/20

2021/22

2023/24

2017/18

2019/20

2021/22

2023/24

2017/18

2019/20

2021/22

2023/24

100

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

90
80
70
60
50
40
30

Baseline

20

Historical scenario

10

Most extreme stress test

0
2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

2009/10

2011/12

2013/14

2015/16

14

Debt service-to-exports ratio
12
10
8
6
4

Baseline
Historical scenario

2

Most extreme stress test

0
2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

2009/10

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

2011/12

2013/14

2015/16

- 49 -

APPENDIX IV

Table 1b. Lesotho Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2004-2023
(In percent)
Projections
2 2004/05

2005/06

2006/07

2007/08

2008/09

2013/14

2023/24

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline

37

37

34

33

31

26

25

37
37

33
37

30
36

27
35

24
34

17
32

18
35

37
37
37
37
37
37
37

37
33
40
43
33
54
53

35
31
45
43
35
51
50

33
29
42
41
33
48
48

32
28
41
39
31
46
45

26
23
34
33
26
38
37

25
24
32
27
26
37
32

67

70

66

67

66

56

54

67
67

63
71

57
69

54
71

50
72

35
68

40
74

67
67
67
67
67
67
67

70
56
70
81
52
70
101

66
55
66
82
49
66
199

67
55
67
83
49
67
202

66
54
66
83
49
66
200

56
46
56
70
41
56
163

54
48
54
58
42
54
142

7

12

8

7

7

4

3

7
7

10
12

7
8

6
8

5
7

3
5

2
5

7
7
7
7
7
7
7

12
10
12
12
10
12
34

8
7
8
8
6
8
22

7
7
7
8
6
7
21

6
6
6
7
5
6
19

4
3
4
5
3
4
11

3
3
3
4
2
3
9

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
B7. Loss of trade preferences (export ratio returning in 2005 to 1999 level) 6/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
B7. Loss of trade preferences (export ratio returning in 2005 to 1999 level) 6/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
B7. Loss of trade preferences (export ratio returning in 2005 to 1999 level) 6/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 7/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ This test was added for Lesotho, and is not part of the standard set of bound tests.
7/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
September 19, 2005
The following information has become available since issuance of the staff report on
August 18, 2005. The thrust of the staff’s assessment remains unchanged.
•

Consumer price inflation fell to 3.1 percent in June 2005, about 0.5 percentage points
lower than the inflation rate at end March, 2005.

•

The loti exchange rate against the US dollar moved from 6.65 at the end of June to
6.3 in the first week of September, moderating the exchange rate depreciation of the
first half of 2005. The effective yield on treasury bills declined further, from
7.7 percent in March to 6.9 percent in June, while the savings deposit rate remained
unchanged during the period.

•

Gross international reserves rose from US$508 million, representing 4.5 months of
import coverage at end-March, to US$548 million at end-June, representing
4.8 months of import coverage.

•

The signing of the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) compact in July was
followed by the launching, in September, of feasibility studies for the various
programs and projects envisaged under the compact.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/134
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
September 29, 2005
Corrected: 1/6/06

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation
with Lesotho
On September 19, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Lesotho.1
Background
Real GDP growth weakened to about 2 percent in 2004/05, from over 3 percent in the
preceding two years, mainly due to the impact of adverse shocks affecting manufacturing and
agriculture. The slowdown in manufacturing reflected the appreciation of the real exchange rate
(by 30 percent) since February 2002, uncertainty regarding Lesotho’s duty free access to the
U.S. market under the U.S. African Growth and Opportunity Act, and the elimination of textile
quotas in January 2005. Agricultural output declined due to a prolonged drought in the past
three years, as well as structural weaknesses, such as poor farming techniques, soil erosion,
lack of water in the lowlands, and lack of agro-financing. Over one quarter of the population is
estimated to be in need of emergency food assistance.
In line with trends in South Africa, the CPI-based annual inflation rate declined from 7.7 percent
at end-March 2003 to 3.7 percent at end-March 2005, notwithstanding increases in oil import
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.

-2prices. The unemployment rate is estimated at 30 percent, and the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate
has remained high (at about 29 percent of the adult population).
The overall fiscal balance (including grants) has turned from a deficit to an increasing surplus in
the last two fiscal years. The large fiscal surplus of 9.1 percent of GDP in 2004/05 reflected
mainly the temporary rise in receipts from the South African Customs Union. Domestic revenue
collection has improved since the launching of the Lesotho Revenue Authority. On the
expenditure side, current outlays particularly salaries and wages, were lower than projected, as
the new local government administration did not take off during the fiscal year as earlier
envisaged.
Monetary developments have reflected those in South Africa. The discount rate has held steady
since August 2004, market yields on Treasury-bills have moved downward, influenced by the
fall in the government borrowing requirement, and spreads relative to South Africa have
narrowed to less than 40 basis points as of end-March 2005.
During 2003/04 and 2004/05, the external current account deficit narrowed from 11 percent of
GDP to less than 3 percent, mainly owing to considerable export growth and a sharp rise in
South African Customs Union (SACU) receipts in 2004/05. Remittances from South Africa also
increased. These developments have led to an increase in the central bank’s foreign reserves,
which reached 4.5 months of imports of goods and services by end-March 2005.
Lesotho’s debt indicators have improved markedly. With the strengthening of its fiscal position,
the government reduced the stock of outstanding Treasury bills from 17 percent of GDP in
2002/03 to 8 percent in 2004/05. Lesotho’s external public debt as a share of GDP has declined
from 83 percent of GDP at end-March 2003 to 53 percent two years later, largely due to
exchange rate appreciation. In net present value terms, the stock has fallen below 40 percent of
GDP.
The authorities have strengthened their efforts to address poverty and HIV/AIDS. They have
prepared a Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) through a highly participatory process involving
the private sector, civil society and the donor community. The PRS identifies key areas that are
important for making progress toward the Millennium Development Goals. Particular attention
has recently been paid to strengthening institutional and implementation capacity to speed up
the use of government and donor funding for the fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors welcomed the marked improvement in the economic performance of
Lesotho over the past two fiscal years, with a lower fiscal deficit, a stronger external current
account position, a further decline in inflation, and an increase in net international reserves.
The authorities’ prudent policies had helped to contain government debt at manageable levels.
However, persistent drought conditions, weakened external competitiveness, a continued
worsening of the terms of trade, and job losses from the phasing out of textile quotas by
industrial countries had caused real GDP growth to slow in 2004/5. Against this background,

-3Directors considered that finding the basis for consistent high growth over the medium term,
to help address widespread poverty, achieve the Millennium Development Goals, and confront
the high incidence of HIV/AIDS, will be the primary challenge for the authorities in the period
ahead.
Directors observed that the further loss of trade preferences, declining revenues from the South
African Customs Union SACU, and contraction of inward remittances from migrant workers
were likely to be durable economic shocks. They considered that faster economic growth in the
future is therefore likely to depend on raising efficiency and broadening the production and
export base. In that light, Directors urged the authorities to implement ambitious structural
reforms aimed at restoring competitiveness and fostering private sector development.
Directors observed that, as Lesotho’s membership in the Common Monetary Area constrains
the use of the monetary policy lever, an appropriate fiscal policy will be the key to preserving
financial viability. They recommended limiting future fiscal deficits to levels that can be financed
largely by foreign grants and concessional loans. Also, the government’s net creditor position
vis-à-vis the banking system should be maintained, and the official net international reserve
position protected. Directors noted that a continued prudent fiscal stance will provide room to
expand credit to the private sector without pushing domestic interest rates higher than those
prevailing in South Africa.
Given the decline in receipts from SACU, Directors called for a strengthening of revenues
through a broadening of the tax base and improved tax administration. They encouraged the
authorities to proceed with their plans to upgrade the hardware and provide training to the staff
of the Lesotho Revenue Authority, to implement the planned Automated System for Customs
Data project, and ensure that government entities comply with VAT payment and refund
procedures.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ efforts to strengthen the execution, monitoring and
evaluation of public expenditure programs, which will support the alignment of expenditures with
poverty reduction strategy priorities and the phase-out of nonpriority outlays. They emphasized
the importance of ensuring that planned increases in outlays for poverty reduction are
consistent with medium-term fiscal sustainability and the absorptive capacity, and take into
account the recurrent cost implications of such spending. Directors encouraged the authorities
to expedite implementation of the Public Sector Reform and Improvement Program so as to
contain the public sector wage bill and improve public services.
Directors welcomed the progress made in strengthening the institutional framework to address
the incidence of HIV/AIDS, especially the steps taken to improve the management and
coordination of HIV/AIDS-related programs and to set up monitoring and evaluation systems.
They encouraged the authorities to accelerate similar efforts in the other priority areas related to
poverty reduction.
Directors stressed that, in order to promote private sector-led growth, a comprehensive
structural reform agenda needs to be formulated and implemented without delay. Key reforms

-4should aim to enhance labor productivity through training and skill-enhancing programs,
address bottlenecks in infrastructure and public service delivery, eliminate the legal and
administrative impediments to investment, and promote financial intermediation through the
removal of legal obstacles to bank lending.
Directors supported the authorities’ objective of strengthening regional trade and investment
links, especially with South Africa, through structural reforms and sectoral strategies,
which could help to diversify Lesotho’s export products and markets. In this context,
they advised the authorities to avoid creating subsidies for certain sectors that could distort
incentives, entail large fiscal costs, or weaken fiscal transparency and accountability.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report for the Article IV consultation with
Lesotho may be made available at a later stage if the authorities consent.

-5-

Lesotho: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1/
2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

Est.
2004/05

Proj.
2005/06

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
Real Economy
GDP at 2003 prices
GDP at current market prices (in millions of maloti)
Consumer price index (period average)

2.8
6,766
9.2

3.2
7,564
9.6

3.3
8,251
6.4

2.0
8,644
4.3

-0.7
8,771
5.0

National Accounts
Gross Domestic Investment
Gross national savings
Foreign Saving

40.8
26.7
14.1

42.9
24.3
18.6

40.5
29.8
10.8

34.9
32.1
2.8

35.4
28.9
6.6

Central Government
Revenue and grants
Revenue
Total grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance

44.0
41.2
2.8
43.4
-2.2
0.6

44.0
40.1
3.9
48.4
-8.3
-4.3

43.8
41.7
2.2
43.1
-1.4
0.8

47.2
44.6
2.6
43.5
6.5
9.1

54.7
51.6
3.1
49.9
1.9
5.0

-68.5

73.4

16.5

-27.8

-4.1

3.7
-6.0
17.0

15.0
-45.8
2.7

-5.8
16.0
5.3

-27.8
8.8
6.2

-7.4
4.3
2.8

Money and credit
Domestic assets (net) 2/
Of which
Government 2/
Rest of the economy 3/
Money and quasi-money (M2)

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
External sector
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
External debt 4/
External debt-service ratio 5/
Gross official reserves (end of period)
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
(In months of imports of goods and services)

-30.8
-14.1
78.1
17.8

-35.1
-18.6
82.5
11.8

-25.7
-10.8
62.7
9.1

-22.2
-2.8
53.1
7.3

-28.4
-6.6
55.2
12.5

399.7
4.3

408.4
4.3

436.9
3.8

507.7
4.5

474.4
4.1

Sources: Lesotho authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/

Fiscal year beginning in April.
Change in percent of M2 at the beginning of the period.
Credit to the rest of the economy affected by a write-off of bad loans in 2002/03.
Government only. The appreciation of the loti had a significant effect on the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2003/04.
In percent of exports of goods and services.

Statement by Peter Ngumbullu, Executive Director for the Kingdom of Lesotho
and Joseph Kanu, Advisor to Executive Director
September 19, 2005
1.

Introduction

On behalf of the Kingdom of Lesotho authorities, we thank Management and staff for their
continued involvement and support and for the technical assistance provided. Lesotho’s
macroeconomic performance over the years has consistently improved, largely as a result of
the authorities’ commitment to ensure that their macroeconomic objectives are achieved.
Going forward, the authorities are keen on implementing policies aimed at promoting
sustainable economic growth, improving the delivery of public services as well as the
investment environment. The authorities have identified several key areas for development in
the recently concluded PRSP, to guide the country’s vision and efforts towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals.
2.

Recent Economic Developments

Lesotho has continued to record improvements in its overall financial situation, despite a
mixed macroeconomic performance and sluggish real economic activity. However, marked
improvements have been experienced in the fiscal and external current account positions,
with a decline in inflation and a substantial increase in international reserves. Domestic and
foreign debts have been contained at manageable levels. The appreciation of the exchange
rate, however, has impacted on economic growth, coupled with the phasing out of textile
quotas by industrial countries, thereby resulting in declining terms of trade. These adverse
developments have been compounded by the cumulative effects of external shocks on
manufacturing and the ongoing drought on agricultural output.
The overall fiscal balance has during the past years, shown a surplus reflecting a 6.1
percentage points increase of GDP in SACU receipts arising from the 2002 revision of
import data. As Lesotho is a member of the CMA, monetary developments reflected those in
South Africa. The fall in the domestic borrowing requirement by government has led to a
downward movement of market yield on treasury bills. The interest rate spread also
narrowed, while banks’ financial soundness remains strong. In addition, the authorities will
submit the draft anti-money laundering legislation to Parliament this year, while
implementation of the recommendations of the 2001 FSAP has commenced.
There has been significant reduction in the external current account deficit accompanied by a
corresponding increase in net international reserves. This was facilitated by several factors
including a boost in exports, the reopening of a diamond mine, rise in SACU receipts and a
strong flow of remittances from Lesotho’s migrant workers in South Africa. These effects
have been able to offset the adverse impact of a worsening terms of trade. There has also
been a marked improvement in debt indicators due to the strengthening of the fiscal situation.
However, the share of external public debt to GDP fell to 53 percent in 2005 from 83 percent

-2in 2003, due to exchange rate appreciation thereby resulting in the net present value of debt
declining to below 40 percent of GDP.
The authorities have made more efforts towards tackling poverty and the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. Important reforms have also been identified in the PRS, while more efforts are
being taken towards achievement of the MDGs. The authorities have aligned the budget with
the PRS and have taken measures to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity.
3.

Medium and Long-Term Outlook, Challenges and Strategy

The authorities are cognisant of the country’s vulnerability to a range of potential and
permanent adverse developments over the medium term as well as the cumulative impact of
several shocks, that include the erosion of trade preferences and the real effective
appreciation of the exchange rate. In this context, they are committed to taking actions to
deal with the ongoing challenges facing the country. They will implement measures to
address immediate trade shocks, consolidate the gains already achieved in macroeconomic
stability, and promote both domestic and external private sector development. A strong
export diversification strategy that will generate higher growth and reduce the country’s
vulnerability to external shocks will be pursued. Because of the urgency in restoring external
competitiveness, the authorities will endeavor to maintain exchange rate parity in view of the
benefits arising from the CMA and the intimacy of trade and financial ties with South Africa.
Heavy reliance will be placed on structural reforms to ensure achievement of strengthened
competitiveness. The authorities will also embark on implementation of the second mediumterm scenario as identified by staff to achieve the above objectives.
Fiscal Policy
The burden of safeguarding macroeconomic stability under the exchange rate parity
arrangement will fall on fiscal policy. In view of this, the authorities will address the
envisaged weakening of the fiscal position in the immediate and medium term. The
authorities are aware of the potential for the country’s underlying revenue performance to
deteriorate with weaker economic growth. The increase in civil service wages would result
in an expected 5 percent increase in individual income tax threshold and increased
expenditures. As a result, the authorities will maintain an overall balance consistent with
macroeconomic stability, which will include repayment of two high interest rate loans to
reduce the burden on future debt service. In the event that any domestic financing of fiscal
deficits in excess of grants and concessional loans could weaken the external current account
and worsen the reserve position, efforts will be made to minimize loss of foreign exchange
reserves. The authorities will also limit fiscal deficits over the medium term to 2-3 percent of
GDP and will undertake a periodic review of this position based on realistic assessments of
the country’s prospects for mobilizing grants and concessional loans. This includes the
potential for any domestic financing that will be raised in the case that demand for
expenditure increases. In addition, the authorities will implement other measures that will
include strengthening revenue mobilization, while pursuing reforms in the allocation
mechanism of the development component of SACU in view of the concerns raised by the
poorest members.

-3-

External Sector Policies and the Monetary framework
The current exchange rate parity has facilitated regional trade and progress is expected to be
made towards achieving fiscal and monetary discipline as well as reduce inflationary
pressures. Because of the weakening of external competitiveness due to large adverse
exogenous exchange rate movements that were not offset by wage adjustments, the
authorities, in association with other CMA partners will also take action to modify the
common exchange rate arrangements to promote long-term growth in smaller member
countries. They will also implement sound macroeconomic policies that would include
prudent fiscal restraints and structural reforms that will enhance competitiveness. In addition,
the authorities will continue to maintain an open trade and exchange system, in view of the
fact that trade policies are largely dictated through the SACU arrangements.
As the exchange rate is at par with the South African rand, there is currently no space for the
authorities in determining monetary policy. This implies a virtual absence of exchange
controls on capital movements within CMA. Given this development, the authorities are
determined to have an indicative monetary policy framework for the current period that will
target international reserves which are currently at about four months of imports. This would
include projections for money demand, while taking into account projected declines in real
GDP and inflation. The authorities are fully aware of the benefits of such a mechanism in
determining the limits to be observed especially with regards to net domestic assets and net
creditor position of government in the banking system. More prudence will be undertaken to
lower the NPV of external debt below the 40 percent of GDP threshold, currently an
appropriate indicative threshold for the debt to GDP ratio.
Structural Reforms
The authorities will continue to implement measures that will increase labor productivity and
contain domestic cost pressures. In view of the current high unemployment in the
manufacturing sector, they will ensure that parties involved in wage negotiations are
encouraged to take into account productivity and terms of trade movements. They will also
continue to exercise constraints on any increases in public sector wages to avoid spill-over
effects in the economy. In order to stimulate production and eliminate further declines in
employment, the authorities will provide subsidies to the textile sector, that will be properly
designed to protect against any downside risks. Such action will be weighed against the
expected benefits in investment flows, output and employment. The investment climate will
be improved to further attract foreign investment and will entail accelerating reforms that
will eliminate legal and regulatory impediments towards private sector development,
including improvements in infrastructure facilities and completion of the privatization of the
Lesotho Electricity Corporation (LEC).
The authorities will also strengthen institutional framework for the development, execution,
monitoring, and evaluation of new programs for scaling up poverty reduction expenditures.
They will continue to pursue public-private partnerships, aimed at improving infrastructure
and public service delivery in health and education sectors.

-4Financial Sector Issues
The authorities will implement measures that will lead to improvements in the financial
sector, especially with regards to enabling competition and private sector access to bank
credit. They will develop a three-tier banking system that will consist of foreign-owned
banks, local cooperatives and small banks, and microfinance institutions. Measures will also
be taken to strengthen banking regulation, amend the Matrimonial and Land Acts, and
remove obstacles to bank lending as well as ensure a proper and well functioning payments
system that will involve revision of the current legislation and facilitate electronic transfer
payments.
4.

The PRS Process

The authorities are fully aware that the PRS is an important step toward sustained growth and
poverty reduction in the country as well as meeting the MDGs. The process has been
conducted through broad based consultations with key stakeholders and civil society. The
authorities have fully outlined their priorities with a program of actions that has facilitated
preparation of a set of cost matrices and performance indicators. The key limitations and
risks to the PRS relate to its operationalization, possible further shocks to the economy and
governance. Given the goals and objectives identified in the PRS, the authorities are ready
and committed to transfer this into actual work plans. They will also exercise expenditure
restraints as dictated by the fiscal framework, especially in non-priority areas that have been
identified. There will be improvements in monitoring and evaluation which will help to
identify existing capacity constraints in the public sector.
While ensuring that these challenges are overcome and risks mitigated, the authorities will
give priority to developing and implementing a comprehensive medium-term
macroeconomic framework and an action plan for sustained growth to address external
vulnerability and competitiveness concerns. In addition, the authorities will address the
designation of an action plan to improve the allocation of resources and public expenditure
management, including civil service reform and address the HIV/AIDS pandemic more
vigorously.
5.

Conclusion

The authorities have taken appropriate measures to ensure achievement of macroeconomic
objectives. Given this development, the authorities have expressed strong interest in
continued Fund involvement and support through capacity building and technical assistance.
They are requesting Fund assistance and involvement in crucial areas of fiscal and public
resource management, financial sector reform and prudential supervision, as well as the
designing of an appropriate macroeconomic framework. They have also shown interest in
securing the necessary assistance in drafting an appropriate law for electronic banking,
review of the study conducted to determine an adequate level of foreign reserves and
provision of field training to personnel in financial programming.

