December 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/446

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Sri Lanka: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Sri Lanka
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on October 25, 2006, with the officials of Sri Lanka on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on October 10, 2006. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF;

•

a staff statement of October 25, 2006 updating information on recent developments;

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its October 25, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation; and

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Sri Lanka.

The document listed below will be separately released.
Selected Issues
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SRI LANKA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2006 Article IV Consultation with Sri Lanka
Approved by Wanda Tseng and Mark Plant
October 10, 2006
•

Dates: July 3–17, 2006

•

Team: Ms. Liu (Head), Ms. Ruiz-Arranz, Ms. Wandwasi (all APD), Ms. Rahman (PDR),
Mr. Lopez Murphy (FAD). Messrs. Valdivieso (Senior Resident Representative), Narain (MFD)
and Coady (FAD) assisted the mission. Messrs. Misra and Herat (both OED) also participated in
the discussions.

•

Sri Lanka representatives: The Finance Secretary, the Governor of the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka, and other senior government officials, as well as representatives from opposition
parties, the private sector, the donor community, NGOs, and labor unions. The mission also met
with President Mahinda Rajapaksa.

•

Previous arrangements: The three-year PRGF and EFF arrangements, approved in April 2003
for SDR 413 million (SDR 59 million disbursed), expired without completion of the first review.
On January 13, 2005, the Executive Board approved the extension of repurchase expectations
arising in the remainder of 2005 (SDR 74 million) and on March 4, 2005, approved a purchase
under the Fund’s Emergency Assistance Policy for Natural Disasters (SDR 103 million).

•

Previous Article IV consultation: Directors encouraged the authorities to implement
tsunami-related relief and reconstruction work in an effective and transparent manner by
mobilizing donor assistance. Macroeconomic policies should be tightened to maintain
macroeconomic and financial stability, and structural reforms are also needed to address
Sri Lanka’s longer-term challenges, including a complex tax system, labor market rigidities, poor
infrastructure, and an underdeveloped capital market. (A summary of the Executive Board
discussion can be found at www.imf.org.)

•

Statistics: Adequate for conducting effective surveillance. A subscriber to GDDS.

•

Exchange rate: Managed float.

•

Exchange system: Sri Lanka maintains requirements that importers of certain goods deposit
margin with commerial banks (described in Appendix III) that give rise to an exchange restriction
inconsistent with Article VIII, Section 2(a) of the Fund’s Articles. Staff is looking into whether
the exchange restriction warrants approval in accordance with Fund policies.*

∗

On November 9, 2006, the Fund approved the retention of the exchange restriction until
November 2, 2007 or the completion of the next Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka,
whichever comes earlier.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I. Introduction..........................................................................................................................4
II. Recent Developments ..........................................................................................................5
III. Policy Discussions ...............................................................................................................8
A. Outlook and Risks..........................................................................................................8
B. Fiscal Policy...................................................................................................................9
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ........................................................................12
D. Financial Sector Policies..............................................................................................13
E. Structural Policies ........................................................................................................14
IV. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................17
Boxes
1. Exchange Rate Assessment and External Competitiveness ................................................7
2. Challenges with Tax Revenue Mobilization......................................................................11
3. State-Owned Banks............................................................................................................15
Figures
1. Real, Fiscal, and Monetary Sector Developments.............................................................20
2. Financial and External Sector Developments....................................................................21
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–2006........................................................................22
2. Balance of Payments, 2005–2010......................................................................................23
3 Monetary Accounts, 2003–2006........................................................................................24
4. Summary of Central Government Operations, 2004–2010 ...............................................25
5. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2005–2010..................................................26
6. Vulnerability Indicators, 2001–2005 .................................................................................27
7. Projected Payments to the Fund, 2006–2010.....................................................................28
8. Millennium Development Goals........................................................................................29
Appendixes
1. Tsunami Relief and Reconstruction Update ......................................................................30
2. Debt Sustainability Analysis..............................................................................................32
3. Fund Relations ...................................................................................................................41
4. Relations with the World Bank Group ..............................................................................43
5. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ....................................................................48
6. Statistical Issues.................................................................................................................50
7. Public Information Notice .................................................................................................54

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
•

Notwithstanding an escalation of hostilities, Sri Lanka’s economy has continued to
show resilience. Military confrontations between the government forces and the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in the North and East have intensified recently, and progress
to settle the conflict through multi-party negotiations remains limited. With only minor
interruptions in most parts of the country, growth is projected at 7 percent. Financial
markets have remained calm, though investor confidence has been somewhat weakened by
increased uncertainties.

•

Growth has accelerated since mid-2005, reflecting in part tsunami-related
reconstruction efforts. This was initially accompanied by large capital inflows and lower
inflation. More recently, however, while strong growth brightens the near term outlook,
inflation has been rising, coupled with a slowdown in capital inflows and a rise in the debt
service burden. Continued fast credit growth and a further increase in world oil prices are
key risks, which may intensify the underlying imbalances. The high debt level and
relatively low international reserves also add to vulnerabilities.

•

Macroeconomic policies in the near term should be geared toward reducing inflation
expectations and external vulnerabilities. Meeting the 2006 budget deficit target is
appropriate to limit stimulus, and further interest rate adjustments may also be required to
contain inflation. These policies should be supported by greater flexibility in the exchange
rate to help safeguard external reserves and maintain competitiveness.

•

Over the medium term, the authorities aim to reduce poverty through raising
potential growth. This will require fundamental reforms to improve the business climate
and promote private investment.
o Fiscal consolidation. The authorities stressed their commitment to bring the fiscal
deficit down to 5 percent by 2010, which is essential for debt sustainability. This is best
achieved through revenue enhancing policies and rationalization of current spending to
protect critical development projects. The recent decision to implement the full passthrough of oil prices has removed a significant component of fiscal vulnerability. Other
concrete measures, however, remain to be spelled out in the 2007 budget.
o Banking reform. Significant progress has been made to improve financial stability, but
challenges remain, particularly in the two large state-owned banks. Fast credit growth
could also undermine loan quality. An FSAP update will help reflect new challenges
and vulnerabilities and prepare the system for the transition toward Basel II in 2008.
o Infrastructure development. Power bottlenecks, high energy cost, and large quasi-fiscal
losses remain key constraints on growth. The authorities are implementing a new energy
policy which aims at expanding capacity, employing low-cost alternative sources, and
adjusting prices to help remove quasi-fiscal losses. Financing of this policy, however,
implies an increase in commercial borrowing over the medium term. To ensure debt
sustainability, critical steps will need to be taken to improve debt management, enforce
a sound regulatory environment for private investors, and develop capital markets.

4
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Notwithstanding decades of civil conflict, Sri Lanka’s economy has shown
resilience. Growth performance has improved from an average of 4–5 percent in the
1980−90s to 6–7 percent recently. From
Gross National Income Per Capita 1/
a regional perspective, Sri Lanka’s
(Index: 1990=100)
500
growth in income per capita has
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Sri Lanka
markedly exceeded the pace of its
400
Vietnam
neighbors since the early 1990s,
300
reaching $1,000 in 2004, and helping to
200
lift thousands out of poverty. The
human development index and other
100
non-income social indicators have also
0
improved over time, and they are now
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators .
far ahead of those in other South Asian
1/ Atlas method.
economies. However, income inequality
has deteriorated in the last few years,1 rural poverty remains high, and the urban-rural
poverty gap and regional growth disparities widened. Meeting some of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) continues to be a challenge.

2004

Selected Social Indicators in Asia
Sri Lanka
Human development index rank 1/
Life expectency at birth 2/
Adult literacy rate 2/
Reduction in infant mortality 2/
(from 1970; per 1,000 live births) 1/
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 2/
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (in percent) 3/

Nepal

China

India

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Pakistan

93
74
91

136
62
49

85
71
91

127
63
61

139
63
...

134
64
...

135
65
50

52
12
25

104
59
42

55
26
5

64
62
29

99
...
50

86
...
...

39
80
33

Source: Human Development Report 2005 , UNDP; and World Development Indicators , World Bank.
1/ 2003 data.
2/ 2004 data.
3/ 1990 to 2002 from the Human Development Report for the most recent year available in each country.

2.
President Rajapaksa’s government has placed a strong emphasis on reducing
poverty through raising economic growth over the medium term. This is to be achieved
by increasing growth to 8 percent, supported by a sharp increase in investment, especially in
infrastructure (power and roads). The strategy also emphasizes the need to reduce regional
inequalities, create income-generating activities to assist the poor, and promote small and
medium enterprise development, along with a new energy policy to increase power
generation while reducing its cost. A Development Forum is being planned for early 2007.
1

See Chapter VI, Regional Economic Outlook, Asia and Pacific Department, September 2006. The Gini index
for Sri Lanka increased by about 10 Gini points (the highest among the 18 Asian countries).

5
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
3.
Since late 2005, there has been a sharp escalation in hostilities between the
government and the LTTE. The peace talks in June failed in the last minute, bringing the
four-year ceasefire close to collapse and raising fears of a return to a full-scale civil war. The
authorities have made further efforts to settle the conflict through multi-party negotiations.
More recently, both sides communicated their willingness to resume peace talks during
October 28−29 through their facilitators. While this has raised cautious optimism, risks
remain. The intensity of fighting, in particular, continues to pose a threat to the peace efforts.
4.
The economy has shown strong resilience, with growth reaching 8 percent in the
first half of 2006, but inflationary pressures are building (Table 1, Figure 1). Improved
agricultural performance, strong tsunami-reconstruction activities, and robust service sector
growth, helped mitigate the impact of rising oil prices and the removal of export quotas for
textiles and apparel. GDP growth is projected at 7 percent for 2006, reflecting some easing in
the second half of 2006 in an environment of rising interest rates and high oil prices.
Inflation declined in 2005, but has risen since early 2006 reflecting pressures from fast credit
growth, the impact of the oil price pass-through, and increases in wages and pension
payments.2 Unemployment has declined to 7¾ percent at end-2005 (from 8½ percent in
2004), indicating a possible gradual tightening in the labor market. CPI inflation is projected
at 12 percent for 2006.
5.
The external current account deficit has been widening, and reserves are below
comfortable levels. Despite robust growth in exports and remittances, the oil shock and
strong non-oil (intermediate and capital goods) imports are expected to widen the current
account deficit to 4¾ percent of GDP in 2006 (from 2.8 percent of GDP in 2005) (Table 2,
Figure 2).3 Tsunami-related inflows amounted to about $1 billion (including the debt
moratorium and the Fund’s Emergency Assistance) in 2005, equivalent to 4 percent of GDP.
An additional $450 million tsunami-related inflows is projected in 2006, but the actual
disbursements have so far been slow (Appendix I). With the debt service burden rising (due
in part to the expiration of the Paris Club moratorium), the government has resorted to
foreign currency borrowing from domestic banks (through syndication) and to the issuance
of domestic dollar-denominated bonds to buffer the balance of payments. Gross official
reserves have been hovering around $2.4 billion, equivalent to 2.4 months of imports and
86 percent of short-term debt. The rupee-dollar exchange rate has weakened somewhat since
2

Food-based CPI (70 percent of the total weight) increased by 7 percent during January-July 2006, while
nonfood CPI increased by 17 percent, with sub-components in electricity, fuel products, and transportation
rising by an average of 25 percent, reflecting mainly the impact of oil price pass-through during April-July.
3

See Chapter I of the selected issues, “Macroeconomic Challenges of High Oil Prices in the South Asian
Region.”

6
the second half of 2005. Reflecting high domestic inflation relative to trading partners, the
real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by 2 percent during the same period
(Box 1).
6.
Despite monetary policy tightening, credit growth remains high. The central bank
raised its policy rate five times (cumulative 2 percentage points) during November 2004December 2005, and by another 1 percentage point recently. Reserve money growth was
brought down to below 15 percent at end-March 2006 (from 20 percent a year ago), but this
trend has reversed since April reflecting increased central bank financing of the budget.
Credit growth to the private sector (including housing loans) remains strong (about
24 percent in June), contributing to demand pressures (Table 3).
7.
The 2005 fiscal deficit widened to 8.7 percent of GDP, larger than budgeted,
mainly because of tsunami-related spending. Excluding tsunami-related flows, the budget
deficit was contained at 7.5 percent of GDP (compared to 8.2 percent of GDP in 2004).
Revenue increased, reversing the downward trend of previous years. But there were large
overruns in oil subsidies and in the wage bill,4 which were offset by cuts in other recurrent
expenditures and a reduction in interest payments to protect capital spending (Table 4).
8.
The fiscal deficit in the first half of 2006 was contained through adjustment of
capital expenditures. Tax revenue grew at a healthy 23 percent, but still fell short of the
budget target of 27 percent growth. There have been sizable overruns on recurrent
expenditure, emerging from larger than budgeted oil subsidies and pensions, as well as
additional security and humanitarian spending. However, a generous capital budget provided
scope for adjustment (in line with project execution) and helped to contain the deficit.
Excluding tsunami-related spending (1.7 percent of GDP), the budget deficit target would be
7.4 percent of GDP (similar to the actual in 2005). With slower than expected
tsunami-related disbursements, domestic financing of the budget in the first six months
reached Rs. 101 billion, compared with the budget estimate of Rs. 123 billion for the year.
9.
Total public debt declined by 11 percent of GDP, but remains high at 94 percent
of GDP in 2005. Moreover, liquidity pressures are building. Out of the total $935 million
foreign currency borrowing from domestic banks and local investors during 2004–05, about
$780 million will need to be repaid in 2006 ($300 million of which in the last quarter).
Sri Lanka was given its first international credit rating by Fitch (BB-) in December 2005, on
par with Vietnam, Indonesia, Brazil, and Turkey. But with renewed security concerns, Fitch

4

This resulted from a 20 percent wage hike and the hiring of over 42,000 graduates to public services.

7

Box 1. Sri Lanka: Exchange Rate Assessment and External Competitiveness
Indicators of Sri Lanka’s external competitiveness warrant close monitoring.

•

•

Export volume growth appears to be moderating,
including in the garments sector. With the
elimination of the textiles quota, Sri Lanka’s export
growth in garments and textiles (45 percent of total
goods exports) slowed to 3 percent in 2005 as
compared to that of Bangladesh and Vietnam, which
were at 15 percent and 12 percent, respectively. It is
not clear to what extent this reflects underlying trends
versus short-term fluctuations—garments industry
representatives report strong order books, a growing
niche market for Sri Lankan apparels, and increased
backward linkages which would reduce costs and
turnover periods. Furthermore, Sri Lanka has
maintained its competitive edge in tea and spice
exports, which accounts for about 15 percent of total
exports.

Jan-06

Jul-05

Oct-05

Apr-05

Jan-05

Jul-04

Oct-04

Apr-04

Jan-04

Jul-03

Oct-03

Apr-03

Jul-02

Jan-03

Unit labor costs in industry appear to be
increasing and profitability decreasing.
Productivity growth in industry in 2005 declined by
5.6 percent which, together with increases in firm’s
costs arising from higher domestic interest rates,
oil prices, and wages (from public-sector wage
spillover effects) point toward declining profitability.

Oct-02

•

Apr-02

Sri Lanka’s real effective exchange rate (REER) is in the middle range compared with its main
regional competitors (see figure). The REER (CPI
Regional Real Effective Exchange Rates
based) depreciated by 23 percent during 1998–2004
110
before appreciating by 8 percent in the first half of
2005, following pledges of tsunami aid from donors
100
(Figure 2). There was a further appreciation of
2 percent in the next 12 months up to June 2006,
90
resulting mainly from higher relative price
Bangladesh
differentials. Given the extent of the previous
Vietnam
80
Sri Lanka (SLCPI based)
Pakistan
depreciation, this recent appreciation is not of
India
immediate concern but bears monitoring.
70
Jan-02

•

Regional Export Volume Growth
30.0
25.0
20.0

India
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Vietnam

15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

-5.0
-10.0

Regional Share of Export
(In percent of world export)
0.100

0.165

0.095

0.160

0.090

0.155

0.085
0.080

0.150

0.075

0.145

0.070

0.140

0.065

Sri Lanka (left scale)
Bangladesh (right scale)
Pakistan (right scale)

0.060
0.055

0.135
0.130

0.050

0.125
2000

2001

Source: IMF DOTS.

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sri Lanka’s market share in world exports
appears to be declining. Sri Lanka’s share in total world exports (0.06 percent) declined by 27 percent
during 2000–05, mainly from a loss of market share in the United States and EU. Over the same period,
Bangladesh and Pakistan’s share in total world exports was broadly maintained at 0.08 percent and
0.13 percent, respectively. This deteriorating trade performance reflects in part structural weaknesses and
political vulnerabilities particular to Sri Lanka which have affected FDI and business sentiment, and in part to
competition from rapidly growing Chinese and Indian exports.

8
downgraded the country outlook for Sri Lanka to negative (from stable). The government
decided to put the planned global bond issuance on hold and instead raised $580 million of
dollar-denominated Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDB) during April-September 2006.
The bonds carried a maturity of 2–3 years and an average interest rate of LIBOR+140 bps.
10.
Sri Lanka’s financial markets have been holding up despite increased security
concerns and volatility in international financial markets. The Colombo Stock Exchange
(CSE) has become one of the best performers in the region. The All Share Price Index rose
by a cumulative 70 percent during 2004–05, and is up by another 25 percent so far in 2006,
owing to a large extent to the performance of the telecommunication industry and the
financial sector. The average P/E ratio of 12 is similar to those in Bangladesh and Pakistan,
but lower than in India. The decline during the emerging market sell-off in May was modest
(by only 2.5 percent), reflecting in part investor optimism over the near-term economic
outlook, as well as the lack of alternative channels for other high yield investments in
Sri Lanka.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS

Jul-06

Aug-06

Apr-06

May-06

Mar-06

Jan-06

Feb-06

Dec-05

Oct-05

Nov-05

Sep-05

Jul-05

Aug-05

Jun-05

Apr-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Feb-05

11.
While growth remains robust, near-term risks and vulnerabilities have
increased since the last Article IV
Sri Lanka: Business Confidence Index
consultation. Inflationary pressures
180
BCI
Two-month moving average
are building; managing further oil
160
140
price shocks remains a challenge; and
120
reserves are below comfortable levels.
100
The rising debt service burden,
80
60
particularly during 2008−09, has
40
intensified external vulnerabilities.
20
Potential increases in military
0
spending also add risks to the fiscal
outlook. The setbacks in the peace
Source: LMD-ACNIELSEN Business Confidence Index.
process, which have caused some
weakening in confidence, could further affect investment going forward.

Jun-06

A. Outlook and Risks

12.
Sri Lanka’s medium-term prospects are favorable, provided that peace resumes,
near-term risks are managed, and essential reforms are implemented (Table 5). The
country has significant untapped growth potential, including in the conflict affected areas in
the North and East, and could also benefit from productivity gains by an educated labor force
and rapid growth in major countries in the region. Staff projects growth to sustain at around
7 percent over the medium term, assuming macroeconomic stability and fiscal consolidation,
but noted that growth could reach the authorities’ 8 percent target or even higher if the
above-mentioned challenges are overcome and fundamental reforms are advanced.

9
13.
Otherwise, medium-term prospects are subject to significant downside risks.
Fiscal consolidation is key to creating space for critical infrastructure investment and social
spending without jeopardizing debt sustainability. Without it, higher fiscal deficits would
increase the interest payment burden on the budget, crowd out private sector investment, and
undermine financial sector development. Other reforms, addressing entrenched problems in
the labor market, trade regime, and energy sector, will also help Sri Lanka to improve its
growth potential.
14.
The authorities are aware of the risks to the economic outlook. They emphasized
that maintaining macroeconomic stability and increasing growth to 8 percent are the two
pillars underpinning their medium-term strategy. They acknowledged that far-reaching
structural policies will be required for improving the business climate for private investment
and job creation. They are focusing on fiscal consolidation and debt sustainability, reforms of
the banking sector and state-owned enterprises, infrastructure development, and reducing
rural-urban income disparities. In addition, they are working on deepening regional
integration, including with India and Pakistan. Against this background, the discussions
centered on managing short-term risks and vulnerabilities, as well as some key elements of
the structural reform agenda.
B. Fiscal Policy
15.
The authorities agreed that adhering to the 2006 fiscal deficit target would help
address inflationary risks and strengthen the credibility of fiscal consolidation. Revenue
collections have improved significantly in the first seven months, with income tax and VAT
growing at 47 percent and 12 percent, respectively. The ongoing expansion of VAT to the
financial sector and services has already helped boost revenue. The authorities also plan to
implement some within-year measures to strengthen risk assessment, reduce illegitimate
VAT refunds, and modify the depreciation schedule for capital goods (e.g., with a reduction
in the depreciation allowance). For the year as a whole, revenue is projected to improve by
1 percent of GDP (compared to a targeted increase of 1.8 percent of GDP in the budget).
16.
The authorities attributed the sizable recurrent spending overruns to date to
certain unforeseen factors. The most important was higher world oil prices, contributing to
larger than anticipated oil subsidies. There were also increases in pension payments
following the November election, and additional security-related spending more recently.
17.
Nevertheless, the government has taken measures to offset spending overruns.
Revenue collection efforts have been enhanced. Steps were also taken to achieve full price
pass-through for major fuel products (see ¶18) and to rationalize fertilizer subsidies. They are
confident that with these measures, together with further rationalization of low-priority
projects, the fiscal deficit target of 9.1 percent of GDP will be met. They plan to intensify the
implementation of tsunami-related projects to fully utilize committed donor resources
in 2006.

10
18.
Full price pass-through for major fuel products has virtually eliminated oil
subsidies in the budget, starting from September 2006. Domestic fuel prices were
increased by 35 percent (weighted average) during April-September, achieving full
pass-through for petrol and diesel, while substantially reducing subsidies for kerosene. To
avoid amplifying price shocks, the authorities have removed VAT (15 percent) on diesel.
Moreover, the pricing formula was revised to ensure cost recovery plus a profit margin for
the two oil companies (one foreign), setting the stage for price liberalization starting from
September.
19.
The authorities are committed to fiscal consolidation over the medium term.
They aim to bring the deficit down to 7½ percent of GDP in 2007 and to 5 percent by 2010—
essentially the same consolidation path as stipulated under the Fiscal Management
Responsibility Act (FMRA), but with a two-year delay. Staff supported this consolidation
path, and noted that this is best achieved through two-pronged reforms to broaden the tax
base and strengthen tax administration, while rationalizing recurrent expenditure (Box 2).
Staff discussed options including reducing exemptions, simplifying VAT rates while
broadening the VAT base, and introducing the TIN to enhance administration. The
authorities agreed in principle that quality changes are required, but found it difficult to
implement some measures, like simplifying VAT rates, as early as 2007 without adequately
analyzing the revenue implications of different rate options. They indicated that extending
VAT to wholesale and retail stages would not be feasible in the near term as it would require
changes in the constitution to modify the power of provincial councils over sales taxes to
prevent potential double taxation at both the central and local levels. In addition, a revenue
sharing mechanism between the central and local governments will be needed. Noting
exemptions were rising, staff also underscored the need to review the exemption criteria in
the context of the 2007 budget.
20.
Increased infrastructure and social spending have placed a premium on the need
to rationalize recurrent expenditure. In view of Sri Lanka’s public sector hiring, which
significantly outpaced growth in population and labor force in the past five years, staff
advised to restrain real growth in wages and salaries with limited hiring. In addition, efforts
are needed to improve targeting and delivery of subsidies and social programs. Interest costs
could also be reduced through strengthened debt management to replace the expensive
short-term bank loans in foreign currency with less expensive, longer term, instruments. The
authorities responded that efforts have been made in these areas. In particular, they are
targeting an overall nominal wage increase of 20 percent over the next three years (2007−09)
for the public sector, supported by limited recruitment. Negotiations have started with labor
unions of SOEs and public banks. Moreover, improvements in the targeting for fertilizer
subsidies are also envisaged in the 2007 budget.

11
Box 2. Sri Lanka: Challenges with Tax Revenue Mobilization
Tax revenue mobilization remains a challenge in Sri Lanka, posing a constraint to
government goals of fiscal consolidation. At 14.2 percent of GDP in 2005, central government tax
revenue in Sri Lanka is higher than in India and Bangladesh, but remains much lower than levels
observed in the 1990s (averaged 19 percent of
Sri Lanka: Revenue, 1993–2005
GDP), reflecting to a large extent the impact of
(In percent of GDP)
21.0
trade reforms through reductions in tariffs. This
Total revenue
20.0
declining trend in tax revenue was reversed in
Tax revenue
19.0
2005 (for the first time since 1999), largely due
18.0
17.0
to better performance in income and excise taxes,
16.0
as well as in other taxes.
15.0
14.0
In the first seven months of 2006, tax revenue
13.0
grew by a healthy 23 percent, but still lower
12.0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
than the ambitious budget target. Tax revenue
is projected to improve by 1 percent of GDP to
15.2 percent of GDP in 2006 based on improvements in all tax categories, except VAT which is
expected to remain flat as a ratio of GDP.

VAT collection, the largest category in all taxes, accounts for about 41 percent of total tax
revenues. The coverage of VAT, however, remains narrow with many exemptions causing cascading
effects. In particular, wholesale and retail trade remains outside the VAT net and are taxed on the
basis of turnover by the provincial governments. There are many nonstandard exemptions, including
in the agricultural sector (including inputs), imported capital goods, pharmaceuticals, lease of
residential accommodation, import by persons having an agreement with the Board of Investment,
pearls and precious stones, essential food items (e.g., rice, flour, milk, bread, fish, vegetable, tea,
potatoes, onions, etc). Moreover, Sri Lanka currently has three VAT rates (5, 15, 20), plus a zero rate
for exporters and domestic buyers of capital inputs, complicating VAT administration and increasing
the scope for fraud. Despite these weaknesses, the efficiency ratio of Sri Lanka’s VAT (defined as the
ratio of VAT revenue to GDP divided by the standard rate), at 0.39, is in line with the regional
average in Asia and Latin America (both at 0.38) and Eastern and Central Europe (at 0.4).
Fiscal consolidation over the medium term requires a significant strengthening in tax revenue
on a sustainable basis. This could be achieved through tax base broadening, further improvements
in tax administration, and a more intensive and efficient use of information technology. Options
discussed with the authorities include:
∗

Unifying the VAT rates to simplify administration and improve compliance;

∗

Broadening the VAT base, including trimming exemptions and extending to wholesale and retail
sectors, and introducing a low presumptive tax for companies below the VAT registration
threshold;

∗

Improving VAT audit by adopting a sound risk assessment framework to enforce governance and
reduce fraud in the refund system;

∗

Introducing the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) to individual income tax payers; and

∗

Tightening the eligibility criteria for corporations under the Board of Investment with the aim to
curtail further proliferation of tax exemptions.

12
21.
Fiscal consolidation and strengthened debt management are critical for
medium-term debt sustainability. Staff noted that chronic fiscal deficits have propelled
public and publicly guaranteed debt to over 90 percent of GDP, and interest payments have
reached one third of tax revenue. With GDP per capita already above $1,000 in 2005,
Sri Lanka is likely to move towards middle-income status in the next few years, implying
potentially less concessional financing. Therefore, a meaningful fiscal consolidation is
essential. The authorities explained that the amount borrowed during 2004–05 was in part to
cushion the oil shock. Recently, they have sought to mobilize less expensive resources
through issuance of foreign-currency-denominated SLDBs of longer maturity (2–3 years).
Staff noted that while this strategy gives a breathing space in 2007 and reduces interest costs
as compared to treasury bonds of similar maturity, debt service pressures in foreign exchange
are expected to rise sharply from 2008, and likely to exert pressures on the balance of
payments. It is important to gradually unwind such borrowing while limiting it for general
budget support. The authorities were also encouraged to coordinate closely with donors to
establish a framework, aimed at fully utilizing the committed external concessional financing
in the pipe line.
22.
The authorities emphasized that implementing the new energy sector policy will
require additional financing of about $800 million during 2007–2010. They are currently
exploring various long-term financing options, including sharing mechanisms with investors,
tapping international capital markets, and developing the corporate bond market. Staff
supported these approaches, and indicated that a well-developed domestic bond market
would provide a system for shared risks and improve the allocation of capital to its most
productive users, thereby stimulating productivity. Moreover, it would be an important
vehicle to support private sector development. Early implementation of this policy will help
prepare Sri Lanka for the potential decline in concessional financing as the country moves
toward middle-income status. The Fund is ready to provide technical assistance if needed.
23.
The DSA presented to the authorities highlighted the sensitivity of debt
dynamics to the fiscal deficit, growth, and exports. The fiscal consolidation indicated
above would yield a declining path for Sri Lanka’s total public and public guaranteed debt,
falling from 94 percent of GDP in 2005 to 74 percent of GDP in 2010. With a modest level
of commercial borrowing from 2007 onwards (including financing for the planned energy
sector projects), debt-service-to-exports is projected to remain at around 13 percent over the
medium term, below the DSA indicative threshold for debt service distress (at 20 percent) for
a medium performer under the 2005 CPIA Index. However, extreme stress tests, including
lower GDP growth, lower exports, and exchange rate and deflator shocks, could bring this
ratio to around 21 percent (Table II.1, Appendix II), indicating a risk of debt distress.
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
24.
The authorities agreed that monetary policy should be geared toward reducing
inflation expectations. In light of pressures from the oil price pass-through and fast credit
growth, further monetary tightening will be required. Interest rate hikes could also be

13
justified in an environment of rising global and regional interest rates. The authorities are
committed to bring down reserve money growth to around 16 percent by end-2006 (from
18 percent at end-June) and adjust interest rates as needed. They also intend to step up open
market operations to reduce excess liquidity in the banking system. Staff noted that loan
growth to the housing sector has outpaced the overall credit growth by a significant margin,
posing potential risks to uneven economic development among sectors and potential rising of
NPLs.
25.
The authorities underscored their commitment to a market-based exchange rate
and to limit intervention to reduce volatility. They concurred that greater flexibility in the
nominal exchange rate will help safeguard external reserves and reduce external
vulnerability.5 The authorities explained that the intervention undertaken during May-July
was to reduce volatility in response to market pressures arising from lumpy tsunami-related
imports. Net sales in August were markedly reduced, although there has been some pick up
in September. They also noted that steps are being taken, including increasing official
banking services and lowering the cost and time period for transfers, to facilitate a
continuation of strong inflows of workers’ remittances to help mitigate future shocks.6 Sri
Lanka maintains requirements for the deposit of margin by importers of certain goods. These
requirements affect approximately less than 3 percent of total imports. They give rise to an
exchange restriction that is subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) of the
Fund’s Articles of Agreement.*
26.
Staff shared its analysis on Sri Lanka’s real exchange rate and medium-term
competitiveness, highlighting the likely intensified competition in global markets. Staff
agreed with the authorities that exchange rate competitiveness is not an immediate concern in
view of the small variations in the REER in the last 12 months and the current trend of export
performance. However, the decline in labor productivity and the rise in unit labor costs
warrant close monitoring. The authorities appeared less worried about the recent drop in the
export market share of garments and textiles, noting that order books look promising for the
year, and that Sri Lanka still maintains a niche market in apparel. They also expect the
Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) to yield positive results. Moreover, Sri Lanka’s tea
exports to major European and Middle East markets have performed well to date.

5

Based on developments in the past three years, the exchange rate regime in Sri Lanka has been reclassified
under the Fund system as managed float since June 2006 (from the previous free float).
6

See Chapter III of the selected issues, “Are Workers’ Remittances a Hedge Against Shocks? The Case of
Sri Lanka.”
*On November 9, 2006, the Fund approved the retention of the exchange restriction until November 2, 2007 or
the completion of the next Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka, whichever comes earlier.

14
D. Financial Sector Policies
27.
Banking sector soundness has improved, and progress has been made in
strengthening the supervisory framework. The NPL ratios of the state-owned banks
declined from 18 percent in 2003 (15.6 percent including foreign currency banking units) to
8 percent in June 2006, and reached similar levels to those of domestic banks. Capital
adequacy ratios have also improved (to 8.3 percent of total assets), and steps have been taken
to further enhance the regulatory and supervisory framework, including plans to adopt the
Basel II capital accord by 2008 (Box 3). However, risks remain. While credit growth is a
welcome sign of financial deepening, credit acceleration in the housing sector is a concern.
Supervision will need to be strengthened to mitigate risks of a potential rise in NPLs,
including raising loan-specific capital buffers or increasing provisions for fast growing credit
categories. Moreover, the banking system continues to be characterized by high spreads
which are almost double those in other economies in the region. Fostering consolidation in
the banking industry would help rationalize the cost structure and improve competitiveness.
Given the current structure of cross holding of assets by the banking groups and
conglomerates, it is also important to implement a consolidated supervision framework to
monitor financial risks among these entities.
28.
Continued efforts in restructuring the two large public banks remain important
for financial sector stability (Box 3). While their NPL ratios have declined and
provisioning and profitability have improved, loan practices and risk management remain
weak, and the low capital adequacy ratio in the People’s Bank is still a risk. Staff encouraged
a stepped up effort toward implementing the restructuring program for the People’s Bank,
supported by AsDB. The authorities indicated that they are moving toward implementing
Basel II in 2008, and that will cover the two public banks with respect to all prudential
measures. They also agreed that an FSAP update in 2007 would be useful to verify the
improvements and examine new challenges and vulnerabilities in these banks.
29.
Staff sought clarification regarding the new role of SEMA as a holding company
of strategic SOEs, including public banks. The importance of addressing the risk of
conflict of interests was emphasized, as this arrangement could potentially open the door for
connected lending between the industrial groups and public banks all under the purview of
SEMA. In this regard, it is critical to ensure the role of the CBSL as the sole regulatory
power to supervise and regulate operations of all public banks under SEMA.
E. Structural Policies
30.
Infrastructure development (power and roads) is a central element of the
government’s medium-term development strategy. Their emphasis is on restoring the
financial viability of the power sector while expanding generation capacity by using more

15
Box 3. Sri Lanka: State-Owned Banks
The financial situation of the Sri Lankan banking sector depends crucially on the performance of
the state-owned banks. The banking sector is dominated by two commercial state-owned banks, Bank of
Ceylon and the People’s Bank, together accounting for about a third of banking system assets. Both banks
have had a long history of recapitalization and restructuring. For both banks, recapitalization in the 1990s
was not combined with effective restructuring, resulting in underperformance, and negative equity in the
case of the People’s Bank. The 2002 FSAP identified these banks as the key vulnerability in the banking
system.

2Q06

1Q06

4Q05

3Q05

2Q05

1Q05

4Q04

3Q04

2Q04

1Q04

4Q03

3Q03

2Q03

1Q03

4Q02

3Q02

2Q02

1Q02

4Q01

3Q01

2Q01

1Q01

Progress has been made in the restructuring of the two state-owned banks recently. For People’s
Bank the restructuring plan calls for recapitalization with a loan from the Asian Development Bank over a
period of five years. The first tranche of equity
Sri Lanka: Nonperforming Loans
capital investment—of about $20 million—took
(In percent)
25
place in December 2005 upon completion of
some of the benchmark targets. The restructuring
20
plan formulated for Bank of Ceylon in 2004
15
included targets in the areas of asset
reconstruction, systems upgrading, human
10
resource development, and capital enhancement,
State commercial banks
5
to be achieved within a two-year period. The
Private domestic banks
Foreign banks
bank was able to achieve its targets for 2005.
0
There have also been changes in the Board and
senior management of both banks that appears to
have strengthened these institutions.

2Q06

1Q06

4Q05

3Q05

2Q05

1Q05

4Q04

3Q04

2Q04

1Q04

4Q03

3Q03

2Q03

1Q03

4Q02

3Q02

2Q02

1Q02

4Q01

3Q01

2Q01

1Q01

Both banks have seen improvements in their
Sri Lanka: Capital Adequacy Ratios
financial performance. The NPL ratios of the
30
State commercial banks
state banks have improved from 18 percent in
25
Private domestic banks
Foreign banks
2003 (15.6 percent including foreign currency
20
units) to 8 percent in June 2006 and have reached
15
similar levels to those of domestic private banks.
10
However, they are high compared to the
5
1 percent NPL ratio of foreign banks operating in
the country. At the same time, provisioning has
0
increased from 70 percent of all NPLs to
-5
80 percent. As a result, net NPLs (net of interest
in suspense and loan loss provisions) have
declined below 2 percent. People’s Bank reported
a positive net worth of about Rs. 4 billion in 2005, from a negative net worth of Rs. 6 billion in 2001. The
capital adequacy ratio of Bank of Ceylon has increased to 12 percent, above the regulatory minimum of
10 percent, and that of People’s Bank turned positive following the recapitalization and has since reached
2 percent. Profitability rations have also increased on the back of a stronger economic and robust credit
growth.
Notwithstanding these improvements, the state banks face entrenched structural weaknesses and
operating challenges. They still suffer from large stocks of bad debt, poor risk management practices,
inadequate information technology, and very difficult labor problems that stand in the way of
modernization and restructuring. This is compounded by weaknesses in the legal system and framework
for dealing with insolvencies and loan recoveries. Furthermore, lending by state-owned banks to stateowned enterprises increases the risks of the banking system.

16
cost-efficient sources (including coal power). The authorities indicated that, following the
initial increase in electricity tariffs in September, further adjustments are envisaged with a
view to eliminate future quasi-fiscal losses by 2007–08 (currently estimated at ½ percent of
GDP in 2006). Staff encouraged the authorities to also speed up operational restructuring of
the power companies to reduce system losses and improve efficiency, and strengthen the
regulatory guidelines to promote private investment including FDI. The road projects are
progressing well with the support of the World Bank and AsDB. The authorities expect that
the forthcoming development forum will help map out the financing requirements of their
development strategy with donor support.
31.
Reducing rural-urban income inequality remains a priority of the government.
While recent price increases for energy products bringing fiscal and efficiency gains, they
could exert significant impact on the poor by lowering their real income. This is of concern
in Sri Lanka as the income gap between the rich and the poor has widened during the last
decade. Staff suggested that safety net measures be introduced to cushion the real income
impact on the poor.7 Several scenarios estimating the social impact of energy price
adjustment were discussed, with a view to identify ways to address this issue in the 2007
budget. The authorities indicated that some cash payments may be considered in 2007 for
targeted low income households, and that they will review more thoroughly other affordable
and transparent safety net means in the context of their development plan.
32.
Sri Lanka’s performance in the post-MFA environment highlights potential
challenges in the period ahead. Recent data indicate that textile and garment exports grew
at only about 4 percent in January-July, and Sri Lanka’s market share in apparel to the
United States and EU may continue to decline given increased competition and lack of
full-utilization of the GSP access due to issues regarding rules of origin.8 The authorities
explained that plans have been developed recently to strengthen the backward linkages of the
garments sector with textile factories to help reduce input costs and turnover periods. Also,
poor infrastructure, particularly weaknesses in port operations, raises the cost of
manufacturing and exporting, and plans are underway to address these issues.
33.
Maintaining a liberal trade system is critical for Sri Lanka to benefit from
regional and global trade. In this regard, the recent ad hoc increases in fees placed on a
number of consumer imports (cesses) have complicated the system and sent wrong signals to
the private sector. The authorities reiterated their continued commitment to an open trade
regime. They were less concerned about the cesses, arguing that these fees cover limited
7

See Chapter II of the selected issues, “The Fiscal and Distributional Impacts of Fuel Subsidy Reform and
Alternative Mitigating Measures.”

8

This refers to the minimum threshold for locally produced materials and value added which cannot always be
met by Sri Lanka's garment exporters.

17
consumer goods and are earmarked for specific use including export promotion and
development related activities. The staff encouraged them to review this issue with assistance
from the World Bank. A number of bilateral trade negotiations are ongoing, including with
India and Pakistan.9 In this context, staff advised that moving to a low uniform tariff
structure will help minimize distortions and inefficiencies.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
34.
Sri Lanka’s near- and medium-term economic prospects depend critically on
progress on the peace front and on implementing essential reforms. The authorities’
medium-term framework rightly places its emphasis on raising growth and reducing
vulnerability through fiscal consolidation, infrastructure development, supporting rural and
small and medium enterprises, and creating income-generating activities to assist the poor.
This strategy, however, is yet to be fully articulated in terms of well-defined measures to
create the fiscal space needed for increased investment and social spending. Achieving
7−8 percent growth will also require an improvement in investment efficiency and
productivity. In this context, policies will need to be fleshed out to further reform the
financial sector, rationalize the trade regime, and improve the business climate to lift the
growth potential over the medium term.
35.
Macroeconomic policies in the near term should be geared toward reducing
inflationary expectations and external vulnerabilities. The economy has shown
remarkable resilience against adverse shocks. However, with the strong growth momentum,
demand pressures are increasing as evidenced by rising inflation and a widening current
account deficit. Continuing the current policy stance with fast credit growth would pose
upside risks to inflation. In this context, the recent increase in policy rates is appropriate,
signaling the commitment of the authorities to price stability. Nevertheless, further interest
rates hikes may still be needed to firmly contain credit growth and keep inflation
expectations in check.
36.
The current exchange rate regime has served Sri Lanka well and remains
appropriate in the period ahead. The authorities should limit intervention in the foreign
exchange market to smoothing excessive volatility, and allow greater flexibility in the
exchange rate to help safeguard external reserves and maintain competitiveness, particularly
in view of the declining trend in Sri Lanka’s export market share and rising unit labor costs.
In view of potential external shocks and an expected rise in debt service burden over the
medium term, a sustained drop in external reserves below the current level should be
avoided. With regard to the exchange restriction arising from the requirments that importers
9

South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) came into effect on January 1, 2006. Under the agreement, India,
Pakistan, and Sri Lanka will bring down their customs duties significantly.

18
of certain goods deposit margin, the authorities have committed to eliminate the measures
shortly. Staff is looking into whether the exchange restriction warrants approval in
accordance with Fund policies.*
37.
The authorities’ commitment to adhere to the 2006 budget deficit target is
appropriate, and the 2007 budget should firmly advance to fiscal consolidation. This
will help achieve a more balanced policy mix for growth and stability. Recent steps toward
full pass-through for major petroleum products have removed a major element of fiscal
vulnerability. For the 2007 budget, the tendency to rely on overly optimistic revenue
projections to deliver adjustment should be avoided, as this complicates fiscal management
when the envisaged revenue yields do not materialize. The budget will need to focus on
adopting revenue measures that simplify the tax system, enhance administration, and
improve tax buoyancy through base broadening. Reducing exemptions should be a priority,
which could be implemented without delay. Sustainable fiscal adjustment will also require
greater spending efficiency, including restraining real wage growth through limited hiring
and improving targeting for subsidy programs. This will help free resources for productive
investment as well as deficit reduction. Rural development also represents a potentially large
expenditure commitment, and should proceed in line with revenue enhancing efforts.
38.
Debt sustainability in Sri Lanka hinges on the strength of fiscal consolidation
and policies to improve potential growth over the medium term. While the authorities’
medium-term fiscal consolidation path provides a strong rationale for reform,
implementation is key. To date, however, concrete fiscal and structural measures supporting
this adjustment path remain to be spelled out. Insufficient fiscal adjustment could lead to
adverse debt dynamics, further compromising the ability of the government in meeting its
poverty reduction and MDG objectives. Moreover, increased debt service pressures in the
next few years could complicate debt management. A well-defined medium-term fiscal
policy framework, supported by an improved debt management policy, will be important to
help manage this situation. Further recourse to commercial borrowing for budgetary purposes
should be limited. Capital market development, in particular the corporate bond market,
could help channel private investment envisaged under the medium-term development plan.
39.
Good progress has been made in strengthening financial sector stability and in
implementing the 2002 FSAP recommendations. Enhancing the regulatory and
supervisory framework and restructuring the two large public banks have contributed to
visible improvements in financial soundness indicators and declined NPL ratios across the
banking
*On November 9, 2006, the Fund approved the retention of the exchange restriction until November 2, 2007 or
the completion of the next Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka, whichever comes earlier.

19
system. Building on this positive momentum, efforts could be made to further strengthen
prudential standards to mitigate risks posed by rapidly rising credit and enlarged exposures.
Strengthening the framework for the consolidated supervision is also critical for monitoring
system risks, including among the banking groups and financial conglomerates. Satisfactory
progress in meeting the Basel Core Principles is an essential prior to the planned adoption of
Basel II in 2008. Moreover, banking industry consolidation could help rationalize the cost
structure and prepare banks for regional competition. Restructuring efforts for the two large
public banks will need to focus on credit risk management to ensure that new lending
policies will significantly improve the quality of the loan portfolio, and improving the
framework for dealing with insolvencies and loan recoveries. In this context, an early FSAP
update would be beneficial. It is also important to clarify the role of SEMA as a holding
company for both strategic SOEs and public banks, and the CBSL’s sole regulatory power
should be protected.
40.
The energy sector plays a vital role in economic growth. In the next few years, the
cost of energy will remain high and quasi-fiscal losses could continue if electricity prices
remain below cost recovery levels. Further adjustments in tariffs, combined with balance
sheet restructuring and enhanced operational efficiency, is key to eliminate these losses and
generate internal funds for investment. Remaining quasi-fiscal losses could be brought on
budget. Design of the new tariff structure should consider provisions to protect low-income
groups. In addition, with the new formula to liberalize domestic fuel prices based on
commercial principles, any temptations to interfere should be limited. Strengthening
regulatory guidelines for the energy sector could also help promote a broadening of the
investor base for needed long-term energy sector financing.
41.
An open trade regime with minimum distortions will best serve Sri Lanka to
benefit from regional and global growth. Consideration could be given to curtail the cess
regime with an aim to integrate these fees in the tariff structure. Over the medium term, a
single low tariff structure could be considered to help maximize efficiency.
42.
Staff encourages the authorities to further develop their medium-term policy
framework into a comprehensive growth and poverty reduction strategy. Sri Lanka has
made significant progress in the last decade to improve its social indicators and revitalize the
economy, and the government’s emphasis on reducing poverty and narrowing the rural-urban
income inequality will go a long way to support a sustainable economic development.
Moving forward, the authorities are encouraged to build consensus for needed policies to
support their growth and poverty reduction objectives. This strategy will also benefit from
more regular and broad-based participatory consultations with relevant parties to spell out
policy debates. Provincial and district-level participation is also important for targeting and
costing of poverty reduction policies.
43.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka take place on
a standard 12-month cycle.

20
Figure 1. Sri Lanka: Real, Fiscal, and Monetary Sector Developments1/
GDP growth continued to be strong and inflation
subsided by end-2005. The trend in inflation has,
however, reversed in 2006.
24

GDP Growth and Inflation

20 (Percent change from a year ago)

GDP growth
Sri Lanka CPI
Colombo CPI

All main sectors performed better than in 2004 and
this has continued in the first quarter of 2006.
24

12

20

10 (Change in percent of previous year's GDP)

Contributions to Real GDP Growth

Agriculture
Industry
Services

12
10

16

16

8

8

12

12

6

6

8

8

4

4

4

4

2

2

0

0

0
lkabp02a

-4 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III -4
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

The fiscal deficit, excluding tsunami-related
spending, was contained in 2005.
40
35

Fiscal Deficit

Budget deficit excl. tsunami

(In percent of GDP)

Total revenue
Total expenditure and net lending excl. tsunami

0
lkabp02b

-2 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II -2
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Public debt declined owing to strong growth.
40
35

115

Total debt in percent of GDP (left scale)
Interest payments in percent of total revenue (right scale)

110

30

30
Including tsunami

60

Central Government Debt

50

105

25

25

20

20

15

15

95

10

10

90

5

5

85

0

80

40

100
30

Including tsunami

0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

Monetary Aggregates
Broad money

16

lkabp04b

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

24

60

20

50 (In percentage points)
40

16

Contributions to Reserve Money Growth

Reserve money

8

12

20
Reserve money

0

10
0
-10

-20

-20
Net domestic assets
lkabp03b

-30

-40 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III -40
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and CEIC Data Company Ltd.
1/ GDP for FY2004 is a staff estimate.

40
30

-30
4 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III 4
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

50

20

-10
8

lkabp03a

Net foreign assets

60

30
10

12

0

...through active open market operations and policy
interest rate.

(Twelve-month percent change)
20

10

Est.

Monetary policy was tightened...
24

20

21
Figure 2. Sri Lanka: Financial and External Sector Developments
The Central Bank has increased its policy rate by
2½ percentage points since November 2004.
16

The recent steepening of the yield curve suggests
that inflation expectations have increased.
16

Nominal Interest Rates

12

12

Yield Curve Government Securities

(In percent)

Repo rate
Reverse Repo rate
3-month T-bill rate

14

14

12

12

10

10

8

8

June 2006

(Percent per annum)

11

11
October 2005
10

10

May 2005

9

9

lkabp03c

6 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III 6
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

The stock market performed strongly during most of
2005, but declined sharply following upsurge of
violence.

8

8
91D

182D

364D

2Y

3Y

4Y

The trade deficit narrowed slightly in 2005 owing to
strong export growth and a slowdown in non-oil
imports but has begun to widen in 2006.
2800

450

750

400 (January 2002=100)

400

500 (In millions of U.S. dollars)

350

350

250

2200

300

0

1900

250

250

-250

1600

200

200

-500

1300

150

150

-750

450

Stock Market

Colombo stock exchange
Other Asian comparators 1/

300

100

100
lkabp03e

-1000

External Trade

Exports of goods
(right scale) 2/

Imports of goods
(right scale) 2/

Trade balance
(left scale)

2500

1000
700

lkabp02c

50 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III 50
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

-1250 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III 400
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Large tsunami aid inflows and workers’ remittances
helped strengthen the balance of payments and
build up reserves.

The rupee exchange rate has weakened somewhat
since the second half of 2005.

2.4

Gross Official Reserves

(Net of ACU balances; in billions of U.S. dollars)

1.6

1.6

1.2

1.2

0.8

0.8

0.4

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

0.4

92
REER
(left scale)

100

94
96

90

98
NEER
(left scale)

80

100
102

Rupees per U.S. dollar
(right scale, reversed)
lkabp02e

104

70 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III 106
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and CEIC Data Company Ltd.
1/ Weighted average of indices of India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Philippines.
2/ Three-month moving average.

Ru p ee/US$

2.0

90

Exchange Rates

2.4

2.0

lkabp02d

110

2.8

January 2002=100

2.8

22
Table 1. Sri Lanka: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–2006
Main exports (percent of total, 2005): garment (48), tea (14)
GDP per capita (2004): US$1,029
Unemployment rate (2005): 7.7 percent
Poverty rate (2004, incidence): 22 percent
FDI (2005): $200 million
Public debt (2005): 94 percent of GDP
Foreign public debt (percent of total, 2005): 43
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005
Est.

2006
Proj.

-1.5
12.1
13.4

4.0
10.2
6.6

6.0
2.6
1.0

5.4
7.9
16.8

6.0
10.6
3.6

7.0
8.0
12.0

16.6
27.5
-4.1
-10.8
-10.8
8.8
103.2

16.5
25.4
-1.6
-8.9
-8.9
8.0
105.6

15.7
24.0
-1.2
-8.3
-8.3
4.8
105.8

15.3
23.5
-2.2
-8.2
-8.2
5.8
105.4

16.1
24.7
-3.6
-8.7
-7.5
5.2
93.9

17.0
26.0
-3.6
-9.1
-7.3
4.8
89.6

Money and credit (percent change, end of period)
Reserve money
Broad money
Domestic credit
Private sector credit
Public sector credit
91-day T-bill rate (in percent, end of period)

7.0
13.6
16.2
8.9
30.6
12.9

12.3
13.4
6.5
12.0
-2.6
9.9

11.9
15.3
7.6
16.9
-10.0
7.4

20.9
19.6
22.4
22.1
23.2
7.3

15.8
19.1
15.5
21.5
0.7
10.5

16.0
16.5
18.9
20.7
13.8
10.5

Balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Exports
Imports
Current account balance
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Export value growth (percent)
Import value growth (percent)

4,817
5,974
-179
-1.1
-12.8
-18.4

4,699
6,105
-236
-1.4
-2.4
2.2

5,133
6,673
-74
-0.4
9.2
9.3

5,757
7,999
-646
-3.2
12.2
19.9

6,347
8,863
-650
-2.8
10.2
10.8

6,950
10,501
-1,281
-4.7
9.5
18.5

Gross official reserves (end of period)
In millions of U.S. dollars 1/
In months of imports
As a percent of short-term debt 2/

1,183
2.0
57

1,560
2.4
80

2,146
2.8
109

1,833
2.2
88

2,458
2.5
72

2,662
2.4
86

9.5
60.2

10.3
62.6

11.7
64.1

12.8
63.9

13.0
55.4

13.6
49.7

1,407
15.7

1,582
16.5

1,761
18.2

2,029
20.1

2,366
23.5

2,759
27.4

GDP and inflation (in percent)
Real GDP growth
Inflation (Sri Lanka CPI; average)
Inflation (Sri Lanka CPI; end-of-period)
Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Revenue
Expenditure
Primary balance
Overall balance
Overall balance (excluding tsunami)
Domestic financing
Government debt (domestic and external)

External debt (public and private)
In billions of U.S. dollars
As a percent of GDP
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in billions of rupees)
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding central bank Asian Clearing Union (ACU) balances.
2/ As reserves exclude ACU balances, they are also excluded from short-term debt to compute this ratio.

23
Table 2. Sri Lanka: Balance of Payments, 2005–2010
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)

Current account
Trade balance
Exports
Of which: textiles and garments
Imports
Non-oil imports
Of which : Tsunami adjustment
Oil imports
Services
Receipts
Income
Transfers
Private (net)
Official (net)
Capital and financial account
Capital transfers (net)
Financial account
Long-term flows
Direct investment
Private sector borrowing 1/
Official sector borrowing
Disbursements
Program
Project
Commercial loans (gross) 2/
Of which : SLDB
Amortization
Of which commercial
Short-term flows
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Debt service moratorium
Of which: moratorium on interest due
NIR (- = increase)
Gross reserves
Reserve liabilities (- is outflow)
Memorandum items:
Current account (in percent of GDP)
Tsunami Inflows
Export growth (in percent)
Import growth (in percent)
Oil
Gross official reserves 3/ 4/
(In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services)
(In percent of short-term debt)
Net international reserves
GDP (US$ millions)
Real growth rate
Oil price (US$ per barrel)
Short-term debt (US$ million, residual maturity)

2005
Act.

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

-650
-2,516
6,347
2,896
8,863
7,208
342
1,655
338
1,539
-300
1,828
1,735
93

-1,281
-3,551
6,950
3,012
10,501
8,354
248
2,147
377
1,662
-247
2,140
1,995
145

-1,734
-4,371
7,588
3,133
11,959
9,528
350
2,430
499
1,862
-259
2,398
2,334
64

-1,501
-4,600
8,213
3,258
12,813
10,328
220
2,485
597
2,048
-272
2,775
2,708
67

-1,244
-4,793
8,863
3,388
13,656
11,143
110
2,513
700
2,253
-286
3,135
3,073
62

-1,173
-5,267
9,565
3,524
14,832
12,284
0
2,548
855
2,500
-300
3,539
3,488
51

1,224
250
974
798
234
11
553
747
20
608
120
0
194
0
176

1,556
276
1280
1110
324
-52
838
2,065
55
759
1251
580
1227
806
170

1,776
282
1494
1474
315
150
1009
1,783
100
1102
581
290
774
281
20

1,384
290
1094
1053
378
85
590
1,788
105
917
766
383
1198
566
41

1,513
158
1355
1305
416
125
764
1,889
110
981
798
399
1125
598
50

1,405
145
1260
1210
478
40
692
1,859
130
756
973
487
1167
673
50

-336

0

0

0

0

0

238

275

42

-117

269

232

-238
264
77
-502
-625
123

-275
0
0
-275
-203
-72

-42
0
0
-42
-12
-29

117
0
0
117
185
-69

-269
0
0
-269
-175
-94

-232
0
0
-232
-196
-36

-2.8
497
10.2
10.8
36.9
2,458
2.5
72
2,076
23,540
6
53.4
3,400

-4.7
451
9.5
18.5
29.7
2,662
2.4
86
2,351
27,411
7
67.2
3,091

-5.6
610
9.2
13.9
13.2
2,674
2.2
73
2,393
30,739
7
73.5
3,670

-4.4
466
8.2
7.1
2.2
2,489
2.0
70
2,277
33,854
7
72.3
3,542

-3.3
272
7.9
6.6
1.1
2,664
1.9
73
2,546
37,266
7
70.3
3,664

-2.9
0
7.9
8.6
1.4
2,860
1.9
89
2,778
40,859
7
68.5
3,215

Sources: Data provided by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes public corporations.
2/ From 2006 includes dollar denominated Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDBs) and Foreign Currency Banking Union (FCBU) borrowing.
3/ Net of ACU debit balances.
4/ Valued at historical cost through 2002, and at market cost since then.

24
Table 3. Sri Lanka: Monetary Accounts, 2003–2006
2003
Dec.
Act.

2005
Dec.
Act.

2006
June
Act.

2006
Dec.
Proj.

(In billions of Sri Lankan rupees)

Monetary authorities
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Of which : net credit to government
Reserve money

2004
Dec.
Act.

165
-23
42
141

152
19
108
171

197
1
74
198

219
-6
78
212

231
-1
88
230

(Contribution to reserve money growth, in percent)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Reserve money (percent change)

37.4
-25.5
11.9

26.5
-10.7
15.8

32.1
-14.0
18.1

17.1
-1.0
16.0

(In billions of Sri Lankan rupees)

Monetary survey
Net foreign assets
Monetary authorities
Deposit money banks
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Public sector (net)
Government (net)
Public corporations
Private sector
Other items (net)
Broad money

-9.1
30.0
20.9

167
165
2
551
732
212
176
36
519
-181
718

170
152
19
688
896
262
220
41
634
-208
859

205
197
8
817
1,034
263
247
17
771
-217
1,022

197
219
-22
892
1,132
286
270
16
846
-240
1,089

222
231
-9
969
1,230
300
277
23
930
-261
1,191

6.1
35.9
-188.0
22.6
21.3
12.8
16.2
-23.8
24.5
19.3

8.3
17.2
-211.9
18.5
18.9
13.8
12.3
36.0
20.7
16.5

(Annual percent change)
Net foreign assets
Monetary authorities
Deposit money banks
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Public sector (net)
Government (net)
Public corporations
Private sector
Broad money

51.0
40.2
-137.1
7.6
7.6
-10.0
-8.7
-15.9
16.9
15.3

1.9
-7.8
641.9
25.0
22.4
23.2
25.1
13.8
22.1
19.6

20.3
29.8
-57.3
18.7
15.5
0.7
11.9
-59.5
21.5
19.1

(Contribution to broad money growth, in percentage points)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Public sector (net)
Government (net)
Public corporations
Private sector

9.1
6.3
8.3
-3.8
-2.7
-1.1
12.1

0.4
19.2
22.9
6.9
6.2
0.7
16.0

4.0
15.0
16.1
0.2
3.1
-2.9
15.9

1.2
18.0
21.8
3.6
4.1
-0.6
18.2

1.7
14.8
19.1
3.6
3.0
0.6
15.6

Memorandum items:
Broad money multiplier
Velocity of broad money
Private sector credit (in percent of GDP)

5.08
2.65
29.5

5.02
2.61
31.3

5.16
2.54
32.6

5.13
...
...

5.19
2.50
33.7

Sources: Central Bank of Sri Lanka; and Fund staff projections.

25
Table 4. Sri Lanka: Summary of Central Government Operations, 2004–2010
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2004
Act.

2005
Est.

Budget

2006
Staff
Proj.

Q2

15.3

16.1

17.8

17.0

Tax revenue
Income taxes
Value added tax/GST
Excise taxes
Taxes on international trade
Other
Nontax revenue

13.9
2.0
5.9
3.2
2.0
0.6
1.5

14.2
2.2
5.9
3.3
1.9
1.0
1.8

16.0
2.8
6.4
3.1
2.4
1.3
1.8

Total expenditure and net lending

23.5

24.7

19.2
3.2
1.3
3.6
5.2
4.1
0.4
1.8
0.9
0.0
1.1
5.9
0.7
5.2
4.3
...
...

Total revenue

Current expenditure
Civil service wages and salaries
Other civilian goods and services
Security related expenditure
Subsidies and transfers
Households
Of which : Samurdhi
pensions
petroleum
tsunami
Institutions, corporations, other government agencies
Interest payments 1/
Foreign
Domestic
Capital expenditure and net lending
Of which : capital expenditure
Of which : tsunami
Saving to be identified
Overall balance
Overall balance (without tsunami measures) 1/
Financing
Net external financing
Net domestic financing
Bank
Nonbank
Privatization
Grants
Of which : tsunami
Memorandum items:
Current account balance (excluding grants)
Primary balance (excluding grants)
Primary balance (including grants)
Paris Club debt moratorium
Nominal GDP (in billions of rupees)
Total debt
Of which : domestic debt

2007

2008
2009
Projections

2010

7.5

17.3

17.8

18.3

18.8

15.2
2.5
5.9
3.3
2.2
1.3
1.8

6.7
1.0
2.7
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.8

15.6
...
...
...
...
...
1.7

16.1
...
...
...
...
...
1.7

16.6
...
...
...
...
...
1.7

17.1
...
...
...
...
...
1.7

26.9

26.0

11.9

24.8

24.1

23.9

23.8

18.7
3.8
1.0
3.5
5.4
4.3
0.4
2.0
1.1
0.4
1.1
5.1
0.3
4.8

18.7
4.1
1.2
3.6
4.3
3.1
0.4
1.8
0.1
0.1
1.2
5.6
0.7
4.9

19.9
4.0
2.1
3.6
4.7
3.5
0.4
1.8
0.4
0.1
1.2
5.5
0.7
4.8

9.3
1.8
1.6
1.7
1.6
...
0.2
1.0
...
...
...
2.6
0.3
2.3

18.2
3.9
1.2
3.5
4.1
...
...
...

17.6
3.8
1.2
3.3
4.0
...
...
...

17.3
3.7
1.2
3.2
3.9
...
...
...

16.7
3.6
1.1
3.0
3.8
...
...
...

...
5.5
0.7
4.9

...
5.3
0.6
4.6

...
5.3
0.7
4.6

...
5.2
0.7
4.5

6.0
5.9
1.0

8.2
7.8
1.7

6.1
6.3
1.7

2.6
...
...

6.6
6.7
0.8

6.5
6.5
0.4

6.6
6.6
0.0

7.1
7.1
0.0

…

...

...

...

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-8.2
-8.2

-8.7
-7.5

-9.1
-7.3

-9.1
-7.3

-4.4

-7.5
-6.7

-6.3
-5.9

-5.6
-5.6

-5.0
-5.0

8.2
1.8
5.8
2.2
3.7
0.1
0.4
...

8.7
2.0
5.2
1.1
4.1
0.0
1.4
0.4

9.1
3.0
4.5
0.0
4.5
0.0
1.6
1.2

9.1
1.5
6.0
1.1
4.9
0.0
1.5
1.0

4.4
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

7.5
2.3
4.2
0.0
4.2
0.0
1.0
0.6

6.3
1.5
4.0
0.0
4.0
0.0
0.8
0.4

5.6
2.0
3.0
0.0
3.0
0.0
0.6
...

5.0
1.3
3.3
0.0
3.3
0.0
0.4
...

-3.9
-2.2
-1.8
…
2,029
105.4
56.3

-2.7
-3.6
-2.2
1.0
2,366
93.9
53.5

-0.9
-3.5
-2.0
...
2,721
90.8
51.0

-3.0
-3.6
-2.1
...
2,759
89.6
51.9

-0.9
-1.9
-0.9
...
3,194
84.3
48.7

0.2
-1.0
-0.2
...
3,650
80.4
46.6

1.0
-0.4
0.2
...
4,132
76.9
44.2

2.1
0.2
0.6
...
4,643
73.8
42.6

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and staff estimates.
1/ Measures include tsunami expenditure and in 2005 interest savings from Paris Club debt moratorium.

2,759

26
Table 5. Sri Lanka: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2005–2010
2005
Prov.

2006
Proj.

2007
Proj.

2008
Proj.

2009
Proj.

2010
Proj.

Real sector (percent change)
Real GDP
Contribution of domestic demand
Contribution of external demand
Inflation (Sri Lanka CPI; average)
Inflation (Sri Lanka CPI; end-of-period)

6.0
5.5
0.5
10.6
3.6

7.0
10.5
-3.5
8.0
12.0

7.0
10.8
-3.8
8.0
7.0

7.0
8.2
-1.2
6.0
5.5

7.0
8.1
-1.0
5.0
5.0

7.0
9.4
-2.3
5.0
5.0

Savings-investment balance (in percent of GDP)
Gross national saving
Gross domestic investment
Private
Public

23.7
26.5
22.3
4.2

22.6
27.3
23.0
4.3

23.6
29.2
24.5
4.7

25.1
29.6
25.0
4.5

26.9
30.2
25.5
4.7

28.2
31.0
26.0
5.0

Public finances (in percent of GDP)
Total revenue
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Of which: interest payments
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall balance
Overall balance (excluding tsunami)
Primary balance
Net external financing (including grants)
Net domestic financing
Assets sales
Total government debt
Of which : domestic debt

16.1
24.7
18.7
5.1
6.0
-8.7
-7.5
-3.6
3.4
5.2
0.0
93.9
53.5

17.0
26.0
20.0
5.5
6.1
-9.1
-7.3
-3.6
4.3
4.8
0.0
89.6
50.7

17.3
24.8
18.1
5.5
6.7
-7.5
-6.7
-2.1
4.2
3.3
0.0
84.4
47.8

17.8
24.0
17.5
5.2
6.5
-6.2
-5.8
-1.0
2.5
3.7
0.0
80.3
45.5

18.3
23.9
17.2
5.2
6.7
-5.6
-5.6
-0.4
2.6
3.0
0.0
76.9
43.2

18.8
23.7
16.6
5.1
7.2
-5.0
-5.0
0.1
2.1
2.9
0.0
73.7
41.4

-10.7
-2.8
1.0
2,458
2.5
55.4

-13.0
-4.7
1.0
2,662
2.4
49.7

-14.2
-5.6
0.1
2,674
2.2
47.2

-13.6
-4.4
-0.3
2,489
2.0
44.5

-12.9
-3.3
0.7
2,664
1.9
42.7

-12.9
-2.9
0.6
2,860
1.9
40.3

Money and credit (in percent of GDP)
Reserve money
Broad money
Domestic credit
Private sector credit
Public sector credit

8.4
43.2
43.7
32.6
11.1

8.3
43.2
44.6
33.7
10.9

8.3
43.1
44.2
34.9
9.2

8.3
43.5
45.0
37.0
8.0

8.3
43.8
44.6
37.6
7.0

8.4
44.5
44.8
38.2
6.5

Memorandum item:
Oil price (U.S. dollar per barrel)

53.4

67.2

73.5

72.3

70.3

68.5

Balance of payments (in percent of GDP)
Trade balance
Current account balance
Overall balance
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1/
(in months of imports of goods and services)
Total external debt (public and private)

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding central bank Asian Clearing Union (ACU) balances.

27
Table 6. Sri Lanka: Vulnerability Indicators, 2001–2005
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

18.2
15.7
13.2

17.8
15.0
8.7

17.9
12.0
6.3

11.6
10.5
3.3

9.2
8.5
2.0

0.1
10.4
16.0

1.7
10.8
21.7

1.7
10.6
15.8

3.8
11.1
12.4

6.7
10.9
20.4

13.6
8.9
88.1
21.8
621

13.4
12.0
87.9
22.1
815

15.3
16.9
88.1
21.7
1,062

19.6
22.1
88.4
23.8
1,507

19.1
21.5
88.8
22.8
1,922

External indicators
Exports (annual percent change)
Imports (annual percent change)
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
Capital and financial account balance
Of which : portfolio investment
Medium- and long-term inflows, net
Foreign direct investment
Exchange rate (Sri Lankan rupee per U.S. dollar, period average)

-12.8
-18.4
-1.3
3.4
-0.1
1.0
0.5
89.4

-2.4
2.2
-1.6
2.7
0.2
2.0
1.1
95.7

9.2
9.3
-0.6
4.0
0.0
4.0
0.9
96.5

12.2
19.9
-3.4
3.2
0.1
3.4
1.1
101.2

10.2
10.8
-3.2
5.2
0.3
3.4
1.0
100.5

Reserves indicators
Gross official reserves (millions of US$; excl. ACU balance)
As percent of broad money
As percent of short-term debt 3/ 4/

1,183
20.1
57.4

1,560
24.2
79.6

2,146
28.9
109.0

1,833
22.3
87.5

2,458
24.5
72.3

Debt indicators
Government debt (domestic and external)
Total external debt (public and private)
Debt service (as percent of exports goods & services)
Short-term debt (in percent of GDP) 3/ 4/

103.2
60.2
14.3
10.5

105.6
62.6
12.3
9.7

105.8
64.1
10.9
9.1

105.4
63.9
10.1
10.4

93.9
55.4
7.4
9.9

Banking sector indicators 1/
Nonperforming loans (as percent of total loans)
State-owned commercial banks
Domestic private banks
Foreign banks
Risk-based capital asset ratio (total capital over risk-weighted assets)
State-owned commercial banks
Domestic private banks
Foreign banks
Financial indicators
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis) 2/
Private sector credit (percent change, 12 month basis) 2/
Share of deposits in broad money 2/
Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits 2/
Stock market index (ASPI; 1985=100)

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes foreign currency banking units. Indicators are weighted averages of individual bank data.
2/ Including foreign currency banking units (FCBUs).
3/ Includes CPC acceptance credits, other trade credits, central bank ACU balances, and commercial bank liabilities.
4/ Based on residual maturity, including amortization of public and publicly guaranteed debt.

28
Table 7. Sri Lanka: Projected Payments to the Fund, 2006–2010
(In millions of SDRs, unless otherwise indicated)

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Repayments 1/
Charges/interest 1/

98.32
9.45

7.76
9.67

46.04
8.87

62.8
6.24

24.04
3.69

Stock of outstanding use of Fund resources

168.5

160.7

114.7

51.9

27.8

1.8
26.1
0.6
5.9

0.3
4.2
0.1
1.0

0.8
13.3
0.2
3.3

0.9
16.7
0.3
3.9

0.3
6.7
0.1
1.5

2.9
40.7
0.9
9.3

2.5
38.9
0.8
8.9

1.7
27.7
0.5
6.9

0.7
12.5
0.2
2.9

0.3
6.7
0.1
1.5

Disbursements

Memorandum items:
Debt service
Payments to the Fund/exports GNFS
Payments to the Fund/Quota
Payments to the Fund/GDP
Payments to the Fund/reserves
Outstanding use of Fund resources
Outstanding UFR/exports GNFS
Outstanding UFR/quota
Outstanding UFR/GDP
Outstanding UFR/reserves

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ On an obligation basis.

29
Table 8. Sri Lanka: Millennium Development Goals 1/
1990
Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 2/
Income share held by lowest 20 percent
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (in percent of children under 5)
Poverty gap at $1 a day - PPP (in percent)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day - PPP (in percent of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (in percent of population)
Prevalence of undernourishment (in percent of population)
Achieve universal primary education 3/
Literacy rate, youth total (in percent of people ages 15-24)
Persistence to grade 5, total (in percent of cohort)
Primary completion rate, total (in percent of relevant age group)
School enrollment, primary (in percent of net)
Promote gender equality 4/
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent of ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent of total nonagricultural employment)

1995

1998

2001

2004

(2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates)
...
...
...
8.0
...
...
33.0
...
30.0
...
...
...
...
1.0
...
...
...
...
6.0
...
20.0
25.0
...
...
...
...
...
26.0
...
22.0
95.0
92.0
92.2
...

(2015 target = net enrollment to 100)
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
98.6
...
...
...
...

96.0
...
...
99.0

5.0
101.7
98.3
39.0

(2005 target = education rate to 100)
...
5.0
5.0
...
...
102.1
...
...
...
44.0
40.0
45.0

4.0
102.3
101.1
43.0

Reduce child mortality 5/
Immunization, measles (in percent of children ages 12-23 months)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)

(2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 motality by two thirds)
80.0
87.0
94.0
99.0
26.0
21.0
...
16.0
32.0
25.0
...
19.0

Improved maternal health 6/
Births attended by skilled health staff (in percent of total)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

(2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three fourths)
...
...
...
96.0
...
...
...
92.0

Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 7/
Children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Contraceptive prevalence (in percent of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (in percent of ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (in percent of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)

...
...
60.5
...
...
...

Ensure environmental sustainability 8/
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (in percent of land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Improved sanitation facilities (in percent of population with access)
Improved water source (in percent of population with access)
Nationally protected areas (in percent of total land area)

0.2
36.0
7.0
70.0
68.0
...

(2015 target = various /1)
0.3
0.4
...
...
9.0
8.0
...
...
...
...
...
...

0.5
32.0
8.0
91.0
78.0
...

...
30.0
9.0
...
...
13.5

Develop a global partnership for development 9/
Aid per capita (current U.S. dollars)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, in percent of exports of Goods and Services, excl. workers' remittances)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Total debt service (in percent of exports of goods, services and income)
Unemployment, youth female (in percent of female labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth male (in percent of male labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth total (in percent of total labor force ages 15-24)

42.9
15.0
7.2
0.0
0.2
14.0
46.9
22.8
33.3

(2015 target = various /2)
30.6
22.6
9.0
9.0
14.2
37.2
0.1
2.9
1.1
4.8
8.0
8.0
41.3
33.6
27.0
24.6
32.8
28.2

16.7
10.0
79.8
8.0
9.3
10.0
30.9
19.9
23.6

26.7
9.0
164.9
14.4
27.3
9.0
36.1
21.9
27.2

2.0
840.0
15.7
22.0
73.9
...
18.7
80.9

1.9
1,010.0
19.5
25.0
74.4
90.7
19.4
81.9

General indicators
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method - current ( in U.S. dollars)
GNI, Atlas method - current ( in billions of U.S. dollars)
Gross capital formation (in percent of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (in percent of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (in millions)
Trade (exports and imports of goods and services, in percent of GDP)

2.5
470.0
7.9
22.6
71.2
88.7
17.0
67.2

(2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.)
...
...
...
...
...
70.0
...
...
...
...
...
0.0
...
...
0.0
59.3
70.7
68.0

2.2
700.0
12.7
25.7
72.5
...
18.1
81.6

2.1
810.0
15.2
25.1
73.1
...
18.8
78.5

96.0
12.0
14.0
...
...

...
...
60.5
...
0.0
70.2

Source: World Development Indicators database, April 2006.
1/ In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
2/ Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
3/ Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
4/ Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
5/ Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
6/ Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
7/ Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS. Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
8/ Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without
sustainable access to safe drinking water.
9/ Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the special needs of the least developed countries. Address the special needs
of landlocked countries and small island developing states.

30
APPENDIX I: SRI LANKA—TSUNAMI RELIEF AND RECONSTRUCTION UPDATE
The initial relief efforts have been largely successful with the government facilitating the
distribution of goods and building interim shelters. As the reconstruction activities gain
momentum in 2006, a few issues remain to be resolved including the relocation of previous
inhabitants of the newly demarked no-construction buffer zone, and improved coordination
between the government and donors on the utilization of tsunami funds. On the economy,
tsunami reconstruction activities and relief efforts helped support growth and improved the
balance of payments position, while the impact on inflation seems modest to date.
Reconstruction Activity
The tsunami of December 26, 2004 killed over 35,000 people and displaced 1 million,
with extensive damage to physical property and infrastructure and loss of livelihoods.
The immediate relief efforts were largely successful with the help of the government, the
local communities and private sector, and international donors and NGOs. The recovery and
reconstruction process is expected to take 3–5 years with an estimated cost of about
$2.2 billion. The international community pledged $2.8 billion for recovery and
reconstruction activities, of which $2 billion were committed. Sri Lanka received about
$260 million in debt moratorium from Paris Club creditors and $157.5 million in emergency
assistance from the Fund.
The initial relief efforts were successful. This included facilitating the distribution of
in-kind goods, providing 50,000 temporary houses, and extending welfare support to
thousands of people. While figures on aid disbursements are difficult to obtain and
consolidate, a minimum of $500 million (2.2 percent of GDP) was received in 2005.
Reconstruction activity is gaining momentum in 2006. The government recently revised
the total housing requirement from the original 98,525 units to 120,000 units in order to
include people without legal ownership of land outside the former buffer zone and extended
families. About 13 percent of the total units in the housing program are donor funded. At
end-2005, 85,525 families had been assigned new locations in either transitional shelter
(53,000) or in private homes (32,525). About 18,154 permanent houses had been completed
and about 80,371 remained. The government plans to finish construction of all housing units
by the end of 2006. About 55,483 housing units were already completed at end-June 2006,
and 40,589 units were under construction.
Some significant issues have affected progress with tsunami reconstruction. Relocation
debates unleashed social conflicts over religion and more than half of households are not
willing to move to government-identified sites. Lost documentation (loss of identity cards
and ownership documents) has been a major hindrance for obtaining grants and loans from
banks. Also, there have been some complaints of corruption and an effective mechanism for
dispute resolution is absent. There is also a shortage of building materials and manpower,
which may result in higher prices as the reconstruction gathers pace.

31

Economic Impact
Tsunami reconstruction activities supported growth. Real GDP growth accelerated to
6 percent in 2005, compared with 5½ percent in 2004 and with an average of 5 percent in the
last decade. The construction sector—mostly related to tsunami relief and reconstruction—
grew by 9 percent, which helped offset in part the loss of activities in fishery which
contracted by about 40 percent. Hotel and restaurant services recovered to a large extent
during the year.
Tsunami inflows contributed to a turn around in the balance of payments. The balance
of payments registered a surplus of $238 million in 2005, compared with a deficit of
$205 million in 2004. The turnaround was supported by the tsunami inflows, amounting to
about $1 billion (including the Fund emergency assistance and debt moratorium from the
Paris Club), that helped offset the current account deficit.
The impact of tsunami activities on inflation seems modest to date. Year-on-year
inflation slowed down to 3.6 percent at end-2005, compared with 16.8 percent at end-2004.
While the prices of building materials surged during the year, there have been no clear signs
of this contributing to wage pressure. Tsunami inflows also helped strengthen the rupee
exchange rate, helping slow inflation by containing the prices of imported goods.
The tsunami also resulted in changes in the pattern of employment and sources of
income. Most livelihoods affected by the tsunami are fishery related and low income
households receiving less than $50 per month pre-tsunami. The tsunami victims were mainly
women, children and elderly. The latest government report on Needs Assessment Survey for
Income Recovery suggests a 15 percent income non-recovery rate among the households
with men and a 35 percent
Sri Lanka: Main Source of Household Income by Sector
non-recovery rate among those
(In percent)
Before
with women. It also found that
Sector
Tsunami
Now
displaced people are more
5
4
Agriculture and livestock
Fisheries
43
30
vulnerable to being
Manual labor and manufacturing
20
24
Private services and small business
23
21
unemployment and earn less
5
6
Public sector/government services
Temporary relief work with non-government organizations
0
2
Income not from work (foreign remittances, government welfare,
whenever they find employment.
2
12
charity, loans, pensions, selling personal belongings)
Other
0
1
The structure of household
Not mentioned
0
1
Total
100
100
income also changed slightly after
Source:
.
Joint
Status
Report
of
the
United
Nations
Group
and
the
Sri
Lankan
Government
the tsunami, with a significant
increase in income that result
from sources such as remittances and government welfare and a significant fall in income
from the fisheries sector.

32
APPENDIX II: SRI LANKA—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS10
Assumptions
Sri Lanka’s DSA presents an illustrative scenario assuming strong growth, fiscal
consolidation, and a gradual increase in foreign currency commercial borrowing to
support infrastructure developments over the medium term. Growth over 2007–2010 is
projected to be 7 percent based on the current trend and policies outlined in the main report.
The fiscal consolidation path assumes a reduction in the fiscal deficit to 5 percent by 2010
and to 4 percent by 2026. Export growth is assumed at 9 percent in the medium term, while
reserves are maintained at around 2 months of imports. In addition to the standard DSA, the
analysis includes an assessment of the pressures on external debt service arising from the
stock of domestic foreign-currency-denominated loans as of September 2006 (of about
$1.2 billion). A gradual net increase in such borrowing is assumed from 2007 onwards (at an
average of $250 million per year) to illustrate the needed financing to support the authorities'
development plan in an environment of diminishing concessional financing. Risks are
reflected in the debt service distress indicators through the extreme stress tests in Figure II.2.
Central Government Debt Sustainability
The sustainability of Sri Lanka’s public sector debt depends largely on the strength of
future fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to increase potential growth. The
baseline scenario of sustained fiscal consolidation yields a favorable path for public debt.
Under this scenario, central government debt falls linearly from 94 percent of GDP in 2005
to 74 percent in 2010 and 48 percent in 2026 (Table II.1). NPV indicators of debt-to-GDP
and debt-to-revenue as well as the debt-service-to-revenue ratio perform similarly. The main
driver of the relatively favorable debt dynamics is a continued interest rate/growth
differential. The real growth projection of 7 percent over 2006–2010 and 6 percent through
2026 (compared to an average of 4½ percent over the last 10 years) exceeds the projected
real interest rates on domestic and foreign debt (5.8 percent for the period 2006–2012).
There are substantial downside risks to this outlook, largely arising from a stall or
reverse of reforms. The alternative scenario A2 (Table II.2) assumes continuation of recent
policies (2003–2005) throughout the period: primary deficit of 1.6 percent, an average real
interest rate of 1.5 percent, and real growth of 5.8 percent. This period coincides with a
historical period based on peace but limited fiscal consolidation, which can also be
interpreted as a no policy change scenario. Under these assumptions, the NPV of debt-toGDP would decline marginally from 78 percent in 2006 to 75 percent in 2010 and to
10

This DSA was conducted jointly and agreed with the World Bank.

33
70 percent in 2026. A greater risk exists if growth and primary balances were to continue at
the average level of the last 10 years. This scenario could be associated to a reverse of
reforms or return to the conflict situation of the last decade. In this case, the NPV of debt-toGDP would increase to 80 percent of GDP in 2010 as compared to falling to 65 percent in
the baseline and would continue to increase to a level of 104 percent in 2026 (Table II.2,
alternative scenario A1). Under the two alternative scenarios (A1 and A2), the debt serviceto-revenue ratio would remain around the high level of 2005, constraining the government’s
ability to increase other expenditures.
External Debt Sustainability
Sri Lanka’s nominal external debt has been consistently above 50 percent of GDP in the
last decade. In 2005, the majority of total external debt was public and publicly guaranteed
(PPG) primarily of medium- to long-term maturity. Private external debt comprised mainly
of short-term debt, in particular export trade credits. External debt is mainly concessional
(about 70 percent), with low effective interest rates of just over 2 percent. External debt
ratios are particularly vulnerable to movements in the rupee exchange rate against the SDR,
Japanese yen and U.S. dollar given that 90 percent of external debt is held in these
denominations.
The baseline scenario suggests that Sri Lanka’s medium term external debt ratios are
on a sustainable path but debt service pressures are emerging in the near term. Ratios
of the NPV of PPG external debt, as a percent of both GDP and exports, are projected to
decline smoothly over 2006–2026 (Table II.3 and Figure II.2) and remain well below the
indicative thresholds of debt distress for low-income countries with medium policy
frameworks (see table).11 However, the baseline debt-service-to-exports ratio increases
rapidly from 5 percent to 15.5 percent over 2005–2006 and averages at the higher level of
10.5 percent over 2007–2011. In part, this reflects the resumption of interest and
amortization
Comparison of IMF/World Bank Indicative Debt-Burden Thresholds
payments
with Sri Lanka's Medium-Term Baseline
following the
Indicative Thresholds
Sri Lanka's Medium-Term Baseline
Paris Club
(Medium performer)
2006
2011
2026
moratorium
NPV of debt/exports
150
94
87
48
in 2005
NPV of debt/GDP
40
29
25
11
(2.5 percent of
the total increase
NPV of debt service/exports
20
15
8
9
in debt service
11

Based on debt and debt service thresholds approved by Boards of the Fund and Work Bank for use in the
assessment of LIC DSA framework. Sri Lanka is classified as a medium performing country based on its 2005
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment Index (CPIA) score of 3.6.

34
over 2006–2011). The major part, however, reflects the rollover of foreign currency
commercial liabilities of the public sector of relatively short (2–3 years) maturity. Including
all foreign currency liabilities increases debt service pressures further, particularly over
2008–2009. While the debt service to exports ratio is below the indicative threshold for debtdistress countries, its rapid increase, lumpy payment schedule, and high rollover risk is
worrisome as it places significant liquidity pressures on the public sector balance sheet and
increases the vulnerability of the debt dynamics to shocks.
Sensitivity analyses show a contained trajectory for PPG external debt stock ratios but
indicate potential vulnerabilities in the debt-service ratio. A one standard deviation shock
to the historical export growth value will increase the NPV of external debt to GDP by
6 percent over 2006–2008, falling to the 2006 level in 2013. The same shock would increase
the NPV of external debt to exports by 45 percentage points over 2006–2008, falling to
the 2006 level in 2018. Stress tests on the debt-service-to-exports reflect increased
vulnerability to export growth and combination shocks, particularly over 2012–2013 when
the most extreme test shows an increase in the ratio to about 16.4 percent of exports.
Including all foreign currency liabilities significantly increases the vulnerability of
debt-service with shocks to export growth propelling it to just under 21 percent in 2013. In
the medium term, given current assumptions on commercial borrowing, the debt-service-toexports ratio plateaus at approximately 9 percent of exports.
Staff’s Assessment
Staff assesses Sri Lanka to have a moderate risk of public and external debt distress.
Sri Lanka’s debt sustainability could be significantly improved in the medium to longer term
if meaningful fiscal consolidation takes place and key structural reforms are implemented to
unleash the growth potential. The path of Sri Lanka's public debt is favorable under the
baseline scenario of strong and sustainable growth and fiscal consolidation, and the debt
service burden appears manageable. However, while the baseline shows that the external
debt stock and debt service indicators are well below thresholds, extreme stress tests
(assuming slower growth, lower exports, and deflator and exchange rate shocks) could raise
the debt service indicators to the debt distress thresholds. Moreover, Sri Lanka could face
some lumpy repayments in the next few years on account of domestic foreign currency loans
cumulated during 2005–06. A well-defined medium term fiscal framework, supported by an
improved debt management policy, would help manage the situation. Steps to develop
domestic capital market will also go a long way to prepare Sri Lanka for the potential decline
in concessional financing as the country moves toward middle-income status.

6.0
1.3
8.7
5.0
-1.1
...

...
...
...
...
32.2
...
…
104.1
0.5

0.2
-3.5
0.7
16.2
0.5
16.9
-3.6
-2.1
3.9
-6.0
-1.6
-0.6
-0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8

105.8
55.4

5.4
1.4
2.3
9.4
10.0
...

...
...
...
...
28.5
...
…
91.2
2.2

-0.4
-2.4
1.8
15.8
0.4
17.6
-4.1
-4.6
0.8
-5.4
0.5
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.0

105.4
56.1

6.0
0.6
1.2
10.0
18.3
...

...
34.2
30.0
...
28.4
...
…
84.9
13.7

-11.5
-9.7
2.2
17.4
1.4
19.6
-11.1
-6.3
-0.3
-6.0
-4.8
-0.8
0.0
0.0
-1.1
0.3
-1.8

93.9
48.7

4.5
1.4
5.8
8.7
2.5
...

2.1

2.3
0.3
3.0
2.7
9.4
...

1.1

Historical Standard
2005 Average 5/ Deviation 5/

7.0
1.6
3.1
9.0
12.0
...

77.8
33.4
30.9
...
28.8
420.7
166.9
93.0
6.4

-4.3
-4.0
2.1
18.5
1.5
20.6
-6.4
-5.0
1.1
-6.1
-1.4
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
-0.3

89.6
45.2

2006

1/ Gross central government debt.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues including grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Sources: Sri Lankan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

NPV of public sector debt
Of which : foreign-currency denominated
Of which : external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/
Of which : external
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/ 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which : contribution from average real interest rate
Of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g., bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

Public sector debt 1/
Of which : foreign-currency denominated

Actual
2003 2004

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

7.0
1.7
4.1
8.2
0.1
...

73.1
31.5
29.1
...
25.0
399.4
159.2
81.5
6.2

-5.3
-5.6
0.9
18.3
1.0
19.2
-6.6
-4.3
1.6
-5.9
-2.4
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3

84.3
42.8

2007

7.0
1.7
5.6
6.8
4.7
...

70.2
30.3
28.0
...
24.3
377.6
150.6
82.8
4.2

-4.0
-3.7
0.2
18.6
0.8
18.8
-4.0
-3.5
2.1
-5.5
-0.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
-0.2

80.4
40.4

2008

7.0
1.8
6.9
5.8
6.1
...

67.9
29.7
27.6
...
22.6
359.3
145.9
76.8
3.2

-3.5
-3.3
-0.2
18.9
0.6
18.6
-3.1
-2.8
2.5
-5.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

76.9
38.7

2009

7.0
1.9
7.9
5.0
6.8
...

65.3
28.6
26.6
...
21.5
340.1
138.4
73.1
2.6

-3.2
-3.0
-0.6
19.2
0.4
18.6
-2.5
-2.3
2.8
-5.0
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

73.8
37.1

6.0
1.9
9.1
5.0
5.5
...

62.7
27.6
25.6
...
20.0
328.1
134.1
68.2
2.3

-3.1
-2.0
-0.8
19.1
0.4
18.3
-1.3
-1.1
3.1
-4.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.1

70.7
35.6

6.8
1.8
6.1
6.6
5.8
...

0.3

Projections
2010 2011 2006–11
Average

Table II.1. Sri Lanka: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003–2026

6.0
2.1
8.4
5.0
6.4
...

56.3
21.6
19.8
...
17.6
289.2
101.6
59.8
0.9

-1.6
-1.5
-0.7
19.5
0.5
18.8
-0.8
-0.7
2.8
-3.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

60.8
26.1

2016

6.0
2.6
6.1
5.0
6.2
...

44.7
12.8
11.1
...
15.0
224.5
56.0
49.3
1.0

-1.1
-1.0
-0.1
19.9
0.4
19.8
-0.9
-0.6
2.2
-2.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

48.3
16.5

2026

6.0
2.3
7.2
5.0
6.6
...

-0.3

2012–26
Average

35

93
93
93
93
93

93
93
93

93

421
421
421
421
421

421
421
421

421

78
78
78
78
78

78
78
78

85
82
84
82
82

83
82
82

82

422
412
422
468
453

414
415
402

399

77
75
77
86
83

76
75
73

91
85
90
84
91

88
85
84

83

426
405
425
440
429

411
411
383

378

80
75
79
82
80

77
75
71

86
81
85
79
85

85
82
78

77

415
386
405
417
408

412
408
367

359

79
73
77
79
77

78
75
69

68

Projections
2011
2012

76
67
71
72
71

80
74
66

78
67
71
73
71

84
76
67

62

79
67
70
72
69

86
76
67

61

399
353
371
379
373

420
403
343

328

404
350
368
379
367

434
409
345

324

407
345
362
373
359

446
408
345

317

83
77
82
75
81

85
81
75

73

80
73
77
71
76

83
78
71

68

80
71
75
70
74

85
79
71

66

81
71
75
70
74

88
81
71

66

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 3/

403
365
384
394
386

414
404
351

340

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 3/

77
70
74
76
74

80
75
67

63

2013

80
69
73
68
71

88
80
70

63

408
338
355
364
350

455
404
344

308

79
65
69
71
68

89
76
67

60

2014

1/ The historical sceneario could also be interpreted as a return to conflict scenario
2/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
3/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.
4/ Real growth, primary balance, real interest rate and residual. 2003-2005 coincides with a period based on peace, which can also be interpreted as a no policy change scenario

Sources: Sri Lankan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

B. Bound tests

A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages 1/
A2. Key indicators at 2003-2005 averages 4/
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 2/

A. Alternative scenarios

Baseline

Debt service-to-revenue ratio 3/

B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

B. Bound tests

A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages 1/
A2. Key indicators at 2003–2005 averages 4/
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 2/

A. Alternative scenarios

Baseline

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2006–2007
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007

B. Bound tests

A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages 1/
A2. Key indicators at 2003–2005 averages 4/
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 2/

A. Alternative scenarios

70

2010
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

73

2009

65

78

2008

Baseline

2007

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

2006

Table II.2. Sri Lanka: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2006–2026

80
67
71
66
69

89
80
69

61

408
330
347
354
340

463
399
342

299

79
64
67
69
66

90
75
67

58

2015

79
66
69
65
68

90
80
69

60

407
322
338
344
329

470
393
340

289

79
63
66
67
64

92
75
66

56

2016

82
57
60
58
55

102
80
73

49

418
269
281
284
256

518
351
368

225

83
53
56
56
51

104
70
73

45

2026

36

13.9

15.1

6.4
2.1
3.6
13.4
7.9

...
...
...
...
12.1
10.2
...
...
7.4

54.2
52.4
-6.8
-3.1
0.6
7.1
36.5
43.6
-5.5
-1.0
-0.9
-2.8
2.0
-3.6
-1.2
-3.7
0.0

1997

15.8

4.7
0.0
3.5
3.6
1.2

...
...
...
...
12.7
10.1
...
...
-1.6

55.4
53.7
1.2
-1.9
-0.4
6.0
36.2
42.2
-5.7
-0.7
-0.9
-0.6
1.8
-2.4
0.0
3.1
0.0

1998

61.8
60.1
-1.9
2.8
4.5
10.8
39.6
50.4
-6.1
-0.2
-1.1
-0.6
2.0
-3.7
1.0
-4.8
0.0

60.2
58.6
-1.6
2.9
-0.5
5.8
39.3
45.1
-6.4
0.1
-0.5
3.9
1.6
1.0
1.3
-4.5
0.0

Actual
2000
2001

62.6
60.8
2.4
-2.5
0.1
6.7
36.1
42.8
-6.8
0.2
-1.1
-1.6
1.3
-2.3
-0.6
4.9
0.0

2002

64.1
62.3
1.5
-6.4
-0.8
6.3
35.9
42.1
-6.8
-0.2
-0.9
-4.7
1.2
-3.4
-2.5
7.9
0.0

2003

63.9
61.8
-0.2
-3.6
2.0
9.1
36.3
45.4
-6.9
-0.2
-1.1
-4.5
1.2
-3.1
-2.7
3.4
0.0

2004

55.4
53.7
-8.5
-7.7
1.9
9.3
33.5
42.8
-7.8
0.4
-1.0
-8.6
0.9
-3.3
-6.2
-0.8
0.0

15.7

4.3
-5.0
3.4
-2.3
2.1

16.3

6.0
-1.6
3.3
16.1
21.1

15.7

-1.5
-2.1
2.5
-4.4
-13.7
...

16.5

4.0
1.0
2.3
-3.6
-0.4
...

18.2

6.0
4.1
2.1
9.6
8.5
...

20.1

5.4
4.3
2.1
11.3
18.5
...

23.5

6.0
10.7
1.6
8.3
10.5
...

0.2

-0.9

1.0
4.1
0.3
6.8
7.7
...

0.7

-6.3

5.3
5.0
2.0
6.4
9.3
...

1.7

1.0

Historical Standard
2005 Average 7/ Deviation 7/

...
...
...
...
...
...
31.2
...
...
...
...
...
...
93.0
...
...
...
...
...
...
29.5
...
...
...
...
...
...
88.1
14.0
13.2
14.3
12.3
10.9
10.1
7.4
11.0
9.9
9.4
10.0
8.8
8.0
5.0
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
485.3 1,362.4 1,650.7 1,651.6 1,602.4 1,665.9 2,076.8
-6.6
6.4
1.1
-2.3
-2.3
2.2
10.4

63.7
61.9
8.2
2.9
1.7
7.8
35.6
43.4
-5.8
-0.3
-1.1
2.4
1.9
-2.4
2.9
5.3
0.0

1999

47.2
45.6
-2.5
1.5
4.4
12.6
30.7
43.3
-7.8
-0.4
-1.0
-1.9
1.2
-3.1
…
-4.0
0.0

2007

44.5
42.8
-2.7
0.3
3.3
11.8
30.3
42.1
-8.2
-0.3
-1.1
-1.9
1.1
-3.0
…
-3.0
0.0

42.7
40.8
-1.8
-0.6
2.2
11.0
29.8
40.8
-8.4
-0.3
-1.1
-1.7
1.1
-2.8
…
-1.2
0.0

Projections
2008
2009

40.3
38.5
-2.3
-1.0
1.8
10.8
29.5
40.3
-8.7
-0.3
-1.2
-1.7
1.0
-2.7
…
-1.3
0.0

2010

38.4
36.4
-2.0
-0.7
1.7
10.9
29.2
40.1
-8.9
-0.3
-1.2
-1.2
1.0
-2.2
…
-1.3
0.0

2011

27.4

7.0
8.8
2.7
9.2
17.1
9.4

30.7

7.0
4.8
2.7
9.7
13.0
11.8

33.9

7.0
2.9
2.7
8.6
7.1
10.7

37.3

7.0
2.9
2.7
8.3
6.6
10.6

40.9

7.0
2.5
2.7
8.5
8.3
8.6

44.9

6.0
3.6
2.7
8.5
9.1
10.3

30.6
30.2
29.3
29.0
28.0
27.3
97.4
98.1
96.6
97.4
95.0
93.5
29.4
28.6
27.6
27.2
26.2
25.3
93.5
93.0
91.1
91.1
88.9
86.8
16.8
13.3
15.0
12.1
12.8
9.7
15.4
12.1
12.3
10.1
10.4
8.4
18.4
12.3
15.6
14.0
13.4
10.0
2,331.1 2,481.3 2,481.3 2,480.8 2,480.8 2,480.5
9.1
6.9
5.9
4.1
4.2
3.7

49.7
48.4
-5.7
0.2
3.4
11.6
31.4
43.0
-7.8
-0.4
-1.2
-2.1
1.3
-3.3
…
-5.9
0.0

2006

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDB) are dollar-denominated government bonds held by domestic banks and investors
6/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
7/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over 2002-2005 due to the previous civil conflict, subject to data availability.

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)

3.8
2.8
4.0
5.0
2.0

...
...
...
...
15.3
12.1
...
...
8.0

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio including SLDB (in percent) 5/
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 6/
Growth of exports of goods & services (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of goods & services (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

61.0
59.1
-5.7
0.1
2.3
8.9
35.0
43.9
-5.5
-1.1
-0.6
-1.6
2.5
-2.4
-1.8
-5.8
0.0

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which : public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
Of which : exceptional financing

1996

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table II.3. Sri Lanka: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2006–2026 1/

6.8
4.3
2.7
8.8
10.2
10.2

2006–11
Average

20.8
18.9
-1.0
-0.8
0.2
10.4
23.2
33.6
-10.2
-0.1
-0.5
-0.5
0.7
-1.2
…
-0.2
-0.6

2026

67.7

6.0
2.4
3.3
6.8
7.0
15.3

154.3

6.0
2.4
3.7
6.9
7.5
7.3

21.7
13.1
79.9
56.3
19.8
11.1
72.7
48.0
11.6
11.0
8.9
8.7
11.6
12.6
3,190.8 5,989.8
1.5
1.2

31.2
29.3
-1.2
-1.5
0.2
10.0
27.2
37.2
-9.6
-0.2
-0.9
-0.8
1.0
-1.8
…
0.2
0.0

2016

6.0
2.4
3.4
6.9
7.3
12.8

-0.8

-9.8

0.3

2012–26
Average

37

38
Table II.4. Sri Lanka: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2006–26
(In percent)
Projections
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2016 2026

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

29

29

28

27

26

25

20

11

29
29

25
30

22
29

20
30

19
29

18
29

15
26

11
20

29
29
29
29
29
29

29
31
30
30
33
40

29
35
29
31
38
39

29
34
29
30
37
38

28
33
28
29
35
37

27
32
27
28
34
35

21
23
21
21
25
28

12
12
12
11
12
16

94

93

91

91

89

87

73

48

94
94

83
96

73
97

69
99

64
99

60
98

55
94

46
86

94
94
94
94
94
94

93
112
93
97
110
93

91
139
91
101
131
91

91
138
91
100
130
91

89
135
89
98
127
89

87
131
87
95
123
87

73
102
73
77
96
73

48
60
48
49
56
48

15

12

12

10

10

8

9

9

15
15

12
12

12
10

9
9

9
8

6
9

6
9

8
11

15
15
15
15
15
15

12
13
12
12
13
12

12
15
12
13
14
12

10
14
10
11
13
10

10
14
10
11
13
10

8
12
8
9
11
8

9
13
9
10
13
9

9
11
9
9
10
9

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007–26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007–26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/
NPV of Debt-to-Exports Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007–26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007–26 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/
Debt Service Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007–08 4/
B5. Combination of B1–B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and nondebt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in
the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level
after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

39
Figure II.1. Sri Lanka: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenario, 2006–2026 1/
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
No further reforms
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
No further reforms
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
Most extreme stress test
No further reforms
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2009. No further reforms test is the test that assumes
continuation of recent (2003–2005) policies.
2/ Revenue including grants.

40
Figure II.2. Sri Lanka: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006–2026
(In percent)
45
NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

40
35
30
25
20
15
Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

10
5
0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
160
NPV of Debt-to-Exports Ratio

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

25
Debt Service-to-Exports Ratio
20
15
10
5
0

Baseline
Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test
Most extreme stress test including SLDB
Indicative Threshold

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
Source: Staff projections and simulations.

41
APPENDIX III: SRI LANKA—FUND RELATIONS
(As of August 31, 2006)

I.

Membership Status:

Joined 8/29/50; accepted Article VIII, Sections 2, 3,
and 4, March 1994.

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
413.40
513.74
47.86

Percent Quota
100.00
124.27
11.58

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
70.87
2.06

Percent Allocation
100.00
2.91

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Emergency Assistance
Extended arrangements
PRGF arrangements
Stand-by arrangements

SDR Million
103.35
20.67
38.39
24.16

Percent Quota
25.00
5.00
9.29
5.84

V.

Financial Arrangements:

Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

EFF
PRGF
Stand-by

Apr 18, 2003
Apr 18, 2003
Apr 20, 2001

Apr 17, 2006
Apr 17, 2006
Sep 19, 2002

144.40
269.00
200.00

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)
20.67
38.39
200.00

VI.
Projected Obligations to Fund—Obligation basis: (SDR million; based on existing
use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
2006
Principal
Charges/interes
t
Total

2007

2008

2009

2010

18.12
2.66

7.76
9.67

46.04
8.87

62.80
6.24

24.04
3.69

20.78

17.44

54.91

69.04

27.73

42
VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Managed float. The central bank floated the rupee on January 23, 2001. The CBSL has
removed the foreign exchange regulations that were imposed after the float. By
Circular No. 35/01/005/0010/01 dated October 22, 2004, Circular No. 35/01/005/0010/05
dated October 18, 2006 and Operating Instructions Ref. 02/04/004/0009/001, the CBSL
required importers to deposit with commercial banks margins of 50 percent of the total
invoice value with respect to the import of certain goods (and 100% with respect to certain
vehicles). In particular, these measures restrict current payments due in connection with
letters of credit (which are a “normal short term banking and credit facility” under Article
XXX(d)).
VIII.

Safeguards Assessment:

Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the CBSL is subject to a full safeguards
assessment with respect to the PRGF arrangement which was approved on April 18, 2003.
The assessment was completed on July 30, 2003 and concluded that the CBSL had made
commendable progress in strengthening its safeguards since the 2001 assessment. As a result,
the risk ratings have been upgraded in four of the five areas of the safeguards framework.
The report found a few remaining vulnerabilities that could be addressed through a series of
measures to further strengthen the CBSL’s operations. The authorities have already
implemented most of the proposed measures, including the full implementation of
International Accounting Standards, and committed to implementation of the outstanding
ones, including in the context of the new Central Banking Act.
IX.

Article IV Consultation:

It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka will be in accordance with
the provisions applying to countries on the standard consultation cycle. The Executive Board
concluded the 2005 Article IV consultation on July 15, 2005.
X.

FSAP and ROSC Participation:

•

MFD: Both the FSSA and the FSAP reports were completed in 2002.

•

STA: A data ROSC was completed and the report published in 2002.

•

FAD: A fiscal transparency ROSC was completed and the report published in 2002.
A ROSC update was completed and the report published in July 2005.

XI.

Resident Representative:

43

A resident representative has been stationed in Sri Lanka since 1977. Mr. Valdivieso is the
current Senior Resident Representative.

44
APPENDIX IV: SRI LANKA—RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP12
(As of September 5, 2006)
The Bank’s last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Sri Lanka was presented at a time of
great optimism in April 2003. Since that time, much has happened in Sri Lanka—most
notably, the devastating tsunami in December 2004. In addition, the peace talks have stalled
and the country is engulfed in renewed violence. While average growth has remained at
about 5 percent, this has not been adequate for significantly reducing poverty beyond urban
areas. The fiscal situation remains under stress and needed reforms have proved elusive in
the face of the political instability and the challenge of recovering from the tsunami. In short,
the political constraints and uncertainties have affected the peace process, policy
implementation and the environment for pro-poor, broad-based economic growth. As such,
Sri Lanka is facing considerable challenges today and while the Bank’s strategy remains
fundamentally the same, there has been a significant shift in the structure of the Bank’s
activities.
A. IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
World Bank Activities
A number of operations support the implementation of reforms in public administration and
public expenditure management, including: (i) the Economic Reform Technical Assistance
(ERTA) credit; (ii) the recently closed Distance Learning Initiative helped to strengthen the
environment for policy reform and build capacity in the public and private sectors through
the transfer of the latest global knowledge with the establishment and operation of a Distance
Learning Center (DLC); and (iii) the e-Sri Lanka Development Project that aims to enhance
growth, employment and equity by promoting affordable access to and wide use of on-line
public information and services by citizens and businesses and private sector
competitiveness, particularly of knowledge industries and small and medium enterprises. The
Bank has also led the dialogue on public expenditure issues, primarily to assist in the efforts
to implement a medium term budget framework (MTBF).
In the health sector, the ongoing National HIV/AIDS Prevention project is assisting in
curbing the spread of HIV infection. The Bank also worked closely with the authorities in
developing a health sector strategy/program that resulted in the financing of the Health
Sector Development operation. Analytical work is also underway on nutrition and ageing.
In the education sector, the Bank was involved in two recently closed projects (Second
General Education and Teachers Education and Teachers Deployment ) and a major report
(Treasures of the Education System in Sri Lanka: Restoring Performance, Expanding
12

Prepared by the World Bank staff.

45
Opportunities and Enhancing Prospects)—that provided a comprehensive analysis of the
education system and assisted the Government in developing the sector strategy. These
provided the foundation for the Education Sector Development Project. With regard to
reform of the tertiary sector, Bank support is being provided through the Improving the
Relevance and Quality of Undergraduate Education project.
In rural development, the Bank completed a major study—“Sri Lanka: Promoting
Agricultural and Rural Non-Farm Sector Growth”—that identified key constraints,
including poor access to critical infrastructure and services, ineffective public sector
expenditure programs, poor flow of information on technology transfer and dominance of
public sector as a service provider and underutilization of private sector initiatives. Another
major study underway focuses on the constraints to and actions needed to sustain the growth
of the tea and rubber sectors, and to improve the welfare of the large number of tea and
rubber dependent households. The Community Development and Livelihood “Gemi Diriya”
project addresses poverty reduction and reinvigoration of the rural economy.
In the area of peace and reconstruction of the North and East (NE), the North East Irrigated
Agriculture Project II (NEIAP II) helps conflict-affected communities in the NE and
adjoining areas in restoring livelihoods, enhancing agricultural and other production and
incomes, and building capacity for sustainable, social and economic reintegration. To address
housing needs, the North East Housing Reconstruction Project (NEHRP) is providing the
poorest conflict-affected families in the NE (that meet accepted vulnerability criteria) with
improved and affordable housing units.
To assess and improve the environment for the private sector, the Bank and ADB jointly
conducted a comprehensive Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) of the urban formal
sector and entrepreneurship in the rural areas. The Bank, through the Legal and Judicial
Reform Project, is also working to make the existing legal and judicial framework more
efficient, transparent and responsive to the needs of the public at large and of the private
sector in particular.
In infrastructure, the Economic Reform Technical Assistance (ERTA) project was designed
to facilitate reforms in priority sub-sectors (transport, telecommunications, petroleum, power,
port and airport services, and urban water supply and sanitation services). Through the
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development (RERED) project, the Bank is helping
to improve the quality of rural life by utilizing off-grid renewable energy technologies to
bring electricity to remote communities and promote private sector power generation from
renewable energy resources from the main grid. In addition, through the Second Community
Water Supply and Sanitation (CWSSP II) project, the Bank is supporting the
implementation of demand-responsive and sustainable rural water and sanitation services.
The Bank recently approved a large Road Sector Assistance Project with the objective of
lowering transportation costs through sustainable delivery of an efficient national road
system.

46
Related to the tsunami, the Bank—in collaboration with ADB and Japan Bank for
International Cooperation—conducted a preliminary damage and needs assessment and
released a joint report in early February 2005. The assessment formed the basis for a
Tsunami Emergency Recovery Program (TERP) covering roads, rail, power, water,
housing, health, education and livelihoods.
World Bank and IMF Collaboration
The Bank and the IMF are working closely together on financial sector issues. Through the
recently closed Central Bank Strengthening project, the Bank supported improvements to
the Central Bank and the financial sector policy and regulatory framework. The Bank also
recently completed a piece of sector work entitled “Sri Lanka: Improving Access to
Financial Services” that highlights numerous opportunities for promoting higher financial
inclusion and points to the need for a multi-pronged approach to address current gaps and
serve the diverse needs of households and businesses. The IMF has been providing technical
advice to the Central Bank in a number of reform areas, including with regard to drafting/
implementing key new legislation and in conducting active open market operations.
The Bank and the IMF have shared responsibility for discussing social protection programs
with the Government—including the various options under the 2002 Welfare Benefit Act—
and reforming the welfare system to better target the poor and improve efficiency. Related to
this, the Bank recently completed a report that reviews Sri Lanka’s social protection
programs and proposes options for enhancing their role in promoting growth with equity.
Finally, given the importance of trade to achieving Sri Lanka’s growth and poverty reduction
objectives, the Bank carried out a trade policy analysis as part of the recent DPR. The
contribution of the IMF will continue to be on supporting trade reforms focused on making
progress toward a simplified and transparent two-band tariff system, including reducing
agricultural protection.
B. World Bank Group Strategy and Lending Operations
Country Assistance Strategy. The CAS for Sri Lanka was considered by the Bank’s Board
on April 1, 2003. The CAS was designed to support the 2003 PRSP’s three core themes:
peace, growth and equity. In December 2005, a CAS Progress Report was prepared to reflect
the significantly changed operating environment. While the program continues to provide
strong support to the peace and equity pillars along with the added assistance to
tsunami-related reconstruction and recovery, the emphasis of the program has shifted with
regard to the growth pillar. In this revised program of support, there is a strong bias towards
lending operations that: (i) support human development; (ii) further recovery in the
conflict-affected areas; and (iii) assist roads and irrigation as the core infrastructure needed to
support-pro-poor growth via reduced transport costs and sustained access to water for
agriculture.

47
Bank Assistance Program in Sri Lanka. The Bank’s active portfolio as of
September 5, 2006 comprises 16 IDA credits/grants and one Global Environmental Facility
(GEF) grant for a total commitment (net of cancellation) of $806.6 million (Table IV.1). The
FY06 lending program includes two new projects approved in December 2005: (i) Education
Sector Development Project; and (ii) Road Sector Assistance Project.
Economic and Sector Work. A key economic report is the “Development Policy Review”
(DPR) (Report No. 29396-LK, December 8, 2004). This was complemented by a major piece
on poverty: “Poverty Assessment for Sri Lanka—Engendering Growth with Equity:
Opportunities and Challenges” (June 2006). A number of important sector reports/policy
notes were completed in FY04–FY06: “Treasures of the Education System in Sri Lanka:
Restoring Performance, Expanding Opportunities and Enhancing Prospects,” “Sri Lanka:
Improving the Rural and Urban Investment Climate,” “Post-Tsunami Recovery Program:
Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment,” “Attaining the Millennium Development
Goals in Sri Lanka,” “Sri Lanka: Improving Access to Financial Services,”
“Decentralization and Service Delivery in Sri Lanka: Assessment and Options.” Other key
diagnostic work completed over the last few years includes the Country Procurement
Assessment Review (CPAR), Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), ROSC
Accounting and Auditing Assessment, “Promoting Agricultural and Rural Non-Farm Sector
Growth” (Report No. 25387-CE, February 26, 2003), Health Sector Policy Note and Roads
Policy Note. Economic and sector work currently under way includes work on nutrition,
ageing, and the tea and rubber sectors. These helped shape the report, “Sri Lanka
Development Forum: The Economy, The Tsunami and Poverty Reduction” (Report
No 32221-LK, April 28, 2005) that aimed to contribute to the national debate on the primary
issues.
IFC’s Activities in Sri Lanka. As of July 31, 2006, IFC’s held portfolio in Sri Lanka
consisted of investments in eight companies, with a total committed exposure of
US$89.6 million. The portfolio is spread over financial institutions, power, health care,
manufacturing, ports and telecommunications. Greater investment involvement is linked to
progress on the political/security situation. IFC remains interested in investing in Sri Lanka
(especially in infrastructure, manufacturing and financial markets) depending upon progress
on reforms. Focus is instead on delivering a technical assistance (TA) program. In FY06, IFC
opened a dedicated small and medium enterprise development program for Sri Lanka and the
Maldives. IFC will provide $2 million of the $10 million total funding requirement for the
five-year program along with other donors. The program’s focus will be on financial
services, and the business enabling environment, as well as specific sub-sectors, such as,
tourism, construction and agribusiness. In light of the tsunami, IFC accelerated the launch of
this program to assist the rehabilitation and creation of sustainable private enterprises.
Questions may be referred to Ms. Tinsley (458-4920) and on IFC to Ms. Gekis (458-4865).

48

Table IV.1. Summary of World Bank Operations
(As of September 5, 2006)
Credit/
1/ Name of Operation
Grant # FY

IDA
Amount

GEF
Amount

Cancellation

Undis2/
bursed

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2880
3384
3496
3673
3722

1996
2000
2001
2002
2003

3781
H013
H035
H078
H095
3935
4014
3986
4039/
H147
H196
4138

2003
2003
2003
2004
2004
2004
2005
2005

Private Sector Infrastructure Development
Legal and Judicial Reforms
Land Titling and Related Services (LIL)3/
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development
Economic Reform Technical Assistance
Improving Relevance and Quality of Undergraduate
Education
National HIV/AIDS Prevention
Second Community Water
Community Development and Livelihood
Health Sector Development
North-East Irrigated Agricultural Project II
North East Housing Reconstruction Program
E-Sri Lanka Development

2005 Tsunami Emergency Reconstruction Program Phase II
2006 Education Sector Development Project
2006 Road Sector Assistance

GEF
Projects4/
5/
51248 2002 Renewal Energy for Rural Economic Development
Total
1/

77.0
18.2
5.0
75.0
15.0

15.0

2.9
3.1
1.0
20.0
3.6
25.2

40.3
12.6
39.8
51.0
60.0
64.7
75.0
53.0

9.0
28.1
43.8
50.4
61.6
53.4
39.8

75.0
60.0
100.0

15.2
54.9
89.3

821.6

8.0
8.0

15.0

1.8
503.1

FY is the fiscal year of Board approval.
All loan accounting is done in SDR. As these figures are in U.S. dollars, exchange rate fluctuations may result in
undisbursed balances that are greater than original principal amounts.
3/
LIL: Learning and Innovation Loan.
4/
Global Environment Facility.
5/
Not counted as a separate project.
2/

49
APPENDIX V: SRI LANKA—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of June 30, 2006)
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) started its operation in Sri Lanka in 1969 and has
provided 133 loans totaling about $3.7 billion and 220 technical assistance projects totaling
about $91.6 million.
The Asian Development Bank approved five loans for Sri Lanka in 2005, amounting to
$253 million. A grant of $150 million from the ADB’s Asian Tsunami Fund was also
approved. The $150 million grant and a $7 million loan for the Tsunami-affected Areas
Rebuilding Project (TAARP) will help to rapidly improve the living conditions of people in
tsunami-affected areas by restoring basic social infrastructure, community and public
services, and livelihoods. ADB’s Asian Tsunami Fund was set up in February with an initial
ADB contribution of $600 million to deliver prompt emergency grant funding to
tsunami-affected countries. An additional $14 million grant and a $26 million loan for the
North East Community Restoration and Development Project II (NECORD II) will continue
the government’s rehabilitation program in conflict-affected areas of the Northern and
Eastern provinces.
Six Technical Assistance (TA) projects were approved, amounting to $2.78 million. Two
JFPR projects were also approved, amounting to $4 million, for tsunami related assistance.
ADB assistance in 2005 includes road sector development, North East rehabilitation,
technical education, and local government infrastructure improvement.
In 2005, the ADB’s Board of Directors endorsed the Country Strategy and Program Update
(CSPU) for 2006–2008, which envisages assistance of about $840 million over the next three
years. The CSPU 2006–2008 supports road and port development, social infrastructure
including education, rural finance and SME support, agriculture, and fiscal reforms.
ADB’s top priorities in Sri Lanka are supporting broad-based economic growth, advancing
social development and supporting improved governance. Emphasis will be placed on poorer
regions and those encountering particular hardship. Out of the total, $270 million will come
from ADB’s Asian Development Fund (ADF), which supports the sustainable social and
economic development of poor countries in the Asian and Pacific region, and $570 million
will be from ordinary capital resources (OCR). The timing and magnitude of the assistance
program will be responsive to the status and implementation of the ceasefire agreement, the
prevailing security situation and country performance.
Reflecting ADB’s country-wide focus, ADB’s support over the three–year duration of the
new program cycle will help the country provide quality education, increase access of the
poor to social services, develop basic economic infrastructure, rebuild conflict-torn areas and

50
reintegrate them into the national economy, enhance rural livelihoods, remove the barriers to
attracting investment, and improve governance.
The lending program will be supported by technical assistance operations of about
$8 million. The technical assistance program will support project preparation, institutional
development, and economic, thematic and sector work.
As of June 30, 2006, the sectoral distribution of the loan portfolio was agriculture and natural
resources, 14.2 percent; water supply, sanitation, waste management, 11.4 percent; energy,
8.0 percent; education, 11.4 percent; finance, 7.8 percent; transport and communications,
24.7 percent; industry and trade 3.9 percent; law, economic management, and public policy
4.0 percent, and multisector, 14.6 percent.
Lending by the Asian Development Bank, 1998–2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

1998

Commitment
Net resource transfer
Disbursement

1999

190
93
126

Source: Asian Development Bank.

184
72
99

2000

209
47
76

2001

100
65
91

2002

157
125
171

2003

315
166
225

2004

184
116
186

2005

n.a.
123
206

51
APPENDIX VI: SRI LANKA––STATISTICAL ISSUES
Staff Assessment
Overall, the coverage and timeliness of available data in Sri Lanka are adequate for program
monitoring and surveillance purposes. The authorities supply key data to the Fund on a
timely basis, and publish data regularly, including daily information on stock, money, and
foreign exchange through electronic media. However, as noted below, there are deficiencies
in the statistical base which, if rectified, would improve the ability to monitor developments
and formulate appropriate economic policies. Sri Lanka is a participant in the General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS) and metadata were posted on the Fund’s DSBB in July 2000.
Quarterly national accounts and monthly monetary and fiscal revenue data are published
regularly. The authorities have expressed their intention to subscribe to the Special Data
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and have appointed an SDDS coordinator in February 2003.
However, substantial work is still needed for meeting all SDDS requirements and preparing
the necessary metadata before Sri Lanka is ready for subscription.
Most data ROSC recommendations have been implemented while others are expected to be
implemented in the near future. In particular, most data are now being disseminated in the
Census and Statistics and central bank websites; a census of industries is underway while a
Census of Agriculture (including the North and East) has been finalized; a labor force survey
is being conducted on a quarterly basis; the CBSL has issued an advance release calendar
and designated a contact person to assist data users.
Outstanding Statistical Issues
Real Sector
Sri Lanka produces several consumer price indices. The official price measures are the
Sri Lanka Consumer Price Index (SLCPI) and the Colombo Consumer Price Index (CCPI),
produced by the Department of Census and Statistics (DCS). The SLCPI is based on the
spending patterns of the lowest 80 percent of households for the entire country excluding the
Northern and Eastern provinces. The CCPI is based on the spending patterns of the lowest
40 percent of households within the Colombo municipal area. The CCPI, however, uses an
outdated consumption basket and weighting system and has become increasingly irrelevant
as a measure of general inflation. The DCS also publishes a Greater Colombo Price Index
(GCPI), including Colombo city and the suburbs. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka
(CBSL) produces a Colombo District CPI (CDCPI) and a Wholesale cum-Producer Price
Index (WPI/PPI).
A technical assistance report by STA (October 1998) recommended that authorities should
produce a single, high quality official CPI, which should cover all households (rather than
just lower-income ones), and include a reliable price indicator for rent and owner-occupied
housing. In response, a new nationwide CPI, covering the second to eighth income deciles, is
being published. STA expects to publish this new index in IFS, following an assessment of
its quality.

52
A data ROSC mission in June 2001 noted that considerable progress has been made in
meeting most requirements for the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). However,
the mission identified a number of deficiencies. The national accounts suffer from a lack of
data sources and from undeveloped statistical techniques. Sri Lanka does not have periodic
comprehensive benchmarks or a system for conducting regular annual surveys of
establishments. A statistical business register, which would serve as the main basis for
conducting sample surveys, is not available. As a result, the few surveys that are conducted
do not have good sample frames. Most of the data used for regular compilation are obtained
on a timely basis. However, detailed data needed to measure both output and intermediate
consumption are mostly unavailable or not collected. As a result, the estimates of gross value
added are prepared directly relying on outdated fixed ratios established from the base
year 1996, often with outdated studies or ad hoc assumptions. Quarterly indicators are used
for compiling quarterly value added estimates. The methodology for deriving GDP at
constant prices is not satisfactory. Expenditures estimates are available only annually and
rely mostly on commodity flow techniques. Whenever possible, estimates are validated and
checked with other sources.
Fiscal Sector
A government finance statistics mission from STA in May 2003 followed up on the ROSC
recommendation to develop a migration path to compile data in accordance with the
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). As part of that plan, the
authorities agreed to revise from end–2003 the budgetary classifications and the accounting
structure to eventually match the GFSM 2001 classifications of all stocks and flows and to
apply that chart of accounts to all general government units. Progress with the
implementation of these improvements needs to be assessed.
Data for 2002 were reported for publication in the 2004 GFS Yearbook, but no updates were
received since then. These data cover only the budgetary accounts of central government. No
data on the four extra-budgetary funds or the provincial and local governments are provided.
No sub-annual data are provided for publication in IFS.
Monetary Sector
Foreign Currency Banking Units (FCBUs) are now classified as resident institutions in the
monetary survey (since 1998). To adjust for the proportion of nonresident foreign currency
deposits (NRFC), which are actually held by residents (mainly returning migrant workers),
50 percent of these deposits are reclassified from foreign liabilities to domestic deposits.
The authorities started reporting the adjusted monetary data to STA from January 1999.
A monetary statistics mission from STA in June 2003 followed up on issues raised during
the 2001 ROSC mission. In particular, the mission clarified the methodology in the treatment
of Fund accounts; recommended that repos be treated as collateralized loans (rather than on a
change of ownership basis); and resolved discrepancies between the monetary authorities’
data reported to STA and to APD, which reflected problems in the valuation of Fund
accounts and different methodological treatments.

53

External Sector
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka publishes balance of payments statistics on a quarterly and
annual basis. Quarterly data are available three months after the end of the quarter. The data
largely follow the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual.
A STA mission visited Colombo in December 2004. The highest priority issues identified by
the mission included dealing with some shortcomings in the international transactions
reporting system (ITRS), which is the primary data source for the balance of payments. The
recommended improvements included addressing the large values of unclassified
transactions, inclusion of FCBUs (foreign currency banking units) in the data, and providing
an instruction book to assist ITRS reporters to apply classifications and coding more
accurately. The mission advised the authorities on the development of a comprehensive
survey to implement their medium-term plan to introduce international investment position
statistics. The GDDS website advises that FCBUs are now included in the data and that work
has been done on international investment position statistics.
The CBSL provides gross and net official reserves and intervention data in U.S. dollar terms
on a weekly basis.

10/31/2005
02/28/2006

Central bank balance sheet

Consolidated balance sheet of the banking
system

12/2005
Q4/2004
Q4/2004
12/2005
12/2004

Stocks of central government and central
5
government-guaranteed debt

External current account balance

Exports and imports of goods and services

GDP/GNP

Gross external debt

4/29/2005

8/16/2006

3/31/2005

3/31/2005

7/12/2006

7/12/2006

9/16/2006

05/08/2006

05/08/2006

02/06/2006

02/06/2006

02/06/2006

07/2006

8/04/2006

Date
Received

A

Q

Q

Q

M

M

M

W

M

M

M

W

D

D

Frequency of
6
Data

A

Q

Q

Q

M

M

M

W

M

M

M

W

W

D

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

A

Q

Q

Q

M

M

M

W

M

M

M

W

W

D

Frequency of
6
Publication

LO, LO, LNO, LNO

LO, LO, LO, LO

O, O, O, O

O, LNO, LO, O

LO, LO, LO, LO

LNO, LNO, LO, NA, O

LO, LO, LO, NA, LO

LO, NA, LO, NA, LO

O, LO, O, NA, NA

LO, O, O, NA, NA

Data Quality Accuracy
8
and Reliability

Memorandum Items:
Data Quality—
Methodological
7
Soundness

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
7
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published in May 2002 and based on the findings of the mission that took place during June 2001 for the dataset corresponding to
the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively) concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for
recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or not observed (NO), not applicable (NA).
8
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and
validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.

1

12/2005

7/2006

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition
3
of financing —central government

Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition
3
4
of financing —general government

Consumer price index (SLCPI)

02/2/2006

10/31/2005

Broad money

2

10/31/2005

Reserve/base money

Interest rates

06/30/2006

7/31/06

International reserve assets and reserve liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange rates

Date of
Latest
Observation

As of September 20, 2006

Sri Lanka: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance

54

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
October 25, 2006

1.
This statement contains information that has become available since the staff report
was circulated to the Executive Board on October 11, 2006. This information does not alter
the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) left its key policy rates unchanged at its
October review meeting, following a ½ percentage point increase in late September.
Money growth continued to slow in August, with both broad and reserve money growth
declining to 16 percent (from their respective peaks of 19 percent and 21 percent in April).
Private sector credit growth also slowed somewhat to 23 percent in August (from its peak of
25 percent in June). Interest rates of government securities have increased by about
1¼ percentage points since late September (to 11–12 percent for 3-month to 2-year
instruments).
3.
The authorities have limited their interventions in the foreign exchange market
since early October, and the rupee has depreciated by about 2 percent against the
dollar. While the recent decline in world oil prices may provide limited breathing space in
the balance of payments in 2006,1 growth of non-oil imports remains high. International
reserves have remained around $2.4 billion (2.2 months of import cover). The central bank
recently announced the issuance of foreign-currency denominated treasury bonds to
nonresidents (commencing end-October) and additional foreign currency borrowing through
syndicated loans from banks (in November).
4.
On October 20, the CBSL issued a press release announcing the introduction of
a 50 percent margin deposit requirement on imports of “nonpriority consumer items”
and on the opening of letters of credit to pay for such imports. Staff has received a copy
of the regulatory text by which this new exchange control measure has been introduced, and
is actively engaged with the authorities to establish the facts, as well as the jurisdictional
implications of the new measures.
5.
Financial markets have remained relatively calm despite recent intensification of
hostilities. The Colombo Stock Exchange gained a further 3.5 percent during the last two
weeks, with daily turnover volumes exceeding the daily average so far this year.
6.
The 2007 budget is expected to be presented to parliament on November 14. The
authorities reiterated their commitment to reduce the fiscal deficit to 7½ percent of GDP
(excluding tsunami-related spending), but detailed revenue measures are yet to be spelt out in
the budget. The Appropriations Bill of 2007, recently introduced to parliament, points to a
1

Based on the latest WEO oil price baseline, petroleum imports could be lowered by an estimated $90 million in 2006 and
$300 million per year over 2007–2010, compared to projections in the staff report. Domestic fuel prices, liberalized in
September, have also moderated, reflecting the trend in world oil prices.

2
likely increase in capital expenditures for power, railways, ports, and agriculture (totaling
about 2½ percent of GDP), and an increase in defense spending mainly for impending wage
increases and new recruitment (amount to about ¾ percent of GDP). The government expects
these increases to be offset by intensified revenue efforts, adjustments in subsidies and
transfers to local governments, and cuts in noncore and under-funded capital projects.
7.

The authorities have requested an FSAP update in 2007.

8.
The government and the LTTE are scheduled to talk during October 28–29 in
Geneva. Progress has also been made to bring the main opposition party (UNP) to work
together on priority national issues, including the conflict in the North and East, electoral
reform, good governance, economic development, nation building, and social development.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/132
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 13, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation
with Sri Lanka
On October 25, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Sri Lanka.1
Background
Since the last Article IV consultation, the economy has shown resilience in an environment of
rising oil prices and the removal of export quotas for textiles and apparel. Real GDP increased
by 6 percent in 2005 and by a further 8 percent in the first quarter of 2006. Growth was led by
domestic demand and underpinned by improved agricultural performance, strong
tsunami-reconstruction efforts, and robust service sector growth. Inflation declined from
18 percent in January 2005 to 3.5 percent at end-2005, helped by monetary policy tightening
and a sharp decline in food prices. Inflation has, however, risen since early 2006, reflecting
pressures from fast credit growth, the pass-through of higher oil prices, and increases in
wages and pension payments.
The recent escalation of hostilities could pose a risk to future economic prospects. Peace talks
in June did not generate an outcome for an early settlement of the ethnic conflict, bringing the
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities.

2
four-year ceasefire close to collapse and the security situation has deteriorated further in
recent months. The setbacks in the peace process, which have caused some weakening in
confidence, could further affect investment going forward. The government and the main
opposition party (UNP) have recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding on five key
policy areas (the ethnic conflict, electoral reform, good governance, social development,
and structure for collaboration) to facilitate consensus building.
The 2005 fiscal deficit widened to 8.7 percent of GDP, larger than budgeted, mainly because
of tsunami-related spending. Excluding tsunami-related flows, the budget deficit was contained
at 7.5 percent of GDP (compared to 8.2 percent of GDP in 2004). Revenue increased,
reversing the downward trend of previous years. But there were large overruns in oil subsidies
and in the wage bill, which were offset by cuts in other recurrent expenditures and a reduction
in interest payments to protect capital spending.
The fiscal deficit in the first half of 2006 was contained through adjustment of capital
expenditures. Tax revenue grew at a healthy 23 percent, but still fell short of the budget target
of 27 percent growth. There have been sizable overruns on recurrent expenditure, emerging
from larger than budgeted oil subsidies and pensions, as well as additional security and
humanitarian spending. However, a generous capital budget provided scope for adjustment
(in line with project execution) and helped to contain the deficit.
Sri Lanka’s debt remains high by international standards and dollar-denominated commercial
borrowing is building up. Total public debt declined by 11 percent of GDP (to 94 percent of
GDP) in 2005. Sri Lanka was given its first international credit rating by Fitch (BB-) in
December 2005, on par with Vietnam, Indonesia, Brazil, and Turkey. But renewed security
concerns resulted in Fitch revising the country’s outlook from stable to negative. The
government decided to put the planned global bond issuance on hold and mobilized resources
from domestic investors during April-September 2006.
The current account deficit narrowed in 2005, contributing to a stronger balance of payments
despite the oil shock. However, further oil price increases and strong demand for non-oil
imports are expected to contribute to an increase in the current account deficit by end-2006.
Tsunami-related inflows have also slowed somewhat in 2006 while the debt service burden
rose. Gross official reserves have been hovering around $2.4 billion, equivalent to 2.4 months
of imports and 86 percent of short-term debt. The rupee-dollar exchange rate has weakened
somewhat since the second half of 2005. Reflecting high domestic inflation relative to trading
partners, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by 2 percent during the same
period.
Despite monetary policy tightening, credit growth remains high. The central bank raised its
policy rate five times (cumulative 2 percentage points) during November 2004–
December 2005, and by another 1 percentage point recently. Interest rates of government
securities have also increased by about 1¼ percentage points since September 2006.
Reserve money growth was brought down to 16 percent in August 2006 (from 21 percent in

3
April this year). Credit growth to the private sector (including housing loans) remains strong
(about 23 percent in August), contributing to demand pressures.
Banking sector soundness has improved, and progress has been made in strengthening the
supervisory framework. The NPL ratios of the state-owned banks declined from 18 percent
in 2003 to 8 percent in June 2006, and reached similar levels to those of domestic banks.
Capital adequacy ratios have also improved (to 8 percent of total assets), and steps have been
taken to further enhance the regulatory and supervisory framework, including plans to adopt
the Basel II capital accord by 2008. Progress has also been made in restructuring the two
large state-owned commercial banks—their NPL ratios have declined while provisioning and
profitability have improved. Fast credit growth is, however, raising concerns about credit
quality.
Infrastructure development (power and roads) is a central element of the government’s
medium-term development strategy. Their emphasis is on restoring the financial viability of the
power sector while expanding generation capacity by using more cost-efficient sources
(including coal power). A development forum is being planned for early 2007.
Sri Lanka’s financial markets have been holding up despite increased security concerns and
volatility in international financial markets. The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) has become
one of the best performers in the region. The All Share Price Index rose by a cumulative
70 percent during 2004–05, and is up by another 25 percent so far in 2006, owing to a large
extent to the performance of the telecommunication industry. The average P/E ratio of 12 is
similar to those in Bangladesh and Pakistan, but lower than in India. The decline during the
emerging market sell-off in May was modest, reflecting in part investor optimism over the
near-term economic outlook, as well as the lack of alternative channels for other high yield
investments in Sri Lanka.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities’ efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability
and high growth in a challenging political and economic environment, and observed that the
economy has demonstrated remarkable resilience in the face of adverse shocks. Directors
welcomed monetary policy actions to contain inflation, full pass-through of oil prices to reduce
fiscal vulnerability, and enhance revenue collections to help meet the fiscal deficit target
in 2006.
Directors noted, however, that inflationary pressures are rising, the external current account is
widening, and reserves are below comfortable levels. In this context, the rising debt service
burden adds to the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks.
Directors agreed that macroeconomic policies in the near term should be geared towards
reducing inflation and external vulnerabilities. They emphasized that further monetary
tightening may be needed to firmly contain credit growth and keep inflation expectations in

4
check. Directors encouraged the authorities to limit intervention in the foreign exchange market
and allow greater flexibility in the exchange rate to help safeguard external reserves and
maintain competitiveness.
Directors noted that, over the medium term, strong fiscal adjustment will be critical to avoiding
adverse debt dynamics, which would compromise the ability of the government to meet its
poverty reduction and Millennium Development Goals. As increased debt service pressures in
the next few years could complicate debt management, prompt action to ensure fiscal
consolidation will be critical, along with the development of a well-defined medium-term fiscal
policy framework and improvements to debt management.
Against this background, Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment to adhering to
the 2006 budget target and reducing the fiscal deficit target to 7½ percent of GDP in 2007.
Directors also endorsed the authorities’ plan to bring the fiscal deficit down to 5 percent by
2010, and stressed that this would be best achieved through revenue enhancing policies and
rationalization of current spending, so as to protect critical development projects. Further
recourse to commercial borrowing for budgetary purposes should also be limited.
Directors supported the authorities’ medium term framework, which emphasizes raising growth
and reducing vulnerability. They noted that achieving these goals depends critically on
progress towards durable peace and on implementing essential structural reforms.
This includes articulating policies to further reform the tax system and the financial sector,
rationalizing the trade regime, and improving the business climate.
Directors commended the authorities for progress made in strengthening the prudential
regulations and in implementing the 2002 FSAP recommendations. They encouraged the
authorities to make efforts to further strengthen prudential standards to help improve the
monitoring of systemic risks. Timely implementation of the Basel Core Principles is also
essential for the planned adoption of Basel II in 2008. Further restructuring of the two large
public banks should focus on improving lending practices and strengthening capital adequacy.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ recent decision to conduct an FSAP update in 2007.
Directors encouraged further efforts to reduce quasi fiscal losses of the energy companies
through adjustments in electricity tariffs, combined with balance sheet restructuring and
enhanced operational efficiency. In this context, they emphasized the need to develop safety
nets to protect low-income households. Also, strengthening regulatory guidelines for the
energy sector could help broaden the investor base for needed long-term energy sector
financing.
Directors noted that an open trade regime with minimum distortions would best serve
Sri Lanka to benefit from regional and global growth. They encouraged the authorities to curtail
the cess regime and integrate these fees in the tariff structure. They noted that a single low
tariff structure could help maximize efficiency.

5
Directors commended the authorities for significant improvements in social indicators in the
last decade. They welcomed the emphasis of the authorities on reducing rural poverty and
narrowing rural-urban income inequality. They also welcomed the extensive discussions with
the public and private sector, NGOs, civil society, and other stakeholders to build consensus
for the national development strategy.
Directors encouraged the authorities to improve the quality and coverage of fiscal statistics
and to address the remaining issues needed to meet the SDDS requirements. They welcomed
the passage of anti-money laundering legislation in 2006.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

6

Sri Lanka: Selected Economic Indicators
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
Proj.

4.0
6.6
19.5
21.2

6.0
1.0
21.6
22.1

5.4
16.8
21.6
25.0

6.0
3.6
23.7
26.5

7.0
12.0
22.6
27.3

16.5
25.4
-8.9

15.7
24.0
-8.3

15.3
23.5
-8.2

16.1
24.7
-8.7

17.0
26.0
-9.1

105.6

105.8

105.4

93.9

89.6

4,699
6,105

5,133
6,673

5,757
7,999

6,347
8,863

6,950
10,501

-236
-1.4

-74
-0.4

-646
-3.2

-650
-2.8

-1,281
-4.7

444
186

722
201

632
227

1,224
234

1,556
324

1,560
2.4

2,146
2.8

1,833
2.2

2,458
2.5

2,662
2.4

0.1

-4.9

-5.1

8.8

...

62.6

64.1

63.9

55.4

49.2

12.3

10.9

10.1

7.4

10.4

13.4
-4.2
12.0

15.3
-8.7
16.9

19.6
25.1
22.1

19.1
11.9
21.5

16.5
12.3
20.7

9.9

7.4

7.3

10.1

11.8

Domestic economy
Real GDP growth (percent)
Inflation (percent, end of period) 1/
National savings (percent of GDP)
Gross investment (percent of GDP)
Fiscal position
Revenue (percent of GDP)
Expenditure (percent of GDP)
Overall deficit (percent of GDP) 2/
Total government debt (percent of GDP)
External economy
Exports
Imports
Current account balance
(in percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account balance
Of which, direct investment 3/
Gross official reserves (excluding ACU balances)
(in months of prospective imports)
Real effective exchange rate (percent change,
period average) 4/
External debt (in percent of GDP)
Debt service (in percent of goods and services
exports) 5/
Financial variables
Broad money growth (annual percent change) 6/
Of which, net credit to government
Of which, credit to the private sector
Interest rate (percent, end of period) 7/

Sources: Data provided by the Sri Lankan authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Sri Lanka consumer price index.
2/ Excluding grants and privatization receipts.
3/ Includes privatization.
4/ (-) = depreciation.
5/ Foreign exchange debt service on Foreign Currency Bank Unit (FCBU) loans and Sri Lanka Development
Bond (SLDB) is estimated at 1.3 percent and 2.2 percent of goods and services exports in 2004 and 2005,
respectively; and is projected to increase to 9.4 percent in 2006.
6/ Including FCBU.
7/ Three-month treasury bill rate.

Statement by Amal Uthum Herat, Alternate Executive Director for Sri Lanka
October 25, 2006

1.
The Sri Lankan authorities would like to express their appreciation to the staff for a
well focused set of papers. They also wish to thank the Executive Board and Management of
the Fund for their advice and assistance to Sri Lanka.
Recent Economic Developments and Outlook
2.
The Sri Lankan economy has registered a strong performance in 2006, despite
difficulties. Following a growth of 6 percent in 2005, GDP growth increased to a remarkable
8 percent in the first half of 2006. Growth has been broadbased, with agriculture,
manufacturing and services all contributing. The growth momentum is expected to continue,
delivering an annual growth of 7 percent or higher for 2006 as a whole. The benefits of
growth are being reflected in a reduction in unemployment, which declined to 7.2 percent in
the first quarter of 2006 and further to 6.3 percent in the second quarter of 2006, one of the
lowest levels on record. Inflation is of some concern. As projected in our Buff last year,
inflation was brought down to single digit levels by the end of 2005. However, due primarily
to the direct and indirect effects of increased fuel prices, an increase has been seen again in
the past few months. My authorities are greatly concerned about the ill effects of inflation,
particularly on the most vulnerable economic groups, and are taking measures to dampen
inflationary pressure. The recent drop in the international oil prices would be a silver lining.
Supporting future growth, investment grew significantly in the last two years, rising from
22.1 percent of GDP in 2003, to 25 percent in 2004 and further to 26.5 percent in 2005. The
increasing trend is expected to continue in 2006. Confidence in the medium-term growth of
the economy is reflected in the growth in the stock market, which has been one of the best
performers in the region in 2006.
3.
The authorities are committed to fiscal prudence. They are keenly aware of the need
to contain the fiscal deficit, in view of the high level of public debt. However, they are also
strongly of the view that a mere reduction of public expenditure and the fiscal deficit, per se,
is not necessarily a characteristic of prudent public finance management. Hence, they are
committed to increasing revenue and capital expenditure, while curtailing unnecessary
expenditure. They are also committed to providing a safety net to low income groups. The
fiscal policies adopted led to an increase in revenue of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2005, reversing
a declining trend seen over a number of years. A substantial increase in revenue is also
expected in 2006. My authorities recognize that this is a challenging task, but are confident
that it is one that is achievable. As noted by staff, tax revenue has increased by 23 percent in
the first seven months of 2006. Current expenditure was reduced to 18.7 percent of GDP in
2005, from 19.2 percent in 2004, despite tsunami related expenditure, while capital
expenditure was increased from 4.3 percent of GDP to 6.0 percent. The Budget for 2006
projects a containment of the fiscal deficit to 9.1 percent of GDP in 2006, in comparison to
8.7 percent in 2005. In fact, if tsunami related expenditure is excluded, the deficit is
projected to be limited to 7.3 percent of GDP, implying a reduction in the deficit in both
2005 and 2006. There is a significant need for increased infrastructure investment to
maintain growth. Investment in the magnitude or areas required are not likely to come from

2
the private sector. Hence, public investment will be increased, although the government will
continue to explore avenues for public sector-private sector partnerships, as in the past.
4.
On the trade front, the post–Multi Fiber Arrangement environment has presented new
challenges. Despite the increased competition, Sri Lanka has achieved a 5 percent increase
in the value of exports of textiles and garments in the first eight months of 2006. Sri Lankan
exporters have established themselves in niche markets, which has helped expand exports.
With the increasing backward linkages in the industry, and concessions from the GSP+
scheme for the European Union, domestic industrialists have expressed confidence in their
ability to maintain and increase exports.
5.
The high prices of fuel in the international market have continued to take their toll on
Sri Lanka’s economy. Not only have they increased inflation, as noted earlier, but they have
also been a significant drain on external resources. The cost of petroleum imports increased
by a third in 2005. In the first eight months of 2006, the cost of petroleum imports increased
by a further 46 percent, offsetting the gains from increased imports and seriously
exacerbating the trade deficit.
6.
Sri Lanka is committed to maintaining open trade policies. Over the years tariff rates
have been lowered and impediments to trade have been removed. One major constraint
being faced in further tariff reductions is the impact on government revenue. Given the high
levels of public debt and the need to protect revenue, the authorities will proceed cautiously.
The free trade agreements with India and Pakistan have already led to expanded trade with
these countries. Further growth is expected as these economies expand.
7.
Foreign remittances have increased substantially. These remittances provide a
relatively stable and large inflow of funds, and are reflective of enhanced employment of
Sri Lankan workers overseas. The government is taking steps to create additional
opportunities for such employment, while working with the banking sector to facilitate the
flow of remittances into the country.
8.
Monetary policy is focused on containing inflation, while not depressing the
economic expansion. Money and credit expansion associated with the increasing economic
prospects generated a demand pressure. The Central Bank has tightened monetary policy
significantly. Policy rates have been increased on three occasions in 2006. Responding to
the monetary policy measures, inflation is expected to moderate in the coming months. The
Central Bank would continue to monitor market developments carefully and make
appropriate changes to the stance of monetary policy. The Bank’s operations are now
conducted with a high degree of transparency. The monthly monetary policy announcements
convey the Bank’s policy stance clearly to the markets.
9.
The Sri Lankan authorities are committed to a market determined exchange rate.
Intervention in the market is designed to counteract injurious, excessive volatility. As staff
notes, this system has served Sri Lanka well and there is no misalignment of the exchange
rate.

3
10.
The need for a strong and well regulated financial sector to ensure stable economic
growth is clearly recognized. Hence, market development and adequate prudential regulation
figure prominently in the operations of the authorities in the financial sector. As the
vulnerability indicators in the banking sector demonstrate, major improvements have
occurred over the past few years. Non-performing loan ratios have declined substantially,
risk based capital asset ratios have increased, adequate provisioning has taken place and the
sector continues to be highly profitable. A notable feature is the improvement in the two
state owned banks. My authorities are strongly convinced that privatization is no panacea.
Hence, rather than privatizing these banks, they have been given commercial autonomy and
have performed extremely well. Not only have they been profitable, but they have provided
banking services throughout the country, outside urban centers, a feature notably lacking in
the banking practices of foreign banks. The banking sector continues to be highly
competitive, and is open to foreign investment. Foreign banks currently account for 50
percent of all banks in the country. The Central Bank, in a consultation with the banking
industry, has decided to adopt the Basle II capital accord from 2008. Legislation to combat
the financing of terrorism and counter money laundering has been passed. A Financial
Intelligence Unit has been activated to carry out operations in this regard. In order to provide
all stakeholders with an objective assessment of the progress made in the financial sector, my
authorities have recently requested the Fund to conduct an update of the FSAP.
Tsunami Recovery
11.
There has been significant progress in the recovery from the effects of the tsunami.
The fishing and tourism sectors, which were the economic sectors worst affected, have
recorded a notable recovery. The vast majority of houses to be reconstructed are expected to
be completed by the end of 2006. The reconstruction of other infrastructure, including roads
and railways, is expected to be completed within 2-3 years, as planned. My authorities wish
to express again their gratitude to the international community for the assistance rendered in
this reconstruction effort.
Structural Issues
12.
The Sri Lankan authorities are cognizant of the need for structural changes to sustain
economic growth and alleviate poverty. Infrastructure and market development are
recognized as essential elements in these changes.
13.
One area of concern to the authorities is energy. The high international price of fuel
has burdened the government through the cost of subsidies. Hence, the government has
gradually permitted a full pass through of price increases in gasoline and diesel to the
ultimate consumers. Domestic oil companies are now free to charge market prices for these
commodities. A small, but greatly reduced, subsidy is still maintained in the case of
kerosene to protect low income groups. As noted in the interesting study in the Selected
Issues paper, this is an effective way of providing a cushion to the most vulnerable economic
groups. Electricity tariffs have been increased, improving the financial viability of the
Electricity Board. However, in the longer run, lower cost power is essential to sustain
economic growth. Therefore, the government is embarking on developing lower cost sources
of electricity. Projects to build coal based sources and expand hydro power have commenced
with financial assistance from bilateral and multilateral sources.

4
14.
A second area of concern relates to the network of highways. Work on planned major
highways is in progress. Construction work on the highway from the capital to the south of
the country is underway with assistance from multilateral and bilateral sources. Once
completed, these would increase economic activity and help reduce disparities in regional
income.
15.
Financial markets are being strengthened and debt markets developed. In order to
assist in this development, and as a part of the gradual process of capital account
liberalization, the government securities market has been partially opened to non-residents
recently. Non-residents will now be permitted to hold up to 5 percent of government bonds
that have a maturity exceeding two years.
16.
Action is being taken to improve the operations of strategic state owned enterprises.
The government has indicated that these will not be privatized. Rather, their operations
would be streamlined, making them net contributors to government revenue. To this end, the
Strategic Enterprises Management Agency would assist in revamping the operations of these
entities.
Future Directions
17.
The national economic policy, as enunciated on the President’s vision for the country,
is to integrate the positive attributes of a free market economy with domestic aspirations, to
ensure a modern and balanced approach, where domestic enterprises can be supported, while
encouraging foreign investment. The government is committed to following prudent
macroeconomic policies. A concern of my authorities is that despite the growth in recent
years, income disparities have increased. Hence, measures are being adopted to filter the
benefits of economic development to the general public, in particular, to the lower income
groups. Strong efforts are being made to strengthen small and medium scale industries, as
these are the backbone of the economy. A small and medium enterprises bank has been
established to assist these enterprises.
18.
The government is in the final stage of the preparation of a national development
strategy. Extensive discussions have been held with the public and private sectors, NGOs,
civil society and other stakeholders, to develop a clear strategy. The plan is to present the
draft to Parliament later this year to ensure comprehensive discussion and acceptance.
19.
My authorities are committed to achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). Long before these goals were formally adopted by the international community,
Sri Lankan governments committed significant levels of resources to uplifting the welfare of
the citizens. The results are reflected in Sri Lanka’s high levels of human development
indicators. The aim of the government is therefore to achieve and even exceed, all MDGs.
Finally, the Sri Lankan government is deeply committed to the peace process. My authorities
are open to discussions and negotiations, as they are acutely conscious of the benefits of
peace to the people of the country.

