July 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/231

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Kuwait: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; and Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Kuwait, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on December 12, 2005, with the officials of Kuwait on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on March 8, 2005. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of April 25, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its April 25, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
KUWAIT
Staff Report for 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Kuwait
Approved by Saleh M. Nsouli and Juha Kähkönen
March 7, 2005
•

The 2005 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Kuwait from November 29 to
December 12, 2004.

•

The team comprised Messrs. Mansur (head), Delgado, Davoodi, Govil, and Takizawa (all
MCD). Mr. Shaalan, Executive Director for Kuwait, also participated in the policy
discussions.

•

The mission met with Mr. Abdullah Abdul Rahman Al-Taweel, Minister of Commerce and
Industry; Sheikh Salem Abdulaziz Al-Sabah, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK);
Mr. Nabeel Al-Mannae, Deputy Governor, CBK; Dr. Yousef Al-Ebraheem, Economic
Advisor to the Prime Minister; Mr. Abdul Muhsen Yousif Al-Hunaif, Under Secretary,
Ministry of Finance; Ms. Sarah Ahmad Al-Duwaisan, Under Secretary, Ministry of Planning;
and other government officials and private sector representatives.

•

In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation on February 9, 2004, Executive Directors
commended the Kuwaiti authorities for pursuing cautious macroeconomic policies over the
past several years, which had resulted in sizeable fiscal and external current account surpluses,
a comfortable level of net foreign reserves, and low inflation. Directors considered that the
main challenges ahead were to accelerate non-oil economic growth in order to absorb the
rapidly growing Kuwaiti labor force and maintain intergenerational equity over the long run,
as well as to reduce the budgetary dependence on oil revenue. They endorsed the official
strategy of pursuing structural reforms and fiscal strengthening to achieve these objectives. In
particular, they encouraged accelerating reforms to reduce state involvement in the economy,
promote private investment, and improve the functioning of the labor market. While
commending the authorities for the strong overall fiscal position, they noted that the non-oil
fiscal deficit remained high, and supported the authorities' intention to implement fiscal policy
in the context of a medium-term macroeconomic framework by adopting a three-year rolling
budget.

•

Kuwait accepted the obligations of Article VIII on April 5, 1963. It also accepted the Fourth
Amendment of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.

•

The authorities will consider issuing the Public Information Notice (PIN) and publishing the
staff report following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation discussion by the
Executive Board.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... 3
I. Background and Recent Developments ................................................................................... 4
A. Overview...................................................................................................................... 4
B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural Reforms, 2003–04 ................. 6
II. Report on Discussions ........................................................................................................... 11
A. Near- and Medium-term Outlook .............................................................................. 11
B. Macroeconomic Policies............................................................................................ 12
C. Structural Reforms ..................................................................................................... 16
D. External Sector Policy and Regional Integration....................................................... 17
E. Statistical Issues......................................................................................................... 18
III. Staff Appraisal ....................................................................................................................... 19
Text Boxes
1. Kuwait at an Important Crossroad: The Way Forward............................................................ 5
2. Institutional Developments in the Financial Sector............................................................... 10
3. Is the Current Fiscal Stance Sustainable in the Long Run?................................................... 14
Text Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05................................................................................ 22
Summary of Government Finance, 2000/01–2004/05........................................................... 24
Summary of Balance of Payments, 2000–05 ......................................................................... 25
Monetary Survey, 2000–04.................................................................................................... 26
Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 2000–09......................... 27
Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–04 ......................................................................................... 28

Appendices
I. Fund Relations ....................................................................................................................... 30
II. Relations with the World Bank.............................................................................................. 32
III. Statistical Issues..................................................................................................................... 37

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Current Setting
Reflecting sharply higher oil prices and production, economic conditions improved significantly in 2003
and 2004. Real GDP grew at an average rate of 8.5 percent during the two-year period, its highest pace in
the preceding decade and a half. The rebound was also supported by the spillover effects of the renewed
trade relations with Iraq, which in part explained the increase in non-oil GDP growth to 5.5 percent
in 2004. Inflation remained low. The Kuwaiti stock price index more than doubled in 2003, and increased
further by 34 percent in 2004, reflecting improved general economic conditions and abundant liquidity.
Over the medium term, the economic and financial positions are projected to remain strong mainly on
the expectation that world oil prices will decline only gradually. There are downside risks to this
favorable medium-term outlook, since it is based on a historically high level of oil price and output
assumptions. The main economic challenge facing Kuwait is to create sufficient employment
opportunities for the rapidly growing national labor force by accelerating the growth of the private
non-oil economy.

Policy Discussions
•

Although the overall fiscal position is projected to remain in comfortable surplus over the
medium term, the staff cautions the authorities about the sustainability of the rapid increase in
budgetary spending and recommends a strengthening of the structure of the budget through
containment of the wage bill and rationalization of transfers. Managing Kuwait’s large and
growing savings for future generations will also be key to long-term fiscal viability.

•

Non-oil exports have surged in the aftermath of the Iraq war, but sustainability of the increase
from their low base remains a challenge. The authorities are of the view that by positioning
Kuwait as a regional trading hub, increasing investment in petrochemical projects and the
continued GCC integration would help Kuwait to sustain higher non-oil output and exports.

•

Monetary management has been prudent, and succeeded in maintaining price stability and the
exchange rate peg. Since credit expansion continued at a pace much faster than the growth of
the deposit base, recognizing the systemic risk to the financial system, the authorities
imposed a ceiling on the ratio of bank loans to deposits at 80 percent in July 2004. The
authorities underscored the need for firm actions, but also intend to abolish the ceiling once
domestic credit expansion stabilizes. Significant progress has been achieved in strengthening
the financial sector institutions and in implementing the FSAP recommendations.

•

Progress has also been made on the structural reform front, albeit at a slow pace. Under the
Kuwaitization policy, the authorities are pursuing a two-pronged strategy entailing imposition
of sector-specific quotas and training of the unemployed Kuwaitis. The staff calls for limiting
public sector hiring to essential areas, establishing links between public sector wages and
productivity, and rationalizing public sector benefits.

•

While progress has been made in the dissemination of financial and fiscal data, efforts would
be needed to address data weaknesses in a number of areas.

-4-

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
A. Overview1
1.
The 2004 consultation discussion was held against the backdrop of accelerating
economic activity, high oil prices, and large fiscal and external current account surpluses.
Reflecting sharply higher oil prices and production, economic conditions improved
significantly in 2003 and 2004. Strong growth in oil revenue generated substantial fiscal and
current account surpluses, but further increased Kuwait’s dependence on oil.2 The effects of
the renewed trade relations with Iraq also supported economic growth. Kuwait continues to
depend heavily on foreign workers comprising nearly two-thirds of its population of
2.6 million and four-fifths of its labor force of 1.6 million in June 2004. The immigrant labor
force has increased further by about 30 percent during the period 2000 to end-June 2004.3
2.
Since 2000, the Kuwaiti authorities have undertaken a comprehensive structural
reform program to: (a) accelerate non-oil GDP growth; (b) generate employment for the
Kuwaiti nationals at a fast pace; and (c) ensure fiscal surpluses so as to maintain
intergenerational equity over the long run. The staff and the authorities agree on the
appropriateness of this strategy. In the previous Article IV consultations, the staff made
recommendations and encouraged the authorities to speed up structural reforms, strengthen
the budget structure, train Kuwaiti labor force, and apply sector specific quotas in a flexible
manner. Progress has been made in many of these areas, although the implementation of the
reform agenda has been slower than expected, in part, due to difficulties in reaching a
political consensus and regional uncertainties. Financial sector institutional framework has
been strengthened further, including implementation of some of the FSAP recommendations.
Preparations are underway to implement the three-year rolling budget by 2006/07 in line
with the FAD mission’s recommendations; however, efficient ways of transferring oil wealth
and strengthened public expenditure management will be key to long-term fiscal
sustainability. The authorities however look forward to accelerating the pace of reforms,
taking advantage of the opportunities created by the post Iraq war developments (Box 1).

1

Kuwait’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively.
Data issues are covered in Appendix III.

2

In 2003, oil accounted for 51.2 percent of total GDP, 84 percent of total exports, and 77.2 percent of total
budgetary revenue.

3

The accompanying Selected Issues Paper discusses Kuwait’s economic structure, past economic performance,
and future prospects.

-5-

Box 1. Kuwait at an Important Cross Road: The Way Forward
Kuwait’s economic structure and performance suffered greatly during the 1990s owing to the
regional security situation and the shift to a more public sector-oriented economic program. The
change of the regime in Iraq and the opening up of markets in the region have contributed to the
current growth spurt in Kuwait and created a window of opportunity for sustaining this momentum
leading to a more diversified economic structure dominated by the private sector. This box
describes Kuwait’s past legacy and its new challenges.
The invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and the destruction that followed altered the course of Kuwait’s
International Comparisons of Kuwait's Productivity Growth, 1980–2002 1/
developmental path leading
to a less diversified
Average Annual Rates of Change
economy compared with
Output
Per Worker Contribution of
other GCC countries, a
Real Output
Per Worker
Capital Education
TFP
larger public sector, and a
Kuwait
0.9
-2.4
0.5
0.4
-3.3
slowdown in economic
3.8
0.5
0.5
0.4
-0.4
growth. The invasion was a MENA (19)
exporters
3.3
-0.1
0.5
0.5
-1.0
major shock to an otherwise Oil
Non-oil exporters
4.4
1.3
0.4
0.4
0.4
3.6
0.2
0.6
0.3
-0.7
stable economic system and GCC
inflicted large human,
Developing countries
(Excluding East Asia and MENA) (44)
3.4
1.0
0.7
0.3
-0.1
physical, and financial
East Asia (7)
6.3
3.9
2.0
0.4
1.5
losses. The high budgetary
Industrialized countries (21)
2.6
1.6
0.6
0.3
0.7
Latin America (22)
2.4
-0.4
-0.2
0.3
-0.5
spending associated with
South Asia (4)
4.9
2.7
1.3
0.3
1.0
rehabilitation and
reconstruction as well as
Sources: "Determinants of Growth in the MENA Region," G. Abed and H. Davoodi (2004).
changes in the composition
1/ Numbers in parenthesis denote number of countries.
of government spending
toward wages, benefits, and transfers created hard-to-reverse expenditure commitments and
contributed to greater inflexibility in the fiscal structure. The end of Kuwait’s traditional role as a
regional trading hub and the loss of export markets to Iraq led to a secular decline in non-oil exports
and re-exports. Reflecting these developments and the security risk, private investment also
declined steadily throughout the period contributing to low levels of non-oil GDP growth in
Kuwait. Against this background, apart from a brief rebound following the 1990 invasion, there has
been a secular decline in various measures of productivity (labor and the total factor productivity
(TFP)).
The authorities are aware that Kuwait needs to increase its investment rate significantly, while
simultaneously boosting its factor productivity. Their policy response to overcome these problems
and reduce the dependence on oil entails: (i) opening up the economy; (ii) improving the investment
climate; (iii) reestablishing Kuwait as a regional trading hub through various large scale projects;
(iv) developing its petrochemical industry to broaden the non-oil production base; (v) developing
oil reserves in the North Fields with possible private sector participation; (vi) increasing investment
in the oil sector to boost oil production and refinery capacity; and (vii) adopting a phased approach
to implementation of structural reforms by taking stock of outdated laws and regulations with the
intention of amending them to suit a more market-friendly business environment.
The authorities hope that these reforms, if implemented appropriately, will increase private
investment, augment the relative size of Kuwait’s private sector, boost non-oil GDP growth to
absorb the growing labor force, increase productivity, and diversify the economy.

-6-

B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural Reforms, 2003–04
3.
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance
has been strong in 2003 and 2004 reflecting
sharply higher oil prices and production
(Table 1). Real GDP grew at an average rate of
8.5 percent during the two-year period, its highest
pace in the preceding decade and a half. The
rebound was also supported by the spillover effects
of the renewed trade relations with Iraq and an
expansionary fiscal policy, which account for the
steady increase in non-oil GDP growth to an
estimated 5.5 percent in 2004. After taking into
account the terms-of-trade gains, per capita income
increased by 34.5 percent during the two-year
period to $19,560 in 2004. Inflation remained low
at less than 2 percent4 and the rate of
unemployment remained stable at about 3.5 percent
despite higher labor force growth. The Kuwaiti
stock price index more than doubled in 2003, and
increased further by 34 percent in 2004, reflecting
higher corporate profits, an improved economic
outlook and abundant liquidity.

Real Sector Indicators
(Percentage Changes)

25

25

Real non-oil GDP

20

20

Real oil GDP
Real GDI

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

Stock Market Indicators
(In percent of GDP)

7,000

160

6,000

140

Stock market capitalization 1/
(Right scale)

5,000

120

4,000
100

3,000
2,000

80

Stock price index
(left scale)

60

1,000
0

40

1999Q1

1999Q4

2000Q3

2001Q2

2002Q1

2002Q4

2003Q3

2004Q2

Sources: National authorities, Kuwait Stock Exchange, and the Arab Monetary Fund.
1/ 2004 data are for September.

4.
The central government budgetary position remained strong due to significantly
higher oil revenues, with annual fiscal surpluses
Fiscal Performance
at about 20 percent of GDP (Table 2). Oil
(In percent of non-oil GDP)
revenues increased by 33 percent during the twoyear period, while non-oil domestic revenues
declined in nominal terms, mainly reflecting the
declining Gulf war-related U.N. compensation
payments. The stance of fiscal policy was
expansionary in 2003/04 and 2004/05, as a large
part of the higher oil revenue was spent on various
government programs.5 In 2003/04, almost
90 percent of the increase in hydrocarbon revenues
110

110

Total expenditure

100

90

Non-oil revenue excluding investment income

90

80

Non-oil deficit

80

100

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

4

The open and flexible nature of Kuwait’s immigrant labor market, the policy of keeping the prices of public
sector services, gasoline, water, and electricity unchanged, and the policy of not granting any general salary
increase for the public sector employees have dampened to a large extent the inflationary effect of the KD
depreciation in real effective terms.

5

Expenditure grew by 24 percent in real terms during 2003–04, but declined in relation to GDP because of the
oil price induced sharp increase in nominal GDP.

-7-

were spent on goods and services, subsidies and transfers, wages and salaries, and on capital
projects. Although half of the increase in hydrocarbon revenues is expected to be saved
in 2004/05, the growth in spending is projected to be higher than in the preceding year. A
part of the increase in expenditure was attributable to security-related outlays and to a onetime transfer of higher oil revenues to the citizens.6 Wages and salaries, and subsidies and
transfers also increased significantly and are estimated to have accounted for almost
70 percent of current expenditures. As a manifestation of the expansionary fiscal stance, the
non-oil primary deficit as a percent of non-oil GDP increased by 8.3 percentage points
during the two-year period to 59.3 percent in 2004. Most of the fiscal surplus was transferred
to the Reserve Fund for the Future Generation (RFFG) and the General Reserve Fund (GRF),
ensuring the most rapid asset buildup since the 1990 Gulf war.
External sector

External Sector Development
(In percent of GDP)

70

5.
With higher oil export receipts, the
external current account surplus more than
doubled in relation to GDP over the two-year
period 2003–04 (Table 3). Exports grew at an
annual rate of 33.6 percent due to a surge in oil
and non-oil exports, the latter supported by a
sharp increase in exports and re-exports to Iraq.
Imports also increased sharply, driven by
accelerating domestic activity and re-exports to
Iraq. Although the services account deficit
widened because of higher payments associated
with travel and transportation, it was more than
offset by higher investment income. As in the
past, much of the current account surplus was
invested abroad by both the public and private
sectors, contributing to large capital account
outflows. External reserves of the Central Bank
of Kuwait (CBK) remained comfortable.7 The
depreciation of the U.S. dollar against other
major currencies and the low inflation in

70

Oil exports
Non-oil export
Current account balance
Central bank gross external reserves

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
g

Exchange Rate Movements
(1990=100)

135
130

Nominal effective exchange rate

125
120
115
110

Real effective exchange rate

105
100
95

U.S. dollar per dinar

90
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System ; and Central Bank of Kuwait.

6

At the time of the Iraq war in 2003, security-related additional outlays amounted to KD 121 million
(0.9 percent of GDP). The authorities also transferred KD 200 per citizen, amounting to KD 192 million
(1.2 percent of GDP), in January 2005, in lieu of a general salary increase for the public sector employees.

7

The CBK foreign reserves declined by $1.7 billion in 2003 reflecting the large expansion of credit by
commercial banks, which was funded by the banks drawing down their excess (remunerated) reserves at the
CBK. However, as monetary conditions tightened in the second-half of 2004, CBK external reserves increased
by $0.7 billion to about $8.4 billion (5.7 months of imports) by end-December 2004.

-8-

Kuwait have contributed to a depreciation of the dinar by 9 percent in real effective terms
during January 2003–October 2004. The continued depreciation of the dinar in real effective
terms has largely corrected the appreciation experienced during 1995–2002, and has
enhanced the competitiveness of non-oil exports.
Monetary and financial developments
6.
Monetary policy has been consistent with the objective of maintaining the
exchange rate peg, which also contributed to
the continued price stability. In line with low
Developments in 3-Month Deposit Interest Rates
(In percent per anum)
10
10
U.S. interest rates, CBK’s discount rate
9
remained stable at 3.25 percent in 2003 and the 9
8
8
interest rates on three-month KD deposits were
U.S. dollars
7
7
stable at about 1.5 percent. The spread between
6
6
the KD and the U.S. dollar deposit rates at
5
5
Kuwaiti dinar
domestic banks, which also remained stable in
4
4
the range of 60–80 basis points, was considered 3
3
2
2
adequate to prevent potential capital outflows
1
1
and to maintain the stability of the exchange
0
0
rate. The record low interest rates, abundant
1999Q1 1999Q4 2000Q3 2001Q2 2002Q1 2002Q4 2003Q3 2004Q2
Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
liquidity, and increased trade with Iraq
facilitated a 21 percent increase in credit to the private sector. The credit demand from the
private sector was only partially offset by a decline in net credit to the government, resulting
in an acceleration of broad money growth by 3 percentage points to 7.8 percent in 2003.
7.
Monetary conditions tightened in the second half of 2004, as a consequence of
the increase in interest rates and the introduction of a ceiling on the credit to deposit
ratio. In response to the rise in the U.S. Federal Funds rate and in order to widen the interest
rate spread in favor of the KD to attract KD
Money and Credit
deposits, the CBK raised the discount rate on
(Percentage changes)
40
40
five occasions since July 2004, by 150 basis
35
35
Broad money (M3)
points to 4.75 percent by end-December 2004. In 30
Private sector credits
Total deposits
30
July 2004, the authorities also imposed a ceiling 25
25
on the ratio of credit (net of provisions) to
20
20
deposits at 80 percent, in order to address a
15
15
prudential concern regarding the rapid expansion 10
10
of credit to the private sector over the last three
5
5
years without a parallel increase in bank
0
0
deposits. Banks have until June 2005 to comply
-5
-5
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
fully with the ceiling. Since the average of the
Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
net credit to deposits ratio as of endSeptember 2004 was 78.6 percent, its introduction contributed to a gradual deceleration of
the credit expansion to 15.3 percent over the 12-month period through end-December 2004.

-9-

8.
The 2003 FSSA report concluded that Kuwaiti banks were well capitalized and
liquid, with no imminent threat to the stability of the banking system.8 Despite the rapid
expansion of credit, the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) remained comfortable at 17.3 percent
as of end-September 2004, well above its minimum regulatory level of 12 percent.9 Asset
quality also continued to improve and net bank profits and returns on equity also increased
significantly.10 Progress was also made in strengthening the financial sector institutional
framework, including in implementing some of the FSAP recommendations (Box 2).
Structural reforms
9.
Progress has been made on the structural reform front, albeit at a slow pace,
because of delays in reaching a political consensus. The Foreign Investment Law, which
allows foreigners to own up to 100 percent of Kuwaiti companies, came into effect in 2003.11
A draft Privatization Law and an amendment to the Tax Law to lower the corporate income
tax that applies only to foreign companies from 55 percent to 25 percent are awaiting
parliamentary approval. The authorities allowed private sector participation in sectors
previously dominated by the public sector and are also identifying the entities that could be
privatized under the existing laws. The Kuwaitization12 policy has been in place since
October 2003, entailing training of unskilled Kuwaiti nationals and enforcing quotas by
imposing penalties. Under this policy, 3,000 Kuwaitis have been trained13 and, through the

8

The Kuwaiti banking system with an asset base of KD19 billion (125 percent of GDP) accounts for about
75 percent of the assets of the financial system. Eleven banks are operating in Kuwait as of end-2004; out of
which one is state-owned (with 2 percent market share), one is foreign-owned (about 1 percent market share),
and two are Islamic banks (the second largest bank in Kuwait accounting for 6 percent of market share, and a
new bank licensed in October 2004).

9

The CAR declined by 2.4 percentage points between January 2003 and September 2004, primarily due to the
expansion of credit.

10

The nonperforming loans ratio fell from 7.8 percent as of end-2002 to 5.4 percent by end-September 2004.
Net profits of banks increased by 21.2 percent in 2003 and a further 10 percent in the first three quarters of 2004
raising the return on equity to 20.4 percent as of end-September 2004.

11

The government has already approved projects amounting to $2.4 billion under the law, and new investment
proposals amounting to $1.8 billion are under review by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
12

The Kuwaitization policy aims at increasing the proportion of Kuwaitis employed in the private sector by
establishing targets (proportional to the workforce) that the nongovernment companies must observe. The
proportion varies from sector to sector. Nongovernment companies not complying with the established limits are
not allowed to conclude contracts or do business with the government.

13

Twenty five percent of them have been hired by the private sector.

- 10 -

enforcement of the new sector specific quotas, 8,00014 Kuwaitis have been hired by the
private sector.
Box 2. Institutional Developments in the Financial Sector
The authorities have made commendable progress in strengthening the financial sector
institutional framework. Substantial progress has been made in implementing most of the measures
recommended by the 2003 FSSA report. The following are the salient institutional developments.
General: The blanket guarantee on bank deposits was removed in April 2004, and the CBK has started
discussions with the banks in order to introduce a limited deposit insurance scheme.
Banking: (i) A legal amendment to Law 32/1968 on currency and banking was passed by parliament in
January 2004 allowing the establishment of branches of foreign banks; a foreign bank (BNP Paribas) has
been authorized to open a branch in Kuwait and other applications are being considered; (ii) the legal
changes also enable CBK to exchange information with foreign supervisors, and CBK supervisory staff
has conducted inspections of foreign subsidiaries of Kuwaiti banks; (iii) the minimum capital for local
banks was increased from KD 3 million to KD 75 million, and a limit of 5 percent on a bank’s capital
ownership concentration was established, beyond which CBK’s authorization is needed; and (iv) CBK’s
supervisory authority has been extended to Islamic banks, and the regulatory framework has been
strengthened, in consultation with the Islamic Financial Services Board. As a result, Kuwait’s financial
regulation and supervision is currently compliant or largely compliant with all Basel Core Principles
(BCP), according to the authorities’ self-assessment.
Securities: A draft Capital Markets Law, creating a single, independent and accountable authority with
full powers to develop and regulate the securities market and industry has been drafted. The law, which
also addresses entry standards, insider trading, and market manipulation, is under review by the Ministry
of Finance, prior to its eventual submission to parliament.
Insurance: A new Insurance Law has been drafted and submitted to the Ministry of Finance for review.
The law will specify the independent nature of the insurance supervisory authority and define its
institutional form. Training of about 20 insurance supervisors has already begun.
Payment system: The new Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment system is fully operational
since August 2004; exposure limits were assigned to all participating institutions; and information on
requirements to join the system is available from CBK upon request. Therefore, the authorities are
confident that current regulations and practices comply with all the Core Principles for such systems.
AML/CFT: The National Committee for AML/CFT was reorganized in April 2004, in order to
strengthen the AML/CFT strategy design and policy implementation. The amendments to the law
32/1968 on currency and banking enabled the sharing of information with other foreign AML/CFT
authorities. In addition, the committee has prepared a draft executive order extending the coverage of
AML/CFT oversight onto the broad financial sector, currently under review by the Ministry of Finance
for its approval.

14

This is equivalent to 0.6 percent of the total labor force in Kuwait and about 3 percent of the total Kuwaiti
labor force in 2003. The total labor force in Kuwait was 1.45 million in 2003.

- 11 -

II. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS
10.
The discussions focused on the recent economic developments and policy
implementation; the outlook for 2005 and the medium term; the authorities’ plans for
accelerating the reform program; the need to improve the structure of the budget; the
importance of strengthening further the financial sector; and developments with regard to the
planned Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) monetary union.
A. Near- and Medium-Term Outlook
11.
In 2005, both the fiscal and external current account surpluses are projected to
remain high. Real GDP, however, is projected to slow down to about 3 percent, since both
oil and non-oil GDP growth are likely to taper off. The slowdown in non-oil GDP growth
assumes that the pace of reform will remain sluggish, and as in the past, only a small part of
private and public savings will be utilized domestically. The slowdown also reflects the
wearing-off of the boost generated through the pickup in trade with Iraq. However, despite
this slowdown in GDP growth, gross national income is expected to increase at a respectable
pace boosted by higher investment income from abroad (10 percent of GDP).
12.
Over the medium term (2006–09), the economic and financial positions are
projected to remain strong. Both the external current account and fiscal positions will
remain in large surplus, albeit at declining levels, mainly reflecting the projected fall in oil
prices (Table 5). In view of the expected slow pace of structural reforms, the concomitant
absence of a broadening of the domestic non-oil production base, and as the spillover effects
of the reconstruction of Iraq wear off, non-oil GDP growth is projected to gradually decline.
The baseline outlook envisages a modest pickup in gross domestic investment, supported by
higher private investment, but still insufficient to increase non-oil GDP to create jobs at a
pace required for the fast growing Kuwaiti labor force. However, the outlook for investment
income will improve significantly because of higher interest rates, contributing an additional
1.5–2 percent of GDP to the projected gross disposable income each year.
13.
Kuwait’s medium-term non-oil growth prospects depend critically on the pace of
structural reforms to create the enabling conditions for attracting a much higher level
of private investment in the domestic economy. Generating employment opportunities for
the growing labor force will require much higher levels of domestic investment than
observed in recent years.15 The authorities noted that the stepped-up efforts on their part to
improve the investment climate and the strategy outlined in Box 1 should boost domestic

15

The Kuwait labor force has been growing at about 6 percent per annum in recent year. Meanwhile, gross
domestic investment as a percentage of GDP has declined sharply from pre-2000 levels (as percent of GDP to
8.7 percent of GDP in 2003), except for a modest pickup in 2004.

- 12 -

investment,16 although the outlook is still uncertain. They also noted that further opening of
the economy with the introduction of the GCC common external tariff and the initiatives
under the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA) should boost trade and growth prospects
for the non-hydrocarbon sector.
14.
There are downside risks to the
Overall Fiscal and Current and Account:
favorable medium-term baseline outlook,
Alternative Oil Price Scenario
(
since it is based on a historically high level
of oil price and output assumptions. A
large degree of uncertainty remains with
regard to world oil demand and supply,
pointing to substantial volatility and
downside risks to the oil price projection, as
experienced in the past. On the assumption of
an oil price that is $5 per barrel below the
present WEO medium-term oil price
projection—equivalent to about one standard
deviation below the baseline—staff estimates
indicate that the fiscal surplus in relation to
GDP would be 6 percentage points lower than in the baseline scenario in 2005/06, steadily
declining to a surplus of only 6 percent of GDP by 2009/10. The current account surplus will
also decline by 5–7 percentage points in relation to GDP over the medium term to reach
17.8 percent.
In percent of GDP)

45

45

Current account balance (under baseline scenario)
Current account balance (under alternative oil price scenario)
Fiscal balance (under baseline scenario)
Fiscal balance (under alternative oil price scenario)

40

40

35

35

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5
0

0

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

B. Macroeconomic Policies
Fiscal policy
15.
Kuwait’s fiscal strategy continues to be characterized by the distribution of a
part of oil wealth to the current generation while building up sizable financial assets for
future generations. The distribution of oil wealth to the current generation has been
implemented through the creation of jobs in the public sector as well as through subsidies
and transfers. Employment in the public sector accounted for more than 80 percent of
Kuwaiti labor force in 2003, and wages, salaries, subsidies, and transfers are estimated to
have amounted to 59 percent of government expenditure in 2003/04. Sizable assets for future
generations have been built up by setting aside 10 percent of all government revenue for the
Reserve Fund for Future Generations (RFFG) and saving the fiscal surpluses in the General
Reserve Fund.

16

To this end, the construction of a port on Boubiyan Island (a joint public-private venture that is likely to be
ready by 2008) and the proposed North-South GCC train line would contribute to higher investment and
facilitate trade-related activities.

- 13 -

16.
Although the overall fiscal position is projected to remain in comfortable surplus
over the medium term, the current high level of the non-oil deficit cannot be sustained
over the long term. An unchanged fiscal stance will not only be inconsistent with the
maintenance of total net wealth, the accumulated reserves could be exhausted within the next
25 years and lead to a buildup of debt at an unsuitable pace thereafter (Box 3)17. Such high
non-oil deficits may also create uncertainty and capacity problems in the non-oil economy.
The staff accordingly recommended a strengthening of the structure of the budget through
expenditure containment, rationalization of transfers, and revenue measures along the lines
outlined in the baseline medium-term fiscal scenario. The fiscal stance underpinning the
staff’s medium-term scenario envisages a reduction in the non-oil primary deficit in relation
to non-oil GDP over the medium term by 11 percentage points to historically normal levels.
It also allows for a greater flexibility in making higher allocations for health, education, and
infrastructure development, while at the same time permitting an accelerated accumulation of
financial assets for future generations. The authorities acknowledged that achieving these
objectives will require forceful measures limiting the growth of expenditure in the coming
years, which would be possible politically once the surge in oil prices ends and the
associated pressures for spending stabilize.
17.
The authorities should use efficient ways of transferring oil wealth and
strengthen public expenditure management. The staff underscored the need for not relying
on the public sector as the “employer of last resort”, and putting in place stricter controls on
new hiring; and called for rationalizing subsidies and transfers, which accounted for more
than 25 percent of total expenditure in 2003/04, and targeting them to the low-income
families. The authorities noted that deliberations were continuing on the utility tariff
rationalization issues, which could be concluded in the next two years. The staff supported
the authorities’ intention to use part of the higher oil revenue on education, health, and
infrastructure projects, with due consideration given to absorptive capacity. The authorities
should also implement the FAD technical assistance recommendations to improve public
expenditure management and formulate fiscal policy in the context of a macroeconomic
framework and a three-year rolling budget. The authorities observed that they were in the
process of completing their discussions on the rolling budget with other ministries and hoped
to have it in place by 2006/07. The staff urged the authorities to consider further
harmonization of the tax structures (both direct and indirect) among the GCC countries and
to introduce a value-added tax (VAT) at a low basic rate in coordination with other GCC
countries.

17

For more details on this issue, see the accompanying Selected Issues Paper.

- 14 -

Box 3. Is the Current Fiscal Stance Sustainable in the Long Run?
Kuwait has accumulated large fiscal surpluses,
enabling it to built up a sizeable asset position for the
future generations. The fiscal position is also expected to
remain comfortable over the medium term, but the recent
rapid increase in expenditures raises doubts about the
sustainability of the current fiscal stance over the longer
term. Expenditures have grown at a very rapid pace in
recent years, contributing to a sharp increase in the non-oil
deficit (60 percent of non-oil GDP). This level is very high
by international standards, and even by historical Kuwaiti
standards. The issue of sustainability of the current fiscal
stance is further compounded by the fact that more than
90 percent of government revenues are from oil and
investment income from external financial assets, both of
which are subject to significant global uncertainties.

70

70

GCC Countries: Non-oil Fiscal Deficit, 2003
(In percent of non-oil GDP)

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
U.A.E.

Bahrain

Oman

Saudi Arabia

Qatar

Kuwait

Source: Data provided by the national authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

The current fiscal stance is found to be unsustainable based on two different frameworks: the Permanent
Income Hypothesis (PIH) of consumption and the standard debt sustainability analysis. The following analysis is
based on “Fiscal Sustainability and Options for
Adjustment” in the accompanying Selected Issues
Fiscal Adjustment Paths Under Alternative Scenarios
paper. Under both frameworks, the current fiscal
(In percent of non-oil GDP)
policy stance is not sustainable with reasonable
-20
assumptions regarding global oil prices, Kuwait’s real
-30
PIH rule
oil and non-oil sector growth rates, inflation rates, and
-40
nominal rates of return on financial assets. The PIH
rule targets a constant total net wealth in real terms
Adjustment scenario
-50
where total net wealth is defined as the sum of the
Unchanged fiscal policy stance
-60
value of hydrocarbon reserves and gross financial
assets net of gross financial debt. The fiscal path for
-70
the period 2005–08 is assumed to be the medium-term
-80
fiscal scenario in Table 5. From 2009 onwards,
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
however, the net primary deficit starts exceeding the
permissible level if expenditure in relation to non-oil GDP remains unchanged at the current level. The PIH
approach, however, has its limitations since the path of fiscal stance that is implied is indeed a conservative one and
is one of many that ensure fiscal sustainability. Also, such analysis is sensitive to changes in the key assumptions.
A standard debt sustainability analysis also reconfirms that the unchanged fiscal policy stance would lead to
exhaustion of accumulated assets and a rapid
Net Financial Debt/Asset Under Alternative
buildup of debt over the long term. For the
Scenario (In percent of GDP)
first 20 years of the simulation, the net financial asset
position is positive. However, the net financial asset
400
position rapidly declines after 2012 and turns into a
Adjustment scenario
300
net debt position by 2030 as the increase in primary
200
expenditure starts dominating the much smaller
increase in revenues. Contributing to the smaller
100
Unchanged fiscal policy stance
increase in revenues is a projected rather flat profile
0
of oil export receipts. The unchanged fiscal policy
-100
cannot be maintained indefinitely (given the outlook
-200
for oil prices and production), no matter how large is
-300
Kuwait’s net financial asset position; the growing
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
fiscal deficit will eventually exhaust the financial
assets accumulated for the future generations, leading to unsustainable government debt levels. A possible fiscal
adjustment scenario prepared by the staff points to 1½ percentage points of non-oil GDP in discretionary measures
each year over the long term, to ensure a stable debt to GDP ratio.

- 15 -

18.
Proper safeguard arrangements and efficient management of RFFG assets will
be key to Kuwait’s long-term fiscal viability. Kuwait has built up a sizable investment
abroad, despite the setback of the 1990 Gulf war, and the assets are likely to be built up at a
faster pace in the coming years because of higher oil revenue. Investment income of the
RFFG is already significant and is likely to assume greater importance over time. The
authorities have ensured that safeguard arrangements were in place through internal and
external audits of the investment accounts, in addition to oversights by the Board of
Directors of the Kuwait Investment Authority and by parliament. The authorities concurred
with the staff’s observation that an efficient management of these assets would be key to
Kuwait’s long-term fiscal sustainability.
Monetary and financial sector policies, and the exchange system
19.
Monetary policy has been successful in maintaining price stability and
supporting the exchange rate peg. The Kuwaiti dinar has been officially pegged to the
U.S. dollar since January 2003, and the authorities did not foresee a change in the exchange
rate policy in the period leading up to the establishment of the GCC monetary union by 2010.
At this point, all options remain open regarding the exchange rate regime under the monetary
union. The staff considers the peg sustainable. The recent real effective exchange rate
depreciation and the surge in non-oil exports indicate that Kuwait’s exchange rate remains
competitive.
20.
The limit on the loans to deposit ratio was introduced because of prudential
considerations, and is expected to be abolished once domestic credit expansion stabilizes
at a sustainable pace. The authorities explained that the implementation of the ratio
responded to the need to preserve systemic stability, given the growth in loans to deposits
ratio during the past three years. They were of the view that the ratios for many local banks
reached uncomfortable levels, posing a systemic threat in the event of an adverse shock of
domestic or external origin. The staff noted the effectiveness of the measure in containing the
impact of a potential asset price correction on the stability of the financial system and
endorsed the precedence of prudential concerns over other short-term effects that the
measure may have. The staff, however, pointed out that this type of ceiling may have
negative implications over the medium term, particularly on financial sector profitability and
resource allocation. Accordingly, once domestic credit expansion stabilizes, the staff
recommended addressing the prudential problem through strengthening of risk-based
prudential ratios. The authorities explained that the stability of the financial system and the
soundness of its units far outweighed the short-term profitability considerations, and the
limit, together with other supervisory regulations, could provide an incentive for banks to
maintain higher quality assets with sustainable returns. However, the authorities concurred
with the staff’s recommendation that the ceiling should be abolished once the required ratio
is achieved by the local banks and domestic credit expansion stabilizes.
21.
The staff welcomed the substantial progress achieved in strengthening the
financial sector regulation and supervision, and in liberalizing the financial system,
described in Box 2. The staff, however, expressed its concern about the possibility that the

- 16 -

prevailing sector specific lending rate ceilings could be binding and that the ceilings,
together with the ceiling on the credit to deposit ratio, may interfere with the efficient
allocation of resources by the market. The authorities concurred with the staff’s view, but
noted that the sector specific ceilings were mandated by a law and, despite the recent
increases in rates, the ceilings were not binding for the corporate lending rates. The staff
underscored the importance of the two important draft laws aimed at providing the legal
basis for the independence of the Capital Markets Authority and Insurance Supervision
Authority, and hoped for their speedy legislation by parliament.
C. Structural Reform
22.
The authorities are pursuing a multi-pronged strategy to accelerate the
implementation of structural reforms. The government is articulating its reform strategy
through various public awareness programs, particularly after the Prime Minister’s recent trip
to Asia. It has also taken several measures to open up the economy further.18
23.
The staff recommended that the authorities encourage market-based pricing of
publicly provided goods and services, and foster FDI inflows into Kuwait. In particular,
appropriate pricing of electricity, petroleum products, and water should be part of the
government action plan to encourage the growth of the private sector, ensure an efficient
allocation of resources, and reduce the burden on the budget.19 In this context, the staff noted
the importance of establishing a regulatory framework and appropriate institutional
arrangements to ensure protection against monopolies; supported the authorities’ efforts to
foster FDI in Kuwait; encouraged them to improve the investment climate for boosting
private investment in general and, for tax purposes, treat both domestic and foreign
companies equally. The current FDI law stipulates a high degree of discretion for approving
individual investment projects and a lengthy approval process for screening applicants. It
does not have a clear “negative list” which is the best practice followed worldwide.20 The
Foreign Investment Bureau, the investment agency created under the law to facilitate foreign
investment, should also be independent and fully operational.

18

These include: (a) granting of visas to citizens of some 34 countries upon arrival in Kuwait; (b) issuing work
permits to tourists who can find a willing employer within the first month of their arrival; and (c) taking stock of
all outdated laws and regulations with the intention of amending them to suit a more market-friendly business
environment.

19

However, targeted subsidies could be considered to protect low-income families from the increase in the cost
of living.
20

Under the FDI by-laws, eleven sectors have been identified for 100 percent foreign ownership except for
enterprises related to oil or gas explorations or production and others that are at the discretion of other
government agencies.

- 17 -

24.
The authorities are responding to the higher global demand for oil with
investment plans to boost capacity in the medium term.21 They are contemplating plans to
rehabilitate existing oil refineries, add a new refinery, and increase oil production capacity to
4 million barrels per day by 2020. As regards development of Kuwait’s oil reserves in the
North Fields, which is expected to add some 480,000 barrels per day to Kuwait’s production
capacity, a draft law will be submitted to parliament and its approval is expected in 2005.
The staff encouraged the authorities to ensure the timeliness and transparency of data related
to petroleum reserves, production, exports, and inventories, including in the context of the
Joint Oil Data Initiative.
25.
The staff called for a cautious application of Kuwaitization policy and for an
intensification of efforts to raise the skills of the Kuwaiti labor force. The authorities are
pursuing a two-pronged strategy entailing imposition of sector specific quotas and training of
the unemployed Kuwaitis under the Manpower and Government Restructuring Program. The
current policy of guaranteed employment in the public sector in order to alleviate the
unemployment pressure raises the reservation wage for private sector jobs and acts as a
disincentive for acquiring the skills needed for private sector jobs. The staff, therefore, called
for limiting public sector hiring to essential areas, establishing links between public sector
wages and productivity, rationalizing public sector benefits, and continuing the application of
sector specific quotas in a flexible manner.
D. External Sector Policy and Regional Integration
26.
Although Kuwait’s external balance of payments outlook remains comfortable
over the medium-term, it depends heavily on oil exports and the non-oil export base is
very narrow. Despite the surge in non-oil exports in the aftermath of Iraq war, sustainability
of the increase remains a challenge. Much of the increase has been due to petrochemical
products and re-exports to Iraq. Domestic non-oil exports remain relatively small at about
3 percent of GDP. Furthermore, Kuwait’s success in increasing exports of petrochemical
products has been rather limited compared to other GCC countries. The authorities are of the
view that the potential for further export growth is strong because of new investments in the
petrochemical sector and Kuwait’s efforts in establishing itself as a regional trading link.22
Regional trade and economic integration are also key elements of their strategy.
27.
Progress continues in regional integration efforts. The GCC common external
tariff at 5 percent rate is in effect since early 2003. Negotiations are ongoing among the GCC
21

Production of crude oil has been increased to 2.5 million barrels per day in recent months, and through higher
investments, capacity is expected to increase to 2.6 million barrels per day in 2005 and steadily to 3 million
barrels per day by 2009.
22

The coming on stream of Equate II project, and the aromatics and styrene plants by 2008 will significantly
increase Kuwait’s export capacity.

- 18 -

countries to prepare a common list of items to be prohibited for security and religious
reasons. In connection with the envisaged monetary union among the members of the GCC,
deliberations are continuing on: (a) identifying issues that would need to be addressed in
establishing a common central bank; (b) establishing a common data standard and a common
fiscal accounting framework to facilitate the adoption of macroeconomic convergence
criteria by 2005; and (c) identifying other areas that would need further harmonization. Tariff
cuts under the GAFTA initiative were continuing at an accelerated pace: in 2004, tariff rates
were cut further by 20 percent; and all import duties were eliminated in January 2005.
28.
The staff commended the authorities for its generous external development
assistance program. In 2002/03, the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development
(KFAED) made loan commitments of KD 126.3 million (1.1 percent of GDP) to finance
15 projects in 14 countries. The authorities also agreed in principle to cut Iraqi debt owed to
Kuwait (estimated at $8.2 billion, excluding the U.N. war compensation) by 80 percent, in
line with the terms offered by the Paris Club creditors; and has committed to provide
$500 million to Iraq in 2004 to finance infrastructure projects and an additional $60 million
for health and education projects. Kuwait has committed to provide $100 million to the
victims of the recent tsunami in Asia.23 It has also disbursed the full amount of its
commitment to the HIPC Trust Fund (SDR 4.3 million).
E. Statistical Issues
29.
The staff reviewed the progress made in addressing data weaknesses and
recommended stepped-up efforts in a number of areas. Kuwait’s data are adequate for the
surveillance purpose. Monetary and financial data and fiscal data in non-GFS format are
updated regularly and widely disseminated, by posting in websites. However, reporting on
national income and customs data, the consumer price index, and the wholesale price index
suffers from unusual delays. CBK relies on its own estimates of foreign trade data to publish
balance of payments statistics on a timely basis, given the delays in preparing trade data by
the customs department. The authorities observed that preparations were underway to
expedite collection and computerization of customs data needed for the compilation of both
national accounts and balance of payments statistics, and the problem should be resolved in
the coming months. The staff called for improving the coverage of fiscal data relating to
investment income, transfer of profits of public institutions, and interest payments on
treasury bills and bonds. Looking forward, in collaboration with other GCC countries, the
authorities also need to adopt common data standards across all sectors to ensure compliance
with convergence criteria for the planned monetary union.

23

Kuwait has also announced a freeze on the repayment of about $763 million of loans extended to the six
Asian countries affected by the tsunami.

- 19 -

III. STAFF APPRAISAL
30.
Kuwait has recorded a strong economic rebound and strengthened further its
macroeconomic position due to higher oil output and prices. The highest pace of
economic expansion since the 1990 Gulf-war, combined with the oil-related terms-of-trade
gains, boosted per capita income and helped build up assets for future generations at a record
pace. The removal of security threat from the former regime in Iraq, resumption of trade
relations with Iraq, and the spillover effects of developments in Iraq combined with the boost
from the surging oil exports receipts have created much optimism on the economic front.
Large external current account and fiscal surpluses, a rapid pace of public sector asset
buildup, and continued price stability have laid the foundation for potential vibrant private
sector-led non-oil activities, as manifested by a booming stock market. These remarkable
gains notwithstanding, generating employment opportunities for the fast growing Kuwaiti
labor force in the domestic private sector remains a major challenge and will require faster
non-oil growth led by the private sector over the medium term.
31.
Accelerating the pace of structural reforms to further open up the economy for
private sector investment will be critical to overcome the medium-term challenge. The
authorities’ intention to take advantage of the improved security situation and the
opportunities created by reopened economic relations with Iraq and to reposition Kuwait in
its traditional role as a gateway to regions to its north and east is appropriate. The associated
infrastructure investment projects should be led and managed by the private sector, the public
sector playing only the role of a facilitator to signal the shift in economic policy. An
expeditious passage of the Privatization Law and a simultaneous broadening of private sector
participation in primarily public sector dominated activities will be critical in this regard.
32.
Although Kuwait’s fiscal position is projected to remain comfortable over the
medium term with continued sizeable surpluses, the sharp increase in the non-oil deficit
in recent years is a source of concern. The pace of expenditure growth experienced in
recent years is not sustainable, and by increasing the relative size of the public sector and
raising the wage bill, this rapid growth in outlays is undermining the authorities’ stated
objective to increase the role of the private sector in the economy. A strengthening of the
structure of the budget through expenditure containment and rationalization of transfers to
reduce significantly the non-oil deficit should be the cornerstone of the authorities’ mediumand longer-term fiscal strategy. To reduce the non-oil primary deficit in relation to non-oil
GDP to historically normal levels over the medium term, and thereafter, move to a long-term
adjustment path, would require a better targeting of subsidies, putting in place strict controls
on new hiring, and not using the public sector as the “employer of last resort.” Efficient
management of Kuwait’s large and fast-growing savings funds and protecting the
investments will also be increasingly important for Kuwait’s long-term fiscal sustainability.
33.
Prudent conduct of monetary policy has supported the exchange rate peg and
contributed to a remarkable degree of price stability. The strong non-oil export growth
and the recent significant depreciation of the dinar in real effective terms also indicate that
competitiveness is not a problem. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to keep the

- 20 -

exchange rate peg unchanged until the GCC monetary union and to remain open toward the
choice of the exchange rate regime under the planned monetary union. The continued rapid
expansion of credit for the last three successive years and the strong surge in stock prices,
although partly backed by strong economic fundamentals, have posed some risks to the
financial system. The authorities are rightly concerned about the systemic impact of domestic
or external shocks on the stability of the financial system and had to implement some steps to
stem the unsustainable pace of credit expansion. The limit on the loans to deposit ratio
should help achieve this objective by containing credit expansion in line with the expansion
of the banks’ deposit base. Maintaining such an administrative ceiling, however, constrains
market-based operations. Accordingly, the staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to
abolish the ceiling once domestic credit expansion stabilizes and recommends addressing the
potential risks to the financial system through strengthening of risk-based prudential ratios.
34.
The Kuwaiti banking system is financially sound, well managed, and effectively
supervised. The staff commends the authorities for the substantial progress achieved in the
further liberalization of the financial system, and in strengthening the prudential regulations
and supervision, including in implementing some of the FSAP recommendations. While
taking note of these significant steps, the staff hopes that the legal basis for the independence
of the capital market authority, the insurance supervision authority, and CBK’s supervisory
authority will be secured soon.
35.
Generating employment for the fast growing Kuwaiti labor force is the most
important economic challenge for Kuwait. Accelerating the pace of structural reform and
reducing the relative size of the public sector operations to support private sector-led non-oil
economic expansion in the midst of the oil revenue induced boom will not be easy
politically. The reform initiative undertaken following the Prime Minister’s East Asia trip is
encouraging and should lead to a stronger push for legislative reforms and broader private
sector role in sectors previously dominated by the government. Addressing the pressures for
job creation through training and providing incentives for development of skills needed by
the private sector is appropriate. However, despite the effectiveness of the sector specific
quotas to force the private sector to hire Kuwaiti workers under the Kuwaitization policy, the
policy should be applied flexibly so that the competitiveness and profitability of the private
sector is not adversely affected. The staff underscores the promotion of market-based
flexibility in wages for the Kuwaiti workforce in order to facilitate the integration of the
segmented labor markets.
36.
Although progress has been made in compilation and dissemination of Kuwait’s
economic statistics, the staff recommends stepped-up efforts in a number of areas.
Although Kuwait’s data are adequate for surveillance purpose, delays in collection and
computerization of customs data have been a problem for regular and accurate compilation of
national accounts and balance of payments statistics. The staff hopes that efforts underway to
expedite collection and compilation of customs data will help resolve the problem. Steps will
also be needed in coordination with other GCC countries to adopt common data standards
across all sectors as a step toward establishing convergence criteria for the planned monetary

- 21 -

union. Fund technical assistance, perhaps on a GCC-wide basis, would be particularly
beneficial.
37.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 22 -

Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05

Oil and gas sector
Total oil and gas exports (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Average oil export price (in U.S. dollar/barrel)
Crude oil production (in millions of barrels/day)
Share of oil GDP in total GDP (in percent)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

18.2
25.0
1.98
53.4

15.0
21.2
1.95
47.5

14.1
22.9
1.75
45.2

19.0
25.5
2.11
51.2

26.0
31.8
2.30
55.7

28.4
34.5
2.32
56.4

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts and prices
Nominal GDP (market prices, in billions of Kuwaiti dinar)
Nominal GDP (market prices, in billions of U.S. dollars)
Real GDP
Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Real Gross Disposable Income (GDI)
CPI inflation (average)
Unemployment rate (Kuwaiti nationals)

11.3
36.9
1.9
2.2
1.9
19.4
1.6
1.0

Investment and savings
Investment
Public
Private
Gross national savings
Public
Private
Savings/investment balance 1/

7.7
1.8
5.9
47.1
43.2
3.9
39.4

10.4
10.7
12.4
15.3
34.1
35.2
41.7
51.8
0.7
-0.5
9.7
7.2
-3.3
-7.9
19.8
9.5
3.6
4.3
4.8
5.5
-4.5
2.1
11.8
14.1
1.4
0.8
1.0
1.8
2.5
3.6
3.4
...
(In percent of GDP at market prices)
8.7
2.2
6.6
33.2
24.1
9.1
24.4

9.2
3.0
6.2
21.2
27.5
-6.3
12.1

8.7
2.8
5.8
26.8
26.6
0.2
18.1

16.5
56.1
3.2
0.7
4.7
6.0
1.8
...

11.2
4.5
6.7
40.4
29.0
11.3
29.1

12.3
4.4
7.9
44.1
29.6
14.5
31.8

(In percent of GDP at market prices)
Budgetary operations 2/
Revenue
Oil
Non-oil, of which
Investment income
Expenditures and net lending
Of which: current
capital
Balance
Domestic financing
External financing
Non-oil primary balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Total gross debt (calendar year-end)

80.2
55.5
24.7
20.3
39.4
36.2
3.2
40.8
-2.8
0.0
-25.0
35.0

63.1
43.1
20.0
13.2
45.6
40.8
4.0
17.5
-1.3
0.0
-44.6
36.0

65.2
49.4
15.8
10.5
43.9
38.8
4.7
21.3
-3.2
0.0
-51.0
32.5

60.6
46.8
13.8
8.8
41.5
36.3
4.8
19.1
-0.9
0.0
-56.9
26.4

61.9
49.0
12.9
9.4
39.8
34.4
4.5
22.1
-5.2
0.0
-59.3
19.5

62.5
48.8
13.7
10.1
37.8
33.0
4.5
24.7
-2.6
0.0
-52.8
17.1

(Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector

11.5
-5.1
-7.3
3.9

6.5
6.3
-4.1
11.1

-4.1
8.8
0.2
10.5

-4.8
12.6
-2.8
17.2

10.9
-0.1
-7.8
13.8

2.3
2.1
-3.8
6.4

- 23 -

Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05

Broad money
Velocity of broad money
Kuwaiti dinar 3-month deposit rate (average in percent)
U.S. dollar 3-month deposit rate (average in percent)
Stock market index (annual percent change)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

6.3
1.4
5.4
6.0
-6.5

12.8
1.1
3.7
3.3
26.8

4.8
1.1
2.2
1.3
39.0

7.8
1.2
1.5
0.7
101.7

10.8
1.3
2.0
1.3
33.8

4.4
1.4
...
...
...

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports of goods and services
Of which: Oil and refined products
Annual percentage change in volume
Imports of goods and services
Annual percentage change in volume
Current account
In percent of GDP 1/
External public and publicly guaranteed debt
International reserve assets, of which:
Central Bank of Kuwait
In months of imports of goods and services

21,298
18,182
9.0
-11,369
-4.1
14,671
39.8
0.4
7,186
6,577
7.6

17,910
14,977
-0.3
-12,406
7.0
8,328
24.5
0.4
10,000
9,268
9.7

17,012
14,057
-12.1
-13,959
6.9
4,250
12.1
0.6
9,314
8,455
8.0

22,611
19,004
20.0
-16,239
11.4
7,318
17.5
0.5
7,685
6,744
5.7

30,352
25,951
8.2
-17,328
5.5
15,098
29.1
...
8,359
7,451
5.8

33,017
28,385
0.0
-18,207
4.7
17,825
31.8
...
8,923
8,015
5.9

(Percentage change; unless otherwise noted)
Memorandum items:
Exchange rate (US$ per KD, period average) 3/
Nominal effective exchange rate 4/
Real effective exchange rate 4/
Credit rating (S&P)

3.26
4.7
4.2
...

3.26
5.8
5.1
...

3.29
-0.7
-0.9
...

3.36
-6.9
-7.7
...

3.39
-6.9
-5.4
A+

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For 2003, the discrepancy between the savings/investment balance and the current account balance is possibly
due to the data being preliminary and may be resolved when the authorities revise the data.
2/ Kuwaiti fiscal year ending March 31. The 2000/01 fiscal year was only 9-month, and the data were obtained by
grossing up the 9-month data.
3/ Since January 5, 2003, the exchange rate of the Kuwaiti dinar has been officially pegged to the U.S. dollar at
0.29963 KD/US$ (3.33745US$/KD) within a margin not exceeding 3.5 percent on both sides of this parity exchange rate.
4/ For 2004, average for January to October.

...
...
...
...

- 24 -

Table 2. Kuwait: Summary of Government Finance, 2000/01–2004/05 1/

2002/03

Budg.
2004/05

2003/04

Proj.
2004/05

2000/01

2001/02

Total revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income and transfer
of profits of public entities 2/
Other current revenue 3/
Capital revenue

8,722
6,037

6,630
4,525

7,256
5,499

7,966
6,150

3,167
2,735

9,649
7,634

2,208
476
2

1,386
718
1

1,164
567
26

1,161
618
37

0
407
25

1,461
529
25

Total expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest on domestic debt 5/
Transfers abroad

4,283
3,939
1,573
985
254
91

4,796
4,290
1,637
1,061
203
97

4,890
4,318
1,709
1,196
121
82

5,454
4,773
1,825
1,436
81
63

6,145
5,150
1,939
1,448
37
83

6,207
5,363
1,939
1,355
117
83

Subsidies and transfers
Capital

1,036
344

1,292
506

1,210
572

1,368
681

1,644
995

1,870
844

Overall balance
Overall balance exc. oil rev.

4,439
-1,598

1,834
-2,691

2,366
-3,133

2,512
-3,638

-2,978
-5,713

3,442
-4,192

Financing
Domestic (net)
Banks
Nonbanks
External
Reserve funds 7/

-4,439
-303
-438
135
0
-4,136

-1,834
-134
-169
35
0
-1,700

-2,366
-351
-196
-156
0
-2,014

-2,512
-122
-66
-55
0
-2,390

2,978
....
....
....
....
....

-3,442
-813
-813
0
0
-2,629

80.2
55.5
20.3
4.4
39.4
36.2
14.5
9.1
2.3
9.5
3.2
40.8
-29.7
-25.0

63.1
43.1
13.2
6.8
45.6
40.8
15.6
10.1
1.9
12.3
4.8
17.5
-48.2
-44.6

20.3
17.6
....
2.8
39.4
33.0
12.4
9.3
0.2
10.5
6.4
-19.1
-83.1

61.9
49.0
9.4
3.4
39.8
34.4
12.4
8.7
0.8
12.0
5.4
22.1
-61.0
-59.3

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)

4/

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income
Other current revenue 3/
Expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and noninterest services
Interest on domestic and foreign debt
Subsidies and transfers
Capital
Overall balance
Non-oil deficit/Non-oil GDP
Non-oil primary deficit/Non-oil GDP

65.2
49.4
10.5
5.1
43.9
38.8
15.4
10.7
1.1
10.9
5.1
21.3
-53.0
-51.0

60.6
46.8
8.8
4.7
41.5
36.3
13.9
10.9
0.6
10.4
5.2
19.1
-58.2
-56.9

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars, unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
Overall balance (excluding investment
income and profit transfers)
(In percent of GDP)
Average oil export price (in US dollar/barrel)

2,231
20.5
23.1

448
4.3
21.6

1,202
10.8
23.5

1,351
10.3
27.1

-2,978
-19.1
15.0

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Coverage of budgetary operations includes the operation of the KIA. Data are on an accrual basis.
2/ Excluded from the national budget presentation. Estimated by the Fund staff.
3/ Excludes revenues from utility tariffs (which are included in the national budget presentation), but includes
UN (Iraq) compensations.
4/ Includes the KD 121 million supplementary budget for the emergency spending.
5/ Covers interest payments on the treasury bills and bonds, and on the DCP bonds. Only the latter is
included in the national budget presentation.
6/ Includes KD 192 million one-time transfer of the oil windfall to Kuwaiti nationals.
7/ The Reserve Fund for Future Generations (RFFG) and the General Reserve Fund (GRF).

1,982
12.7
32.5

- 25 -

Table 3. Kuwait: Summary Balance of Payments, 2000–05
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Current account
Goods (trade balance)
Exports
Oil exports
Non-oil exports including re-exports
Of which: re-exports
Petrochemicals 1/
Imports
Services
Transportation
Travel
Other services
Investment income
Receipts
General government 2/
Other sectors 3/
Payments
General government
Other
Current transfers 4/
Capital and financial account
Capital account 5/
Financial account
Direct investment
Abroad
In reporting country
Portfolio investment
Assets
Liabilities
Other investment
Trade credits
Loans
Currency and deposits
Other
Net errors and omissions 6/
Overall balance
International reserve assets (-increase) 7/
Memorandum items
Current account/GDP
Overall balance/GDP
International reserve assets (US$ millions)
Total reserves minus gold
Gold (national valuation)
In months of imports of goods and services

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

15,098
17,843
28,310
25,951
2,359
780

17,825
19,754
30,864
28,385
2,479
820

2000

2001

2002

2003

14,671
13,025
19,476
18,182
1,294
209
761
-6,451
-3,097
-153
-2,396
-548
6,698
7,315
4,704
2,611
-616
-16
-600
-1,956

8,328
9,196
16,246
14,977
1,269
203
752
-7,050
-3,693
-372
-2,740
-581
4,903
5,428
3,673
1,755
-525
-52
-473
-2,078

4,250
7,241
15,363
14,057
1,306
216
751
-8,123
-4,188
-618
-2,902
-668
3,342
3,708
2,780
928
-365
-13
-352
-2,145

7,318
11,012
20,695
19,004
1,691
416
865
-9,683
-4,640
-634
-3,231
-775
3,325
3,610
2,795
815
-285
-10
-275
-2,379

...

...

-10,468
-4,818
-650
-3,340
-828
4,632
5,041
4,033
1,008
-409
-14
-395
-2,558

-11,110
-4,944
-561
-3,525
-858
5,768
6,504
5,376
1,129
-736
-26
-710
-2,753

-11,555
2,217
-13,772
319
303
16
-12,667
-12,921
254
-1,424
-274
-489
-1,040
378

-3,383
2,933
-6,316
-512
-365
-147
-7,448
-7,369
-78
1,644
470
-42
2,055
-838

-3,490
1,671
-5,162
161
155
7
-3,263
-3,425
161
-2,059
-405
-270
-1,503
118

-9,901
1,429
-11,330
4922
4989
-67
-13,042
-13,377
336
-3,211
-278
-225
-2,355
-352

-14,424
500
-14,924
-300
-500
200
-12,000
-12,426
426
-2,624
-342
-503
-1820
41

-17,261
100
-17,361
-50
-350
300
-14,579
-14,953
374
-2,733
-425
-594
-1763
50

-858

-2,131

-1,446

954

0

0

2,258

2,814

-686

-1,629

674

564

-2,258

-2,814

686

1,629

-674

-564

39.8
6.1
7,186
7,082
103.9
7.6

24.5
8.3
10,000
9,897
103.1
9.7

12.1
-2.0
9,314
9,208
105.9
8.0

17.5
-3.9
7,685
7,577
107.6
5.7

29.1
1.3
8,359
8,251
107.6
5.8

31.8
1.0
8,923
8,815
107.6
5.9

Source: Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Exports of Kuwaiti origin plastics in primary form and manufactured fertilizers.
2/ Kuwait Investment Authority, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
Public Institute for Social Security, Kuwait Airways Corporation, and Bank of Savings and Credit.
3/ CBK, local banks, investment companies, exchange companies, insurance companies, and the non-financial
private sector.
4/ Primarily expatriate workers' remittances.
5/ Includes UN war compensation.
6/ Includes other unclassified private sector flows.
7/ As reported in Table 31 of the Statistical Appendix.

- 26 -

Table 4. Kuwait: Monetary Survey, 2000–04
End of period

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Foreign assets (net)
Central bank
Local banks
Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Central bank (net)
Claims
Deposits
Local banks (net)
Claims
Government debt bonds
Public debt instruments
Other claims
Deposits
Claims on nongovernment sector
Credit facilities
Local investments
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

2,778
2,005
773
5,385
2,911
-532
0
532
3,443
3,628
1,491
2,137
0
185

3,306
2,850
456
5,902
2,573
-598
0
598
3,171
3,402
1,294
2,108
0
231

2,930
2,521
409
6,716
2,595
-354
0
354
2,949
3,248
1,006
2,242
0
299

2,467
1,966
500
7,935
2,323
-413
0
413
2,735
3,050
818
2,232
0
315

3,603
2,165
1,438
7,919
1,510
-662
0
662
2,172
2,750
604
2,146
0
578

5,848
5,230
619
-3,375

6,753
6,027
726
-3,423

7,723
6,854
870
-3,602

9,379
8,419
959
-3,767

10,814
9,808
1,006
-4,405

9,209
9,646
10,401
1,641
2,067
2,612
7,567
7,580
7,790
892
904
991
(Annual percentage change)

11,522
2,983
8,539
1,169

8,163
1,468
6,695
895

Foreign assets (net)
Central Bank
Local banks
Domestic assets (net)
Claims on Government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

46.3
51.9
33.6

19.0
42.2
-41.0

-11.4
-11.6
-10.3

-15.8
-22.0
22.3

46.1
10.1
187.3

-6.8
-16.2
5.4
-4.0

9.6
-11.6
15.5
-1.4

13.8
0.8
14.4
-5.2

18.1
-10.5
21.4
-4.6

-0.2
-35.0
15.3
-16.9

6.3
12.8
4.8
7.8
10.8
7.0
11.8
25.9
26.4
14.2
6.2
13.0
0.2
2.8
9.6
1.6
-0.3
1.3
9.6
18.1
(Change in percent of beginning broad money stock)

Foreign assets (net)
Central bank
Local banks
Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits
Memorandum items:
Net domestic credit (annual percentage change)
Sources: Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates.

11.5
8.9
2.5
-5.1
-7.3
3.9
-1.7

6.5
10.4
-3.9
6.3
-4.1
11.1
-0.6

-4.1
-3.6
-0.5
8.8
0.2
10.5
-1.9

-4.8
-5.7
0.9
12.6
-2.8
17.2
-1.7

10.9
1.9
9.0
-0.1
-7.8
13.8
-6.1

6.3
1.3
5.1
0.2

12.8
2.1
10.7
0.0

4.8
4.6
0.1
0.1

7.8
5.6
2.2
0.9

10.8
3.6
7.2
1.7

-3.0

6.5

10.6

13.4

5.3

55.9
49.3
-29.0
18.2
39.8
65.8
22.0
43.8
7.7
1.8
5.9
47.1
43.2
3.9

Balance of payments 3/
Exports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Of which : oil and refined products
Imports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Investment income (net)
Current account

Saving-investment balance 3/
Final consumption
Government
Private
Gross domestic investment
Government
Private
Savings
Government
Private

75.1
24.2
50.9
8.7
2.2
6.6
33.2
24.1
9.1

50.6
44.0
-34.5
14.4
24.5

63.1
43.1
13.2
45.6
40.8
4.0
17.5
4.3
-48.2

10,446
-7.7
4.1
0.7
-3.3
3.6
21.2
1.95

2001

82.2
27.4
54.8
9.2
3.0
6.2
21.2
27.5
-6.3

46.3
40.0
-37.7
9.5
12.1

65.2
49.4
10.5
43.9
38.8
4.7
21.3
10.8
-53.0

10,691
2.4
6.7
-0.5
-7.9
4.3
22.9
1.75

2002

75.5
25.9
49.6
8.7
2.8
5.8
26.8
26.6
0.2

50.8
45.5
-35.6
8.0
17.5

60.6
46.8
8.8
41.5
36.3
4.8
19.1
10.3
-58.2

12,441
16.4
3.7
9.7
19.8
4.8
25.5
2.11

2003

63.7
21.5
42.1
11.2
4.5
6.7
40.4
29.0
11.3

53.5
50.1
-28.3
8.9
29.1

61.9
49.0
9.4
39.8
34.4
4.5
22.1
12.7
-61.0

15,267
22.7
11.4
7.2
9.5
5.5
31.8
2.30

Est.
2004

61.3
20.8
40.5
12.3
4.4
7.9
44.1
29.6
14.5

53.9
50.6
-27.5
10.3
31.8

62.5
48.8
10.1
37.8
33.0
4.5
24.7
14.6
-54.4

16,536
8.3
6.6
3.2
0.7
4.7
34.5
2.32

2005

66.5
22.0
44.5
11.7
4.7
6.9
40.5
26.4
14.2

51.3
47.8
-29.5
12.6
28.8

60.5
45.9
10.8
39.6
34.5
4.8
20.9
10.1
-52.9

16,425
-0.7
6.1
3.2
1.0
4.5
32.0
2.35

70.9
23.2
47.7
11.3
5.0
6.3
37.7
23.8
13.9

48.9
45.2
-31.1
14.5
26.5

59.0
43.3
11.7
41.2
35.7
5.1
17.9
6.2
-51.1

16,455
0.2
6.1
3.1
1.0
4.3
30.0
2.37

74.3
24.0
50.3
10.7
5.2
5.5
35.8
22.1
13.7

47.2
43.4
-32.3
16.3
25.1

58.1
41.6
12.4
42.2
36.6
5.2
15.9
3.5
-49.5

16,778
2.0
6.1
3.1
1.3
4.0
29.0
2.39

Baseline Scenario
2006
2007
2008

78.5
24.7
53.9
9.0
5.4
3.6
33.1
20.6
12.4

45.8
41.8
-33.2
17.8
24.1

57.5
40.2
12.9
43.2
37.4
5.4
14.3
1.3
-48.6

17,183
2.4
5.7
2.5
0.7
3.5
28.5
2.42

2009

1/ On a fiscal year basis (July-June); since 2001/02, the fiscal year was changed to April-March. FY 2001/02 was obtained by grossing up the 2001/02 fiscal data.
2/ Includes profits of public enterprises.
3/ Domestic demand and net export do not add up to GDP because of the difference in available data coverage of the balance of payments and the national accounts.

Sources: Kuwait authorities, IMF World Economic Outlook, and Fund staff estimates.

80.2
55.5
20.3
39.4
36.2
3.2
40.8
20.5
-30.0

11,312
23.4
2.6
1.9
2.2
1.9
25.0
1.98

Public finance 1/
Revenue, of which :
Oil and gas
Investment income 2/
Expenditure
Current
Capital
Fiscal balance (deficit -)
Fiscal balance excluding investment income (deficit -)
Non-oil fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)

Production and prices
Nominal GDP (KD millions)
Nominal GDP (percent change)
Nominal non-oil GDP (percent change)
Real GDP (percent change)
Real oil GDP (percent change)
Real non-oil GDP (percent change)
Kuwait crude export price (US$ per barrel)
Crude oil output (millions of barrels per day)

2000

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)

Table 5. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 2000–09

- 27 -

- 28 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–04
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

4.2
9,956
4,199
5,757
27.0
46.7
19.7
2.9

5.1
11,094
5,255
5,839
32.6
61.9
29.3
2.9

-0.9
12,368
4,901
7,467
35.2
72.7
28.8
2.2

-7.7
12,404
5,863
6,541
29.7
54.9
25.9
1.3

-5.4
12,772
6,185
6,586
24.7
42.1
20.4
0.8

11/

35.0
2.9

36.0
3.1

32.5
1.7

26.4
1.0

21.1
1.2

12/

86.4
13.6
69.2

85.6
14.4
68.3

91.0
9.0
75.8

90.7
9.3
77.2

88.7
11.3
79.1

12/

6,564
6,577
6.9
156.6
375.5
136.9
2,532
6,445
3,913
93.4

9,257
9,268
9.0
176.4
547.3
173.8
1,481
6,583
5,101
92.2

8,415
8,455
7.3
172.5
429.1
122.5
1,366
8,149
6,782
91.5

6,672
6,744
5.0
115.0
288.1
76.1
1,698
8,230
6,532
91.8

7,346
7,451
5.2
120.5
280.7
73.6
4,879
11,717
6,838
91.7

Financial sector indicators
Increase in net bank profits
Ratio of net profits to total bank assets
Ratio of net profits to total shareholders' equity
Banks' capital-asset ratio
Banks risk-weighted capital-asset ratio
Banks' leverage 5/

20.9
2.0
17.6
11.5
22.2
8.7

9.9
2.0
18.2
11.2
22.0
9.0

0.6
1.8
17.4
10.4
19.7
9.6

21.2
2.0
18.6
10.7
18.4
9.4

16.8
2.3
20.4
11.3
17.3
9.1

Financial sector indicators
Banks' liquidity ratio 6/
Ratio of banks' nonperforming loans to total loans
Nonperforming loans from before invasion
Nonperforming loans since liberation
Loan provisions as a proportion of nonperforming loans

16.3
19.2
12.8
6.4
50.1

14.8
10.3
5.1
5.2
53.7

14.0
7.8
4.8
3.0
64.3

12.9
6.1
3.6
2.5
72.4

15.7
5.4
3.1
2.3
72.4

External solvency indicators
REER (CPI based, period average)
External debt including private sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Short-term debt (original maturity) 1/
Medium- and long-term debt 2/
External debt/GDP
External debt/total exports of goods and services
Short-term debt/total exports of goods and services
External debt service/total exports of goods and services
Public sector solvency indicators
General government domestic debt/GDP 3/
Interest payments/total revenue
Distribution of the public domestic debt by holders
Local commercial banks
Other (including nongovernment public institutions)
Oil revenue/total revenue
External liquidity indicators
CBK net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
CBK gross foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4/
In months of imports of goods and services
Relative to short-term external debt
Relative to M0
Relative to M1
Local banks' net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities
Oil exports/total exports

12/

13/
13/
13/
13/
13/

13/
13/
13/
13/

- 29 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Vulnerability Indicators, 2000–04
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

Ratio of bank lending to total domestic credit facilities
Stock market-related
Real estate 7/
Total (stock market, real estate)

4.8
16.3
21.1

6.4
19.3
25.7

5.8
18.9
24.8

9.0
17.0
26.0

8.5
16.4
24.9

Ratio of bank lending to banks' own funds
Stock market-related
Real estate 7/
Total (stock market, real estate)

15.7
53.9
69.6

22.9
69.3
92.2

22.5
73.3
95.8

37.6
71.4
109.0

39.6
76.3
115.9

-0.6
37.4

0.4
31.5

0.9
31.4

0.8
...

0.6
...

Banks' interest rate spread 8/
Investment companies' capital and reserve/total assets

14/

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Net foreign assets of local banks
Net foreign assets of investment companies 9/
Open foreign exchange position of banks 10/

773.3
794.8
38.9

456.1
667.1
-34.9

409.3
709.0
74.6

500.4
699.0
84.9

Source: Central Bank of Kuwait, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Short-term data are obtained from the joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank database.
2/ Medium- and long-term debt is estimated as a residual.
3/ Treasury bills and bonds, and debt purchase bonds.
4/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.
5/ Ratio of total liabilities to banks' own funds.
6/ Ratio of liquid assets (cash, central bank current deposits, and treasury bills and bonds) to total assets.
7/ Ratios may be overestimated due to loan classification problems by the local banks.
8/ Calculated as the difference between 3- month deposits rates in KD relative to the 3-month deposit rates in US$.
9/ Equals nonresident assets minus nonresident liabilities, excluding own funds.
10/ A (-) sign indicates a short position.
11/ Average for January to October 2004.
12/ As of end-June 2004.
13/ As of end-September 2004.
14/ Average January-September 2004.

1,437.7
902.8
72.2

13/
13/

- 30 -

APPENDIX I

KUWAIT
FUND RELATIONS
(As of December 31, 2004)
I.

Membership Status: Joined September 13, 1962
Article VIII on April 5, 1963

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
1,381.10
922.16
458.94

% Quota
100.00
66.77
33.23

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
26.74
117.07

% Allocation
100.00
437.74

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Since January 1, 2003, the Kuwaiti dinar has been pegged to the U.S. dollar. The decision to
peg the dinar to the U.S. dollar reflected plans to create a single currency for the six members
of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). Previously, the Kuwaiti
dinar was pegged to a U.S. dollar-dominated basket of currencies. The central bank normally
maintains buying/selling rates for the U.S. dollar at one-sixteenth of 1 percent on either side
of the Kuwaiti dinar exchange rate: US$1=KD 0.29470 as of end-October 2004.
VIII. Article IV Consultations:
The latest Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on
February 9, 2004. The staff report and the associated Statistical Appendix were issued in
July 2004, Country Report No. 04/186 and 04/197, respectively.
IX.

FSAP Participation

A FSAP exercise was conducted in September 2003 in order to assess three international
standards and codes (banking, securities, and AML/CFT). A FSSA report was discussed by

- 31 -

APPENDIX I

the Executive Board along with the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation and was
issued in May 2004, Country Report No. 04/151.
X.

Technical Assistance:
FAD
MAE
FAD
STA
FAD

Advisory mission
Advice on bank report forms
Advice on fiscal reform
Multi-topic statistics mission
Budget advisor

MED Macroeconomic model
MAE Early warning system and banks supervision
STA Balance of payment statistics
MAE Monetary policy instruments
MAE Early warning system
MAE Monetary policy issues
MAE Bank supervision
INS Financial programming
MAE Bank deposit scheme
STA Seminar on GDDS
STA National Accounts and Price Statistics
FAD Restructuring Budget Processes
FAD A Program for Tax Reform
MFD/LEG Bank Insolvency
XI.

Resident Representative:

April 1992
October 1992
February–March 1993
April–May 1994
September 1993–
October 1994
September 1996
May 1997
November 1998
November 1998
December 1998
March 1999
April 1999
April 1999
October/November 1999
February 2000
June 2001–June 2002
January/February 2002
December 2002
October 2004

None

XII. Kuwait has consented to the quota increase under the Eleventh General Review of
Quotas; it has accepted the Fourth Amendment of the Articles of Agreement.

- 32 -

APPENDIX II

KUWAIT
Relations with the World Bank Group
As of January 13, 2005
An annual Technical Cooperation Program Agreement was first signed in the spring of 2002 and
renewed in June 2003 for another year. However, it expired last March and was not renewed,
due to organizational changes within the government. As a result, the technical cooperation
program slowed considerably. Currently, two projects are ongoing:
1. Kuwait Education Indicators and Assessment Project (KEIAP): The Ministry of
Education (MOE) launched the Kuwait Education Indicators and Assessment Project
(KEIAP) in September 2003. The main accomplishments to date include the following:
•

An Education Indicators Report, the first of its kind in Kuwait, has been completed
and is being published;

•

Testing instruments for the national assessment for grades 4 and 8 have been
developed and pilot testing has been completed;

•

Participation in the 5-year cycle of the international Program in Reading Literacy
Studies (PIRLS) started on time;

•

Preparations are well underway for rejoining the Trends in Mathematics and Science
Studies (TIMSS) (starting February 2005); and

•

The development of an Education Information Management System (EMIS) has been
launched.

These accomplishments provide a sound basis for diagnosing the issues in the education
system, designing education reform and monitoring progress. This is the second year of a
six-year program.
2. International Conference on Challenges of Economic Development for the GCC
Countries: The Bank will provide four keynote speakers to present their papers at the
conference-taking place in January 29–31, 2005.
3. There is renewed interest in re-activating the agreement, given interest from various
government units for Bank support, such as ppps/BOTs.
Past Activities:

- 33 -

APPENDIX II

•
Post-war reconstruction: In January 1991, the Bank submitted to the government a
report, Kuwait: Emergency Relief Program that included action plans and a framework for
reconstruction following liberation.
•
Privatization: The World Bank has carried out a study of privatization strategies in
the industrial, services, health, telecommunications, power, ports, and transportation sectors,
(World Bank, Kuwait: A Privatization Strategy, Washington, 1993); assisted delegations
from the National Assembly and the KIA in studying worldwide experience in the
implementation of privatization (1994–97); and provided assistance on the draft and
privatization law. In addition, the World Bank has been advising the Kuwait Investment
Authority (KIA) on the divestiture phase of the privatization program.
•
Development strategy: The Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) prepared
in 1995 focused on several issues (i) the role of government and public sector productivity;
(ii) fiscal policies and public saving; (iii) welfare and subsidization; and (iv) the labor market
and employment policies. The World Bank also provided the National Assembly with its
views on the draft Five-Year Plan (1996), in addition to providing advice on the draft reform
plan prepared by the Higher Committee for Economic Development and Reform over the
period 1998–99. Also, the World Bank in collaboration with Kuwait’s Higher Planning
Council, and Kuwait University has in early March 2001 completed a study entitled
“Energizing the Private Sector” in Kuwait. In 2002, the World Bank is conducting various
missions in land policy, power sector reform, telecommunications, transportation, and
tourism to identify areas where technical assistance might be needed.
•
Reform implementation: Based on this recent study on “Energizing the Private
Sector,” as well as other technical assistance activities, the Government of Kuwait has
requested World Bank assistance in implementation of the various reform initiatives,
including the institutional set-up for an implementation agency. The Government of Kuwait
and the World Bank are currently exploring mechanisms for more World Bank technical
assistance involvement in this regard.
•
Investment environment: The World Bank’s recent technical assistance
relationship with the Kuwaiti authorities has concentrated on enhancing the investment
environment, with work on the FDI law, identification of policy and administrative
impediments to investment, and development of a competition law and policy. A
presentation was made on investment promotion, investment climate, and FDI regulations
in 2002. Further, the World Bank initiated the FDI Bylaw and provided technical assistance
on the negative restricted list.
•
Public awareness: As a first step to support the Economic Reform Program, the
Bank began managing on behalf of the government a Public Awareness Campaign for its
reform agenda in April 2001.

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

•
Transparency and anti-corruption: At the request of the government, a scoping
mission was conducted in September 2002. One central objective of the mission was to
develop the Terms of Reference (TORs) and identify the key institutions to be involved. The
Council of Ministers assigned the responsibility for developing the Transparency and AntiCorruption Strategy to the Citizens Services and Governmental Bodies Assessment Agency.
A working group was also formed based on Bank recommendation. Last June, a Bank
mission produced a report, “Toward a Comprehensive Transparency and Anti-Corruption
Strategy in Kuwait.” The report proposed a number of measures that could be initiated in the
short term, as well as a framework that encompassed the main elements of a long-term
strategy. Next step is to organize a high-level workshop on international experience and
strategies currently planned for early 2004.
•
Small business promotion: The World Bank has provided technical assistance,
which has led to the establishment of the Kuwait Small Projects Development Company
(KSPDC). The World Bank is currently advising KSPDC on its operations.
•
Labor market: The World Bank, in partnership with Kuwait Institute for Scientific
Research (KISR), carried out a labor market study. The study includes a household survey,
and an employee/employer survey. The study was conducted at the request of the Higher
Committee for Economic Reform and Development and was completed in January 1999. In
March 1999, a presentation of the main recommendations of the study was made to the
government. The presentation was attended by three ministers, namely Finance, Planning,
and Education. Some recommendations of the study were proposed by the government for
legislative approval.
•
Employment generation: As a follow up to the Labor Market Study, the
government requested Bank support in creating private sector jobs for Kuwaitis. A Bank
mission visited Kuwait in late August 2003 to develop the Terms of Reference for this
activity.
•
Education Sector Reform: Following the successful completion of “Education
Expenditure Analysis” study, the government sought Bank assistance in implementing the
recommendations. It was agreed to focus on these issues: (i) indicators for general education
system; (ii) introducing program budgeting; and (iii) carrying out more in-depth analysis on
the financing issues and of the costs at school level. This is expected to be carried out in four
phases. Phase one, which includes development of indicators, has started and a mission
visited Kuwait in late last June. A larger mission visited Kuwait in September 2003 to
continue the development of indicators and begin work on program budgeting for education.
•
Kuwait health sector: The government recently requested Bank support in assessing
the general performance of the health sector and in identifying areas of potential reform, and
missions were sent in October 2002 and January 2003. The study (June 2003) provided a
general overview of the main issues facing the health sector plus special coverage of five
priority areas identified by the government: (i) developing the National Health Accounts

- 35 -

APPENDIX II

(NHA), and financing the expatriate health insurance system; (ii) hospital accreditation and
quality; (iii) regulation of private health insurance; (iv) assessing hospital efficiency; and
(v) program budgeting for the health sector.
•
Telecommunications: The Bank received a request from the government in 2002 to
develop a Sector Reform Strategy and an implementation action plan. Both have been
completed. Recently the government appointed KMPG as advisor on sector reform. Bank
will continue to advise government on strategic sector reform issues and help supervise their
advisors.
•
Power and water strategy: Two draft reports, one on possible LNG options and the
other on reforms in the power and waters sector, were submitted to government for
comments in early August. The next steps include several tasks: (i) developing the
government’s vision for the development of the electricity and water sectors; (ii) working out
key principles for a legal and regulatory framework and the role for an independent
regulatory agency; (iii) determining options for industry restructuring; (iv) discussing various
options with key stakeholders; and (v) working out an implementation plan.
•
Concessions/BOT: Based on the Concessions Study submitted in early 2002,
implementation steps for the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) were sent to the government. In
addition to addressing the background of the BOT issue, the note identified the required
decisions and responsibilities of the various ministries and departments, and included TORs
for a BOT Manager and a Value-for-Money Committee.
•
Public private partnerships: The project is in the early stages of being defined with
the government—(with its focus on its scope and plan of action. The government is
considering combining current Concessions/BOT activity with the planned PPP project.
•
Land Transport Reform: In July 2002, Kuwait launched an initiative to explore
options for reforming its public transport sector, and requested Bank assistance in a Land
Transport Sector Reform project consisting of two phases. Phase I (completed August 2002)
addressed sector shortcomings in policy, strategy, regulations, and service. Phase II
(completed August 2003) recommended interventions, the institution of a “Land Transport
Regulatory Authority” to focus on near term needs and private sector participation. The next
steps will be to finalize the regulatory strategy and decrees; structure future industry
including Public Transport Corporation (KPTC); and prepare a transition package for
privatization.
•
Bubyan Port Strategic Assessment: This pre-feasibility study was requested in July
and implemented on an accelerated basis. Consultants provided their draft final report.
Project was completed in September 2003.
•
Land Policy: Land management in Kuwait is in transition. A review of the existing
situation in the land and real estate was prepared. The review identified barriers for more

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

productive and efficient use of urban land and set out an action plan for the sector. The
review and action plan were submitted in October 2002.
•
Housing Policy: As a follow up to the work done on land policy, a study on housing
subsidies was conducted by the Bank. A draft report entitled “A Study of the Housing
Benefits Program” was delivered to government for comments last May.
•
Competition Policy: Work began in July 2002 and included: (a) preliminary
assessment of laws and policies in place as they interface with or impact competition policy;
and (b) provision of a draft outline of the type of competition law/policy that Kuwait may
wish to consider. The report was finalized in October 2002, and the letter of invitation and
the TOR for law firms to engage in the drafting of the competition law/policy were sent in
January 2003.
•
General public reform: The World Bank has been advising government on various
reform initiatives, and has provided ad hoc technical assistance on various topics. In
November 2000, the Bank finalized an Evaluation of the Offset Program in Kuwait, which
assessed the current structure and presented options for reform. As for ad hoc issues, the
Bank made a presentation to high-level decision makers on WTO issues and how Kuwait can
benefit from its membership in WTO.

- 37 -

APPENDIX III

KUWAIT
STATISTICAL ISSUES

National Accounts and Production
The Central Statistical Office (CSO) has prepared estimates of GDP at both current and
constant prices through 2003 (the 2003 estimates are still provisional). Recent improvements
of national accounts includes: change of the base year for the constant price data from 1984
to 1995; and improvements in the estimates of value-added for subsidized-goods and services
of the public utilities sector through the use of input costs (the household expenditure survey
was used previously). The estimates of GDP have been published at the Central Statistical
Office website. Starting from the final 2002 data, further improvements will be made to
national accounts reflecting the adoption of the 1993 SNA, a sampling frame based on the
establishment survey (2002), and the expansion of the coverage of questionnaires. Continued
progress, especially in the estimation of value-added for the oil sector, requires the
dedication of adequate resources and improved coordination between the Ministries of
Planning, Oil, and Finance. STA has provided technical assistance to the Ministry of
Planning to improve national accounts and price data. A resident statistics expert was
attached to the Ministry of Planning from June 2001 to June 2002. It would be useful if the
Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) would publish oil sector information in the Quarterly
Statistical Bulletin pertaining to output, refining, domestic consumption, export price for
crude and refined products and the domestic price of petroleum products. These data are
readily available from the Ministry of Oil.
Price Statistics
The household expenditure survey (2000) has been completed, and a revised basket of goods
and services for the consumer price index (CPI) was finalized by the end of 2001. Improved
monthly CPI based on a revised basket has been published in monthly CPI bulletins with
about a two months lag. The wholesale price index (WPI) needs to be revised to a more
modern statistical measure, such as a producer price index (PPI), which is also more useful
for national accounting needs. Also, consideration should be given to compiling data on
wage rates and developments in the private sector.
Government Finance Statistics
Kuwait reports annual GFS data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook (GFSY) and monthly GFS data for publication in IFS. The GFSY data, however,
are reported with a substantial lag (the latest data reported in 2004 is for 1999). The major
components of its extrabudgetary revenues (investment income and transfers of profits of
public institutions), extrabudgetary expenditures (interest on foreign debt and treasury
paper), and financing operations conducted by two reserve funds are not reported. Data on

- 38 -

APPENDIX III

investment income, and on interest on foreign debt and treasury paper, however, are usually
provided to Article IV consultation missions. The authorities have made some progress in
fiscal data presentation, but the lack of a suitable classification of data on the execution of
the budget remains a constraint on monitoring effectively fiscal developments during the
year. Moreover, data on the operations of the Public Institute for Social Security are not
made available. Much of the weaknesses in the fiscal accounts stem from the limitations on
the sharing of information between various government agencies. STA has indicated to the
authorities that operations of the two reserve funds should be classified as part of government
as they perform activities for public policy purposes (management of debt and assets, and
financing of the budget). The authorities have also been briefed on the IMF’s ongoing work
to enhance the transparency of fiscal accounts and presentations detailed in the “Code of
Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency” and were encouraged to adopt some of the practices
recommended in the Code. According to the FAD report entitled “Restructuring Budget
Processes” which was finalized in March 2002, the weakest part of the Kuwaiti Public
Expenditure Management (PEM) system is the accounting system.
Money and Banking Statistics
Money and banking data are reported on a regular and timely basis. Coverage in IFS of the
data on deposit money banks and other banking institutions from January 1981 onward was
revised according to recommendations of the 1994 STA multi-sector mission. On an issue
noted by that mission, it was clarified that the Savings and Credit Bank (SCB) does not
accept transferable deposits from the public.
Balance of Payments Statistics
Kuwait’s balance of payments data have substantially improved, in both coverage and
methodology. Since the beginning of 1997, the CBK has compiled and disseminated detailed
annual data in accordance with the methodology of the BPM5. Quarterly balance of
payments and an annual statement of Kuwait’s international investment position (IIP) have
also been compiled since 1997 by the CBK and provided to Article IV consultation missions.
Partial IIP data submitted to STA exclude foreign assets of other government agencies, and
are not in BPM5 format. Data on capital flows of the nonfinancial private sector (including
foreign direct investment abroad and portfolio investment abroad) are currently not being
compiled but measures are being taken (including collaboration between the CBK and the
Tax Department of the Ministry of Finance) to correct this omission (which has led to a large
“errors and omissions” item in the BOP statistics). Enhancements have been made in the
estimation of travel services, but further improvements are needed in compilation practices
and in the estimation of data on several service items and private transfers. During recent
discussions (October 2004) between STA and the Central Bank of Kuwait, it was agreed that
Kuwait should aim to participate in the Fund’s 2004 Coordinated Portfolio Investment
Survey (CPIS) with a coverage limited to the financial sector.

- 39 -

APPENDIX III

Data dissemination
Kuwait is one of the first GDDS partcipants, and most of its metadata were last updated in
the Fund’s DSBB in October 2002. The CBK has established its own webpage, which
contains the following data that are made available online to the public: money and banking
(monthly); balance of payments (annually); trade balance (monthly); exchange rate (average,
monthly); GDP by sector and expenditure at current and constant prices (annually); public
finance (selected data are available monthly); CPI and WPI (monthly with about a threemonth lag); and securities market indicators (quarterly). Similarly, the Ministry of Planning
has constructed a webpage where the CSO, publishes data on national accounts, prices, and
other related statistics. The Ministry of Finance’s webpage includes elaborated data for the
actual and estimated budget. In addition, the KIA’s webpage provides data on stock market
indices, volume and value of securities traded, as well as privatization schedules and other
related information.

- 40 -

KUWAIT: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF JANUARY 31, 2005
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
1
Data

Frequency
of
1
Reporting

Frequency
of
1
publication

Exchange Rates

01//05

02/05

M

M

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
2
of the Monetary Authorities

12/04

01/05

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

01/05

02//05

M

M

M, Q

Broad Money

01/ 05

02/ 05

M

M

M, Q

Central Bank Balance Sheet

01/ /05

02 /05

M

M

M, Q

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

12/04

02/05

M

M

M

Interest Rates

01/05

02 /05

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

09/04

01/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing– Central Government

FY2003/04

12/04

A

4

A

Not
published
on Fund
standards

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/04

01/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing – General Government

External Current Account Balance

2003

08/04

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

09/03

10/04

M

M

Q

GDP/GNP

2003

12/04

A

A

A

2003

12/04

A

A

A

5

Gross External Debt
1

Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); NA: Not Available
Central Bank of Kuwait only.
3
Fiscal year data only.
4
Higher frequency data available only in national format.
5
Primarily private sector; except for a small volume of trade credits, Kuwait has no public external debt.
2

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
April 25, 2005

This statement provides information on recent developments in Kuwait that has
become available since the staff report was circulated to the Executive Board on
March 8, 2005. The new information does not change the thrust of the staff appraisal.
Oil price. After the issuance of the staff report, the WEO oil price projection was
revised upward. The upward revision to the oil price projection used in the staff report is
significant, ranging between $9–11 per barrel over the medium term (2005–09). As a result,
both the fiscal and the external current account balances are projected to register surpluses
that are much larger than those reported in the staff report. The overall fiscal surplus is now
projected to be 34 percent of GDP in 2005/06, compared with 24.7 percent of GDP reported
in the staff report. The external current account surplus is also projected to be 8.5 percentage
points higher at more than 40 percent of GDP in 2005. On the assumption that oil prices will
remain firm over the medium term, the average fiscal and current account surpluses are
projected to be close to 30 percent of GDP and 40 percent of GDP, respectively, during
2006–09.
Oil production and investment in the oil sector. As a key participant in the oil
market, Kuwait continues to play an important role in contributing to oil market stability and
responded to the fast growing global demand for oil by increasing output. In March 2005,
Kuwait produced 2.6 million barrels per day (bpd), about 0.4 million bpd above its current
OPEC output quota and recent statements by the authorities indicate that actual production
could be increased to 2.75–2.8 million bpd by the end of 2005, if warranted by market
conditions.
Monetary developments. Credit to the private sector has slowed down, as expected,
following the introduction of the 80 percent ceiling (to be fully effective in July 2005) on the
credit (net of provisions) to deposits ratio in July 2004. Credit to the private sector
decelerated to an average annual rate of 7.4 percent during the period August 2004–March
2005, compared with an average annual growth rate of 23.2 percent during January 2003–
July 2004. At the same time, commercial banks’ deposit base increased at an annual rate of
18.9 percent since the introduction of the ceiling (compared with an annual rate of
9.4 percent in the previous 19 months). As a result, the ratio of credit to the private sector to
total deposits declined from 87 percent in July 2004 to 81.3 percent in March 2005. As
anticipated, banks shifted their asset composition, channeling the non-loanable portion of the
increase in deposits toward foreign assets. Consequently, the net foreign assets (NFA) of the
commercial banks increased by 107 percent since the introduction of the ceiling to more than
US$5 billion by end-March 2005. Since interbank funding is not eligible for the purpose of
meeting the new ceiling, interbank deposits declined by 78 percent during the period
August 2004 through March 2005. The Central Bank of Kuwait raised its discount rate by
25 basis points to 5.25 percent on March 23, 2005 in line with the increase in the
U.S. Federal Funds rate.

-2-

Stock market developments. The Kuwait stock exchange index witnessed a further
increase of 33 percent in 2005 (by April 17, 2005), in the fifth year of the ongoing bull
market. The sharp increase in the stock price index is a regional phenomenon, supported by
continued growth in corporate profitability, record high oil prices, an improved economic
outlook, and higher budgetary outlays.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/63
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 13, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Kuwait
On April 25, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Kuwait.1
Background
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance strengthened further in 2003 and 2004 reflecting sharply
higher oil prices and production. Real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 8.5 percent during
this period, its highest pace in the preceding decade and a half. The rebound was also supported
by the spillover effects of the renewed trade relations with Iraq. After taking into account the
terms-of-trade gains, per capita income increased by 34.5 percent over the two-year period.
Inflation and the rate of unemployment remained low at less than 2 percent and 3.5 percent,
respectively. The Kuwaiti stock price index more than doubled in 2003, and increased further by
34 percent in 2004, reflecting higher corporate profits, an improved economic outlook and
abundant liquidity.
The central government budgetary position remained strong in 2003/04 and 2004/05 due to
significantly higher oil revenues, with annual fiscal surpluses at about 20 percent of GDP.
The stance of fiscal policy was expansionary, as a large part of the higher oil revenue was spent
on various government programs. Most of the fiscal surplus was transferred to the Reserve Fund
for the Future Generation and the General Reserve Fund, ensuring the most rapid asset buildup
since the 1990 Gulf war.
Broad money growth accelerated to 7.8 percent in 2003, keeping pace with increases in demand
and supported by a rapid increase in private sector credit (21 percent) in an environment of
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On return
to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive
Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board,
summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country's
authorities.

-2record low interest rates and strengthened domestic economic activity. Monetary conditions
tightened in the second half of 2004, as a consequence of the increase in interest rates in line
with the rise in the U.S. federal funds rate and the introduction of a ceiling on the credit to deposit
ratio. The ceiling was imposed to address prudential concerns regarding the rapid expansion of
credit to the private sector over the last three years without a parallel increase in bank deposits.
Kuwaiti banks are well capitalized and liquid. The capital adequacy ratio remained comfortable
(17.3 percent as of end-September 2004), well above its minimum regulatory level (12 percent).
Asset quality improved further and net bank profits and returns on equity also increased
significantly. Progress was also made in strengthening the financial sector institutional
framework.
With higher oil export receipts, the external current account surplus more than doubled over the
two-year period to 29 percent of GDP in 2004. Exports grew at an annual rate of 33.6 percent due
to a surge in oil and non-oil exports, the latter supported by a sharp increase in exports and reexports to Iraq. As in the past, much of the current account surplus was invested abroad by both
the public and private sectors. External reserves of the Central Bank of Kuwait remained at
comfortable levels. The depreciation of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies and the low
inflation in Kuwait have contributed to a depreciation of the dinar by 9 percent in real effective
terms during January 2003–October 2004, enhancing the competitiveness of non-oil exports.
Progress has been made on the structural reform front, albeit at a slow pace. The Foreign
Investment Law and the associated by-laws are in place, allowing foreigners to own up to
100 percent of Kuwaiti companies in listed sectors. A draft Privatization Law and an amendment
to the Tax Law to lower the corporate income tax that applies only to foreign companies from
55 percent to 25 percent are awaiting parliamentary approval. The authorities allowed private
sector participation in sectors previously dominated by the public sector. The Kuwaitization policy
has been in place since October 2003, entailing training of unskilled Kuwaiti nationals and
increasing the proportion of Kuwaitis employed in the private sector by establishing targets
(proportional to the workforce) that the nongovernment companies should observe.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal. They commended the authorities
for Kuwait’s strong economic rebound and a further strengthening of the macroeconomic position
in 2004. The fastest pace of economic expansion since the 1990 Gulf-war, combined with the oilrelated terms-of-trade gains, has boosted per capita income and helped build up assets for future
generations at a record pace. Directors agreed that, with oil prices likely to remain firm over the
medium term, Kuwait’s medium-term outlook has improved and is likely to remain favorable,
supported by large fiscal and current account surpluses, and low inflation. They observed that
generating employment opportunities for the fast-growing Kuwaiti labor force in the domestic
private sector and diversifying the structure of the economy are the major medium-term
challenges for Kuwait.
Directors encouraged the Kuwaiti authorities to accelerate the pace of structural reforms to further
open up the economy for private sector investment in order to address the country’s medium-term
challenges. Directors welcomed the authorities’ awareness of these challenges and their
commitment to addressing them, and encouraged them to build the necessary internal

-3consensus. They welcomed the authorities’ intention to take advantage of the improved security
situation and the opportunities created by reopened economic relations with Iraq, and to
reposition Kuwait in its traditional role as a gateway to regions in the north and east.
Directors encouraged the authorities to allow the private sector to take a leading role in the
associated infrastructure investment projects. In this context, they urged an expeditious passage
of the Privatization Law and the amendment to the Tax Law awaiting Parliamentary approval, and
a simultaneous broadening of private sector participation in primarily public sector dominated
activities. Directors noted that market-based pricing of publicly-provided goods and services could
help foster private sector activity, ensure efficient resource allocation, and reduce their burden on
the budget.
Directors commended the authorities for the large overall fiscal surpluses recorded in recent
years, but expressed concern about the pace of expenditure growth—including the rise in the
wage bill—that might be difficult to reverse if that became necessary. They also noted with
concern the consequent sharp increase in the non-oil fiscal deficit. Directors observed that
increasing the relative size of the public sector undermines the authorities’ stated objective to
increase the role of the private sector in the economy.
Directors urged the authorities to reduce significantly the non-oil deficit, as a cornerstone of the
authorities’ medium- and longer-term fiscal strategy. They called for a better targeting of
subsidies, putting in place strict controls on new hiring, and not using the public sector as the
“employer of last resort.” Directors underscored the importance of efficient management of
Kuwait’s large and fast-growing savings funds and protecting the investments for Kuwait’s longterm fiscal sustainability. They therefore welcomed the authorities’ intention to push forward
reforms aimed at reducing the role of the state in the economy, including its employment role.
Directors also strongly supported the authorities’ plans to implement a three-year rolling budget
by 2006/07 and to strengthen budget and expenditure management. To boost non-oil revenues,
several Directors recommended tax reforms in the context of the planned Gulf Cooperation
Council union, including the eventual introduction of a value added tax.
Directors commended the authorities for their prudent conduct of monetary policy, which has
supported the exchange rate peg and contributed to a remarkable degree of price stability.
They noted that the strong non-oil export growth and the recent significant depreciation of the
dinar in real effective terms also indicate that the economy remains competitive. Directors
supported the authorities’ intention to keep the exchange rate peg unchanged until the Gulf
Cooperation Council monetary union is established, and to remain open to the choice of the
exchange rate regime under the planned monetary union.
Directors noted that the continued rapid expansion of credit for the last three successive years
and the strong surge in stock prices, although partly backed by strong economic fundamentals,
has posed some risks to the financial system. They agreed that the authorities are rightly
concerned about the potential systemic impact of domestic or external shocks on the stability of
the financial system, and that they have to implement some precautionary steps to stem the
unsustainable pace of credit expansion. Directors observed, however, that the limit on the loans
to deposit ratio introduced by the authorities to contain credit expansion in line with the expansion
of the banks’ deposit base, would constrain market-based operations. Accordingly, they
welcomed the authorities’ intention to abolish the ceiling on banks’ loans to deposit ratio once

-4domestic credit expansion stabilizes. Directors also encouraged the authorities to address the
potential risks to the financial system through strengthening of risk-based prudential ratios.
Directors commended the authorities for their effective supervision of the banking system, which
has resulted in the development of financially sound, well-managed, and profitable institutions.
They noted the substantial progress achieved in further liberalizing the financial system and in
strengthening the prudential regulations and supervision, including through implementation of
some of the Financial Sector Assessment Program recommendations. While taking note of these
significant steps, Directors urged the authorities to secure at the earliest the legal basis for the
independence of the capital market authority, the insurance supervision authority, and the Central
Bank of Kuwait’s supervisory authority. On AML/CFT issues, Directors welcomed the ongoing
progress, including the amendments to the regulatory framework that have enabled the sharing of
information with foreign counterparts.
Directors emphasized that generating employment for the fast growing Kuwaiti labor force is the
most important economic challenge for Kuwait. They supported the authorities’ labor market
reform strategy aimed at training and providing incentives for development of skills needed by the
private sector. However, they urged the authorities to continue applying the Kuwaitization policy
flexibly so that the competitiveness and profitability of the private sector are not adversely
affected. They stressed the importance of promoting market-based wage flexibility for the Kuwaiti
workforce in order to facilitate the integration of the segmented labor markets.
Directors welcomed the progress made in compilation and dissemination of Kuwait’s economic
statistics. They urged the authorities to reduce the delays in collection and reporting of national
income, price indices, and customs data. Directors encouraged the authorities to adopt, in
coordination with other GCC countries, common data standards across all sectors as a step
toward establishing convergence criteria for the planned monetary union. A few Directors also
noted the importance of improving the timeliness and transparency of petroleum-related data.
Directors expressed their appreciation to the Kuwaiti authorities for their generous financial
assistance to developing countries, including through the HIPC Initiative, as well as for Kuwait’s
role in stabilizing the oil market.
It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Kuwait will be held on the standard
12-month cycle.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.
.

-5Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

(Percent change)
Production and prices
Real GDP

-1.8

1.9

0.7

-0.5

9.7

Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Consumer price index

-6.5
2.1
3.1

2.2
1.9
1.6

-3.3
3.6
1.4

-7.9
4.3
0.8

19.8
4.8
1.0

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
Financial variables 1/
Total revenue, of which:

68.9

80.2

63.1

65.2

60.6

Oil and gas 2/
Investment income 2/
Total expenditure
Current
Capital
Overall fiscal balance

46.8
19.3
39.9
36.4
3.5
29.0

55.5
20.3
39.4
36.2
3.2
40.8

43.1
13.2
45.6
40.8
4.0
17.5

49.4
10.5
43.9
38.8
4.7
21.3

46.8
8.8
41.5
36.3
4.8
19.1

Change in broad money supply (in percent)

1.6

6.3

12.8

4.8

7.8

Interest rate (in percent) 3/

5.3

5.4

3.7

2.2

1.5

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b. of which:

12,225

21,298

17,910

17,012

22,611

11,029

18,182

14,977

14,057

19,004

-11,880

-11,369

-12,406

-13,959

-16,239

5,010

14,671

8,328

4,250

7,318

16.6

39.8

24.5

12.1

17.5

4,928

7,186

10,000

9,314

7,685

In months of imports of goods and services

5.0

7.6

9.7

8.0

5.7

Real effective exchange rate (percent change)

0.9

4.2

5.1

-0.9

-7.7

Crude oil and refined products
Imports, c.i.f.
Current account balance (deficit = -)
In percent of GDP
Central Bank of Kuwait’s international reserves

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF Staff estimates.
1/ The fiscal year was changed from July–June to April–March effective 2001/02.
2/ Includes profits of public enterprises.
3/ Three–month Kuwaiti dinar deposits.

