April 2006
IMF Country Report No. 06/132

© 2006 International Monetary Fund

Febriaru 21, 2005
December 14, 2005

March 10, 2006
January 29, 2001
2006
January 29, 2001

Kuwait: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Kuwait
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Kuwait, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on December 14, 2005, with the officials of Kuwait on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on February 21, 2005. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of March 8, 2006 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its March 10, 2006 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Kuwait.

The documentlisted below has been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
KUWAIT
Staff Report for 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2006 Consultation with Kuwait
Approved by Lorenzo Pérez and Juha Kähkönen
February 21, 2006

•

The 2006 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Kuwait from November 30 to
December 14, 2005.

•

The team comprised Messrs. Mansur (head), Delgado, Floerkemeier, and Govil, and
Ms. Farahbaksh (all MCD). Mr. Shaalan, Executive Director for Kuwait, also participated in
the policy discussions.

•

The mission met with Mr. Bader Mishary Al-Humaidhi, Minister of Finance; Mr. Abdullah
Abdul Rahman Al-Taweel, Minister of Commerce; Sheikh Salem Abdulaziz Al-Sabah,
Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK); Dr. Nabeel Al-Mannae (Deputy Governor, CBK);
and other representatives from the government and private sectors.

•

The previous consultation was concluded on April 25, 2005. The Public Information Notice of
the Executive Board’s discussion is available at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pn/2005/pn0563.htm.

•

Kuwait accepted the obligations of Article VIII on April 5, 1963, and maintains an exchange
system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions.

•

Kuwait’s currency is pegged to the U.S. dollar at a fixed exchange rate of KD 0.299 per
U.S. dollar since January 2003.

•

The authorities will consider issuing the Public Information Notice (PIN) and publishing the
staff report following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation discussion by the
Executive Board.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 4
I.

Background and Recent Developments.......................................................................... 5
A. Overview ................................................................................................................. 5
B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural
Reforms, 2004–05 ................................................................................................... 6

II. Report on Discussions .................................................................................................... 9
A. Near- and Medium-Term Outlook Remains Strong .............................................. 10
B. Hydrocarbon Sector: Is the Investment Plan Supportive of
Global Oil Market Stability and Kuwait’s Growth Potential? ..............................11
C. Fiscal policy: Improving Resource Management and Ensuring
Long-Term Fiscal Viability................................................................................... 13
D. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies: Promoting Financial
Intermediation While Safeguarding Macroeconomic Stability.............................16
E. Structural Reform: How can Kuwait Sustain Its Non-Oil
Growth Momentum? ............................................................................................. 18
F. Statistical and Other Issues.................................................................................... 19
III. Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................. 20
Text Boxes
1.
2.
3.

Kuwait Stock Market: Recent Developments and Some Characteristics.......................7
Hydrocarbon Sector Investment Plans, 2006–11 ......................................................... 12
Kuwait: How Should the Fiscal Surpluses be Used? ................................................... 15

Figures
GCC: Oil GDP as percent of total GDP................................................................................. 5
Domestic Investment in Selected GCC Countries, 2000–05 ................................................. 5
GDP Growth and Inflation, 2000–05..................................................................................... 6
GCC Government Saving, 2004 ............................................................................................ 6
Exchange Rate Movements, January 1990–November 2005 ................................................ 8
Broad Money and Credit to Nongovernment Sector, 2000–05 ............................................. 8
Fiscal and Current Account Surpluses, 2000–10................................................................. 10
Fiscal and External Current Account Outlook Under Alternative Oil
Price Scenarios ............................................................................................................. 10
Oil Production Increase, 2003–05 ....................................................................................... 11
Interest Rate Indicators, 2000–05 ........................................................................................ 17

-3Text Tables
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, 2004/05 ................................................... 20
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–06 ...................................................................... 23
Summary of Government Finance, 2001/02–2010/11.................................................. 25
Summary of Balance of Payments, 2002–10................................................................ 26
Monetary Survey, 2000–06 .......................................................................................... 27
Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 2001–10 ...............28
Financial Soundness and Other Vulnerability Indicators, 2001–05 .............................29

Appendixes
I. Fund Relations ..............................................................................................................31
II. Relations with the World Bank..................................................................................... 33
III. Statistical Issues............................................................................................................ 35

-4EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Current setting
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance has been strong in recent years reflecting sharply
higher oil and non-oil activity. Real GDP growth was strong (averaging 7.5 percent during
2004–05); inflation remained low; and the external current account and fiscal surpluses
increased sharply. The stock price index has more than tripled during the period 2003–05,
including a 67 percent increase in 2005.
Over the medium term, Kuwait’s financial position is projected to remain strong. The large
external current account and fiscal surpluses are expected to lead to a buildup of a large stock
of financial assets for future generations. However, GDP growth is expected to slow down
unless the pace of structural reforms accelerates. There are also downside risks to this
favorable medium-term financial outlook since it is based on historically high levels of oil
price and output assumptions.
Policy discussions
•

Kuwait continued to play a constructive role in support of oil price stability. In
response to growing world demand, oil production has increased significantly, and a
$22 billion plan to expand crude oil capacity to 3 mbd by 2008, increase refining
capacity, and almost double the production of petrochemical products is being
implemented.

•

Although the overall fiscal position is projected to remain in a comfortable surplus
over the medium term, the staff encouraged the authorities to consider improvements
in the structure of the budget by gradually increasing capital expenditure,
rationalizing transfers and subsidies, and achieving a better balance between
productive expenditure and fiscal saving. Managing the rapidly growing savings fund
for future generations effectively will also be key to Kuwait’s long-term fiscal
viability.

•

Monetary policy has been successful in maintaining price stability and the exchange
rate peg. The Kuwaiti banking system continues to be financially sound, wellmanaged and effectively supervised. The continuing upward trend in the stock price
index, despite strong economic fundamentals, poses some risk to the otherwise
favorable financial sector outlook. Staff urged the authorities to expeditiously
legislate a capital market authority law to intensify oversight of the stock market.

•

Progress on the structural reform front remains slow. The authorities have adopted
some measures to allow for a broader role of the private sector in the economy, but
the reforms need to be cast in the context of a comprehensive strategy.

-5-

I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
A. Overview1
1.
The consultation discussions were held against a backdrop of strong economic
activity, high oil prices and large fiscal and external surpluses, but slow progress in the
implementation of structural reforms. The optimism created by high oil prices and output
has resulted in booming non-oil activity, a rapidly expanding equity market, and building up
of assets for future generations at an accelerated pace, in conjunction with increased
allocations for higher public spending.2
2.
The authorities’ stated objectives are to achieve a sustainable high rate of nonoil GDP growth to diversify the economy 3 and
GCC: Oil GDP as percent of total GDP 1/
(Average during 2000–05)
absorb the fast growing Kuwaiti labor force;
70
60
ensure intergenerational equity through an
50
accelerated buildup of assets; and guard
40
against potential instability arising from the
30
20
asset market. In the previous Article IV
10
consultations, the staff made recommendations
0
to speed up structural reforms, and strengthen
Bahrain
UAE
Oman
Saudi
Kuwait
Qatar
Arabia
the budget structure and oversight of the
Sources: Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff est imat es.
1/ Bahrain, Qatar, and t he U.A.E. figures include hydrocarbon.
financial sector.
Progress has been made in many of these areas,
Domestic Investment in Selected GCC Countries,
although implementation of the reform agenda has
2000–05
(In percent of GDP)
been slower than expected, in part, due to
30
difficulties in reaching a political consensus. The
UAE
25
apparent lack of a comprehensive strategic plan
Saudi Arabia
20
for non-oil sector development has led to
Oman
piecemeal and ad hoc efforts toward reforms in
15
various areas, which may not enable Kuwait to
Kuwait
10
realize its national objectives, and over time its
5
economic performance could fall behind other
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
GCC countries. Although investment in the
Sources: GCC National authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
economy has increased significantly in recent
years, gross domestic investment as a percent of GDP has remained low (14 percent in 2004).
1

Kuwait’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendixes I and II, respectively.
Data issues are covered in Appendix III.

2

Kuwait continues to depend heavily on foreign workers which increased by about 47 percent during the period
2000–end-June 2005, and they comprise nearly two-thirds of its population of 2.9 million and four-fifths of its
labor force of 1.7 million in June 2005.

3

Oil accounted for 50 percent of Kuwait’s GDP in 2000–05, and Kuwait remains one of the least diversified
economies in the GCC region.

-6-

B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural Reforms, 2004–05
3.
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance has been strong in 2004 and 2005
(Table 1). Real GDP expanded at an average rate
Kuwait: GDP Growth and Inflation, 2000–05
of 7.5 percent, as a result of higher oil production
(In percent per annum)
4
14
and buoyant non-oil activity (6.4 percent). After
12
taking into account the terms-of-trade gains, per
Real non-oil GDP
Real GDP
10
capita GDP increased by 43 percent to more than
8
$26,000 during the two-year period through
2005. Inflation remained low at 1.3 percent in
6
2004, although it rose to almost 4 percent in
4
2005, 5 due to rising non-oil activity, abundant
2
CPI Inflation
liquidity, and the delayed effect of the
0
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
depreciation of the dinar against the euro and
Sources: Kuwaiti authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
yen. The weighted stock price index (WPI) more
than tripled during 2003–05, although the pace of increase over the recent two-year period
(averaging 39 percent annually) has been slower than in other heavily oil-endowed GCC
countries, in part reflecting a tighter monetary policy stance (Box 1).
4.
Central government budgetary position strengthened further due to higher oil
revenues, with the overall fiscal surplus estimated at 24 percent of GDP in 2004/05 6
(Table 2). Fiscal policy was expansionary in
2004/05, as expenditures increased by more than
14 percent and the non-oil primary deficit in
relation to non-oil GDP increased by
4 percentage points to 61 percent. The
expansionary fiscal stance was primarily
attributable to sharply higher subsidies and
transfers and higher capital outlays, while the
growth in the wage bill was moderate and
GCC Government Savings, 2004
In percent of GDP

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Bahrain

Saudi Arabia

Oman

Qatar

UAE

Kuwait

Source: GCC National authorities.

4

Construction, financial institutions, insurance, personal and household services, and transport, storage and
communications sectors contributed significantly to the non-oil sector growth witnessed during 2004–05.

5

The increase in the inflation rate has been low partly because of unchanged administered prices of petroleum
products and utilities and an open and flexible labor market. The housing component of the CPI which has a
weight of 26.7 percent in the overall index and includes house rent, water, fuel and power increased by only
0.8 percent in 2004 and by 0.3 percent during January-October 2005, in part because of unchanged utility
prices. The prices of water, fuel, and power are administered and have largely remained unchanged since 2000.

6

The fiscal year in Kuwait covers April 1 through March 31 of the following year.

-7Box 1. Kuwait Stock Market: Recent Developments and Some Characteristics
Stock prices and market capitalization continued to
grow at an accelerated pace. After outperforming most
markets in the region in 2003, the Kuwait Stock
Exchange (KSE) WPI grew by 15 percent in 2004. The
market was more bullish in 2005, helped by the surge in
oil prices, expanding liquidity, and strong corporate
performance. As a result, the WPI increased by
67 percent. Market capitalization remained stable at
135 percent of GDP in 2004 and grew to the equivalent
of 191 percent of GDP in 2005.

Performance of Stock Price Indices, December 2003–05 1/
Dec. 2003 =100
45

300
Market Capitalization
(right axis, in billion KD)

250

40

35
200
30

Benchmark Price Index
150

Weighted Price Index

25

100

20
Despite the strong growth, the increase in the WPI
since 2004 has been moderate in comparison to other
15
50
GCC markets. The average price index for the stock
Dec-03
Dec-04
Dec-05
markets of Arab countries during 2004–05 increased by
Sources: Bloomberg and Kuwait Stock Exchange.
1/ End-month data.
215 percent, well above the 93 percent gain in Kuwait
during the same period. The valuation of Kuwaiti stocks, as measured by their price/earnings ratio (PER), price/book
value ratio (PBR), and dividend yield compares
Performance of GCC Stock Price Indices, December 2003–December 2005
(December 2003 =100)
favorably with other markets in the region and even with 450
mature markets.
UAE

400
Saudi Arabia

The relatively moderate growth in Kuwaiti stock
prices results from a combination of strengths and
weaknesses. The new prudential and monetary measures
introduced by the CBK in 2004 and 2005 have
effectively contributed to the deceleration in the rate of
private sector credit growth. However, it may also be
related to KSE’s relatively weak legal, regulatory, and
supervisory framework (as noted in the 2004 FSAP
report). Also, according to market participants, a sizable
part of listed companies’ profit growth is attributable to
capital gains on stock investments.

350

Shua'a Arab
Index

300
Qatar

250

Kuwait, weighted
index
Oman

200
150

Bahrain

100
50
2003

2004

2005

Source: Bloomberg.

Key Stock Market Indicators 1/
The financial system is well equipped to withstand
any reasonable correction. Strong economic
Dividend Yield
fundamentals, in particular high corporate profitability
PER
PBR
(percent)
underpinned by high oil prices have provided a solid
Dow Jones Average
20.97
3.06
2.28
basis for the increase in stock prices. However, some
S&P 500
18.28
2.80
1.77
level of speculative demand, mainly concentrated in
Saudi Arabia
45.20
10.10
1.30
volatile stocks with low market capitalization, is pushing Kuwait
13.14
3.23
1.90
prices beyond some firms’ economic value. In addition,
Korea
11.92
1.63
0.95
Egypt
27.68
7.97
2.70
the market remains very sensitive to external factors
such as a decline in oil prices, which may substantially
Source: Bloomberg, Bakheet Financial Advisor,
reduce corporate profits. Financial stability is based on
and Global Investment House.
strong bank capitalization (capital adequacy ratio of
1/ All data as of end–January 2006
17.3), household borrowings guaranteed against salaries,
and moderate exposure to equity market risk (at 9 percent of total loan portfolio, including non-Kuwaiti securities).
Nonetheless, in the event of a substantial correction, profitability of financial institutions would significantly decline
and non-oil GDP growth would be negatively impacted through wealth and balance sheet effects.

-8expenditures on goods and services declined after a sharp pickup in 2003/04 associated with
emergency security spending. Overall, two-thirds of the increase in hydrocarbon revenues is
estimated to have been saved in 2004/05, and Kuwait’s government saving rate of 28 percent
of GDP in 2004/05 was the highest amongst all GCC countries.
5.
The external current account registered annual surpluses averaging $25 billion
(37 percent of GDP) during 2004–05, primarily on account of high oil revenues. At an
annualized rate, exports of oil and oil products increased by over 47 percent, but non-oil
export7 growth slowed down to 15 percent
compared with a surge of about 70 percent in
2003 (Table 3), because of slower growth of reexports to Iraq. Import growth remained high as
a result of strong domestic economic activity.
Although the services account deficit widened
because of higher payments associated with
travel and transportation, it was more than
offset by higher investment income which
surged by 59 percent on an annualized basis.
The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the
Kuwaiti dinar depreciated by 5 percent in 2004;
however, with the strengthening of the U.S. dollar vis-à-vis other major currencies in recent
months, the REER appreciated by 11.7 percent during January–November 2005.
Kuwait: Exchange Rate Movements, January 1995–November 2005
(1990=100)

140
135
130
125

Nominal Effective
Exchange Rate

120
115
110

Real Effective Exchange
Rate

105
100
95

U.S. dollar per dinar

90

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System ; and Central Bank of Kuwait

6.
Broad money growth steadily accelerated during 2004–05 and grew by
16.7 percent during the 12-month period through September 2005, despite efforts to
tighten monetary policy. This accumulation is
Kuwait: Broad Money and Credit to Nongovernment Sector 2000–05 1/
(Twelve month percent change )
attributable to the expansion of credit to the
private sector (13.1 percent of broad money) and
an increase in net foreign assets (15.7 percent of
broad money) (Table 4). The tightening of
monetary conditions since the second half of
2004 was pursued by increasing the benchmark
interest rate in line with global interest rate
developments, by introducing a ceiling on the
credit to deposits ratio in July 2004, and by the
re-introduction of market-based monetary
control mechanisms in August 2005. Banking
supervision has strengthened further, and the
30
28
26
24

Credit to Nongovernment
Sector

22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4

Broad Money

2
0

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Source: Kuwaiti authorities.

1/ Data through end-October 2005.

7

Petrochemicals and manufactured fertilizers accounted for 45 percent of non-oil exports (excluding re-exports)
in 2003.

-9CBK applied the Basel II capital adequacy requirements for conventional banks effective
December 31, 2005. 8 The banking sector has been opened further for foreign banks,9 but
progress on implementing the remaining FSAP recommendations has slowed down since
most pending actions entail legal changes.10
7.
Some progress has been made in private sector participation in the sectors
previously dominated by the public sector (particularly in telecommunications, airlines,
and infrastructure development). However, several draft laws (including the privatization and
competition laws) aimed at promoting a more market-friendly business environment have
been awaiting parliamentary approval for a long time due to a lack of political consensus.
The Kuwaitization11 policy has been in place since October 2003, entailing the training of
unskilled Kuwaiti nationals and enforcing quotas by imposing penalties to increase the
proportion of nationals in the economy.12
II. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS
8.
The discussions primarily focused on the following four areas which are
considered critical for medium- and long-term growth and macroeconomic stability.
These include (a) the authorities’ current plan regarding capacity expansion in the
hydrocarbon sector and its contributions to the medium-term growth and financial outlook;
(b) the fiscal strategy to deal with surging surpluses in a way that contributes to growth
through higher investment, fosters an increased role for the private sector in infrastructure
development and service delivery, and also addresses intergenerational distribution of
wealth; (c) the short- and medium-term challenges for the financial sector, including the
potential vulnerabilities arising from the recent asset market developments; and (d) the
needed structural reforms to sustain the recent pickup in non-oil activity. The discussions
8

The authorities also adopted a prudent approach to the introduction of Islamic banking, legally requiring that
Islamic and non-Islamic financial operations are conducted in separate institutions and limiting the number of
licenses issued during the first phase.
9

Three foreign banks have already opened branches in Kuwait in 2005 and a fourth license has been issued.

10

The main remaining FSAP recommendations that would require legal changes are: strengthening of the
regulatory and supervisory framework for the capital market and insurance companies; criminalizing the
financing of terrorism; granting full independence to the CBK; and removing interest rate ceilings on lending.

11

The Kuwaitization policy aims at increasing the proportion of Kuwaitis employed in the private sector by
establishing targets (proportional to the workforce) that the nongovernment companies must observe. The
proportion varies from sector to sector. Nongovernment companies not complying with the established limits are
not allowed to conclude contracts or do business with the government.

12

Although more than 85 percent of the Kuwaiti national labor force is employed by the public sector, the
percentage of Kuwaiti nationals who found jobs in the public sector has declined from 72.3 percent in 2003 to
59.5 percent during January–November 2005.

- 10 were cast in the context of the near- and medium-term outlook for the Kuwaiti economy and
the underpinning policies.
A. Near- and Medium-Term Outlook Remains Strong
9.
Real GDP is projected to grow by 6.2 percent in 2006, supported by continued
strong oil and non-oil activity. Oil
Kuwait: Fiscal and Current Account Surpluses, 2000–10
(In percent of GDP)
production is expected to remain close to
60
Kuwait’s production capacity of 2.7 mbd.
Projections
50
Inflation is expected to decelerate
Current account
balance
40
somewhat to 3.5 percent as a result of
Fiscal balance
moderation in rental costs and unchanged
30
administered prices for utilities. Both the
20
external current account and the overall
fiscal surpluses are projected at more than
10
40 percent of GDP, 13 despite higher public
0
spending including the full-year effect of
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
the increase in public sector wages by
Sources: Kuwaiti authorities; Fund staff estimates and projections.
about 10 percent effective July 2005.
10.
Over the medium term (2007–10), Kuwait’s financial position is projected to
remain strong. Both the external current account and fiscal balances will remain in large
surplus, albeit at modestly declining levels
Fiscal and External Current Account Outlook Under
in relation to GDP, mainly reflecting the
Alternative Oil Price Scenarios
(In percent of GDP)
projected slow decline in oil prices. The
70
fiscal and current account outlooks are
60
expected to be favorably influenced by the
50
returns from the accumulated assets of the
40
Reserve Fund for Future Generations
30
(RFFG). Although the surpluses are
20
expected to remain large despite a
10
moderate decline in oil prices, the
authorities observed that there are
0
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
downside risks to this favorable mediumSources: Data provided by the Kuwaiti authorities;
and Fund staff estimates and projections.
term financial outlook since it is based on
historically high levels of oil price and output assumptions.14 On the fiscal side, although
total expenditure in relation to GDP is assumed to remain broadly unchanged over the
medium term, these projections entail a significantly lower growth in current outlays than
experienced in recent years. Prospects for private investment and non-oil GDP growth are
Current account balance (under baseline scenario)

Current account balance (under $10 lower oil price scenario)

Fiscal balance (under baseline scenario)

Fiscal balance (under $10 lower oil price scenario)

13

14

Based on the latest (December 2005) oil price projection of the World Economic Outlook (WEO).

On the assumption of an oil price that is $10 per barrel below the present WEO medium-term oil price
outlook, staff estimates indicate that the fiscal and current account surpluses will decline by about 9 percentage
points in relation to GDP over the medium term to reach 30 and 39 percent, respectively.

- 11 expected to weaken over the medium term in view of the expected slow pace of structural
reforms. GDP growth is also expected to decelerate as oil production stabilizes at the
projected 3 mbd level, in line with the envisaged oil-sector investment plan.
B. Hydrocarbon Sector: Is the Investment Plan Supportive of Global Oil Market
Stability and Kuwait’s Growth Potential?
11.
Kuwait’s constructive role in support of oil price stability entailed a rapid
expansion of crude output, a comprehensive plan to expand crude and refined oil
output, and a boost to gas production for domestic uses (Box 2). Production of crude oil
has been increased by 47.5 percent since
Oil Production Increase, 2003–05
(In percent)
2002 in response to growing world
demand. A $22 billion self-financed plan
to expand crude oil capacity to 3 mbd by
2008, increase refining capacity by
60 percent, and almost double the
production of petrochemical products is
under implementation. Staff supported
these plans and underscored that
sustained growth in hydrocarbon output
would be important for Kuwait’s
medium-term growth outlook and would
also contribute to global oil market stability. Forging the necessary political consensus for
developing expeditiously the North Fields under “Project Kuwait,” which the authorities
have been contemplating since 1997, would be critical for the success of their expansion
plans. The authorities now hope that, given the broad political consensus reached on Project
Kuwait, parliamentary approval should be possible in early 2006. Kuwait is contributing to
oil market transparency by providing data to the Joint Oil Data Initiative (JODI), although
there is scope for improving the timeliness of oil data provision.
25

Kuwait

20

15

Kuwait

10

Kuwait

OPEC

OPEC

5

OPEC

0

2003
Sources: Kuwaiti authorities and EIA.

2004

2005

- 12 -

Box 2. Hydrocarbon Sector Investment Plans, 2006–11
Kuwait has 99 billion barrels of proven oil reserves, approximately 8 percent of world oil reserves,
and is undertaking a broad-based investment plan to realize its hydrocarbon sector potential over
the medium and long run. In this context, a $10
billion program to increase crude oil production
GCC: Planned Crude Oil Production Capacity Increase During 2006–10
capacity to 3 mbd by 2008 is under
implementation, which is a part of the
government’s $22 billion plan and is in line with
the long-term plan to increase capacity to 4 mbd
by 2020. The long-term expansion plan critically
depends on the implementation of “Project
Kuwait”, which complements the government’s
own plan with an additional investment of $8
billion, jointly with foreign oil companies. Under
this project, Kuwait is considering permitting
foreign oil companies to invest in upstream
production on “buy-back contract” arrangements,
which do not involve production sharing, concessions, or the “booking” of reserves by foreign
companies. Project Kuwait has been delayed repeatedly due to a lack of political consensus, although
there are signs that legislative approval could be secured soon.
45

40

(in percent of 2005 capacity)

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Kuwait
Saudi Arabia
Sources: Country authorities, oil publications, and staff estimates.

2.5

U.A.E.

As part of its long-term plan, Kuwait is also
planning to spend over $10 billion through
2011 to upgrade and increase its petroleum
refining capacity. Total refinery capacity is
expected to increase from the current level of
0.9 mbd to 1.4 mbd by 2011. The upgrade
would increase capacity to produce ultra-lowsulphur fuel, and to process an increasing
proportion of domestic heavy and sour crude.

GCC: Medium-Term Refining Capacity Plans
(In million barrels per day)
2005
proj.

2.0

Qatar

1.5

1.0

0.5

Kuwait produces a relatively modest
volume of natural gas (around 293 billion
cubic feet in 2003), the vast majority of which
is “associated gas” that is extracted in
conjunction with oil. Kuwait’s natural gas reserves are estimated to be 55 trillion cubic feet, equivalent
to 200 years of reserves at the current level of production. Kuwait hopes to significantly increase its use
of natural gas, especially in electricity generation, water desalination, and petrochemicals plants, by
increasing gas supplies from domestic and imported sources and by reducing the flaring of associated
gas to one percent by 2009 from six percent currently.
0.0

Bahrain

Kuwait

Oman

Qatar 1/

Saudi Arabia

U.A.E.

1/ Includes two gas-to-liquids (GTL) projects.
Sources: Country authorities, oil market publications, and Fund staff estimates.

Development of Kuwait’s petrochemicals sector is being accelerated through an investment plan
of $1.5 billion. The plan includes the Olefins project (also called Equate II) to produce ethylene,
polyethylene, and ethylene glycol; and the aromatics and styrene plants that are expected to come on
stream by 2008. The Equate joint venture is the country’s largest petrochemicals project.

- 13 C. Fiscal policy: Improving Resource Management and Ensuring
Long-Term Fiscal Viability
12.
The overall fiscal position is projected to remain in comfortable surplus over the
medium term. Accordingly, the discussion focused on improvements in the structure of the
budget by gradually increasing capital expenditure, rationalizing transfers and subsidies, and
achieving a better balance between productive expenditure and fiscal savings.15 Staff
supported the authorities’ plans to use a part of the higher oil revenue to further improve the
country’s physical infrastructure and for investments in health and education. In this context,
the staff urged the authorities to promote greater private sector participation in these projects
including through public-private-partnerships (PPP). In response to staff’s observation that
there was ample room for further boosting public investment by accelerating the
implementation of strategically important infrastructure projects, the authorities observed
that several such initiatives are under consideration,16 although many of them would require
consensus building at the domestic and regional levels.
13.
The current favorable fiscal situation is likely to give rise to expenditure
pressures, which are already evident in the area of wage and salary increases and higher
subsidies and transfers. Staff cautioned against a further widening of the public-private
sector wage differential, which would hinder private sector development and further increase
the need for wage subsidies to encourage the employment of Kuwaiti nationals in the private
sector. While concurring with the staff, the authorities observed that they were trying to fend
off such pressures, and the recently announced moderate increase in general salary was a
manifestation of their efforts. The authorities also reaffirmed their intention to implement
stricter rules for additional recruitment in the public sector, limiting new recruitment to actual
staffing needs, and increasingly linking salaries and allowances to individual performance.
14.
Progress in the area of income tax reform has stalled, and a revised strategy
needs to be explored in light of the current favorable fiscal outlook and political
feasibility. The authorities indicated that the envisaged introduction of a new income tax on
national companies might not be politically feasible in the current macroeconomic
environment. Against this background, staff suggested rationalization of tax and expenditures
in order to encourage foreign direct investment and improve efficiency of spending. The
measures suggested include: cutting the prevailing 55 percent maximum income tax rate on
foreign companies to 15–20 percent in line with other GCC countries; and a significant
reduction in large and untargeted subsidies and transfers by rationalizing the system, which
15

While last year’s staff report (Country Report No. 05/231) noted that the fiscal stance was not sustainable at
the oil prices projected at that time, fiscal sustainability is not an issue given the current, markedly higher,
projected oil price path. In view of the large net assets position built up by the public sector, Kuwait can sustain
a balanced overall fiscal position at $17 per barrel in real terms. The fiscal stance envisaged under the mediumterm scenario would also allow for sustaining an unchanged net assets to GDP ratio, with oil prices at $25 per
barrel in constant terms.

16

See paragraph 23.

- 14 accounted for 30 percent of total expenditure in 2004/05.17 The authorities observed that an
initiative to introduce a Value Added Tax (VAT) in Kuwait in coordination with other GCC
countries was continuing. While supporting this step, staff encouraged the authorities to
implement the budgetary reforms they had been contemplating in recent years, including the
introduction of a three-year rolling budget; consolidation of the budgetary process by
bringing all budgetary chapters under the ministry of finance; and adoption of budget
classifications in line with international accounting standards.
15.
The large fiscal surpluses have created both opportunities and challenges for
addressing a number of medium- and long-term issues facing Kuwait (Box 3). The
authorities observed that, although Kuwait’s health and education systems and physical
infrastructure were quite good, substantial additional allocations for these sectors were
envisaged under the forthcoming new five-year plan.18 The large investment plan to expand
hydrocarbon sector activity would be essentially financed by the Kuwait Petroleum
Corporation out of its own resources and its joint venture foreign partners. The authorities
were of the view that despite sizable additional allocations, consistent with Kuwait’s
absorptive and implementation capacity, the fiscal surpluses would still remain very large.
Staff underscored that, in the absence of a clear strategy for utilizing the surpluses, pressures
would intensify for higher salary increases, a larger size of the government, and larger
transfers to Kuwaiti nationals.
16.
While noting that such pressures were indeed building up, the authorities
observed that the government remained committed to proper utilization of the fiscal
surplus. Accordingly, the government contributed an additional 5 percent of revenues (in
addition to the statutory contribution of 10 percent of all government revenues) to the RFFG
in 2004/05 and are likely to do the same in future. The fiscal surplus was also utilized to
pay back a part of the amount borrowed out of the RFFG in the aftermath of the Gulf war
and the government plans to expedite the repayment of the remaining amount. While
endorsing the authorities’ approach, staff observed that investment income of the RFFG was
already significant and, combined with the anticipated large budgetary surpluses, would
likely assume greater importance over time. If resources are well managed, given the
current medium-term oil price outlook and fiscal stance, achieving fiscal sustainability and
the transition to a predominantly non-oil economy in the long run will be much easier.
Accordingly, as regards Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) assets, the staff underscored
the importance of strong safeguard arrangements; continuous oversight by the Board of
Directors of the KIA and by parliament; and greater transparency in the management of
funds by KIA.

17

In particular, subsidies could be better targeted to low-income families through changes in water and
electricity tariff structures and using means testing for various subsidized loan programs.
18

The medium-term fiscal framework allows for expenditures growing at 5 percent in real terms, excluding the
planned large investments in the hydrocarbon sector.

- 15 -

Box 3. Kuwait: How Should the Fiscal Surpluses be Used?
The authorities face the challenge of
Projection of Public Asset Accumulation, 2005–11
managing the large fiscal surpluses
(In percent of GDP)
efficiently. Kuwait has built up sizable
investments abroad, despite the setback of
the 1990–91 Gulf war. The assets are likely to
be built up at a faster pace in the coming years
because of higher oil revenues. Accumulated
public sector savings is projected to reach
300–400 percent of GDP over the next 5–
8 years, contributing about 15–20 percent of
GDP per annum in implicit returns and
thereby greatly strengthening Kuwait’s fiscal
position even in the event of a decline in oil
Source: Fund staff estimates and projections.
prices. However, fundamental decisions will
have to be made on how to allocate the available funds between productive uses.
350

100
90

300

80

250

200

Public Assets
(left scale)

70

Imputed return on assets
(right scale)

60
50

150

40
30

100

20

50

10

0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0
2011

Despite the very high level of savings, the level of domestic investment in Kuwait is still rather low
and public investment is lagging far behind that of other oil-exporting countries in the region.
There appears to be room for further boosting capital expenditure for infrastructure development, health,
and education. Efficient government investment in infrastructure and human capital would also
contribute to intergenerational equity by enhancing the economy’s long-term growth potential.
However, such needs are not likely to be excessive given that Kuwait has already built up good quality
infrastructure.
The fiscal surpluses could also be used to recapitalize Kuwait’s social security system (KPISS),
which has accumulated significant actuarial deficits in the past. KPISS suffers from a serious
structural imbalance because of excessively
KPISS: Actuarial Projections of Basic Pension System
generous benefits and very low contributions. The
last actuarial evaluation of the KPISS done in 2001
indicated that funds of the basic system would be
depleted within the next 15 to 25 years if no
corrective measures were taken. The actuarial
Accumulated Savings
deficit of KPISS has continued to increase since
Expenses
the last valuation, the cumulative actuarial deficit
growing from KD 5.5 billion in 1998 to around
Revenues
KD 7 billion in 2004. Therefore, any
recapitalization operation should be linked to a
Source: Actuarial report prepared by the ILO, 2002.
fundamental and much-needed reform to guarantee
the system’s long-term viability.
7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1998

2003

2008

2013

2018

2023

2028

-1

Finally, a large part of the projected fiscal surpluses should continue to be used in further
accumulating financial assets to ensure fiscal sustainability over the long term and to take account of
intergenerational equity issues with regard to the intertemporal distribution of Kuwait’s oil wealth. Even
though the country’s large natural resource endowments will generate significant government revenues
over a long time, economic policy in the long run would need to address the transition to a situation
where the oil resources/revenues would be depleted. Investment income from financial savings, if
appropriately built up, would help Kuwait to preserve public sector wealth and maintain public services
in future.

- 16 17.
Despite the current surplus position of the Kuwait Public Institution for Social
Security (KPISS), it cannot be considered financially sound in the long run.19 The
authorities are aware that with payments growing faster than contributions and investment
income over the long run, the institution’s financial balance will turn into deficit by the end
of the next decade and assets will be eventually depleted, if no corrective measures are
taken. The authorities agreed with the staff that the current large fiscal surpluses have
created an opportunity to ensure the long-term viability of the KPISS if it is reformed in an
appropriate and socially balanced manner. This would entail rationalization and reduction
of the overly generous benefits and realignment of contributions in line with the benefits. In
the context of such a reform, the staff encouraged the authorities to recapitalize KPISS for
the actuarial shortfalls accumulated in the past, as provided under the Social Security Law,
thereby establishing a fully-funded and sustainable social security system.

D. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies: Promoting Financial Intermediation While
Safeguarding Macroeconomic Stability
18.
Monetary policy has been successful in maintaining price stability and the
exchange rate peg. Although the underlying equilibrium exchange rate might have
appreciated with the positive terms-of-trade shock resulting from higher oil prices, given
Kuwait’s limited non-oil export base and its commitments in the context of the GCC, the
authorities do not foresee a change in the exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar in the period
leading up to the planned establishment of the monetary union by 2010. The authorities are
aware that given the nominal peg to the U.S. dollar, in theory there could be some
inflationary pressures in the economy leading to an appreciation of the real exchange rate.
However, given Kuwait’s very open trade regime and relatively open labor market, they do
not foresee any significant inflationary pressure in the medium term. The pick up in inflation
in 2005 would not last very long, the authorities observed, as the supply of housing would
increase given the construction boom underway and prices of raw materials should stabilize
in the world market. At this point, all options remain open regarding the exchange rate
regime under the monetary union.
19.
The reintroduction of market-based monetary policy mechanisms also have
contributed to maintaining price and exchange rate stability. The auctioning of deposits
and issuance of 3-month CBK bonds to mop up excess liquidity helped keep KD deposit
rates in line with the CBK’s benchmark rate since August 2005.20 As a result, KD bank
deposit rates have increased substantially and the differential with U.S. dollar deposits,
19

Actuarial valuations indicate that the present value of assets amounts to less than 60 percent of the present
value of future liabilities.
20
Banks whose KD deposit rates are above a certain threshold (determined by the CBK) are allowed to purchase
CBK bonds at a pre-determined yield. As of end–October 2005, all bond purchases requested by qualifying
banks have been satisfied. Bond yields are set close to the CBK-determined threshold. In addition, auctions of
deposits are done daily through over-the-counter calls to banks’ treasurers.

- 17 which was negative during the first half of 2005,
became positive again in the third quarter of the
year. While welcoming these developments, staff
noted that enhancing effectiveness of the marketbased intervention will require closer coordination
with fiscal policy – which continues to be the
major source of liquidity expansion in the
economy - to determine the level of intervention.

Interest Rate Indicators, 2000–05
6

4

Kuwait dinar 6-month deposit

2

20.
The ceiling on the loans-to-deposits ratio
U.S. Dollar 6-month deposit
0
achieved its intended objective by dampening
Sep. 2005
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
the rate of credit growth during 2004–0521 and Source: Central Bank of Kuwait.
thus contributed to the comparatively slower equity price increase. With the deposit
growth rate increasing to 16.4 percent, it also restored the balance between the rate of growth
of credit and deposits.22 However, staff noted that despite these positive effects, the ceiling
on the loans-to-deposits ratio, in combination with the ceiling on lending rates, might be
interfering with the efficient allocation of resources.23 For these reasons, and taking into
account the further gains made in strengthening banking supervision, staff recommended that
consideration should be given to abolishing the ceiling if the situation remains stable and to
ease the ceilings on lending rates within the authority of the CBK.24 In the authorities’ view,
in practice neither of these ceilings were affecting negatively the allocation of financial
resources nor were they constraining the activities of banks or nonfinancial firms. However,
they observed that the loans-to-deposits ratio was becoming increasingly less effective with
the accumulation of excess loanable resources by banks and considered the ceiling a
temporary measure to be eliminated once the risk of credit expansion above deposits
disappears.
21.
The authorities agreed with the staff assessment that the continuing upward
trend in the stock price index, despite strong economic fundamentals, posed some risk
to the otherwise favorable financial sector outlook. The exposure of banks to the stock
market through lending for stock purchases (9.4 percent of domestic credit as of end-October
2005) and the continuing surge in stock prices in the final quarter of 2005 warrant close
monitoring. Staff recommended expeditious drafting and passage of the capital market and
insurance laws to establish capital market and insurance authorities that will ensure
21

The rate of growth of credit to the private sector decelerated from 21.4 percent in 2003 to 16.1 percent in 2004
and to 14.1 percent in the 12-month period through October 2005.

22

In addition to the growth in economic activity, the increase in interest rates and the buildup of government
deposits with the domestic banking system also contributed to the growth of deposits.
23

Conceptually this may increase the number and proportion of loans contracted at the binding lending rate
ceilings and may constrain credit supply for the middle corporate market.

24

Although eliminating the lending rate ceiling will require a legal change in the CBK law, the current law
allows the CBK to fix these ceilings.

- 18 comprehensive oversight of the stock exchange, investment companies, and the insurance
sector. Staff also called for strengthening the legal and technical capabilities of the KSE to
supervise the investment companies’ portfolio management and for enhancing coordination
with the CBK.25 While broadly agreeing with the staff assessment, the authorities underlined
that the stress tests conducted by the CBK, including both direct and indirect equity market
risks, showed an adequate and increasing resilience of the banking system against any
reasonable market correction.26 The staff supported the authorities’ intention to introduce a
limited deposit guarantee scheme fully funded by contributions from the banks and urged
them to implement the scheme expeditiously.
E. Structural Reform: How Can Kuwait Sustain Its Non-Oil Growth Momentum?
22.
The current non-oil sector growth momentum is attributable to the optimism
associated with the oil price outlook and private sector dynamism observed across the
GCC region. The authorities agreed with staff that a critical mass of structural reforms,
including amending outdated laws and regulations, would need to be implemented in order to
sustain the growth momentum and promote a more market-friendly business environment. In
this context, staff supported the authorities’ intention to legislate the Competition Law and
implement a legal framework for mega projects under the PPP program. Staff also
encouraged the authorities to: implement the remaining recommendations of the 2003 World
Bank report on “Administrative Barriers to Investment”, including updating of the Labor
Law which dates from 1964; eliminating the discretionary power in the system for the
registration of companies; and continuing the customs administration modernization. The
authorities acknowledged that creation of a market-friendly environment would also entail
the long-awaited parliamentary approval of the Privatization Law. Staff also encouraged the
authorities to consider market-based pricing of publicly provided goods and services,
particularly for electricity, petroleum products27 and water to improve resource allocation,
encourage private sector participation in these activities, and reduce fiscal subsidies.
23.
Various measures were implemented aiming at greater market access and
competition and allowing for a broader private sector role in the economy. However,
there is a need to cast these measures in the context of a comprehensive reform
strategy. The GCC common external tariff at 5 percent rate is in effect since early 2003, and
25

The KSE started to supervise the portfolio management services provided by investment companies in 2005.
The KSE’s supervisory role is hampered by the lack of legal backing to regulate and supervise investment
advisory services, and by its relatively weak technical expertise. The 2004 FSAP recommended establishing a
single regulator for all capital market segments and participants. Until this recommendation is implemented,
coordination with the CBK needs to be strengthened so as to ensure that all risk areas of investment companies
are looked into, criteria are uniformly applied, and unnecessary administrative burdens are avoided.

26

However, the authorities agreed with staff that there was scope for improved transparency through
implementation of more comprehensive accounting standards for financial and nonfinancial companies.
27

Domestic petroleum product prices were broadly market based (entailing no economic subsidy) until 2002.
However, with domestic prices remaining unchanged, they now stand at about one-half of international prices.

- 19 under the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA) initiative all import duties were
eliminated in January 2005. The GCC countries have agreed to negotiate FTAs with other
countries/regional blocks collectively in the future, and an FTA with the European Union is
expected to be signed later this year.28 The granting of licenses for three airlines and four
more private universities, allowing private companies to operate gas stations, and building
two new power plants are also steps in the right direction. The authorities noted that
construction of a port on the Boubiyan Island (a joint venture) which is likely to be
operational in 2008, privatization of port management, the proposed North-South GCC train
line and the initiatives taken under GAFTA would help in their strategy to make Kuwait a
regional trade and financial center. Staff also supported the authorities’ efforts to foster
foreign direct investment (FDI) by amending the FDI Law of 2003 in line with international
best practices.29
24.
The authorities are aware that sustaining the current growth momentum will
require a flexible application of the Kuwaitization policy and intensified efforts to raise
the skills of the Kuwaiti labor force. Staff noted that providing employment in the public
sector to alleviate unemployment pressures, as has been done in the past, raises reservation
wages for private sector jobs and reduces the incentives for acquiring skills needed for
private sector jobs. Accordingly, staff urged the government to limit public sector hiring to
essential areas, establish links between public sector wages and productivity, and rationalize
public sector benefits. Staff encouraged the authorities to consider positive incentive schemes
rather than negative incentives to achieve Kuwaitization goals.30
F. Statistical and Other Issues
25.
While the quality of economic data continues to improve, the lack of timely
availability of some key economic data on the official websites remains an obstacle for
dissemination of information. Significant progress was made in timely provision of the CPI
and WPI, and the authorities’ are planning to conduct an investment survey in order to better
measure nonfinancial foreign direct investment. Staff encouraged the authorities to improve
communications between the various government agencies including the customs agency, the
ministry of planning, and the CBK, in order to improve compilation of the national income
and balance of payments data. The authorities observed that the planned Establishment
Census (expected to be completed in 2006) would enable the construction of a new
macroeconomic framework for collection and compilation of national income data. Staff
called for improving the coverage of export data, collection of private sector external debt
28

Discussions on FTAs are also continuing with China and India.

29

The proposed amendments include: making the Foreign Investment Bureau an independent and fully
operational body; creating a “negative list”; and allowing international arbitration.

30

These positive incentives include: (a) enhancing the current education and training programs; (b) establishing
job matching and job counseling programs; and (c) providing low-cost funds to nationals to start their own
business.

- 20 data, and coverage of fiscal data.31 Staff supported the authorities’ intention to work out a
road map for subscribing to the Funds’ Special Data Dissemination System (SDDS) and
encouraged them to adopt common data standards across all sectors, in collaboration with
other GCC countries, to ensure compliance with convergence criteria for the proposed
monetary union.
26.
Kuwait continued to support low-income countries (LICs) through its sizable
external development assistance program. In 2004/05, the Kuwait Fund for Arab
Economic Development made commitments of KD 201 million (1.2 percent of GDP) in
grants and loans to finance 25 projects in 22 countries. The authorities are considering the
Iraqi request to cut Iraqi debt owed to Kuwait, and have committed to provide economic
support for Iraq,32 the victims of the Asian tsunami ($100 million) 33 and hurricane Katrina
($500 million). Kuwait also disbursed the full amount of its commitment to the HIPC Trust
Fund (SDR 4.3 million).
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
27.
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance strengthened further in 2004 and 2005,
reflecting higher oil output and prices and strong non-oil activity. The high pace of
economic expansion combined with terms of trade gains, boosted per capita income by
78 percent over the last four years. The saving of a significant part of oil price induced
budgetary resources contributed to large fiscal and current account surpluses and an
accelerated buildup of external assets for future generations. Kuwait’s financial position is
also projected to remain strong over the medium term. However, sustaining private sector-led
high non-oil growth to absorb the rapidly growing Kuwaiti labor force and diversify the
economy remains a major challenge. The apparent lack of a comprehensive strategic plan for
non-oil sector development and piecemeal reform efforts, in part due to difficulties in
reaching a political consensus, may undermine realization of Kuwait’s national objectives
and its relative economic performance may fall behind other GCC countries.
28.
Kuwait continues to play a constructive role in support of oil price stability. Oil
production has responded strongly to growing world demand and is currently running almost
at full capacity. The large investment plan being undertaken to expand crude oil output
capacity, increase refining operations, and almost double petrochemicals production
demonstrated the authorities’ readiness to support global economic expansion through oil
31

Relating to investment income, transfer of profits of public institutions, and interest payments on treasury
bills and bonds.
32

The amount of debt owed by Iraq is estimated at $8.2 billion (excluding U.N. war compensation). Kuwait has
committed to provide $500 million to Iraq in 2004 to finance infrastructure projects and an additional
$60 million for health and education projects.

33

Kuwait has also announced a freeze on the repayment of about $763 million in loans extended to the six
Asian countries affected by the tsunami.

- 21 market stability and also realize financial gains for the Kuwaiti population. Staff also urges
the authorities to mobilize the required political support to implement the long-delayed
Project Kuwait which envisages participation of international oil companies to develop the
technically challenging northern oil fields. Staff welcomes Kuwait’s contribution to oil
market transparency by providing data to JODI and urges the authorities to improve
timeliness of oil data provision.
29.
Although Kuwait’s overall fiscal position is projected to remain in comfortable
surplus over the medium term, staff urges the authorities to consider improvements in
the structure of the budget by gradually increasing capital expenditure, rationalizing
subsidies, and achieving a better balance between productive expenditure and fiscal savings.
The stance of fiscal policy in 2004/05 and in the current fiscal year, demonstrates the
authorities’ resolve to contain recurrent outlays despite intensifying pressures for higher
current outlays and a larger size of the public sector. Greater emphasis on capital spending
envisaged under the five-year plan is welcome, although given the size of the projected fiscal
surplus over the medium term, a comprehensive strategy to deal with the surplus issue will
be critical in the face of growing pressures for unproductive spending. While supporting the
authorities’ plan to build up RFFG reserves, staff notes that part of the fiscal surpluses should
be used to recapitalize the social security system in the context of a reform program to ensure
the system’s long-term actuarial soundness. Also key to Kuwait’s long-term fiscal viability
will be the efficient management of the rapidly growing public sector savings.
30.
Monetary policy has successfully maintained price stability and the exchange
rate peg. Staff supports the authorities’ intention to keep the exchange rate peg unchanged
until the GCC monetary union is formed and to remain open toward the choice of exchange
rate regime under the planned monetary union. The ceiling on the loans-to-deposits ratio
introduced in 2004 to tighten monetary conditions has contributed to a deceleration in the
rate of credit growth in 2005 and to a rapid buildup of deposits. In view of the gains already
made and the diminishing effectiveness of the ceiling, and taking into account the further
gains made in strengthening banking supervision, staff recommends that consideration
should be given to abolishing the ceiling.
31.
The Kuwaiti banking system is financially sound, well managed, and well
supervised. While welcoming the steps taken to further strengthen banking supervision and
open further the sector for foreign banks, the staff encourages the authorities to push for
necessary legal changes required for implementing the FSAP recommendations relating to
criminalization of terrorism financing, independence of the CBK, and renewal of interest rate
ceilings. The continuing upward trend in the stock price index, despite strong economic
fundamentals, poses some risk to the otherwise favorable financial sector outlook. Staff
accordingly urges the authorities to implement the FSAP recommendations relating to the
stock market and insurance sector. Staff recommends, in particular, an expeditious drafting
and passing of the capital market and insurance laws; and establishing the capital market and
insurance authorities to ensure comprehensive oversight of the stock exchange, investment
companies, and the insurance sector. While the banking system appears to have the ability to
withstand any reasonable market correction, there is scope for improved transparency

- 22 through implementation of more comprehensive accounting standards for other financial and
non-financial companies.
32.
Staff urges the authorities to cast structural reforms in the context of a
comprehensive strategy allowing for a broader private sector role, and to accelerate
implementation of these reforms. This would lead to a much higher level of investment and
generation of employment in the economy. The progress made in private sector participation
in sectors previously dominated by the public sector is in the right direction. In the same
spirit, staff encourages the authorities to expedite the updating of outdated laws and
regulations to promote a more market-friendly environment, and to move to market-based
pricing of electricity, petroleum products, and water. Staff urges the authorities to apply the
Kuwaitization policy flexibly so that the competitiveness and profitability of the private
sector are not adversely affected, and to intensify their efforts to raise the skills of the
Kuwaiti labor force to meet the requirements of the private sector. Staff also encourages the
authorities to consider positive incentive schemes rather than negative incentives to achieve
Kuwaitization goals.
33.
Although the quality of economic data continues to improve, staff urges the
authorities for more timely dissemination of some key economic data, particularly on
official websites. While Kuwait’s data are adequate for surveillance purposes, the staff
encourages the authorities to improve communications between the various government
agencies to improve compilation of both the national income and balance of payments
statistics. Coordination with other GCC countries to adopt common data standards across all
sectors will also be a step toward establishing the convergence criteria for the planned
monetary union. Fund technical assistance, perhaps on a GCC-wide basis, would be
particularly beneficial.
34.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard
12-month cycle.

- 23 Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–06
(Quota: SDR 1381.1 million)
(Population: 2.87 million, June 2005)
(Per capita GDP: $26,020, 2005 estimate)

2001
Oil and gas sector
Total oil and gas exports (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Average oil export price (in U.S. dollar/barrel)
Crude oil production (in millions of barrels/day)
Share of oil GDP in total GDP (in percent)

2002

2003

2004

Est.
2005

Proj.
2006

15.0
14.1
19.6
27.8
42.1
21.2
22.9
25.5
31.6
45.7
1.95
1.75
2.11
2.29
2.58
46.4
41.9
46.4
52.6
59.8
(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

51.1
51.5
2.69
61.9

National accounts and prices 1/
Nominal GDP (market prices, in billions of Kuwaiti dinar)
Nominal GDP (market prices, in billions of U.S. dollars)
Real GDP
Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Real Gross Disposable Income (GDI)
CPI inflation (average)
Unemployment rate (Kuwaiti nationals) 2/

10.7
34.9
0.7
-3.3
3.5
-4.1
1.4
2.5

11.6
13.8
16.4
21.8
38.1
46.2
55.7
74.6
5.1
13.2
6.4
8.5
-7.9
19.8
7.7
11.3
13.1
10.1
6.3
6.5
6.9
15.0
13.6
23.7
0.8
1.0
1.3
3.9
3.6
3.4
3.9
4.4
(In percent of GDP at market prices)

25.2
86.3
6.2
5.2
6.5
11.5
3.5
...

Investment and savings
Investment
Public
Private 3/
Gross national savings
Public
Private 3/
Savings/investment balance

14.3
3.6
10.7
38.2
23.5
14.7
23.9

17.1
14.6
14.2
15.7
4.3
4.4
4.0
3.4
12.8
10.2
10.2
12.4
28.2
35.0
48.1
58.9
25.4
24.1
32.3
46.8
2.8
10.9
15.8
12.2
11.2
20.4
33.9
43.2
(In percent of GDP at market prices)

14.3
3.2
11.0
63.3
47.6
15.7
49.1

Budgetary operations 4/
Revenue
Oil
Non-oil, of which:
Investment income
Expenditures and net lending
Of which: current
capital
Balance
Domestic financing
External financing
Non-oil primary balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)
Total gross debt (calendar year-end)

60.7
41.4
19.3
12.7
43.9
39.3
4.6
16.8
-1.2
-15.6
-56.9
35.1

59.8
45.3
14.5
9.6
40.3
35.6
4.7
19.5
-2.9
-16.6
-54.4
30.0

55.2
42.6
12.6
8.1
37.8
33.1
4.7
17.4
-0.8
-16.6
-57.1
23.8

59.6
46.0
13.6
9.9
35.2
30.7
4.5
24.4
-6.1
-18.3
-61.5
18.5

70.5
55.9
14.6
11.4
30.1
26.0
4.1
40.4
-1.9
-38.5
-57.6
13.0

71.6
56.3
15.2
12.1
28.5
25.1
3.4
43.0
-2.7
-40.4
-55.7
10.8

- 24 -

Table 1. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators, 2001–06 (concluded)

2001

2002

2003

2004

Est.
2005

Proj.
2006

(Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Money and credit
Net foreign assets 5/
Net domestic assets
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Broad money
Velocity of broad money
Kuwaiti dinar 3-month deposit rate (average in percent)
U.S. dollar 3-month deposit rate (average in percent)
Stock market unweighted index (annual percent change)
Stock market weighted index (annual percent change)

6.5
6.3
-4.1
11.1
12.8
1.2
3.7
3.3
26.8
...

-4.1
8.8
0.2
10.5
4.8
1.2
2.2
1.3
39.0
...

-4.8
12.7
-2.8
17.2
7.8
1.3
1.5
0.7
101.7
69.3

10.3
1.8
-10.4
14.5
12.1
1.4
1.6
1.0
33.8
15.3

5.9
10.6
-3.7
14.2
16.4
1.6
4.0
3.2
78.6
67.4

4.8
2.7
-5.0
8.3
7.5
1.7
...
...
...
...

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports of goods and services
Of which: Oil and refined products
Annual percentage change in volume
Imports of goods and services
Annual percentage change in volume
Current account
In percent of GDP 6/
External public and publicly guaranteed debt
International reserve assets, of which:
Central Bank of Kuwait
In months of imports of goods and services

17,910
14,977
-0.4
-12,406
7.0
8,328
23.9
409
10,000
9,268
9.7

17,010
14,057
-12.1
-13,958
6.9
4,250
11.2
641
9,314
8,455
8.0

24,901
19,567
30.9
-16,464
13.0
9,414
20.4
510
7,685
6,744
5.6

33,321
27,764
5.8
-19,848
10.1
17,323
31.1
510
8,359
7,451
5.1

48,599
42,132
8.3
-22,119
6.5
32,250
43.2
...
9,528
8,688
5.2

58,073
51,051
5.9
-23,968
6.5
42,335
49.1
...
11,194
10,354
5.6

Memorandum items:
Exchange rate (US$ per KD, period average)
Nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) 7/
Real effective exchange rate (REER) 7/
Credit rating (S&P)

3.26
5.8
5.2
A+

3.29
-0.7
-0.9
A+

3.36
-6.9
-7.9
A+

3.39
-4.2
-5.2
A+

3.42
-0.8
1.3
A+

...
...
...
...

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ GDP data for 2001 are not comparable with GDP data for 2002 and later years. While GDP data for 2001 are based on
International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) Revision 2, data for 2002 and later years are based on
ISIC Revision 3 which covers a wider number of variables and sectors.
2/ For 2005, end-June.
3/ Also includes government entities.
4/ Kuwaiti fiscal year ending March 31.
5/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.
6/ For 2004, the discrepancy between the savings/investment balance and the current account balance is possibly
due to the data being preliminary and may be resolved when the authorities revise the data.
7/ For 2005, average for January to November. The NEER and REER appreciated by 9.2 and 11.7 percent during
January-November 2005, respectively.

- 25 -

Table 2. Kuwait: Summary of Government Finance, 2001/02–2005/06 1/

2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Prel.

Budget

Proj.

2004/05

2005/06

2005/06

Total revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income and transfer
of profits of public entities 2/
Other current revenue 3/
Capital revenue

6,630
4,525

7,257
5,499

7,971
6,150

10,579
8,171

4,438
3,914

15,967
12,654

1,386
718
1

1,165
567
26

1,166
618
37

1,753
595
60

0
499
25

2,586
661
67

Total expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest on domestic debt 5/
Transfers abroad

4,795
4,289
1,637
1,061
203
97

4,890
4,318
1,709
1,196
121
82

5,454
4,773
1,825
1,436
81
63

6,252
5,450
1,940
1,421
86
132

7,063
5,901
2,146
1,563
37
77

6,823
5,884
2,155
1,586
82
147

Subsidies and transfers 6/
Capital

1,292
506

1,210
572

1,368
681

1,871
802

2,078
1,162

1,914
939

Overall balance
Overall balance exc. oil rev.

1,835
-2,690

2,367
-3,132

2,517
-3,633

4,327
-3,844

-2,625
-6,539

9,145
-3,509

Financing
Domestic (net)
Banks
Nonbanks
External
Reserve funds 8/

-1,835
-134
-169
35
0
-1,701

-2,367
-351
-196
-156
0
-2,016

-2,517
-122
-66
-55
0
-2,395

-4,327
-1,077
-1,077
0
0
-3,250

2,625
....
....
....
....
....

-9,145
-426
-426
0
0
-8,718

19.6
17.3
0.0
2.2
31.2
26.1
9.5
6.9
...
...
5.1
-11.6
-70.5
...

70.5
55.9
11.4
2.9
30.1
26.0
9.5
7.0
0.4
8.5
4.1
40.4
-39.2
-57.6

4/

7/

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue
Oil and gas
Investment income
Other current revenue 3/
Expenditure
Current
Wages and salaries
Goods and noninterest services
Interest on domestic and foreign debt
Subsidies and transfers
Capital
Overall balance
Non-oil deficit/Non-oil GDP
Non-oil primary deficit/Non-oil GDP
Memorandum items:
Overall balance (excluding investment
income and profit transfers)
(In percent of GDP)
Average oil export price (in US dollar/barrel)

60.7
41.4
12.7
6.6
43.9
39.3
15.0
9.7
1.9
11.8
4.6
16.8
-44.9
-56.9

59.8
45.3
9.6
4.7
40.3
35.6
14.1
9.9
1.0
10.0
4.7
19.5
-45.4
-54.4

55.2
42.6
8.1
4.3
37.8
33.1
12.6
10.0
0.6
9.5
4.7
17.4
-48.5
-57.1

59.6
46.0
9.9
3.4
35.2
30.7
10.9
8.0
0.5
10.5
4.5
24.4
-47.9
-61.5

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars, unless otherwise indicated)
449
4.1
21.6

1,202
9.9
23.5

1,351
9.4
27.1

2,573
14.5
35.2

-2625
-11.6
21.0

6,559
29.0
47.2

Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Coverage of budgetary operations includes the operation of the KIA. Data are on an accrual basis.
2/ Excluded from the national budget presentation. Estimated by the Fund staff.
3/ Excludes revenues from utility tariffs (which are included in the national budget presentation), but includes UN (Iraq)
compensations.
4/ Includes the KD 121 million supplementary budget for the emergency spending.
5/ Covers interest payments on the treasury bills and bonds, and on the DCP bonds. Only the latter is included in
the national budget presentation.
6/ A breakdown of the relative share of subsidies and transfers is provided in Table 17 of the Statistical Appendix.
7/ Includes KD 192 million one-time transfer of the oil windfall to Kuwaiti nationals.
8/ The Reserve Fund for Future Generations (RFFG) and the General Reserve Fund (GRF).

- 26 -

Table 3. Kuwait: Summary Balance of Payments, 2001–10
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2007

Proj.
2008

2009

2010

32,250
31,532
45,064
42,132
2,931

42,335
39,428
54,178
51,051
3,127

42,951
40,100
56,020
52,796
3,224

44,109
40,302
57,300
53,004
4,296

47,105
42,365
60,460
54,980
5,480

47,183
41,240
60,398
54,570
5,828

...

...

...

...

Current account
Goods (trade balance)
Exports
Oil exports
Non-oil exports including re-exports 1/
Of which: re-exports
Imports
Services
Transportation
Insurance
Travel
Other services
Investment income
Receipts
General government 2/
Other sectors 3/
Payments
General government
Other
Current transfers

8,328
9,196
16,246
14,977
1,269
203
-7,050
-3,693
-372
10
-2,740
-591
4,903
5,428
3,673
1,755
-525
-52
-473
-2,078

4,250
7,241
15,363
14,057
1,306
216
-8,123
-4,188
-618
37
-2,902
-705
3,342
3,708
2,780
928
-365
-13
-352
-2,145

Capital and financial account
Capital account 4/
Financial account
Direct investment
Abroad
In Kuwait
Portfolio investment
Assets
Liabilities
Other investment (net)
Trade credits
Loans
Currency and deposits
Other

-3,406
2,933
-6,338
-470
-323
-147
-7,444
-7,366
-78
1,575
470
-39
1,983
-838

-3,490
1,671
-5,162
161
155
7
-3,263
-3,425
161
-2,059
-405
-270
-1,503
118

-10,041
1,429
-11,471
4828
4895
-67
-12,787
-13,122
336
-3,512
-846
1312
-3,938
-40

-19,466
434
-19,900
-1971
-1971
0
-13,699
-13,987
288
-4,230
-1744
102
-2861
273

Net errors and omissions 5/

-2,043

-1,718

-1,129

2,812

0

0

0

0

0

0

2,873

-958

-1,757

669

1,168

1,666

648

783

1,180

1,168

23.9
8.2
10,000
9,897
103.1
9.7

11.2
-2.5
9,314
9,208
105.9
8.0

20.4
-3.8
7,685
7,577
107.6
5.6

31.1
1.2
8,359
8,251
107.7
5.1

43.2
1.6
9,528
9,420
108.7
5.2

49.1
1.9
11,194
11,086
108.6
5.6

47.2
0.7
11,842
11,733
108.6
5.5

47.1
0.8
12,625
12,517
108.6
5.5

48.0
1.2
13,805
13,696
108.6
5.6

45.8
1.1
14,973
14,865
108.6
5.7

Memorandum items
Current account/GDP
Overall balance/GDP
International reserve assets (US$ millions) 6/
Total reserves minus gold
Gold (national valuation)
In months of imports of goods and services

2004

2006

2002

Overall balance

2003

Est.
2005

2001

9,414 17,323
11,911 17,978
21,792 30,122
19,567 27,764
2,225
2,358
420
594
-9,881 -12,145
-3,473 -4,506
-510
-689
-3
-27
-3,231 -3,512
271
-278
3,355
6,400
3,724
6,844
2,815
5,619
909
1,225
-369
-444
-10
-10
-359
-434
-2,379 -2,548

...

...

-13,531
-5,073
-969
-22
-3,684
-398
8,483
9,407
7,774
1,633
-923
-21
-902
-2,714

-14,750
-5,323
-1,066
-8
-3,840
-416
11,121
12,347
10,204
2,143
-1,226
-28
-1,198
-2,890

-15,920 -16,998 -18,095 -19,158
-5,628
-5,954 -6,302 -6,674
-1,173
-1,290 -1,419 -1,561
-10
-12
-14
-17
-4,001
-4,168 -4,342 -4,522
-454
-496
-541
-590
11,543 12,993 14,436 16,163
12,784 14,234 15,677 17,404
10,565 11,763 12,956 14,384
2,219
2,470
2,721
3,021
-1,241
-1,240 -1,241 -1,241
-28
-28
-28
-28
-1,212
-1,212 -1,212 -1,212
-3,064
-3,232 -3,394 -3,547

-31,082
280
-31,362
-1955
-2055
100
-25,155
-25,800
645
-4,252
-2542
225
-2286
350

-40,669
100
-40,769
-2100
-2300
200
-33,022
-33,868
847
-5,648
-3436
89
-2500
200

-42,304 -43,325 -45,925 -46,015
50
50
50
50
-42,354 -43,375 -45,975 -46,065
-1860
-1588
-1527
-1459
-2200
-2200
-2200
-2200
340
612
673
741
-33,502 -34,405 -36,742 -36,803
-34,361 -35,287 -37,684 -37,747
859
882
942
944
-6,992
-7,383 -7,706 -7,802
-4148
-4456
-4568
-4618
100
100
100
100
-3044
-3126
-3338
-3344
100
100
100
60

Sources: Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Also includes unrecorded exports.
2/ Kuwait Investment Authority, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development,
Public Institute for Social Security, Kuwait Airways Corporation, and Bank of Savings and Credit.
3/ CBK, local banks, investment companies, exchange companies, insurance companies, and the
nonfinancial private sector.
4/ Includes UN war compensation.
5/ Includes other unclassified private sector flows.
6/ Includes SDRs and IMF reserve position.

- 27 -

Table 4. Kuwait: Monetary Survey, 2000–06

End of period

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Est.
2005

Proj.
2006

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Foreign assets (net) 1/
Central bank
Local banks

2,778
2,005
773

3,306
2,850
456

2,930
2,521
409

2,464
1,966
497

3,535
2,165
1,370

4,218
2,497
1,721

4,871
2,983
1,888

Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Central bank (net)
Claims
Deposits
Local banks (net)
Claims
Government debt bonds
Public debt instruments
Other claims
Deposits

5,385
2,911
-532
0
532
3,443
3,628
1,491
2,137
0
185

5,902
2,573
-598
0
598
3,171
3,402
1,294
2,108
0
231

6,716
2,595
-354
0
354
2,949
3,248
1,006
2,242
0
299

7,938
2,323
-413
0
413
2,735
3,051
818
2,232
0
315

8,120
1,246
-662
0
662
1,908
2,750
604
2,146
0
842

9,353
820
-796
0
796
1,616
2,547
445
2,102
0
932

9,717
140
-1,055
0
1,055
1,195
2,431
328
2,102
0
1,235

5,848
5,230
619
-3,375

6,753
6,027
726
-3,423

7,723
6,854
870
-3,602

9,379
8,419
959
-3,764

10,886
9,867
1,019
-4,011

12,546
11,501
1,044
-4,012

13,676
12,537
1,138
-4,099

8,163
1,468
6,695
895

9,209
1,641
7,567
892

9,646
2,067
7,580
904

10,401
2,612
7,790
991

11,655
3,174
8,481
1,169

13,571
3,831
9,740
1,704

14,588
4,134
10,453
1,829

Claims on nongovernment sector
Credit facilities
Local investments
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

(Annual percentage change)
Foreign assets (net)
Central Bank
Local banks
Domestic assets (net)
Claims on Government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)
Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits

46.3
51.9
33.6

19.0
42.2
-41.0

-11.4
-11.6
-10.3

-15.9
-22.0
21.5

43.5
10.1
175.4

19.3
15.3
25.6

15.5
19.5
9.7

-6.8
-16.2
5.4
-4.0

9.6
-11.6
15.5
-1.4

13.8
0.8
14.4
-5.2

18.2
-10.5
21.4
-4.5

2.3
-46.4
16.1
-6.6

15.2
-34.2
15.2
0.0

3.9
-82.9
9.0
-2.2

6.3
7.0
6.2
1.6

12.8
11.8
13.0
-0.3

4.8
25.9
0.2
1.3

7.8
26.4
2.8
9.6

12.1
21.6
8.9
18.0

16.4
20.7
14.8
45.8

7.5
7.9
7.3
7.3

(Change in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Foreign assets (net)
Central bank
Local banks

11.5
8.9
2.5

6.5
10.4
-3.9

-4.1
-3.6
-0.5

-4.8
-5.7
0.9

10.3
1.9
8.4

5.9
2.8
3.0

4.8
3.6
1.2

Domestic assets (net)
Claims on government (net)
Claims on nongovernment sector
Other items (net)

-5.1
-7.3
3.9
-1.7

6.3
-4.1
11.1
-0.6

8.8
0.2
10.5
-1.9

12.7
-2.8
17.2
-1.7

1.8
-10.4
14.5
-2.4

10.6
-3.7
14.2
0.0

2.7
-5.0
8.3
-0.6

6.3
1.3
5.1
0.2

12.8
2.1
10.7
0.0

4.8
4.6
0.1
0.1

7.8
5.6
2.2
0.9

12.1
5.4
6.6
1.7

16.4
5.6
10.8
4.6

7.5
2.2
5.3
0.9

-3.0

6.5

10.6

13.4

3.7

10.2

3.4

Broad money
Money
Quasi money
Of which : Foreign currency deposits
Memorandum items:
Net domestic credit (annual percentage change)
Sources: Central Bank of Kuwait; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.

- 28 -

Table 5. Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators and Illustrative Baseline Scenario, 2001–10
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise specified)
2001
Production and prices 1/
Nominal GDP (KD millions)
Nominal GDP (percent change)
Nominal non-oil GDP (percent change)
Real GDP (percent change)
Real oil GDP (percent change)
Real non-oil GDP (percent change)
Kuwait crude export price (US$ per barrel)
Crude oil output (millions of barrels per day)
Consumer price index (percent change)

2002

10,700 11,585
-7.5
8.3
3.9
17.3
0.7
5.1
-3.3
-7.9
3.5
13.1
21.2
22.9
1.95
1.75
1.4
0.8

Prov.
2004

Est.
2005

13,768 16,420
18.8
19.3
9.7
5.5
13.2
6.4
19.8
7.7
10.1
6.3
25.5
31.6
2.11
2.29
1.0
1.3

21,783
32.7
12.4
8.5
11.3
6.5
45.7
2.58
3.9

2003

2006

Baseline Scenario
2007 2008 2009

2010

25,191 26,555 27,346 28,667 30,052
15.6
5.4
3.0
4.8
4.8
9.7
8.5
7.2
6.8
6.8
6.2
4.7
5.2
5.4
3.3
5.2
2.0
4.3
5.7
1.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
51.5
52.3 50.3 49.3
48.5
2.69
2.74 2.85 3.02
3.05
3.5
3.0
2.0
1.9
1.8

Public finance 2/
Revenue, of which :
Oil and gas
Investment income 3/
Expenditure
Current
Capital
Fiscal balance (deficit -)
Fiscal balance excluding investment income (deficit -)
Non-oil fiscal balance (in percent of non-oil GDP)

60.7
41.4
12.7
43.9
39.3
4.6
16.8
4.1
-44.9

59.8
45.3
9.6
40.3
35.6
4.7
19.5
9.9
-45.4

55.2
42.6
8.1
37.8
33.1
4.7
17.4
9.4
-48.5

59.6
46.0
9.9
35.2
30.7
4.5
24.4
14.5
-47.9

70.5
55.9
11.4
30.1
26.0
4.1
40.4
29.0
-39.2

71.6
56.3
12.1
28.5
25.1
3.4
43.0
30.9
-34.7

70.6
55.2
12.3
28.9
25.3
3.6
41.8
29.5
-33.8

70.2
53.8
13.1
29.3
25.7
3.7
40.8
27.8
-31.6

69.8
52.7
13.7
29.5
25.7
3.8
40.3
26.6
-29.6

67.8
50.0
14.3
29.6
25.8
3.8
38.2
23.9
-27.8

Balance of payments
Exports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Of which : oil and refined products
Imports of goods and services excl. re-exports
Investment income (net)
Current account

49.4
42.9
-33.7
14.1
23.9

42.8
36.9
-34.8
8.8
11.2

50.8
42.4
-32.6
7.3
20.4

56.2
49.8
-32.0
11.5
31.1

61.8
56.5
-26.3
11.4
43.2

64.2
59.2
-24.7
12.9
49.1

63.2
58.1
-25.3
12.7
47.2

63.2
56.6
-26.5
13.9
47.1

63.8
56.0
-27.1
14.7
48.0

58.7
53.0
-18.6
15.7
45.8

69.9
23.6
46.3
14.3
3.6
10.7
38.2
23.5
14.7

74.9
25.3
49.6
17.1
4.3
12.8
28.2
25.4
2.8

67.1
23.8
43.3
14.6
4.4
10.2
35.0
24.1
10.9

58.8
21.0
37.8
14.2
4.0
10.2
48.1
32.3
15.8

48.8
16.7
32.0
15.7
3.4
12.4
58.9
46.8
12.2

46.2
15.7
30.5
14.3
3.2
11.0
63.3
47.6
15.7

47.9
15.9
32.0
14.2
3.3
10.9
61.4
46.0
15.4

49.8
16.3
33.5
13.5
3.5
10.1
60.6
45.3
15.3

50.1
16.5
33.6
13.1
3.5
9.6
61.1
44.9
16.2

53.8
16.7
37.2
12.6
3.6
9.0
58.5
42.8
15.6

Saving-investment balance
Final consumption
Government
Private 4/
Gross domestic investment
Government
Private 4/
Savings
Government
Private 4/

Sources: Kuwait authorities; IMF World Economic Outlook, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ GDP data for 2001 are not comparable with GDP data for 2002 and later years. While GDP data for 2001 are based on
International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) Revision 2, data for 2002 and later years are based on
ISIC Revision 3 which covers a wider number of variables and sectors.
2/ Kuwaiti fiscal year ending March 31.
3/ Includes profits of public enterprises.
4/ Also includes government entities.

- 29 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Financial Soundness and Other Vulnerability Indicators, 2001–05
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2001

2002

2003

2004

Est.
2005

22.0
22.7
10.3

19.7
14.1
7.8

18.4
7.2
6.1

17.2
5.9
5.5

17.3
0.8
4.5

5.1
5.2

4.8
3.0

3.6
2.5

2.9
2.6

2.4
2.1

6.4
19.3
25.7
2.0
18.2
24.1
133.1
-2.1

5.8
18.9
24.8
1.8
17.4
21.0
86.4
4.2

9.0
17.0
26.0
2.0
18.6
14.8
52.3
4.2

8.5
16.4
24.9
2.5
22.4
13.2
52.0
9.5

9.3
21.9
31.2
3.2
25.7
12.5
52.0
3.0

11.2
9.0
31.5
53.4

10.4
9.6
31.2
64.3

10.7
9.4
30.3
77.7

12.1
8.3
30.3
83.2

12.6
8.0
32.3
97.2

22.9
69.3
92.2
9.9
2.0
18.2
0.4

22.5
73.3
95.8
0.6
1.8
17.4
0.9

37.6
71.4
109.0
21.2
2.0
18.6
0.8

36.0
69.5
105.5
27.5
2.5
22.4
0.5

40.5
120.9
161.4
3.2
25.7
49.1
0.8

Core Financial Soundness Indicators
Banks risk-weighted capital-asset ratio 1/
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital 1/
Ratio of banks' nonperforming loans to total loans 1/
Of which:
Nonperforming loans from before invasion 1/
Nonperforming loans since liberation 1/
Ratio of bank lending to total domestic credit facilities
Stock market-related 1/ 2/
Real estate 1/ 3/
Total (stock market, real estate) 1/
Return on assets 1/
Return on equity 1/
Banks' liquidity ratio 4/
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities 5/
Net open position in foreign exchange to capital 1/
Other Financial Soundness Indicators
Banks' capital-asset ratio
Banks' leverage 6/
Investment companies' capital and reserve/total assets 1/ 7/
Loan provisions as a proportion of nonperforming loans 1/
Ratio of bank lending to banks' own funds 1/
Stock market-related 1/ 2/
Real estate 1/ 3/
Total (stock market and real estate) 1/
Increase in net bank profits 1/
Ratio of net profits to total bank assets 1/
Ratio of net profits to total shareholders' equity 1/
Banks' interest rate spread 8/

(In millions of Kuwaiti dinars)
Net foreign assets of local banks
Net foreign assets of investment companies 7/ 9/
Open foreign exchange position of banks 1/ 10/

456.1
667.1
-34.9

409.3
708.3
74.6

497.3 1,369.8 1,720.8
899.6 1,045.3 1,222.4
84.9 210.6
84.7

- 30 -

Table 6. Kuwait: Financial Soundness and Other Vulnerability Indicators, 2001–05 (concluded)
(In percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2004

Est.
2005

5.2
-0.9
-7.9
-5.2
11,094 12,368 12,404 12,772
5,255 4,901 5,863 6,185
5,839 7,467 6,541 6,586
31.8
32.4
26.8
22.9
61.9
72.7
49.8
38.3
29.3
28.8
23.5
18.6
3.9
3.4
4.2
...

1.3
12,629
6,116
6,513
16.9
26.0
12.6
...

2001

2002

2003

Other vulnerability indicators
External solvency indicators
REER (CPI based, period average) 11/
External debt including private sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Short-term debt (original maturity) 12/
Medium- and long-term debt 13/
External debt/GDP
External debt/total exports of goods and services
Short-term debt/total exports of goods and services
External debt service/total exports of goods and services
Public sector solvency indicators
General government domestic debt/GDP 14/
Interest payments/total revenue
Distribution of the public domestic debt by holders
Local commercial banks
Other (including nongovernment public institutions)
Oil revenue/total revenue
External liquidity indicators
CBK net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) 15/
CBK gross foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) 15/
In months of imports of goods and services
Relative to short-term external debt
Relative to M0
Relative to M1
Local banks' net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities
Oil exports/total exports

35.1
3.0

30.0
2.0

23.8
1.2

18.5
0.9

13.0
0.6

85.6
14.4
68.8

91.0
9.0
74.0

90.7
9.3
76.8

88.4
11.6
77.2

88.2
11.8
78.9

9,257
9,268
9.0
176.4
547.3
173.8
1,481
6,583
5,101
92.2

8,415
8,455
7.3
172.5
429.1
122.5
1,366
8,149
6,782
91.5

6,672 7,347
6,744 7,451
4.9
4.5
115.0 120.5
288.1 279.3
76.1
69.2
1,687 4,648
8,230 10,831
6,542 6,183
89.8
92.2

8,551
8,688
4.7
142.0
319.9
66.2
5,893
12,284
6,391
93.5

Sources: Central Bank of Kuwait, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ 2005 data are as of end-September.
2/ Includes lending for stock purchases of listed and unlisted domestic and foreign companies .
3/ Includes only credit to developers (excludes credit to home buyers). Ratios may be overestimated due to problems
with loan classification by the local banks.
4/ Ratio of liquid assets (cash, central bank current deposits, and treasury bills and bonds) to total assets.
5/ Liquid assets on short-term liabilities (demand, government, and interbank deposits).
6/ Ratio of total liabilities to banks' own funds (in times).
7/ Includes only non-Islamic financial companies.
8/ Calculated as the difference between 3-month deposit rates in KD relative to 3-month deposit rates in US$.
9/ Equals nonresident assets minus nonresident liabilities, excluding own funds.
10/ A (-) sign indicates a short position.
11/ 2005 data is the average for January to November.
12/ Short-term data are obtained from the joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank database.
13/ Medium- and long-term debt is estimated as a residual.
14/ Treasury bills and bonds, and debt purchase bonds.
15/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.

- 31 -

APPENDIX I

FUND RELATIONS
(As of January 31, 2006)
I.

Membership Status: Joined September 13, 1962
Article VIII on April 5, 1963

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
1,381.10
1,210.30
170.82

% Quota
100.00
87.63
12.37

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
26.74
128.70

% Allocation
100.00
481.21

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Since January 1, 2003, the Kuwaiti dinar has been pegged to the U.S. dollar with a margin of
3.5 percent on either side around the parity exchange rate of 299.63 fils/U.S. dollar. The
decision to peg the dinar to the U.S. dollar reflected plans to create a single currency for the
six members of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC). Previously,
the Kuwaiti dinar was pegged to a U.S. dollar-dominated basket of currencies. On April 2,
2002 Kuwait notified the Fund, under Decision 144-(52/51), of exchange restrictions it
introduced in order to implement UN Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1333 (2000)
and 1267 (1999).
VIII. Article IV Consultations:
The last Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on April 25, 2005.
The staff report and the associated Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix were published
on the Fund’s external website in July 2005, Country Report Nos. 05/231 and 05/234,
respectively.

- 32 -

IX.

APPENDIX I

FSAP Participation

A FSAP exercise was conducted in September 2003 in order to assess three international
standards and codes (banking, securities, and AML/CFT). A FSSA report was discussed by
the Executive Board along with the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation and was
issued in May 2004, Country Report No. 04/151.
X.

Technical Assistance:
STA Seminar on GDDS
STA National Accounts and Price Statistics
FAD Restructuring Budget Processes
FAD A Program for Tax Reform
MFD/LEG Bank Insolvency

XI.

Resident Representative:

February 2000
June 2001–June 2002
January/February 2002
December 2002
October 2004

None

XII. Kuwait has consented to the quota increase under the Eleventh General Review of
Quotas; it has accepted the Fourth Amendment of the Articles of Agreement.

- 33 -

APPENDIX II

KUWAIT
RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of January 18, 2006)
In February 2005, the Ministry of Finance renewed Kuwait’s commitment to continue the
TCP for another two years, effective January 1, 2005.
Activities Completed and Ongoing During FY 2006
•

Review of the Offset Program: Based on government request, World Bank staff
conducted a review of the offset program in early May 2005, and presented its
findings and conclusions in June 05.

•

Kuwait Petroleum Company (KPC): Bank responded to a request for assistance in
privatization. Phase I of the project consists of analyzing privatization schemes for an
independent hydrocarbon regulatory institution. Final report was submitted in early
January 2006 and a presentation on findings will be made to officials end of January.

•

Competition Law-Policy: Following up on a previous Bank report, a Project
Concept Note was submitted in October 2005 for the implementation strategy.
Revisions to incorporate comments received are underway. A mission to kick-off
project is scheduled for mid-February 2006.

•

MOF – Purchasing System Department: In May 2005, MNATC received a request
to streamline the government purchasing/procurement systems. A draft proposal was
sent on September 1, 2005. Clarifications sought by client. Response delivered.
Waiting for authorities’ decision.

•

Labor Market, Education and Training (LABET): A World Bank team visited
Kuwait and a draft proposal was submitted in August 2005. In the meantime, client
had some inquiries which were responded to. Waiting for decision of authorities.

•

Redesigning Business Registration Processes: Following up on a previous study on
administrative barriers to investment, World Bank staff developed a concept note for
implementation of the recommendations. A revised Concept Note was sent on
January 11, 2006. Authorities agreed to the Concept Note and a mission is currently
visiting Kuwait.

•

Tax Reform Program: The World Bank was requested to provide a report on tax
reform, including income, corporate taxes, and VAT. A presentation was made to the
Minister of Finance during the Annual Meetings 2005, in collaboration with an IMF
team.

- 34 -

APPENDIX II

•

Public Private Partnership: In October 2005, the World Bank submitted a draft
proposal for PPP law. Law and bylaws were finalized end of December 2005 and are
currently being translated into Arabic. The guidelines are being finalized and
translated.

•

Education Sector Reform/Education Indicators and Assessment Project:
Following the completion of “Education Expenditure Analysis” study, the World
Bank continues to provide assistance in implementing the recommendations. This is a
six-year program and we are in the third year.

•

Education Workshop: World Bank conducted a workshop on education reform.
Participants included the Minister of Education, undersecretary, assistant
undersecretaries, heads of divisions, and representatives from the academia. This took
place in the headquarter on July 6–12.

•

7th Gulf Water Conference: World Bank will provide two keynote speakers at a
regional water conference on November 19–23, 2005.

- 35 -

APPENDIX III

KUWAIT: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Kuwait’s data are adequate for surveillance, but there is scope for improved compilation of
the national accounts and balance of payments statistics through better coordination between
statistical agencies.
National Accounts and Production
The Central Statistical Office (CSO) has prepared estimates of GDP at both current and
constant prices through 2003 (the 2003 estimates are still provisional). Recent improvements
of national accounts include: change of the base year for the constant price data to 2000 and
the estimates of value added for subsidized goods and services of the public utilities sector
through the use of input costs (the household expenditure survey was used previously). The
estimates of GDP have been published on the Central Statistical Office website. Starting
from the final 2002 data, further improvements are planned for national accounts reflecting
the adoption of the 1993 SNA, a sampling frame based on the establishment survey (2002),
and the expansion of the coverage of questionnaires. Continued progress, especially in the
estimation of value added for the oil sector, requires the dedication of adequate resources and
improved coordination between the Ministries of Planning, Oil, and Finance. STA has
provided technical assistance to the Ministry of Planning to improve national accounts and
price data. A resident statistics expert was attached to the Ministry of Planning from
June 2001 to June 2002. It would be useful if the Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) would
publish oil sector information in the Quarterly Statistical Bulletin pertaining to output,
refining, domestic consumption, export price for crude and refined products and the domestic
price of petroleum products. These data are available from the Ministry of Oil.
Price Statistics
The weights are based on the household expenditure survey undertaken for 1999/2000 and
were introduced into the index for a reference year of 2002=100. An improved monthly CPI
based on a revised basket has been published in monthly CPI bulletins with about a
one-month lag. The wholesale price index (WPI) needs to be developed into a producer price
index (PPI), to include all domestically produced goods, ex-factory, for the export and the
domestic market, and, moreover, to be consistent with needs of national accounts. Timely
and comprehensive labor force data are not available
Government Finance Statistics
Kuwait reports annual GFS data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics
Yearbook (GFSY) and monthly government finance data for publication in IFS. The major
components of its extrabudgetary revenues (investment income and transfers of profits of
public institutions), extrabudgetary expenditures (interest on foreign debt and treasury
paper), and financing operations conducted by two reserve funds are not reported. Data on
investment income, and on interest on foreign debt and treasury paper, however, are usually
provided to Article IV consultation missions. The authorities have made some progress in

- 36 -

APPENDIX III

fiscal data presentation, but the lack of a suitable classification of data on the execution of
the budget remains a constraint on monitoring effectively fiscal developments during the
year. Moreover, data on the operations of the Public Institute for Social Security are not
made available. Much of the weaknesses in the fiscal accounts stem from the limitations on
the sharing of information between various government agencies. STA has indicated to the
authorities that operations of the two reserve funds should be classified as part of government
as they perform activities for public policy purposes (management of debt and assets, and
financing of the budget). The authorities have also been briefed on the IMF’s ongoing work
to enhance the transparency of fiscal accounts and presentations detailed in the “Code of
Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency” and were encouraged to adopt some of the practices
recommended in the Code. According to the FAD report “Restructuring Budget Processes”
finalized in March 2002, the weakest part of the Kuwaiti Public Expenditure Management
(PEM) system is the accounting system.
Money and Banking Statistics
Money and banking data are reported on a regular and timely basis.
Balance of Payments Statistics
Kuwait’s balance of payments data have substantially improved, in both coverage and
methodology. Since the beginning of 1997, the CBK has compiled and disseminated detailed
annual data in accordance with the methodology of the BPM5. Quarterly balance of
payments and an annual statement of Kuwait’s international investment position (IIP) have
also been compiled since 1997 by the CBK and provided to Article IV consultation missions.
Partial IIP data submitted to STA exclude foreign assets of other government agencies. They
are not published by STA as the data are not reported in the prescribed format to facilitate
the internationally accepted presentation. .Data on capital flows of the nonfinancial private
sector (including foreign direct investment abroad and portfolio investment abroad) are
currently not being compiled but measures are being taken (including collaboration between
the CBK and the Tax Department of the Ministry of Finance) to correct this omission (which
has contributed to the “errors and omissions” item). Enhancements have been made in the
estimation of travel services, but further improvements are needed in compilation practices
and in the estimation of data on several service items and private transfers. During
discussions in October 2004, STA recommended to the CBK to aim to participate in the
Fund’s 2004 Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) with a coverage limited to the
financial sector. A follow-up mission in October 2005 reviewed progress in this area with the
CBK.
Data dissemination
Kuwait is one of the first GDDS participants. Most of its metadata have not been updated in
the Fund’s DSBB since October 2002. The CBK has established its own webpage, which
contains the following data that are made available online to the public: money and banking

- 37 -

APPENDIX III

(monthly); balance of payments (annually); trade balance (monthly); exchange rate (average,
monthly); GDP by sector and expenditure at current and constant prices (annually); public
finance (selected data are available monthly); CPI and WPI (monthly with about a threemonth lag); and securities market indicators (quarterly). Similarly, the Ministry of Planning
has constructed a webpage where the CSO, publishes data on national accounts, prices, and
other related statistics. The Ministry of Finance’s webpage includes elaborated data for the
actual and estimated budget. In addition, the KIA’s webpage provides data on stock market
indices, volume and value of securities traded, as well as privatization schedules and other
related information.

- 38 -

APPENDIX III

KUWAIT: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(AS OF FEBRUARY 2, 2006)
Date of
latest
observation
Exchange Rates

Date
received

Frequency
of
1
Data

Frequency
of
1
Reporting

Frequency
of
1
publication

1/06

2/06

M

M

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
2
of the Monetary Authorities

12/05

1/06

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

10/05

12/05

M

M

M, Q

Broad Money

10/ 05

12/ 05

M

M

M, Q

Central Bank Balance Sheet

10/05

12 /05

M

M

M, Q

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

10/05

12/05

M

M

M

Interest Rates

10/05

12/05

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

10/05

12/05

M

M

M

FY2003/04

12/04

A

4

A

Not
published
on Fund
standards

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt

09/05

10/05

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

2004

08/05

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

06/05

08/05

M

M

Q

GDP/GNP

2004

12/05

A

A

A

2003

12/04

A

A

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
Financing – General Government
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing– Central Government

5

Gross External Debt
1

Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); NA: Not Available
Central Bank of Kuwait only.
3
Fiscal year data only.
4
Higher frequency data available only in national format.
5
Primarily private sector; except for a small volume of trade credits, Kuwait has no public external debt.
2

Statement by IMF Staff Representative
March 10, 2006
This statement provides information on recent developments in Kuwait that has become
available since the staff report was circulated to the Executive board on February 22, 2006.
The new information does not change the thrust of the staff appraisal.
Fiscal developments. The 2006–07 budget framework was announced recently. The budget
is based on an oil price assumption of $36 per barrel compared with $21 per barrel assumed
in the 2005–06 budget, and the average export price of $47 per barrel estimated to have been
received in 2005/06. The total expenditure has been budgeted at KD 10.326 billion, an
increase of almost 43 percent over the 2005/06 budget allocation of KD 7.232 billion. The
increase is largely on account of KD 2.2 billion allocated to finance a part of the accumulated
actuarial shortfall of the Public Institution for Social Security (KPISS). Excluding this
transfer to the KPISS, the budget framework envisages an increase of 12.4 percent in total
spending over the 2005/06 budget. The increase in wages and salaries (chapter I) is budgeted
to be limited at 7.6 percent. However, the allocation for goods and services (chapter II),
transport and equipment (chapter III), and capital spending including land acquisition
(chapter IV) have been significantly increased from their 2005/06 budget allocations by 31.8,
38.9, and 27.7 percent, respectively.
Oil sector developments. The oil ministry has resumed discussions with parliament over the
proposed Project Kuwait bill relating to the development of the country’s northern oil fields.
Meanwhile, Kuwait has signed a joint-venture deal with China to build a petrochemical
refining complex in China with an investment of over $6 billion.
Monetary developments. The final quarter of 2005 showed a continuation of the trend
observed during the first three quarters. Broad money grew by 16.5 percent during the year,
mainly due to the dynamism of private sector credit (growing by 14.2 percent of the initial
broad money stock). Growth of net foreign assets (NFA), however, decelerated substantially
in the final quarter of the year, containing the 12-month growth in relation to broad money at
4.8 percent (down from 15.7 percent as of end-September). These developments are closely
linked to the reintroduction of market-based monetary management mechanisms by the
Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK), which encouraged banks to switch from foreign assets to
CBK bonds and deposits.

-2-

Stock market developments. Kuwait has been
moderately resilient to the recent correction in
stock prices in several GCC equity markets. After
growing moderately vis-à-vis other major oil
exporting countries in the GCC during 2004–05
(see Box 1 in the staff report SM/06/74, 2/22/06),
the weighted Kuwaiti stock price index in the
first two months of the year has remained
virtually unchanged, despite a modest decline
(4 percent) from its peak level in earlyDecember 2005.

GCC Stock Market Change 1/
(Percentage change)
Cumulative

Jan.–Feb.

Peak to

2004–05

2006

Feb. 2006

Bahrain

61.2

2.4

-4.6

Kuwait Weighted

93.0

0.4

-4.2

Oman

78.8

7.7

-7.6

Qatar

180.1

-22.8

-33.3

Saudi Arabia

276.6

8.9

-5.5

Abu Dhabi Securities Market (U.A.E.)

296.1

-13.4

-27.8

Dubai Stock Market (U.A.E.)

632.6

-20.2

-35.8

Shua'a Capital Index 2/

215.0

7.3

-1.5

Sources: Bloomberg and Global Investment House.
1/ All data are end of month.
2/ Shua'a Capital index is a composite index of 14 Arab countries.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 06/35
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 29, 2006

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with Kuwait
On March 10, 2006, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Kuwait.1
Background
Kuwait’s macroeconomic performance strengthened further in 2004 and 2005. Real GDP
expanded at an average rate of 7.5 percent, as a result of higher oil production and buoyant
non-oil activity (6.4 percent). After taking into account the terms-of-trade gains, per capita GDP
increased by 44 percent to more than $26,000 during the two-year period through 2005.
Inflation remained low at 1.3 percent in 2004, although it has risen to almost 4 percent in 2005,
due to rising non-oil activity, abundant liquidity, and the delayed effect of the depreciation of the
dinar against euro and yen. The weighted stock price index more than tripled during 2003–05,
although the pace of increase over the recent two-year period (39 percent annually) has been
slower than in other heavily oil-endowed Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, in part
reflecting a tighter monetary policy stance.
The central government budgetary position strengthened further due to higher oil revenues, with
the overall fiscal surplus estimated at 24 percent of GDP in 2004/05. Fiscal policy was
expansionary in 2004/05, as expenditures increased by more than 14 percent and the non-oil
primary deficit in relation to non-oil GDP increased by 4 percentage points to 61 percent.
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by
the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman
of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to
the country's authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during the Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.
1

-2The expansionary fiscal stance was primarily attributable to sharply higher subsidies and
transfers and higher capital outlays, while the growth in the wage bill was moderate. Overall,
two-thirds of the increase in hydrocarbon revenues is estimated to have been saved in 2004/05,
and Kuwait’s government saving rate of 28 percent of GDP in 2004/05 was the highest amongst
all GCC countries.
Broad money growth steadily accelerated during 2004–05 and grew by 16.7 percent during the
12-month period through September 2005, despite efforts to tighten the stance of monetary
policy. This acceleration is attributable to the expansion of credit to the private sector
(13.1 percent of broad money) and an increase in net foreign assets (15.7 percent of broad
money). A tightening of monetary conditions since the second half of 2004 was pursued by
increasing the benchmark interest rate in line with global interest rate developments, by
introducing a ceiling on the credit to deposits ratio in July 2004, and by the re-introduction of
market-based monetary instruments in August 2005. Banking supervision has strengthened
further, and Central Bank of Kuwait applied the Basel II capital adequacy requirements for
conventional banks effective December 31, 2005. The banking sector has been opened further
for foreign banks.
The external current account registered annual surpluses averaging $25 billion (37 percent of
GDP) during 2004–05, primarily on account of high oil revenues. At an annualized rate, exports
of oil and oil products increased by over 47 percent, but non-oil export growth slowed down to
15 percent following a surge of about 70 percent in 2003, because of slower growth of
re-exports to Iraq. Import growth remained high as a result of strong domestic economic activity.
The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the Kuwaiti dinar depreciated by 5 percent in 2004;
however, with the strengthening of the U.S. dollar vis-à-vis other major currencies in recent
months, the REER appreciated by 11.7 percent during January–November 2005.
Progress continues on the structural reform front, albeit at a slow pace. Private sector
participation in the sectors previously dominated by the public sector has increased (particularly
in telecommunications, airlines, and infrastructure development). However, several draft laws
(including the privatization and competition laws) aimed at promoting a more market-friendly
business environment are awaiting parliamentary approval. The Kuwaitization policy, in place
since October 2003 and aimed at increasing the proportion of Kuwaitis employed in the private
sector, is being applied in a flexible manner and contributed to a higher proportion of Kuwaiti
nationals joining the private sector in recent years.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for a further strengthening of Kuwait’s
macroeconomic position in 2005. The high pace of economic expansion, driven in part by oilrelated inflows and terms-of-trade gains, boosted per capita income and contributed to large
fiscal and current account surpluses as well as to the rapid accumulation of external assets for
future generations. Looking ahead, Directors agreed that Kuwait’s financial position is likely to
remain strong over the medium term given the favorable outlook for oil prices. They encouraged
the authorities to develop a comprehensive and transparent strategy to manage fiscal surpluses

-3over the medium-term as well as to foster private-sector-led economic diversification, growth
and job creation, which are needed to absorb the rapidly growing Kuwaiti labor force.
Directors commended the authorities for continuing to play a constructive role in support of oil
price stability. As oil production is currently running almost at full capacity, they supported the
large investment plans being implemented to expand capacity, increase refining operations, and
almost double petrochemicals production. These actions demonstrated the authorities’
readiness to support global economic expansion through oil market stability and also realize
financial gains for the Kuwaiti population.
Directors observed that Kuwait’s overall fiscal position will remain in comfortable surplus over
the medium term, and urged the authorities to seize this opportunity to further improve the
structure of the budget by gradually increasing capital expenditure, rationalizing subsidies, and
achieving a better balance between productive expenditure and fiscal savings. They welcomed
the authorities’ commitment to contain recurrent outlays despite intensifying pressures for
higher expenditures and new public sector hiring, while increasing spending on health,
education, and physical infrastructure. Directors noted that efficient management of the rapidly
growing public sector savings will be key to Kuwait’s long-term fiscal viability. Directors
supported the authorities’ plan to build up the reserves of the Reserve Fund for Future
Generations, and the recent budget announcement to use a part of the fiscal surplus to
recapitalize the social security system, but also underscored the importance of implementing a
reform program to ensure the social security system’s long-term actuarial soundness. With
regard to increasing non-oil revenues, some Directors suggested that consideration be given to
the introduction of a Value Added Tax, in coordination with other members of the GCC.
Directors commended the authorities for their prudent conduct of monetary policy, which has
helped maintain price stability and the exchange rate peg. They supported the authorities’
intention to keep the exchange rate peg unchanged until the GCC monetary union is formed,
and to remain open toward the choice of exchange rate regime under the planned monetary
union. Directors observed that the ceiling on the loans-to-deposits ratio introduced in 2004 to
tighten monetary conditions has contributed to a deceleration in the rate of credit growth in 2005
and to a rapid buildup of deposits. They suggested, however, that consideration be given to
phasing out the ceiling on the loans-to-deposits ratio, in light of the diminished effectiveness of
the ceiling and the reintroduction of market-based instruments.
Directors commended the authorities for ensuring that the Kuwaiti banking system is financially
sound, well managed, and well supervised. They welcomed the steps taken to further
strengthen banking supervision and open further the sector to foreign banks. Directors observed
that the continuing upward trend in the stock price index in recent years, while reflecting strong
economic fundamentals, should be carefully monitored to assess its potential impact on the
financial sector. In this context, they urged the authorities to implement the Financial Sector
Assessment Program recommendations relating to the stock market and insurance sector.
Directors recommended, in particular, an expeditious passing of capital market and insurance
laws, and establishing comprehensive oversight of the stock exchange, investment companies,
and the insurance sector. Directors noted that, while the banking system appears to have the

-4ability to withstand any reasonable market correction, there is scope for improved transparency
through the implementation of more comprehensive accounting standards for other financial
and non-financial companies. Regarding Anti-Money Laundering/Combating Financing of
Terrorism, the authorities were encouraged to work toward adopting the legislation currently
under review and to authorize the Financial Intelligence Unit to share information with its global
counterparts.
Directors urged the authorities to cast structural reforms in the context of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at strengthening the private sector, and increasing investment and employment.
They encouraged the authorities to expedite the updating of outdated laws and regulations to
promote a more market-friendly environment, and to move to market-based pricing of electricity,
petroleum products, and water. To promote further private sector participation, a number of
Directors also encouraged the authorities to reduce the maximum income tax rate on foreign
companies, in line with other GCC countries. Directors urged the authorities to apply the
Kuwaitization policy flexibly, so that the competitiveness and profitability of the private sector
are not adversely affected, and to intensify their efforts to raise the skills of the Kuwaiti labor
force. Directors also encouraged the authorities to consider positive incentive schemes in
support of the goals of the Kuwaitization policy.
Directors welcomed the improvements in the quality of economic data. They urged the
authorities to increase the timeliness and dissemination of some key economic data. Directors
also encouraged the authorities to improve communications between the various government
agencies to improve compilation of both the national income and balance of payments statistics.
Directors also suggested that the authorities adopt common data standards, in coordination with
other GCC countries, as a step toward establishing the convergence criteria for the planned
monetary union. They welcomed Kuwait’s contribution to oil market transparency by providing
data to the Joint Oil Data Initiative, and urged the authorities to improve the timeliness of oil
data provision.
Directors expressed their appreciation to the Kuwaiti authorities for their continued support to
low-income countries through their sizeable external development assistance program,
including through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

Kuwait: Selected Economic Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

13.2
19.8
10.1
1.0

6.4
7.7
6.3
1.3

(Percent change)
Production and prices
Real GDP
Real oil GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Consumer price index

4.8
2.2
6.5
1.6

0.7
-3.3
3.5
1.4

5.1
-7.9
13.1
0.8

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
Financial variables 1/
Total revenue, of which:

78.3
54.2
19.8
38.5
35.4
3.1
39.9

60.7
41.4
12.7
43.9
39.3
3.9
16.8

59.8
45.3
9.6
40.3
35.6
4.3
19.5

55.2
42.6
8.1
37.8
33.1
4.4
17.4

59.6
46.0
9.9
35.2
30.7
3.7
24.4

Change in broad money supply (in percent)

6.3

12.8

4.8

7.8

12.1

Interest rate (in percent) 2/

5.4

3.7

2.2

1.5

1.6

Oil and gas
Investment income
Total expenditure
Current
Capital
Overall fiscal balance

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports, of which:

21,298

17,910

17,010

24,901

33,321

18,182

14,977

14,057

19,567

27,764

-11,369

-12,406

-13,958

-16,464

-19,848

14,671

8,328

4,250

9,414

17,323

38.9

23.9

11.2

20.4

31.1

6,577

9,268

8,455

6,744

7,451

In months of imports of goods and services

7.6

9.7

8.0

5.6

5.1

Real effective exchange rate (percent change)

4.2

5.2

-0.9

-7.9

-5.2

Crude oil and refined products
Imports
Current account balance (deficit = -)
In percent of GDP
Central Bank of Kuwait’s international reserves 3/

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year ending March 31.
2/ Three–month Kuwaiti dinar deposit rate.
3/ Excludes SDRs and IMF reserve position.

Statement by Shakour Shaalan, Executive Director for Kuwait
March 10, 2006

1.
On behalf of the Kuwaiti authorities, we thank staff for a well-balanced set of reports,
which evaluate Kuwait’s policy options for consolidating macroeconomic stability, while
providing a comprehensive review of strategies aimed at fostering medium- and long-term
growth.
Recent Developments
2.
Buoyant oil and non-oil activity over the past twelve months undeniably strengthened
Kuwait’s already solid macroeconomic performance further. This performance was coupled
with subdued inflation, and exceptionally high fiscal and external surpluses. As a result, per
capita GDP increased to more than US$26,000, assets for future generations continued to
buildup, and Kuwait consolidated its remarkably strong net external creditor position. At the
same time, domestic private investment as a share of GDP increased markedly, equities
continued to increase strongly, and unemployment remained low despite the growing labor
force. Alongside favorable oil market developments, which have helped in entrenching
Kuwait’s strong performance, sound economic policies, as well as prudent management of
hydrocarbon revenues over time have been major contributors.
3.
Looking forward, the medium-term outlook for the Kuwait economy remains strong.
This is due to the determination to maintain sound macroeconomic policies and a prudent
investment policy of oil proceeds in external assets. These policies contributed largely to
reducing Kuwait’s vulnerability to international oil price volatility. The Kuwaiti authorities
are determined to take advantage of the remarkable oil revenues induced windfall
opportunity to launch reforms aimed at achieving sustainable high rates of GDP growth in
the medium- and long-term. These include efforts aimed at productively diversifying the
economy, reforming the labor market to encourage private sector employment and reduce the
role of the public sector, achieving long-term fiscal consolidation, and providing an enabling
environment for private sector-led growth.
Supporting Oil Price Stability
4.
Kuwait is well aware of its responsibilities as a major global oil producer, with about
8 percent of the world’s proven crude oil reserves. It continued to play a constructive role in
ensuring an additional supply of oil over the past years, thus supporting international oil price
stability. The authorities have raised their production of crude oil by 47.5 percent since 2002
in response to the increasing global demand and are currently running almost at full capacity.
5.
The authorities’ readiness to support global oil market stability is reflected by
launching a mega investment program of US$22 billion for expanding crude oil capacity,
increasing refining capacity, almost doubling the production of petrochemical products, and
boosting gas production for domestic uses. The project would be essentially financed by the
Kuwait Petroleum Corporation’s own resources and its joint venture foreign partners.

-2Fiscal Developments and Policies
6.
Higher oil revenues have led to a significant strengthening of the fiscal position over
the past two years, with the overall fiscal surplus estimated at 24 percent of GDP in 2004/05.
In spite of increasing demands on the budget engendered by the favorable fiscal
position―already manifested in higher subsidies and transfers―the authorities remain
committed to fiscal prudence. This is evidenced in the steady decline, expected to continue
into the future, in both current and total expenditures in relation to GDP, from 39.3 percent
and 43.9 percent in 2001/2002 to 30.7 percent and 35.2 percent, respectively, in 2004/05. The
composition of spending has also improved with the share of wages and salaries as well as
subsidies and transfers in total expenditures declining over the same period. The prudent
fiscal stance has allowed the government to accumulate substantial foreign assets, with
two-thirds of the increase in hydrocarbon revenues estimated to have been saved in 2004/05.
7.
The fiscal position is expected to remain exceptionally strong in the medium term.
Nonetheless, the authorities remain committed on using the surplus in a manner consistent
with ensuring fiscal sustainability in the medium term and intergenerational equity. To
improve intergenerational equity, the Reserve Fund for Future Generations will likely
continue to receive an additional contribution amounting to 5 percent of government
revenues―in addition to the statutory annual transfer of 10 percent of all government
revenues―provided the budget outcome remains favorable. A portion of the remaining
surplus will be also utilized to increase investments in health and education and to improve
physical infrastructure, within the medium-term fiscal framework expenditure program. It is
worth noting that the sizable planned budget outlays are in line with Kuwait’s increasing
absorption and implementation capacity. On the other hand, the authorities would like to
reiterate their commitment to moderate increases in the general level of wages in the
economy and to stricter rules for additional recruitment in the public sector.
8.
Going forward, the focus on improving the structure of the budget and expenditure
management will be maintained. The authorities recognize that there is scope for
rationalizing transfers and subsidies, recapitalizing the social security system, and achieving
a better balance between productive expenditure and fiscal savings. They are considering the
staff recommendations in this regard. The authorities are also intent on implementing
planned budgetary reforms, which are now included in the five-year plan. These reforms
include the introduction of a three-year rolling budget, the consolidation of the budgetary
process, and the adoption of budget classifications in line with international accounting
standards. Efforts are also continuing to coordinate with other GCC members the
introduction of a Value Added Tax.
Monetary and Financial Sector
9.
The Central Bank of Kuwait (CBK) was successful in maintaining price and
exchange rate stability through continued monetary restraint. In order to ensure that money
and credit growth remains commensurate with the expansion of non-oil activity, the CBK
increased the benchmark interest rate in line with global interest rate developments,
introduced a ceiling on the credit to deposit ratio, and recently relied upon market-based

-3monetary control mechanisms. These policies have resulted in a substantial increase in
domestic currency deposit rates, which have risen above U.S. dollar deposit rates. Moreover,
the rate of credit growth was restrained in 2004-05, which in turn contributed to moderating
equity price increase, while restoring the balance between the rate of growth of credit and
deposits. The authorities consider the loan-to-deposit ratio ceiling as a temporary prudential
measure aimed at avoiding any emergence of credit risk that could undermine the soundness
of the banking sector. Although they do not believe that the measure has interfered with the
efficient allocation of bank resources, the authorities will continue to closely monitor the
situation, as all local banks have met the loan-to-deposit ratio requirement and are now, with
their increasing deposit base, in a position to meet the private sector financing needs.
10.
The financial sector strengthened further in 2005 and played an important role in
supporting non-oil private sector activity. The Kuwaiti banking system realized strong profits
and considerably increased provisions coverage for non-performing loans. Banking
supervision has strengthened further over the past year, foreign competition was allowed in
the banking sector, in line with the recent amendment of the banking law, and the CBK
applied the Basel II capital adequacy requirements for conventional banks effective
December 31, 2005. The CBK is confident that these developments will further strengthen
the soundness and stability of the banking system by motivating banks to apply best practices
in managing and monitoring various aspects of risk. While there are clear indications that the
banking system is increasingly resilient to any reasonable stock market correction, the
authorities are monitoring the upward trend in the stock market index closely. In this context,
accelerating the approval of the stock market and insurance sector laws, as recommended by
staff, in addition to improving the banking sector transparency, remain a priority.
External Sector
11.
The external current account surplus rose substantially in 2004-05 mainly due to
higher oil export receipts, as non-oil exports which increased strongly in 2003, were slower
on account of a decline in re-exports to Iraq. Imports remained high, on account of the strong
domestic economic activity. Staff’s projections indicate that a substantial external current
account surpluses will continue over the medium term. Although they take comfort from
these projections, the Kuwaiti authorities will maintain their efforts to diversify the
production and export base in an effort to reduce the economy’s vulnerability to
developments in international oil markets. Several measures, aimed at allowing market
access and competition in industries previously dominated by the public sector, including the
telecommunications, airlines, and infrastructure sectors, were implemented. These measures
included granting licenses for three airlines and four additional private universities, allowing
private companies to operate gas stations, building two new power plants, completing the
joint venture Boubiyan Island port project by 2008, in addition to the proposed North-South
GCC train line.
12.
Significant progress has been made in trade liberalization and regional integration.
The GCC common external tariff at 5 percent has been in effect since early 2003, and import
duties are no longer levied on products from Arab countries under the Greater Arab Free
Trade Area since January 2005. Moreover, the GCC common market is projected to come

-4into effect in 2007 and the GCC countries have agreed to negotiate free trade agreements
(FTAs) with other countries or regions collectively in the future, while an FTA with the
European Union is expected to be signed later this year. Being a WTO member for over ten
years, Kuwait remains committed to further opening and liberalizing its economy. In this
context, the foreign direct investment law of 2003 is about to be amended in line with
international best practices, in an effort to attract foreign investment.
Other Structural Reforms
13.
In order to promote a more business-friendly environment, the government is
considering amending the tax law aimed at reducing the corporate income tax from 55 to 25
percent on foreign business. The privatization law also awaits parliamentary approval and the
authorities remain committed to advance a comprehensive strategy for government divesture
from major state-owned enterprises. The authorities also plan to legislate the Competition
Law and to implement a legal framework for large projects under the public-private
partnerships program.
14.
The Kuwaiti authorities acknowledge that sustaining vigorous rates of growth in the
medium and long term requires a flexible implementation of the Kuwaitization program, with
due consideration to safeguarding the competitiveness of the private sector. They remain
committed to moderate increases in wages and to stricter rules for additional recruitment in
the public sector. This, together with the program aimed at providing vocational training, job
search allowances for the unemployed, and enhancing job placement services, will encourage
Kuwaiti nationals to improve their skills to be able to compete for job opportunities in the
private sector.
Statistical Issues
15.
Considerable progress has been made in improving the quality and dissemination of
economic data, especially with regard to the timely provision of the CPI and WPI. Kuwait is
also a strong supporter of the Joint Oil Data Initiative to help improve oil data transparency.
In addition to the planned investment survey aimed at better assessing non-financial foreign
direct investment, the authorities intend to subscribe to the Fund’s Special Data
Dissemination System. Notwithstanding this progress, the Kuwaiti authorities remain
strongly committed to further improvements in data collection and dissemination, in line with
best practices.

