April 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/105

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Singapore: 2003 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Supplement; and Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2003 Article IV consultation with Singapore, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on December 15, 2003, with the officials of Singapore on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on February 23, 2004. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff supplement of March 10, 2004 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its March 15, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
Financial System Stability Assessment
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SINGAPORE
Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Singapore
Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Juha Kähkönen
February 23, 2004

•

The 2003 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Singapore during
December 3–15, 2003. The team comprised Messrs. Schwartz (head), Jang, and
Eggertsson (all APD), Pedersen (ICM), and Brooks (RES). Ms. Tseng (APD) participated
in discussions with senior officials during December 10–11, and Mr. Ishii (MFD) joined
the mission to conclude the FSAP discussions during December 9–12.

•

The mission met with Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong (who also serves as the
Minister of Finance and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore), MAS
Managing Director Koh Yong Guan, other senior officials, and representatives of the
private sector.

•

In concluding the last Article IV consultation in December 2002, Directors commended
the authorities for their skillful handling of the 2001 recession. They noted that the
implementation of appropriate countercyclical policies had paved the way for a modest
economic recovery. Directors also welcomed the authorities’ timely new medium-term
development strategy, with wide-ranging restructuring and liberalization measures to
promote high-value-added activities, develop the services sector, and enhance labor
market flexibility. They endorsed recent initiatives to increase the transparency of the
monetary framework, and encouraged the authorities to enhance fiscal transparency.
They welcomed Singapore’s participation in the FSAP.

•

The accompanying Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) concludes that
Singapore’s financial system remains robust, notwithstanding a number of severe
economic shocks, and that regulatory and supervisory practices exhibit a high degree of
observance of international standards and codes across all segments of the financial
sector.

•

Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. It maintains
an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions. Singapore also provides data to the Fund on a generally timely
basis, and is in observance of the SDDS.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................3
I.

Introduction and Background ........................................................................................4

II.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................5
A. Macroeconomic and Market Developments .............................................................5
B. Macroeconomic Policies ...........................................................................................8
C. Corporate Sector Developments................................................................................9

III.

Outlook and Risks........................................................................................................10

IV.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................11
A. Fiscal Policy............................................................................................................12
B. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy ......................................................................13
C. Structural Policies and Other Issues........................................................................15

V.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................20

Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Economic Impact of the SARS Outbreak and Policy Response.................................. 6
Changes in Monetary Policy Stance, 2001–03 ............................................................ 9
Singapore’s Free Trade Agreements.......................................................................... 18
Findings of the Financial System Stability Assessment ............................................ 19

Figures
1.
Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators..................................................... 22
2.
Labor and Asset Market Developments..................................................................... 23
3.
Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators....................................................... 24
4.
Monetary and Fiscal Indicators.................................................................................. 25
5.
External Developments.............................................................................................. 26
6.
Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity.............................................. 27
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998–2004 ......................................... 28
Balance of Payments, 1998–2004.............................................................................. 29
Monetary Survey, 1998–2003.................................................................................... 30
Summary of Government Operations, 1998/99–2003/04.......................................... 31
Indicators of Vulnerability, 1998–2003..................................................................... 32
Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2000–09........................................................... 33

Annexes
I.
Key Recommendations of the Economic Review Committee................................... 34
II.
Fund Relations .......................................................................................................... 37
III.
Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................ 39

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
•

The economy is recovering strongly in the aftermath of the SARS outbreak of early
2003. After contracting sharply in the second quarter of 2003, real GDP began to recover,
with growth for the year registering almost 1 percent. Led by strong external demand, the
outlook continues to improve, and GDP growth of around 5 percent is expected in 2004.
Nevertheless, domestic demand has yet to revive, and unemployment remains high.

•

The authorities responded to the SARS-induced economic downturn by adopting a
supportive macroeconomic policy mix. Fiscal support was provided through a package
of assistance to SARS-inflicted sectors of the economy. Monetary policy was eased midyear with the recentering of the exchange rate band around the prevailing lower level of
the Singapore dollar. Supply-side measures were also adopted to reduce business costs.

•

Concerns about Singapore’s medium-term competitiveness and growth prospects
have featured prominently in domestic policy discussions. The economy is facing
competitive pressures from low-cost regional producers. The authorities have responded
with reforms to make the economy more open and competitive, including most recently
the endorsement of the recommendations of the Economic Review Committee (ERC).
Key elements of the strategy include a reduction in tax rates, the divestment of
government-linked companies (GLCs), and steps to foster labor market flexibility.

Key Issues and Staff Recommendations
•

The mission welcomed the authorities’ recent pragmatic use of macroeconomic
policies to counter economic shocks. Given the sizeable output gap and still weak
domestic demand, the staff encouraged the authorities to maintain a supportive
macroeconomic policy stance until the recovery becomes more broad-based.

•

To enhance Singapore’s medium-term growth potential, the mission encouraged the
authorities to accelerate and deepen structural reforms, including:
¾ The divestment of GLCs, to foster the growth of the private sector and promote
entrepreneurship.
¾ Implementation of further reforms to the Central Provident Fund (CPF) to ensure
adequate financial savings for retirees.
¾ Adoption of further steps to enhance the transparency of economic information and
policy making. Progress has been made in the area of monetary policy, but additional
efforts would be desirable, especially with respect to fiscal policy.

•

The FSAP exercise concluded that Singapore’s financial sector remains robust,
despite the economic downturn and declines in asset prices. The authorities agreed
with the key FSAP findings and recommendations.

-4-

I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1.
After averaging over 9 percent in the decade prior to the Asian financial crisis,
economic growth in Singapore has slowed markedly in recent years (Text Figure 1). This
outcome is attributable to three major recent shocks: (i) the Asian crisis in 1997-98; (ii) the
16
16
bursting of the tech bubble in 2000–01
Text Figure 1. Real GDP
(resulting in Singapore’s worst recession 14 (Annual percent change)
14
since independence in 1965); and more
12
12
recently, (iii) the outbreak of Severe
10
10
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in
8
8
early 2003, exacerbated by uncertainties
6
6
related to international terrorism and the
4
4
war in Iraq.
2
2
0

0

2.
The economic shocks have
-2
-2
come as Singapore is also facing
-4
-4
structural challenges owing to
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
competition from low-cost regional
economies, including China and India. The economic downturns and an ongoing industrial
restructuring toward capital-intensive sectors such as chemical and pharmaceuticals have
contributed to rising unemployment. Concerns about Singapore’s medium-term
competitiveness and growth prospects, along with an increasing awareness of the economy’s
vulnerability to external shocks (especially in the electronics sector, which dominates the
country’s manufacturing exports), have featured prominently in domestic policy discussions.
The economic slowdown has given rise to an internal re-examination of the appropriate role
of the government in the economy, with concerns that Singapore’s growth model based on
extensive government involvement in the economy may be running out of steam.
3.
In response to these challenges, over the past couple of years the authorities have
undertaken a wide range of reforms to diversify and open the economy. Motivating the
reforms has been a desire to maintain, if not enhance, Singapore’s international
competitiveness. Progress has been made in liberalizing the domestic banking, telecom, and
utility sectors, enhancing the financial regulatory and supervisory framework, liberalizing the
use of the Singapore dollar in international transactions, reaching free trade agreements with
major trading partners, reforming the tax system, and increasing wage and labor market
flexibility.
4.
The reforms have been given further impetus with the authorities’ official
endorsement of the recommendations of the Economic Review Committee (ERC)
(Annex I). The ERC was established in late 2001 to evaluate Singapore’s long-term strategy
and the need for structural change. Finalized in early 2003, the ERC recommendations seek
to enhance competitiveness and entrepreneurship. Key elements of the strategy include a
reduction in tax rates, the divestment of non-strategic government-linked companies (GLCs),
and policies to foster greater labor market flexibility.
5.
On the domestic political scene, the ruling People’s Action Party (PAP), in power
since independence, remains firmly in control (it retains an overwhelming majority in

-5-

Parliament). In August 2003, Prime Minister Goh, who has been in office since 1990,
announced that he would step down in the next one to two years. Deputy Prime Minister Lee
Hsien Loong has been named as his successor. The next Parliamentary election is due by
early 2007.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
A. Macroeconomic and Market Developments
6.
An economic recovery is underway in the aftermath of the SARS outbreak of
March 2003 (Table 1):
•

After a modest rebound from the recession of 2001, real GDP growth turned
sharply negative in the second quarter of 2003, but has since recovered strongly.
Output contracted by a near-record
20
20
10 percent (seasonally adjusted
Text Figure 2. Quarterly Real GDP
(Seasonally adjusted annualized percent change)
annualized q/q basis) in the second
15
15
quarter due to SARS (Text Figure 2
10
10
and Box 1). The services sector was
5
5
hit particularly hard, especially
tourism-related activities.
0
0
Manufacturing output held up
-5
-5
relatively well, with a rapidly
expanding pharmaceuticals industry -10
-10
providing a counterbalance to weak
-15
-15
electronics output. On the demand
2000q1
2000q3
2001q1
2001q3
2002q1
2002q3
2003q1
2003q3
side, exports held up well, but
falling domestic demand (particularly investment) contributed to the sharp drop in
activity. A recovery took hold in the second half of the year, led by strong external
demand and a rebound in the services sector, although the construction sector continues
to contract. For 2003 as a whole, real GDP is estimated to have increased by 0.8 percent.

•

Inflation has remained subdued
after a period of mild deflation in
the year through October 2002
(Text Figure 3). CPI inflation has
edged up in recent months, to
0.7 percent (y/y) at end-2003. Despite
some one-off cost-push factors,
including an increase in the Goods
and Services Tax (GST), weak
domestic demand and soft labor
market conditions continue to dampen
any inflationary pressures. While

6

6

Text Figure 3. Inflation and Unemployment

5

5

Unemployment rate (In percent)

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
-1

-1
CPI (Y/Y percent change)
-2
Jan-00

-2
Jul-00

Jan-01

Jul-01

Jan-02

Jul-02

Jan-03

Jul-03

-6-

Box 1. Economic Impact of the SARS Outbreak and Policy Response
The Singapore economy was among the most severely affected by the outbreak of SARS.1
Together with the uncertainties in the external environment existing at the time, the SARS
outbreak resulted in a near-record economic contraction in the second quarter of 2003 of
10 percent at a seasonally adjusted annualized rate. The staff’s preliminary estimate indicates
that the negative impact of SARS on annual 120
120
Tourist Arrivals
growth amounts to about 1½ percentage
(January 2003=100)
100
100
points. The service sector (accounting for
over 60 percent of GDP), including tourism
80
80
and transport-related activities (such as
hotels, restaurants, retail, airlines, and
60
60
taxis), was most severely hit, as a result of
the sharp decline in visitor arrivals, which
40
40
declined by 71 percent (y/y) in May.
20
20
Business and consumer confidence were
also adversely affected. The SARS
0
0
outbreak did not, however, significantly
Jan-03 Feb-03 Mar-03 Apr-03 May-03 Jun-03 Jul-03 Aug-03 Sep-03 Oct-03 Nov-03
affect the manufacturing sector nor external
trade. A recovery has been under way in recent months; visitor arrivals and the hotel occupancy
rate in December recovered to their pre-SARS levels.
In response to the economic downturn, the authorities have taken the following measures:
•
The fiscal stance has become expansionary, with the revised budget for FY2003/04
targeting a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP, down from 4.3 percent in the previous year. In
particular, the government has implemented the following: (i) a S$230 million aid package
(0.2 percent of GDP) in April for the SARS-inflicted tourism and transport-related sectors; and
(ii) a S$1 billion package of rebates, incentive schemes, and infrastructure projects (0.6 percent
of GDP) in August to assist businesses, low-income earners, and the unemployed.
•
On the supply side, steps have included: (i) several changes to the CPF (a fully funded
mandatory pension scheme) to reduce business costs and save jobs, including a cut on
October 1, 2003 in the employer contribution rate from 16 percent to 13 percent; and (ii) a
reduction in civil service wages by 1–9 percent for the period July 2003–June 2004, in line with
a recommendation in May by the tripartite National Wages Council.
•
Monetary policy has also been eased to support the recovery. In July, the MAS eased
policy by announcing that it would recenter its exchange rate policy band at the prevailing lower
level of the nominal effective exchange rate, while maintaining a “zero percent appreciation”
path and keeping the width of the band unchanged. The MAS estimated that the easier monetary
policy stance taken since January 2002 would increase real GDP growth by ½ percentage points
in 2003.

___________________
1

SARS first appeared in Singapore in mid-March, resulting in 32 deaths and 206 infections in the citystate. Singapore was officially removed from the list of SARS-affected areas on May 31 (an isolated case
last September turned out not to result from local transmission).

-7-

falling from a 17-year high of 5.5 percent in September 2003, unemployment remains
high by historical standards.1
•

A strong rebound in exports contributed to a sharp widening of the current account
surplus, estimated at almost
60
60
Text Figure 4. Exports
30 percent of GDP in 2003 (Table 2).
50 (Y/Y percent change)
50
Non-electronics Exports
As elsewhere in Asia, a key driver of
40
40
export growth has been demand from
30
30
within the region, notably China.2
20
20
While electronics exports grew by
10
10
5 percent in 2003, reversing two
0
0
consecutive years of contraction, gains -10
-10
were most apparent in non-electronics, -20
-20
particularly pharmaceuticals and
-30
-30
Electronics Exports
chemicals (Text Figure 4). Import
-40
-40
Jan-00
Jul-00
Jan-01
Jul-01
Jan-02
Jul-02
Jan-03
Jul-03
growth was sluggish through much of
the year reflecting the weak domestic
economic situation, although there was a sharp rise toward the end of the year. Official
reserves increased by US$14 billion during 2003, to stand at US$96 billion (7 months of
imports) at end-December.
Text Table 1. Key Financial Indicators for Local Banks

•

(In percent)

Bank lending has begun to rise
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
2003
since mid-2003, largely on robust
Jan.-Sep.
Capital adequacy
gains in housing loans (Table 3).
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
18.1
20.6
19.6
18.1
16.9
17.8
Loan growth to the corporate
Asset quality
sector, which remained weak until
Classified nonbank loans to total nonbank loans
11.0
12.2
9.1
8.0
7.7
7.0
Classified loans to total loans
7.8
8.5
5.5
5.7
5.5
5.3
early 2003, has also shown some
Profitability
tentative signs of strengthening.
After-tax return on assets
0.4
1.2
1.3
0.8
0.8
0.8
After-tax return on equity
4.2
10.7
12.6
7.7
7.6
7.8
Domestic interest rates have
remained low, consistent with
trends in the global interest rate environment and ample liquidity in the domestic money
market. Local bank balance sheets have remained healthy (Text Table 1).

1

The spike in the September unemployment rate, to 5.5 percent in September from
4.6 percent in June, mainly reflected entrants into the labor force, which may have been
attributable to the return of discouraged workers due to the improving economic outlook.
Indeed, the decline in the unemployment rate in December reflected a stronger-than-expected
pickup in the job market, led by services, but with manufacturing also registering
employment growth, for the first time in three years.
2

Non-oil exports to China grew by almost 35 percent in 2003, and have more than doubled
since 2000. Taken together, exports to China and Hong Kong SAR have now overtaken the
U.S. as Singapore’s second largest export market.

-8-

•

Financial market sentiment has
strengthened since mid-May 2003,
in line with regional trends and the
improving economic outlook (Text
Figure 5). After declining modestly
in 2002, equity prices rebounded by
about 30 percent in 2003. Property
prices have continued to decline,
reflecting oversupply (particularly in
the commercial market), but are
showing signs of bottoming out.

200

180

200

Text Figure 5. Stock Market Index and Real Estate Prices
(1998q4=100)
Residential

180

Stock Market Index

160

160

140

140

120

120

100

100

80

60
1995q1

Office Space

80

60
1996q1

1997q1

1998q1

1999q1

2000q1

2001q1

2002q1

2003q1

B. Macroeconomic Policies
7.
The authorities implemented a number of fiscal measures in response to the
SARS-induced economic downturn (Box 1). The FY2003/04 (April–March) fiscal stance
has been expansionary, with the revised budget targeting a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP
(down from 4.3 percent in the previous year), amounting to a fiscal impulse of 1.8 percent of
GDP according to staff estimates (Table 4). Building on structural measures contained in the
original budget (including the implementation of various ERC recommendations), the revised
budget provided additional stimulus, consisting largely of programs to assist low-income
earners and the unemployed (including through utility rebates and training programs), and to
accelerate infrastructure projects. Several supply-side measures to reduce business costs and
support employment were also implemented, including a downward adjustment to the
Central Provident Fund (CPF) employer contribution rate.
8.
Monetary policy was also eased in July 2003 to support the recovery, with the
exchange rate depreciating through much of the year (Text Figure 6 and Box 2).3 More
recently, in October 2003, the MAS
110
110
Text Figure 6. Monetary Condition Index
reaffirmed that it would maintain its
108 (June 1995=100)
108
Tighter
current “neutral” policy stance to support 106
106
104
the recovery. While the NEER
104
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
102
depreciated by 3½ percent (period
102
100
average) for the year, it has recently
100
98
come under some appreciation pressure,
MCI
98
96
as reflected in a sharp accumulation of
96
94
international reserves (reserves rose by
94
92
about US$5 billion during the fourth
92
90
Easier
quarter of 2003).
90
88
Jan-00

3

Jul-00

Jan-01

Jul-01

Jan-02

Jul-02

Jan-03

Jul-03

Since 1981, monetary policy in Singapore has centered on the management of a tradeweighted exchange rate index within an undisclosed policy band, with the prime objective of
promoting price stability.

-9-

Box 2. Changes in Monetary Policy Stance, 2001-03
July 2001

Shifted from a tightening to a neutral stance by centering the exchange rate policy band
on a "zero percent appreciation" path (i.e., a horizontal rather than upward sloping
band) of the trade-weighted exchange rate in response to a deterioration in the external
economic environment and a sharp downturn in the global demand for electronics.

October 2001

Widened the band (while maintaining a "zero percent appreciation" path) to
accommodate higher volatility in the aftermath of the September 11 events.

January 2002

Recentered and narrowed the band at the prevailing lower level of the trade-weighted
exchange rate to support economic recovery and as market volatility subsided.
Maintained a "zero percent appreciation" path.

July 2003

Recentered the band at the prevailing lower level of the trade-weighted exchange rate to
support a recovery in the aftermath of the SARS outbreak, but maintained a "zero
percent appreciation" path and kept the width of the band unchanged.

C. Corporate Sector Developments
9.
The nonfinancial corporate sector has shown resilience to recent shocks, and has
been consistently profitable (Text Table 2). The sector’s resilience is due in part to
relatively low debt-equity ratios, and high levels of liquidity.4 Despite these strengths, as
noted above, the corporate sector is facing increasingly strong competitive pressures from
low-cost regional producers and neighboring economies, and is undergoing structural
changes to remain competitive, including the development of new industries and
restructuring toward capital-intensive sectors.

Text Table 2. Selected Indicators for the Nonfinancial Corporate Sector 1/
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Debt-equity ratio

0.8

0.9

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

Current ratio (current assets/current liabilities)

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.1

1.1

6.6
13.9

5.6
11.6

3.7
6.0

5.3
11.7

6.0
13.3

3.8
7.3

Profitability
Return on asset (pre-tax)
Return on equity (pre-tax)
Source: Singapore Department of Statistics.
1/ Data for 2002 and 2003 are not yet available.

4

See the accompanying Selected Issues paper on Singapore’s corporate sector and Box 3 of
Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA).

- 10 -

III. OUTLOOK AND RISKS
10.
With the economic recovery continuing to gain momentum, the near-term
outlook has improved. Exports, manufacturing output, and tourism-related sectors are all
now showing signs of strength. Moreover, with indications that the global IT sector is
picking up, prospects for manufacturing and exports are relatively good. On the basis of
continued strength in external demand
6
6
Text Figure 7. Output Gap 1/
and a continuation of the present policy
5 (In percent)
5
stance, the staff projects real GDP
4
4
growth to rebound by 5 percent in 2004
3
3
(toward the top of the authorities’ official 2
2
1
growth projection of 3–5 percent). While 1
0
0
exports are expected to be the driver of
-1
-1
the recovery, domestic demand should
-2
-2
also begin to contribute, with a modest
-3
-3
recovery in consumption as confidence
-4
-4
improves and the unemployment rate
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Est.
Proj.
declines, as well as a pickup in
investment as the slack in the economy
dissipates and inventories are rebuilt. Inflation is projected to remain modest at around
1 percent in 2004, due in part to the soft labor market conditions and persistent output gap
(Text Figure 7).
1/ Calculated using the HP filter.

11.
The risks to the outlook are broadly balanced. The main downside risks relate to
the strength of the global and regional recovery, and the possibility that unemployment and
the still depressed property market could become drags on growth. Geo-political tensions,
including the terrorism threat, and the possibility of a return of SARS, while diminishing,
also pose risks. Nevertheless, as Singapore’s external position and financial sector remain
robust, the risk of an economic crisis is remote (Table 5).5 Moreover, there is upside potential
to the 2004 projection, especially if the pickup of external demand gathers further
momentum, and growth in the export sector spills over to domestic demand.

5

The net international investment position was 52 percent of GDP at end-2002. Singapore
does not have any external public debt, and consecutive years of fiscal surpluses have given
rise to a substantial government net asset position estimated at over 50 percent of GDP. The
stock of domestic public debt—amounting to about 100 percent of GDP at end-2003—
consists of CPF investments in nonmarketable government bonds, and government securities
issued to stimulate development of the domestic capital market.

- 11 -

12.
The medium-term outlook depends on the success with which Singapore can
restructure its economy to remain competitive with the region’s low-cost producers.6
The emergence of China and other regional economies no doubt provides opportunities (Text
Figure 8), but it also poses challenges. In addition to the loss of lower-end manufacturing,
Singapore is competing for foreign direct investment flows. Competition from other regional
financial centers and neighboring economies
Text Figure 8. Direction of Trade
could also reduce the demand for Singapore(In percent of total trade)
based financial intermediation, transportation,
1998
2002
and shipping services over the medium term.
Oceania Japan
Oceania Japan
Assuming that the loss of such industries can be
3%
3%
Europe
10%
11%
Europe
China
China
14%
17%
7%
minimized, and that the opportunities afforded
4%
by the region’s expanded markets can be seized,
United
States
the staff’s estimates suggest that potential
14%
United
States
growth over the medium term is likely to be
19%
Other
around 4–5 percent, in line with the authorities’
7%
Other
7
Asia excluding
Asia excluding
estimates (Table 6). The high level of the
7%
Japan and China
Japan and China
39%
45%
current account surplus is projected to narrow in
the years ahead as the economy’s high savings
rate declines because of population ageing, and as investment recovers from its current low
level.
IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
13.
With broad agreement on the assessment of the economic outlook, the
discussions focused on the appropriate policy stance and on structural reforms needed
to raise Singapore’s medium-term growth potential. The thrust of the authorities’
economic policies have been broadly in line with recent Fund recommendations (Text
Table 3). Any differences have largely centered on the pace of reform rather than substance;
on fiscal transparency, however, the authorities remain reluctant to proceed boldly due in part
to concerns of a possible loss in policy flexibility, as well as credibility if targets are not met.
The mission commended the authorities for their pragmatic use of countercyclical policies in

6

While concerns at the sectoral level persist, standard indicators do not reveal an overall
competitiveness problem at present (Figure 3). The real effective exchange rate remains
competitive relative to regional economies, as do unit labor costs.
7

Few observers expect growth to return to the high levels of the 1980s and 1990s, and the
authorities consider the ERC’s growth estimate of 3–5 percent in the medium term to be
realistic. The drop in potential output growth relative to pre-crisis outturns might be
explained by a number of factors, including Singapore’s advanced stage of development,
ongoing corporate restructuring in response to recent economic shocks and external
competition, and a decline in investment rates over the last few years. See the accompanying
Selected Issues paper for a more detailed assessment.

- 12 -

response to adverse shocks
Text Table 3. Fund Article IV Policy Advice, 2000–02
over the past couple of years—
Policy Advice
Status
in contrast to earlier periods
•
Implement macroeconomic policies •
Countercyclical fiscal and
when policies were focused
flexibly.
monetary policies adopted.
almost exclusively on
•
Enhance fiscal and monetary
•
No action in fiscal area; progress
transparency.
made to clarify monetary
medium-term objectives—and,
framework.
with domestic demand still
•
Accelerate GLC privatization.
•
Some limited divestment to date.
weak, encouraged them to
•
Reform CPF scheme to focus on
•
Reforms taken to boost returns to
maintain a supportive policy
core retirement savings objective.
saving and limit pre-retirement
withdrawals.
stance until the recovery
•
Strengthen social safety net.
•
Programs in place to promote job
becomes more broad-based.
search and training.
With respect to structural
•
Further liberalization of domestic
•
Various liberalization measures
reforms, the staff welcomed
financial sector.
adopted.
the government’s endorsement • Remove restrictions on inter•
All but two restrictions removed.
of the ERC recommendations,
national use of Singapore dollar.
but noted that they were
somewhat incremental and had fallen short of market expectations. The mission encouraged
the authorities to consider deepening and accelerating reforms in key areas to foster private
sector growth and enhance the economy’s flexibility. The authorities agreed that further
reforms would be desirable over time, but preferred to proceed cautiously.
A. Fiscal Policy
14.
The mission commended the authorities on their move to an expansionary fiscal
policy in 2003/04, and urged that a supportive stance be maintained in the coming year.
In the staff’s view, there was still ample room for fiscal support given the government’s
strong net asset position, resulting from several consecutive years of accumulated budget
surpluses. The authorities explained that they could have provided even more stimulus in
2003/04, but had exercised restraint, as in their view further stimulus would have been
ineffective given the sizeable leakages due to Singapore’s high degree of external openness.8
15.
The authorities were still in the very early stages of preparing the 2004/05
budget (for submission to Parliament in late February).9 They agreed with the staff on the
merits of maintaining a supportive stance in the coming year—by aiming for an unchanged
fiscal stance (i.e., unchanged structural surplus)—in light of the still weak domestic demand
8

Calls by retailers to defer the scheduled GST increase on January 1, 2004 (from 4 percent to
5 percent) were rejected as (i) the size of the increase was modest; (ii) the contractionary
impact would be offset by the distribution of “Economic Restructuring Shares” (a form of
financial transfer designed to compensate consumers for increase in the GST); and (iii) the
increase had already been partially postponed—a 2 percentage point increase, from 3 percent
to 5 percent had originally been planned for January 1, 2003.
9

An update on the policies and key parameters underlying the 2004/05 budget will be
provided for the forthcoming Board discussion.

- 13 -

conditions. To achieve this, they envisaged further initiatives on the tax side through
additional income tax cuts and rebates (a reduction in the top personal and corporate income
tax rate from 22 to 20 percent is envisaged by 2005, in line with the ERC recommendations)
rather than spending initiatives, whose effectiveness they believe is limited. The mission
largely agreed with this strategy, but saw scope for additional spending in the form of
targeted assistance to unemployed workers. In addition to cushioning the impact on displaced
workers, the staff emphasized that, as Singapore currently has only a very limited program in
place to provide financial assistance to unemployed workers, introduction of a well-designed
and targeted scheme could enhance labor market flexibility by removing obstacles to labor
retrenchment and job search. While agreeing that additional labor market flexibility would be
desirable, the authorities noted that wage flexibility was already increasing, and emphasized
that they had put into place a number of job training and search facilitation programs.
16.
Over the medium term the authorities explained that they plan to gear fiscal
policy toward achieving broad balance. The staff asked whether such an approach was
excessively cautious given the authorities’ substantial net asset position. The authorities
responded that they see scope to respond flexibly to short-term economic shocks, but prefer
to be guided by the overall objective of protecting the budget in anticipation of rising health
care and social services costs associated with an ageing population. They emphasized that, as
Singapore lacks natural resources to fall back on during hard times, one of their key mediumterm policy objectives is to save accumulated surpluses as a cushion against unforeseen
shocks.
17.
The mission emphasized that there is scope to enhance the transparency of fiscal
information and policy making. It noted that the limited availability of information
continues to hamper fiscal policy analysis. In particular, information on consolidated
government accounts remains unavailable, notably with respect to the operation of statutory
boards and the government’s investment income. The mission also noted that it would be
helpful to publish a medium-term budget framework, and to provide information on the
financial operations of the Government Investment Corporation (GIC). The authorities
agreed with the merits of publishing consolidated fiscal accounts, but explained that various
technical issues involving reconciliations of cash versus accrual accounting still needed to be
addressed. They remained reluctant, however, to publish a medium-term budget framework,
given their desire to retain policy flexibility by not committing to any specific fiscal path, and
also concern about a potential loss of credibility if the targets were not achieved. The mission
encouraged the authorities to undertake a fiscal ROSC, as they had previously indicated
would be considered upon completion of the FSAP. They authorities said that a ROSC was
still under consideration, but that no decision had yet been reached.
B. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policy
18.
In view of the low inflation rate and widened output gap, the mission expressed
support for maintaining an easy monetary policy stance. The authorities explained that
they intended to maintain a supportive stance until evidence of inflationary pressures begins
to emerge, which they did not anticipate in the near term. The staff agreed that the level of
the trade-weighted exchange rate appeared broadly appropriate, especially in light of cyclical

- 14 -

conditions; once the recovery took hold, there would be scope for some tightening of the
current easy monetary policy stance, consistent with the price stability objective which,
together with the economic recovery, would enable Singapore to contribute to the adjustment
of global current account imbalances. In the authorities’ view, the substantial widening of the
current account surplus largely reflected weaknesses in domestic demand and structural
factors.10 They expected the surplus to narrow as domestic demand picks up with the
economic recovery.
19.
The authorities considered that their exchange rate based monetary policy
framework continues to perform well, and do not envisage significant changes. While
agreeing that the framework is functioning smoothly, the staff noted that it appeared to
loosely resemble an inflation targeting approach, consistent with the MAS’ objective of price
stability.11 If so, the staff inquired whether there might be gains to adopting such a
framework explicitly. The authorities explained that they prefer not to adopt rigid rules in
their approach to monetary policy making, but to maintain flexibility in response to shocks.
They indicated that they are continuing to evaluate the operation of the monetary regime on
an ongoing basis, and would be prepared to make changes in the future if warranted by
economic circumstances. For the time being, they envisaged that any changes going forward
would be in the direction of strengthening the efficiency of the framework through measures
to enhance transparency (below) and improve understanding of the transmission mechanism
through which the exchange rate affects the real economy.
20.
The mission welcomed recent initiatives by the MAS to enhance the
transparency of its monetary policy framework and policy setting process. Steps over
the past couple of years include publication of the twice-yearly Macroeconomic Review and
Monetary Policy Statement (which, among other things, discloses the broad parameters of the
policy band), dissemination of a series of monographs and guides on monetary policy
operations, and provision of information to market participants on money market
transactions. Such steps have enhanced the market’s understanding of monetary operations
and, in the view of the authorities, have improved the effectiveness of the MAS’ policy
instruments. Nevertheless, the mission noted that there was still scope to clarify monetary
policy implementation, and encouraged the authorities to continue to make further efforts to
enhance the transparency and market’s understanding of the framework. The authorities
explained that they continue to prefer not to disclose the weights used in the trade-weighted
exchange rate index or precise limits of the band. They emphasized, moreover, that they had
already provided sufficient information to the markets to enable analysts to make wellinformed estimates of these parameters. The authorities indicated that they will nevertheless
continue to assess the benefits of releasing additional information against the possible impact
10

As described in the accompanying Selected Issues paper, demographics (i.e., ageing
population) may be a key structural factor underlying the current account surplus.

11

Previous staff research has revealed that the authorities place a high weight on controlling
inflation (see “Singapore’s Unique Monetary Policy: How Does It Work?” WP/04/10).

- 15 -

on policy effectiveness, and will proceed with efforts to enhance transparency, such as
through the annual publication of a review of MAS’ monetary operations.
21.
In line with the recommendations of the FSAP team, the mission also
encouraged the authorities to address the potential for conflicts of interest from the
multiple functions of the MAS Chairman (who currently also serves as Minister of
Finance). While conflicts of interest have so far not arisen, due in part to the government’s
historically strong fiscal position, the authorities were receptive to this recommendation, and
were planning to address it through a review of the MAS Act. They argued, however, that a
limited pool of qualified public servants to fill such positions meant that officials had to serve
occasionally in dual functions.
22.
The mission inquired about the authorities’ plans with respect to removing the
remaining restrictions on the use of the Singapore dollar in international transactions.12
The authorities considered the remaining restrictions to be effective in deterring currency
speculation. They did not believe that the restrictions were inhibiting economic transactions,
a view confirmed by the mission’s and FSAP team’s discussions with market participants.
Nevertheless, they continue to evaluate the pros and cons of retaining the restrictions, and
may consider their elimination in the future.
C. Structural Policies and Other Issues
23.
While the shocks of the past several years have posed challenges for short-term
economic management, the most significant policy issues are structural. Increasing
competition from low-cost regional economies—both in the service and manufacturing
sectors—has raised concerns within Singapore about the economy’s medium-term
competitiveness and growth prospects. The government’s endorsement of the ERC
recommendations is a response to these challenges, and builds on efforts of recent years to
liberalize and diversify the economy and promote flexibility. Of particular importance are
measures to enhance competitiveness and entrepreneurship through, among other things,
divestment of non-strategic GLCs, a shift from direct to indirect taxation, an increase in the
variable component of wages, reforms to the CPF scheme aimed at enhancing its core
retirement savings objective, and a strengthening of job training programs.
24.
The mission encouraged the authorities to accelerate their planned divestment of
GLCs. The authorities maintained that the GLCs are run on commercially sound principles
and do not act as a drain on the public finances. Nevertheless, the mission emphasized that
the public sector retains ownership in GLCs across a broad range of economic activities, and
that anecdotal evidence suggests that GLCs may be stifling competition and
12

In 2002, all but two restrictions on the use of the Singapore dollar in international
transactions were removed. The remaining restrictions pertain to: (i) the requirement that
nonresident financial entities swap Singapore dollar proceeds into foreign currency to finance
activities abroad; and (ii) a prohibition on the extension of credit facilities (in excess of
S$5 million) by domestic financial institutions to nonresidents for speculative purposes.

- 16 -

entrepreneurship. To foster private sector initiative and enhance the economy’s ability to
respond to external competition, therefore, the mission emphasized that it would be desirable
to step up the GLC divestment process, particularly with respect to small- and medium-sized
GLCs, in which there was not an obvious role for the government. The authorities noted that
their objective was to privatize GLCs, except in cases where national strategic and security
interests are at stake (i.e., key utilities, transportation networks, and social services), or where
a given corporation has the potential to grow beyond the domestic market (consistent with
the ERC recommendations and Temasek Charter, which call for GLCs to maintain an
outward orientation). They noted that a number of firms had been wholly or partially
divested in recent years, and that they planned to continue this process as market conditions
permit. To clarify the government’s role in GLCs, they also planned to publish a list of all
GLCs during the course of 2004. The mission noted that it would also be desirable to develop
and publish a broad timeframe for planned divestments. The authorities, however, preferred
to approach divestments on a case-by-case basis, and argued that the divestment schedule
was constrained in part by the limited pool of domestic entrepreneurial talent available to
purchase and run GLCs effectively.
25.
The mission discussed other ways to enhance the economy’s competitiveness. The
authorities noted that they have taken a number of steps, with recent measures including cuts
in corporate and personal income tax rates, a reduction in the employer contribution rate to
the CPF (below), reductions in user fees and charges, and the implementation of programs to
facilitate job search and training. The mission suggested that an acceleration of planned tax
cuts could be considered; while Singapore’s income tax rates are low by international
standards, its corporate tax rate is still some 4½ percentage points above that in Hong Kong
SAR. The mission also suggested that ongoing reviews of government fees and charges,
including with respect to rents on industrial land owned by the government, could be helpful
in determining the scope for further lowering business costs. The authorities broadly agreed
with these suggestions, but did not see scope to accelerate tax cuts, given their objective of
ensuring adequate revenues in advance of the fiscal demands associated with an ageing
population.
26.
While recent reforms to the CPF seek to ensure adequate savings for retirement,
the mission noted that achieving this goal would require further efforts over time. The
authorities’ reform initiatives have been designed to address shortcomings in the CPF savings
scheme; despite a relatively high contribution rate (currently set at 33 percent of wages,
subject to a salary ceiling), retirees often find themselves short of sufficient liquid financial
savings.13 To enhance the return to savings portfolios, CPF contributors have been permitted
13

These shortcomings were documented in a recent Selected Issues paper (IMF Country
Report No. 00/83). The CPF was established in 1955 as a core retirement scheme, but over
time has been amended by permitting withdrawals from retirement accounts for specified
purposes in order to advance various national objectives, including universal home
ownership. Given the large share of wealth held in the form of home ownership, retirees in
Singapore often face the dilemma of being “asset rich, but cash poor.”

- 17 -

to invest a portion of their savings in privately managed investment funds. Rules for
withdrawing contributions for purposes other than saving for retirement have also been
tightened, with a notable reduction in the amounts available for housing financing. Even after
these initiatives, however, the projected income replacement ratio (defined as the amount of
cash available at retirement as a share of recent wage earnings) remains low, at about 20–40
percent, according to the government’s estimates. The authorities accepted the need for
further reforms, which will become more 0.6
0.6
Text Figure 9. Old Age Dependency Ratios 1/
pressing after the year 2010, when the
0.5
0.5
number of retirees is projected to
accelerate (Text Figure 9). The mission
0.4
0.4
Singapore
therefore encouraged them to consider a
Japan
Korea
more fundamental reform of the CPF
0.3
0.3
system, which would, among other
Thailand
Hong Kong
0.2
0.2
things, further reduce withdrawals from
Malaysia
retirement accounts for home financing.
0.1
0.1
Moreover, with wage flexibility on the
0.0
0.0
rise, the mission encouraged the
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
authorities to refrain from adjusting the
employer contribution rate as a countercyclical instrument (the authorities currently envisage a variable rate of 10–16 percent, or an
overall contribution rate of 30–36 percent, which would fluctuate depending on economic
conditions). The mission argued that an early return to a stable contribution rate would assist
in refocusing the CPF toward its core savings objective.
Source: UN World Population Projections
1/ Ratio defined as retired-age population (+65 years) divided by working-age population (15 to 64 years).

27.
The mission commended the authorities on their continued support of free trade.
The authorities explained that they remained fully committed to the multilateral approach to
trade liberalization, including in the context of the Doha Round. They have also aggressively
pursued free trade agreements, having concluded a pact over the last year with the United
States (Box 3). The authorities view their free trade agreements as useful catalysts for
regional and broader multilateral initiatives.
28.
The FSAP team concluded that Singapore’s financial sector remains robust,
despite the series of economic shocks and asset price declines of the past few years
(Box 4 and attached Financial System Stability Assessment). Both local and major foreign
bank branches remained profitable, and their balance sheets healthy. The authorities agreed
with the FSAP findings, and noted that they were already taking steps to address the key
recommendations, including a review of the MAS Act with a view to strengthening the
MAS’ accountability and independence. The authorities are also reviewing the relatively high
capital adequacy requirements for local banks (12 percent of total risk-weighted assets),
which have put pressure on local banks’ returns on equity. The authorities were relatively
optimistic about Singapore’s ability to retain its status as a major financial center over the
medium term. They noted in particular Singapore’s reputation for good governance, strong
macroeconomic fundamentals, well-developed infrastructure, and sound legal and regulatory
framework. While pressures were increasing from lower-cost regional competitors, the
authorities believed that Singapore was likely to retain higher-value added activities. The
main constraint, in their view, was related to the small size of the domestic market and the

- 18 -

Box 3. Singapore’s Free Trade Agreements
Singapore is highly trade-dependent, with one of the highest trade-to-GDP ratios in the world
(at over 270 percent of GDP). The country is a member of various multilateral and regional trade
organizations, including the WTO and ASEAN. In addition to participating in multilateral
initiatives, the authorities have also sought bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs), which they
believe serve as a catalyst to broader trade liberalization initiatives, and have concluded discussions
with a number of strategic trading partners. Singapore’s bilateral FTAs are WTO-compliant and are
viewed by the authorities as complements to other multilateral initiatives. FTAs have been
concluded with New Zealand, Japan, European Free Trade Association (EFTA), Australia and the
U.S. (below), and negotiations are ongoing with ASEAN, Canada, China, Korea, India, Jordan,
Mexico, “Pacific-3,” Panama, and Sri Lanka. As Singapore has almost no import tariffs (apart from
tariffs on six categories of alcoholic beverages), the concessions it has offered to negotiating
partners have mainly involved foreign access to service industries in Singapore (such as banking),
stronger protection of intellectual property rights, and introduction of a new competition law to
level the playing field for companies competing against Singaporean firms.1
An important agreement was reached last August, when Singapore and the U.S. concluded an
FTA (the U.S. is Singapore’s largest source of foreign investment and its second largest trading
partner, constituting 14 percent of its total trade). The
agreement came into force on January 1, 2004, and marks
Direction of Trade
the first bilateral FTA signed by the U.S. with an Asian
(In percent of total trade)
state. Its primary goal is to open up the U.S. market further
to Singapore’s merchandise exports, in return for access by
2002
U.S. firms to Singapore’s service sector, particularly the
financial sector. The agreement also encompasses
Oceania Japan
intellectual property rights and electronic commerce. Under
3%
10%
Europe
China
the terms of the treaty the U.S. is to eliminate tariffs on all
14%
7%
products originating from Singapore (92 percent of such
tariffs will be eliminated within the first four years of the
FTA). This would result in an estimated S$200–300 million
United
worth of tariff savings per year for Singapore companies. In
States
return, Singapore is to remove its existing tariffs on goods
14%
(alcoholic beverages) from the U.S.
Another significant FTA was implemented with Japan in
Other
7%
2002. The Japan-Singapore FTA is similar in scope to the
U.S. treaty, with about 94 percent of Singapore’s exports to
Asia excluding
Japan being made duty-free. In return, Singapore has
Japan and China
45%
removed its tariffs on imports from Japan and provided
access to its service sector. The treaties with Australia, New
Zealand and the European Free Trade Area (EFTA) are likely to have a relatively smaller economic
impact, since these economies account for a fairly small share of Singapore’s total trade (see
figure).
_______________________
1
Any negative welfare effects of trade diversion on Singapore would be minimal given the absence
of tariffs.

- 19 -

Box 4. Findings of the Financial System Stability Assessment
The recent FSAP exercise determined that Singapore’s financial system remains robust,
even after the recent economic downturns and substantial asset price declines. Singapore’s
local banks, which dominate the domestic retail banking sector, are profitable and well
capitalized. They are also liquid, adequately provisioned for nonperforming asset exposures,
and conservative in their management practices. The insurance sector is also well capitalized
and profitable overall. Its links to the banking sector are not systemically important despite
some cross-ownership. Stress test results indicate that Singapore’s systemically important
banks (including major foreign bank branches) and insurance companies could still withstand
significant shocks.
The FSAP team found that regulatory and supervisory practices exhibit a high degree of
observance of international standards and codes across all segments of the financial
sector. Singapore’s financial sector also benefits from an efficient legal system, accounting
standards that closely follow international best practices, and ongoing initiatives to promote
good corporate governance and strengthen the framework of disclosure practices.
Nevertheless, there is scope for MAS to further enhance regulatory and supervisory
practices. The FSAP team’s recommendations include: (i) further enhancing the legal and
regulatory frameworks for risk-based capital requirements; (ii) reducing the potential for
conflicts of interest arising from the multiple responsibilities of the Chairman of the MAS; (iii)
disclosing more information on recent developments in the financial sector and supervisory
actions to enable the public to better assess the supervisory performance of MAS under the
risk-based regulatory framework; and (iv) strengthening macro prudential monitoring in the
areas of cross-border flows, derivative activities, and the balance sheets of the household and
corporate sectors.
While the MAS’ conservative regulatory and supervisory framework has helped local
banks weather a series of adverse shocks, it may also serve to constrain local banks’
future growth. Local banks have consistently reported strong returns on assets, but their
relatively high capitalization rates have limited their equity returns compared with many
internationally active banks. The MAS is reviewing the regulatory minimum requirements for
capital.
A further deepening of the corporate bond market would help to diversify funding
sources for the corporate sector. Notwithstanding a number of recent initiatives to facilitate
market development, the corporate bond market in Singapore is not yet at an advanced stage of
development. Market growth has been constrained by the size and structure of the domestic
economy and ample liquidity in the banking system. To further boost bond market activity, the
FSAP team has encouraged the authorities to review and address factors that may constrain the
corporate bond market, including the limited use of credit ratings, the guaranteed interest rates
of the CPF, and the CPF investment policy which segments large long-term funds from local
capital markets.
Singapore has in place a sound and comprehensive legal, institutional, policy and
supervisory framework for AML/CFT. The legal system is well regarded, with a low crime
rate, an intolerance for corruption, and an efficient judiciary. Nevertheless, there is scope for
improving the effectiveness of cross border mutual legal assistance.

- 20 -

lack of a natural “hinterland” (such as the role that China plays for Hong Kong SAR). They
plan to address these shortcomings through policies to further develop the domestic capital
market and wealth management industry.14
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
29.
The Singapore economy is recovering from another turbulent year. Following the
shocks associated with the Asian financial crisis and bursting of the tech bubble over the last
several years, the economy was buffeted in 2003 by the fallout from the SARS epidemic,
resulting in a sharp economic contraction during the second quarter. Nevertheless, output
growth for the year remained positive, at close to 1 percent, and a strong economic recovery
has taken hold, led by external demand. GDP growth for 2004 appears likely to reach around
5 percent, and could well be even higher. While the outlook has brightened, the
unemployment rate remains high by historical standards, and the authorities recognize the
importance of addressing structural reforms if the economy is to meet the challenges of rising
competitive pressures from low cost regional producers over the medium term.
30.
The authorities are to be commended for their pragmatic macroeconomic policy
response to the economic downturn in 2003. Supportive fiscal and monetary policies
helped to cushion the impact of the SARS-induced economic shock. While it is appropriate
for the authorities to retain a medium-term focus for economic policies, they should be
prepared to continue to use macroeconomic policy instruments to counter economic shocks,
given Singapore’s high degree of exposure to the volatile external environment.
31.
Fiscal policy in FY2003/04 became appropriately expansionary, with the revised
budget providing welcome stimulus in response to the economic downturn. The
initiatives to provide targeted support to SARS-inflicted sectors of the economy were
particularly welcome, as were measures to support wage flexibility to maintain
competitiveness and ease the impact on employment. With domestic demand still recovering,
the authorities are encouraged to maintain a supportive fiscal policy stance in period ahead.
32.
The easing of monetary policy in July 2003 through the announced recentering
of the MAS’ exchange rate policy band was also welcome. In the absence of inflationary
pressures, and with domestic demand still weak, it remains appropriate to maintain a
supportive monetary policy stance. Once the recovery takes hold, there should be scope for
some tightening of the current easy monetary policy stance, consistent with the price stability
objective which, together with the economic recovery, would enable Singapore to contribute
to the adjustment of global current account imbalances. While the MAS’ monetary policy
framework centered on the management of the trade-weighted exchange rate has continued to
serve the economy well, the authorities have made welcome strides to improve the
effectiveness of the framework by enhancing the transparency of the policy setting process
and disseminating operational background materials to the market. The staff encourages that
such efforts be continued.
14

See the accompanying Selected Issues paper on bond market development.

- 21 -

33.
The authorities appropriately recognize that the most significant policy
challenges they face over the medium term are on the structural reform front. Rising
competition from the region’s low costs producers is fostering structural changes in the
economy, shifting from lower end manufacturing and services to higher value added
activities. The government’s endorsement of the ERC recommendations is helpful, as their
implementation over time will help foster entrepreneurship and improve the economy’s
overall competitiveness. Of special importance are initiatives to lower income tax rates,
enhance labor market flexibility, and reduce the government’s role in the economy through
the divestment of GLCs. Nevertheless, further efforts will be needed to meet the competitive
challenges that lie ahead. The staff encourages the authorities to consider accelerating the
divestment of GLCs where possible, in order to promote entrepreneurship and increase the
role of the private sector. The staff commends recent initiatives to ensure adequate savings
for retirees under the CPF scheme. Steps taken in recent years to increase the returns to assets
by permitting savers to invest in privately managed investment funds are welcome, as are
efforts to shift the scheme away from promotion of housing financing back toward the CPF’s
core function as a retirement scheme. In this regard, the staff also encourages the authorities
to consider an early return to a stable contribution rate.
34.
The FSAP has concluded that Singapore’s financial system is resilient to
economic shocks, and remains healthy after the economic downturns of recent years.
Good progress has been made to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework for riskbased supervision. The staff also welcomes the ongoing review of the MAS Act, which seeks
to address the potential for conflict arising from the multiple official responsibilities of the
Chairman of the MAS, and to improve the institutional decision-making process and
disclosure policy. This initiative should help to safeguard Singapore’s track record of good
performance and the future integrity of the monetary and financial policy framework. The
authorities are also encouraged to implement the remaining recommendations of the FSAP
team, including to enhance the transparency of how supervisory decisions are taken, disclose
more information to assess supervisory performance, and strengthen the MAS’ macroprudential monitoring.
35.
There is scope to enhance the transparency of fiscal policy information. The
authorities are encouraged to develop and publish consolidated sets of fiscal accounts, and to
provide more information on the government’s investment income, including with respect to
the financial operations of the GIC. Such efforts would facilitate fiscal policy analysis.
36.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Singapore be held
on the standard 12-month cycle.

- 22 Figure 1. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators
Annual percent change
15

Annual percent change
15

Real GDP Growth

10

10

Consumer Price Inflation

Proj.

10

Proj.
8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

10

5

5

0

0

Singapore
Korea
-5

-5

Malaysia
Hong Kong

1995

-4

sgpsr02b

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Percent of GDP
16

-6

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2002

2003

2004

-6

January 1996=100
180

180

160

160

140

140

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

Stock Market Indices

12

Hong Kong

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

40

Singapore
Korea
Malaysia

40

20

Hong Kong

20

-4

sgpsr02c

1995

2001

Proj.

Singapore 1/
Korea
Malaysia

12

-10

16

Central Government Fiscal Balance

-8

-2

Malaysia
Hong Kong

-4

sgpsr02a

-10

Singapore
Korea

-2

sgpsr02d

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-8

0

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities.
1/ Overall balance on a calendar year basis.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 23 Figure 2. Singapore: Labor and Asset Market Developments
Four-quarter moving average, 1998Q4=100
200

In percent; seasonally adjusted
200

Real Estate Property Prices

180

6.0

6.0

Unemployment Rate

5.5

5.5

5.0

5.0

4.5

4.5

4.0

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0

180
Residential

160

160

140

140

120

120

100

100

Office space
80

80
1.5
sgpsr05a

60

1.5
sgpsr05b

60

1.0

January 1995=100
180

180

Four-quarter percent change
20

160

160

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Stock Exchange: Straits Times Index

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1.0

20

Labor Costs

16

16
Monthly earnings

140

12

12

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

-4

140

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

-8

40

40

-12

-12

-16

-16

sgpsr05c

20

1995

-8
Unit
labor costs

sgpsr05d

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

20

-20

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-20

Sources: CEIC Database; and data provided by the Singapore authorities.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 24 Figure 3. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators
Annual percent change
50

Percent of GDP
50

Export Growth 1/
Singapore
Korea

40

40

Malaysia
Hong Kong
30

35

35

Current Account Balance

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

Singapore
Korea
Malaysia
Hong Kong

-5
-20

-20

1995

sgpsr03b

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

January 1995=100
140

Real Effective Exchange Rates

130

-30

-15

140

1995=100; U.S. dollar basis
160

130
China

120

120

110

110
India

100

100

90

90

80

80
Singapore
China

70

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-15

160

Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing

Proj.
Korea
Taiwan, P.O.C

140

140

Hong Kong
Singapore
120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

60

Korea
50

50
sgpsr03c

1995

1995

70

Hong Kong
India
Malaysia

60

40

-10

-10

sgpsr03a

-30

-5

sgpsr03d

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

40

0

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities.
1/ Exports of goods and services, BOP basis.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 25 Figure 4. Singapore: Monetary and Fiscal Indicators
Twelve-month percent change
30

In percent
30

Money and Credit 1/

27

27

23

23

20

20

Private sector
credit

17

11

11

10

10

8

8

13

10

10
M3

7

Three-month SIBOR
( U.S. dollar)

7

Prime rate

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

2

2

3

3
0

0

-3

-3

-7

-7

1995

1

sgpsr06c

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Percent of GDP
45

-10

45

Central Government Revenue

0

Capital and investment

40

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Percent of GDP
36

Proj.
Current
Development
Net lending

32

0

36

Central Government Expenditure

Proj.
Tax
Non-tax

40

Three-month
Interbank rate

1

sgpsr06a

-10

12

Interest Rates

17

13

7

12

32

Total
35

35

28

28

30

30

24

24

25

25

20

20

20

20

16

16

15

15

12

12

10

8

sgpsr06b

10

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

sgpsr06b

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

8

Sources: CEIC Database; and data provided by the Singapore authorities.
1/ Adjusted for the purchase of POSBank by DBS Bank in November 1998.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 26 Figure 5. Singapore: External Developments
Twelve-month percent change
40

Percent of GDP
40

Trade Volume
Domestic
exports

30

30

20

20

Percent of GDP
20

Invisibles Balance

16

Transfers
Total

20
12

10

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

-4

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

Imports

-30

-30
sgpsr04a

1995

sgpsr04b

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Billions of Singapore dollars
15

-40

15

Balance of Payments

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-8

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

July 1997=100
115

-8

115

Exchange Rates
U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar

110

Japanese yen / Singapore dollar
NEER
REER

105

110

105

100

100

95

95

90

90

85

85

80

80

-20

75

75

-25

70

-10

-15

-15
Current account
Capital and financial account
Overall balance

-20
sgpsr04c

-25

12

10

0

-40

16

Services
Income

1995

sgpsr04d

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

70

Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 27 Figure 6. Singapore: Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity
Quarter-on-quarter percent change; seasonally adjusted
15

15

12

12

9

9

6

6

3

3

0

0

-3

-3

-6

-6

Real Gross Domestic Product

Year-on year percent change
40

40

Real Domestic Demand

30

Real GDP
Manufacturing
Business and financial services

-9
-12

1996

1997

1998

1999

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-12
2000

2001

2002

2003

1995=100
150

-15

Percent
40

Leading Economic Indicators

30

140

20

-9

sgpsr01a

-15 1995

General business expectations 1/
(right scale)

20

130

sgpsr01b

-30 1995

1996

1997

0
110
-10
100

-20

Composite leading
indicators 2/
(left scale)

-30

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

70

60

60

50

50

Global Semiconductor Market Developments 3/

40

40
Shipments
(three-month
moving average)

20

30
Sales

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-30

-30

-40
80

sgpsr01c

-40
sgpsr01d

-40

-50

Billions of Singapore dollars
3.5

3.5

Billions of Singapore dollars
10

3.0

3.0

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Investment Commitments in Manufacturing

Total

2.5

2.5

1995

1996

1997

2.0

1.5

1.5

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

-50

10

Construction Contracts Awarded

9

9

8

8

7

7
Total

6
2.0

-30

Year-on-year percent change; U.S. dollars
70

30
10
120

90

30

Total domestic demand
Private consumption
Gross fixed capital formation

6

5

5

4

4

Public

3

3

2

2

Foreign
1.0

1.0

1
0.5

sgpsr01e

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0.5

0

1

Private
sgpsr01f

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

0

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities.
1/ Percentage change of firms expecting an improvement in business conditions in the manufacturing sector.
2/ The composite leading index has nine components which include money stock, stock of finished goods, company formation,wholesale
price changes in manufactured goods, inverted real unit labor costs for manufacturing, inverted default rates for manufacturing,
the business forecast for wholesale trade, new orders, and the stock price index.
3/ Based on data by the Semiconductor Industry Association. Reflects value of shipments in a single month. Sales data are on an annual basis.

q:/data/sgp/charts/artiv03/sgpsrcht.cmd

- 28 -

Table 1. Singapore: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998–2004
Nominal GDP (2002): US$87.0 billion

GDP per capita (2002): US$20,887

Population (2003): 4.19 million

Quota: SDR 862.5 million
1998

Growth (percent change)
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in inventories (contribution to GDP growth)

-0.9
-10.7
-3.7
-1.8
-6.0

1999

2000

6.4
7.1
2.3
7.9
-4.9

2001

9.4
15.5
12.0
14.8
7.9

-2.4
-7.4
-0.1
3.6
-5.8

2002

2003

2004

Est.

Proj.

2.2
-2.3
-2.5
1.7
-9.7

0.8
-7.5
-1.4
0.5
-5.1

5.0
6.2
3.1
3.1
3.0

-6.2

3.7

2.6

-6.2

0.3

-4.6

1.9

8.8

1.2

-2.6

3.9

4.1

7.2

0.8

Exports of goods and services

-5.3

9.0

14.2

-6.6

4.0

9.3

7.0

Imports of goods and services

-10.8

9.5

17.8

-9.5

1.9

6.2

7.9

Net exports (contribution to GDP growth)

`
Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Gross capital formation

55.0
32.3

51.1
32.4

46.8
32.3

43.2
24.2

42.1
20.6

44.5
15.0

44.9
17.0

Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent)
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

-0.3
3.2

0.0
3.5

1.3
3.1

1.0
3.3

-0.4
4.4

0.5
4.7

1.2
4.2

Central government budget (percent of GDP) 1/
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Primary operating balance 2/

30.8
29.1
1.7
0.5

29.9
24.3
5.6
3.5

29.6
20.7
8.9
1.1

27.5
24.0
3.5
-3.5

23.2
18.9
4.3
-2.8

22.0
21.3
0.7
-4.8

22.4
21.4
0.9
-4.5

8.0
8.0
1.9

7.3
-3.0
2.8

-1.8
5.9
2.8

4.0
16.3
1.3

-0.8
-8.6
0.8

5.9
5.4
0.8

Merchandise trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade

-0.3
-12.9
0.1

5.4
9.5
-0.8

16.8
14.8
-2.5

-8.6
-12.4
-1.8

4.4
1.2
-0.8

12.2
7.3
0.3

7.2
8.0
0.0

Balance of payments (US$ billion)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Balance on goods
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Overall balance

18.5
(22.6)
14.3
110.4
-96.1
3.0

15.2
(18.7)
12.0
116.6
-104.6
4.3

13.3
(14.5)
12.3
139.9
-127.6
6.9

16.1
(19.0)
14.8
124.4
-109.7
-0.9

18.7
(21.5)
18.5
128.4
-109.8
1.3

27.1
(29.5)
27.7
148.2
-120.5
11.7

27.9
(27.9)
29.5
163.4
-133.9
3.0

International reserves and external debt
Gross official reserves (US$ billion)
(In months of imports) 5/
Gross external debt (US$ billion) 6/
(In percent of GDP)

75.0
(7.0)
9.2
(11.1)

77.2
(6.0)
11.7
(14.1)

80.4
(7.1)
11.9
(13.1)

75.8
(6.6)
15.2
(18.5)

82.3
(6.6)
15.9
(17.8)

96.3
(7.0)
...
...

...
...
...
...

Exchange rate (end of period)
S$/US$
Nominal effective exchange rate 7/
Real effective exchange rate 7/

1.661
125.6
114.0

1.666
119.2
106.8

1.732
119.5
106.9

1.851
121.2
107.7

1.737
120.2
105.2

1.701
115.8
100.3

1.696 4/
...
...

Money and credit (end of period, percent change)
Broad money (M3) 3/
Credit to private sector
Interest rate (three-month interbank, in percent)

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year beginning on April 1.
2/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers.
3/ Adjusted for the acquisition of POSBank by the Development Bank of Singapore in November 1998.
4/ As of February 6, 2004.
5/ In months of next year's imports of goods and services.
6/ Based on BIS data; corporate bonds outstanding and the external bank claims by the BIS reporting countries.
7/ IMF Information Notice System monthly index (1990 = 100); period average.

...
...
0.8 4/

- 29 -

Table 2. Singapore: Balance of Payments, 1998–2004 1/
(In billions of U.S. dollars)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004
Proj.

Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which : electronics exports
Imports, f.o.b.
Services balance
Income balance
Transfer payments (net)

18.5
14.3
110.4
59.7
-96.1
2.9
2.4
-1.1

15.2
12.0
116.6
63.0
-104.6
2.4
1.8
-1.0

13.3
12.3
139.9
77.0
-127.6
2.2
-0.1
-1.1

16.1
14.8
124.4
64.1
-109.7
2.0
0.5
-1.1

18.7
18.5
128.4
65.1
-109.8
2.4
-1.1
-1.1

27.1
27.7
148.2
…
-120.5
3.0
-2.5
-1.1

27.9
29.5
163.4
…
-133.9
2.8
-3.1
-1.2

Net capital flows 2/
Capital and financial account balance
Capital account (net)
Financial account (net)
Direct investment (net)
Portfolio investment (net)
Other investment (net)
Net errors and omissions

-15.6
-18.9
-0.2
-18.7
7.2
-9.5
-16.5
3.3

-10.9
-12.9
-0.2
-12.8
7.9
-8.9
-11.7
2.1

-6.4
-2.1
-0.2
-1.9
6.4
-13.5
5.2
-4.3

-17.0
-15.5
-0.2
-15.4
1.4
-11.1
-5.7
-1.5

-17.4
-15.8
-0.2
-15.7
2.0
-12.6
-5.0
-1.6

-15.4
-13.0
-0.2
-12.8
3.5
-10.4
-5.9
-2.4

-24.9
-24.9
-0.2
-24.7
3.5
-13.8
-14.4
0.0

3.0

4.3

6.9

-0.9

1.3

11.7

3.0

22.6

18.7

14.5

19.0

21.5

29.5

27.9

...
...

...
...

...
...

40.4
47.6

45.1
51.8

...
...

...
...

Overall balance
Memorandum item:
Current account as percent of GDP
Net international investment postion
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
(In percent of GDP)

Sources: Monetary Authority of Singapore, Economic Survey of Singapore; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data for the current account balance, the capital and financial account balance, and net errors and ommissions are converted to
U.S. dollars from the official presentation in Singapore dollars using period-average exchange rate.
2/ Including net errors and omissions.

- 30 -

Table 3. Singapore: Monetary Survey, 1998–2003
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002
Mar.

2003
June

Sept.

Nov.

(In billions of Singapore dollars at end-period)
Net foreign assets
Monetary authorities
Deposit money banks 1/

115.5
124.3
-8.8

131.0
127.1
3.8

126.3
137.8
-11.5

132.9
138.6
-5.7

133.2
141.5
-8.3

140.1
146.3
-6.2

144.1
151.4
-7.3

141.9
156.1
-14.2

149.0
160.7
-11.7

Domestic credit (net)
Claims on private sector
Claims on government (net)

122.1
154.9
-32.8

121.8
150.2
-28.4

126.6
159.1
-32.5

144.6
185.1
-40.4

121.3
169.1
-47.7

125.1
168.0
-42.9

127.2
172.7
-45.5

128.7
174.6
-45.8

133.2
177.0
-43.8

Other items (net)

-76.9

-78.3

-82.1

-96.6

-74.2

-81.7

-86.7

-85.5

-88.7

M2
M1
Quasi-money

160.8
27.2
133.5

174.5
31.1
143.4

170.9
33.3
137.6

180.9
36.1
144.8

180.3
35.8
144.5

183.5
36.9
146.7

184.7
36.7
147.9

185.1
38.0
147.1

193.5
38.6
154.8

-2.4
1.0
2.9
1.7

6.3
2.8
4.8
3.6

8.8
3.6
7.7
5.6

(Annual percentage change)
Domestic credit
Claims on private sector
M2
M3
Source: International Financial Statistics , IMF.
1/ Commercial banks.

18.2
8.0
30.2
8.0

-0.3
-3.0
8.5
7.3

4.0
5.9
-2.0
-1.8

14.2
16.3
5.9
4.0

-16.1
-8.6
-0.3
-0.8

-4.7
-0.6
0.5
-0.1

- 31 Table 4. Singapore: Summary of Government Operations, 1998/99–2003/04
(In percent of GDP)
1998/99

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

Budget

Act.

Budget 1/

Proj. 2/

Total revenue
Current revenue
Tax revenue
Investment income 3/
Other nontax revenue
Capital revenue 4/

30.8
24.3
16.0
3.6
4.7
6.4

29.9
26.1
15.9
4.6
5.6
3.8

29.6
25.4
16.0
5.8
3.6
4.2

27.5
24.4
16.0
5.5
2.9
3.2

23.4
21.7
14.4
4.8
2.5
1.7

23.2
21.5
13.7
5.2
2.5
1.7

22.2
20.9
13.6
4.6
2.8
1.2

22.0
20.8
13.4
4.6
2.8
1.2

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Operating expenditure
Debt servicing
Agency fees on land sales
Investment expenses
Transfer payments
Development expenditure and net lending
Development expenditure 5/
Net lending
Fund transfers 6/

29.1
11.9
10.9
0.7
0.0
0.2
0.0
17.2
9.1
8.1
0.0

24.3
11.5
10.4
0.6
0.0
0.2
0.3
12.6
7.2
5.4
0.2

20.7
12.9
11.5
0.3
0.0
0.4
0.6
7.3
5.9
1.4
0.5

24.0
15.7
12.2
0.3
0.0
0.4
2.7
7.5
6.9
0.6
0.7

21.2
13.2
12.3
0.3
0.0
0.7
0.0
8.0
6.6
1.4
0.0

18.9
13.7
12.3
0.3
0.0
0.3
0.8
4.8
5.5
-0.7
0.4

20.6
13.7
12.5
0.2
0.0
0.6
0.4
6.9
6.9
0.1
0.0

21.3
14.0
12.9
0.2
0.0
0.6
0.4
7.3
7.2
0.1
0.0

1.7
0.5

5.6
3.5

8.9
1.1

3.5
-3.5

2.2
-2.7

4.3
-2.8

1.5
-4.0

0.7
-4.8

12.5
1.3
2.2
84.0
43.5

14.4
3.4
-2.1
91.2
45.4

12.0
0.1
3.3
85.2

7.9
-3.2
3.3
98.0

8.4
-2.5
-0.6

7.3
-2.6
-0.5
100.7

7.2
-3.6
0.9

38.4

58.8

Overall balance
Primary operating balance 7/
Memorandum items:
Government saving
Structural primary operating balance 8/
Fiscal impulse based on operating balance 9/
Government domestic debt 10/
Of which : Central Provident Fund

...
...

60.6

...
...

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Original budget, excluding supplementary budgets. Fiscal year runs from April 1 through March 31.
2/ Includes supplementary budget measures announced in mid-April and in late August.
3/ Includes all investment income from government assets and interest earnings on development loans from 2000/01.
4/ Sale of government property.
5/ Includes the land reclamation expenditure.
6/ Includes transfers to the Edusave Endowment Fund, the Medical Endowment Fund, the Lifelong Learning Endowment Fund and the ElderCare Fund.
7/ Overall balance excluding investment income, capital revenue, debt service, net lending, and fund transfers.
8/ Calculated with the elasticity of revenue with respect to output equal to 1.1, and a zero elasticity of expenditure with respect to output.
9/ Calculated as an increase in the structural primary operating deficit.
10/ Data for end of calendar year.
11/ As of end-September.

6.8
-4.4
1.8
103.6 11/
62.3 11/

- 32 -

Table 5. Singapore: Indicators of Vulnerability, 1998–2003

Financial sector indicators
Broad money (M3, percent change, y/y)
Private sector credit (percent change, y/y)
Credit to the property sector (percent change, y/y)
Share of property-sector credit in total non-bank credit (percent)
Credit rating of local banks (S&P) 1/
Three-month Interbank rate (percent, end-year)
NPL ratio (Singapore-incorporate banks, percent)
Capital adequacy ratio of local banks (percent)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Date

8.0
8.0
16.7
37.8
AA/A
1.9
11.0
18.1

7.3
-3.0
2.1
39.8
A
2.8
12.2
20.6

-1.8
5.9
9.6
41.7
A+/A
2.8
9.1
19.6

4.0
16.3
6.4
41.9
A+/A
1.3
8.0
18.1

-0.8
-8.6
2.4
43.4
A+/A
0.8
7.7
16.9

5.9
5.4
12.2
45.8
A+/A
0.8
7.0
17.8

Dec-03
Dec-03
Dec-03
Dec-03
Dec-03
Dec-03
Sep-03
Sep-03

Asset market indicators
Stock prices (percent change, y/y)
P/E ratio
Stock prices of the finance sector (percent change, y/y)
Real estate prices (1998Q4=100) 2/
Residential
Office space

-7.6
19.0
4.0

78.0
99.2
120.6

-22.3
20.9
-23.2

-15.7
16.8
-1.9

-17.4
21.2
-13.5

31.6
24.5
23.8

Dec-03
Nov-03
Dec-03

118.3
117.8

121.3
93.3

137.1
116.6

123.4
107.8

115.4
88.3

113.3
76.5

2003Q4
2003Q4

External Indicators
Current account balance (US$ billion)
(In percent of GDP)
Gross official reserves (US$ billion)
(In month of next year's imports of goods and services)
Real exchange rate (end of period, 1990=100)
Sovereign yield spread (in percent) 3/

18.5
22.6
75.0
7.0
108.3
…

15.2
18.7
77.2
6.0
106.0
…

13.3
14.5
80.4
7.1
109.1
2.1

16.1
19.0
75.8
6.6
105.6
2.1

18.7
21.5
82.3
6.6
104.4
1.5

7.2
30.6
96.3
7.0
97.4
0.9

2003Q3
2003Q3
Dec-03

9.2
11.1
6.9
0.0

11.7
14.1
8.2
0.0

11.9
13.1
7.1
0.0

15.2
18.5
9.9
0.0

15.9
17.8
10.1
0.0

...
...
...
...

External debt (US$ billion) 4/
(In percent of GDP)
(In percent of exports of goods and services)
Of which: Public sector external debt

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities and IMF, Information Notice System.
1/ Ratings of the three major local banks.
2/ Based on four-quarter moving average.
3/ Spread of 10-year U.S. dollar-denominated bond issued by DBS over the U.S. government bond.
4/ Based on BIS data; corporate bonds outstanding and the external bank claims by the BIS reporting countries.

Dec-03
Dec-03

- 33 -

Table 6. Singapore: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2000–2009
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Real growth (percent change)
GDP
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in inventories 1/
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

9.4
15.5
12.0
14.8
7.9
2.6
14.2
17.8

-2.4
-7.4
-0.1
3.6
-5.8
-6.2
-6.6
-9.5

2.2
-2.3
-2.5
1.7
-9.7
0.3
4.0
1.9

0.8
-7.5
-1.4
0.5
-5.1
-4.6
9.3
6.2

5.0
6.2
3.1
3.1
3.0
1.9
7.0
7.9

4.0
4.3
3.9
3.7
4.2
0.0
6.2
7.2

4.3
4.7
4.3
4.1
4.7
0.0
6.0
7.0

4.5
5.1
4.6
4.3
5.3
0.0
6.0
6.9

4.6
5.4
4.9
4.5
5.7
0.0
6.1
6.8

4.6
5.6
5.2
4.7
6.1
0.0
6.0
6.8

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Central government
Private and other
Gross fixed capital formation

46.8
13.1
33.7
30.0

43.2
9.6
33.7
29.5

42.1
7.9
34.2
25.7

44.5
7.0
37.5
23.9

44.9
7.0
38.0
24.0

44.0
7.1
36.9
24.3

43.4
7.1
36.3
24.5

42.8
7.1
35.7
24.9

42.3
7.1
35.2
25.4

41.6
7.1
34.5
26.0

1.3
3.1

1.0
3.3

-0.4
4.4

0.5
4.7

1.2
4.2

1.5
3.8

1.5
3.4

1.5
3.3

1.5
3.3

1.5
3.3

Central government (percent of GDP) 2/
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Primary operating balance 3/

29.7
21.6
8.1
1.7

28.0
23.2
4.9
-2.3

24.3
20.2
4.1
-3.0

22.3
20.7
1.6
-4.3

22.3
21.4
0.9
-4.6

22.4
21.4
1.0
-4.5

22.4
21.4
1.0
-4.5

22.4
21.4
1.0
-4.5

22.4
21.4
1.0
-4.5

22.4
21.4
1.0
-4.5

Merchandise trade (percent change)
Export volume
Import volume
Terms of trade 4/

16.8
14.8
-2.5

-8.6
-12.4
-1.8

4.4
1.2
-0.8

12.2
7.3
0.3

7.2
8.0
0.0

6.2
7.1
0.3

6.1
7.0
0.2

6.1
7.0
0.1

6.2
7.0
0.1

6.2
7.0
0.0

13.3
(14.5)
12.3
139.9
-127.6
6.9
80.4
(7.1)

16.1
(19.0)
14.8
124.4
-109.7
-0.9
75.8
(6.6)

18.7
(21.5)
18.5
128.4
-109.8
1.3
82.3
(6.6)

27.1
(29.5)
27.7
148.2
-120.5
11.7
96.3
(7.0)

27.9
(27.9)
29.5
163.4
-133.9
3.0
99.0
(6.7)

28.2
(26.5)
30.6
174.3
-143.7
4.0
103.0
(6.5)

28.5
(25.4)
31.7
185.8
-154.1
4.5
107.5
(6.3)

28.8
(24.1)
32.6
198.6
-165.9
4.6
112.1
(6.1)

29.0
(22.9)
33.7
212.5
-178.8
4.6
116.7
(5.9)

28.9
(21.5)
34.7
227.7
-193.0
4.7
121.4
(5.8)

Inflation and unemployment
(period average, percent)
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

Balance of payments and official reserves
(in billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
(percent of GDP)
Balance on goods
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Overall balance
Gross official reserves
(In months of imports) 5/

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ On a calendar year basis.
3/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers.
4/ Based on changes in export and import unit values.
5/ In months of next year's imports of goods and services.

- 34 -

ANNEX I

Key Recommendations of the Economic Review Committee
Recommendations

Status

• Reduce corporate and personal income
tax rates to 20 percent by year of
assessment (YA) 2005.

• The government cut corporate and top personal tax
rates from 24.5 percent and 26 percent respectively to
22 percent in YA2003. The FY2003/04 budget
announced intention to bring both down to 20 percent
by YA2005.

• Raise GST from 3 percent to 5 percent.

• The GST rate was raised from 3 to 4 percent on January
1, 2003, and to 5 percent on January 1, 2004.

Taxation

• Create GST offset package to help
Singaporeans adjust to GST increase.

• Implemented in 2003 offset package that includes
income transfers (Economic Restructuring Shares
(ERS)); additional ERS will be distributed in 2004 and
2005.

Central Provident Fund (CPF)
• Refocus CPF on providing basic
retirement savings, home ownership and
medical needs, and on addressing labor
market flexibility.
• Defer returning CPF contribution rate to
40 percent from 36 percent (20 percent
employee; 16 percent employer) for two
years.

• In August 2003, the government made further changes
to earlier ERC recommendations.
• A lower long-term variable contribution rate of
30 percent to 36 percent (with employer rate between
10 percent and 16 percent) was set to maintain
competitiveness. For older workers, CPF rate will be
reduced to 27 percent by 2006.
• From October 1, 2003, cut employer contribution rate
from 16 percent to 13 percent. Employees continue to
contribute 20 percent.
• Increased CPF and Medisave minimum sums; revised
Special and Medisave Accounts contribution rates;
strengthened withdrawal rule at age 55; and further
reduced CPF salary ceiling.

Land
• Pursue policies that ensure the adequate
supply of land at competitive, stable
prices.

• Lowered rentals and prices for industrial properties.
• Extended rental rebates for industrial tenants and
lessees until June 2004.
• Expanded eligibility for tax deductions for upfront land
premium payments for industrial land to 60-year leases
from 30 years previously.

- 35 Recommendations

Status

Labor Market
• Enhance labor market flexibility by
raising variable wage component and
drop seniority-based wage system.

• Made several changes to CPF to address labor market
flexibility (see above).
• FY2003/04 budget introduced portable medical
benefits.
• In January 2004, Tripartite Taskforce on Wage
Restructuring encouraged companies to adopt a more
flexible wage model that would increase the variable
component of wages, linked to the performance of the
employee and company.

Entrepreneurship and
Internationalization
• GLCs should be commercially run and
operate globally. They should be
reviewed for divestiture.
• To create pro-enterprise environment,
have sunset rule on all licenses,
outsource licensing and other
government functions, allow
enterprises to retain intellectual
property from government projects,
and enact generic competition law.

Manufacturing and Services Sectors
• Continue to attract multinationals in
electronics, chemicals, biomedical
sciences and engineering sectors.
Encouraging new sectors in industrial
IT, micro-electromechanical systems,
nanotechnology and photonics.
• Continue to develop areas with strong
expertise, like trading and logistics,
ICT, financial services and tourism. In
addition, launch into new sectors such
as healthcare, education and creative
industries.

• Companies to be divested are Ascendas, PSB Corp and
Hdbay.
• Subject non-core government services to markettesting.
• Exempt from tax foreign income in the form of
dividends, branch profits and services income.
• Allow companies to defer income taxes for two years if
their overseas investment incurs operating losses.

• Promote private wealth management. Measures include
exempting from income tax foreign trusts administered
by all trust companies from 2004.
• Allow approved companies to claim capital allowances
on equipment used by subsidiaries outside Singapore
from FY2003.

- 36 Recommendations
Human Capital
• Develop the full potential of
individuals through a more flexible
school curriculum.
• Assist unemployed through
comprehensive re-employment
approach with job counseling,
training, job search assistance and
subsidized job attachments.

Status
• A new statutory board (the Singapore Workforce
Development Agency) was established in September
2003 to promote continuing education and training.
• To encourage Singaporeans to upgrade their skills in
preparation for career switches, tax relief for course
fees is increased from S$2,500 to S$3,500 and
extended to courses that eventually result in a career
switch.

- 37 -

ANNEX II

SINGAPORE—FUND RELATIONS
(As of December 31, 2003)
I.

Membership Status: Joined August 3, 1966; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

None

V.

Financial Arrangements:

None

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

None

VII.

Exchange Arrangement:

SDR million

Quota
(In percent)

862.50
483.32
379.27

100.00
56.04
43.97

SDR million

Allocation
(In percent)

16.48
139.61

100.00
847.42

Singapore follows a policy under which the Singapore dollar is permitted to float. The Monetary
Authority of Singapore (MAS) monitors its value against an undisclosed basket of currencies and
intervenes in the market to maintain this value within an undisclosed target band. The U.S. dollar is the
intervention currency. As of December 31, 2003, US$1=S$1.7008.
Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains an exchange
rate system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions.
Singapore maintains restrictions on Singapore-dollar credit facilities, and bond and equity issuance.
Singapore-dollar proceeds obtained by non-resident financial entities (such as banks, merchant banks,
finance companies, and hedge funds) from loans, equity listings or bond issuance to finance activities
outside Singapore have to be swapped or converted into foreign currency upon draw-down. Financial
institutions are prohibited from extending Singapore-dollar credit facilities in excess of S$5 million to
nonresident financial entities if there is reason to believe that the Singapore-dollar proceeds may be
used for Singapore-dollar currency speculation.
VIII.

Last Article IV Consultation:

The 2002 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Singapore during September 5–17, 2002, and
the consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on December 9, 2002.

- 38 IX.

FSAP Participation:

The FSAP has been undertaken in conjunction with the 2003 Article IV consultation. FSAP missions
took place in November 2002, July-August 2003, and September 2003.
X.

Technical Assistance:

None

XI.

Resident Representative:

None

- 39 -

ANNEX III

SINGAPORE—STATISTICAL ISSUES

1.
Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and meets the SDDS
specifications for the coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of the data, and for the
dissemination of advance release calendars. However, there are a number of deficiencies in
statistical practice, particularly in the external and fiscal areas.
•

In early 2003, the Singapore Department of Statistics (DOS) completed a rebasing of
the Singapore System of National Accounts to reference year 1995 from 1990. The
DOS also made improvements in data sources and methodology. One issue addressed
in this exercise was the treatment of a value-added tax, namely the Goods and
Services Tax (GST), introduced in April 1994. Also, a reconciliation of various
national accounts estimates was conducted, resulting in lower statistical
discrepancies, and work on further improvements is ongoing.

•

Merchandise trade statistics do not fully include trade with Indonesia, although trade
transactions with Indonesia are captured elsewhere in the current account of the
balance of payments. In January 2004, the authorities released some trade data with
Indonesia covering 2003. The authorities plan to publish additional information on
trade with Indonesia as part of their plans to accede to the Harmonized System
Convention of the World Customs Organization (WCO).

•

In December 2003, the DOS introduced a new reporting format for the BOP’s
services account that includes the standard services components (except
communication services), in line with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments
Manual (BPM5). Other goods and services receipts and payments, which are
substantial, used to be not disaggregated. The DOS used data from the Survey on
International Trade in Services (launched in 1996) as an additional source for the
compilation of more detailed services statistics.

•

Information on government assets held abroad is not published nor provided to the
Fund. Interest on these assets and debt service payments on domestic debt made from
the extrabudgetary Government Securities Fund are published on an annual basis, but
are not fully reflected in the fiscal position. More generally, data on the financial
position of the consolidated public sector are not published. Singapore has
nevertheless complied with the expanded SDDS requirements to include data on the
international investment position.

2.
During the course of the year, staff receive a steady flow of economic data from
published sources, via the Reuters monitor, various official websites, and the TREND
database. Most data are received on a timely basis.
3.
Annual balance of payments data are reported to STA each year. Quarterly financial
account data as provided to STA by the authorities are not sufficiently detailed for
publication in the International Financial Statistics. The authorities are working to improve
their data sources for the compilation of quarterly estimates of financial flows.

Singapore—Core Statistical Indicators
(As of January 30, 2004)
International
Reserves

Reserve/
Base
Money

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

Broad
Money

Interest
Rates

Consumer
Price Index

Exports/
Imports

Current
Account

Overall
Government
Balance

GDP

External
Debt/Debt
Service 1/

Date of latest
observation

1/30/04

12/03

12/03

12/03

12/03

1/30/04

12/03

12/03

Q3/03

Q3/03

Q3/03

...

Date received

1/30/04

1/04

1/04

1/04

1/04

1/30/04

1/04

1/04

11/03

11/03

11/03

...

Frequency of
data 2/

D

M

M

M

M

D

M

M

Q

Q

Q

...

Frequency of
Reporting 2/

D

M

M

M

M

D

M

M

Q

Q

Q

...

Source of data 3/

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

...

Mode of
reporting 4/

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

E

...

Confidentiality

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

Public

...

Frequency of
publication 2/

D

M

M

M

M

D

M

M

Q

Q

Q

...

1/ Official external debt is zero; data from official sources on private external debt are not available, although a survey to improve reporting in this area has recently been launched.
2/ D-daily; M-monthly; Q-quarterly.
3/ A-direct reporting by authorities; N-official publications and websites.
4/ E-electronic data transfer.

- 40 -

Exchange
Rates

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SINGAPORE
Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation
Supplementary Information
Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Singapore
Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Juha Kähkönen
March 10, 2004
1.
This supplement provides information on recent economic and policy
developments that has become available since the release of the staff report. The
information does not alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
The GDP outturn for 2003 has been revised upward by the authorities (Table).
Newly released data indicate that the economy grew by 1.1 percent in 2003, compared to the
estimate of 0.8 percent presented in the staff report. The data suggest that the SARS-induced
contraction of the second quarter amounted to 7 percent (seasonally adjusted annualized q/q
basis), somewhat less severe than 10 percent previously estimated, and that the rebound in
the fourth quarter was a strong 11 percent, compared to 8 percent previously estimated.
While the staff’s 2004 GDP growth projection remains at 5 percent, given the positive signs
of recovery and strong global environment, the government has raised its official growth
forecast by ½ percentage point, to 3.5 percent to 5.5 percent.
3.
The breakdown of GDP growth for 2003 remains largely as described in the staff
report. The recovery during the second half of the year was led by external demand, with
domestic demand, particularly investment, remaining weak. The current account surplus has
been revised slightly upward, to US$28 billion, equivalent to 31 percent of GDP, and official
reserves have increased to US$101 billion at end-February 2004. CPI inflation edged up to
1.3 percent (y/y) in January, from 0.7 percent in the previous month, partly due to the
1 percentage point increase in the Goods and Services Tax that took effect on January 1.
4.
The FY2004/05 budget was presented to Parliament at end-February (fiscal year
beginning April 1). Detailed data to assess the budget stance in a format consistent with the
presentation in the staff report (based on GFS methodology) will become available to staff
only after the budget is approved around end-March. However, based on preliminary
information contained in the Minister of Finance’s budget speech, the proposed budget
appears to be broadly in line with that envisaged during the consultation discussions. Based
on the staff’s estimates, the budget targets a slightly higher overall surplus (by about
0.2 percent of GDP) compared to the latest projected outturn for FY2003/04. Such a target
would amount to an unchanged fiscal stance (i.e., no provision or withdrawal of fiscal
stimulus).

-2-

5.
As anticipated in the staff report, the budget contains a number of tax side
initiatives to support the recovery and enhance competitiveness. These include: (i) a
2 percentage point cut in the corporate income tax rate to 20 percent beginning in 2005;
(ii) an extension of the tax exemption to individuals on foreign-sourced and domestic
financial investment income beginning in 2005; and (iii) tax exemptions for start-up
companies. An anticipated 2 percentage point cut in the top personal income tax rate (an
ERC recommendation) is being deferred, given the authorities’ desire to preserve revenues.
The sectoral distribution of spending is to be largely unchanged from the previous year.

-3Table. Singapore: Revisions to Selected Economic Indicators for 2003

2003
Staff Report

Revised

Growth (percent change)
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Final domestic demand
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in inventories (contribution to GDP growth)
Net exports (contribution to GDP growth)

0.8
-7.5
-1.4
0.5
-5.1
-4.6
7.2

1.1
-9.6
-1.6
-0.4
-3.8
-6.2
8.7

Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Gross capital formation

44.5
15.0

44.2
13.4

Central government budget (percent of GDP) 1/ 2/
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Primary operating balance 3/

22.0
21.3
0.7
-4.8

21.1
20.1
1.0
-3.9

27.1
(29.5)
27.7
148.2
-120.5
11.7

28.2
(30.9)
29.3
157.8
-128.5
6.8

Balance of payments (US$ billion)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Balance on goods
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Overall balance

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fiscal year beginning on April 1.
2/ Data for staff report (2/23/04) include supplementary budget measures announced in mid-April
and in late August.
3/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service,
and fund transfers.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/41
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
April 26, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with Singapore
On March 15, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Singapore.1
Background
After averaging over 9 percent in the decade prior to the Asian financial crisis, economic growth
in Singapore has slowed in recent years. This outcome is attributable to three major recent
shocks: (i) the Asian crisis in 1997–98; (ii) the bursting of the tech bubble in 2000-01; and more
recently, (iii) the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in early 2003,
exacerbated by uncertainties related to international terrorism and the war in Iraq.
The economic shocks have come as Singapore is also facing structural challenges owing to
competition from low-cost regional economies, including China and India.
Economic growth registered 1.1 percent in 2003, down from 2.2 percent in 2002. The slowdown
was due mainly to the outbreak of SARS in March 2003, resulting in rising unemployment and a
sharp economic contraction in the second quarter. Falling domestic demand (particularly
investment) contributed to the sharp contraction. However, the economy began to recover
strongly in the second half, led by a rebound in the services sector and strong external demand.
Inflation remained subdued in 2003 after a period of mild deflation in 2002. Reflecting weak
domestic demand conditions and strong external demand, the current account surplus
increased sharply to 31 percent of GDP in 2003; official international reserves increased by

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2-

US$14 billion, to stand at US$96 billion at end-2003. The Singapore dollar depreciated by
3½ percent (period average) in nominal effective terms in 2003.
The government implemented a supportive macroeconomic policy stance to support the
economy in response to the SARS-induced economic downturn. Fiscal stimulus was provided
through higher development expenditure and two supplementary budgets (consisting largely of
targeted assistance to SARS-inflicted sectors, low-income earners and the unemployed, and of
acceleration of infrastructure projects). In addition, supply-side measures, including a reduction
in the Central Provident Fund (CPF) employer contribution rate by 3 percentage points from
October 2003, were taken to reduce business costs. Monetary policy was also eased in mid2003 with the recentering of the exchange rate band at the prevailing lower level of the tradeweighted exchange rate.
Recent indicators confirm that a strong recovery is underway, and the staff’s outlook is for
growth to rebound by around 5 percent in 2004. CPI inflation is projected to remain modest at
around 1 percent in 2004, due in part to the soft labor market conditions. While the recovery
should continue to benefit from strong external demand, domestic demand should also begin to
contribute, with a modest recovery in consumption as confidence improves and the
unemployment rate begins to decline, as well as a pickup in investment as the slack in the
economy dissipates and inventories are rebuilt. The risks to the outlook are broadly balanced.
The main downside risks relate to the sustainability of the global and regional recovery, and the
possibility that the high unemployment rate and still depressed property market could become
drags on growth. At the same time, there is some upside potential to the 2004 forecast,
especially if the pickup of external demand gathers further momentum, and growth in the export
sector spills over to domestic demand. Over the medium term, the staff expects growth to be
around 4–5 percent.
Increasing competition from low-cost regional economies has raised concerns within Singapore
about the economy’s medium-term competitiveness and growth prospects, along with an
increasing awareness of the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks (especially in the
electronics sector, which dominates the country’s manufacturing exports). The government’s
adoption of the recommendations of the Economic Review Committee (ERC) is a response to
these challenges. The ERC was established in late 2001 to evaluate Singapore’s long-term
strategy and the need for structural change. Finalized in early 2003, the ERC recommendations
seek to enhance competitiveness and entrepreneurship and to diversify the economy. Key
elements of the strategy include a shift from direct to indirect taxation (including a reduction in
personal and corporate income tax rates), reforms to the CPF scheme aimed at enhancing its
core retirement savings objective, the divestment of non-strategic government-linked companies
(GLCs), and policies to foster greater labor market flexibility and strengthen job training
programs.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that the economy had suffered another bout of turbulence in 2003
due to the SARS outbreak, the latest in a series of economic shocks in recent years. Directors
commended the authorities for their continued pragmatic use of countercyclical fiscal and

-3-

monetary policies, noting that supportive policies had cushioned the impact of the SARSinduced economic downturn and were contributing to a strong economic recovery.
They emphasized that the most significant policy challenges are to advance structural reforms
to enhance the economy’s medium-term competitiveness and growth prospects, and improve its
resiliency to external shocks.
While the near-term economic outlook has brightened, Directors observed that there remains a
sizeable output gap, unemployment is still high by historical standards, and the recovery has
been based on external demand. They therefore encouraged the authorities to maintain a
supportive macroeconomic policy stance in the period ahead, until the recovery broadens.
On fiscal policy, Directors endorsed the package of measures taken last year to cushion the
impact of the SARS outbreak, which included providing assistance to SARS-afflicted sectors of
the economy and a package of rebates, incentives, and infrastructure projects. They also
welcomed civil service wage restraint, as an important wage-setting signal to the private sector,
given the soft labor market conditions, and a reduction in the employers’ contribution to the
Central Provident Fund, as a means to reduce business costs.
Directors endorsed the authorities’ intention to maintain a supportive fiscal stance in the coming
year, as outlined in the recent budget proposal for fiscal year 2004/05, and plans to continue
cutting income tax rates and reorienting the tax system toward taxes on goods and services.
They also supported reducing unemployment through job training and search programs, and
saw some additional scope for a strengthened and well-structured social safety net for the
unemployed. While supporting continued flexibility in the fiscal position, Directors endorsed the
authorities’ intention to achieve budget balance over the medium term to address concerns
about rising health care and pension costs.
Directors endorsed the easing of monetary policy in mid-2003 in response to the economic
downturn. In the absence of inflationary pressures, and with domestic demand still weak, they
considered it appropriate to maintain a supportive monetary policy stance. Directors observed
that Singapore’s exchange-rate-centered monetary policy framework has continued to serve the
economy well. They generally were of the view that once the recovery takes hold, there would
be scope for some tightening of the current easy monetary policy stance, consistent with the
price stability objective which, together with the economic recovery, would enable Singapore to
contribute to an orderly adjustment of global current account imbalances. Directors welcomed
ongoing initiatives to enhance the transparency of the monetary policy setting process and
disseminate operational background materials, and encouraged the authorities to continue
these efforts, which have improved the effectiveness of the monetary policy framework.
With regard to structural reforms, Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to enhance the
economy’s competitiveness and flexibility. In view of increasing competition from abroad, they
urged the authorities to continue to facilitate Singapore’s shift from lower-end manufacturing
and services to higher value-added activities, by providing a policy environment conducive to
stimulating private and foreign direct investment. In this regard, Directors welcomed the
authorities’ endorsement of the Economic Review Committee recommendations, emphasizing,
in particular, the importance of initiatives to lower income tax rates, enhance labor market

-4-

flexibility, and reduce the government’s role in the economy through the divestment of
government-linked companies. They encouraged the authorities to consider accelerating the
divestment of GLCs, where appropriate.
Directors highlighted the importance of recent steps to encourage a higher level of savings for
retirees under the CPF scheme. They supported initiatives to enhance the returns to the CPF
assets by permitting savers to invest in privately managed investment funds and giving the fund
more marketable instruments, and to refocus the fund on its core function as a retirement
scheme, including by reducing its role in housing finance. Although Directors supported a
reduction in the CPF’s contribution rate to reduce employers’ costs, they considered that an
early return to a stable contribution rate would be useful.
Based on the findings of the Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA), Directors
highlighted the resiliency of Singapore’s financial system, despite a number of economic shocks
in recent years. They commended the high degree of observance of international standards and
codes, and ongoing initiatives to further strengthen corporate governance and the legal and
regulatory framework for risk-based supervision. Directors supported the ongoing review of the
Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) Act to strengthen the MAS’ accountability and
independence. To further enhance financial sector stability, they encouraged the early
implementation of the FSSA recommendations, including those to strengthen the MAS’
macroprudential monitoring and further improve the transparency of supervisory actions.
Directors also saw scope to enhance the transparency of fiscal policy information.
They welcomed the authorities’ intention to improve the published database in terms of
timeliness, frequency, comprehensiveness, and format, and they emphasized the importance of
developing a consolidated set of fiscal accounts. They also encouraged the authorities to
undertake a fiscal Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes. Directors welcomed the
authorities’ decision to publish the Staff Report, the FSSA and its Supplement, and other papers
related to the Article IV consultation.
Directors commended the authorities on their continued commitment to multilateral trade
liberalization and strong support for free trade, which has resulted in a number of free trade
agreements. They concurred with the authorities that such agreements could serve as a
catalyst to broader trade liberalization initiatives.

Public Information Notices (PINs) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the
conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to
the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of
member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF's assessment of these policies; and (ii)
following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board.

-5-

Singapore: Selected Economic Indicators
2000

2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004
Proj.

9.4
14.8

-2.4
3.6

2.2
1.7

1.1
-0.4

5.0
3.1

7.9

-5.8

-9.7

-3.8

3.0

2.6

-6.2

0.3

-6.2

1.9

-2.6

3.9

4.1

8.7

0.8

46.8
32.3

43.2
24.2

42.1
20.6

44.2
13.4

44.9
17.0

1.3
3.1

1.0
3.3

-0.4
4.4

0.5
4.7

1.2
4.2

Central government (percent of GDP) 2/
Revenue
Expenditure
Overall balance
Primary operating balance 3/

29.6
20.7
8.9
1.1

27.5
24.0
3.5
-3.5

23.2
18.9
4.3
-2.8

21.1
20.1
1.0
-3.9

21.2
20.0
1.2
-3.6

Money and credit (end of period, percent change)
M3
Credit to private sector
Interest rate (three-month interbank, in percent)

-1.8
5.9
2.8

4.0
16.3
1.3

-0.8
-8.6
0.8

5.9
5.4
0.8

...
...
...

Balance of payments (US$ billion)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance
Gross official reserves

13.3
(14.5)
6.9
80.4

16.1
(19.0)
-0.9
75.8

18.7
(21.5)
1.3
82.3

28.2
(30.9)
6.8
96.3

27.9
(27.9)
3.0
...

Exchange rate
S$/US$ (end of period)
Nominal effective exchange rate 4/
Real effective exchange rate 4/

1.732
119.5
106.9

1.851
121.2
107.7

1.737
120.2
105.2

1.701
115.8
100.3

...
...
...

Growth (percent change)
Real GDP
Consumption
Gross fixed investment
Change in inventories 1/
Net exports 1/

`
Saving and investment (percent of GDP)
Gross national savings
Gross capital formation
Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent)
CPI inflation
Unemployment rate

Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Contribution to GDP growth.
2/ Fiscal year beginning on April 1.
3/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending and fund transfers.
4/ IMF, Information Notice System monthly index (1990=100); period average.

