November 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/351

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

July 6, 2004
May 25, 2004

July 28, 2004
January 29, 2001
2004
July 28, 2004

People's Republic of China: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff
Statement; and Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the
People’s Republic of China, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 25, 2004, with the officials of the People’s
Republic of China on economic developments and policies. Based on information available
at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on July 6, 2004. The
views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of July 28, 2004 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 28, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for
The 2004 Article IV Consultation with the People’s Republic of China
Approved by David Burton and Anthony R. Boote
July 6, 2004

•

The 2004 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Beijing during
May 17–25, 2004.

•

The staff team comprised Mr. Dunaway (Head), Messrs. Prasad, Rumbaugh, and
Feyzioğlu and Ms. Wang (all APD), Ms. Fedelino (FAD), Ms. Baldwin (MFD), and
Ms. Baker (PDR). The team was assisted by Mr. Brooks (Senior Resident
Representative) and Mr. Barnett (Resident Representative). Messrs. Wang, Ge, and
Zheng (OED) participated in the discussions. Mr. Kato and Mr. Nolan joined the
mission on May 20-21 and Mr. Burton during May 17–20.

•

China has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles
of Agreement. Exchange controls continue to apply to most financial account
transactions.

•

While progress continues to be made in upgrading China’s economic statistics,
weaknesses remain in key areas. These include the national accounts, fiscal and labor
statistics, and the international investment position. The authorities are making
improvements in all of these areas. China has subscribed to the GDDS, with its
metadata posted on the official website (Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board) since
April 2002.

•

At the time of circulation, the Chinese authorities have not indicated whether or not
they consent to the publication of the paper.

•

The last Article IV consultation was concluded on October 31, 2003.

-2-

Table of Contents
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. 3
I.

Recent Economic Developments and Outlook ................................................................. 4
A. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 4
B. Economic Developments.............................................................................................. 4
C. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks ............................................................................. 8

II.

Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................... 11
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ......................................................................... 11
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................... 13
C. Structural Reforms ..................................................................................................... 17

III. Staff Appraisal ................................................................................................................ 23
Boxes
1. Lessons from Earlier Economic Cycles ............................................................................9
2. Regional Impact of a Slowdown in China ......................................................................10
3. Exchange Rate Flexibility and Capital Account Liberalization in China .......................14
4. Reform of the Banking System .......................................................................................18
Figures
1. Growth and Demand Indicators ......................................................................................27
2. External Indicators ..........................................................................................................28
3. Macroeconomic Policies .................................................................................................29
Tables
1. Summary Indicators ........................................................................................................30
2. Balance of Payments .......................................................................................................31
3. External Debt ..................................................................................................................32
4. Indicators of External Vulnerability................................................................................33
5. Monetary Developments .................................................................................................34
6. State Budgetary Operations.............................................................................................35
7. Official and IMF Budget Definitions..............................................................................36
8. Medium-Term Scenario ..................................................................................................37
Annexes
I.
Fund Relations ................................................................................................................38
II. Debt Sustainability Analysis ...........................................................................................42
III. China’s Fiscal Reforms and Technical Assistance .........................................................45
IV. Statistical Issues ..............................................................................................................50
V. Relations with the World Bank.......................................................................................55
VI. Relations with the Asian Development Bank .................................................................60
VII. Millenium Development Goals.......................................................................................62

-3EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Economic Setting:
The pace of economic activity increased considerably in 2003, despite the SARS
outbreak. GDP grew at an annual rate of 10 percent in the fourth quarter of 2003 and
continued roughly at that rate in the first quarter of 2004, led primarily by high levels of
investment. CPI inflation picked up to 4.4 percent in May.
In response to overinvestment in several sectors and signs of potential overheating,
economic policies were tightened in several stages beginning in mid-2003 through a series of
monetary and administrative measures. While money and credit growth rates have slowed,
they still remain high at 18–19 percent (y/y) as of May 2004.
Policy Discussions:
Staff believes that a further tightening in monetary conditions is likely to be needed.
The authorities recognize that additional steps could be required, but prefer to give the
measures taken so far more time to work. Local government-sponsored projects have been a
major source of the surge in investment, and the central government has taken administrative
measures to exert greater control and help achieve a “soft landing.”
Large capital inflows continue to complicate the conduct of monetary policy. Greater
exchange rate flexibility would enhance China’s ability to pursue an independent monetary
policy, as well as to adjust to economic shocks and major structural changes. The authorities
agree in principle on the need for greater exchange rate flexibility, but are concerned about
the impact of a potential appreciation of the renminbi on the domestic economy, particularly
with respect to employment growth.
Fiscal policy has an important role to play in cooling down the economy. The authorities
plan to use part of a likely revenue overperformance which is retained by the central
government to settle outstanding VAT refunds and are considering reductions in spending,
particularly for public investment.
Fundamental fiscal reforms with respect to taxation and expenditure management are
moving forward. However, to improve the effectiveness of fiscal management, the
introduction of a new budget classification system, together with changes in the chart of
accounts, in time for the 2006 budget needs to be expedited.
Progress continues to be made on banking sector reforms. Restructuring plans are being
put in place for the two state banks that were recently recapitalized. The staff cautioned that
problems in the rest of the banking system should also be addressed expeditiously. The recent
rapid credit growth threatens to reverse the progress made in reducing non-performing loans,
adding to the urgency of tightening credit policy.
Continued implementation of reforms in other areas will be necessary to address
macroeconomic and structural vulnerabilities and support sustainable growth. These
include SOE reform, implementation of WTO commitments, development of labor and
capital markets, and improvements in economic statistics.

-4I. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
A. Introduction
1.
In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors cautioned
that continued strong investment activity and rapid money and credit growth could
lead to a buildup of economic imbalances. They called for stronger action to rein in
excessive credit growth and curb potential overinvestment in some sectors of the economy.
They observed that increased flexibility of the exchange rate over time would be in the best
interest of China. Directors also urged the authorities to stick to budgeted levels for spending
and to use additional revenues to reduce outstanding VAT refunds owed to exporters and to
further consolidate the fiscal position. They cautioned that the medium- and longer-term
fiscal outlook remains a source of vulnerability and welcomed the authorities’ intention to
keep the level of the fiscal deficit roughly unchanged in nominal terms over the next few
years. They emphasized that medium-term prospects depend critically on the pace of
structural reforms. Since the Article IV consultation, China has tried to rein in credit and
investment growth, conducting monetary and fiscal policies in a manner broadly consistent
with the Executive Board’s recommendations.
2.
In March 2004, the 2nd plenary session of the 10th National Peoples’ Congress
emphasized the importance of a more balanced approach to development and the need
to push ahead with structural reforms. The meeting cautioned against excessive
investment in some sectors, and focused more on social and environmental development, as
well as measures to address the widening regional and rural-urban income disparities. Policy
initiatives to raise farmers’ incomes, develop the inland regions, and enhance the social safety
net were unveiled. The government also signaled its determination to increase the pace of
structural reforms by rolling out a wide range of measures including in the financial and SOE
sectors and the fiscal area.
B. Economic Developments
3.
Real GDP growth was slightly above 9 percent in 2003, led by strong investment
and export growth, leading to concerns that overinvestment in some sectors might lead
to a more generalized overheating (Figure 1 and Table 1).1 Fixed capital formation is
estimated to have increased by about 20 percent in real terms—the fastest rate since 1993—
reaching 44 percent of GDP. Consumption growth is estimated to have declined somewhat
from 2002 (annual retail sales growth in real terms dropped 1 percentage point to 9 percent),
reflecting the impact of the SARS epidemic in the second quarter. Nevertheless, the overall

1

There is considerable speculation that the official statistics understate recent GDP growth.
The fact that nominal GDP measured on an expenditure basis grew 2 percentage points faster
than the official growth rate measured on a production basis lends some support to this view.
GDP in real terms is only reported on a production basis.

-5impact of SARS was short-lived, as economic activity rebounded quickly in the second half
of the year, with GDP growth reaching 10 percent (year-on-year) in the fourth quarter. Export
growth reached 35 percent in 2003, up from 22 percent in 2002, as China continued to make
significant gains in market share in major industrialized countries. Imports were even more
buoyant, as strong demand for raw materials (e.g., steel, aluminum, copper, and fuel), inputs
for exports, and agricultural products helped to push import growth to 40 percent in 2003.2
4.
Growth momentum remained strong in the first quarter of 2004. Real GDP grew
by 9¾ percent (year-on-year). Industrial production growth was particularly strong at
18 percent, and fixed asset investment grew by an estimated 36 percent in real terms.
Reflecting continued strong domestic demand, imports increased by 41 percent (year-on-year;
customs basis) in the first five months, while exports rose by 33 percent.
5.
CPI inflation rose to 4.4 percent (year-on-year) in May 2004, led by food price
increases. Excluding food, inflation turned slightly positive, following price declines in the
previous two years.3 The increase in food prices partly reflects supply-side factors, including
reductions in the area under cultivation and the effects of drought and floods in parts of China
last year. Strong investment demand in China and increasing world commodity prices have
led to a surge in raw material prices, and in the producer price index, but these factors have
not yet been reflected in manufactured consumer goods’ prices. These prices have continued
to decline, but at a slower pace than previously.
6.
China’s role in international trade and, in particular, in the region’s production
chain continued to grow. Total exports and imports reached 60 percent of GDP in 2003, and
China became the fourth largest exporter in the world. China’s growing role in the global
production of manufactured goods and rising domestic demand are contributing to the
pick-up in growth in several regional economies, as well as pushing up international prices
for many key commodities. Imports from Asia grew rapidly, and China’s trade deficit with
the region increased further, largely offsetting the country’s trade surplus with the United
States and the euro area. The overall trade surplus was $45 billion (3 percent of GDP; balance
of payments basis), about the same level as in 2002.
7.
China’s overall external position has continued to strengthen (Tables 2–4 and
Figure 2). The current account surplus increased by ½ percentage point in 2003 to 3¼ percent
of GDP, as the balance on invisibles shifted into a small surplus. Official reserves increased
by $162 billion in 2003. With the use of $45 billion to recapitalize two state-owned
commercial banks, the level of reserves stood at $412 billion at year end (equivalent to about
9 months of imports). Almost half of the increase in reserves was accounted for by net nonFDI capital inflows, which have been attracted by a combination of interest rate differentials
2

Based on existing estimates of changes in trade prices, export volume increased by
29 percent in 2003 and import volume by 27 percent.
3

Recent price developments and the inflation outlook are discussed in the Selected Issues
paper.

-6favoring renminbi-denominated assets and speculation about an appreciation of the currency.
External debt increased to nearly $200 billion in 2003, but remains modest relative to exports
and GDP. In the first five months of 2004, China registered a trade deficit of $9 billion
(custom basis), compared with an overall trade surplus of $2 billion in the same period last
year. Sizable capital inflows have continued as foreign exchange reserves increased by
another $55 billion despite the trade deficit.
8.
During the course of 2003, China’s real effective exchange rate, as estimated by
the staff, depreciated by 6½ percent, while the nominal effective exchange rate
depreciated by 8 percent, reflecting the depreciation of the U.S. dollar against other
major currencies. In the first five months of 2004, it is estimated to have appreciated by
1.4 percent in nominal effective terms and 2.7 percent in real effective terms. The one-year
non-deliverable forward rate appreciated by about 5 percent during 2003, but it depreciated
by 4 percent in the first five months of 2004, suggesting that speculative pressures may have
diminished somewhat.
China: Sources of Reserve Accumulation, 1998–2003
(In billions of U.S. dollars)

Increase in gross
official reserves
Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance
FDI, net
Non-FDI, net
Of which: Error and Omissions

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

6.4

8.5

10.5

47.3

75.5

162.0 1/

31.5
-25.0
41.1
-66.1
-18.7

21.1
-12.6
37.0
-49.6
-17.8

20.5
-9.9
37.5
-47.4
-11.9

17.4
30.0
37.4
-7.4
-4.9

35.4
40.1
46.8
-6.7
7.8

45.9
116.2
47.2
69.0
18.4

Sources: Staff estimates for analytical purposes based on data provided by CEIC, PBC, SAFE.
1/ For 2003, staff estimates of the reserve change include the $45 billion used for bank recapitalization. The
official figure for foreign reserves increased by $116.8 billion in 2003.

9.
Reflecting growing concerns about overheating, the authorities took a series of
monetary and administrative measures to curtail investment. The push for investment by
new local government leadership beginning in the second half of 2002 was fueled by
substantial excess liquidity in the banking system. While the People’s Bank of China was
concerned about rapid credit growth already evident in early 2003, its policy response was
delayed by the SARS epidemic in the second quarter of that year. Sustained capital inflows,
which grew substantially in magnitude in the latter part of 2003, further complicated the
conduct of monetary policy. With the end of the SARS outbreak in July, the PBC announced
an increase in the reserve requirement by 1 percentage point effective in September 2003, and
by a further ½ percentage point in April 2004, and it engaged in moral suasion to reduce
credit growth to banks. The authorities also tightened lending standards in sectors
experiencing overinvestment (in particular, metals production, cement, automobiles, and real

-7-

estate). In addition, the PBC raised short-term relending and rediscount rates by 0.6 and
0.3 percentage points, respectively, in March 2004. The PBC also intensified its sterilization
operations in 2004. While only about one-third of inflows were sterilized in 2003, the PBC
sterilized about two-thirds of its foreign exchange purchases from January to May 2004.
10.
While money and credit growth slowed, they remain above the authorities’
targets (Table 5, Figure 3). As of May 2004, M2 growth declined to 17.5 percent and credit
growth to 18.6 percent, but they still exceed the authorities’ respective targets for the full year
of 17 percent for M2 and an increase of RMB 2.6 trillion (16 percent) for lending. However,
the extent to which credit growth has actually slowed is unclear. While the month-on-month
seasonally adjusted rates of growth in credit have declined, part of the slower rise in the stock
of outstanding loans may simply reflect an acceleration in the write-off of existing
nonperforming loans (NPLs). Moreover, measures taken thus far have had little impact on
interbank interest rates and the average excess reserve ratio for the banking system remains
relatively large at around 3 percent as of May 2004. Thus, to the extent that credit growth has
slowed, it appears to be more due to the effects of administrative measures, rather than to the
impact of indirect monetary instruments.
11.
The fiscal deficit declined in 2003 by about ½ percentage point to 2.5 percent of
GDP.4 The deficit was ¼ percent of GDP lower than the budget on account of revenue
overperformance, part of which was saved, while the remainder was used to reduce
outstanding tax refunds owed to exporters. Total revenue was 15 percent higher than in 2002
and 1 percentage point of GDP higher than the budget projections, reflecting stronger-thanexpected output and import growth. Revenues from VAT and import duties were particularly
strong. Total expenditure rose by 12 percent from 2002 and exceeded the budget by
RMB 95 billion (¾ percent of GDP) reflecting, among other things, higher capital and social
expenditures, SARS-related expenditures, and natural disaster relief.
12.
In line with the authorities’ stated fiscal policy objective, the 2004 budget holds
the nominal deficit at its 2003 budgeted level. This implies, on the basis of the staff’s GDP
forecast, that the deficit relative to GDP would be roughly the same in 2004 as its outturn
in 2003. Revenue is budgeted to increase by 9 percent, but this is likely to be a conservative
estimate in part because it is based on an assumption of 7 percent real GDP growth. While
total expenditure is projected to decline by almost 0.3 percent of GDP, expenditure in the
rural sector is budgeted to increase by about RMB 30 billion to finance policy initiatives such
as compensation of local governments for a reduction in the agricultural tax, the so-called
4

This is the general government budget deficit according to the official budget classification;
the central government deficit was 2.7 percent of GDP. According to the budget law, local
government savings can not be used to finance the central government deficit. The
consolidated deficit according to the IMF definition was 2.8 percent of GDP. As Tables 6 and
7 indicate, the differences between the official and IMF definitions of the fiscal balance
primarily reflect the treatment of privatization receipts and on-lending to local governments
of funds borrowed by the central government.

-8-

“fee-to-tax” reforms,5 and the provision of increased direct subsidies to grain farmers. Capital
expenditure is to be curtailed significantly, reflecting a lower issuance of construction bonds
(by RMB 30 billion) than in the 2003 budget. During the first five months of 2004, revenue
increased by 32 percent compared with the same period of 2003, while expenditure increased
by 14 percent.
C. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks
13.
The staff projects that real GDP growth will average around 9 percent in 2004,
with growth slowing to an annual rate of 7½ percent (y/y) in the fourth quarter of the
year. This forecast is based on the assumption that macroeconomic policy tightening will be
effective in bringing about a substantial reduction in investment growth, engineering a “soft
landing” of the economy. Export growth is also expected to ease from the exceptionally high
levels reached last year. In contrast, consumption would pick up moderately, aided by the
continuing development of the consumer credit market and efforts to boost rural incomes.
Import growth would decline, reflecting the slowdown in export and investment growth,
although import growth would remain higher than export growth. Consequently, the current
account surplus would decline from 3¼ percent of GDP in 2003 to 2½ percent of GDP in
2004. CPI inflation is expected to be 3½ percent in 2004, with inflationary pressures
dissipating during the year as food price increases ease and demand pressures diminish.
14.
The Chinese economy is not yet assured of a soft landing despite the measures
taken to reduce credit and investment growth, and overheating and inflation remain
serious possibilities. This has prompted concerns that a boom/bust cycle similar to those
experienced by China in the past could develop (Box 1). Despite the administrative actions
taken, strong incentives remain at local levels to maintain high rates of investment. There is
also a risk of a premature easing of policies once there are indications that the economy is
slowing, which was a problem during the cycle in the mid-1990s. Furthermore, signs of
overheating could be temporarily masked by the buildup of excess capacity in some sectors.
This, in turn, could delay the implementation of additional measures necessitating a much
sharper tightening of policies later, particularly if inflation begins to rise sharply.
Nonperforming loans could rise significantly as credit growth is reined in and the economy
slows, prompting a further cutback in bank lending and contributing to a sharper reduction in
economic growth. Spillover effects on other countries in Asia of a sharp drop in Chinese
growth would be significant but manageable (Box 2).
15.
China’s medium-term prospects are favorable, provided that near-term risks are
handled effectively and structural reforms implemented expeditiously (Table 8).
Structural reforms, particularly in the enterprise and financial sectors and labor markets, are
needed to address macroeconomic vulnerabilities, maintain strong productivity growth and

5

The fee-to-tax reform aims to simplify the rural tax system and reduce the tax burden on
farmers.

-9Box 1. Lessons from Earlier Economic Cycles
Since the initiation of economic reforms, China’s economic growth has been marked by periods of cyclical
surges in economic activity and inflation, followed by periods of retrenchment. In the 1980s, two cycles ended
with hard landings. Particularly notable is the 1986-90 cycle. This cycle began with an early relaxation of
monetary and fiscal policies due to concerns that stringent policies, adopted during the previous cycle, were
causing problems for SOEs. Inflation rose to 19 percent in 1988, and the authorities responded with a heavy
reliance on administrative measures. Inflation was quickly brought under control, but growth slowed sharply, and
the administrative measures adopted had adverse implications for resource allocation.
The 1991-97 cycle was initiated by a rise in central and local government spending and an easing in bank credit
policies. By 1992, an investment boom was underway (similar to the present boom, see table), with real GDP
growth exceeding 14 percent. Demand pressures led to a pick up of inflation, boosted by liberalization of food
prices and public sector wage hikes. The authorities responded in mid-1993 with a “16-point” plan to cool the
economy. The measures included raising interest rates, tightening central bank credit to banks, and limiting
investment approvals. But the credit squeeze hit SOEs hard, prompting calls for a relaxation of policies. The
authorities then temporarily reversed the tightening in late 1993. This easing and the exchange rate devaluation
of 1994 resulted in inflation rising to a peak of over 24 percent in 1994.
The authorities eventually achieved a soft landing of the economy, with inflation in single digits by 1996 and
only a modest slowdown in growth. Factors contributing to the soft landing included: structural reforms to
increase the market orientation of the economy; a record grain harvest in 1996 that reduced food prices; the
buildup of excess capacity that put downward pressure on prices; and greater use of indirect monetary policy
instruments. While a soft landing was achieved, the rapid pace of credit growth in 1992–96 contributed to the
weakness of the financial sector today. Most of the non-performing loans in the banking system date from this
period, as banks funded SOEs with little regard for credit risk.
Several policy lessons can be drawn from the earlier cycles. First, earlier action to rein in credit and investment
growth would have restrained the upswings, contained inflation, and mitigated the eventual NPL problems.
Second, consistent implementation of monetary tightening actions, rather than premature easing of policies,
would have been more effective in restraining domestic demand and bringing inflation down. Third, greater
commercialization of banks and SOEs would have supported the effectiveness of monetary policy. Fourth,
increased use of indirect monetary policy instruments rather than administrative measures would improve
resource allocation and could also help control the cycles.

China: Comparison of the 1991-97 cycle with the current cycle
(In percent change)
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

2002

2003

2004
Q1

9.2
13.1
26.5
20.2
15.7
-9.1
-2.2

14.2
26.2
30.8
22.8
17.3
-11.6
-2.3

13.5
36.7
24.0
38.9
32.6
-19.2
-2.0

12.6
14.4
34.9
26.1
17.7
-9.2
-2.7

10.5
11.5
29.5
22.5
17.5
-0.5
-2.1

9.6
11.8
25.3
21.5
19.3
4.8
-1.6

8.8
9.3
17.3
16.3
16.5
8.4
-1.8

8.3
13.3
16.8
15.8
22.5
-1.1
-3.3

9.1
19.7
19.6
19.6
28.8
-7.1
-2.8

9.8
30.7
19.1
18.0
...
-6.0
...

Consumer prices
3.4
6.4
14.7 24.1
17.1
Food prices
3.3
7.7
14.3 31.8
22.9
Sources: Data provided by the Chinese authorities, and staff estimates.

8.3
7.6

2.8
-0.1

-0.8
-0.6

1.2
3.4

2.8
7.1

GDP (real)
Fixed Investment (real)
M2 growth
Domestic credit
Change in credit/GDP
NEER
Fiscal balance (Percent GDP)

- 10 Box 2. Regional Impact of a Slowdown in China
Simulations were conducted to assess the impact on other countries in the region (relative to the WEO baseline for
2004) of a one-time 10 percentage point decline in China’s import growth for domestic use arising from a slowdown
in domestic investment.1 For simplicity, imports of textiles and electronics products (which serve as a proxy for
China’s import of parts which are assembled into goods for export) were assumed to remain unaffected. Such a
decline in China’s imports is estimated to be consistent with an initial drop of 5.5 percentage points in real
investment growth. This would correspond to an initial drop of 2.9 percentage points in GDP growth and eventually a
4.3 percentage point decline in GDP growth in the longer term after all multiplier effects are taken into account.
The impact on the rest of Asia is estimated to be a 0.4 percentage point drop in GDP growth. The impact varies
considerably across the economies of the region, with declines in growth rates ranging from near zero to as high as
0.6 percentage points, depending on the importance of China as an export destination and the share of non-textile,
non-electronic exports to China. Asian NIEs are most affected, with their GDP growth slowing by 0.6 percentage
points (Table 1). These estimates are subject to a number of caveats: (i) import and export prices are assumed to
remain unchanged, thus excluding possible adverse terms of trade effects; (ii) the secondary impact of slower growth
in each economy on the other economies in the region is not taken into account; and (iii) offsetting policy
adjustments by affected economies are not considered. These should offset each other to a certain extent so that the
resulting estimates still provide a useful reference point.
Table 1. Estimated Impact of a 10 Percentage Point Decline in China's Non-Processing Import Growth

Asia excluding China
Industrial countries
Japan
Asian NIEs
Other Asia
ASEAN-4

Real GDP growth
(percentage points reduction)

Current Account Balance
(reduction in billions)

-0.4
-0.5
-0.5
-0.6
-0.3
-0.3

-6.5
-3.8
-3.5
-2.0
-0.7
-0.5

While this result is significant for several economies, such a shock should be manageable given the fairly robust
outlook for the region. Even though China is becoming increasingly important in supporting growth in the region,
other Asian economies are still largely dependent on the U.S. and E.U. markets for their exports, and the share of the
region’s exports that go to China is still only about 15 percent (including exports for processing). As a result, a
substantial drop in the growth of exports to China would still leave countries in the region with relatively robust
export growth rates provided that growth momentum in industrial markets is sustained. A slowing in China’s growth
would also have an impact on economies outside the region. However, because their trade shares with China are
even lower, the impact would be small. For example, preliminary estimates for the United States and the Euro area
reveal an impact of less than 0.1 percentage points.2
___________________
1
The estimates derived are based on a framework that captures the main trade flows within Asia. Because economic
relationships in the framework are linear, the results can be adjusted for impacts of different magnitude.
2
The latter results are based on preliminary estimates made in consultation with RES.

- 11 -

increase the market orientation of the economy. These would help China maintain an average
annual rate of GDP growth of 7–8 percent, create greater employment opportunities, reduce
fiscal risks, and better integrate the country into the global economy. The external position
should remain relatively strong, with the current account surplus largely unchanged relative
to GDP and continued sizable FDI inflows.
II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
16.
The authorities agreed with the general economic outlook presented by the staff.
They saw the economic measures already taken producing a slowing in growth momentum in
the second half of the year with inflation remaining moderate. Main differences with the staff
centered around the need for and timing of additional policy measures. Against this
background, the discussions focused on the further steps that may need to be taken to ensure
that economic growth moderates and on the difficult balancing act the authorities face in
trying to avoid a repetition of the boom/bust cycles of the past. Discussions also focused on
how speculative inflows have complicated monetary policy and on the need for greater
flexibility in the exchange rate; the role fiscal policy should play in the near term in reducing
demand and over the medium term in supporting a high sustainable rate of economic growth;
and the structural reform agenda.
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
17.
The staff argued that a further tightening of monetary policy appears to be
needed to ensure that monetary conditions are consistent with a slowing of growth to a
more sustainable pace. Since excess liquidity remains in the system, a further tightening of
monetary conditions is likely to be required to make sure that growth in monetary and credit
aggregates slows at least in line with the PBC’s targets. Moreover, a premature relaxation in
policies—a problem experienced in earlier cycles—should be avoided. Reserve requirements
could be increased further, and the scale of open market operations should be intensified.
With lending rates very low in real terms, the PBC also has scope to increase the base lending
rate to provide a clear signal of its intention to tighten monetary conditions. It would also be
appropriate to consider further use of prudential and supervisory guidance to tighten bank
lending standards, especially for sectors continuing to experience rapid investment growth.
Foreign currency lending by banks is still relatively small, but it is also growing rapidly and
will need to be monitored carefully.
18.
The authorities concurred with staff’s assessment that money and credit growth
needed to be reduced. However, they did not want to overdo the tightening in policies and
run the risk of precipitating a hard landing. They felt that it would be prudent to first give the
measures taken so far a chance to work, and see what impact they would have. While excess
reserves in the banking system appear high, they noted that part of these excess reserves are
held by banks for settlement purposes given the undeveloped state of the interbank market.

- 12 -

The staff acknowledged that measures already taken could continue to lower credit growth,
but noted administrative measures, which appeared to have had the largest impact so far,
could become less effective over time. Monetary policy needed to be forward-looking and
market-based, and risks in the present situation were such that it would be better to err on the
side of caution since excess liquidity remained in the banking system. Accordingly, the staff
suggested that additional action to tighten monetary policy be taken without undue delay. If
economic activity were to slow down sharply it would likely be due to the administrative
measures. In that case, these measures could be relaxed, but that would make it all the more
important to use market-based instruments to bring underlying monetary conditions at least in
line with the authorities’ monetary targets.
19.
Controlling money and credit growth has become increasingly difficult in the
presence of large capital inflows. The staff continued to stress that greater exchange rate
flexibility would enhance China’s ability to pursue an independent monetary policy and
adjust to shocks. Increased flexibility might best be accomplished by a widening of the
exchange rate band, possibly accompanied by a move to a currency basket. The staff also
maintained its view that it is difficult to find persuasive evidence that the renminbi is
substantially undervalued.6 While acknowledging the need eventually for increased exchange
rate flexibility, the authorities have strong reservations about making an initial move in
present circumstances. In particular, they were concerned that a small initial move could
exacerbate capital inflows. The staff suggested that, if sizable speculative capital inflows
were to continue, a larger initial move would be necessary.
20.
The staff noted that there may be some reasons to expect that the pace of capital
inflows could ease in the near term. The prospect of higher interest rates in the United
States and investor concerns about a sharp slowdown in China’s economic growth, could
change the relative attractiveness of putting and retaining funds in China. This would create a
more favorable environment for introducing exchange rate flexibility.
21.
The authorities expressed concerns about the impact that a large change in the
value of the renminbi might have on employment. They noted, in particular, that the
economy needed to generate 20−25 million new jobs a year to provide sufficient employment
opportunities for new entrants, the unemployed, and migrants from rural to urban areas. The
staff agreed that job creation remained a major policy challenge, but suggested that balanced
and sustainable growth would provide the best conditions to stimulate employment growth.
To this end, increased flexibility of the exchange rate would improve the effectiveness of
6

Staff analysis is summarized in SM/03/317 and Chapter IV of Occasional Paper 232,
“China’s Growth and Integration into the World Economy.” As noted in those papers,
existing methodologies yield a wide range of estimates of the equilibrium level of the
renminbi, with a great deal of uncertainty associated with each of these estimates. Views
among academics and market analysts, summarized in the Selected Issues paper, vary widely,
with estimates of the degree of undervaluation ranging from 0 to 35 percent.

- 13 -

monetary policy in reducing overheating risks. Staff noted that increased exchange rate
flexibility would not pose substantial risks for the banking system as the banks have a limited
scale of foreign currency assets and liabilities. Introducing flexibility would also provide the
incentive for banks to improve risk management skills. Moreover, rapid productivity growth,
the recent real effective depreciation of the renminbi, and the economy’s current strong
position would work to moderate any adverse effects on growth and employment from an
exchange rate change. Greater flexibility would also contribute to the orderly resolution of
global imbalances.
22.
Maintaining China’s steady and gradual approach to capital account
liberalization is appropriate. The staff and authorities agreed that a premature relaxation of
capital controls would expose the financial system to substantial stress and risks. At the same
time, staff noted that the existence of capital controls should not be a reason to delay the
movement toward greater exchange rate flexibility. In fact, many countries had found it
advantageous to increase exchange rate flexibility prior to capital account liberalization. This
approach would also help in achieving the authorities’ objective of allowing the exchange
market and hedging instruments to develop more fully before opening the capital account
(Box 3).
23.
The authorities and staff agreed on the need for further developing the foreign
exchange market. The staff, in particular, suggested that foreign exchange surrender
requirements could be further reduced and applied uniformly across enterprises. Allowing
enterprises access to the China Foreign Exchange Trade System through a licensed broker
system would also increase participation and liquidity in the interbank foreign exchange
market. Even within a narrow band, bid-offer spreads could be allowed to fluctuate so as to
encourage participants to take positions on both sides. In addition, forward markets and
instruments should also be allowed to develop.7
B. Fiscal Policy
24.
Fiscal policy has an important role to play in cooling down the economy. Based
on collections in the first five months of this year, it is likely that gross revenue collections in
2004 could exceed budget estimates by as much as 1 percent of GDP. In the current
circumstances, staff urged the government to save the tax revenue overperformance retained
by the central government (likely to be ½ percent of GDP). The authorities stated their
intention to hold all central government expenditure items to budgeted levels, and they
indicated that consideration might be given to keeping the amount of bonds issued for public
construction projects below its budgeted level. Steps were also being taken to rein in local
government sponsored investment, especially through the use of environmental and land

7

These and other issues related to the development of the foreign exchange market are
discussed in the Selected Issues paper.

- 14 -

Box 3. Exchange Rate Flexibility and Capital Account Liberalization in China
Full renminbi convertibility has been the stated goal of the authorities since 1993, but they have always
emphasized that it would take a long time to achieve that objective. While significant progress on trade
liberalization has been achieved (supported by WTO accession), and current account convertibility has been in
place since 1996, the authorities have taken a gradual and deliberate approach to capital account liberalization
in view of the substantial weaknesses in the domestic financial sector. Controls on international capital and
financial flows and other features of China’s exchange system are described in Annex I.
While exchange rate flexibility and capital account liberalization are related, they are distinct issues and do not
necessarily have to be implemented simultaneously. Some countries have liberalized capital flows without
exchange rate flexibility—an approach that entails considerable risks if financial markets are not sufficiently
developed, as was experienced during the Asian crisis—while others have introduced exchange rate flexibility
well in advance of capital account liberalization. International experience suggests that, in general, countries
tend to have better medium-term outcomes if they introduce exchange rate flexibility before fully liberalizing
their capital account, especially if there are weaknesses in the financial sector. Many countries including the
United Kingdom, Japan, several European countries, and more recently, India have introduced some exchange
rate flexibility well in advance of the removal of capital controls.
China’s gradual approach to capital account liberalization is appropriate, given the weaknesses in the financial
system. While there is wide recognition that capital account liberalization is an important counterpart to trade
liberalization and part of a natural progression towards a full market economy, there are substantial risks
associated with exposure to capital flows if there is not sufficient institutional development, especially in the
financial sector, to mitigate such risks. The liberalization of capital flows should be sequenced in a manner that
reinforces domestic financial liberalization and allows for institutional capacity building to manage the
additional risks. It also needs to be supported by a sound and credible macroeconomic policy environment.
Exchange rate flexibility should be pursued in a phased manner and this would not, in itself, pose risks to the
financial sector. Domestic banks do not have a large net exposure to currency risk, and the introduction of
greater flexibility would create stronger incentives for developing the foreign exchange market and for currency
risk management, including developing hedging instruments and forward markets that are currently absent. In
this way, the introduction of exchange rate flexibility can facilitate further capital account liberalization by
better preparing the economy to deal with the impact of increased capital flows. In fact, greater flexibility in the
exchange rate should be seen as a prerequisite before fully opening the capital account. A movement toward
more flexibility also does not necessarily mean immediate adoption of a free float. In fact, a period of “learning
to float” can be advisable to overcome “fear of floating”, and the maintenance of capital controls can, to some
degree, support this process by providing protection from potential instability arising from capital flows while
institutional arrangements needed to support capital account convertibility are allowed to develop.
In view of these considerations, a preferred approach would be to initiate a phased movement toward greater
exchange rate flexibility, develop the foreign exchange market, continue implementation of financial sector
reform, and carefully sequence opening of the capital account. Gradual capital account liberalization at the
margin (e.g., allowing more scope for capital outflows during a period of strength) can be beneficial, provided
that the direction is consistent with the longer-term objectives. Accordingly, steps toward relaxation of capital
controls should be undertaken carefully so they can be sustained. Uncertainties and policy inconsistencies that
would result from the relaxation and reintroduction of controls over time should be avoided.

- 15 -

regulations. The authorities agreed that revenue was on pace to exceed budget estimates, but
were less optimistic than the staff regarding the scale of excess revenue. They also noted that
at least part of any revenue overperformance would be used to pay down arrears on VAT
refunds owed to exporters, and that it was their intention to avoid any further increase in
refund arrears.8 Staff agreed with this approach, especially with respect to cutting back on
public investment, and urged that consideration be given to smoothing the timing of any
clearing of VAT refund arrears to limit the effect on liquidity and aggregate demand.
25.
The authorities’ medium-term fiscal objective is to keep the nominal deficit
constant (at RMB 320 billion). This would imply a gradual decline in the deficit relative to
GDP, consistent with the medium-term fiscal adjustment path of ¼ to ½ percent of GDP per
year endorsed by the Executive Board during the 2003 Article IV consultation.9 However, the
government faces substantial future demands on the budget to deal with existing quasi-fiscal
liabilities in the financial sector (including the possibility of additional NPLs in the future),
the pension system, and local government obligations, and to meet demands for health,
education, and social spending. In view of this situation, the staff suggested that the
authorities should take advantage of the prospect of achieving a lower deficit in 2004 to
reduce the medium-term deficit target. The authorities indicated that such a scenario was a
possibility, and a change in the medium-term deficit target might be considered.
26.
Achieving medium-term objectives will require expenditure reprioritization and
improved revenue collections, as well as implementation of a number of reforms designed
to improve the efficiency of fiscal management. While welcoming the significant progress
that has been made, the staff urged the authorities to push ahead more rapidly with these
essential reforms.10
27.
Expenditure management reforms will be a key to enhancing the efficiency of
fiscal policy. The ongoing introduction of the treasury single account system has already
made a fundamental difference in improving cash collections and recording in the budget.
8

These refunds are related to VAT and business taxes paid during production and
distribution cycles. In 2003, the authorities used part of the revenue overperformance in that
year to pay refunds in excess of the amount budgeted. In earlier years, especially 2000-02,
high export growth rates meant that insufficient funds were budgeted to pay approved
refunds. Arrears on VAT refunds were estimated at RMB 300 billion at end-2003
(2.6 percent of 2003 GDP).
9

Explicit government debt is low (26 percent of GDP), but there are substantial contingent
liabilities. See the 2003 Selected Issues paper (SM/03/317) for an analysis of longer-term
fiscal sustainability.
10

A description of Fund technical assistance, including in support of fiscal reforms, is
contained in Annex III.

- 16 -

Further improvements in cash management will be necessary to extract the full benefits for
fiscal management. More fundamentally, however, the introduction of a new budget
classification system and associated changes in the chart of accounts will be necessary for
more transparency, accountability, and better overall control of government spending, as well
as for making fiscal policy more effective as a tool of macroeconomic management. Work
needs to continue for implementation of the new system in time for the 2006 budget at the
latest, as currently envisaged by the authorities. The staff also strongly encouraged the
authorities to make additional efforts to move extra-budgetary funds, especially at the local
level, on to the budget. Local government-sponsored projects—often financed outside of the
budget—have been a major source of the recent surge in investment. The authorities
indicated that efforts are ongoing in all of these areas, and underscored once again their
commitment to these reforms.
28.
On the revenue side, staff urged the authorities to push ahead with pending tax
reforms. Improvements in tax administration have already contributed significantly to higher
collections, and these efforts will need to continue to offset the revenue impact of some tax
policy changes, such as reductions in agricultural taxes and the business tax on financial
institutions. Improved administration and extension of the VAT to services would provide the
basis for improved revenue collections over the medium term. The authorities are also
making preparations to shift the VAT from a production to a consumption basis. A pilot
project in three Northeast provinces was to be implemented this year with a view to
extending it to the whole country in the near future. However, this pilot has been postponed
owing to concerns that the change in the VAT to a consumption basis would provide
incentives to boost investment at a time when government efforts are being directed at
slowing it. Staff encouraged the authorities to continue preparations so that when the
macroeconomic situation stabilizes, the change could be made quickly. It would also be
important to minimize the time between the beginning of a pilot and its eventual extension to
country-wide coverage to limit distortions that would arise from partial implementation of a
major tax reform.
29.
Center-local fiscal relations remain a critical issue for limiting potential fiscal
liabilities, as well as for ensuring that all local governments have sufficient resources to
provide basic public services. Local governments are prohibited by law from direct
borrowing to finance their operations. However, they are able to circumvent these formal
rules by borrowing through public enterprises set up especially for this purpose. Accordingly,
a special task force was recently established to study potential liabilities being generated by
local governments. The staff welcomed this initiative and recommended that this work be
supported by establishing a fiscal risk register in the Treasury to keep track of any potential
liabilities. The staff also emphasized that any future relaxation of legal constraints on direct
borrowing by local governments should not take place until a number of structural reforms
have been implemented, including strengthening the recording and reporting of local
government operations and enhancing the accountability and transparency of local

- 17 -

government financial management.11 The authorities have also moved to increase transfers to
local governments in the 2004 budget to further improve local fiscal systems, and they are
considering a rationalization of the functions of lower-level governments within the current
five-tier system as a cost saving measure. Notwithstanding these efforts, staff emphasized
that the current transfer system may not provide sufficient resources to enable all local
governments (particularly those in poorer provinces) to provide a basic level of public
services. Key things that need to be done include reforming tax assignments across levels of
government, clarifying expenditure mandates, and establishing a rules-based transfer system.
C. Structural Reforms
Financial Sector
30.
The authorities recognize the importance of banking reforms for ensuring future
financial stability and creating sound domestic banks that will be able to adequately compete
after 2006 when the banking sector will be fully open to foreign participation. Progress has
been made in strengthening supervision and dealing with problems in the sector, but the
financial condition of the banks generally remains fragile. As a result, efforts to reform the
banks have been stepped up. The $45 billion recapitalization of two large state banks (Bank
of China and China Construction Bank) at end-December was a major new initiative (Box 4).
Efforts are being directed at improving internal management and corporate governance in
these banks, with time-bound action plans being put in place. The staff emphasized the
importance of holding bank management strictly accountable for the timely implementation
of these plans. A similar approach to recapitalization is being formulated for a third state
bank (Industrial and Commercial Bank of China).12 However, there is a general need to
strengthen bank balance sheets, improve corporate governance, and enhance the ability of
banks to manage risk throughout the banking system. It will be important to not allow the
focus on the large state banks to divert attention from problems in the rest of the banking
system. In particular, rapid loan growth by joint stock banks merits careful monitoring.
Moreover, meeting capital adequacy requirements with full provisioning by 2007 should be
achieved by all banking institutions, as required by existing guidelines. Further liberalization
of lending rates would also help increase the commercial orientation of the banks. The staff
added that the government should strengthen its ownership and oversight role in guiding the
bank restructuring process. The recently created Central Huijin Investment Company—the
holding company for the government’s share in BOC and CCB—could fill this role if it were
11

Local government’s financial management and debt are discussed in the Selected Issues
paper.
12

The last of the four large state banks (the Agricultural Bank of China) is substantially
different in character as it was directly involved in policy support to the agricultural sector in
the past. Its restructuring will be addressed in the context of overall reform of rural financial
institutions.

- 18 -

Box 4. Reform of the Banking System
On December 30, 2003, following a decision by the State Council, the authorities announced a
$45 billion (about 4 percent of GDP) capital injection for two of the four state-owned commercial
banks, Bank of China and China Construction Bank. The recapitalization was executed by the
People’s Bank of China by transferring the funds from its international reserves (which at that time
amounted to around $450 billion) into a new entity called the Central Huijin Investment Company.
The banks will retain these foreign currency assets in their original form as there are some restrictions
on the use of the funds and their conversion into domestic assets. The transaction has also increased
the risks to the PBC’s balance sheet, as reserves have been exchanged for an equity investment of
uncertain value.
The Chinese government announced that the capital injection is to be part of a broader reform process
for the two banks. These measures include (i) strengthening the corporate governance of the banks;
(ii) resolution of NPLs; (iii) reform of the shareholding system; (iv) the use of external auditors to
assess the true underlying financial position of the banks; and (v) enhanced external oversight of the
banks’ operations, including taking prompt action in the event that the capital base is threatened. The
authorities have also indicated interest in inviting strategic investors, both foreign and domestic. To
measure progress under the reform program, the China Banking Regulatory Commission has
established a number of performance assessment indicators against which the banks’ performance will
be monitored. The guidelines also stipulate that the banks must publicly disclose their compliance with
these requirements. Since receiving the capital injection, BOC and CCB have fully provisioned against
NPLs, allowing for a more accurate representation of their capital adequacy ratios. As of end-2003,
their CARs stood at 6.98 percent and 6.51 percent, respectively.
Additional steps could further strengthen the reform process, including development of a
comprehensive plan for government involvement in financial sector restructuring. A clear framework
should be established through which the government will exercise its ownership interest in the banking
sector. Close monitoring of the newly injected funds, as well as the government’s existing equity stake,
will ensure that the program stays on track and that public funds are not misused. A review of
international experience in bank restructuring reveals other common themes for consideration in
designing a comprehensive banking sector restructuring program. Those most applicable to China’s
current situation include: (i) development and monitoring of time-bound restructuring plans;
(ii) adoption of a commercial focus; and (iii) enhancements to the market infrastructure.
While the two recapitalized banks are developing action plans, monitoring and enforcement will be
key to keeping the program on track. Other banks should be encouraged to develop similar plans, even
in the absence of additional government capital being invested. In order to operate on a truly
commercial basis, all the banks will need to adopt modern corporate governance structures and be
relieved of public policy responsibilities and government influence in lending decisions. Further
enhancements to the market infrastructure would facilitate commercial operations. The legal
framework could better support the enforcement of financial contracts and the balance between
creditor and debtor rights. Legislation addressing both financial transactions—such as securitization—
and financial institution bankruptcy would be useful, and enhancements to accounting, auditing, and
disclosure requirements would promote market discipline.

- 19 -

properly staffed, granted the necessary enforcement authority, subject to appropriate
accountability requirements, and operated independently of agencies responsible for
regulation, supervision, or the implementation of monetary policy.13
31.
While considerable emphasis has been placed on reform of the large state banks,
the authorities said that they are also paying close attention to other parts of the
banking system. They have been actively engaged on a country-wide basis in steps to
address the problems of Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs) and in promoting consolidation of
the smaller city commercial banks. For the RCCs, a pilot program has been launched in eight
provinces involving ownership diversification and the injection of significant amounts of
private capital. It was also the authorities’ intention to strengthen the Central Huijin
Investment Company to exercise an ownership function on behalf of the government, with it
operating under international corporate governance standards. Other new initiatives include
the central bank beginning work on establishing a credit information system, and relevant
government agencies setting up an early warning system to identify emerging financial sector
problems.
32.
The authorities agreed with the staff on the need to continue with efforts to
reduce nonperforming loans (NPLs).14 The authorities acknowledged the importance of
limiting the occurrence of new NPLs, and that this would require slowing the current rate of
credit expansion. The staff argued that, in addition to improving overall supervision,
tightening of lending standards and advancing SOE reforms would be necessary. Orderly
resolution of existing NPLs also needs to remain a priority, including by enhancing the ability
of banks and asset management companies (AMCs) to resolve distressed debts by improving
the legal framework for creditor rights, foreclosure, and bankruptcy, and by allowing full tax
deductibility for specific loan loss provisions.
33.
Significant progress has been made in the on-going self assessment of the
financial system. The authorities expect that the assessment will be finalized soon and a
report will then be submitted to the State Council. After the State Council reviews the report,
a decision on participating in an FSAP will be made. The staff continued to strongly urge the
authorities to take part in an FSAP, as this would help in formulating next steps in financial
sector reform.

13

International experiences with banking sector restructuring are discussed in the Selected
Issues paper.
14

The evolution of NPLs in China’s banking system is discussed in Chapter VII of IMF
Occasional Paper 232 “China’s Integration with the Global Economy: Prospects and
Challenges.”

- 20 -

SOE Reform
34.
Restructuring the SOE sector remains a key policy priority. SOE profitability
improved considerably in 2003 with total profits increasing by 31 percent (to
RMB 495 billion; 4 percent of GDP), reflecting strong economic growth, the positive effects
of high international commodity prices on resource-producing companies, and progress in
implementing reforms. The State Asset Supervision and Administration Commission
(SASAC) has taken a number of steps to improve management of the SOEs and speed up the
reform process since its creation last year. These include the initiation of performance
reviews for senior SOE managers and new laws and regulations related to supervision,
restructuring, and the sale of state assets.
35.
The staff pointed to the importance of moving forward more rapidly with SOE
reform, especially since it is essential for supporting other reforms. While the steps taken
by SASAC over the last year are welcome, greater efforts are needed to put these policies into
effect and in evaluating SOEs based on commercial criteria. Furthermore, to encourage
commercial orientation, SOEs need to be subject to hard budget constraints and operate
independently. Staff recommended that all profitable SOEs should pay dividends to the
government, especially if dividends are being paid to private shareholders. SOEs that are not
viable should be closed or, if deemed socially important, receive support directly from the
budget. The authorities explained that the focus of their attention so far has been on
improving the regulatory framework, closing loss-making SOEs, and boosting performance
of large SOEs. For example, shareholding systems are being introduced in large SOEs and
more than 28 million workers have been laid off since 1998.
Labor and Capital Markets
36.
The authorities noted that, even with a high rate of GDP growth, labor market
pressures will continue. Registered unemployment in urban and township areas increased to
4.3 percent in 2003 from 4.0 percent in 2002, in part due to the closure of SOE reemployment
centers and the movement of laid-off SOE workers (xiagang) to the registered unemployment
rolls.15 In addition, there are an estimated 150 million excess rural workers and more than 10
million new workers are projected to enter the labor force each year for the next 5–6 years,
before labor force growth begins to slow around 2010. The staff stressed that improvements
in the functioning of labor markets will be needed to absorb these inflows into the labor pool.
This should include better information on job opportunities, improved education and training,
and steps to enhance labor mobility. Further reforms of the household registration (hukou)
system to allow freer movement of labor will also be important for mitigating
underemployment in rural areas and reducing income disparities. The authorities noted that
15

The actual level of unemployment remains uncertain given the poor quality of the data.
Labor market performance and challenges are described in Chapter VIII of Occasional
Paper 232.

- 21 -

they plan to improve the environment for rural workers by further removing restrictions and
charges on rural migrant workers and offering job training to 60 million people within the
next seven years.
37.
Further improvements in the social safety net for both rural and urban workers
are necessary. The current pension system is severely underfunded, and there are rising cash
deficits in many regions—as growth in the numbers of those receiving benefits is exceeding
that of new participants—which have been met by transfers from the budget.16 To address the
system’s problems, the authorities are expanding the administrative level of pooling for some
regions to the city or provincial level, and are considering expanding the coverage of the
system, including to the self-employed. Also, in the Liaoning pilot program, budgetary
resources were used to fully fund the individual accounts that are used to cover current
pension payments. This pilot program is being extended to two more provinces with revisions
to some parameters. The staff underlined that additional reforms are needed to deal with
remaining unfunded liabilities. These reforms should include further increases in the level of
pooling and adjustments to key parameters such as benefit payments and retirement age.
More generally, improvements in safety nets in both urban and rural areas are needed to
protect vulnerable groups and reduce poverty levels. In this regard, the central government is
studying the feasibility of implementing a nationwide minimum living allowance scheme for
the rural population.
38.
Capital markets need to be further developed to reduce the current heavy
reliance on the banking system. The relative size of bond issuances and IPOs is small and
the majority of shares (accounting for about two-thirds of total stock market capitalization)
are not traded. Moreover, the futures markets are limited and the bond and inter-bank markets
are not unified. To promote the development of capital markets, the State Council issued
guidelines in January 2004 to allow qualified non-bank financial institutions to issue
securities and to give more latitude to insurance and pension funds to participate in the
capital markets.17 Substantial improvements in the availability and reliability of information
on companies’ activities and performance are essential for further capital market
development. Specifically, for bond market development, there is a need for a unified
regulatory framework and removal of restrictions on coupon rates to improve the liquidity
and efficiency of the market.
39.
The authorities continue to move gradually toward greater capital account
liberalization. Sixteen international financial institutions have been approved under the
Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors scheme to invest in domestic equity and bond
16

A detailed description of China’s pension system and the need for reform is contained in
the Selected Issues paper for the 2002 Article IV consultation (SM/02/231).

17

A “second board” equity market for small and medium enterprises started trading in
May 2004.

- 22 -

markets with a total approved investment quota of $1.9 billion and a number of applications
are pending. Plans for a Qualified Domestic Institutional Investors scheme are under careful
review. The social security fund and insurance companies have been allowed to invest in
overseas securities markets.
Trade, Statistics, and Other Issues
40.
The authorities noted that the implementation of WTO commitments is broadly
on track and, in some cases, ahead of schedule. The unweighted average tariff rate was
reduced to 10.4 percent in 2004 from 11.3 percent in 2003 and key commitments with respect
to banking services and trade and distribution rights have also moved forward. The
authorities are committed to implement agreed reforms and plan to further liberalize trading
rights with effect from July 1, six months ahead of schedule.18 The authorities see multilateral
agreements as their biggest trade priority and indicated full support for the completion of the
Doha Development Round. A number of regional and bilateral free trade agreements under
discussion are seen as supplementary to this broader effort. Staff encouraged the authorities
to improve the administration of tariff-rate quotas for agriculture, and to address other issues
related to WTO compliance. The authorities indicated their willingness to do so, and to
discuss any issues raised by partner countries through the WTO's dispute resolution
procedures, if necessary. The authorities expressed alarm at the number of anti-dumping
claims being made against them and indicated that they are engaged in discussions with a
number of countries to recognize China as a market economy.19
41.
External debt remains low relative to GDP and the level of international
reserves. However, both short-term debt and foreign-currency denominated domestic debt
have risen sharply. While still not a serious concern (see Table 4), staff advised the
authorities to watch these categories closely as their growth may represent potential
vulnerabilities. The authorities noted that the recent growth is from a very low base, and both
are still quite low relative to international reserves and foreign exchange deposits. They have
conducted an investigation and found that recent increases in debt largely correspond to
legitimate underlying transactions. China continues to forgive external debt owed by HIPCeligible and other low income countries. Partial debt relief agreements have been concluded
with a number of African and Asian countries, and China has pledged to cancel all its debt
owed by 31 African countries totaling $1.27 billion.

18
19

China’s WTO commitments are described in IMF Occasional Paper 232.

Some countries, including Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, and Thailand, have
recognized China as a market economy. The European Commission recently ruled that China
could not yet be designated a market economy.

- 23 -

42.
Progress continues to be made in upgrading China’s economic statistics.
However, inadequate data in several areas still adversely affect the monitoring of
macroeconomic developments. The greatest needs are in national accounts, labor statistics,
and government finance. The authorities indicated that they will continue to make
improvements in statistics in the context of their participation in GDDS, and expressed
interest in subscribing to SDDS in the future. They are currently improving the quality of real
GDP by expenditure category and expect to begin quarterly estimates in the near future. The
staff strongly encouraged the provision of data on the international investment position (IIP).
The authorities said that they are still resolving some data issues.
43.
China does not have a separate anti-money laundering (AML) framework, but
continues to enforce existing provisions contained in various other laws. At end-2003, an
amendment to the central bank law assigned the responsibility for guiding the development of
China’s AML system to PBC. A working group to draft comprehensive AML/CFT
legislation has been established and the PBC and SAFE issued regulations in 2003 for:
(i) customer identification; (ii) the monitoring and reporting of financial transactions; and
(iii) procedures for seizure and confiscation of illegal proceeds. In May 2004, the authorities
participated in an MFD/LEG workshop on AML/CFT issues and at that time indicated a
three-year time frame to come into compliance with FATF requirements.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
44.
China has favorable medium-term prospects for maintaining strong growth and
continuing its integration into the global economy. The biggest near-term risk to the
economic outlook is that policy measures taken may not be sufficient to ensure a soft landing
of the economy. Strong investment momentum remains, and continued rapid credit growth
will risk a further significant rise in nonperforming loans. To ensure that economic growth
slows to a more sustainable pace, a further tightening of monetary policy would appear to be
needed. The measures taken so far will contribute to reducing money and credit growth.
However, continued vigilance will be needed to ensure that further policy tightening is
undertaken in a timely manner. Excess liquidity remains in the system, and a further
monetary tightening would ensure that growth in monetary and credit aggregates comes
down, at least in line with the central bank’s targets. It would also be appropriate for efforts
to reduce the pace of credit growth to continue to be complemented by prudential and
supervisory guidance to tighten bank lending standards, especially for sectors experiencing
rapid investment growth.
45.
Greater exchange rate flexibility continues to be in China’s best interest.
Controlling money and credit growth has become increasingly difficult in the presence of
large capital inflows. A more flexible exchange rate would enhance China’s ability to pursue
an independent monetary policy and adjust to shocks. Increased flexibility of the exchange
rate would also improve the effectiveness of monetary policy in containing domestic demand
and price pressures. While recent strong capital inflows potentially complicate the

- 24 -

introduction of flexibility, it is best for China to move from a position of strength, which
should serve to limit adverse effects, and a move to greater exchange rate flexibility should
not be unduly delayed.
46.
The staff continues to support a gradual approach to capital account
liberalization. However, the maintenance of capital controls should not deter a movement
toward exchange rate flexibility. Greater exchange rate flexibility has preceded capital
account convertibility in many advanced and developing countries. In fact, experience
suggests that it is advantageous to have exchange rate flexibility for a period of time prior to
the liberalization of capital flows to allow the exchange market and hedging instruments to
more fully develop. While the cautious removal of some restrictions on overseas investment
could be implemented, this should not be seen as a substitute for the benefits of greater
exchange rate flexibility.
47.
Fiscal policy should play a more supportive role in achieving a soft landing of
the economy. The authorities are urged to save the expected revenue overperformance that is
retained by the central government, reduce public investment by limiting the amount of
construction bonds, and lower the deficit below the level targeted in the 2004 budget. Further
administrative steps might also be taken to hold down local government sponsored
investment. At the same time, new claims for VAT refunds should be settled in a timely
fashion, and efforts made to clear the remaining stock of arrears. However, consideration
should be given to the timing of clearing these arrears to limit the impact on overall liquidity.
48.
Medium-term fiscal consolidation will be required to meet prospective demands
on state resources without putting public debt on an unsustainable path. The staff
continues to recommend that the authorities aim to steadily reduce the fiscal deficit by
¼ to ½ percent of GDP per year over the medium term. A further reduction of the 2004
budget deficit below its target would provide an opportunity to pursue a more rapid fiscal
consolidation. This would also provide more resources over time to address large contingent
liabilities arising from nonperforming loans in the banking system, unfunded pension
obligations, and liabilities at the local government level. It would also facilitate the
government’s ability to cope with spending pressures related to SOE restructuring, improving
the social safety net, and rising health care needs, especially with an aging population.
49.
A combination of expenditure reprioritization and revenue measures would
facilitate fiscal consolidation and promote economic efficiency. Expenditure management
reforms will be the key to improving the effectiveness of spending. These include the
adoption of a revised budget classification system and chart of accounts, the full introduction
of the treasury single account, and improved cash management. Extra-budgetary funds,
especially at the local government level, should continue to be brought onto the budget.
These measures need to move forward as quickly as possible to enhance the effectiveness of
fiscal policy as a macroeconomic tool. On the revenue side, priority reforms include
extending the VAT to services, shifting the VAT from a production to a consumption-based
tax, unifying income tax rates for domestic and foreign companies, reducing the tax burden
on the financial sector, and continuing to strengthen tax administration.

- 25 -

50.
A number of measures are needed to address growing concerns over fiscal risks
at the local government level. The recent establishment of a special government task force
to study local governments’ potential liabilities is a welcome development, but this should
also be supported by a fiscal risk register in the Treasury (Ministry of Finance). Strengthening
the recording and reporting of local government operations and enhancing the accountability
and transparency of local government financial management should precede any future
relaxation of legal constraints on direct borrowing by local governments. Fundamental
changes in center-local fiscal relations are also needed to ensure that all local governments
have sufficient resources to provide a basic level of public services, particularly education
and health care, which should help reduce income disparities. Key measures include
reforming tax assignments across levels of government, clarifying expenditure mandates, and
reforming the transfer system to move toward a more rules-based equalization system.
51.
Achieving continued strong growth over the medium term will depend on speedy
implementation of structural reforms in a number of key areas. These include
restructuring of the banking system, SOEs, and the pension system, further development of
labor and capital markets, and meeting scheduled WTO commitments.
52.
The financial condition of the banking sector remains weak, although
considerable efforts have been made in recent years to improve its performance and to
strengthen supervision. The recapitalization of two state commercial banks at end-2003 was
an important new initiative aimed at stepping up the pace of reform. It will be crucial to
monitor progress in implementing the time-bound action plans for these banks, evaluate the
banks’ performance relative to these plans, and ensure that capital adequacy requirements
with full provisioning can be achieved by 2007, as required by existing guidelines. In this
regard, recent efforts to address the problems of rural financial institutions are welcome.
More generally, bank balance sheets need to be considerably strengthened throughout the
system, governance improved, and the banks need to be better able to manage risk.
Diversifying ownership in the banks—including by allowing qualified foreign financial
institutions to take strategic ownership stakes—would aid the restructuring process. The
further liberalization of lending rates would allow banks to increase the commercial
orientation of their lending over time and should contribute to improved financial
performance.
53.
More effective execution of the government’s ownership role going forward
would also aid the restructuring of the banks. The Central Huijin Investment Company
could fill this ownership and oversight role if it was properly staffed, granted the necessary
enforcement authority, and subject to appropriate accountability requirements. It should also
operate independently of agencies responsible for regulation, supervision, or the
implementation of monetary policy in order to avoid conflicts of interest.
54.
Progress has been made in reducing nonperforming loans, and these efforts need
to continue. Strong efforts will be needed to limit the occurrence of new nonperforming
loans, and this argues for slowing the current rate of credit expansion. In addition to
improving overall supervision, tightening of lending standards will be necessary. A more

- 26 -

favorable environment for the orderly resolution of existing NPLs also needs to be made a
priority. The ability of banks and AMCs to resolve distressed debts needs to be enhanced by
improving the legal framework for creditor rights, foreclosure, and bankruptcy, and allowing
full tax deductibility for specific loan loss provisions. Consideration should also be given to
granting AMCs legal powers to more easily seize and dispose of collateral. The staff
welcomes the progress the government has made in conducting its self assessment of the
financial sector, and continues to recommend that China participate in the Financial Sector
Assessment Program at the earliest opportunity. The authorities should also move forward
with plans to develop AML/CFT legislation.
55.
Restructuring the SOE sector remains a key policy priority. The current strong
pace of economic activity and job creation provides a conducive environment for moving
forward rapidly with SOE reforms. A number of initiatives to improve management of the
SOEs and speed up the reform process have been taken. Greater efforts are needed to put
these policies into effect and to evaluate SOEs based on commercial criteria. Furthermore, to
encourage commercial orientation, SOEs need to be subject to hard budget constraints,
operate independently, and pay dividends to the government. SOEs that are not viable should
be closed or, if deemed socially important, receive support directly from the budget.
56.
Continued successful implementation of WTO commitments is the key to
maintaining market access in industrial countries and sustaining integration with the
global economy. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to implement remaining
commitments as scheduled and China’s ongoing support for the completion of the Doha
Development Round.
57.
Improvements in the functioning of labor markets will be needed to deal with a
rapidly growing labor force. Even with a high rate of GDP growth, labor market pressures
will continue, given projected increases in the working age population and further substantial
migration from rural to urban areas. Labor market reforms should include better information
on job opportunities, improved education and training, and a strengthened social safety net
(including pensions) for both rural and urban workers. Further reforms of the household
registration (hukou) system to allow freer movement of labor are important for mitigating
underemployment in rural areas and reducing income disparities.
58.
The staff welcomes the continued improvement in the quality of economic
statistics. However, inadequate data in several areas still adversely affect the monitoring of
macroeconomic developments. The greatest need is the provision of annual and quarterly
estimates of real GDP on an expenditure basis. Compilation of fiscal and labor statistics also
needs to be brought in line with international standards. As required by the IMF’s Articles of
Agreement, reporting of data on the international investment position should be done as soon
as feasible.
59.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with the People’s Republic of
China take place on the standard 12-month consultation cycle.

- 27 Figure 1. China: Growth and Demand Indicators
15

15

50

10

10

40

40

5

5

30

30

GDP Growth
(4-quarter percent change)

50

Demand Indicators
(12-month percent change)

Fixed asset investment 1/

0

-5

Contribution of external demand
Contribution of domestic demand

0

20

-5

10

20

10
Real retail sales

GDP growth

-10

-10

0

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
10
8
6

Inflation
(12-month percent change)
Non-food, non-energy CPI

0
1997

10

15

8
6

2000

Components of CPI Inflation
(12-month percent change)

10

2003
15

10

4

4

Non-tradables

2

2

0

0

-2

CPI

5

5

0

0

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

Tradables
PPI

-8
-8
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

-5
-5
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

1/ Prior to January 2004 fixed-asset investment includes investment by state-owned units and others. After January 2004 it refers to stateowned units and others, urban collectives, and urban private-owned enterprises.

- 28 Figure 2. China: External Indicators
30

70

Trade Account
(Year-on-year percent change)

Imports
(right scale)

Trade balance
(US$b; left scale)

20

50

8.8

8.6

8.6
1-year non-deliverable
forward rate

8.4
10

8.8

Renminbi per U.S. dollar

8.4

30
Spot rate

8.2
0

10
Exports
(right scale)

-10

-10
1997

90

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
90

Inward Foreign Direct Investment
(Year-on-year percent change)

8.0

8.0

7.8
2000
240
200

60

8.2

60

7.8
2001

2002

External Debt
(In US$ billions)
Long-term debt
(left scale)

2003

2004
24

Total debt in percent of
GDP
(right scale)

20
16

160

Committed
30

30

12

120
Short-term debt
(left scale)

80
0

8

0

-30

-30

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1997
12

130

Gross Official Reserves
400
In months of imports of goods
and non factor sevices
(right scale)

300

0

0

2004

450

350

4

40

Actual

10

120

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
130

Real and Nominal Effective Exchange
Rates
(June 1997=100)

120

NEER
110

250

110

8
100

200

100
REER

150

6

In US$ billions
(left scale)

100
50

4
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

90

90

80
1997

80
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

- 29 Figure 3. China: Macroeconomic Policies
-1

Fiscal Balance and Public Debt
(In percent of GDP)
Public debt
(right scale)

-2

30

12
10

10

25

Fiscal balance
(left scale)

8

8
20

1-year lending rate

6
4

-3

12

Interest Rates
(Percent per annum)

-4

4

RMB denominated
deposit rate

15

10

6

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

5
-4
-5

0

Money and Credit 1/
(3-month average,
year-on-year percent change)

-6

-6
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004

1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
25

25

1000

1000

Reserve Money Growth 2/
(Quarterly, in billions of yuan)

800

800

Other
OMO (net)
Foreign exchange reserves
Reserve money

600
20

-4

Spread between RMB and
US$ deposit rates

600

20
Broad money

15

400

400

200

200

15
0

0

10

10
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
1/ 2004Q2 covers April and May.
2/ 2004 covers the first two months of the year.

-200

-200

Financial Institutions
loans

-400

-400
2002

2003

2004

- 30 -

Table 1. China: Summary Indicators
Nominal GDP (2003):
Population (2003):
GDP per capita (2003):
Quota:

US$1,410 billion
1.292 billion
US$1,091
SDR 6,370 million
1999

Real GDP (production)
Real GDP (expenditure) 1/
Real domestic demand
Consumer prices

7.1
6.7
8.1
-1.4

2000

8.0
7.4
7.1
0.4

2001

2002

(Change in percent)
7.5
8.3
9.1
9.3
7.9
7.9
0.7
-0.8

2003
Prel.

2004

2005

9.1
11.5
9.5
1.2

9.0
…
8.9
3.5

7.5
…
6.7
3.0

Proj.

(In percent of GDP)
Total capital formation
Of which : Fixed capital formation
Gross national saving
External current account

37.4
35.9
39.0
1.6

36.3
36.5
38.2
1.9

38.5
37.8
40.0
1.5

44.4
44.4
47.6
3.2

45.8
45.8
48.3
2.5

44.7
44.5
47.7
3.0

Overall budget balance, IMF basis 2/
Revenue
Expenditure (including net lending)
Overall budget balance, authorities definition, in bn RMB
Overall budget balance, authorities definition

-4.0
14.3
18.3
-174
-2.1

-3.6
-3.1
-3.3
-2.8
15.3
17.0
18.2
18.7
18.9
20.1
21.5
21.6
-250
-246
-310
-292
-2.8
-2.5
-3.0
-2.5
(Change in percent; end of period)

-2.2
19.0
21.2
-260
-2.0

-2.0
19.6
21.5
-260
-1.8

Banking system's net domestic assets 3/
Of which : Domestic credit 3/
Broad money 3/
Reserve money
Interest rate (one-year time deposits, year-end)

15.0
15.9
14.7
7.3
2.3

10.8
21.2
17.0
8.5
2.3

…
…
…
…
…

…
…
…
…
…

Current account balance
Of which : Exports
Imports
Capital and financial account balance 4/
Of which : Direct investment inflows (net)
Errors and omissions
Change in net international reserves (increase -)

21
195
159
5
37
-18
-9

21
249
215
2
37
-12
-11

17
266
232
35
37
-5
-47

35
326
281
32
47
8
-76

46
438
394
53
47
18
-117

40
543
512
110
48
…
-150

52
678
634
47
49
…
-100

Gross international reserves 5/
In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
As a percent of short-term external debt 6/
External debt 6/
Of which: Short-term debt 6/
Debt-service ratio (in percent of exports) 6/
Exchange rate at end-period (Rmb per US$) 7/
Nominal effective exchange rate 7/
Real effective exchange rate 7/

158
7.6
1,043
152
15
9.1
8.3
70.8
107.2

169
7.5
1,291
146
13
7.3
8.3
72.7
108.8

219
8.0
432
170
51
7.1
8.3
76.9
114.1

295
7.9
529
171
56
6.5
8.3
76.1
110.9

412
8.6
535
194
77
5.1
8.3
70.6
102.9

562
9.5
611
216
92
4.6
…
…
…

662
9.3
682
230
97
4.1
…
…
…

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (In billions of RMB)
Exports growth (in percent)
Imports growth (in percent)

8,207
6.1
15.8

8,947
27.9
35.4

9,731
6.8
8.1

10,517
22.4
21.3

11,690
34.6
39.8

13,188
24.0
30.0

14,602
24.8
24.0

3.4

5.5

0.9

2.0

2.8

4.2

3.6

16.5
6.5
14.4
9.2
2.3

40.3
40.1
43.1
2.8

15.3
17.2
16.8
13.3
2.0

19.7
19.6
19.6
17.1
2.0

(In billions of U.S. dollars)

Real GDP growth of trading partners

Sources: Data provided by the Chinese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ IMF staff estimate. For data up to 2002, the implicit deflators from the production GDP was used. For 2003, consumption
was deflated with CPI, investment with implicit deflator for fixed investment.
2/ Central and local governments, including all official external borrowing. Figures for 2004 are budget estimates.
3/ Banking survey.
4/ For 2004-05, includes errors and omissions.
5/ Includes gold, SDR holdings, and reserve position in the Fund.
6/ Official data sources. The coverage and classification of official external debt data were modified in 2001. Categories of debt
previously not covered are now included.
7/ Annual averages (1990 = 100), using revised weights.

- 31 -

Table 2. China: Balance of Payments
(In billions of U.S. dollars)
1999

2000

2001

2002
Q1

2003
Q2

Q3

Q4

2003
Prel.

Current Account Balance

21.1

20.5

17.4

35.4

2.6

8.5

8.7

26.0

45.9

Trade balance
Exports
Imports (BOP basis)

36.0
194.7
158.7

34.5
249.1
214.7

34.0
266.1
232.1

44.2
325.7
281.5

3.1
86.3
83.2

10.5
104.1
93.6

9.4
117.2
107.7

21.7
130.7
109.0

44.7
438.3
393.6

Services

-5.3

-5.6

-5.9

-6.8

-3.1

-3.1

-1.8

-0.5

-8.6

Income

-14.5

-14.7

-19.2

-14.9

-1.1

-2.6

-3.6

-0.6

-7.8

4.9

6.3

8.5

13.0

3.8

3.8

4.7

5.4

17.6

5.2

1.9

34.8

32.3

23.2

21.2

16.1

-7.8

52.7

0.0

0.0

-0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Current transfers
Capital and Financial Account Balance
Capital Account
Financial Account

7.7

2.0

34.8

32.3

23.2

21.2

16.1

-7.7

52.8

37.0
38.8
-1.8

37.5
38.4
-0.9

37.4
44.2
-6.9

46.8
49.3
-2.5

11.2
12.0
-0.8

21.2
15.8
0.0

9.1
8.3
0.7

11.2
11.0
0.3

47.2
47.1
0.2

Portfolio investment
Assets
Liabilities

-11.2
-10.5
-0.7

-4.0
-11.3
7.3

-19.4
-20.7
1.2

-10.3
-12.1
1.8

-4.1
-4.4
0.3

-0.2
-5.0
0.3

1.6
1.4
0.2

14.1
6.6
7.6

11.4
3.0
8.4

Other investment
Assets 1/
Liabilities
Trade credit
Loans
Long term
Credit
Debit
Short term
Credit
Debit
currency and deposits
other

-20.5
-24.4
3.9
13.3
-0.5
0.2
12.5
-12.4
-0.7
2.5
-3.2
-1.5
-7.3

-31.5
-43.9
12.3
18.2
-2.4
-1.9
8.7
-10.6
-0.5
3.5
-4.0
-0.1
-3.5

16.9
20.8
-3.9
-2.4
-1.5
-1.2
7.1
-8.3
-0.3
3.2
-3.5
0.5
-0.5

-4.1
-3.1
-1.0
2.8
-4.1
-4.5
18.4
-22.9
0.4
33.7
-33.3
0.3
0.0

16.1
12.9
3.2
1.8
1.4
0.8
5.6
-4.8
0.6
8.8
-8.2
0.3
-0.3

5.7
5.3
0.4
-0.5
0.6
-1.1
4.9
-6.0
1.7
12.7
-11.0
0.3
0.0

5.5
2.3
3.1
3.9
-0.3
...
...
...
...
...
...
-0.1
-0.4

-33.1
-38.4
5.3
-0.5
4.9
...
...
...
...
...
...
0.2
0.7

-5.9
-17.9
12.0
4.7
6.6
-5.4
17.5
-22.9
12.0
61.4
-49.4
0.7
0.0

-17.8

-11.9

-4.9

7.8

4.0

0.7

12.7

1.0

18.4

8.5

10.5

47.3

75.5

29.8

30.4

37.5

19.3

117.0

-8.5

-10.5

-47.3

-75.5

-29.8

-30.4

-37.5

-19.3

-117.0

2.1
1.9
1.5
6.1
27.9
6.8
15.8
35.4
8.1
3.9
3.6
3.8
157.7
168.3
215.6
...
...
426
107.2
108.8
114.1
991.4 1,080.7 1,175.8

2.8
22.4
21.3
3.9
291.1
523
110.9
1,270.7

...
33.6
52.1
...
321.0
...
...
...

...
32.3
38.0
...
351.4
...
...
...

...
31.5
34.8
...
388.9
...
...
...

...
40.1
38.0
...
408.2
...
...
...

3.2
34.6
39.8
3.3
408.2
530
102.9
1,412.3

Net direct investment
Foreign direct investment in China
Direct investment abroad

Errors and Omissions 2/
Overall Balance
Reserve assets
Memo items:
Current account as percent of GDP
Export growth (value terms)
Import growth (value terms)
FDI (inward) as a percent of GDP
Gross reserves (excludes gold valuation)
as a percent of ST debt by remaining maturity
Real effective exchange rate (1990 = 100)
GDP

Sources: Chinese authorities and IMF staff calculations
1/ 2003 figure includes the counterpart transaction to the US$ 45 billion of foreign exchange reserves used for bank recapitalization.
2/ Includes counterpart transaction to valuation changes.

- 32 Table 3. China: External Debt
(In billions of U.S. dollars)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Debt to Commercial Banks
Foreign banks and financial institutions
Buyer's credit

55.8
26.5
13.0

53.4
24.4
13.8

46.2
20.2
13.2

46.5
33.5
13.1

44.1
31.7
12.4

53.7
42.4
11.3

Debt to Official Creditors
Bilateral official creditors
Multilateral creditors

45.4
22.4
23.0

51.7
26.6
25.1

51.0
24.6
26.3

51.3
23.7
27.6

52.1
24.4
27.7

51.9
25.4
26.5

Bonds Issued Abroad

12.4

12.0

12.3

12.7

10.8

11.2

Debt to other creditors
Of which:
Loans from other non-bank sources
Trade credit
International financial leasing

32.5

34.8

36.3

59.6

64.3

76.9

17.4
1.7
13.1

20.2
2.0
12.3

22.8
1.6
11.9

23.5
24.4
10.1

23.6
26.3
9.2

27.5
36.6
7.7

146.0

151.8

145.7

170.1

171.4

193.6

17.3
…

15.2
…

13.1
…

43.9
50.6

47.9
55.7

73.0
77.0

Total debt
Of which:
Short-term debt (original maturity) 1/
Short-term debt (remaining maturity) 1/

Sources: Chinese authorities, Bank for International Settlements, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development and Fund Staff estimates.
1/ Significant changes in coverage and classification of official external debt data were made in 2001.
Categories of debt previously not covered are now included, especially under short-term debt (e.g., trade credit).

- 33 Table 4. China: Indicators of External Vulnerability
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004
2005
Projections

Monetary and Financial indicators
Public sector domestic debt (official data; in percent of GDP)
Broad money (M2: annual percentage change)
Foreign currency deposits to broad money (percent)
Credit to nonstate sectors (annual percentage change)
Foreign currency loans to credit to the economy (in percent)

15.5
14.7
7.1
15.6
6.3

17.7
12.3
7.7
18.1
4.2

19.4
14.4
7.0
8.5
5.2

21.2
16.8
6.7
15.3
5.0

22.0
19.6
5.6
21.2
5.4

21.6
…
…
…
…

21.5
…
…
…
…

Stock Exchange Index (end of period, Dec. 19, 1990 = 100) 1/
Stock Exchange capitalization (percent of GDP)
Number of listed companies

1,452
32.4
484

2,192
53.8
572

1,713
44.4
646

1,419
36.5
715

1,569
36.5
780

…
…
…

…
…
…

Balance of payments indicators
Exports (annual percentage change, U.S. dollars)
Imports (annual percentage change, U.S. dollars)
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP)
Of which: Gross foreign direct investment inflows

6.1
15.8
2.1
0.5
3.9

27.9
35.4
1.9
0.2
3.6

6.8
8.1
1.5
3.0
3.8

22.4
21.3
2.8
2.6
3.9

34.6
39.8
3.3
3.7
3.3

24.0
30.0
2.5
5.9
3.3

24.8
24.0
3.0
1.9
3.1

Reserve indicators
Gross reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
Gross reserves to imports of GNFS (months)
Gross reserves to broad money (M2) (percent)
Gross reserves to short-term external debt by remaining maturity (percent) 3/

158
7.6
10.9
438

169
7.5
10.4
852

219
8.0
11.8
432

295
7.9
13.6
530

412
8.6
…
535

562
9.5
…
579.1

662
9.3
…
648.7

15.3
151.8
47.3
34.4
15.2
…
36.6

13.5
145.7
49.0
29.8
13.1
…
70.0

14.5
170.4
49.8
30.1
43.9
50.6
88.6

13.5
171.4
50.5
29.1
47.9
55.7
109.8

13.7
193.6
52.8
58.1
73.0
77.0
…

13.5
215.6
58.8
64.7
80.6
92.0
…

13.0
229.6
62.6
68.9
85.6
97.0
…

69.5
9.1
3.8
137

52.1
7.3
2.9
162

56.9
7.1
3.2
116

46.9
6.5
2.8
88

39.9
5.1
2.3
83

35.8
4.6
2.0
…

30.6
4.1
1.8
…

A3
BBB

A3
BBB

A3
BBB

A3
BBB

A2
BBB

…
…

…
…

991
218
-1.5

1,081
280
6.7

1,176
299
2.8

1,266
365
-7.1

1,412
485
-6.6

1,593
602
…

1,764
752
…

External debt and balance sheet indicators 4/
Total external debt (percent of GDP)
Total external debt (billions of U.S. dollars)
Of which: Public and publicly guaranteed debt 5/
Banking sector debt
Short-term external debt by original maturity (billions of U.S. dollars)
Short-term external debt by remaining maturity (billions of U.S. dollars)
Net foreign assets of banking sector (billions of U.S. dollars)
Total debt to exports of GNFS (percent)
Total debt service to exports of GNFS (percent)
Of which: Interest payments to exports of GNFS (percent)
Bond spread (benchmark bond, end of period, basis points)
Foreign-Currency Sovereign Bond Ratings
Moody's
Standard and Poor's
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (US$ billions)
Exports of GNFS (US$ billions)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period, annual percentage change)
Sources: Chinese authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections

1/ Shanghai Stock Exchange, A share.
2/ The sum of the current account, FDI inflows, and identified non-FDI flows from BIS data less reserve accumulation.
3/ Based on BIS debt data until 2000, and on official data from 2001 on.
4/ Based on official debt data unless otherwise indicated.
5/ Debt of banking sector not included.

- 34 Table 5. China: Monetary Developments
2000

2001

2002

2003
March

June

2004
Sep.

Dec.

March

(In billions of yuan)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit 1/
Net credit to government
Credit to non-government
Other items, net 1/
Broad money
Reserve money

2,058

2,642

3,175

3,376

3,501

3,690

3,773

4,139

11,403

13,288

15,326

16,072

16,989

17,667

18,349

19,015

13,066

14,002

17,262

18,026

19,067

19,845

20,628

21,239

588

1,102

1,333

1,198

1,172

1,169

1,318

1,231

12,479

12,900

15,929

16,828

17,895

18,676

19,311

20,008

-1,664

-714

-1,936

-1,954

-2,078

-2,178

-2,279

-2,224

13,461

15,930

18,501

19,449

20,491

21,357

22,122

23,154

3,649

3,985

4,514

4,411

4,321

4,673

5,284

5,046
1,487

Of which:
Required reserves

720

856

1,006

1,064

1,128

1,172

1,410

Excess reserves

879

851

907

678

505

623

845

634

Net foreign assets of PBC

1,519

1,935

2,282

2,479

2,671

2,949

3,066

3,346

Net domestic assets of PBC

2,130

2,050

2,232

1,932

1,649

1,724

2,218

1,700

(Twelve-month percentage change)
Net foreign assets 2/

3.0

4.3

3.3

4.4

4.3

4.4

3.2

3.9

Net domestic assets

10.8

16.5

15.3

16.9

19.8

19.5

19.7

18.3

Domestic credit 3/ 4/
Of which: Loans
Other items, net 2/ 3/ 4/
Broad money 5/
Including foreign currency deposits
M1 5/
M0 5/
Quasi money

21.2

6.5

17.2

16.5

19.7

20.7

19.6

18.0

13.4

11.6

15.4

19.5

22.9

23.5

21.1

20.1

-11.4

7.2

-2.3

-2.5

-3.2

-4.2

-3.1

-2.7

17.0

14.4

16.8

18.5

20.8

20.7

19.6

19.1

13.1

17.4

15.7

17.7

19.7

19.5

18.2

17.8

16.0

12.7

16.8

20.1

20.2

18.5

18.7

20.1

8.9

7.1

10.1

10.1

12.3

12.8

14.3

12.8

10.0

15.5

16.8

17.6

21.2

22.0

20.1

18.5

Reserve money

8.5

9.2

13.3

7.0

6.5

17.2

17.1

14.4

Net foreign assets of PBC 6/

2.2

11.4

8.7

13.6

17.0

21.4

17.4

19.7

Net domestic assets of PBC 6/

6.4

-2.2

4.6

-6.6

-10.4

-4.1

-0.3

-5.3

Reserve ratios: 7/
Required reserves

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

7.0

7.0

Excess reserves

7.3

6.0

5.4

4.2

3.0

3.1

4.6

4.6

Memorandum items:
Money multiplier
Forex deposits of residents (US$ billion)
In percent of total deposits
Forex loans of residents (US$ billion)

3.7

4.0

4.1

4.4

4.7

4.6

4.2

4.6

128.3

134.9

150.7

148.8

151.1

148.1

148.7

146.8

8.1

7.3

6.9

6.5

6.2

5.9

5.8

5.4

61.2

80.7

102.8

107.9

117.3

126.4

130.2

140.2

Sources: The People's Bank of China; and staff calculations.
1/ Starting 2002, includes foreign currency operations of domestic financial institutions and domestic operations of foreign banks.
In addition, some items were moved from Other Items Net to Net Credit to Government.
2/ Twelve-month change as a percent of beginning-period stock of monetary liabilities.
3/ 2002 growth rates are based on data that exclude the revisions made in 2002 (see footnote 1).
4/ The growth rates are corrected for the transfer of NPLs from banks to the AMCs.
5/ The growth rates are based on official announcements, which correct for the definitional changes in the series.
6/ Twelve-month change as a percent of beginning-period reserve money stock.
7/ In percent of total bank deposits. 2003-04 excess reserve figures are averages provided by the authorities.

- 35 Table 6. China: State Budgetary Operations 1/
2000

2001

2002

2003
Budget

Prel.

2004
Budget

Proj.

(In billions of yuan)
Total revenue
Tax revenue 2/
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on goods and services
Other taxes
Nontax revenue

1,366
1,257
262
847
149
109

1,657
1,529
391
977
162
127

1,916
1,763
472
1,112
180
154

2,076
1,908
479
1,226
204
168

2,194
2,000
476
1,298
226
194

2,380
2,169
519
1,401
249
211

2,501
2,290
544
1,491
255
211

Total expenditure
Current expenditure, of which:
Administration and defense
Culture, education, public health, and science
Pensions and social welfare relief
Subsidies
Interest
Capital expenditure
Unrecorded expenditures 3/

1,691
1,316
396
286
153
133
73
300
75

1,958
1,564
481
350
204
104
79
351
43

2,272
1,820
576
415
272
90
68
411
40

2,435
1,985
612
456
245
88
97
411
39

2,527
2,035
655
471
266
84
96
452
39

2,730
2,267
714
520
295
96
76
433
31

2,792
2,358
757
544
306
98
112
403
31

Overall balance

-325

-301

-355

-359

-333

-351

-291

Financing
Domestic (net, residual)
Foreign (net)

325
311
14

301
294
7

355
349
6

359
354
5

333
328
5

351
346
5

291
287
4

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue
Tax revenue 2/
Taxes on income and profits
Taxes on goods and services
Other taxes
Nontax revenue

15.3
14.1
2.9
9.5
1.7
1.2

17.0
15.7
4.0
10.0
1.7
1.3

18.2
16.8
4.5
10.6
1.7
1.5

18.3
16.8
4.2
10.8
1.8
1.5

18.8
17.1
4.1
11.1
1.9
1.7

18.4
16.8
4.0
10.8
1.9
1.6

19.0
17.4
4.1
11.3
1.9
1.6

Total expenditure
Current expenditure, of which:
Administration and defense
Culture, education, public health, and science
Pensions and social welfare relief
Subsidies
Interest
Capital expenditure
Unrecorded expenditures 3/

18.9
14.7
4.4
3.2
1.7
1.5
0.8
3.3
0.8

20.1
16.1
4.9
3.6
2.1
1.1
0.8
3.6
0.4

21.6
17.3
5.5
3.9
2.6
0.9
0.6
3.9
0.4

21.4
17.5
5.4
4.0
2.2
0.8
0.9
3.6
0.3

21.6
17.4
5.6
4.0
2.3
0.7
0.8
3.9
0.3

21.1
17.5
5.5
4.0
2.3
0.7
0.6
3.3
0.2

21.2
17.9
5.7
4.1
2.3
0.7
0.8
3.1
0.2

Overall balance

-3.6

-3.1

-3.4

-3.2

-2.8

-2.7

-2.2

Financing
Domestic (net, residual)
Foreign (net)

3.6
3.5
0.2

3.1
3.0
0.1

3.4
3.3
0.1

3.2
3.1
0.0

2.8
2.8
0.0

2.7
2.7
0.0

2.2
2.2
0.0

-105
-2.8
22.2
17.7
4.5
-2.8
8,947

-108
-2.3
23.6
19.4
4.2
-2.5
9,731

-115
-2.7
25.1
21.2
4.0
-3.0
10,517

-115
-2.3
26.4
22.6
3.7
-2.8
11,355

-199
-2.0
25.6
22.0
3.7
-2.5
11,690

-221
-2.1
25.8
22.5
3.3
-2.5
12,946

-221
-1.4
24.9
21.6
3.2
-2.0
13,188

Memorandum items:
VAT refunds to exporters (in billions of yuan)
Primary balance
Government debt
Domestic
External
Budget balance (authorities' definition)
Nominal GDP (in billions of yuan)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; People's Bank of China; National Bureau of Statistics; and staff estimates.
1/ The coverage is central government, provinces, municipalities, and counties.
2/ Tax revenues are net of refunds for VAT and business taxes paid on inputs. As of end-2003, refunds amounting to roughly RMB 250 billion
had been claimed but not paid. The IMF definition is not adjusted for tax refund and wage arrears in the absence of adequate data.
3/ Includes external borrowing excluded from the budget and unbudgeted "fiscal stimulus" spending (see Table 7).

- 36 Table 7. China: Official and IMF Budget Definitions
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
Budget
Prel.

2004
Budget

Proj.

(In billions of yuan)
Revenue (official definition) 1/

1,144

1,338

1,639

1,890

2,050

2,172

2,357

2,478

29

28

30

26

26

23

23

23

0

0

12

0

0

0

0

0

Revenue (IMF definition)

1,173

1,366

1,657

1,916

2,076

2,194

2,380

2,501

Expenditure (official definition)

1,319

1,588

1,884

2,205

2,370

2,465

2,677

2,738

29
52
46

28
13
62

30
3
40

26
15
25

26
14
25

23
14
25

23
16
15

23
16
15

Expenditure (IMF definition)

1,505

1,691

1,958

2,272

2,435

2,527

2,730

2,792

Balance (official definition)
Balance (IMF definition)

-174
-332

-250
-325

-246
-301

-315
-355

-320
-359

-293
-333

-320
-351

-260
-291

Plus :
Subsidies to loss-making SOEs 2/
Minus :
Privatization proceeds

Plus:
Subsidies to loss-making SOEs 2/
External borrowing excluded from the budget 3/
Unrecorded fiscal stimulus spending 3/
(onlending to local governments)

(In percent of GDP)
Revenue (official definition)
Revenue (IMF definition)

13.9
14.3

15.0
15.3

16.8
17.0

18.0
18.2

18.1
18.3

18.6
18.8

18.2
18.4

18.8
19.0

Expenditure (official definition)
Expenditure (IMF definition)

16.1
18.3

17.7
18.9

19.4
20.1

21.0
21.6

20.9
21.4

21.1
21.6

20.7
21.1

20.8
21.2

Balance (official definition)
Balance (IMF definition)

-2.1
-4.0

-2.8
-3.6

-2.5
-3.1

-3.0
-3.4

-2.8
-3.2

-2.5
-2.8

-2.5
-2.7

-2.0
-2.2

8,207

8,947

9,731

10,517

11,355

11,690

12,946

13,188

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (in billions of yuan)
Sources: Ministry of Finance; and staff calculations.

1/ Tax revenues are net of refunds for VAT and business taxes paid on inputs. As of end-2003, refunds amounting to roughly RMB 300 billion
had been claimed but not paid. The IMF definition is not adjusted for tax refund and wage arrears in the absence of adequate data.
2/ Assumption for 2004 budget.
3/ Assumptions for 2003 preliminary and 2004 budget.

- 37 -

Table 8. China: Medium-Term Scenario
2000

2001

2002

2003
Est.

2004

2005

2006
2007
Projections

2008

2009

(Percent change)
Real GDP
Real domestic demand
Consumer prices (average)

8.0
7.1
0.4

7.5
7.9
0.7

8.3
7.9
-0.8

9.1
9.5
1.2

9.0
8.9
3.5

7.5
6.7
3.0

7.5
7.4
2.5

7.5
7.6
2.5

7.5
7.2
2.5

7.5
7.0
2.5

44.5
44.3
47.1
-1.8
19.9
21.7
2.6

44.2
44.1
46.7
-1.6
20.3
21.9
2.5

43.9
43.9
46.4
-1.5
20.6
22.1
2.5

43.4
43.0
45.9
-1.4
20.8
22.2
2.5

(In percent of GDP)
Total capital formation
Of which: fixed capital formation
Gross national saving
Fiscal balance
Revenue
Expenditure
Current account balance

36.3
36.5
38.2
-3.6
15.3
18.9
1.9

38.5
37.8
40.0
-3.1
17.0
20.1
1.5

40.3
40.1
43.1
-3.3
18.2
21.5
2.8

44.4
44.4
47.6
-2.8
18.7
21.6
3.2

45.8
45.8
48.3
-2.2
19.0
21.2
2.5

44.7
44.5
47.7
-2.0
19.6
21.5
3.0

(In billions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports
(Percent change)
Imports
(Percent change)
Net services and transfers (incl. inv. inc.)
Of which: net investment income

21
34
249
27.9
215
35.4
-14
-15

17
34
266
6.8
232
8.1
-17
-19

35
44
326
22.4
281
21.3
-9
-15

46
45
438
34.6
394
39.8
1
-8

40
32
543
24.0
512
30.0
8
-5

52
44
678
24.8
634
24.0
9
-5

51
42
803
18.5
761
20.0
9
-2

54
41
932
16.0
891
17.0
13
1

59
42
1072
15.0
1030
15.5
17
2

66
48
1228
14.6
1180
14.6
18
3

Capital and financial account, net 1/
Direct investment, net
Portfolio investment, net
Other investment, net

2
37
-4
-32

35
37
-19
17

32
47
-10
-4

53
47
11
-6

110
48
1
61

47
49
-9
7

24
42
-9
-10

21
42
-8
-13

16
42
-8
-19

14
42
-10
-19

Errors and omissions

-12

-5

8

18

…

…

…

…

…

…

Change in reserves (- indicates increase)

-11

-47

-76

-117

-150

-100

-75

-75

-75

-80

International reserves
(Months of imports of goods and nfs)

169
(7.5)

219
(8.0)

295
(7.9)

412
(8.6)

562
(9.5)

662
(9.3)

737
(8.9)

812
(8.5)

887
(8.0)

967
(8.0)

External debt (official definition) 2/
(Percent of GDP)
Debt-service ratio (official definition)
Nominal GDP (In billions of RMB)

146
(13.5)
7.3
8,947

170
(14.5)
7.1
9,731

171
(13.5)
6.5
10,517

194
(13.7)
5.1
11,690

216
(13.5)
4.6
13,188

230
(13.0)
4.1
14,602

245
(12.6)
3.7
16,090

261
(12.2)
3.4
17,729

279
(11.8)
3.1
19,535

297
(11.4)
2.9
21,525

Memorandum items:

Sources: Data provided by the Chinese authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Exludes errors and omissions up until 2003, included erros and omissions from 2004 onwards.
2/ The coverage and classification of official external debt data were modified in 2001. Categories of debt previously not covered have since been included.

- 38 -

ANNEX I

CHINA—FUND RELATIONS
As of May 31, 2004
I.

Membership Status: Joined 12/27/45; Article VIII (December 1, 1996)

II. General Resources Account:

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million

% Quota

6,369.20
4013.67
2,355.57

100.00
63.02
36.98

III. SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million

% Allocation

236.80
757.41

100.00
319.85

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None
V.

Financial Arrangements:

Type
Stand-by
VI.

Approval Date

Expiration
Date

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)

11/12/86

11/11/87

597.73

597.73

Projected Obligations to Fund: None

VII. Exchange Arrangements:
1.
On January 1, 1994 the Chinese authorities introduced a market-based, unified and
managed floating exchange rate system. Under the new system, certain banks are designated
to sell and purchase foreign exchange. On December 1, 1996, the renminbi became
convertible for current account transactions. In the interbank market, the PBC has limited
daily movements against major currencies. For example, the PBC has limited movements of
the renminbi against the U.S. dollar to +/-0.3 percent around a reference rate announced
daily. On May 31, 2004 the exchange rate was Y 8.28 per U.S. dollar.

- 39 -

ANNEX I

2.
China accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s
Articles of Agreement on December 1, 1996. There are repatriation and surrender
requirements on proceeds from exports and from invisible transactions and current transfers.
With effect from May 1, 2004, enterprises authorized to conduct current account transactions
may retain foreign exchange equivalent to 30 or 50 percent of their current account foreign
exchange earnings in the previous year (depending on the ratio of foreign exchange
expenditures to the previous year’s foreign exchange earnings), except for special purpose
transactions, such as donations and international postal remittances, for which the ceiling is
100 percent. They must sell the rest of their foreign exchange earnings to authorized banks.
Importers must provide valid proof and commercial bills to obtain foreign exchange. In 1998,
new requirements expanded the scope of documentation required for most forms of current
transactions and required prior verification of the underlying transactions in some instances
(e.g., the customs service must certify the value of imports before banks can provide foreign
exchange for payment). There are no measures currently in force that have been determined
to be exchange restrictions subject to Fund jurisdiction.
3.
Exchange controls continue to apply to most capital transactions. In general, capital
account transactions require the approval of the SAFE, however there has been some
relaxation of controls in recent years. Effective December 1, 2002, qualified foreign
institutional investors (QFIIs) are allowed to invest domestically in A shares, subject to the
following restrictions: (i) QFIIs must have minimum experience in the industry (5 years for
fund managers; 30 years for insurance companies) and at least $10 billion in assets under
management in the latest financial year, and be cleared of any major irregularities in their
home market over the past three years; (ii) a QFII that is a bank must be among the top
100 international banks by assets in the latest financial year; (iii) a QFII that is an insurance
or a securities company must have a minimum paid-up capital of $1 billion; and (iv) for each
QFII, ownership of any Chinese company listed on the Shanghai or Shenzhen stock exchange
is limited to 10 percent, and the total shares owned by QFIIs in a single Chinese company
cannot exceed 20 percent. QFIIs must set up a special renminbi account with domestic banks
and use the services of domestic securities companies. Close-ended QFIIs can only remit
capital after three years, in installments of no more than 20 percent of the total each time, and
at intervals of one month or more. Other QFIIs can only remit capital after one year, in
installments of no more than 20 percent of the total, and at intervals of three months or more.
Regarding investment abroad, the National Council of the Social Security Fund has been
approved to invest in overseas markets; no transactions have yet taken place. In addition, as
of November 22 and December 5, 1991, respectively, nonresidents are allowed to purchase B
shares denominated in U.S. dollars and B shares denominated in Hong Kong dollars.
Effective from February 19, 2001, residents are allowed to purchase B shares denominated in
both currencies, using their foreign currencies deposited with the commercial banks before
that date. And effective from June 1, 2001, residents are allowed to buy B shares using the
foreign currencies deposited after the date (i.e. February 19, 2001). Nonresidents are not
permitted to issue capital or money market securities in the domestic market. Purchases of

- 40 -

ANNEX I

capital and money market instruments abroad by residents are restricted to a few financial
institutions and listed enterprises, as are foreign stock and bond issues which also require
prior approval. In 2001, measures were introduced to ease restrictions on the purchase of
foreign exchange with RMB for the advance repayment of foreign debts, foreign exchange
on-lending and domestic foreign exchange loans. Prior approval from the SAFE is needed for
licensed commercial banks to convert foreign exchange into yuan for capital investment
purposes, except in some provinces where it was eliminated under a 2001 pilot program.
Also, since December 2001, FFEs no longer need SAFE approval to convert foreign currency
into yuan and commercial banks are now responsible for verifying the related documents.
4.
An annual foreign borrowing plan sets mandatory ceilings for all medium- and longterm borrowing by government departments and enterprises (except FFEs which are subject
to individual limits negotiated in the investment approval process). The State Development
and Reform Commission determines the ceilings, while the SAFE is responsible for the
approval of each issue and management of external borrowing (pre-approval investigation
covers the financial situation of the enterprise, the need for the loan, and whether the terms of
the loan are consistent with the use of the proceeds). For short-term borrowing by financial
institutions (less than a year), the amount of borrowing is subject to an overall limit
determined by the SAFE on an annual basis (there are also enterprise-specific limits);
financial institutions can conduct business within this limit without explicit approval, but
must register the borrowing with the SAFE.
5.
Regulations on guarantees by residents to nonresidents have the following key
features. First, guarantees consist of collateral and pledges in addition to what are commonly
known as guarantees. Second, prior SAFE approval is required for financing guarantees
provided by banks and all guarantees provided by other institutions (with the exception of
FFEs). Prior approval is not required for nonfinancing guarantees. Third, both domestic and
foreign-currency-denominated guarantees are covered by the regulations. Fourth, the approval
process for guarantees is based on prospective guarantors’ profits, assets to liabilities, and
asset-quality-ratio requirements.
6.
China maintains controls on FDI, although it has generally pursued an “open door”
policy toward inward FDI. In the case of outward FDI, foreign exchange can be remitted
abroad after a SAFE review of sources of foreign exchange funds, the approval by the
agencies in charge of investment abroad, and registration with SAFE. From October 2001, on
a pilot basis, some provinces and municipalities were authorized quotas of $5 million to $200
million for overseas investment. In July 2004, the pilot was expanded to 21 provinces and
municipalities, with overseas investment quotas totaling to $2.33 billion. In the case of
inward direct investment, nonresidents can invest in China subject to meeting certain
regulations and MOC approval. On April 1, 2002, a new four-tier classification system for
foreign investment was introduced, defining activities where foreign investment is
encouraged, permitted, restricted or banned. In effect, this resulted in the opening up of many
industries previously closed to foreign investment, particularly in the services sectors,
consistent with China’s WTO-related commitments.

- 41 -

ANNEX I

7.
Domestic financial institutions and firms cannot engage in such derivative
transactions for purposes of speculation. However, transactions designed to hedge interest
rate or exchange rate risk are possible. All transactions involving derivative instruments
under foreign debt items must be registered with SAFE, except those undertaken by FFEs.
With respect to the development of a forward foreign exchange market for the renminbi, a
few banks have been permitted to offer forward transactions involving the renminbi, but the
market remains small and proof of an underlying current transaction is required for access to
forward cover. In 2001, some domestic enterprises were approved to hedge their risks in the
international futures market. From 2003, eligible forward transactions have been expanded
from current account transactions to also include foreign debt with maturity up to one year
(compared with four months previously).
VIII. Article IV Consultation:
8.
The 2003 Article IV consultation was concluded on October 31, 2003 (SUR/03/116
rev. 1, staff report SM/03/316). China is on the standard 12–month consultation cycle.
IX.

Technical Assistance:

9.
Technical assistance provided in 2000 through March 2004 is summarized in
Annex III.
X.

Other Visits:

10.
The Managing Director, Mr. de Rato, visited China in June 2004, and the Deputy
Managing Director, Mr. Kato, in May 2004. A mid-term staff visit was held in December
2003. Former Managing Director, Mr. Köhler, visited China in September 2003.
XI.

Resident Representative:

12. The resident representative office in Beijing was opened in October 1991.
Mr. Ray Brooks is the Senior Resident Representative and Mr. Steve Barnett is the Resident
Representative.

- 42 -

ANNEX II

CHINA—DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
1.
An analysis of the sustainability of China’s government debt based on the standard
Fund framework does not suggest major difficulties over the next few years; however, over
the longer term, large quasi-fiscal liabilities and rising expenditure pressures are key sources
of potential fiscal vulnerability. The standard Fund framework cannot be easily extended to
longer horizons because data limitations preclude precise estimates of quasi-fiscal liabilities,
and there are considerable uncertainties in trying to gauge the magnitude of potential
expenditure pressures over the longer term.1
2.
China’s official government debt is low, but would be significantly larger if
quasi-fiscal liabilities were included. Official data show that the stock of explicit
government debt stood at 26 percent of GDP at end-2003.2 Contingent liabilities include
nonperforming loans (NPLs) in the banking system, unfunded pension obligations, and
external borrowings by state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and semi-governmental finance
companies. Owing to lack of data, this debt sustainability analysis only includes estimated
losses from reported NPLs and the minimum transition costs of shifting to a viable pension
system.3 However, potential data weaknesses and inevitable problems in implementing new
prudential regimes suggest that the scale of problem loans may be higher. Transition costs of
the pension reform could also be substantially higher, depending on the magnitude of changes
to the pension parameters. Liabilities, direct and contingent, of local governments are not
included, as no information is available. On the other hand, China could potentially use its
substantial stock of state assets to finance government debt obligations. Moreover, potential
pressures on spending are expected to intensify over time, and the bulk of their impact on the
fiscal position would fall outside of the medium-term horizon that this debt sustainability
analysis is based on.
3.
The debt sustainability analysis is based on the staff’s macroeconomic
projections and on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal framework. Key assumptions
include:
•

GDP growth is projected to average 7½ percent a year.

1

For an assessment of longer-term fiscal sustainability issues, see China: Selected Issues
(SM/03/317).

2

This includes regular issues of bonds to finance the central government’s budget deficits, as
well as the bonds issued to recapitalize the four state-owned commercial banks in 1998 and
bonds used for on-lending to local governments.
3

According to the authorities’ data, NPLs amounted to 38 percent of GDP at end-2003, with
a recovery rate of about 21 percent. Unfunded pension liabilities are assumed to be 7 percent
of GDP.

- 43 -

ANNEX II

•

The nominal value of the deficit will be held constant at its projected 2004 level,
implying a decline in the primary deficit of about ¼ percent of GDP a year.

•

The average domestic real interest rate increases gradually to 3 percent within five
years, reflecting gradual liberalization of the financial sector.4

4.
Under these assumptions, the debt-to-GDP ratio would decline from 61 percent
of GDP in 2004 to 58 percent in 2009 (Table II.1). The sensitivity analysis suggests that
fiscal sustainability may not be a major concern over the next few years, provided that
structural reforms continue to be implemented. To take into account the uncertainties about
the future macroeconomic conditions, spending needs, and the actual level of contingent
liabilities, the effects of a higher real interest rate, lower growth, wider primary deficit, and a
higher stock of contingent liabilities were simulated. Isolated or combined temporary adverse
shocks on these key variables would only increase the debt-to-GDP ratio in the short run.
•

Individual temporary shocks. A temporarily lower GDP growth rate would increase the
debt-to-GDP ratio to about 63 percent in 2006, and a higher real interest rate would
increase the ratio to 67 percent, but these ratios would then decline as in the baseline
scenario.5

•

Combined temporary shocks. Should GDP growth be slower, the real interest rate higher,
and public spending more expansionary all at the same time (but by only one standard
deviation), the debt-to-GDP ratio would increase to about 67 percent in 2006 and then
decline.

•

Higher initial public debt stock. If debt-creating flows were to be 10 percentage points of
GDP higher in 2005, the debt-to-GDP ratio would reach 70 percent in 2005, but would
fall to about 66 percent of GDP by 2009.

4

Given the existing interest rates and maturity structure of public debt, the projected return of
modest inflation produces a decline in the aggregate effective real interest rate during the
projection period.

5

The standard deviations and means for all variables have been calculated on the basis of the
last 10 years.

- 44 -

ANNEX II

Table II.1. China: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
1999

2000

2001
Actual

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006
2007
Projections

2008

2009

I. Baseline Projections
Public sector debt and contingent debt 1/

...

...

...

...

62.2

60.8

59.9

59.9

59.4

58.6

57.7

Contingent debt

...

...

...

...

36.6

35.9

35.4

35.9

35.9

35.9

35.7

20.3
4.8

22.2
4.5

23.6
4.2

25.1
4.0

25.6
3.6

24.9
3.2

24.5
3.0

24.0
2.7

23.4
2.5

22.8
2.3

22.0
2.1

3.2
3.3
3.3
14.3
17.6
0.0
0.0
1.1
-1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

1.9
2.0
2.8
15.3
18.1
-0.9
-0.9
0.6
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.4
1.4
2.3
17.0
19.4
-1.0
-1.0
0.6
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

1.5
1.6
2.7
18.2
20.9
-1.0
-1.0
0.7
-1.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

0.4
0.3
2.0
18.7
20.8
-1.7
-1.7
0.3
-2.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-0.7
-0.7
1.6
19.0
20.6
-2.3
-2.3
-0.3
-2.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.4
-0.4
1.1
19.6
20.7
-1.5
-1.5
0.1
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.5
-0.5
0.9
19.9
20.9
-1.4
-1.4
0.3
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.6
-0.6
0.8
20.3
21.0
-1.3
-1.3
0.3
-1.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.7
-0.7
0.6
20.6
21.2
-1.3
-1.3
0.3
-1.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-0.8
-0.8
0.5
20.8
21.3
-1.2
-1.2
0.3
-1.5
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

141.8

145.5

139.0

137.9

136.4

131.2

124.9

120.4

115.5

110.3

105.6

5.6
55.1

5.4
58.4

5.2
61.4

5.9
74.4

5.5
77.1

4.8
76.9

4.6
81.0

4.4
85.0

4.2
89.1

3.9
93.2

3.7
97.2

7.1
4.4
6.7
0.0
-2.2
24.7
3.3

8.0
4.4
3.4
0.0
0.9
10.9
2.8

7.5
4.0
2.8
0.0
1.2
15.1
2.3

8.0
3.0
3.3
0.0
-0.3
17.0
2.7

9.1
3.6
1.6
0.0
2.1
8.2
2.0

9.0
2.5
-1.0
...
3.5
8.1
1.6

7.5
3.8
0.8
...
3.0
8.1
1.1

7.5
3.9
1.4
...
2.5
8.3
0.9

7.5
4.0
1.5
...
2.5
8.4
0.8

7.5
4.2
1.7
...
2.5
8.5
0.6

7.5
4.3
1.8
...
2.5
7.8
0.5

1 Public sector debt
o/w foreign-currency denominated
2 Change in public sector debt
3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
4 Primary deficit
5
Revenue and grants
6
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
7 Automatic debt dynamics 2/
8
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
9
Of which contribution from real interest rate
10
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
11
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
12 Other identified debt-creating flows
13
Privatization receipts (negative)
14
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
15
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
16 Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
In billions of U.S. dollars
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2005-09 8/
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2005-09
A3. Country-specific shock in 2005, with reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation 9/

60.8
60.8
60.8

60.2
60.4
60.8

60.5
61.1
60.9

60.3
61.3
60.3

60.1
61.5
59.5

59.8
61.6
58.6

60.8
60.8
60.8
60.8
60.8
60.8

63.4
61.3
62.4
63.5
61.4
69.9

67.0
63.2
64.9
67.3
61.3
69.4

66.0
63.3
64.1
66.3
60.7
68.3

64.9
63.2
63.1
65.2
59.9
67.0

63.7
62.9
62.0
64.0
58.9
65.7

B. Bound Tests
B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2005 and 2006
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations (1.6 percent of GDP) in 2005 and 2006
B4. Combination of 2-4 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2005 10/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2005

1/ It is assumed that the government will make a decision in 2005 to bring contingent liabilities related to nonperforming loans onto explicit public debt in 2006, from which point these debt will accrue interest
The coverage is central government; unfunded pension liabilities are also included. Contingent liabilities of local governments, which are not known, are excluded.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
8/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
9/ The implied change in other key variables under this scenario is discussed in the text.
10/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
11/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and primary balance) remain at the level in percent of GDP/growth rate of the last projection year.

- 45 -

ANNEX III

CHINA’S FISCAL REFORMS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
1.
In recent years technical assistance has focused on statistical development, banking
supervision, economic training, and a comprehensive fiscal program. The attached table lists
recent technical assistance missions to China. This annex highlights the main staff
recommendations in the fiscal area, and summarizes recent fiscal reforms.
Fiscal Technical Assistance Program
2.
FAD provides advice in the areas of budget management, tax policy, tax
administration, and intergovernmental fiscal relations in the context of a US$2.6 million
project in coordination with UNDP and UK DFID. The current project covers 2000-2004,
and discussions are underway on a successor project that would continue to support priority
fiscal reforms.
Tax policy
3.
The scope of the Fund TA work in this area has been quite comprehensive, covering
every major tax: the value-added tax (VAT), the business tax, the enterprise income tax
(EIT), and the personal income tax (PIT). Some of the TA has also targeted the tax treatment
of specific sectors, including the financial sector and small businesses.
4.
The VAT is currently the most important tax in China from a revenue standpoint.
However, it has two unique features: (1) it is a production-type VAT, i.e., credits are not
given for the VAT on capital goods; and (2) it excludes most services, which are taxed under
a separate business tax. The focus of the Fund’s TA advice on the VAT has been on
transforming it into a consumption-type VAT, and bringing the service sector into the VAT
net. As there are important revenue and central-province intergovernmental implications of
the VAT reform, the Fund has paid particular attention to alternative transition strategies.
5.
With respect to income tax, the Fund’s TA advice has focused on improving the
structure of the enterprise income tax (EIT), including the unification of the regimes applying
separately to domestic and foreign enterprises, and rationalizing and reducing the scope of
EIT incentives. Steps are underway for EIT unification, to be implemented in 2005. For the
personal income tax (PIT), while the present revenue yield is still relatively insignificant, it is
important for its distributive implications and revenue consequences over time. Its structure
should be streamlined and its rates simplified. The PIT should also be made more progressive
at the low ranges of the income scale.
6.
The liberalization of the financial sector under the WTO commitments will have
important tax implications, in particular as the financial sector opens up to foreign
competition. The Fund’s TA advice in this area has covered topics of taxing banks, insurance
companies, investment and pension funds, derivatives, and security transactions, allowing tax
deductibility of specific loan provisions, and shifting business tax from a gross interest base
to a net interest base.

- 46 -

ANNEX III

7.
The authorities also intend to streamline and reduce the tax burden on farmers. In this
regard, the 2004 budget announced the reduction of the agricultural tax by 1 percentage point
each year starting this year, the elimination of special excise taxes except for tobacco, and the
continuation of the nationwide extension of the pilot on the fee-to-tax reform.
Tax administration
8.
The authorities have been putting in place the basic building blocks of a modern
national tax administration. In this regard, the Fund TA program has aimed at assisting the
State Administration of Taxation (SAT) to develop the strategic capacity required for it to
manage a national tax system, with assistance provided to both the central and provincial
governments. Information technology (IT) development has been satisfactorily completed and
risk management techniques have been introduced to SAT and to its provincial level
managers.
9.
The operational effectiveness of the national tax administration still needs to be
improved, for instance, by developing a nationally consistent organizational structure,
improving compliance management, and developing self-assessment practices.
Public expenditure management
10.
In order to improve the efficiency of public spending, a number of budget and
treasury reforms are being implemented. In the budget area, the budget coverage is being
expanded to include extra-budgetary revenue and spending, the budget preparation cycle has
been brought forward and extended, and departmental budgets are being implemented. On
the treasury reform side, a treasury single account (TSA) has been established at the central
level and is being rolled out to the provincial level.1
11.
The authorities have recently announced their intention to reform the Budget Law, in
line with recent Fund TA. Areas to be improved include the clarification of the roles and
rights of the legislative and executive in the budget process; restriction on the use of
extrabudgetary funds; improvements in the sequencing and timetable for budget preparation;
stronger medium-term focus of the budget; and the joint consideration of current and capital
budgets.
12.
Work is, however, still needed in the treasury and accounting area, where there are
three main concerns. First, while there are valid arguments for using the pilot testing
approach favored by the authorities, these pilots should best be developed after the decision is
taken on the underlying process reforms and the appropriate IT strategy. Otherwise, there is a
1

A standard Treasury Single Account (TSA) is a bank account or a set of linked bank
accounts through which the government, including its entities and spending units, transacts
all receipts and payments, and consolidates its cash balances. Cash balances held by a
government are efficiently centralized through a TSA.

- 47 -

ANNEX III

risk that communication (and particularly data transfer) between different parts of the system
will be compromised. Second, insufficient progress has been made on the chart of accounts,
which represents a key requirement for the computerized General Financial Management
Information System (GFMIS) conceptual design. Finally, and more generally, treasury
reforms have advanced faster than those in the budget area. For this reason, it is crucial that
the adoption of budget classification system in line with international standards—currently on
hold—be resumed expeditiously, as this is a key prerequisite for developing an appropriate
reporting system.
Intergovernmental fiscal relations
13.
In recent years, the authorities have become increasingly aware of the need to reform
the intergovernmental fiscal relations, as imbalances between the center and subnational
levels are growing and regional disparities are widening. There is a need to clarify
expenditure mandates, including by centralizing some spending responsibilities such as
pensions. Revenue assignments and the design of the transfer system also need to be looked
at. Key considerations should include giving more control over tax rates to local
governments, while transfers need to be sufficient to allow each province to deliver minimum
standards of public services.
14.
There is also growing concern about the fiscal risks building up at the local
government level. Local governments, faced with a legal prohibition to borrow, resort to
creative financing to fund their expenditures. As no comprehensive records are available on
the resulting liabilities, the authorities have recently announced the establishment of a special
task force to study fiscal risks of local governments. In line with recent Fund TA
recommendations, at a minimum a fiscal risk register should be established in the treasury to
keep track of these liabilities. The possible relaxation of the legal constraints on local
government borrowing will need to be preceded by a number of structural reforms, including
strengthening the recording and reporting of local government operations and enhancing the
accountability and transparency of local government financial management.

- 48 -

ANNEX III
ATTACHMENT

China—Summary of Technical Assistance, 2001–2004
Department

Purpose

Tax system reform
FAD
Mission on VAT and inheritance tax
FAD
Mission on tax preference
FAD
Mission on financial sector taxation
FAD
Mission on personal income tax reform
Tax administration reform
FAD
Missions on computerizations (5)
FAD
Missions on strategic planning (2)
FAD
Seminar on strategic planning in Washington
FAD
Mission on revenue administration
Budget reform
FAD
Workshop on treasury, government fiscal management
information system
FAD
Mission on budget classification, treasury single
account, macro-fiscal coordination, budget preparation
FAD
Mission on budget preparation, budget classification,
and treasury reform
FAD
Mission on budget classification
Workshop on budget and treasury modernization in
FAD
Washington
FAD
Mission on treasury and accounting reforms
FAD
Mission on budget law reforms
Intergovernmental fiscal relations
Mission intergovernmental relations
FAD
Mission on subnational fiscal risks
Statistics
STA
Seminar on General Data Dissemination System
STA
Seminar on money and banking statistics
STA
Missions on trade statistics
STA
Mission on GDDS
STA
Seminar on Balance of Payments
STA
Mission on government financial statistics
STA
Seminar on GDDS/SDDS in Washington
STA
GDDS Review

Date

April 2001
September 2001
Aug/Sep 2002
November 2003
June 2000–Oct. 2002
Nov. 2001–Aug. 2002
October 2002
November 2003
February 2001
November 2001
June 2002
March 2003
October 2003
November 2003
March 2004
November 2002
November 2003
April 2001
April 2001
June 2001–Jan. 2002
Feb./March 2002
August 2002
September 2002
September 2002
December 2003

- 49 -

ANNEX III
ATTACHMENT

China—Summary of Technical Assistance, 2001–2004
Department

Purpose

Monetary Policy and Bank Supervision
MFD
Missions on banking supervision
MFD
Bank Restructuring
MFD
AML/CFT Issues
MFD
AML/CFT Seminar
Review of TA
FAD
Visit to review and reschedule UNDP/IMF/China fiscal
reform TA activities
FAD/TAS
Missions for tripartite review of the UNDP/IMF/China
fiscal reform TA activities (2)
MFD
Mission on TA needs in banking sector reform
MFD
Mission on TA needs in financial sector
FAD
Participation in UNDP/DFID fiscal reform workshop
Training
INS
INS
MFD
MFD
MFD
FAD
MFD
INS/MFD

Courses on financial programming and policies (3)
High-level seminar on banking reform
Capital Account Convertibility
Course on monetary policy and operations
Banking Risk Management
Course on public sector expenditure management
Central Bank Accounting
High-level seminar on monetary policy transmission

Date

October 2003
April 2004
September 2003
April 2004
February 2001
Jan. 2002, Feb. 2003
July 2002
October 2003
February 2004

July 2000–June 2002
March 2001
April 2001
May 2001–June 2002
July 2001
June/July 2002
November 2002
April 2004

- 50 -

ANNEX IV

CHINA—STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
China has made significant strides in bringing its economic and financial statistics
into line with international good practice. In April 2002, China began participation in the
Fund’s GDDS, and posted its metadata on the Fund’s DSBB (the most comprehensive
documentation of Chinese economic and financial statistics available in English). In
December 2003 the GDDS metadata were updated. However, weaknesses remain in the
quality of the data, including coverage, frequency and timeliness. The main statistical issues
are noted below.
Real sector
2.
Data on the expenditure components of GDP are not published on a quarterly basis;
nor are the estimates of expenditure components at constant prices on an annual basis. The
data are produced in cumulative form, with minimal revisions of previous data, making it
difficult to assess quarterly developments accurately or to make seasonal adjustments.
Constant price measures of GDP are also suspect because of deficiencies with the price
indices and techniques used to derive the estimates. Nevertheless, the National Bureau of
Statistics has made a number of improvements to the range and quality of national accounts
data, including quarterly estimates of GDP by industry and estimates of GDP by type of
expenditure. Further improvements are intended, including the adoption of the 1993 System
of National Accounts, further development of income and expenditure data, and
improvements to quarterly GDP estimates. However, no target dates have been set. As in
other countries, rapid economic change, including the expansion of the nonstate sector,
presents new problems for data compilation. The ability to change the collection of data is
restricted by the decentralized nature of the statistical system. Extensive technical assistance
has been provided from multilateral and bilateral institutions.
3.
Monthly industrial production, retail sales, and fixed investment data also have a
shifting base that does not permit the production of a consistent time series. Data revisions
tend to be made without publishing the entire revised series. Retail sales and fixed investment
data are published only in nominal, not real, terms.
4.
Labor market statistics—including employment and wage data—are not
comprehensive, and are only available on an annual basis, with considerable lag.
5.
Prior to December 2000, the consumer price index was not produced in a time series
format, as there were only comparisons between the current month and the previous month,
and the current month with the same month of the previous year. For most items, the weights
were for the previous year’s expenditures with the other weights being updated each month.
Technical assistance missions in September 1991, April 1995, and June 1997 dealt with the
concepts and methodology of internationally used index formulae. The authorities have
received technical assistance and training on price index methodology under a cooperative

- 51 -

program with Statistics Canada. A technical assistance mission in August 1999 reviewed the
methodology to compile fixed-base price indices in test projects in four provinces and found
that only in one province the index was adequate. In January 2001, the NBS began to publish
a new fixed base CPI, which more accurately reflects consumer spending patterns (e.g., the
weight of services increased, while the weight of food declined). The number of survey items
has been expanded to more than 700 from the previous 325. The weights of the major CPI
components were provided to the staff during the 2001 Article IV mission.
Government finance
6.
Serious data shortcomings continue to hamper fiscal analysis. Budgetary data exclude
spending associated with domestic bond proceeds on-lent to local governments and official
external borrowing. Also, data on the social and extra budgetary funds are only provided
annually and with a long lag. Expenditure classification remains very poor, mainly because
data are not classified by economic type. This should start to improve when the new budget
classification system is introduced.
7.
China irregularly reports central government and local government budget data for
publication in the GFS Yearbook. The latest published data are for 2001. No data are
provided on government debt or the operations of extrabudgetary funds. The revenue
classification does not fully distinguish between revenue and grants, tax and nontax revenue,
and current and capital revenue. The presentation of expenditure is by function only. The
functional classification does not comply with international standards.
Monetary accounts
8.
In recent years, improvements have been made in the classification of accounts of the
monetary authorities and banking institutions. From 2002, compilation and reporting of
monetary data include foreign-currency-denominated accounts of residents and accounts of
the branches of foreign banks.
9.
The monetary and banking surveys lack sufficient detail with regard to detailed
breakdowns of bank credit extended by industry and by borrower (including by the various
elements of the state and nonstate sectors). The staff continues to encourage the authorities to
report information of this nature for analytical purposes.
10.
Due to the restructuring of the banking sector, new statistical issues have arisen, such
as how to record the transfer of non-performing loans to asset management companies, and
how to classify these companies in the banking survey. As a result, there is a need for some
revisions to the current Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual.
11.
The reported net foreign assets position of PBC does not include exchange rate
valuation effects nor interest earnings on foreign reserves.

- 52 -

Balance of payments
12.
The State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) obtains data relating to
service, income, current transfers, and capital and financial account transactions through an
“international transactions reporting system” (ITRS). Data on travel receipts are obtained
from sample surveys conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics and China National
Tourism Administration, while those on travel payments are derived from ITRS and
estimated by SAFE. Data on stock issuance are provided by the China Securities Regulatory
Commission, and bond issuance data are from SAFE debt statistics. Sources for data on
overseas securities investment and direct investment inflow are provided by PBC and the
Ministry of Commerce and data on direct investment outflow are obtained from ITRS.
13.
The data are compiled (in U.S. dollars) largely in accordance with the fifth edition of
the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5). Semi-annual (January-June) data are compiled and
disseminated within four to five months after the end of the reference period while data on
an annual basis are disseminated within six months of the close of the reference period. It
appears that the authorities may be close to being able to publish quarterly estimates of the
balance of payments. Within the current account, component detail is available on goods,
services, income, and transfers. Data on the financial account are also available with
significant component detail for functional categories, but with limited sectoral breakdown.
14.
The Fund has provided extensive technical assistance for China to improve balance of
payments and IIP statistics. In August 2002 a seminar was held on Balance of Payments and
IIP statistics in Chengdu, China. The coverage of direct investment transactions remains a
problematic issue in the Chinese balance of payments and IIP statistics. Data on these
transactions, received mainly from the Ministry of Commerce (formerly Ministry of Foreign
Trade and Cooperation), apparently do not cover all required elements such as
disinvestments. On the other hand, the direct investment survey developed by SAFE has not
provided reliable data. Another issue that has to be addressed by the authorities is to extend
verification and auditing programs to reduce measurement errors and ensure the long-term
performance of the ITRS. For this purpose regular training programs for staff in the
provincial offices of SAFE were recommended. In addition, in January 2003 a legislative
guarantee for the improvement of the quality of ITRS reporting entitled “The Checking
System on Balance of Payments Reporting Data (experimental)” was promulgated by the
SAFE.
15.
The authorities reported that they have been compiling international investment
position (IIP) statements for four years (1999-2002). However, because some data categories
still need to be improved, no IIP data have been published thus far.
16.
The Fund has also provided technical assistance on the coverage, timeliness, and
periodicity of China’s data on official reserves, reserves-related liabilities, as well as on other
external assets and liabilities, financial derivative activities, and other contingent and
potential liabilities. In the December 2003 GDDS progress review, the authorities indicated

- 53 -

that they had completed the preparatory work for completing the template on international
reserves and foreign currency liquidity in accordance with the SDDS and that there were no
technical problems remaining. The authorities also noted that the definition and coverage of
China’s external debt data follow closely the recently-published External Debt Statistics:
Guide for Compilers and Users. Such data are apparently compiled monthly and have been
published quarterly since the third quarter of 2003 (monthly data have not been provided to
Fund staff on a regular basis). Despite an ostensibly modest level of external vulnerability,
there remains a need to strengthen external debt monitoring and compilation, while
introducing additional transparency in data dissemination.
17.
In April 2004, STA conducted a seminar in Xi An China on the Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey (CPIS) to explain the concepts and practical issues involved in
undertaking the survey. There was active participation in the seminar although no
commitment was made at that time to participate in the CPIS.
Data reporting to STA for publications
18.
In June 1999, the PBC resumed reporting monthly monetary data and has agreed to
their publication in IFS. These improvements in reporting notwithstanding, a number of
breaks remain in the series, and comparable historical data are not available.
19.
Since 1994, China’s Ministry of Finance (MOF) has regularly reported annual GFS
data for publication in the GFS Yearbook. The GFS database currently includes data on the
central government budget for 1990–97, and on provincial and local governments for
1995–1999. The MOF also reports annual GFS data for publication in IFS although with
substantial delays. Data through 1998, relate to revenue, expenditure, and the deficit/surplus
of the central, provincial, county-level, and municipal governments' budgets.
20.
Reporting of data to STA for IFS has, in the past, tended to be sporadic and with a
considerable time lag. Following the introduction of new reporting arrangements, the
timeliness of consumer price, industrial production, trade value, and total GDP data in IFS
has improved substantially. However, the range of information is relatively limited, with no
data published on producer prices, wages, trade volumes or prices/unit values.
Data dissemination to the public
21.
The publication of a quarterly statistical bulletin by the PBC has significantly
improved the timing and coverage of publicly available data on the monetary accounts and
the main real sector indicators. However, the monthly statistical publications do not contain
many time series (e.g. unemployment) or the disaggregation necessary for analysis.
Moreover, several important time series, particularly on the main fiscal variables, are not
released in a systematic and timely manner. Extensive annual economic data are available in
various statistical yearbooks, but these are published nine months or more after the end of the
year.

C

E

C

Source of data

Mode of reporting

Confidentiality

D 6/

E,M

C,A,N

M

M

M

April 20, 2004

March 2004

International
reserves

D 6/

E,M

C,A,N

Q, M

Q, M

Q, M

May 27,
2004

April 2004

Reserve/base
money

D 6/

E,M

C,A,N

M

M

M

May 27,
2004

April 2004

Central Bank
balance sheet

D 6/

E,M

C,A,N

M

M

M

May 27,
2004

April 2004

Broad
money

D 6/

E,M

C,N

... 3/

... 3/

... 3/

May 27,
2004

April 2004

Interest
rates

D 6/

E,M

C,N

M

M

M

April 16,
2004

March 2004

Consumer
price
index 1/

D 6/

E

C,N

M

M

M

April 15,
2004

March 2004

Exports/
Imports

D 6/

E,M

C,A

A,Q

A,Q 7/

A,Q 7/

April 28,
2004

Dec. 2003

Current
account
balance

D 6/

E,M

C,A,N

A,M 5/

A,M

A,M

April, 2004

Feb. 2004

Overall
government
balance

D 6/

E,M

C,N

A,
Q (cumulative)

A,
Q (cumulative)

A,
Q (cumulative)

April 16, 2004

March 2004

GDP/
GNP 2/

D 6/

M

A

A

Q

Q

April 2004

Dec. 2003

External
debt

54 -

Explanation of codes is as follows:
Frequency of data: D - daily, M - monthly, Q - quarterly, A - annually.
Frequency of reporting: D - daily, M - monthly, Q - quarterly, A - annually.
Source of data: A - direct reporting by the authorities, C - commercial electronic data provider, N - official publication.
Mode of reporting: E - electronic data transfer, M – mail
Confidentiality: C - unrestricted use, D - embargoed for a specific period, and for unrestricted use thereafter.

1/ Only 12-month growth rates are reported (price indices are not available).
2/ For real GDP, level data are available only on an annual basis (growth rates are available on a quarterly, cumulative basis).
3/ Interest rates change only infrequently; these changes are publicly announced.
4/ While officially transmitted on a monthly basis, these data are available from news sources on a daily basis.
5/ Data on interest expense not published.
6/ Restricted until publication.

D

M 4/

Frequency of
publication

Frequency of reporting

D

June 4, 2004

Date received

Frequency of data

May 31, 2004

Date of latest
observation

Exchange
rates

China: Core Statistical Indicators
(As of June 18, 2004)

-

ANNEX IV

- 55 -

ANNEX V

China—Relations With The World Bank1
1.
The World Bank has been active in China since 1980. World Bank commitments to
China as of June 30, 2004 are expected to total about $38.4 billion for 254 projects. About
90 of these projects are still under implementation, making China's portfolio by far the largest
in the Bank. World Bank-supported projects are found in almost all parts of China and in
many sectors of the economy, with infrastructure (transport, energy, industry, urban
development) accounting for more than half of the total portfolio, and agriculture, social
sectors (health, education, social protection), environment, and water supply and sanitation
comprising the remainder.
2.
In FY2004, lending is projected to total $1,218 million in IBRD loans for nine projects.
Given the increased availability of domestic financing—as a result of China's fiscal stimulus
policy—and a shift of the government's development program to the central and western
areas, the focus of the World Bank's assistance program is now on the poorer and
institutionally weaker inland provinces. As a consequence, the amount of lending per project
has been scaled back to suit the absorptive capacity of those provinces, leading to a lower
lending level compared with the mid-1990s. By sector, the projects to be approved in
FY2004 include two for agricultural development in poor rural areas, one for basic education
in western areas, two for urban environmental improvements in Zhejiang and the Pearl River
Delta, an urban transport in Wuhan, and three transport projects (for the national railway,
inland waterways development and highway development). A summary of Bank
commitments and disbursement to China is given in Table V.1. Details of the sectoral
breakdown of past lending can be found in Table V.2.
3.
Over the next two years, lending is expected to total around $2.5 billion, with support
provided to economic reform nationwide, development of health, agriculture and
infrastructure in the interior provinces, and for urban management and the environment in
both coastal and inland areas. Since China is no longer borrowing IDA funds, the Bank, in
collaboration with the government and the United Kingdom’s Department for International
Development (DFID), has developed a mechanism to blend grant resources with IBRD loans,
resulting in more concessional loans (at an interest rate of about 2 percent) for the social
sectors and poverty reduction. The FY2004 Basic Education Project was supported by a
blend. Use of this blending mechanism with other development partners is envisioned.
4.
The current World Bank Group assistance strategy, covering both lending and
non-lending activities, is designed to help China: (i) improve the business environment and
accelerate the transition to a market economy, mostly through an array of knowledge transfer
1

Prepared by World Bank staff.

- 56 -

ANNEX V

activities; (ii) address the needs of the poorer and disadvantaged people and lagging regions,
through investment lending in rural development, infrastructure, and the social sectors, as
well as analytical and advisory services and training; and (iii) facilitate an environmentally
sustainable development process, through investment lending in natural resource
management, watershed rehabilitation and wastewater treatment, energy, global environment
projects supported by the Global Environment Facility and Montreal Protocol, and policy
work.
5.
In addition to financial assistance, the provision of non-financial services in the form of
technical assistance, policy advice, seminars and training is an essential part of the
cooperation program. The government has strongly endorsed Bank efforts to make its
non-lending activities more responsive to the country's evolving needs, by having a better
balance between detailed studies of issues requiring lengthy technical analysis and quick
delivery of briefer policy notes, supplemented by other forms of collaboration such as
senior-level workshops. Some recent or upcoming outputs include: support to formulation of
the 11th Five-Year Plan; an economic memorandum on promoting growth with equity; issues
in the management of economic crises (building on previous work on public expenditures,
including at the sub-national level, and on the management of fiscal and financial risks);
studies of public service unit reforms, national market integration, maximizing rural health
contributions to growth and employment, education strategies for lagging regions, and labor
reform; program of long-term energy security studies; and a financial sector program focused
on capital market development, banking reform, infrastructure finance and rural finance. In
FY2005, besides continuing support on the 11th Plan, the World Bank expects to assist on,
among other things, macromodeling for Plan formulation, intergovernmental fiscal and
regional development issues (including in the Northeast), a study of public finance reform for
rural development, a poverty assessment as well as major programs of work on the financial
sector and rural health.
Representation:

The People’s Republic of China assumed China’s
representation in the World Bank on May 15, 1980.

Capital Subscription:

China holds 4,480 million shares or 2.85 percent of the total
authorized capital of the IBRD. Currently, China is fully
subscribed.

Technical Assistance:

A technical assistance loan to the People's Bank of China to
enhance the central bank’s supervision, research, and clearing
capabilities was approved in FY1993. A second technical
assistance project, approved in the same year, is financing
reform-supportive studies and economic research, the
strengthening of core agencies responsible for macroeconomic
management and local training institutions, and preinvestment
support. Technical assistance for economic law reform was
approved in FY1995. Fiscal technical assistance, also approved
in FY1995, supported the implementation of a broad range of
public sector reforms. Assistance in bond market development

- 57 -

ANNEX V

has also been provided. In FY1999, technical assistance
projects were approved for reform of accounting, pension and
enterprise systems. Further technical assistance support for
economic research and preinvestment was also provided in
FY1999. A supplemental loan for financial sector technical
assistance was approved in FY2001. A large program of
technical assistance is currently financed by trust funds from
within and outside the Bank, covering economic and financial
sector reform, statistical reform, poverty issues, social sectors,
debt management, and social security.
Resident Mission:

International Finance
Corporation (IFC):

A resident IBRD office in Beijing has been in operation since
October 1985. In October 1997, responsibility for managing the
Bank’s total program for China was decentralized to the
Beijing office.
As of March 31, 2004, IFC has committed financing for
49 projects in China. For these projects IFC has provided
US$673 million: US$589 million for IFC’s own account, and
US$84 million for the account of participating banks. A
resident IFC office in Beijing has been in operation since 1992.
In July 2000, a joint IFC/World Bank regional office for private
sector development was established in Hong Kong SAR, with
management of this program decentralized to that office.
IFC's priorities in China include: supporting private sector
development in interior provinces; expanding the presence of
private enterprises in infrastructure, social services, and
environmental technology sectors; and improving the business
environment, particularly as it relates to financial markets,
private participation in infrastructure, and small and medium
enterprises.

- 58 -

ANNEX V

Table V.1. China: IBRD-IDA Lending Activities, FY1981–04 1/
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Commitments
IDA
IBRD

1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004 3/
Total

100
60
150
424
442
450
556
640
515
590
978
949
1,017
925
630
480
325
293
423
0 2/
0
0
0
0
9,947

100
0
463
616
660
687
867
1,054
833
0
602
1,578
2,155
2,145
2,370
2,490
2,490
2,323
1,674
1,673
788
563
1,145
1,218
28,494

Disbursements
IDA
IBRD

0
0
33
134
146
252
361
399
549
557
494
753
763
869
659
891
722
596
614
420
345
260
153
101
10,071 4/

0
0
0
20
236
352
318
302
685
569
620
618
813
1,057
1,555
1,328
1,405
1,497
1,412
1,408
1,476
1,755
1,628
1,100
20,154

1/ The financial year (FY) runs from July through June.
2/ As of July 1, 1999, China no longer borrows from IDA.
3/ Lending for 2004 is for entire year; disbursement numbers are actuals as of May 31,
2004.
4/ IDA disbursements exceed commitments due to changes in the US$-SDR exchange
rate.

- 59 -

ANNEX V

Table V.2. Distribution of Lending, FY 1980–04
_______________________________________________________________________
Sector
US$ mn. Percent
No. of Projects
___________________________________________________________________________
Rural devt./poverty alleviation
Industry and energy
Industry/corporate reform
Energy/renewable energy

9,833
10,127
3,013
7,114

25.6
26.3

64
54
20
34

Transport

10,121

26.3

54

Human resources
Education
Health

2,650
1,727
923

6.9

30
19
11

Environment and urban
Environment
Urban development
Water supply

5,252
2,965
1,466
821

13.7

38
21
10
7

455

1.2

14

Technical assistance/public sector

Total
38,441
100
254
_______________________________________________________________________

- 60 -

ANNEX VI

CHINA—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK27
1.
The Asian Development Bank’s (AsDB) new Country Strategy and Program (CSP) for
China was completed in late 2003. The CSP focuses on a set of four interrelated challenges:
(i) promoting pro-poor inclusive economic growth; (ii) building an enabling environment for
the private sector and strengthening public sector governance; (iii) fostering regional
cooperation to help integrate the PRC into the global economy; and (iv) promoting
environmental sustainability.
2.
Since China became a member of ADB in 1986, 101 public sector loans totaling
$13.5 billion and 418 technical assistance projects amounting to $223.1 million have been
approved as of end-December 2003. In addition, ADB has approved nine private sector
projects without government guarantee including investments in two commercial banks, three
investment funds for small and medium enterprises, two power projects loans, and two water
sector project loans. The projects involve aggregate investments of $2.1 billion, for which
ADB’s funding commitment consisted of $152 million of direct loans, $79 million of equity
investments, and $172 million in complementary financing.
3.
ADB’s proposed lending program for the next three years will focus mainly on three
areas: (i) agriculture and rural development, (ii) transport and energy primarily in the central
and western regions, and (iii) the environment. Agricultural projects will be more focused on
environment projects (e.g., land degradation, and soil and water management), productivity
enhancement, and poverty-oriented projects. Road projects will include highways
complemented by feeder roads to rural communities, and improving urban transport systems.
In the energy sector, the emphasis will be on renewable energy and clean energy to reduce air
pollution. Improving the urban environment, including water supply/wastewater treatment,
air pollution abatement, and solid waste management projects will constitute the core of
social infrastructure projects.
4.
During 2004–2006, ADB’s lending to the PRC will be around $1.5 billion annually, an
increase from about $1 billion per year in the past five years. The proposed level is
considered appropriate for a large country with sound macroeconomic fundamentals, strong
absorptive capacity, and good project implementation. During 2004-2006, more than
80 percent of the proposed lending will finance projects in the central and western regions.
The transport sector will continue to dominate ADB operations, with environment and social
infrastructure increasing its share.
5.
The ADB’s lending program will continue to be supported by technical assistance
focusing on governance, private sector development, the environment, poverty and regional
cooperation. Efforts to promote social development will be facilitated through new TA
proposals for the education sector. In line with China’s increased decentralization, TA
proposals for forging strategic partnerships with provincial governments in addressing
specific thematic priorities have also been included.
27

Prepared by AsDB staff.

- 61 -

ANNEX VI

6.
Overall, China has demonstrated strong project implementation capability. The good
performance reflects the strong sense of project ownership among agencies involved in the
design, implementation, and management of projects, as well as the rigorous screening
process for development projects, particularly those proposed for external assistance. Loan
disbursement and contract award performance is good.
7.
The establishment of AsDB’s China Resident Mission in Beijing in June 2000 has
contributed to improving portfolio management and project administration and enhanced the
development impact of its lending and knowledge-based operations.
Table VI.1: ADB Distribution of Lending (Public Sector)
(In millions of U.S. dollars; as of 31 December 2003)
Sector

Amount

Agriculture and Natural Resources
Energy
Industry and Finance
Transport and Communications
Social Infrastructure
Others
Total

Percentage No. of Loans

877
2,055
1,217
7,262
1,085
1,003
13,499

7
15
9
54
8
7
100

Percentage

12
18
11
44
9
7
100

12
18
11
43
9
7
100

Table VI.2. China: AsDB’s Commitments and Disbursements, 1993–2003
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Year
Commitments 1/
1993
1,031
1994
1,618
1995
2,304
1996
3,282
1997
4,033
1998
4,518
1999
5,337
2000
6,159
2001
6,748
2002
7,563
2003
8,075
1/ Refers to cumulative contract awards.
2/ Refers to disbursements for the year.

Disbursements 2/
421
492
558
707
715
831
819
848
1,042
782
705

- 62 -

ANNEX VII

China: Millennium Development Goals
(In percent, unless otherwise specified)
1990

1995

2001

2002

1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates
Population below US$1 a day
...
...
16.1
...
Poverty gap at US$1 a day
...
...
3.7
...
Share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
...
...
...
...
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
17.4
12.9
10.0
...
Share of population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption
16.0
...
9.0
...
2 Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5
Youth literacy rate (ages 15-24)

2015 target = net enrollment to 100
97.4
97.9
93.2
86.0
93.8
...
95.3
96.5
97.9

...
...
98.1

3 Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education
Ratio of young literate females to males (ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament

2005 target = education ratio to 100
81.1
87.3
97.6
95.5
97.0
98.1
...
...
...
21.0
21.0
22.0

...
98.2
...
22.0

4 Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)
5 Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)
6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV, female (ages 15-24)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (of women ages 15-49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS
7 Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
8 Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15-24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Population (in billions)
Gross national income (US$ trillion)
GNI per capita (US$)
Adult literacy rate (percent of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)

2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 mortality by two-thirds
49.0
46.0
39.0
36.4
38.0
37.0
31.0
30.0
98.0
93.0
79.0
...
2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three-fourths
...
60.0
...
...
50.3
...
70.0
...
2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.
...
...
0.1
84.6
90.4
83.0
...
...
76,000
...
...
107.0
...
16.0
33.0

...
...
...
...
...

15.6
...
1.7
2.1
71.0
29.0

2015 target = various 1/
...
17.0
6.4
6.4
2.9
4.2
2.6
2.3
...
75.0
...
38.0

...
7.8
...
...
...
...

...
5.9
0.4

2015 target = various 2/
2.9
3.1
35.9
247.7
2.3
19.0

...
...
...

1.1
0.4
320
78.3
2.1
68.9

1.2
0.6
520
81.9
1.9
69.4

1.3
1.1
890
85.8
1.9
70.5

1.3
1.2
940
86.4
1.9
70.7

Sources: World Development Indicators database, April 2002. In some cases the data are for earlier or later years than those stated.
1/ Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. By 2020, to have achieved a significant
improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.
2/Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the Special Needs of the Least
Developed Countries. In cooperation with developing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent and productive work for youth.
In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs. In cooperation with the private sector, make
available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
July 28, 2004
1.
This statement contains information that has become available since the Staff report
was circulated to the Executive Board on July 7, 2004. This information does not materially
alter the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
New data for the second quarter of 2004 point to some success in slowing down the
economy, but data revisions and incomplete reporting make it difficult to draw firm
conclusions. Real GDP grew by 9.6 percent (y/y), down from 9.8 percent in the first quarter.
The slowdown in the reported growth rate appears to have been influenced to some extent by
an upward revision to GDP growth in the second quarter of 2003.1 Without this revision,
second quarter 2004 growth would have been about 11 percent. However, staff estimates of
GDP seasonally adjusted on a quarterly basis suggest a significant slowdown in second
quarter 2004 GDP growth. Indicators for expenditure show a marked decline in fixed asset
investment growth from 36 percent (y/y) in real terms in the first quarter to 22 percent in the
second. Consumption growth, on the other hand, appears to have picked up, as real retail
sales rose by 11½ percent (y/y) in the second quarter, following a 9¼ percent increase in the
first quarter.
3.
External trade continued to be buoyant, with exports and imports increasing by
46 percent and 51 percent (y/y), respectively, in June. China had a small trade surplus of
$1.7 billion (customs basis) in the second quarter, compared with a deficit of $8.5 billion in
the first quarter. Foreign exchange reserves increased by $30 billion during the second
quarter, in part reflecting strong net FDI inflows of $20 billion. On a monthly basis, official
reserves increased on average by $10 billion in the second quarter, compared with $12 billion
in the first, suggesting that non-FDI capital inflows (including errors and omissions) may
have declined in the second quarter.
4.
Food price increases continued to drive CPI inflation. The CPI in June increased by
5.0 percent (y/y), compared with 4.4 percent in May. Food prices were up by 14.0 percent
(11.8 percent in May), and non-food prices by 0.4 percent (0.7 percent in May). Staff
estimates of the CPI on a seasonally adjusted basis suggest that inflation stood at 5.8 percent
(month on month at an annual rate) in June, roughly the same as in May, but less than the
7.8 percent rate in April.
5.
Broad money and loan growth declined to 16¼ percent in June (y/y), compared with
average growth of 19¾ percent and 20 percent, respectively, in the first five months of 2004.
Estimates of loan growth, however, may understate the growth in new lending to some extent
because of the substantial writeoffs of nonperforming loans by banks at the end of last year
and during the first half of 2004. Although broad money and loan growth rates have come
down, the staff believes that continued monetary policy vigilance is needed to ensure a soft
landing of the economy.

1

In the release of GDP data for the first half of 2004, revised data for the same period in
2003 were published, but revised GDP data for the whole of 2003 were not.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/99
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 25, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the
People’s Republic of China
On July 28, 2004, the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Executive Board concluded the
Article IV consultation with China.1
Background
China has continued its rapid economic growth and integration into the global economy. Real
GDP grew by 9.1 percent in 2003, underpinned by strong fixed investment and exports, which
registered growth rates of 20 percent and 29 percent in real terms, respectively. Consumption
growth declined somewhat from 2002, reflecting the impact of the SARS epidemic in the second
quarter. In the first half of 2004, GDP grew by 9.7 percent (year-on-year), with indications that
economic activity was beginning to slow down in response to measures taken to reduce
investment growth. External trade continued to expand rapidly, and consumption growth has
also picked up momentum. Inflationary pressures have emerged. After rising by 1.2 percent in
2003, consumer prices increased by 4.4 percent in the first half of 2004, largely due to food
price increases. Despite the strong GDP growth, unemployment continues to rise; registered
unemployment in the urban areas increased to 4.3 percent in 2003, up 0.3 percentage points
from 2002. The level of surplus labor in the agricultural sector is estimated to be large, and
rural-urban income disparities have continued to widen.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2China’s overall external position has strengthened further. The current account surplus rose
from 2¾ percent in 2002 to 3¼ percent in 2003, mainly as a result of an increase in private
transfers and a decline in the deficit on investment income. The capital and financial account
posted another large surplus in 2003, as net foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows amounted to
$47 billion and net porfolio investment turned positive. Official reserves increased by
$117 billion in 2003 (excluding the $45 billion used for bank recapitalization). In the first half of
2004, the trade account registered a deficit of $7 billion, as imports surged by 43 percent, while
exports grew by 36 percent. Nevertheless, foreign exchange reserves rose by $67 billion,
reaching 471 billion by end-June (equivalent to around 9½ months of imports), as current
transfers and capital inflows continued at a rapid pace.
Real GDP growth is projected to average around 9 percent in 2004. As the effects of recent
macroeconomic tightening continue into 2005, economic activity should maintain a more
sustainable pace, with real GDP growing at about 7½ percent. The CPI is expected to rise by
about 3-4 percent over the next year and a half, with inflationary pressures dissipating towards
the end of 2004 as food price increases ease and demand pressures diminish. The external
current account surplus would decline by about ¾ percent of GDP in 2004, as import growth
continues to outpace export growth, with the latter slowing down from the very high rates
recorded over the last year. Sizable net capital inflows, including FDI, are likely to continue in
2005, and the external position is expected to remain strong.
Significant progress has been made in structural reforms. In the banking sector, restructuring
plans are being put in place for the two state banks that were recently recapitalized, stricter
prudential regulations have been adopted, improved lending practices have contributed to a
decline in the reported ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans, and asset management
companies have made progress in recovering distressed assets. In the state-owned enterprise
(SOE) sector, the government has taken a number of new initiatives to improve management of
the SOEs, including new laws and regulations related to the supervision, restructuring, and sale
of state assets. Shareholding systems are being introduced into large SOEs, while more than
28 million workers have been laid off since 1998 as a result of closures of loss-making SOEs
and reduction of redundant employees. To mitigate the social impact of reforms, the authorities
have taken steps to strengthen the social safety net, including by increasing pension coverage
and payments, widening the coverage of unemployment insurance and urban minimum living
allowance assurance schemes, and providing assistance to laid-off workers for finding new
employment.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Chinese authorities for their skillful economic
management, which has reduced the risk of overheating and further strengthened the Chinese
economy. Efforts to rein in credit and slow investment appear to have started to bear fruit, as
evidenced by the recent signs of moderating economic expansion. The key challenge going
forward will be how to harness the strong potential for sustained economic expansion in China,
while maintaining macroeconomic balance and ensuring sound, broadly-based economic
development.

-3-

A crucial short-term concern is that despite the recent indications of moderation in the fast pace
of investment and economic growth, a soft landing of the economy is not yet assured.
Addressing this challenge, while at the same time maintaining the stability of the financial
system and further integrating China into the global economy, will require the authorities to
pursue prudent macroeconomic policies and accelerated structural reforms in key areas,
including the banking sector, state enterprises, and labor markets. The scope and timing of
actions by the Chinese authorities on all these fronts will have a decisive influence on China’s
medium-term prospects.
Directors noted that in view of the state of development of China’s economy and the observed
overinvestment in certain sectors, the authorities have relied on macroeconomic policies, legal
measures, and some administrative means to deal with the current macroeconomic and
sectoral pressures. Most Directors considered that, as the effects of the various measures
already taken may not yet have been fully realized, additional time may be warranted before
deciding whether further monetary tightening is needed. A number of Directors, however, felt
that the administrative measures taken so far may not be sufficiently effective in reducing the
risk of overheating and credit growth, and were of the view that a further tightening of the
monetary policy stance would facilitate a soft landing. Going forward, Directors agreed on the
need for continued vigilance, and cautioned against a premature relaxation of policy, noting in
particular that significant excess liquidity remains in the banking system. They encouraged the
authorities to further develop indirect monetary policy tools and improve the effectiveness of
market-based instruments, which will allow a gradual phasing out of administrative measures
that are not prudential in nature.
Directors carefully considered China’s exchange rate regime in the context of the Fund’s
obligation to exercise firm surveillance over members’ exchange rate policies. They reiterated
that greater exchange rate flexibility remains in China’s best interest, as it will improve the
effectiveness of monetary policy in containing domestic demand and price pressures, and
enhance the economy’s ability to adjust to shocks. Several Directors stressed that greater
exchange rate flexibility should also be helpful in contributing to an orderly resolution of global
imbalances. Directors accordingly welcomed the Chinese authorities’ aim to introduce, in a
phased manner, greater exchange rate flexibility, with several Directors recognizing that the
exact timing of such a change should be left to the authorities to decide. Directors suggested
that greater exchange rate flexibility is best introduced from a position of strength, as this would
help limit any adverse effects on growth and employment. Many Directors therefore considered
that, in view of the present favorable circumstances, it would be advantageous for China to
make an initial move toward greater exchange rate flexibility without undue delay, with some
Directors preferring that this move be made soon. At the same time, many Directors also
emphasized the importance of carefully sequencing such a move in relation to measures being
taken to develop the capital and foreign exchange markets, liberalize the capital account, and
reform the financial sector to ensure a successful exit from the current exchange rate regime.
Directors supported the authorities’ gradual approach in moving to capital account liberalization,
observing that a key pre-requisite for liberalization is a well-capitalized and sound banking

-4system. Several Directors observed that many countries had found it advantageous to increase
exchange rate flexibility prior to liberalization of their capital accounts in order to allow exchange
market and hedging instruments to develop more fully. They accordingly agreed with the view
that maintenance of capital controls should not deter a movement toward greater exchange rate
flexibility.
Directors stressed that fiscal policy should play a supportive role in achieving a soft landing of
the economy, and urged the authorities to save part of this year’s expected revenue
overperformance, to reduce public investment, and to lower the deficit below the level targeted
in the 2004 budget. Directors noted that fiscal consolidation will also have medium-term
benefits, in view of the likely sharp increase in fiscal pressures associated with the large
contingent liabilities in the financial sector, the pension system, and local government
obligations, as well as rising demand for social expenditures, including on health and education.
They therefore welcomed the authorities’ intention to keep the level of the fiscal deficit roughly
unchanged in nominal terms over the next few years, which should imply a reduction in the
deficit by ¼ to ½ percent of GDP per year over the medium term.
Directors stressed that both expenditure reprioritization and revenue measures will facilitate
fiscal consolidation and promote economic efficiency. They emphasized the importance of
timely adoption of a revised budget classification system and chart of accounts, full introduction
of the treasury single account, and improved cash management to enhance the effectiveness of
spending. Directors encouraged the authorities to continue to bring extra-budgetary funds,
especially at the local government level, onto the budget. They stressed also that priority should
be given to considering an extension of the VAT to services, shifting the VAT from a production
to a consumption-based tax, unifying income tax rates for domestic and foreign companies,
reducing the tax burden on the financial sector, and continuing to strengthen tax administration.
Noting the growing fiscal risks at the local government level, Directors emphasized that local
governments’ accountability and transparency need to be significantly enhanced, and centerlocal fiscal relations revamped, including by reforming tax assignments, expenditure mandates,
and transfers of revenue between levels of government.
Directors emphasized that structural reforms in a number of key areas will be crucial for China
to achieve continued strong growth over the medium term. Of particular importance is banking
sector reform to ensure future financial stability and sound, competitive domestic banks.
Directors considered the recent recapitalization of two state-owned commercial banks at
end-2003 as an important initiative aimed at stepping up the pace of reform. In this regard, they
stressed the need to carefully monitor the implementation of the time-bound action plans for
these banks and to ensure that all banks fully meet capital adequacy requirements with full
provisioning by 2007, as required by existing guidelines.
Directors underscored the need for rigorous efforts to strengthen balance sheets throughout the
banking system, improve corporate governance, and enhance the ability of banks to manage
risks. They noted that diversification of bank ownership and further liberalization of lending rates
will facilitate the restructuring process and increase the commercial orientation of the banks.
Directors welcomed the progress made so far in reducing nonperforming loans, and

-5encouraged the authorities to tighten lending standards and further improve overall,
consolidated supervision, including through greater coordination among financial sector
supervisors. To create a more favorable environment for the orderly resolution of existing
nonperforming loans, Directors called for additional actions to strengthen the legal framework
for creditor rights, foreclosure, and bankruptcy, and to allow full tax deductibility for specific loan
loss provisions. The development of domestic equity and debt markets to reduce domestic
dependence on bank financing and mitigate risks also remains a priority.
Directors commended the authorities for undertaking a self-assessment of the financial sector,
and encouraged China to participate in the Financial Sector Assessment Program in the near
future. They welcomed the steps recently taken by the authorities to improve the framework for
anti-money laundering and combating terrorism financing (AML/CFT), and looked forward to the
finalization of work on comprehensive AML/CFT legislation that matches international
standards.
Directors welcomed the initiatives taken to improve the management of state-owned enterprises
(SOEs). Continued reforms are needed to ensure that SOEs are subject to hard budget
constraints, operate independently, and pay dividends to the government. Directors urged the
authorities to close nonviable firms or, if deemed socially important, support them directly from
the budget.
Directors cautioned that, even with a high rate of GDP growth, labor market pressures will
continue with projected increases in the working-age population and the restructuring of the
SOE and agricultural sectors. To cope with these pressures, Directors emphasized that the
functioning of labor markets should be further enhanced, including by facilitating better
information flow on job opportunities, improving education and training, and strengthening the
social safety net for both rural and urban workers. Further reforms of the household registration
(hukou) system to allow freer movement of labor will help mitigate underemployment in rural
areas and reduce income disparities.
Directors encouraged the authorities to continue to implement WTO commitments
as scheduled, and welcomed China’s ongoing support for the completion of the Doha
Development Round. Directors expressed appreciation for China’s provision of debt relief in line
with the HIPC Initiative.
Directors welcomed the continued improvement in the quality of economic statistics and the
authorities’ commitment to make further improvements in line with the General Data
Dissemination System. They noted that further efforts are particularly needed to improve the
provision of annual and quarterly estimates of real GDP on an expenditure basis, to bring the
compilation of fiscal and labor statistics in line with international standards, and to report data on
the international investment position as soon as feasible. Directors welcomed China’s intention
to join the Special Data Dissemination Standard in the future.

-6-

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-7People’s Republic of China: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1/
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
IMF Staff
Projections

(Change in percent)

Domestic economy
Real GDP

8.0

7.5

8.3

9.1

9.0

Consumer prices (period
Average)

0.4

0.7

-0.8

1.2

3.5

(In billions of U.S. dollars)

External economy
Exports

249

266

326

438

543

Imports

-215

-232

-281

-394

-512

21

17

35

46

40

2

35

32

53

110

37

37

47

47

48

Gross official reserves 3/

169

219

295

412

562

Current account balance
(in percent of GDP)

1.9

1.5

2.8

3.2

2.5

Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance 2/
Of which: Direct investment, net

(In percent of GDP)

Public finance 4/
Overall budgetary balance

-3.6

-3.1

-3.3

-2.8

-2.2

Revenue

15.3

17.0

18.2

18.7

19.0

18.9

20.1

21.5

21.6

21.2

Expenditures

(Change in percent)

Money and interest rates
Broad money (M2) 5/
Interest rate 6/

12.3

14.4

16.8

19.6

…

2.3

2.3

2.0

2.0

…

Sources: Chinese authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ As of August 25, 2004.
2/ Excluding errors and omissions.
3/ Includes gold, SDR holdings, and reserve position in the Fund.
4/ Central and local governments. Data include all expenditure financed by official external borrowing, interest payments
on government debt, and unbudgeted expenditures in 2000 related to the fiscal stimulus program.
5/ Banking survey.
6/ One-year time deposits, year-end.

