June 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/180

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

Sudan: Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation, Final Review of the 2004
Staff-Monitored Program, and the 2005 Staff-Monitored Program; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
Sudan
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2005 Article IV
consultation with Sudan and final review of the 2005 staff-monitored program, and the 2005 staffmonitored program, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, final review of the 2004 staff-monitored
program, and the 2005 staff-monitored program, prepared by a staff team of the IMF
following discussions that ended on December 20, 2004, with the officials of Sudan on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on April 15, 2005. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its April 29, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Sudan.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Financial System Stability Assessment
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Sudan*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of Sudan*
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*May also be included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SUDAN
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation, Final Review of the 2004
Staff-Monitored Program (SMP), and the 2005 Staff-Monitored Program
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia and
Policy Development and Review Departments
Approved by Lorenzo L. Pérez and Matthew Fisher
April 15, 2005
Contents

Page

Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. 4
I.

Introduction..................................................................................................................... 5

II.

Recent Economic Developments and Performance Under the Program ........................ 6

III.

Article IV Discussions .................................................................................................... 9
A. Stocktaking of Performance and Key Challenges .................................................. 9
B. Macroeconomic Program for 2005 ....................................................................... 11
C. Structural Reforms ................................................................................................ 15
D. Medium-Term Outlook and Implications of the Peace Agreement...................... 17
E. Debt Service and Relations with External Creditors ............................................ 18
F. Data Issues and Technical Assistance .................................................................. 19
G. Program Monitoring and Risks............................................................................. 20

IV.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................. 20

Text Boxes
1.
Key Elements of the Peace Agreement........................................................................... 6
2
Sudan’s Oil Savings Account ....................................................................................... 12
3.
Economic Growth over the Medium Term................................................................... 17
Text Tables
1.
Central Government Operations, 2001–04 ..................................................................... 7
2.
Monetary Developments, December 2003–December 2004 .......................................... 8
3.
Bank Soundness Indicators (end-year) ........................................................................... 9
4.
Medium-Term Fiscal Expenditures .............................................................................. 18

-2-

Figures
1.
GDP, Prices, External, and Fiscal Developments, 2000–05......................................... 23
2.
Exchange Rate Indices and International Reserves, January 2000–December 2004 ... 24
3.
Monetary Developments, December 2002–December 2004 ........................................ 25
Tables
1.
Quantitative Indicative Targets, 2003–04..................................................................... 26
2.
Structural Benchmarks for 2004 ................................................................................... 27
3.
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–05 ................................................ 28
4.
Summary Balance of Payments, 2003–08 .................................................................... 29
5.
Central Government Operations, 2001–05 ................................................................... 30
6.
Monetary Survey, 2002–05........................................................................................... 32
7.
Monetary Authorities’ Accounts, 2002–05 .................................................................. 33
8.
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenario, 2004–10..................................................... 34
9.
Indicators of Debt Service Capacity, 2002–05 ............................................................. 35
10. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2003–05 ............................................ 36
11. Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2002............................................................... 37
Appendices
I.
Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................ 38
II.
Relations with the World Bank..................................................................................... 41
III. Statistical Issues............................................................................................................ 43
IV. Tentative Work Program, 2005 .................................................................................... 49
Attachments
I.
Letter of Intent, Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies, and Technical
Memorandum of Understanding ................................................................................... 50
II.
Public Information Notice ............................................................................................ 65

-3-

LIST OF ACRONYMS
AfDB
AFTA
AMF
BOS
CAR
COMESA
FDI
FSAP
GDDS
GFS
HIPC
IFAD
IsDB
JAM
MDG
MOFNE
OPEC
OSA
RAP
SMP
SPLM
WTO

African Development Bank
Arab Free Trade Area
Arab Monetary Fund
Bank of Sudan
Capital Adequacy Ratio
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
General Data Dissemination System
Government Finance Statistics
Heavily-Indebted Poor Countries
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Islamic Development Bank
Joint Assessment Mission
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Finance and National Economy
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
Oil Savings Account
Rights Accumulation Program
Staff-Monitored Program
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
World Trade Organization

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
During the last four years, Sudan has implemented an important economic agenda, with
emphasis on strengthening institutions and mobilizing domestic resources. This agenda,
supported by successive staff-monitored programs, included prudent monetary and fiscal
policies, the liberalization of the trade and investment regimes, privatization and public
enterprise restructuring, tax reforms, and deregulation of the foreign exchange market.
Economic performance has been promising. Between 2001 and 2004, the economy grew at
an average rate of 6.4 percent per year, the non-oil sector expanded at an annual rate of
5.3 percent, inflation was kept at single-digit levels, and investment rose from 17.6 percent of
GDP to 22.6 percent. Higher revenues turned the fiscal balance into surplus, and higher
exports helped to rebuild international reserves and allowed for an expansion in government
spending. However, expenditure restraint was needed to ensure macroeconomic stability and
resources proved insufficient to fund social and development programs.
In January 2005, the government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM)
signed a comprehensive peace agreement that ended a 20-year civil war. However, the
situation in Darfur remains fragile and peace talks between the government and Darfur rebels
have made little progress so far.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved so far, substantial challenges remain. Social and
infrastructure spending should be scaled-up, and as the recent peace agreement with the
south puts pressure on the fiscal accounts, donor support will be critical to meet poverty
reduction goals. Intra-governmental coordination (including with the south) should be
enhanced and emphasis placed on strengthening institutions to ensure the success of
decentralization policies. In addition, variable private transfers, oil receipts, and aid flows
pose a challenge to the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies. Lastly, the 2004 FSAP
exercise revealed an improving trend in most indicators of banks’ financial sector soundness,
although several weaknesses remain.
The program for 2005 is based on prudent financial policies. The program will need to be
adjusted by mid-year to reflect additional financing arising from higher oil prices and aid and
previously unfunded expenditures on social and infrastructure projects. Real GDP growth
and inflation are projected at about 8 and 7 percent, respectively. The structural reform
agenda aims at strengthening the monetary policy regime, cash management, and fiscal and
oil sector transparency. While a postponement of tax and trade policy reforms is
understandable, earliest possible action by the authorities on these areas is still necessary.
Furthermore, regularizing relations with creditors should be a priority and nonconcessional
borrowing should be avoided.
Overall, the staff considers that the recent policy performance and commitments under the
2005 SMP are in line with what would be required under a RAP.

-5-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
A staff team visited Khartoum from December 8 to 20, 2004, to conduct the
2005 Article IV consultation discussions, the final review of performance under the 2004
Staff-Monitored Program (SMP), and discuss the 2005 SMP as well as the authorities’
medium-term reform agenda.1
2.
The thrust of the policy advice in the last Article IV consultation has been
broadly implemented. In concluding the 2003 Article IV consultation on October 31,
2003, Directors commended the authorities for the progress achieved with macroeconomic
stabilization and economic reforms. Directors emphasized the need to improve tax
revenues, maintain the deficit target amidst spending pressures, and ensure exchange rate
flexibility. During a subsequent Executive Board meeting on June 16, 2004, Directors
commended the authorities for the satisfactory implementation of the SMP. Similar to their
assessment about the 2002 and the 2003 SMPs, most Directors considered the quality of
policies envisaged in the 2004 SMP as equivalent to those required under a Rights
Accumulation Program (RAP).2
3.
The government and the SPLM signed a comprehensive peace agreement that
ended 20 years of civil war on January 9, 2005. The two parties have begun working on
the implementation of the agreement that envisages, among other things, political power
sharing in a new national government, security arrangement, and a resource-sharing
framework (Box 1). The UN is considering sending a peacekeeping force to monitor the
implementation of the agreement.
4.
The situation in Darfur remains fragile and progress on peace talks between
the government and rebel forces has been slow. According to a recent UN report,3 the
humanitarian situation in Darfur remains dire and the lack of security in this vast region
continues to undermine relief efforts. Ceasefire violations have been reported on both sides
from time to time. The African Union has a monitoring force in the region and is working to
convene a new round of peace talks.

1

The staff team included Messrs. Shabsigh (head), Ilahi, Hussein, Al-Ghelaiqah, Ms. Huckstep (all MCD),
Mr. Hussain (PDR) and Messrs. Nallari and Park (World Bank). Mr. Gelbard, the incoming mission chief,
participated in the first half of the mission. The mission met with Minister El-Zubeir Ahmed El-Hassan and
State Minister Abda Yahia El Mahdi (Ministry of Finance, Governor Sabir Mohammad Hassan (BOS), and
other government officials.

2

Most Directors noted that the strength of SMPs should be taken into account in determining the period of a
RAP.

3

Report of the International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur to the United Nations Secretary-General,
January 2005.

-6-

Box 1. Key Elements of the Peace Agreement
•

The agreement envisages the formation of a government of national unity by mid 2005 and calls for
nationwide general elections during the “interim period” (six years). It also stipulates the right of the
people of south Sudan to vote at the end of the interim period on whether to remain in Sudan or to become
an independent state.

•

The power-sharing agreement provides for a largely autonomous southern Sudanese government, with
participation in the national government and civil service, a new national constitution, a new bi-cameral
parliament, and the restructuring of national institutions. The agreement calls for a general election in three
years.

•

The wealth-sharing agreement establishes a framework for sharing and managing oil resources,
delineates taxation powers between the national and southern governments, allows conventional banking
in south Sudan (at present only Islamic banking is allowed in Sudan), provides for the introduction of a
new national currency, establishes a process to address land claim issues, and organizes the relations of the
national and southern governments with external donors. The agreement establishes a national petroleum
commission responsible for managing the oil sector, confirms the principle of saving part of the oil
revenue, provides 2 percent of net oil revenues to oil producing states, and divides the remaining net oil
revenues (from oil wells producing in the south) equally between the national and southern governments.

•

The protocol on security allows the two parties to maintain their own armed forces during the interim
period, separated by a UN force, and establishes a new joint force that would become the nucleus of a
future national army, as the two parties gradually downsize their forces.

•

A separate protocol covers the three conflict areas bordering the south: Abyei, Southern Kordofan, and Blue
Nile (also referred to as the Three Areas). The protocol provides special power, resource, and security
arrangements to these areas, including a referendum on whether to join the south at the end of the interim
period.

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM
5.
Performance under the 2004 SMP was satisfactory. All quantitative benchmarks
for end-December 2004 were met except the one on contracting or guaranteeing
nonconcessional external debt (Table 1). During 2004, Sudan paid the Fund
US$32.4 million, compared to US$30 million envisaged under the program. Most of the
structural measures scheduled for implementation by end-December 2004 were
implemented although many were delayed (Table 2).
6.
The economy grew strongly in 2004, although there was a small increase in
inflation. Real GDP rose from 6 percent in 2003 to 7.3 percent in 2004, owing to strong
performance in the oil, manufacturing, construction, power, and services sectors. Higher oil
production capacity led to a 21 percent expansion in the sector’s GDP. Average inflation
rose to 8.4 percent in 2004 compared to 7.7 percent in 2003 because of a loose monetary
policy during the first half of 2004 (Table 3).
7.
The balance of payments improved reflecting higher exports, transfers, and
foreign direct investment (FDI). On a cash basis, the external current account deficit

-7-

declined to an estimated 4.1 percent of GDP compared to about 5 percent in 2003, because
of substantially higher oil export receipts as well as a strong recovery in non-oil exports. Oil
exports grew by about 50 percent in 2004, while non-oil exports grew by 37 percent led by
growth in exports of sesame seeds and livestock. In addition, FDI and private transfers rose
to US$2.5 billion—more than one-third higher than in 2003—owing to a stable
macroeconomic environment, improving trade integration, and the expansion of the oil
sector. These favorable developments allowed for a buildup of foreign exchange reserves
from 1.5 months of imports at end-2003 to 2.9 months at end-2004 (Table 4).
8.
The dinar appreciated in 2004 in the context of greater exchange rate
flexibility. The dinar appreciated by 3.4 percent vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and by 7.7 percent
in real effective terms. The appreciation reflects the stronger balance of payments position,
more flexible exchange rate arrangements, and monetary policy actions by the Bank of
Sudan (BOS). The widening of the range of daily exchange rate fluctuations to ±3 percent
and the easing of some of the restrictions on the amount of foreign exchange traded by
banks have increased exchange rate flexibility. In addition, the BOS lifted exchange
controls, including export surrender requirements on oil services, the prohibition for banks
to issue foreign currency letters of guarantee, and restrictions on the transfer of funds by
nonbanks. The BOS also sold foreign exchange in open market operations to moderate the
growth of money supply in the second half of the year.
9.
Despite higher spending, higher fiscal revenues (oil and non-oil) have turned
the overall fiscal balance into surplus. In 2004, the overall balance recorded a surplus of
1.3 percent of GDP compared to a deficit of 1.2 percent under the program and a surplus of
1.0 percent in 2003 (Table 5). The accumulation of deposits in the oil savings account
(OSA) was higher than programmed by 0.5 percent of GDP. The improved fiscal situation
obviated the need for new net domestic financing.
10.
Fiscal revenues reached 21.5 percent of GDP compared to a program
projection of 18.7 percent. Non-oil
Sudan: Central Government Operations, 2001–04
revenues rose from 8 percent of GDP in
(In percent of GDP)
2003 to more than 10 percent in 2004
2001
2002
2003
(compared to a projected 9 percent),
Revenue
11.0
12.1
16.8
Tax
5.6
5.5
6.1
largely because of improved efficiency
Nontax
5.4
6.6
10.7
from the new large taxpayers’ unit, a
Of which: crude oil 1/
4.4
4.7
8.8
Expenditure
11.9
13.0
15.8
reduction in exemptions, and a telecom
Current
9.6
9.9
12.7
license fee. Oil revenues rose because
Capital
2.3
3.1
3.1
Overall balance (cash basis)
-0.9
-0.8
1.0
of higher production and higher oil
Of which: OSA accumulation
...
0.3
0.8
prices.
Sources: Sudanese authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Oil revenues are valued at international prices and not at the OSA
11.
Expenditures rose because of
benchmark price.
unanticipated spending and capital
outlays. Darfur-related security and relief spending was more than double the amount
programmed (it reached 1.1 percent of GDP). The additional spending was approved

2004
21.5
8.2
13.3
11.2
20.2
14.8
5.4
1.3
1.6

-8-

through a supplementary budget and was financed by using part of the additional oil
revenues.
12.
The BOS tightened monetary conditions in the second half of 2004. Broad
money grew at an annual rate of 37 percent in the first half of the year, but decelerated after
the BOS took steps to mop up
Sudan: Monetary Developments, December 2003-December 2004
liquidity in the second half of
(In billions of Sudanese dinars)
2004 to curb inflation. These
Actual
Actual
Program
Actual Percentage
steps included open market sales
2003
2004
2004
Change
of securities and foreign
Reserve money
354.8
426.5
453.3
27.8
exchange, an increase in the
247.1
337.9
449.9
82.1
NFA (excluding valuation adjustment
NDA
223.7
204.5
129.5
-42.1
required reserves ratio from
Broad money
734.1
917.6
960.4
30.8
12 percent to 14 percent, and the
Of which
Credit to government
111.7
89.1
32.5
-70.9
calling back of some loans
Credit to nongovernment
312.1
417.6
451.9
44.8
extended to banks. By December,
broad money growth had fallen to Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
30.8 percent, compared with a program target of 25 percent (Table 6).
13.
The authorities made progress in implementing structural reforms. On the
fiscal front, a review of exemptions was completed and an action plan to streamline them is
being developed. The tax privileges of the four major oil distribution companies lapsed at
end-2004, and no new ones will be granted. The authorities indicated that technical capacity
problems prevented the broadening of the definition of large taxpayers to include
individuals. Instead, they plan to set up a medium-size taxpayer unit in 2005. The envisaged
medium-term tariff reform program has been developed, but its implementation has been
delayed until 2006 because of needs associated with the recent peace agreement. Regarding
monetary and financial sector reforms, the BOS has improved the management and
monitoring of liquidity and the mechanism for conducting open market operations. The
mandated increase in the minimum capital requirement to SDD 3 billion (US$12 million)
has been completed.4 Some progress has also been made to improve oil sector
transparency. The Auditor General Office has audited the accounts of Sudan Petroleum
Corporation (SPC) and a report has been submitted to parliament. The Office is currently
auditing the accounts of almost all SPC subsidiaries. However, there was little progress in
aligning the SPC accounts with Sudan’s commercial accounting standards
14.
Banking system indicators improved in 2004. The deposit base of
commercial banks expanded, allowing for an expansion of domestic credit that contributed
19 percentage points to the growth of the money supply. Returns on assets and on equity
also improved, and the ratio of nonperforming loans fell slightly to 10.2 percent. As of
December 2004, the central bank’s measure of the banking system’s compliance with

4

Only one bank failed to comply with the required increase in capital.

-9-

prudential norms rated 14 of the 24 banks in
the system were as fair or better. The capital
adequacy ratio (CAR) for the banking
system as a whole increased to 10.8 percent
from 9.9 percent in 2003.

Sudan: Bank Soundness Indicators (end-year)
(In percent)

Capital adequacy ratio 1/
Return on assets 2/
Return on equity
Ratio of nonperforming to
total loans
Ratio of loan provisions to
bad loans

2001

2002

2003

2004

11.00
0.5
26.4

9.0
1.1
29.9

9.9
1.5
32.9

10.8
3.5
38.9

15.
New nonconcessional debt was
16.0
12.7
11.4
10.2
contracted in 2004, and the authorities
23.0
24.0
22.0
23.0
have prepared a new debt and borrowing
Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
strategy. In 2004, Sudan contracted or
1/ CR calculations include fixed capital.
guaranteed US$310 million loans or lines of 2/ Measured as income relative to total assets.
credit on nonconcessional terms.5 In the authorities’ view, such financing was necessary to
undertake critical investments (mostly in water and electricity), in the absence of access to
concessional resources. However, recognizing the importance of strengthening debt
management and rationalizing new borrowing, a new debt strategy and borrowing policy
was prepared and is now awaiting approval by the Council of Ministers. The strategy
emphasizes minimizing the contracting of external debt, which would be restricted to
priority social projects.
III. ARTICLE IV DISCUSSIONS
16.
The discussions, held against the background of the onset of the peace agreement
with the south, focused on: (i) the economic challenges arising from peace in the south and
the adequacy of the reforms already implemented in response to these challenges;
(ii) policies for 2005 to sustain economic growth and macroeconomic stability, while
meeting the demands of the agreement with the SPLM; and (iii) the medium-term outlook
and strategy. The discussions coincided with the conclusion of a Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) mission.
A. Stocktaking of Performance and Key Challenges
17.
Under successive SMPs since 1997, Sudan has carried out an important
economic stabilization and restructuring program. In fact, the set of policies
implemented since 2002 were similar in terms of stabilization policies and related structural
reforms to other upper credit-tranche programs. Price controls were lifted, a number of
economic activities were opened to the private sector, liberal foreign investment and
exchange rate regimes were established, a privatization and enterprise-restructuring
program was pursued, tariff protection was reduced, and most nontariff trade barriers were
eliminated. In anticipation of the peace deal with the south, Sudan pursued over the past
5

These include an Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) import financing (US$22 million), an Arab Monetary
Fund (AMF) loan (US$45 million), a credit line from India (US$50 million), and suppliers’ credit for electricity,
water, and transportation projects from China (US$193 million). Assuming these loans are fully disbursed,
average annual external debt service will increase by about 5 percent over the medium term.

- 10 -

2–3 years a two-pronged strategy that emphasized strengthening economic policy
institutions and mobilizing domestic resources. The authorities removed tax exemptions on
a number of activities and rationalized the process for granting exemptions, improved tax
administration, and introduced a large taxpayers’ unit. Consequently, non-oil tax revenues
rose from under 6 percent of GDP in 2002 to more than 8 percent in 2004.
18.
After decades of sluggishness, economic growth has averaged 6.5 percent per
year since 2001. The restoration of macro-stability in the late-1990s, subsequent economic
reforms, and the emergence of the oil sector helped to increase domestic and foreign
investment. Growth was relatively broad based, but it has been more prominent in the oil,
construction, utilities, and agriculture sectors.
19.
Higher oil exports have transformed the structure of the balance of payments.
Oil exports have risen rapidly and they now account for about 80 percent of total exports.
During a period that Sudan has had little access to foreign official assistance, oil has helped
release the foreign exchange constraint, facilitated the rebuilding of international reserves,
and allowed for a substantial expansion in government spending. In addition to higher oil
revenues, tax reforms have mobilized a substantial amount of domestic resources.
20.
The reforms undertaken place Sudan in a favorable economic position
compared to many other post-conflict cases, but there are significant challenges ahead.
The above-mentioned reforms were carried out largely without external assistance, but
came at a price through restraint in social and development programs. The situation was
exacerbated by the war in the south and the eruption of violence in Darfur since 2003. In an
effort to address regional disparities and with a view to improve the targeting of social
spending, the authorities have launched a countrywide decentralization program supported
by a substantial increase in transfers to the states in 2005. The combined challenges of
decentralization in terms of resource mobilization and capacity building, the mandates of
the peace agreement with the south, the need to accelerate poverty reduction and
development efforts in other states in north Sudan, and the stabilization and eventual
reconstruction of Darfur are all formidable.
21.
International donor support will be critical in the period ahead. The peace
agreement between the government and the SPLM will enhance the favorable economic
environment in Sudan and create the opportunity for additional mobilization of domestic
resources and higher FDI. The agreement could also facilitate a political solution to the
conflict in Darfur and resolving tensions in eastern states.6 With peace throughout the
country, Sudan can begin to realize its full economic potential. The resource requirements
for a successful post-conflict transition and effective poverty reduction to meet the

6

There have been some disturbances in Eastern Sudan where rebel groups are demanding a larger share of
resources and more power within the federal system.

- 11 -

Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) will require additional donor support.7 A key part
of this support should include the resolution to Sudan’s external arrears and debt problems
to allow the resumption of concessional financing by international financial institutions.
The World Bank and the UN have carried out, with input from Fund staff, a Joint
Assessment Mission (JAM) of Sudan’s needs in 2005 and beyond. The findings of the JAM
have recently been presented at a donors’conference hosted by Norway on April 11–12,
2005, where donors pledged a total of about US$1.9 billion for development assistance over
the next three years.8
22.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to maintain macroeconomic
stability. The authorities were well aware of the challenges facing Sudan and the
uncertainties of donor assistance. They stressed their commitment to the pursuit of prudent
policies and noted that they will take supportive actions as necessary. This commitment was
evident in the design of the 2005 budget and other policies that maintained the focus on
macroeconomic stability despite a large resource need. The authorities also agreed that
institutional and capacity building would be as important as financial resources in achieving
their economic objectives. They requested a significant increase in technical assistance and
training support from the Fund.
B. Macroeconomic Program for 2005
23.
The economic outlook for 2005 envisages somewhat higher output growth and a
slight decline in inflation. Real GDP growth is projected to rise to 8.3 percent because of a
significant increase in oil production and higher private and state spending on
infrastructure.9 Non-oil real GDP growth may be subdued because of the effects of a weak
rainfall on crop production. The program aims at containing average inflation at 7.5 percent
for the year.
24.
The discussions took place amidst considerable uncertainty about financing
and fiscal needs for 2005 and the medium term. The program discussed with the
authorities and the 2005 budget is based on a price for Sudanese oil of US$34 per barrel
(consistent with the December 2004 WEO projection)10 and on a reduction in expenditure
allocations for wages, emergency and federal development spending equivalent to 3 percent
of GDP. This would result in a deficit of 0.6 percent of GDP. Such a conservative approach
was taken because of uncertainties about oil-related flows and donor financing in 2005 and
7

Two World Bank-managed multi-donor trust funds have been established to handle donor support in a
coordinated fashion.
8

An additional US$2.6 billion was pledged for the direct delivery of humanitarian support.

9

In 2005, new oil fields are expected to raise oil production by 34 percent to 390,000 barrels per day.

10

Sudan’s crude oil is somewhat heavier than typical traded brands and sells at about three dollars below U.K.
Brent. The recent upward trend in futures’ prices point to an average price of Sudan’s oil of US$43 per barrel in
2005.

- 12 -

the need to accommodate a substantial increase in transfers to the south and to other regions
associated with the peace agreement and decentralization policies.
25.
The budget envisages a worsening of the fiscal position in 2005, although the
domestically financed deficit is expected to remain under one percent of GDP. Total
revenues are projected to rise bolstered by higher oil revenues, while expenditures will also
increase because of higher transfers to the states. Oil revenues are expected to increase by
about 2 percentage points of GDP compared to 2004 because of both higher production and
higher oil prices.11 The OSA benchmark oil price has been raised to US$30 per barrel
compared to US$24 in 2004. Under the OSA mechanism, oil revenues accruing from prices
above US$30 per barrel are expected to be saved in the OSA. The authorities continue to
value the self-insurance provided by the OSA against unanticipated declines in oil revenues
(Box 2). They consider that higher international oil prices and pressing needs justified
raising the OSA price benchmark.
Box 2. Sudan’s Oil Savings Account
The Oil Savings Account (OSA) was established in 2002 to protect government expenditures against volatile
oil prices. Every year, a “benchmark” price of oil lower than international prices is established to finance the
budget, while revenues above the benchmark price are deposited in the OSA. The government can make
withdrawals from the OSA to cover expenditures if international prices fall below the benchmark price.
Since its inception, the OSA has accumulated a sizeable balance driven by the increase in output and
international prices. Oil revenues rose from 4 percent of GDP in 2002 to 11 percent in 2004, and the equivalent
of 2.5 percent of GDP has been saved in the OSA.
In addition to protecting and smoothing out
government spending, the OSA has yielded
additional benefits. First, the OSA has helped
the authorities to suppress demands for
unsustainable increases in government spending
in periods of high oil prices. Second,
expenditure restraint prevented an otherwise
large real exchange appreciation associated
with the oil boom. Third, by saving in the OSA
and using domestic securities to finance the
budget, the authorities have been able to
contain the growth of high-powered money and
inflation (this, in turn, has helped to jumpstart
the domestic market for securities).

11

Figure 1. Sudan. Oil Revenues and the Oil Saving Account Balance
(In percent of GDP)

12

12

10

10

Oil Saving Account balance
Oil revenue

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

If Sudan’s oil prices remain at their level of recent months (the March 2005 WEO projection points to a price
of US$43 per barrel of Sudan’s oil), actual revenues could increase by about 6 percentage points of GDP in
2005, with almost one-half of the increase accruing to the south as stipulated in the peace agreement. However,
there is considerable uncertainty about both oil production increments and oil prices for the remainder of the
year as well as for the medium term.

- 13 -

26.
While oil revenues will rise, non-oil revenues are expected to fall slightly as a
share of GDP. The authorities have reduced the excise tax on domestic petroleum products
to protect consumers from the impact of the recent increase in oil prices.12 The staff argued
that the timing for this reduction seemed inappropriate in light of impending fiscal
pressures. The authorities expressed their concern that allowing a complete pass-through of
higher international oil prices to consumers may undermine growth prospects and could be
politically costly. The authorities also consider that after the substantial increase in non-oil
tax revenues in 2004, it will not be feasible to introduce new tax measures in 2005 because
of the political costs associated with raising taxes in the first year of implementation of the
peace agreement.
27.
On the expenditure side, transfers are expected to increase sharply while other
priority expenditures await additional financing. The budget was originally formulated
under a tight resource envelope, and it contains a large increase in transfers as well as
expenditure reductions in several areas equivalent to about 3.5 percent of GDP. Transfers to
the south are expected to be about 4.6 percent of GDP, while decentralization-related
transfers to other states in the north will rise from 1.3 percent of GDP in 2004 to 3.4 percent
in 2005.13 A planned public sector wage increase in 2005 was postponed and allocations to
social sectors, infrastructure, and general reserves were cut until additional financing could
be identified.
28.
A mid-year supplementary budget is expected to accommodate unfunded
expenditure needs and take into account additional financing. If Sudan’s oil price were
to be updated in line with the March 2005 WEO projection, oil revenues would be higher
than in the original budget by about 4 percentage points of GDP. The central government
would count with additional resources equivalent to about 2.5 percentage points of GDP
and the government of the south and other oil producing states will accrue the remaining
revenue as stipulated in the wealth-sharing agreement. However, an accounting of the
central government’s unfunded priority social and infrastructure projects as well as a release
of some of the expenditure restraint in the original budget could amount to 2–3 percentage
points of GDP. These changes could turn the fiscal balance into surplus, the counterpart of
which would be an additional accumulation of government deposits and international
reserves at the central bank. The staff expects to discuss these issues with the authorities
during the mid-year review and report to the Executive Board on any revisions to the
program.
29.
The external current account deficit (on a cash basis) will likely worsen in 2005,
reflecting the impact of the peace agreement and the reintegration of south Sudan. Both oil
12

In recent years, domestic retail prices were higher than comparable U.S. prices because of high taxes on
petroleum products.

13

Consistent with the spirit of the wealth-sharing agreement with the south, the authorities have launched a plan
to foster fiscal federalism through transferring additional funds to the states.

- 14 -

and non-oil exports are expected to grow rapidly. The latter will be led by growth in meat
and cotton exports. Notwithstanding the strong export growth, imports are projected to
grow at a faster pace, led by post-conflict related imports, particularly for food, construction
material, transportation equipment, and emergency supplies. Investment-related imports are
also projected to rise, including in the oil sector. The current account deficit will be partly
financed by private capital inflows, some project financing, and humanitarian aid. Current
account projections, however, are subject to considerable uncertainty. The projections
discussed with the authorities (based on the December 2004 WEO projection) envisaged a
financing gap of US$365 million for 2005, but this number is likely to be lower once the
effect of the now likely higher oil prices and previously unfunded priority projects are
factored into the analysis.
30.
Sudan’s external position remains vulnerable to potential shifts in oil prices
and private inflows. The authorities assured the mission that if additional revenues were
needed they would be willing to take contingency measures including reversing the recent
decrease in the excise tax. Imports also depend on the uncertainties of the new environment
and emergency needs. To improve Sudan’s ability to safeguard its external position, it is
critical to continue building up international reserves in terms of import coverage.
31.
The monetary program is consistent with the growth and inflation objectives,
but significant uncertainties remain. Monetary policy targets a broad money growth of
28 percent, consistent with the growth and inflation objectives and with a structural increase
in the demand for money reflecting the reintegration of the south.14 The authorities were
concerned about the number of potential sources of monetary shocks in 2005, including
large private capital inflows, oil export receipts, aid flows, and the introduction of a new
currency.15 In addition, the large transfer of fiscal revenues to the south means that fiscal
actions by the state government of south Sudan will also affect monetary developments. The
mission concurred with this assessment and noted that active BOS monitoring and
engagement with the markets and close coordination between the federal government and
south Sudan will be essential for the smooth conduct of monetary policy. The monetary
program will be reassessed by mid-year to take on board new developments.
32.
The authorities reiterated their commitment to a managed floating exchange
rate regime. The authorities, however, expressed some concern about the real effective
exchange rate appreciation of 2004, which could continue in 2005 with rising oil exports
receipts and other inflows. The mission pointed out that the current high growth rate of
non-oil exports, coupled with Sudan’s low labor costs, points to a strong external
competitiveness. The latter could be further enhanced by a continued focus on lowering
inflation, reducing distortions in the economy, and improving the business environment in
14
15

The currency-to-deposits ratio is envisaged to rise from 44 percent in 2004 to 49 percent in 2005.

The peace agreement entails issuing a new national currency. MFD has begun providing technical assistance
in this area.

- 15 -

general. Rationalizing the spending of oil revenue, through OSA savings, would also
support the growth of non-oil sectors. The authorities expressed their intention to manage
the exchange rate flexibly, occasionally intervening to prevent abrupt changes.
C. Structural Reforms
33.
Fiscal structural reforms will concentrate on strengthening tax revenues,
implementing an effective cash management system, and introducing the 2001
Government Finance Statistics (GFS) budget classification system. On tax
administration, the focus will be on setting up a medium-size taxpayers’ unit to broaden the
tax base. The authorities intend to develop a plan to rationalize the tax incentive regime in
light of the review of exemptions that was completed in 2004 and include the plan in the
2006 budget. In the area of financial management, the authorities have taken initial steps to
ensure the autonomy of the cash management unit to schedule payments within a cash plan
and to set up a single treasury account for the ministry of finance transactions in 2005 and
for all other ministries in 2006. The staff feels that further technical assistance in these areas
and strong commitment by the authorities will be necessary for a successful implementation
of these reforms.16 The authorities plan to adopt the GFS methodology in the budgetary
accounts by end 2006.17
34.
The staff emphasized the importance of strengthening monetary operations and
coordination with the fiscal authorities. Efforts will focus on strengthening the monetary
operations unit at the BOS, which has begun providing recommendations on open market
operations in line with Fund technical assistance. The authorities agreed on the importance
of capacity building for effective short-term liquidity forecasting and coordination with
fiscal operations. The mission also recommended open auction of government securities to
increase the effectiveness of the BOS open market operations. In line with these changes,
the BOS will begin, by mid-year, carrying out all of its short-term liquidity management
with banks through securities.
35.
The 2004 FSAP exercise revealed a number of high priority actions to deal with
financial sector vulnerabilities.18 These included formulating a plan for banks to meet
provisioning and capitalization requirements, improving data management at the central
bank, revising the treatment of fixed assets in regulatory capital, organizing tenders for
auctioning government certificates, improving coordination between on-site and off-site

16

The World Bank is planning to launch a Public Expenditure Review (PER), which will also require
participation from Fund experts.
17

Fiscal data for 2001–2003 have been reclassified and a similar exercise is underway for the 2005 budget. For
a pilot, two ministries and two states will keep accounts on both the current and GFS bases in 2005.

18

See the accompanying paper “Sudan: Financial System Stability Assessment.”

- 16 -

supervision activities, and establishing a real time gross settlements system.19 Stress tests
pointed to banking sector vulnerabilities to an economic slowdown. In addition, the legal
and supervisory environment governing insurance and securities market should be enhanced
for these sectors to contribute to financial deepening. Finally, the peace accord will imply
the re-introduction of conventional banks in south Sudan, the restructuring of the central
bank, and a revision of legislation. The authorities expressed broad agreement with the
FSAP recommendations, intend to formulate an action plan to implement them, and have
asked for technical assistance.
36.
External sector reforms are expected to continue. Sudan’s liberal nontariff barrier
regime is expected to be maintained and the delayed three-year tariff reform program to be
initiated in the context of the 2006 budget. The program will be designed and implemented
in the context of Sudan’s commitments under the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Arab Free Trade Area (AFTA) agreement. The
authorities have presented all the required documentation to the World Trade Organization
(WTO) working party and prepared a complete legislative plan to amend and enact laws to
comply with WTO agreements. The authorities also hope that a number of trade sanctions
on Sudan can be lifted soon. Lastly, the authorities agreed to remove any exchange
restrictions that may be identified as part of an ongoing review by MFD and LEG of
Sudan’s exchange system in connection with its acceptance of the obligations under Article
VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement.
37.
Oil sector transparency has been improving, but more needs to be done. While
the auditor general has been auditing SPC accounts since 2001, the audit covers one of the
largest sources of SPC income (the management fee from the government’s share of oil
revenues), but does not cover other sources. The mission urged a comprehensive audit and
the aligning of the SPC and its subsidiaries’ accounting system with commercial standards.
The authorities agreed to implement such improvements in the context of the peace
agreement that calls for major changes in oil sector management.

19

Recent legislation and relevant BOS regulations establish the basic legal framework for anti-money
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism, but implementation is lagging severely. Preventive
measures need strengthening and enforcement, and regulations should be introduced for nonbank financial
institutions and other relevant businesses. A single agency should be made responsible for carrying out the
functions of a financial intelligence unit.

- 17 -

D. Medium-Term Outlook and Implications of the Peace Agreement
38.
The authorities’ medium-term vision focuses on poverty reduction, sustained
high economic growth, and macroeconomic stability.20 Structural reforms that enable
private sector activities, coupled with investments in health, education, and infrastructure,
would sustain long-term growth. Prudent fiscal and monetary policies should ensure
macroeconomic stability while a reorientation of public expenditures would allow for
increased spending on poverty-reducing programs. Policy implementation will be
challenging and will require the strengthening of state institutions. Donor assistance will
also be critical for achieving the medium-term objectives. The medium-term vision is part
of Sudan’s longer-term ambition to meet the MDGs. The MDG agenda will be demanding
both in terms of growth and financing requirements, including debt relief and arrears
clearance that will be necessary to facilitate the resumption of development lending by
international financial institutions.21
Box 3. Economic Growth over the Medium Term
The authorities’ medium-term framework envisages two distinct phases in the growth process. During the next
two years, growth will depend on a surge in oil production and in economic activity in the south. After 2007,
growth will depend more on economic diversification as sectoral policy reforms yield results.
After sharp early growth, oil production is projected to taper off. The outlook does not assume new oil
discoveries during 2007–09. Daily oil output is projected to peak at ½ million barrels in 2006. Accordingly, the
oil sector’s growth contribution will rise sharply in 2005–06, but will subsequently decline.
Agriculture is expected to rebound over the 2004–09 period; its growth is projected to rise from 4.5 to 7 percent
per year. In the early years, livestock expansion will fuel the sector’s growth, while later irrigated agriculture
will play a greater role. Other sectors will also grow rapidly fuelled by construction activity.
Higher levels of private and public investment and greater reliance on foreign savings would help achieve the
medium-term growth rates. Gross investment is expected to rise by about 3 percentage points of GDP, reflecting
substantial increase in public capital spending. A modest increase in government saving would allow for a
medium-term recovery in private consumption.

39.
Sudan’s economic prospects are favorable, assuming peace and a continuation
of the reform efforts. The medium-term outlook envisages growth of 8–9 percent per year,
single-digit inflation, and rising international reserves. Imports will rise faster than exports
earlier on because of post-conflict and emergency needs, leading to an initial worsening of
the external current account and an improvement thereafter. Fiscal policy is expected to
mobilize tax revenues, reorient expenditures toward social sectors, and support
20

The medium-term vision, developed jointly by the government and the SPLM has been embedded in the
World Bank-UN led Joint Assessment Mission report presented at the Oslo Donors’ Conference.

21

Total outstanding external obligations (most of it is debt contracted in the 1970s and 1980s and now in
arrears), exceed US$25 billion.

- 18 -

decentralization. However,
Sudan: Medium-Term Fiscal Expenditures
spending needs are considerable in
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted)
light of the reconstruction and
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
development needs of the south
Central government
and considerable poverty
Base case conditions 1/
25.5
25.9
26.2
26.3
25.1
Additional needs 2/
2.1
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.0
throughout the national territory.
In millions of U.S. dollars 2/
575
376
427
442
457
The medium-term expenditure
States of south Sudan
projections presented in Table 8
Expenditure needs 3/
7.3
7.3
7.7
7.1
6.1
are based on the December 2004
Sources: Joint Assessment Mission Report, April 2005, UN and the World Bank,
and IMF staff estimates.
oil price assumptions and do not
1/ Includes transfers to the states, but compresses central government expenditures and
take on board the additional needs excludes
additional social and infrastructure spending compatible with the objective of
meeting the MDGs.
associated with the recent peace
2/ Includes higher social and infrastructure spending associated with the objective of
meeting the MDGs. Excludes costs of demobilization, reconstruction of Darfur, and
agreement; most of these needs
exteranl debt service due.
were recently estimated as part of
3/ Excludes demobilization costs. Revenue transfers from the central government are
expected to cover between 70 and 80 percent of these expenditures.
the JAM exercise and are
displayed in the text table above. Later this year, a consultation with World Bank staff, the
staff will be discussing with the authorities a new medium-term economic framework that
takes on board more recent oil price assumptions, new commitments from donors, and
additional government spending (e.g., JAM estimated needs, demobilization expenditures).
E. Debt Service and Relations with External Creditors
40.
Sudan’s debt service capacity is increasing, but it remains modest. Sudan’s
external debt remains unsustainable and well above sustainable HIPC-initiative thresholds.
At end-2004, the net present value of Sudan’s debt is estimated at US$24 billion or about
850 percent of the three-year average of exports of goods and services. To achieve external
viability, Sudan will require comprehensive debt relief beyond traditional mechanisms.
Owing to an improved external position, Sudan’s external debt service capacity will
improve in 2005, although the extent of the improvement will be dampened by the resource
needs associated with the peace agreement. Still, if oil prices and private inflows were to be
lower than expected, a sizable financing gap could still emerge.
41.
Sudan plans to continue regularizing relations with its creditors.22 In 2004,
Sudan made partial debt service payments to almost all multilateral creditors, totaling about
US$96 million—of which one-third was paid to the Fund—compared with US$88 million
in 2003. Sudan paid US$5 million to the World Bank and US$6 million to the AfDB.
Sudan’s payments to other multilateral creditors resulted in new disbursements of

22

Since the resumption of debt service payments to the Fund in 1997, Sudan has re-established relations with,
and started partial repayments to, most of its multilateral creditors, as well as various bilateral Arab funds. In
2004, Sudan made partial payments on its obligations to the IMF, World Bank, African Development Bank
(AfDB), AMF, IsDB, Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, International Fund for Agricultural
Development, and the OPEC Fund.

- 19 -

US$74 million.23 While keeping payments to multilateral creditors at the previous year’s
level, the authorities plan to make payments to some bilateral creditors in 2005 (mainly
bilateral Arab funds).24 The largest debt service payments in 2005 would be to China
(US$158 million), primarily related to the Khartoum refinery investment loans and to
Malaysia (US$77 million).25
42.
The staff argued for higher payments to the Fund in 2005, but the authorities
requested that the level of payments be maintained at the level agreed for 2004. The
staff based its case on Sudan’s improving debt service capacity (Table 9). The authorities
indicated that, in light of uncertain financing flows and the impending request for donor
assistance, payments to the Fund be maintained at the level agreed for 2004
(US$30 million). They pointed out that the proposed level of payments is still
US$12.5 million greater than that required to stabilize Sudan’s arrears.26 The authorities
also expressed their expectation that, given the substantial reconstruction needs arising from
the end of the recent civil war with the south, progress could be made on the clearance of
Sudan’s arrears and on subsequent debt relief under the HIPC initiative.
F. Data Issues and Technical Assistance
43.
Sudan’s economic data are sufficient for program monitoring, but gaps remain.
Monetary, fiscal, and oil sector data have improved in recent years and Sudan is now
participating in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Regarding the oil
sector, detailed information is available on both revenues and payments. However, fiscal
expenditure data are still not compatible with GFS methodology, the compilation of
national accounts is slow, and statistics on capital good imports and foreign direct
investment are weak. In addition, information management within the BOS should be
further developed. The authorities expressed interest in technical assistance from the Fund
in these areas. 27
23

In 2005, multilateral creditors (excluding the IMF, World Bank, and AfDB) are expected to make new
disbursements of about US$135 million.
24

In 2004, Sudan paid the Arab bilateral creditors about US$20 million, but received new loans of
US$106 million for these creditors for critical infrastructure and social sector projects. In 2005, total debt
service payments to Arab funds are projected at US$30 million, while new disbursements from them are
expected to be over US$150 million.
25

Since 1997, China provided about US$1.2 billion in new loans to Sudan, including US$910 million for the oil
refinery and $150 million for electricity projects. Debt service payments during 2002-04 amounted to
US$265 million. During 1997-99, Malaysia disbursed US$225 million to Sudan, of which about half of the
amount has been repaid by end-2004.

26

However, this level will lower the ratios of payments to the Fund to net current receipts and to gross official
reserves (Table 9).

27

As part of the JAM exercise, the World Bank has also developed an assistance program for the Central
Bureau of Statistics (CBS).

- 20 -

44.
Beyond the need to strengthen the quality of economic data, there are
substantial technical assistance needs including in areas covered by the Fund. Since the
beginning of the peace negotiations, Fund staff has provided technical assistance on
different aspects of the revenue sharing agreement, the monetary and fiscal policy
implications of the CPA, and the new currency. Looking ahead, technical assistance will be
required on treasury modernization (including cash management), budget accounting and
classification, fiscal decentralization, and consolidated budgeting. Follow-up assistance will
also be needed on tax and custom administration. With respect to the financial sector, the
priorities are the introduction of the new currency, the restructuring of the central bank, the
introduction of a dual banking system, and monetary operations. The staffs of the Fund and
the World Bank have begun working on a technical assistance program on financial sector
areas.
G. Program Monitoring and Risks
45.
The staff-monitored program covers the period from January to December
2005. Monitoring is based on semi-annual quantitative targets and structural benchmarks as
described in the accompanying Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP,
Attachment I). The program period will be one year, ending on December 31, 2005. Staff
proposes to maintain the present cycle of semi-annual reviews for end-June and endDecember performance under the program. The staff will also report any significant
developments or deviations from the program to the Board during informal country matters
sessions.
46.
The macroeconomic impact of the integration of the south, the extent of donor
support, and unforeseen spending pressures are key risks to the program. The
authorities are aware of these risks. They have sought technical assistance in estimating
money demand, but uncertainties remain about the magnitude and impact of additional
spending at the state level. They pointed out that the 2005 budget did not anticipate an
increase in external assistance, but that substantial spending needs are still unmet, including
on Darfur and demobilization. They indicated that if unexpected spending pressures arise,
they would be willing to phase back in the oil excise tax. The possibility of
higher-than-projected oil revenues will also provide additional cushion.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
47.
The authorities’ commitment to economic reforms is commendable. They have
implemented a relatively broad-based reform agenda, maintained macroeconomic stability,
and achieved high economic growth. These achievements should facilitate the transition to a
peaceful and prosperous Sudan. Sudan should be able to mobilize increased levels of
domestic resources that, coupled with international assistance, could be channeled to sustain
high economic growth and reduce poverty. With an early resolution of the Darfur conflict,
Sudan could quickly begin realizing its full economic potential.

- 21 -

48.
The authorities have adopted a prudent economic program for 2005 and their early
move to restructure budgetary allocations in support of the peace-related needs is
commendable. The policy package combines spending restraint and reasonable
compromises in light of substantial pressures arising from the peace agreement with the
south as well as the decision to press ahead with nationwide decentralization.Uncertainties
remain, including about oil receipts and the extent of donor support. Latent expenditure
pressures will need to be addressed, and if enough financing were not available,
contingency measures, including reversing the decrease in the excise tax on petroleum
products should be considered. These issues are expected to be addressed by mid-year and a
supplementary budget prepared accordingly.
49.
Further fiscal reforms are warranted to strengthen public expenditure management
and generate additional revenues in the medium term. In this regard, the authorities should
continue focusing on improving tax and customs administration and cash management, and
reforming fiscal accounting to ensure full implementation of GFS methodology. The staff
also urges the authorities to improve further oil sector transparency through the adoption of
commercial accounting standards.
50.
The oil savings account has served Sudan well; it provides a mechanism for saving
oil revenues when prices are high, while ensuring priority expenditures in the event of a
drop in revenue. These actions also help minimize the liquidity effects associated with the
monetization of foreign exchange receipts. Furthermore, any residual financing of the
budget through securities is noninflationary and contributes to the development of domestic
money markets.
51.
The stance of monetary policy is appropriate, but the authorities should be ready to
tighten monetary conditions if inflationary pressures emerge. Staff welcomes the recent
measures to improve the flexibility of the exchange rate and deems the managed float
exchange rate regime appropriate at the current stage of Sudan’s development.
52.
The authorities’ concerns about the potential difficulties for conducting monetary
policy in 2005 and the need to monitor the appropriateness of the monetary targets in light
of new developments are warranted. Building on recent reforms, future actions should focus
on closely coordinating with the fiscal authorities (including at the state level) in improving
the BOS short-term liquidity management capacity, and establishing market-oriented
operations in government securities. The latter will be critical for developing a process that
harmonizes monetary policy actions in a dual banking system. Finally, the authorities
should develop a financial sector reform plan in line with the FSAP recommendations.
53.
The decision to delay the launching of the second three-year tariff reform program
to 2006 is understandable in light of fiscal needs in 2005. Nevertheless, the authorities need
to finalize the program quickly to send a strong signal to domestic and foreign investors
about Sudan’s commitment to an open trade regime. Such reform will also help reduce
distortions and increase competitiveness. At the same time, additional revenue measures

- 22 -

should be identified and their implementation schedule coordinated with the tariff program
to prevent a revenue loss.
54.
The draft of the new debt strategy is a positive development, but the contracting of a
number of nonconcessional loans in 2004 is a matter of concern. Even though Sudan’s
needs are high and it lacks access to concessional financing, the authorities should minimize
nonconcessional borrowing to prevent aggravating the external debt overhang and
complicate potential debt relief negotiations.
55.
Overall, the staff considers that the policy commitments under the 2005 SMP are in
line with what would be required for a RAP and provide a basis for a post-arrears clearance
program, assuming that progress is achieved on securing financing assurances to resolve the
arrears issue. As soon as the necessary financing assurances become available, the staff
would recommend that in determining the timetable for arrears clearance, the Executive
Board take account of the performance under successive SMPs since 2002.
56.
Sudan’s data are generally adequate for surveillance and program monitoring. It is
proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Sudan be held according to the standard
12-month cycle.

- 23 -

Figure 1. Sudan: GDP, Prices, External, and Fiscal Developments, 2000–05
Consumer Price Index, Dec. 2001–Dec. 2004
(12-month percent change)

Real GDP Growth, 2000–05
(In percent)
9

8

8
Projection

7

14

7

Average 12- month inflation

12
6

Estimate

6

5

10

5
4

8

4
3
3

6

2

2

Month to month
annual % change

4
1

1

0

0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2
Dec01

2005

Apr02

Aug02

Dec02

Apr03

Aug03

Dec03

Apr04

Aug04

Dec04

Government Revenue and Expenditures
(Annualized basis, in percent of GDP)

Current Account Balance,
Q1 2001–Q4 2004 (In millions of U.S. dollars)
1100
900

22.0

Total Revenue

700

20.0

500

Current account balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods

18.0

300
100

16.0

-100
14.0

-300
-500

Total expenditures

12.0

-700
10.0
-900
-1100
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
01 01 01 01 02 02 02 02 03 03 03 03 04 04 04 04

Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

8.0
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
01 01 01 01 02 02 02 02 03 03 03 03 04 04 04 04

- 24 -

Figure 2. Sudan: Exchange Rate Indices and International Reserves,
January 2000–December 2004

130

80

Real effective exchange rate
(left axis)

120

80
79

110

79

100

78

Nominal effective exchange rate
(left axis)

78

90

77
77

80

76
70

Nominal exchange rate against the U.S. dollar
(index, right axis)

76
75

60
Jan- Apr- Jul- Oct- Jan- Apr- Jul- Oct- Jan- Apr- Jul- Oct- Jan- Apr- Jul- Oct- Jan- Apr- Jul- Oct- Jan00
00
00
00
01
01
01
01
02
02
02
02
03
03
03
03
04
04
04
04
05

3.0

1300

2.8

1200

2.6

1100

2.4

1000

2.2

In months of next year's imports
(right axis)

900

2.0

800

1.8

700

1.6
1.4

600

1.2

500

1.0

400

0.8

300

0.6

In millions of U.S. dollars (left
axis)

200

0.4

100

0.2

0

0.0
Jan01

Apr01

Jul01

Oct01

Jan02

Apr02

Jul02

Oct02

Jan03

Apr03

Sources: Bank of Sudan; and Information Notice System, IMF.

Jul03

Oct03

Jan04

Apr04

Jul04

Oct04

Jan05

- 25 -

Figure 3. Sudan: Monetary Developments, December 2002–December 2004

Money and credit
(Annual growth rates, in percent)

Cost of finance
(murabaha rate, in percent)

80

Credit to
nongovernment
sector

70

80

18

18

70

17

17

16

16

15

15

14

14

13

13

12

12

11

11

10

10

60

60

50

50

40

40
Broad money

30

30

20

20
Reserve
money

10

10

0

0

Dec-02

Jun-03

Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

9

9
Dec-02

Composition of broad money
(In billions of Sudanese dinars)
460
Net domestic
assets
(left axis)

Jun-04

Dec-04

24

24

22

22

400
20

400

340
Net foreign
assets
(right axis)

300

Dec-03

Excess reserves ratios
(In percent)

600

500

Jun-03

20

Excess reserves/reserve money

18

18

16

16

14

14

12

12

10

10

280

Net claims on
government
(left axis)

200

100

220

160
8

0

100

Dec-02

Jun-03

Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

Sources: Bank of Sudan; and Fund staff estimates.

8

Excess reserves/deposits

6
Dec-02

6
Jun-03

Dec-03

Jun-04

Dec-04

- 26 -

Table 1. Sudan: Quantitative Indicative Targets, 2003–04
(In billions of Sudanese dinars; unless otherwise indicated)

Dec.
2003
Actual 2/

Cumulative Change During 2004 1/
3rd
3rd
3rd
4th
4th
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Indicative Program
End-year Program
Target w/adjustor Actual
Program w/adjustor

4th
Quarter
Actual

Bank of Sudan net domestic assets 3/
Domestic financing of the fiscal deficit 4/
Contracting or guaranteeing of external nonconcessional
debt by government and BOS 5/
Gross official usable reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6/
Payments to the Fund (in millions of U.S. dollars)

223.7
98.7

16.5
8.5

-4.4
-12.1

-33.9
-89.8

35.5
-10.6

6.3
-39.8

-10.4
-100.4

147.0
526.7
27.0

0.0
225.0
...

0.0
304.7
...

265.2
517.2
...

0.0
280.0
30.0

0.0
396.7
...

310.2
807.0
32.4

Memorandum items:
Broad money 3/
Central government social expenditure 7/
Oil saving account

734.1
53.0
45.2

105.0
34.0
44.1

...
...
...

146.7
...
64.7

161.5
86.4
54.6

...
...
...

226.4
88.4
84.7

1/ Cumulative change from end of the previous year.
2/ Outstanding stock at end-of year.
3/ Net BOS financing is defined as borrowing by the central bank from the BOS (including GMCs) minus central government
deposits at the BOS (excluding deposits accumulation in the OSA).
4/ Defined as total net borrowing by the government, including net borrowing from the Bank of Sudan (including GMCs and changes
in deposits of the central government with the BOS, but excluding the OSA), net sales of GMCs outside the BOS, revenues from
privatization, and repayments of internal domestic debts.
5/ This indicative target applies not only to debt as defined in Point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to
Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274–(00/85), August 24, 2000), but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value
has not been received. Debt will be deemed to be concessional when the currency-specific discount rate (determined by the
market-related “commercial interest reference rates (CIRR)” as published by the OECD) applied to the contractual schedule of
charges and principal payments, indicates a grant element of at least 35 percent. The indicative target excludes the financing of the
Merowe hydropower project.
6/ Include foreign banknotes in the vaults of the BOS.
7/ Central government expenditure on medical care; health services; poor students’ support; supplement to poor consumers of
electricity; social and health insurance; water, health, and education development.

- 27 -

Table 2. Sudan: Structural Benchmarks for 2004
Policy Area

Implementation
Status

Prior Actions
1.

Enforce a ban, through a ministerial decree distributed to all line ministers, on all discretionary tax
exemptions.

2.

Constitute the cash management unit, appoint a cash release committee, and draft an action plan to
operationalize the unit.

3.

Adopt a two-year program to align the budget classifications with the GFS.

4.

Develop an action plan to reform the fiscal reporting system.

Done

5.

Establish a Debt Policy and Monitoring Committee to guide the formulation and implementation
of a debt strategy and to evaluate all new loans.

Done

6.

Prepare a time bound action plan to audit and consolidate the accounts of all subsidiaries of Sudan
Petroleum Corporation, and launch a program to align their accounting system with international
standards.

Done

Done
Done
Done

By end-June 2004
1.

Prepare a fiscal budget cash plan on a monthly basis for the second half of 2004. The cash plan
must be approved by the cash release committee, and presented to the Bank of Sudan (BOS).

Done

2.

Begin to transfer VAT collected by customs to the taxation department on a daily basis.

Not Done 1/

3.

Activate the large taxpayers’ unit.

Done

4.

Classify, as a technical exercise, the 2004 budget sectors into the GFS.

Done

5.

Adopt a universal taxpayer identification number.

Not Done

By end-December 2004
Review completed, but
action plan delayed because
of peace agreement.

1.

Complete a review of all regulations and agreements that grant tax exemptions and develop an
action plan to streamline the regulations in the context of the 2005 budget.

2.

Eliminate all tax privileges of the four major oil distribution companies.

3.

Broaden the definition of large taxpayers to include individuals.

Not done 2/

4.

Develop a new three-year tariff reform program that will be implemented in the context of the
2005 budget.

Reform program completed,
but implementation delayed
until 2006 to prevent the loss
of revenue in 2005.

5.

Formulate an external debt policy of the public sector and have it approved by the Cabinet of
Ministers.

External debt policy
approved by the Minister of
Finance, but it is awaiting
cabinet approval.

1
2

Currently, this is done on a weekly basis.

The authorities intend to establish a medium taxpayers’ unit by mid-2005.

Done

- 28 -

Table 3. Sudan: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2001–05

2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

Prog.
2005

(Annual changes in percent; unless otherwise indicated)
National income, production, population and prices
Nominal GDP (in billions of Sudanese dinars)
Population (in millions)
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Real GDP growth
Real non-oil GDP growth
Average CPI inflation
CPI inflation (end of period)

3,376
31.9
405
6.1
4.7
4.9
7.4

3,876
32.7
419
6.0
4.9
8.3
8.3

4,425
33.6
469
6.0
5.5
7.7
8.3

5,138
34.5
549
7.3
6.0
8.4
8.4

5,973
35.4
625
8.3
5.6
7.5
8.0

(In percent of GDP)
Investment and saving
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
Gross domestic saving
Government
Nongovernment

17.6
2.2
15.3
9.9
2.1
7.8

19.4
2.9
16.5
13.4
3.4
10.0

20.0
2.9
17.1
15.7
5.4
10.3

22.6
5.1
17.5
18.5
7.7
10.8

24.4
6.8
17.7
20.3
7.2
13.1

Central government operations 1/
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Overall balance (cash) 2/

11.0
11.9
-0.9

12.1
13.0
-0.8

16.8
15.8
1.0

21.5
20.2
1.3

22.6
23.2
-0.6

(Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock)
Money and credit
Net domestic assets
Broad money
Reserve money (change in percent)
Velocity 3/

30.8
24.7
3.7
7.2

6.6
30.3
22.0
6.9

16.7
30.3
26.6
6.0

3.2
30.8
27.8
5.3

14.0
28.0
29.1
4.9

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b
Non-oil export volume (percent growth)
Non-oil import volume (percent growth)
Current account balance 1/
In percent of GDP
Terms of trade (Index 1993=100, change in percent)
Real effective exchange rate (change in percent) 4/
Official exchange rate (end of period, SD/US$)
External debt service (in percent of current receipts)
Commitment basis
Actual payments
External debt (billions of U.S. dollars)
Gross usable reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of next year's imports
Crude oil export price (U.S. dollars per barrel)

1,699
-2,031
-27.1
31.6
-1,289
-9.9
-4.6
8.0
261.4

1,949
-2,153
41.7
5.6
-918
-6.2
-2.2
-2.0
261.7

2,577
-2,536
-9.0
9.2
-827
-4.9
8.2
-4.5
260.4

3,778
-3,586.2
14.8
35
-816.1
-4.1
14.3
7.7
251.5

4,975
-4,711.5
7.1
31
-1,408.5
-5.9
-4.0
...
...

38.4
5.1
20.9
44.9
0.2
22.0

24.1
3.9
23.6
248.7
1.0
23.0

24.2
6.1
25.7
526.9
1.5
27.0

18.3
5.4
26.2
1,333.5
2.9
36.4

16.0
5.2
26.5
1,753.8
3.2
34.0

Source: Projections based on information provided by the Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Cash basis.
2/ Including accumulation in the oil savings account (OSA).
3/ Defined as the ratio of GDP to end of period broad money.
4/ End of period.

- 29 -

Table 4. Sudan: Summary Balance of Payments, 2003–08
Actual
2003

Prog.
2004

Est.
2004

2005

Projections
2006
2007

2008

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
Current account balance (on cash basis)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: Crude oil exports
Imports, f.o.b.
Services (net)
Income (net)
Receipts
Non-oil payments
Oil related expenses 1/
Current transfers (net)
Of which: Private transfers
Capital account
Financial account (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Short-term capital flows (net) 2/
Net foreign assets of banks (increase -)
Foreign direct investment and portfolio (net)
Errors and omissions

-1,457
-827
40
2,577
1,968
-2,536
-794
-1,422
10
-691
-740
718
708
0
1,072
85
-239
139
-5
1,092
89

-1,199
-555
217
3,615
2,811
-3,398
-933
-1,541
13
-716
-838
1,058
1,014
0
1,141
255
-280
23
-56
1,199
7

-1,446
-816
192
3,778
2,957
-3,586
-1,020
-1,741
22
-725
-1,038
1,123
1,095
0
1,308
191
-280
-58
-26
1,481
203

-2,107
-1,409
264
4,975
4,082
-4,712
-1,354
-2,153
30
-782
-1,401
1,136
1,102
0
1,462
290
-290
6
-40
1,496
0

-2,370
-1,681
666
6,414
5,320
-5,748
-1,668
-2,631
39
-782
-1,888
1,264
1,216
0
1,558
316
-301
12
-40
1,571
0

-2,725
-1,984
606
7,037
5,691
-6,431
-1,873
-2,821
52
-837
-2,037
1,364
1,304
0
1,617
236
-311
26
0
1,665
0

-2,992
-2,221
434
7,566
5,987
-7,132
-1,992
-2,880
63
-872
-2,070
1,446
1,381
0
1,661
201
-321
33
0
1,749
0

Overall Balance

-296

-51

65

-645

-812

-1,108

-1,330

Change in official reserves (increase -)
Of which : IMF (net)
Exceptional financing
Change in non-Fund arrears
Financing gap

-434
-12
730
708
0

-674
-18
724
724
0

-788
-20
722
722
0

-457
-12
736
736
365

-640
-26
729
729
722

-535
-16
795
795
849

-413
-16
850
850
892

-6.1
-7.3
-8.8
-8.7
-8.7
-2.8
-4.1
-5.9
-6.1
-6.3
5.4
5.6
4.8
4.6
4.3
5.2
5.5
4.6
4.4
4.2
1,142
1,334
1,754
2,350
2,870
2.7
2.9
3.2
3.8
4.2
(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)

-8.4
-6.2
4.1
3.9
3,266
4.4

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)
Memorandum items:
Current account
Current account (cash basis)
Current transfers (net)
Of which: Private transfers
Gross usable reserves (in million of U.S. dollars)
In months of next year’s imports

-8.6
-4.9
4.2
4.2
527
1.5

Exports (value)
Non-oil export (value)
Imports (value)
Terms of trade (non-oil exports and imports)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

32.2
12.8
17.8
13.7
16,957

40.3
36.4
34.0
1.0
19,546

46.6
37.0
41.4
18.2
19,913

31.7
11.6
31.4
1.9
23,891

28.9
9.0
22.0
-0.4
27,373

9.7
10.2
11.9
-0.4
31,365

7.5
10.5
10.9
-1.3
35,572

Crude oil exports (volume, in thousands of barrels)
Sudanese crude oil price (U.S. dollars per barrel)

72,921
27.0

80,650
34.9

81,261
36.4

120,072
34.0

152,038
35.0

169,983
33.5

181,438
33.0

Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes payments to oil companies as stipulated in production sharing arrangements.
2/ Net short-term trade and other credit facilities of the government and commercial banks.

- 30 -

Table 5. Sudan: Central Government Operations, 2001–05
2001

2002

2003

Prog.
2004

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

(In billions of Sudanese dinars)
Total revenues
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Nontax revenue
Departmental fees
National revenues
Non-oil
Oil
o/w Oil Saving Account (OSA) accumulation

370
189
41
147
181
10
171
21
150
...

471
213
41
172
257
13
244
34
211
10

742
270
52
218
472
11
461
39
423
36

937
372
69
304
565
20
545
55
490
55

1,105
421
75
346
684
14
670
91
579
85

1,348
467
95
372
881
19
862
83
779
73

Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Chapter One (wages and salaries)
Chapter Two (other current spending)
Debt service paid
Goods and services
General reserve
Other
Chapter Three (current transfers to states)

401
322
132
166
26
49
60
31
25

503
385
165
187
51
50
50
35
33

699
564
191
321
73
55
104
90
51

999
718
264
354
65
83
120
86
99

1,040
763
274
405
81
71
144
108
84

1,387
1,169
301
369
70
101
90
108
499

Capital expenditure
Domestically financed 1/
Foreign financed

79
73
5

119
109
10

135
113
22

282
173
109

277
227
50

218
135
83

Overall balance (cash basis)

-31

-33

43

-62

65

-39

Financing
Foreign financing 1/
Domestic financing
BOS
DMBs
Nonbanks
Domestic arrears repayments (-)
Privatization
Floats & discrepancies

31
5
39
29
2
13
-7
3
-14

33
10
-133
-22
-133
19
-8
11
156

-43
-15
-18
-32
13
29
-30
2
-9

62
74
-11
-45
22
21
-15
6
0

-65
5
-100
-86
6
14
-34
0
30

39
57
-18
-63
35
15
-15
10
-1

- 31 -

Table 5. Sudan: Central Government Operations, 2001–05 (Concluded)

2001

2002

2003

Prog.
2004

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenues
Tax revenue
Direct taxes
Indirect taxes
Nontax revenue
Non-oil
Oil
Of which : OSA accumulation
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Chapter one (Wages and Salaries)
Chapter two (Other current spending)
Debt service paid 3/
Goods and services
General reserve
Other
Chapter three (Current transfers to states)

11.0
5.6
1.2
4.4
5.4
0.6
4.4
...
11.9
9.6
3.9
4.9
0.8
1.4
1.8
0.9
0.7

12.1
5.5
1.1
4.4
6.6
0.9
5.4
0.3
13.0
9.9
4.3
4.8
1.3
1.3
1.3
0.9
0.8

16.8
6.1
1.2
4.9
10.7
0.9
9.5
0.8
15.8
12.7
4.3
7.3
1.6
1.2
2.3
2.0
1.2

18.7
7.4
1.4
6.0
11.2
1.1
9.8
1.1
19.9
14.3
5.3
7.1
1.3
1.7
2.4
1.7
2.0

21.5
8.2
1.5
6.7
13.3
1.8
11.3
1.6
20.2
14.8
5.3
7.9
1.6
1.4
2.8
2.1
1.6

22.6
7.8
1.6
6.2
14.7
1.4
13.0
1.2
23.2
19.6
5.0
6.2
1.2
1.7
1.5
1.8
8.4

Capital expenditure
Domestically financed 1/
Foreign financed

2.3
2.2
0.2

3.1
2.8
0.2

3.1
2.5
0.5

5.6
3.4
2.2

5.4
4.4
1.0

3.6
2.3
1.4

Overall balance (cash basis)

-0.9

-0.8

1.0

-1.2

1.3

-0.6

Financing
Foreign financing 1/
Domestic financing
Bank of Sudan
DMBs
Nonbanks
Domestic arrears repayments
Privatization
Floats and discrepancies

0.9
0.2
1.2
0.9
0.1
0.4
-0.2
0.1
-0.4

0.8
0.2
-3.4
-0.6
-3.4
0.5
-0.2
0.3
4.0

-1.0
-0.3
-0.4
-0.7
0.3
0.6
-0.7
0.0
-0.2

1.2
1.5
-0.2
-0.9
0.4
0.4
-0.3
0.1
0.0

-1.3
0.1
-2.0
-1.7
0.1
0.3
-0.7
0.0
0.6

0.6
1.0
-0.3
-1.0
0.6
0.3
-0.3
0.2
0.0

6.5
4.4

7.4
4.5

8.0
8.0

8.9
8.7

10.3
9.6

9.5
11.8

9.6
2.3
-4.7
3,376

9.9
3.1
-4.3
3,876

12.7
3.1
-4.6
4,425

14.3
5.6
-6.3
5,024

14.8
5.4
-6.6
5,138

16.0
7.2
-10.1
5,973

Memorandum items
Non-oil revenue 2/
Crude oil revenue (excl. OSA)
Consolidated expenditures 3/
Current
Capital
Primary domestic balance (non-oil) 4/
Nominal GDP (SDD bn; at factor cost)

1/ Repayments for oil projects for 2003 and 2004 hitherto classified as capital participation in refirnery have been
reclassified as principal repayments under net foreign financing.
2/ Total revenue less crude oil revenue.
3/ To facilitate comparison with previous years, it is assumed that one-half of the transfers to the south in 2005 are for
capital expenditures.
4/ Define as percent of non-oil GDP.

734.1
240.2
493.9

292.8
329.7
130.8
115.0
142.2
27.3
10.1
15.8
198.9
63.1
563.3
193.6
369.7
280.3
22.0
30.3
28.5
34.4
46.4
14.2
7.1
39.6
2.0
7.6
11.6
249

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net claims on central government
Bank of Sudan
Claims
Deposits
Of which: Oil Saving Account
Commercial banks
Claims on nongovernment sectors
Other items (net)

Broad money
Currency outside banks
Deposits

Memorandum items:
Reserve money (in billions of Sudanese dinars)
Reserve money (annual percentage change)
Broad money (annual percentage change)
Credit to nongovernment sector (annual percentage change)
Currency to broad money (in percent)
Currency to dinar broad money (in percent)
Excess reserves to reserve money (in percent)
Excess reserves to broad money (in percent)
Foreign currency deposits to total deposits (in percent)
Broad money multiplier
Velocity (average)
Usable international reserves to broad money (in percent)
Usable international reserves (in million of U.S. dollars)

354.8
26.6
30.3
56.9
32.7
43.6
12.6
6.1
37.2
2.1
6.9
18.8
527

247.1

1/ In 2005, calculated using the exchange rate projected for end-December (program exchange rate).

Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

487.0
423.8
111.7
83.1
147.9
64.8
45.2
28.6
312.1
63.2

169.9

Net foreign assets (excluding valuation adjustment)

817.0

796.8

Counterpart to valuation changes 1/

-570.0
-685.4
115.5

-627.0
-741.2
114.2

2003
Dec.

Net foreign assets
Bank of Sudan
Commercial banks

2002
Dec.

(In billions of Sudanese dinars)

413.5
24.5
32.0
46.0
30.1
42.1
15.5
7.3
38.7
2.1
…
31.5
1,046

880.7
265.1
615.6

462.3
420.3
32.1
0.0
155.8
155.8
109.8
32.1
388.2
42.0

418.4

806.2

-387.8
-515.6
127.9

2004
Sept.

Table 6. Sudan: Monetary Survey, 2002–05

453.3
27.8
30.8
44.8
31.7
44.5
15.6
7.4
37.7
2.1
5.3
36.8
1,334

960.4
304.9
655.5

510.5
484.4
32.5
-2.8
148.7
151.5
129.0
35.3
451.9
26.2

449.6

792.1

-341.7
-464.8
123.1

Dec.

494.9
30.2
28.9
29.6
33.0
44.8
14.0
6.6
39.3
2.1
…
36.0
1,414

1,039.3
343.0
696.3

561.9
478.2
25.0
-19.2
150.2
169.4
147.4
43.2
453.3
83.7

477.1

790.6

-312.7
-444.8
132.1

Mar.

518.3
32.9
29.7
24.6
33.0
44.8
14.2
6.7
39.3
2.1
…
36.8
1,514

1,088.5
359.2
729.3

579.3
495.3
21.6
-31.4
152.3
183.7
161.7
52.0
473.7
84.1

508.8

789.1

-279.5
-411.5
132.1

2005
Jun.
Prog.

549.4
32.9
31.0
29.0
33.0
44.8
14.4
6.9
39.3
2.1
…
37.1
1,614

1,153.8
380.7
773.0

615.1
516.8
16.0
-45.8
155.0
200.8
178.8
60.8
500.8
98.3

538.3

787.6

-248.5
-386.5
138.1

Sept.

585.4
29.1
28.0
28.5
33.0
44.8
14.7
7.0
39.3
2.1
4.9
35.7
1,754

1,229.4
405.7
823.7

643.7
584.9
4.0
-64.9
158.7
223.6
201.6
68.9
580.9
59.8

584.4

787.6

-202.4
-346.5
144.1

Dec.

- 32 -

35.2
39.8
11.7

Required reserves 1/
Excess reserves
Deposits at BOS included in broad money

1/ In 2005 calculated of the program exchange rate.

Sources: Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

75.0

Reserves of commercial banks

280.3
193.6

92.5

88.2

Reserve money
Currency outside banks

223.7
131.2
83.1
147.9
37.5
2.9
107.5
64.8
45.2
19.6
17.3
33.5
-2.8

225.3
137.1
115.0
142.2
30.9
3.9
107.5
27.3
10.1
17.2
5.7
17.1
-0.8

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net claims on central government
Claims
Temporary advances
Gov’t. securities
Long-term claims
Deposits
Of which: Oil Stabilization Account
Other deposits
Claims on public enterprises
Claims on banks
Money market instruments
(Central Bank Musharaka Certificates)
Other items (net)

42.5
44.7
27.4

87.2

354.8
240.2

816.6

796.1

Counterpart to valuation changes 1/

-685.4
229.7
915.2

-741.2
119.8
861.0

2003
Dec.

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

2002
Dec.

53.3
63.9
31.2

117.3

413.5
265.1

73.4

125.1
51.7
0.0
155.8
37.5
10.9
107.5
155.8
109.8
46.0
18.5
32.3
0.8

804.1

-515.6
360.5
876.1

2004
Sep.

(In billions of Sudanese dinars)

57.5
70.7
20.2

128.2

453.3
304.9

86.9

129.5
42.6
-2.8
148.7
37.5
3.8
107.5
151.5
129.0
22.6
15.5
30.0
0.0

788.6

-464.8
420.4
885.1

Dec.

59.9
69.1
23.0

128.9

494.9
343.0

115.2

150.0
34.3
-19.2
150.2
35.0
7.8
107.5
169.4
147.4
22.0
17.5
36.0
0.0

789.7

-444.8
440.4
885.1

Mar.

Table 7. Sudan: Monetary Authorities’ Accounts, 2002–05

62.7
73.4
23.0

136.1

518.3
359.2

115.2

141.3
25.7
-31.4
152.3
32.5
12.4
107.5
183.7
161.7
22.0
17.5
39.5
0.0

788.5

-411.5
469.2
880.7

2005
Jun.
Prog.

66.5
79.2
23.0

145.7

549.4
380.7

129.5

149.2
19.3
-45.8
155.0
30.0
17.6
107.5
200.8
178.8
22.0
17.5
47.5
0.0

786.7

-386.5
494.2
880.7

Sept.

70.8
85.9
23.0

156.7

585.4
405.7

130.0

143.8
13.8
-64.9
158.7
27.5
23.8
107.5
223.6
201.6
22.0
17.5
61.2
0.0

788.1

-346.5
529.2
875.7

Dec.

- 33 -

- 34 -

Table 8. Sudan: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenario, 2004–10
Est.
2004

2005

2006

Projections
2007
2008

Production and prices
Nominal GDP (billions of Sudanese dinars)
Real GDP
Non-oil
Oil
Inflation (period average)

5,138
7.3
6.0
21.2
8.4

5,973
8.3
5.6
30.1
7.5

6,843
8.6
6.2
16.4
7.0

7,841
8.6
7.6
13.8
6.5

Investment and saving 1/
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
Gross domestic saving
Government
Nongovernment
Net exports of goods and nonfactor services

22.6
5.1
17.5
18.5
7.7
10.8
-4.0

24.4
6.8
17.7
20.3
7.2
13.1
-4.1

26.1
8.1
18.0
22.9
8.6
14.3
-3.3

Central government operations
Total revenue
Oil revenue 2/
Non-oil revenue
Total expenditure
Current expenditures
Capital expenditure
Overall deficit (cash basis)

21.5
11.2
10.3
20.2
14.8
5.4
1.3

22.6
13.0
9.5
23.2
16.0
7.2
-0.6

External sector
External trade balance
Exports
Imports
Current account balance on cash basis (in percent of GDP)
Capital/financial account balance (US$millions)
Gross official reserves (months of imports)
Export volume (change in percent) 3/
Import volume (change in percent) 3/
Terms of trade (change in percent) 3/

1.0
19.0
-18.0
-4.1
1,308
2.9
14.8
35.1
18.2

Memorandum items:
Sudanese crude oil export price (U.S. dollars per barrel)

36.4

2009

2010

8,893
8.8
8.5
10.3
6.0

10,035
8.5
9.0
5.1
5.0

11,432
8.5
9.5
4.1
5.0

26.6
8.4
18.2
23.0
7.9
15.1
-3.7

26.9
8.6
18.3
22.9
8.2
14.7
-4.0

27.0
8.6
18.4
22.5
7.8
14.6
-4.6

26.6
8.1
18.5
22.1
8.2
13.9
-4.6

25.4
15.9
9.6
25.5
16.9
8.6
-0.1

24.8
14.7
10.0
25.9
16.9
9.0
-1.2

25.2
14.6
10.6
26.2
17.1
9.1
-1.0

25.0
13.6
11.3
26.3
17.1
9.2
-1.4

24.6
12.7
12.0
25.1
16.5
8.5
-0.4

1.1
20.8
-19.7
-5.9
1,462
3.2
7.1
30.8
1.9

2.4
23.4
-21.0
-6.1
1,558
3.8
9.1
22.9
-0.4

1.9
22.4
-20.5
-6.3
1,617
4.2
9.2
12.5
-0.4

1.2
21.3
-20.0
-6.2
1,661
4.4
10.2
10.5
-1.3

0.1
19.5
-19.3
-6.2
1,735
4.5
10.6
8.4
2.1

-0.2
18.0
-18.2
-6.0
1,852
4.5
10.8
6.3
1.2

34.0

35.0

33.0

33.0

32.0

32.0

Sources: Projections based on information provided by the Sudanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ In percent of GDP at market prices.
2/ Crude oil revenue.
3/ Non-oil transactions.

- 35 -

Table 9. Sudan: Indicators of Debt Service Capacity, 2002–05
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2002

Actual
2003

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

137

247

304

361

26
17
3
23
1,475
1,085

28
14
1
26
1,595
1,074

32
17
2
30
1,577
1,065

30
18
2
28
1,607
1,050

Total debt service paid, in percent of:
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Net current receipts 1/
Gross official reserves
GDP

6.8
14.4
55
0.9

9.5
16.7
47
1.5

7.9
12.9
23
1.5

7.2
12.1
21
1.5

Payments to the Fund, in percent of:
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Net current receipts 1/
Gross official reserves
GDP
Quota 2/
External debt service

1.3
2.7
10.3
0.2
11.1
18.8

1.1
1.9
5.3
0.2
11.0
11.2

0.8
1.4
2.4
0.2
12.9
10.7

0.6
1.0
1.7
0.1
11.6
8.3

Overdue obligations to the Fund, in percent of:
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Net current receipts 1/
Gross official reserves
GDP
Quota 2/
External debt

74
155
593
10.0
639
6.2

61
108
303
9.4
633
6.2

41
67
118
7.9
628
6.0

32
54
92
6.7
619
6.1

1,996
952
249
1.0
14,720
169.7
23,609
1.36

2,613
1,478
527
1.5
16,957
169.7
25,709
1.49

3,822
2,351
1,334
2.9
19,913
169.7
26,201
1.48

5,022
2,990
1,754
3.2
23,891
169.7
26,506
1.53

Total debt service paid
Payments to the Fund
Charges and interest falling due
Charges settled
Reduction in overdue obligations
Overdue obligations to the Fund
Overdue obligations to the Fund (in millions of SDRs)

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and services
Net current receipts 1/
Gross official reserves
In months of next year’s imports
GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Quota (in millions of SDRs) 2/
External debt (including arrears)
Exchange rate (U.S. dollar/ SDR, end of period)
Source: Fund staff estimates.

1/ Exports of goods and services adjusted for oil related payments for services and transfers to foreign investors.
2/ As percent of Eigth Review Quota.

- 36 -

Table 10. Sudan: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2003–05
(Cash basis; in millions of U.S. dollars)
Actual
2003

Prog.
2004

Est.
2004

Proj.
2005

-1288

-1559

-1819

-2152

-777

-994

-760

-1,364

-219.3
-219.3
-219.3
-59.9
0.0
-159.4

-266.8
-266.8
-266.8
-62.6
0.0
-204.2

-271.2
-271.2
-271.2
-65.8
0.0
-204.4

-331.0
-331.0
-331.0
-65.7
0.0
-265.3

-278
-13
-28
14

-280
-18
-30
12

-767
-20
-32
12

-444
-12
-30
18

1,287

1,559

1,819

1,787

10

60

28

34

85
55
37
48
1,203

370
200
155
215
1,136

191
138
74
117
1,684

290
200
135
155
1,496

0

0

0

0

Other flows 3/

-10

-7

-85

-34

Financing gap

0

0

0

365

Gross financing requirements
External current account deficit
(excluding interest payments and official transfers) 1/
Debt service payments (interest and principal)
Medium- and long-term debt
Public sector
Multilateral 2/
Paris Club bilaterals
Non-Paris Club Bilaterals
Gross reserves accumulation
IMF repurchases and repayments
Payments to the Fund
Change in arrears on charges
Expected financing
Official transfers and grants
Debt financing
Of which : Merowe project
Multilateral
Bilateral
Foreign direct investment, and errors and omissions
IMF purchases and disbursements

Source: Fund staff.
1/ Includes oil sector profit remittances.
2/ Excluding the IMF.
3/ Includes all other net financial flows.

- 37 -

Table 11. Sudan: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–2002
1990

1995

2001

2002

1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 a day (in percent)
Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (in percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption

...
...
...
...
31.0

...
...
...
33.9
22.0

...
...
...
11.0
25.0

...
...
...
...

2. Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (percent)
Youth literacy rate (percent ages 15–24)

...
93.7
65.0

...
74.2
71.5

45.8
...
78.1

...
...
79.1

3. Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (percent ages 15–24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)

75.9
71.5
22.2
...

84.2
79.7
...
8.0

86.2
87.4
...
...

...
88.5
...
...

120.0
74.0
57.0

106.0
69.0
51.0

97.0
65.0
67.0

94.0
64.0
49.0

...
69.4

...
86.3

590.0
...

...
...

...
8.7
...
...
...

...
10.0
...
...
2.0

3.1
...
62,000
188.0
35.0

...
...
...
216.6
32.9

30.0
...
2.3
0.1
67.0
58.0
...

...
3.6
3.5
0.1
...
...
...

25.9
3.6
4.3
0.2
75.0
62.0
...

...
5.2
...
...
...
...
...

...
2.5
...

...
2.8
0.4

...
17.5
3.6

...
26.5
6.1

45.8
5.4
52.2
6.6

51.5
5.1
54.9
3.9

58.8
4.6
57.5
1.7

59.9
4.4
58.4
2.7

4. Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 12 months)
5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of total)
6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV, female (in percent, ages 15–49)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percentage of women ages 15–49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis prevalence rate (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS
7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (percent of population)
8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15–24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Adult literacy rate (percent of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Aid (percent of GNI)

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators, and Sudan Country Profile.

- 38 -

APPENDIX I

SUDAN: RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
As of January 31, 2005
I.

Membership Status: Joined 09/05/57; Article VIII28

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
169.70
490.72
0.01

% Quota
100.00
289.17
0.01

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
52.19
0.29

% Allocation
100.00
0.56

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-by Arrangements
Extended Arrangements
Contingency and Compensatory
Financing Facility
Trust Fund

SDR Million
183.53
113.02

% Quota
1108.15
66.60

V.

14.40
34.90

Financial Arrangements:

Type
Stand-by
Stand-by
Stand-by
VI.

24.44
59.23

Approval
Date
06/25/1984
02/23/1983
02/22/1982

Expiration
Date
06/24/1985
03/09/1984
02/21/1983

Amount
Approved
(SDR million)
90.00
170.00
198.00

Amount
Drawn
(SDR million)
20.00
170.00
70.00

Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of
resources and present holdings of SDRs):
Overdue291/31/05

Forthcoming
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Principal

380.22

Charges/Interest

680.44

11.77

11.86

11.86

11.87

11.85

1,060.67

11.77

11.86

11.86

11.87

11.85

Total

28
29

The staff is in the process of assessing Sudan’s compliance with Article VIII obligations.

The projection of charges and interest assumes that overdue principal at the report date (if any) will remain
outstanding, but forthcoming obligations will be settled on time.

- 39 -

VII.

APPENDIX I

Exchange Rate Arrangements

The legal tender is the Sudanese dinar, which replaced the Sudanese pound in proportion
SDD 1=LSd 10 in 1999. Since October 1998, the exchange rate system has been unified—market
participants determine the exchange rate and trade freely within a unified regulatory framework.
In 2001, the foreign exchange market came under pressure and the Bank of Sudan (BOS), in an
effort to increase the flexibility of the system, introduced a formal band of +1.5 percent (later
broadened to 2 percent) around the official rate and began auctioning its foreign exchange within
the band. In May 2003, the BOS formally adopted a managed-float exchange rate regime. The
formal exchange rate band was abandoned and the auction system was replaced with direct
transactions in the interbank market. The BOS established an internal limit of +2 percent intraday
fluctuations around the average daily market rate that will trigger its intervention. In 2004, the
BOS changed the permissible intraday exchange rate fluctuation to +3 percentage points. Sudan
maintains one inoperative bilateral payments agreement with Egypt and an inoperative payment
clearing account with the former Soviet Union.
VIII. Article IV Consultation
Sudan is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussion was held
from August 16–28, 2003. The Staff Report was discussed by the Executive Board on
October 31, 2003.
IX.

FSAP Participation

An FSAP mission took place in October 9–14, 2004 and a follow up mission overlapped with the
2005 Article IV consultation mission in December 1–20, 2004.
X.

Resident Representative

The Fund's resident representative in Khartoum was withdrawn in June 1990.
XI. Technical Assistance
In January 1995, the Executive Board decided to resume Fund selective technical assistance to
Sudan. A summary of the technical assistance provided is presented in the following table.

- 40 -

APPENDIX I

Sudan: Technical Assistance from the Fund, 2000–05
Subject

Type of Mission

Timing

Counterpart

Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD)
Reform of indirect taxation

Short-term

Periodic visits in 2000

Ministry of Finance
(MOF)

Expenditure control and management

Short-term

Periodic visits till 2002

MOF

Reform of direct taxation and revenue
administration

Short-term

November 2002 and December
2003

MOF

Reform of direct taxes and investment
incentives

Short-term

March, 2003

MOF

Medium-term budgetary framework

Short-term

April, 2003

MOF

Tax and customs administration

Short-term

September, 2003

MOF

Fiscal cash management and budget
classification

Short-term

February 2004

MOF

Fiscal cash management

Short-term

May and September, 2004

MOF

Revenue administration assessment
(METAC)

Short-term

February, 2005

MOF

Short-term

Periodic visits, till 2002

Bank of Sudan (BOS)

Resident Advisor

May 2001–May 2003

BOS

Islamic compliant monetary instruments

Short-term

October 2002

BOS

Monetary policy operations and
introduction of a commodities
futures/forward market in the agriculture
sector
Monetary policy operations

Short-term

December, 2003

BOS

Short-term

September 2004

BOS

Currency workshop

Short-term

February 2005

BOS

Assess circulating currencies in Sudan

Short-term

March 25–April 1, 2005

BOS

Short-term

Periodic visits, till 2003

BOS

National accounts and CPI statistics

Short-term

Periodic visits, March 2002–
February 2003

Central Bureau of
Statistics (CBS)

Balance of payments statistics

Short-term

July 2003

BOS

General data dissemination system (GDDS)

Short-term

July 2003

CBS, MFE, and BOS

Monetary and Financial Department (MFD)
Monetary management and banking
supervision
Banking supervision

Statistics Department
Monetary statistics

- 41 -

APPENDIX II

SUDAN: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK30
(As of April 2, 2005)
The World Bank has no active lending portfolio in Sudan because of Sudan’s default on its
financial obligations to the Bank, which led to the suspension of disbursements in April 1993.
As a result of discussions between the Bank and the Sudanese authorities on the need for
Sudan to take steps towards normalizing its relations and establishing a track record with the
Bank, the authorities started making “good faith” payments of $1 million per month to the
Bank starting in July 1999. Monthly payments of an equivalent of $500,000 have been made
since October 2002. The amount of payments has not been sufficient to prevent a continued
accumulation of arrears, which stood at about $340 million as of March 31, 2005 (from
$145 million at the end of 1999). Sudan’s outstanding Bank debt, including arrears, is
approximately $1.3 billion.
The Bank was mostly absent from Sudan between 1992 and 2002. In the 1970s and 1980s, the
Bank was a major player in the reconstruction of Sudan, following the Addis Ababa peace
agreement of 1972. In the past, the Bank has occasionally supported small initiatives, on a
grant basis, such as the UNICEF’s data-collection effort. As the prospects for peace rose, the
Bank formulated a strategy for re-engaging with Sudan in the event of peace. This strategy,
described in the Sudan Country Re-engagement Note (CRN), was discussed by the Executive
Board of Directors on July 10, 2003. Main areas of emphasis in the CRN are knowledge
generation and sharing; capacity building to support policy reform; demonstration projects to
improve delivery of social services; and resolution of the debt overhang.
To rebuild its knowledge base, the Bank completed the first economic report on Sudan in a
decade, the Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), which focuses on the social and
economic developments in Sudan from the early 1990s to 2002, and the status of
macroeconomic, governance, and institutional reforms. The Bank has also engaged the
government in policy dialogue on a variety of areas and, together with the Fund, provided
technical resource persons for the discussions around wealth sharing in the peace process.
Between January 2004 and March 2005, the Bank co-led (with the UN) a Joint Assessment
Mission (JAM), covering eight thematic sectors (institutional development; rule of law;
economic policy; productive sectors; basic social services; infrastructure; livelihoods and
social protection; and information and media), and several cross-cutting issues, including:
gender, environment and conflict. IMF staff participated in a number of workshops and
contributed specifically to the economic policy cluster. The JAM synthesis report:
“Framework for Transition, Reconstruction and Poverty Eradication”`, was completed in
March 2005, and outlines the reconstruction and development needs for Sudan over the next
six years.31 The Report was presented at a Donors’ Pledging Conference, held in Oslo on
April 11–12, 2005.
30

Prepared by World Bank staff.

31

The full report can be found on the web at: http://www.unsudanig.org/JAM.

- 42 -

APPENDIX II

The Wealth Sharing Protocol agreed between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) specified that two Multi-Donor Trust Funds
(MDTFs) be established to facilitate the coordination of external donor financing of Sudan’s
reconstruction and development needs as laid out in the JAM. One fund would be for the new
National Government (NG) for war-affected areas in the north and the transition zones, and
one for the Government of Southern Sudan (GoSS). The MDTFs would remain operational
through the six years of the Interim Period. MDTF-financed activities would be within the
context of a unified budget and a coherent public expenditure process. The Implementation
Agreement on Wealth Sharing, signed in Naivasha in December 2004, specified that the
World Bank would be requested to be the Administrator for both MDTFs, and this was
approved by the Board on April 6, 2005.
As part of the JAM, a workshop with the Government and the SPLM initiated work on a joint
strategy for poverty eradication (PRSP). IMF staff also participated. During this workshop,
the parties reached an agreement on a shared vision for poverty eradication, with an
articulation of strategic objectives and associated operational implications. A joint concept
note was developed that provides the foundation for a Poverty Eradication Strategy for the
new National Government that will be formed.
To support capacity building and policy reform, a US$4.5 million Low-Income Countries
under Stress (LICUS) trust fund grant for Sudan was approved by the LICUS Steering
Committee in September 2004. This grant focuses on capacity building and institutional
development of fiduciary and aid management systems both in the north and in the south. The
trust fund complements two ongoing Post Conflict Fund grants from the World Bank totaling
$3.0 million.
The Bank participated in two missions to Sudan in October and December 2004 as part of the
Financial Sector Assessment Program.
The World Bank is also preparing a Public Expenditure Review (PER), with selected broad
activities, which are distinct for the NG and the GoSS. The proposed approach is pragmatic in
that a series of distinct activities are being designed to build joint understanding, ownership,
and to begin to address capacity building needs over the next two and a half years (through
end 2007). IMF staff will participate in this work.
In addition to the above, World Bank staff are working at a technical level with the IMF and
other multilateral creditors to explore options for clearance of arrears and debt relief.

- 43 -

APPENDIX III

SUDAN: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Available economic data are sufficient for program monitoring purposes in Sudan. However,
there are many areas where further improvements are needed, particularly in compiling
national accounts, state budgetary data, and external trade and financial statistics. This
appendix discusses outstanding statistical issues by sector.
As a participant in the Department for International Development (DFID) project for
Anglophone African countries, Sudan has been receiving technical assistance in various area
related to statistical issues. DFID financed three Statistics Department (STA) missions in
June–July 2003 (monetary and financial statistics, balance of payments statistics, and the
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) metadata completion), contributing to Sudan’s
participation in the GDDS starting in August 2003. In early 2004, Sudan also received
assistance for the initial stages of preparation of a strategic plan for the Central Bureau of
Statistics (CBS).
I.

REAL SECTOR

Though the compilation and dissemination of the monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) has
been commendable in recent years, the compilation of the national accounts data lags behind.
Monthly CPI data for the Khartoum area are provided shortly after the end of each month
while the CPI including other states is provided with a three-month lag.
The national accounts statistics suffer from a lack of basic information for many sectors,
including oil, livestock, horticulture, and most services. On the expenditure side, data are
lacking on final consumption by households, investment, and changes in stocks. There are no
national accounts or industrial production data at sub annual frequencies. Furthermore, the
annual data are being reported with a lag of over three years. There is an urgent need to
rebuild the institutional capacity of the CBS, introduce the 1993 System of National
Accounts, conduct a census of agricultural production, and improve coordination among the
Ministry of Finance and National Economy (MOFNE), the Ministry of Energy and Mining,
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, and the CBS. A peripatetic real sector expert is
assisting the authorities in compiling and updating the national accounts.
II.

FISCAL SECTOR

Government finance statistics reported to MCD are adequate, with the main revenue,
expenditure, and financing items reported on a monthly basis with a lag of about one to two
months. Financing items are consistent with the monetary accounts. The reported statistics are
for the budgetary central government only, and do not include consolidated data for the
central government, which are often not available. Data are submitted using economic
classification and, while the allocation of resources by MOFNE to the various ministries is
reported, their actual expenditures are not. There is a strong need to improve accounting and
reporting procedures at MOFNE, introduce the GFS classifications according to guidelines

- 44 -

APPENDIX III

provided in Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 2001, and fully implement the
1997 GFS technical assistance mission’s other recommendations. Data reported for the
Government Finance Statistics Yearbook are weak and cover only budgetary central
government up to 1999. Monthly and quarterly fiscal data are not reported for the
International Financial Statistics (IFS).
III.

MONETARY SECTOR

Sudan has received significant technical assistance resources to improve progressively the
collection, compilation, and dissemination of monetary and financial statistics. Following a
joint MCD and STA mission in monetary and financial statistics in October 1992, six STA
missions were undertaken between 1993 and 2003 to further the development and
implementation of the long-term plan of action initiated by the 1992 mission. Consequently,
the monetary accounts are broadly acceptable for monitoring purposes; however, STA is
concerned that, in the absence of prompt, remedial action as suggested by the July 2003
monetary and financial statistics mission, there may be a re-emergence of the problems of
overestimation of international reserves and errors and omissions in the determination of net
credit to government. This concern is based on findings that there has been only partial
implementation of some of the most important recommendations and that some useful
measures that had earlier been fully implemented are now discontinued. For example, balance
sheet data of the central bank and commercial banks are reported on a monthly basis and are
generally on time. Nevertheless, other items (net) are often large and variable, owing to the
grouping of a large volume of transactions into unclassified assets and unclassified liabilities.
Moreover, there are frequent classification errors in the reports made by the commercial
banks, particularly for consortium financing, which prevents a meaningful analysis of net
domestic assets.
The weekly flash reports of the authorities are particularly commendable, with key monetary
indicators being reported usually with a one-week lag. Starting January 2003, estimates of the
Bank of Sudan’s (BOS) usable reserves were added. However, there is some divergence
between reserve money in the balance sheets and the end-of-month flash reports.
To address these weaknesses, STA agreed to provide a program of peripatetic assistance. The
first of these missions (July 2003) noted limited progress in the BOS’s implementation of
recommendations of past missions and suggested that significant efforts be made by the
authorities to follow up on the highest priority measures, including a revision of the
guidelines related to consortium financing and compliance, and the establishment of a
working group to review the BOS’s foreign assets. A second mission has been postponed to
allow further time for the implementation of some of these recommendations.
IV.

EXTERNAL SECTOR

Daily exchange rate data are reported to the Fund with minimal lags, but there are several
areas for improvement in the external accounts, particularly with regard to foreign direct

- 45 -

APPENDIX III

investment, trade, and oil statistics. The BOS’s active balances include unusable reserves
earmarked for particular purposes such as medicine, oil, and spare part imports, but the
composition of these earmarked reserves and their potential usability in the event of a balance
of payment need is not clear. The authorities need to provide clarification on items that
qualify as international reserves in general, and those earmarked reserves in particular, and
should begin implementing the reserves template.
Regarding import statistics, there are significant discrepancies between the reports of the
customs authorities and the BOS. The July 2003 STA mission identified some possible causes
of such discrepancies and, in collaboration with authorities, attempted to reconcile the data.
The mission reported some progress on implementing the recommendations of the 1999 TA
report on balance of payments statistics. However, the lack of survey data continues to affect
the compilation of important balance of payments items such as foreign direct investment.
Medium-term oil production projections and amortization of private sector investment need
substantial improvement. The authorities have made some progress in improving oil
projections, but appear reluctant to provide more detailed information on the phasing-in and
expected production levels of new blocks and on amortization of investment in the oil sector.
Total oil reserves available are estimated between 10 to 15 billion barrels, which, at a
production rate of 350 thousand barrels a day, would last about 100 years.

Monthly reporting of
main budgetary
items, generally on
time; 1.5-month lag.

Monthly reporting of
balance sheets.
Generally on time;
1.5-month lag.

Monetary
accounts

Introduce the GFS classification;
improve accounting and reporting
procedures at MOFNE. Implement in
full GFS (1997) technical assistance
(TA) mission recommendations.

Only partial data on state budgets available;
incomplete functional classification; MOFNE
allocations to ministries are reported, but not
their actual expenditure; slow progress on the
introduction of the government finance
statistics (GFS) classification.
Large and variable other items (net); frequent
misclassification errors by commercial banks,
in particular for consortium financing, which
prevents meaningful analysis of the
composition of net domestic assets (NDA).

Acceptable following
recent STA missions to
improve transparency
and reliability of the
monetary statistics.

Conduct new household income and
expenditure survey; reduce timing
discrepancies and other reporting
inefficiencies by individual states.

CPI for Sudan as a whole is not available.

Establish a working group to review the
Bank of Sudan’s (BOS) foreign assets;
review and revise the guidelines related
to consortium financing and ensure
compliance. Implement the 2001 TA
mission on monetary statistics
recommendations, including
improvement of commercial banks’
other items net.

Improve coordination between
MOFNE, CBS, and the ministry of
agriculture.

Acceptable; only CPI for
Khartoum area available
promptly; weekly CPI
published in the flash
report.
Good; main revenue and
expenditure items
reported; financing
consistent with monetary
accounts.

Acceptable.

Last and current year
estimates reported to
missions by the
ministry of finance
and national
economy (MOFNE).
Monthly CPI
reported on time,
with a minimal lag.

Rebuild the Central Bureau of
Statistics’ (CBS) institutional capacity;
introduce the 1993 SNA; conduct
census of agricultural production.
Implement the project prepared by the
STA’s peripatetic real sector expert.

1968 System of National Accounts (SNA) still
in use; oil sector value-added calculation not
completed; no real GDP by expenditure;
4-year delay in nominal GDP by expenditure;
private consumption derived as a residual;
estimations rather than surveys are used for
most GDP components.
Estimates are based on incomplete data, in
particular for oil value added, livestock, and
fruit and vegetable production.

Broadly acceptable:
Real and nominal GDP
by sector available with
a 2-year lag.

Historical data
reported on time by
the Central Statistics
Office.

Steps to Improve Integrity

Areas of Concern

Adequacy for
Monitoring

Scope and
Timeliness of
Reporting

Government
finance

Prices

Real sector:
national
accounts

Type of
Data

Sudan: Data Quality

- 46 STATISTICAL APPENDIX III

External
debt

Exchange
rate
Balance of
payments

foreign
exchange
reserves

sector:

External

Type of
Data

Clarify the items that qualify as
international reserves in general, and
those included in earmarked reserves in
particular.

Gross usable reserves are part of BOS active
balances, which also include unusable
reserves earmarked for particular purposes
(such as oil, medicine, and spare parts
imports). The composition of the earmarked
reserves and their potential usability in the
case of a balance of payment need are not
clear.

Acceptable, but needs
improvement; frequency
of monitoring should
increase to weekly;
quality of data needs to
be strengthened.

Reconcile the data with creditors;
further disaggregate the data according
to standard definitions; Debt
Management Unit to send monthly
statements on external debt to the
BOS’s Statistics Department.
BOS records are not reconciled with those of
some creditors; data on Official Development
Assistance not available; charges on interest in
arrears not calculated; for some creditors,
interest on arrears not separated from delayed
interest.

Good; BOS cash flow
table is not available.
Good; coverage is
comprehensive, although
weaknesses in some
areas persist.

BOS cash flow table does not reflect exactly
actual payments made by the MOFNE.

Acceptable, but needs
improvement.

Monthly trade data;
upon request
provided with a
2–3 month lag.
Monthly payments to
creditors. On
time;1.5-month lag.

Other debt data;
10-month lag.

Eliminate timing and recording
discrepancies between the BOS and the
MOFNE.

Discrepancies between BOS data and customs
data.

Good: daily exchange
rate available.
Acceptable, but needs
improvement.

Introduce the revised reports form for
commercial banks; improve data
collection procedures; enforce the use
of residency criterion; enhance
institutional capacity of the BOS BOP
compilation unit. Implement in full the
recommendations of the 1999 and 2003
TA in BOP statistics.

Include data on returns on investment
deposits. Aim at full reporting of the
BOS balance sheet.

Some divergence between reserve money in
balance sheets and end-of-month flash reports.

Good; estimates of
usable reserves of BOS
added in January 2003.

Incompleteness of data on some services (oil
transportation costs), investment income (oilrelated expenses and interest payments due on
external public debt), transfers (workers'
remittances), financial account (amortization
due on external public debt), and FDI; large
positive errors and omissions.

Steps to Improve Integrity

Areas of Concern

Adequacy for
Monitoring

Upon request;
minimal lag.
Quarterly full BOP
data provided on
time and during
missions; 3-month
lag.

Weekly flash reports
of key monetary
aggregates; 1-week
lag.
Monthly reporting of
BOS active balances.
Generally on time;
0.5-month lag.

Scope and
Timeliness of
Reporting

- 47 STATISTICAL APPENDIX III

- 48 -

APPENDIX III

SUDAN: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
AS OF MARCH 21, 2005

Date of latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency of
6
publication

Exchange Rates

3/9/05

3/9/05

D

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

1/31/05

3/8/05

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

1/31/05

3/8/05

M

W

M/W

Broad Money

1/31/05

3/8/05

W

W

M/W

Central Bank Balance Sheet

1/31/05

3/08/05

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

1/31/05

3/08/05

M

M

M

1/31/05

3/8/05

W

M

M/W

Consumer Price Index

Dec. 2004

2/15/05

M/W

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

Dec. 2004

2/15/05

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

A

A

A

Q4/2004

Feb. 2005

Q

Q

Q

Dec. 2004

Feb. 2005

M

M

M

2003

Dec. 2004

A

A

A

Q4/2004

Feb. 2005

A

A

A

Interest Rates

2

External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods and Services
GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic non-bank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Monthly/weekly (M/W); Bi-monthly (B); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I);
Not Available (NA)
2

- 49 -

APPENDIX IV

Sudan: Tentative Work Program, 2005
Participation in the Oslo Donor Conference

April 2005

Staff Visit (monitoring of performance, supplementary
budget)

May 2005

Mid-year Review of the 2005 SMP

August 2005

Staff Visit (2006 Budget)

November 2005

- 50 -

ATTACHMENT I

March 18, 2005
Ms. Anne O. Krueger
Acting Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
Dear Ms. Krueger,
We have carried out with the Fund staff discussions on the successful implementation of the
2004 Staff Monitored Program (SMP) and the Article IV consultation. We have also reached
agreement on strong SMP for 2005, which maintains macroeconomic stability, while
incorporating the substantial resources needed to meet the peace agreement.
The government believes that the policies set forth in the attached Memorandum of
Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) are adequate to achieve the objectives of the
program. In light of the uncertainties surrounding the support from the International
Community and oil prices, we may take further measures that may become appropriate for
the purpose of implementing the program. Sudan will consult the Fund on adopting revision
of the policies contained in the MEFP.
We look forward to the Executive Board's discussion of our performance under the 2004
SMP and endorsement of the strength of our policies under the 2005 SMP. We believe that
the policy content of these programs is equal in strength to a Rights Accumulation Program
(RAP). We will also redouble our efforts with international creditors to obtain financing
assurances for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) framework and
allow Sudan to move expeditiously to a RAP. However, in the event that such assurances are
delayed, we would like the Fund to explore other options to resolve Sudan's arrears with the
IMF in a timely manner to allow the normalization of Sudan's financial relation with its
international creditors and the resumption of external assistance
In light of the substantial financing needs for post- peace reconstruction, we propose to
maintain the payment to the Fund at the 2004 program level of US$30 million. We hope that
both the Board and management will take into consideration the need to finance new
commitments arising from the peace agreement.
Sincerely yours,
/s/
Al- Zubeir Ahmed AL-Hassan
Minister of Finance and
National Economy
Ministry of Finance and National Economy
SUDAN

/s/
Dr. Sabir Mohamed Hassan
Governor
Bank of Sudan

- 51 -

ATTACHMENT I

MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
MARCH 3, 2005
1.
This memorandum reviews the outcome of the 2004 Staff Monitored Program
(SMP), outlines the government’s economic program for 2005, and sets forth our
medium-term policy objectives.
I.

PERFORMANCE UNDER THE 2004 SMP

2.
Policy performance under the 2004 SMP was broadly in line with the program. All
quantitative benchmarks were met except the one on the contracting of nonconcessional
external debt (Table 1). On the background of lack of access to concessional external
resources and urgent development needs, we have decided to contract US$310 million of
nonconcessional debt to finance priority infrastructure projects in the electricity and water
sectors. The structural measures scheduled for implementation by end-December 2004 were
largely met (Table 2), though there were some delays because of the need to consider the
implications of the peace agreement (see below). During 2004, Sudan paid the Fund
$32.4 million, slightly above the program target.
II.

RECENT MACROECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS

3.
We signed on January 9, 2005, a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) with the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A), ending 20 years of conflict in south
Sudan. The agreements, establishes an autonomous government for Southern Sudan, and
provides for broader participation in government and the civil service, the restructuring of
critical national institutions, and a new national constitution. The Wealth Sharing
Agreement provides a national macroeconomic framework for resource allocation and
sustainable decentralization.
4.
The Sudanese economy achieved a real GDP growth of about 7.3 percent in 2004,
compared to 6.7 percent under the program and 6.0 percent in 2003, because of
stronger-than-expected oil production and continued robust growth in the non-oil sector—
particularly in construction, agriculture, and livestock. Average inflation rose to 8.4 percent
in 2004 compared with 6.5 percent under the program and 7.7 percent in 2003. Reflecting a
stronger external position, the exchange rate of the Sudanese dinar against the U.S. dollar
appreciated by 3 percent in the second half of 2004. For the year as a whole, the dinar
appreciated by 8 percent in real effective terms, following a 4.7 percent depreciation in
2003.
5.
The external current account deficit (on cash basis) declined to 4.1 percent of GDP
compared to about 5 percent in 2003, owing to both high oil prices and a strong recovery in
non-oil exports. Oil exports rose by 50 percent to reach $3.1 billion. Non-oil exports also
grew strongly by about 37 percent, led by exports of sesame seeds, meat and livestock.
Imports also grew by 41 percent with much of the increase coming from a continued rising
share of machinery and transport equipments in total imports. Net private transfers and

- 52 -

ATTACHMENT I

foreign direct investment (FDI) flows also grew rapidly reaching $2.5 billion.
Consequently, gross usable international reserves rose by about US$807 million to US$1.3
billion (2.9 months of the next year’s imports).
6.
Stronger oil and non-oil revenues and expenditure restraint led to a considerable
improvement in the fiscal position in 2004. The budget recorded a surplus of 1.3 percent of
GDP in 2004 compared to a deficit of 1.2 percent under the program. Oil revenues rose to
11.3 percent of GDP compared with 9.5 percent in 2003. Non-oil revenues rose from
8 percent of GDP in 2003 to 10.3 percent in 2004, largely because of recently introduced
tax measures and better tax administration, including the establishment of the large taxpayer
unit. On the expenditure side, current expenditures were slightly above the program level
because of the need to fund internal security and humanitarian relief operations in Darfur
and domestic debt repayments. Even though the domestic non-oil (primary) deficit rose in
relation to non-oil GDP in 2004, it was only slightly higher than programmed, reflecting
strong efforts on non-oil revenues and higher savings in the OSA. The latter accumulated
the equivalent of 1.6 percent of GDP (compared to 1.1 percent under the program) despite
the use of oil revenues to pay for emergency spending in Darfur.
7.
Broad money growth (on an annual basis) decelerated to 30.8 percent by endDecember after rising by 37.3 percent at end-June 2004. Reserve money growth also
decelerated to 27.8 percent at end-December compared with 36 percent at end-June 2004,
despite a substantial rise in Bank of Sudan’s (BOS) net foreign assets and higher
government spending. The fall in monetary growth reflected monetary tightening by the
BOS in the second half of 2004, primarily through raising the reserve requirement from
12 to 14 percent (in mid-June 2004) and open market sales of government securities and
foreign exchange.
8.
We made progress in implementing structural reforms. In the fiscal area, a draft
reviewing all regulations and agreements that grant tax exemptions has been completed.
However, the action plan to streamline regulations in the context of the 2005 budget is still
under preparation and will not be applicable until the 2006 budget. A large taxpayers’ unit
was established in early 2004 and is now operational. We also made progress in improving
budget classification and the presentation of fiscal data. New budget classification systems
have been approved for further piloting and implementation—economic and functional
classifications in line with the Government Finance Statistics (GFS), and the fiscal data for
2001–2003 have been reclassified according to the new classification. Fiscal reports of the
budget are now prepared on a monthly basis. We made efforts to improve public
expenditure management by setting up a cash management unit at the Ministry of Finance,
although we are still facing capacity and coordination problems in making the unit
operational. Finally, to strengthen internal controls at the Ministry of Finance, its
accounting and audit department has been reconstituted as a general directorate and has
been empowered accordingly.

- 53 -

ATTACHMENT I

9.
In the monetary area, the steady progress in making the monetary operations unit at
the BOS operational has greatly facilitated the management and monitoring of domestic
liquidity.
10.
To strengthen external debt management, a high-level committee has drafted a new
debt strategy and borrowing policy The policy has been approved by the Minister of
Finance and due to be submitted to the Council of Ministers in 2005. The strategy
emphasizes the use of alternative financing avenues and contracting external debt only
rarely and on concessional terms. It identifies three preferred financing options: attracting
foreign direct investments, considering build-operate-transfer (BOT) options, and
borrowing from the domestic market.
11.
In the oil sector, the 2003 accounts of the Sudan Petroleum Corporation (SPC) and
many of its subsidiaries have been audited by the Auditor General of Sudan and a summary
of the audit report was submitted to parliament.
12.
In line with our commitment to increasing the role of the private sector in the
economy, we continued to pursue an active program of public sector restructuring and
privatization. The restructuring of Sudan Airways has started to prepare it for privatization.
In addition, the debts of a number of public sector companies were consolidated (e.g.,
Public Corporation for Sugar Trade, Rabak Cement Co., National Co. for Water
Development, Public Corporation for Irrigation Works, and Atbara Cement Factory). The
privatization of Khartoum Bank has advanced, albeit at a slower pace than expected.
Because of the costs associated with restructuring and debt consolidation, net privatization
receipts were negative, despite gross proceeds of about SDD 10 billion.
III.

OUTLOOK AND POLICIES FOR 2005

13.
We will continue to implement prudent economic policies in 2005 with the aim of
maintaining macroeconomic stability and sustaining economic growth while meeting the
demands of the implementation of the peace agreement and the expenditures associated
with the situation in Darfur. The conduct of economic policy will be challenging, given the
complexity of the post-conflict environment and the need to restructure institutions as
mandated by the peace agreement. To support the attainment of the policy objective,
relevant structural reforms will be implemented or initiated in 2005.
14.
The program envisages 8.3 percent real GDP growth, an average inflation rate of
7.5 percent, and an increase in international reserves to about 3.2 months of imports. Oil
GDP is projected to grow by about 27 percent, reflecting the coming on stream of new oil
fields in the third quarter of 2005. Non-oil real GDP growth is expected to slow to
5.6 percent, largely because of below-average rainfall affecting agricultural output.
Construction and transport services are expected to grow strongly, in part related to the
initiation of peace-related projects.

- 54 -

ATTACHMENT I

15.
On a cash basis, the external current account deficit net of official transfers is
expected to worsen to 5.9 percent of GDP. Exports are expected to grow by about
31 percent reflecting the projected increase in oil exports and continued recovery of non-oil
exports. However, import demand is also projected to grow rapidly in line with the postconflict needs. We also expect cost-recovery and investment expenses in the oil sector to
increase income payments to nonresidents significantly. The current account deficit will be
financed, in part, by private capital inflows, some project financing and on-going
international humanitarian aid (for south Sudan and Darfur). However, additional donor
support of at least $400 to $500 million will be needed to finance the external current deficit
in 2005. In the event that donor support falls short, we expect a slower build up of
international reserves, as the room for tightening domestic policies is limited given the
needs of peace.
Fiscal
16.
Notwithstanding the high demands of the peace agreement, we remain committed to
pursuing prudent fiscal policies, and we aim to contain the domestically financed budget
deficit to about 1 percent of GDP. The 2005 budget incorporates the stipulations of the
peace protocols, and envisages increased use of oil revenues, expenditure restraint, and
domestic borrowing to finance the additional outlays. We note also that the 2005 budget
does not include external assistance beyond what Sudan has been receiving in recent years.
However, to address poverty issues adequately in the post-conflict environment, we foresee
the need for external financial assistance to fund urgent social and development programs.
These programs have been detailed in a needs-assessment report that has been prepared by
the UN and the World Bank. In the event that additional external funding is secured, a
supplementary budget will be submitted to parliament for funding the new program.
17.
Fiscal revenues are projected to rise in 2005 by one percentage point of GDP
because of higher oil revenues. Given the substantial efforts to raise tax revenues in 2004,
imposing new taxes in a year when the peace agreement is about to be implemented will be
difficult and thus no new measures are envisaged in the 2005 budget. Furthermore, non-oil
revenues are expected to decline by just under 1 percent of GDP, because the excise tax on
domestic petroleum products will be lowered in 2005 to offset the higher international oil
prices. This will leave domestic oil prices at par with international prices. Nevertheless, we
stand ready to phase back the petroleum excise tax or take other measures if fiscal pressures
mount.
18.
Oil revenues are projected to rise by about 2 percentage points of GDP, reflecting
rising oil production. Despite an increase in the oil savings account (OSA) benchmark price
to $30 per barrel, the OSA is expected to accumulate about 1.2 percent of GDP, assuming
the price of oil averages US$35 per barrel. The saving in the OSA is expected to continue to
provide adequate expenditure coverage in the event of an unforeseen drop in international
oil prices.

- 55 -

ATTACHMENT I

19.
Fiscal spending will rise rapidly in 2005, reflecting peace-related expenditures and
our efforts to strengthen Sudan’s federal system through greater decentralization. The 2005
budget envisages an increase in federal government transfers to the states (including to the
south) from 1.6 percent of GDP in 2004 to about 8.4 percent in 2005, of which, about
4.6 percent of GDP will be allocated to south Sudan for the south’s share of oil revenues
and the remainder to other states. We plan an across the board expenditure restraint to
accommodate these higher transfers. Plans to implement the wage increase have been put on
hold and public sector wages are projected to fall slightly in relation to GDP. In anticipation
of an improved security environment, we have also reduced the allocations for emergency
defense-related spending, as captured under the item “general reserve” in the budget.
20.
We envisage a number of structural reforms on the fiscal front. To improve tax
administration further, a medium taxpayers’ unit will be established by end-June 2005. The
cash management unit will be strengthened along the lines recommended by Fund technical
assistance. In addition, we have prepared a two-year plan to move towards a single treasury
account. As a first step, a single treasury account for all of Ministry of Finance operations
will be set up by mid-2005. A two-year program to adopt economic and functional budget
classification system (in line with the 2001 GFS classifications) has also been approved. In
2005, as a pilot project, we will begin implementation of GFS budget classification in two
federal ministries and two states and we will formulate the 2006 budget in line with the
GFS classification.
Monetary Policy and Financial System
21.
The program will target a broad money growth rate of 28 percent in 2005, consistent
with GDP growth and inflation objectives, and an increase in money demand reflecting the
reintegration of the south. The monetary target and the projected build-up in foreign
reserves should allow for an appropriate growth rate of credit to the non-governmental
sector. The conduct of monetary policy will be challenging given a number of uncertainties,
including the impact of the post-conflict activities (e.g., the introduction of new currency),
the size of the private capital movements, oil export receipts, and aid flows. Accordingly,
we expect to reassess the broad money growth target during program reviews to ensure that
it remains in line with the program’s inflation objectives.
22.
The conduct of monetary policy will continue to rely on indirect monetary
instruments and no restrictions will be imposed on market financing rates and banks’ credit
allocations. In addition, the lending to public enterprises (including for agriculture) will
remain curtailed. However, the BOS will continue to assist in managing, but not extending,
the financial support provided by the government to agriculture, given the
underdevelopment of the agriculture finance infrastructure in Sudan at present. By
mid-2005, we intend to rely completely on open market operations for supporting banks’
liquidity needs. To support this objective, all government securities will be issued through
competitive auction process. We have also closed the cost-free overdraft window for the
government, and lending to the government will be carried out solely through government

- 56 -

ATTACHMENT I

securities. Finally, direct lending to banks will be limited to support surges in seasonal
credit demands.
23.
We will continue to pursue our plan to restructure and strengthen the banking
system. Commercial banks’ minimum capital requirements will be raised from
SDD 3 billion to SDD 6 billion with banks required to meet the new capital requirement by
end-2008. Under performing banks will be encouraged to either merge, transform
themselves into small-specialized banks, or will be close. Foreign banks are allowed to
operate freely in Sudan, and a number of new foreign banks are expected to commence
operations in 2005. We plan to prepare a new financial sector reform program by
end-December in light of the recommendations of the recently concluded Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) and the mandates of the peace agreement.
24.
We are committed to maintaining an exchange system that is free of restrictions on
the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions in accordance
with our acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s
Articles of Agreement. We understand that further evaluation from the Fund’s Monetary
and Financial Systems and Legal Departments is required to ascertain compliance with
Article VIII obligations and we are determined to implement any actions that may be
required for that purpose. We are committed to implementing a managed float exchange
rate regime that prevents sharp fluctuations in the exchange rate. In 2005, the dinar may
continue to face appreciation pressures in light of the projected large foreign exchange (oil
and aid-related) inflows, but we may resort to monetary sterilization to prevent an excessive
appreciation that could undermine the recent recovery of non-oil exports and our efforts to
diversify Sudan’s economy away from oil dependency.
Trade and External Debt
25.
We remain committed to an open trade regime. The current liberal non-tariff trade
barrier regime will be maintained. We are also planning a new three-year import tariff
reform program that will further reduce tariff protection, and will bring Sudan’s tariff
regime in line with the schedule mandated by the Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa (COMESA) customs union agreement. However, because of the exceptional
demands of peace on fiscal resources and uncertainties about donor support, we will
postpone the launching of the new tariff reform program until 2006. In this context, we also
received an exemption to delay any additional tariff reductions from the COMESA
obligations for 2005. We will proceed to update the tariff reform proposal prepared in 2004
and incorporate it in the 2006 budget.
26.
Sudan continues to pursue actively its application for accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO). It has presented all the required documentation to the WTO working
party. Sudan has also applied for exemptions from agreement on Trade-related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and customs duties on agricultural goods and some
industrial products, and asked for a transitional period to implement all obligations.

- 57 -

ATTACHMENT I

27.
Sudan’s external debt is unsustainable by any standard, and most of it is in arrears.
The estimated end-2003 stock of public and publicly guaranteed debt was about
US$25 billion, of which about US$21 billion was in arrears. Solving the debt and arrears
problems is an important goal for the Government of Sudan and we are looking forward to
the Fund’s early update of the 2001 Board paper on resolving Sudan’s external debt
problems. Without an early resolution to this problem, Sudan will be denied access to
concessional development assistance at a time when it is most needed to support the peace
efforts in Sudan. In 2004, we had to contract or guarantee new external financing on
nonconcessional terms in order to implement critical social and development projects, such
as supply of water and electricity. In 2005, we will limit the contracting or guaranteeing of
nonconcessional external loan to US$150 million only, for high priority projects, mainly in
the social sector.
Other reforms
28.
We are taking a number steps to encourage private sector participation in the
economy. On the public enterprise front, we have adopted a reform program to privatize
about 42 enterprises most of which operate on a commercial basis and do not receive
budgetary support (e.g., the Sugar Trading Company, the Sudanese Company for
construction, Shibak Transportation Company, Nile Cement Company), and convert other
large enterprises to shareholding companies with the government’s share limited to a
maximum of 20 percent (e.g., Sudan Airways and the National Company for Roads and
Bridges). All other economic activities are open to private sector participation; foreign
investors are treated at par with local ones; an anti-trust law has been prepared and a legal
review to modernize our commercial laws and legal institutions is underway.
29.
With the expected rise in oil production, we are fully aware of the importance of
continuously improving oil sector transparency, and we remain committed to this objective.
One important milestone will be the establishment (as stipulated in the peace agreement) of
a new National Petroleum Commission that will oversee all oil sector activities and report
to parliament. The commission is expected to be constituted in mid-year and will begin
reviewing immediately the existing oil operations and the process of managing oil revenues.
The Commission is also mandated to prepare a national policy for future oil sector
activities. In the meantime, the SPC will begin the process of changing its accounting
standards with a view to aligning them with the applicable commercial accounting
standards in Sudan.
30.
As detailed below, our medium-term policies will focus on poverty alleviation and
development. To this end, we are preparing an interim Poverty Eradication Strategy (PES),
which is meant to provide a foundation for a full PES for the new national unity
government. It stresses on relevant and flexible policies that ensure macroeconomic
framework consistent with post-conflict challenges, decentralization, an enabling
environment for private sector growth, and capacity and institutional building.

- 58 -

IV.

ATTACHMENT I

MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK AND POLICIES

31.
Our medium-term strategy is based on sustaining the high economic growth and
macroeconomic stability achieved in recent years, while focusing on poverty alleviation (in
the context of pursuing the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)) and post-conflict
recovery. Structural reforms that enable private-sector led growth, coupled with public
investments in health and education and key infrastructure will allow growth to be sustained
over a longer horizon, while a reorientation of public expenditures will allow for increased
spending on poverty reducing programs. International donor assistance will be critical for
the attainment of the growth and poverty reduction objectives, by supporting the balance of
payments needs and higher investment levels for reconstruction, infrastructure and human
capital development.
32.
The medium-term macroeconomic framework envisages economic growth of about
8–9 percent and prudent macroeconomic policies that ensure single digit inflation and a
steady build up in international reserves. We anticipate economic growth to be broad-based
across all economic sectors to ensure economic diversity. A surge in oil production and
post-conflict activities will spur growth in the next two years, while over the longer term the
economy will diversify away from oil as sectoral policy reforms begin to yield results.
Achieving the growth objectives would require higher domestic investment rates and
greater reliance on foreign savings. Gross domestic investment is expected to rise by about
3 percentage points of GDP reflecting a substantial increase in public spending (at all levels
of government), particularly on reconstruction in the south.
33.
The external position is likely to worsen over the medium term. On a cash basis, the
external current account deficit will rise from 4 percent of GDP in 2004 to about 6 percent
in 2006 and stabilize at that level thereafter, as both oil export growth tapers off and postconflict import needs mount. We expect private inflows (transfers and FDIs) to remain
strong and responsive to our policies, especially given the assumption of peace, and to
continue playing an important role in funding the balance of payment. Nevertheless, a
significant external gap is likely to emerge without international donor support. We are
hopeful that this support will be forthcoming in the near future. However, in the unfortunate
event that such support falls short of what is needed, we will tighten our policies to the
extent possible and, if necessary, aim for less ambitious build up of international reserves.
As a result economic growth and poverty reduction efforts will be adversely affected and
the vulnerability of our external position will rise.
34.
Fiscal policy will aim at maintaining low domestically financed deficit to support
macroeconomic stability, mobilize new domestic resources, reorient expenditures towards
infrastructure development, human capital improvement, poverty reducing programs, and
support the decentralization process. The continued savings of oil revenues will ensure
fiscal stability in the face of unexpected oil price shocks, and facilitate macroeconomic
stability. Strengthening non-oil revenues will remain a priority and we aim to raise these
revenues, at a minimum, from about 10 percent of GDP in 2004 to about 12 percent by
2010, notwithstanding the expected customs revenue loss from the planned tariff reform

- 59 -

ATTACHMENT I

(about 1 percent of GDP). Measures will include a further reduction in exemptions,
broadening of the tax base, phasing back the excise tax on petroleum products, and
strengthening tax and customs administration. On the expenditure side, the focus will be on
supporting demobilization and fiscal decentralization, reducing military spending subject to
the Demobilization, disarmament and reintegration program (DDR), and channeling
substantially higher resources to social programs (in line with the poverty alleviation goals)
and development spending (particularly on much needed basic infrastructure).
35.
Monetary policy will continue to target a broad money growth rate consistent with
the inflation and economic growth objectives. The existing monetary regime, in close
coordination with fiscal policy, should be adequate to support the achievement of
macroeconomic objectives while responding to the challenges of monetary policy in coming
years. These challenges include potentially large private capital movements, oil export
receipts, aid flows, and unforeseen fiscal shocks (at the federal and state levels).
36.
We believe that a managed-float exchange rate regime remains appropriate for
Sudan over the medium-term, although we foresee a steady move towards an independent
floating regime as conditions improve in the foreign exchange market. The maintenance of
the current system is justified because of the lumpy nature of key foreign exchange flows
(aid flows, and FDIs), and the underdevelopment of foreign exchange markets and
instruments. Still, we will ensure that the exchange rate remains responsive to underlying
fundamentals to avoid exchange rate misalignments.
37.
We would like to express our appreciation for the technical assistance extended by
the Fund to Sudan in different fields, and we hope for a continuation of this valuable and
indispensable assistance, particularly in support of the post conflict needs. In the central
banking area, technical assistance is needed for the introduction of new currency, central
banking restructuring and bank regulations to accommodate the dual banking system,
monetary operations, and payment systems. As for the fiscal area, we are in need for
technical assistance in development of a public expenditure management strategy, budget
accounting and classification, fiscal decentralization, government securities, tax policy, tax
and customs administration, and modernization of treasury. In addition, the statistical
macroeconomic database needs to be improved and technical assistance in the areas of
fiscal statistics, balance of payments; management of monetary data for banking
supervision, and national accounts is needed to improve further the macroeconomic
database.
V.

RELATIONS WITH THE FUND AND OTHER CREDITORS

38.
We remain committed to regularizing relations with all our creditors and, in
particular, strengthening Sudan’s relations with the Fund. In addition to strong cooperation
with the Fund on economic policy matters, including through satisfactory performance on
SMPs since 1997, Sudan made regular payments to the Fund as committed under the 2004
SMP ($30 million), and paid a total of $366 million since the first SMP in 1997, reducing

- 60 -

ATTACHMENT I

our arrears by about 120 million SDRs. We hope that our record of cooperation will be fully
recognized, particularly when moving forward with arrears clearance.
39.
In 2005, Sudan’s debt service capacity will be constrained by the considerable
burden of post-conflict needs and emergency imports for Darfur. Any shortfall (or even a
delay) in donor assistance or a negative shock in oil prices would further limit our capacity
to service its debt obligations. As continued proof of our commitment to normalize our
relations with the Fund and notwithstanding the demands of peace and imports for Darfur
emergency, we would like to maintain the level of payments to the Fund at US$30 million
in 2005.
40.
We are making good progress in regularizing relations with external creditors but
clearance of large arrears remains a daunting challenge. Partial debt service payments are
being made to almost all of the multilateral creditors. Sudan is also servicing its obligations
to a number of bilateral Arab funds, which in most cases are providing net financing inflows
for various social sector projects. Finally, we will work closely with the creditor support
group led by the United Kingdom to secure the support of donors for resolving our external
debt problem under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative.
VI.

PROGRAM MONITORING

The proposed semi-annual quantitative targets for the periods up to end-June and endDecember 2005 are set forth in Table 1, and the structural benchmarks are detailed in
Table 2. The quantitative targets focus on ceilings on the change in net domestic assets of the
BOS and the domestic financing of the fiscal deficit; floors for the buildup of international
reserves; and ceilings on new nonconcessional external debt. There is an oil revenue adjustor
to be applied to the targets on international reserves, net domestic assets of the BOS, and the
domestic financing of the government based on any difference between the projected change
in the balance of the oil savings account and the actual change. We will closely monitor
financial and economic developments in coming months and will implement any measures
that may be needed to safeguard macroeconomic stability in consultation with the Fund staff.

- 61 -

ATTACHMENT I

Table 1. Sudan: Quantitative Indicative Targets for 2005 Staff-Monitored Program
(In billions of Sudanese dinars; unless otherwise indicated)

Dec.
2004
Actual 2/

Bank of Sudan net domestic assets 3/

Cumulative Change During 2005 1/
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Quarter
Indicative
Mid-year
Indicative
End-year
Target
Program
Target
Program

129.5

20.5

11.8

19.7

14.3

-100.4
0.0

-4.0
4.3

-6.3
6

-6.4
9

-17.5
10.0

310.2
1,334
32.4

...
80.0
...

...
180.0
15.0

...
280.0
...

150.0
420.0
30.0

Broad money 3/

960.4

78.9

128.0

193.3

268.9

Oil saving account

129.0

18.4

32.7

49.8

72.6

Domestic financing of the fiscal deficit 4/
Privatization
Contracting or guaranteeing of external nonconcessional
debt by government and BOS (in millions of U.S. dollars) 5/
Gross official usable reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6/
Payments to the Fund (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:

1/ Cumulative change from end of the previous year.
2/ Outstanding stock at end-of year.
3/ Net BOS financing is defined as borrowing by the central bank from the BOS (including GMCs) minus central government
deposits at the BOS (excluding deposits accumulation in the OSA).
4/ Defined as total net borrowing by the government, including net borrowing from the Bank of Sudan (including GMCs and
changes in deposits of the central government with the BOS but excluding the OSA), net sales of GMCs outside the BOS,
revenues from privatization, and repayments of internal domestic debts.
5/ This indicative target applies not only to debt as defined in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect
to Foreign Debt (Decision No. 12274 - (00/85), August 24, 2000), but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which
value has not been received. Debt will be deemed to be concessional when the currency-specific discount rate (determined by the
market-related "commercial interest reference rates (CIRR)" as published by the OECD) applied to the contractual schedule of
charges and principal payments, indicates a grant element of at least 35 percent. The indicative target excludes the financing of the
Merowe hydropower project.
6/ Include foreign banknotes in the vaults of the BOS.
7/ Central government expenditure on medical care; health services; poor students' support; supplement to poor consumers of
electricity; social and health insurance; water, health, and education development.

- 62 -

ATTACHMENT I

Table 2. Sudan: Structural Benchmarks for 2005
Prior Actions
1. Begin pilot implementation of GFS budget classification in two states and two federal
ministries.
By end-June 2005
2.

Introduce an auction system with competitive selling price for the General Musharaka
Certificates (GMC) and General Investment Certificates (GIC) securities in the primary
market.

3.

Set up and operationalize a single treasury account for all Ministry of Finance’s
operations.

4.

Establish a Medium Taxpayer Unit.

5.

Develop a program (including timetable) for aligning the SPC and its subsidiaries’
accounting systems with commercial standards by end 2006.

By end-December 2005
6.

Formulate the 2006 budget based on GFS classification.

7.

Prepare a three-year import tariff reform program and incorporate it in the 2006 budget.

8.

Establish a new financing window that allows liquidity constrained banks to sell
securities to the central bank at a penalty rate.

9.

Prepare a financial sector reform program in light of FSAP recommendations.

- 63 -

ATTACHMENT I

SUDAN
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
This memorandum specifies the understanding reached with the Fund staff regarding
the quantitative benchmarks and indicative targets for the 2005 Staff-Monitored Program
(SMP).
2.
The 2005 SMP relies on five quantitative indicative targets for the first and the third
quarters of the year and an equal number of quantitative semi-annual benchmarks. The
indicative targets and the quantitative benchmarks are subject to an oil revenue adjustor. The
quantitative targets are (i) ceilings on the change in net domestic assets of the Bank of Sudan
(BOS); (ii) ceilings on the domestic financing of the fiscal deficit; (iii) floors for the buildup
of gross usable reserves of the central bank; (iv) ceilings on new nonconcessional external
loans contracted or guaranteed by the government or the central bank; and (v) floors for
payments to the Fund. Broad money and oil revenues will be monitored as memorandum
items. All the targets and benchmarks are presented in Attachment I, Table 1.
3.
The relevant definitions for the quantitative indicative targets and the oil revenue
adjustor are set out hereafter.
4.
Net domestic assets (NDA) of the BOS are defined as the sum of the Net Domestic
Credit of the BOS, the net issue of money market instruments and other items net (OIN) of
the BOS. The Net Domestic Credit of the BOS is defined as total credit to the central
government (including government musharaka certificates (GMCs) and government
investment certificates (GICs)) minus total central government deposits with the BOS plus
BOS claims on public enterprises plus BOS claims on banks. The definition of the central
government comprises all accounts of the line ministries and agencies controlled by them
(corresponding to Group no. 11, Group no. 12, and some accounts of the Group no. 19 in the
BOS general ledger), the Zakat funds (recorded under Group no. 13), and margin deposits
placed with BOS by the central government against letters of credit issued by the BOS. The
definition includes all oil-related accounts controlled by the government. The identification
of all accounting balances recorded under OIN has been established with the help of the
IMF’s Statistics Department mission in May 2000 and is detailed in the corresponding
report.
5.
Domestic financing of the fiscal deficit is defined as total net domestic borrowing
by the central government, including net borrowing from the banking system (including
GMCs and GICs), net sales of GMCs and GICs outside the banking system; revenues from
privatization; and repayments by the central government of internal domestic debts to public
agencies, banks, and private companies. The definition of central government for the
purpose of this criterion is the same as the one applied for the NDA of the BOS.
6.
Gross usable official reserves are foreign reserve assets (as defined in the balance of
payments manual), that are controlled by the BOS and are immediately and unconditionally

- 64 -

ATTACHMENT I

available for meeting balance-of-payment needs. They consist of balances on accounts
maintained with overseas correspondent banks and foreign exchange banknotes in the vaults
of the BOS.
7.
Contracting or guaranteeing of new non-concessional external debt by the
government or the BOS applies not only to debt as defined in point no. 9 of the Guidelines
on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision no. 12274-(00/85),
August 24, 2000), but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed, for which value has
not been received. Debt will be deemed to be concessional when the currency-specific
discount rate applied to the contractual schedule of charges and principal payments, indicates
a grant element of at least 35 percent.32
8.
Broad money is defined as the sum of local currency circulating outside of the
banks, banks’ demand, and time and savings deposits. It also includes transferable deposits
and margin deposits against letters of credit placed by the local government, nonfinancial
public enterprises, and the nonbank private sector with the BOS.
9.
The oil revenue adjustor will be applied as follows: oil revenue arising from an
export price of over $30 per barrel for crude oil exports, f.o.b. Port Sudan, will be deposited
in a government account at the BOS. However, amounts will be transferred, if necessary, to
the government, at least on a quarterly basis, to ensure that government oil export receipts
match the amounts targeted under the program. The program targets for domestic financing
of the budget deficit and for changes in the NDA of the central bank will be reduced, and the
international reserve target will be raised by the difference between programmed and actual
revenues accumulated in the oil savings account. In the event of oil revenue shortfalls below
the program targets, the accumulated balance at the BOS can be drawn down to make up the
shortfall in revenue; correspondingly, the program targets for domestic financing of the
budget deficit and NDA will be raised, and the international reserve target reduced.

32

For program purposes, a loan is considered concessional if the grant element is at least 35 percent calculated
using a discount factor based on the Commercial Interest Reference Rates (CIRRs) published by the OECD
plus margins depending on the loan maturity. The margins are 0.75 percent for repayment periods of less than
15 years, 1 percent for 15–19 years, 1.15 percent for 20–29 years, and 1.25 percent for 30 years or more. The
average of the CIRRs over the last ten years will be used for loans with a maturity of at least 15 years and the
average of the CIRRs for the preceding six months will be used for shorter maturities.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/67
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
May 25, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Sudan
On April 29, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Sudan.1
Background
After more than two decades of civil conflict between the north and south of Sudan, a
comprehensive peace agreement was concluded and signed between the Government of
Sudan (GOS) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) on January 9, 2005.
The peace agreement stipulates the creation of a federal system and the sharing of power and
resources between the North and southern Sudan.
The Sudanese economy continued to grow in 2004. Real GDP growth is estimated to increase
from 6 percent in 2003 to 7.3 percent in 2004 owing to a strong performance in the oil,
manufacturing construction, power, and services sectors. Improvement in productive capacity
led to a 21 percent expansion in oil sector’s GDP. Inflation rose to 8.4 percent in 2004
compared to 6.5 percent in 2003 reflecting loosening of monetary policy in the first half of
2004. The external current account deficit declined to an estimated 4.1 percent of GDP in 2004
from 5 percent in 2003, reflecting a surge in oil export receipts as well as strong recovery of
non-oil export. Further, FDIs and private transfers rose to $2.5 billion—more than one third
higher than in 2003. Gross official reserves reached 2.9 months of imports at end-2004
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2compared with 1.5 months at end-2003. The dinar appreciated by about 3 percent vis-à-vis the
U.S. dollar and by about 8 percent in real effective terms.
Higher oil and non-oil revenues have turned the overall fiscal balance into a surplus in 2003
and 2004, despite higher spending. Total fiscal revenues reached 21.5 percent of GDP in 2004
compared to 16.8 percent of GDP in 2003. Non-oil revenues rose from 8 percent of GDP in
2003 to 10.4 percent in 2004, largely because of improved efficiency from the new large
taxpayer unit, a reduction on exemptions, and a telecom license fee. Oil revenues continued to
increase in 2004 mainly because of higher production and prices, which allowed1.6 percent of
GDP accumulation in the oil savings account. Expenditures also rose because of unanticipated
emergency spending and capital outlays.
Broad money growth decelerated in December 2004 to 30.8 percent (after accelerating at an
annual rate of 37 percent in the first half of 2004), compared to 30.3 percent (on annual basis)
at 2003. In an attempt to contain the excessive growth of broad money, the central bank took
steps to mop up liquidity in late 2004.
Sudan embarked on a number of policy and institutional reforms in recent years aimed at
sustaining economic growth, maintaining macroeconomic stability, and meeting the challenges
of the peace agreement with the south. On the fiscal front, a review of exemptions-granting
regulations and agreements was completed and an action plan to streamline such regulations
is being developed. Regarding monetary and financial sector reforms, the central bank has
improved the management and monitoring of liquidity and the increase in minimum capital
requirements for banks has been effected. A tariff reform program has been developed but its
implementation has been delayed to 2006 because of the fiscal needs arising from the peace
agreement. Oil sector transparency has improved; the Auditor General office has audited the
accounts of the Sudan Petroleum Corporation and submitted his report to Parliament.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Sudanese authorities for persevering with prudent fiscal
and monetary policies and wide-ranging structural reforms in a difficult environment. These
policies have translated into a favorable economic performance, marked by a pickup in foreign
investment, a strengthening of the external position, and single-digit inflation. While oil
production increased sharply, growth of the non-oil sector has also been strong—evidencing
progress in diversifying the economy.
Directors welcomed the recent comprehensive peace agreement in south Sudan, and were
encouraged by the positive response from the donor community for Sudan’s reconstruction
and development. At the same time, Directors recognized the serious challenges ahead in
ensuring the successful implementation of the peace agreement, and, in particular, in resolving
the conflict and humanitarian crisis in Darfur. They stressed that decisive action in these areas
will be key to allowing Sudan to realize its full economic potential, move towards normalizing
its relations with creditors, and make progress toward reaching the Millennium Development
Goals.

-3Directors welcomed the satisfactory implementation of the staff-monitored program in 2004
and the policy package embedded in the program for 2005. They noted that the
implementation of the peace agreement will require strong efforts in institution building, and
that its cost could put pressure on the 2005 economic program, while uncertainties also remain
related to oil prices and the amount of donor support. In this regard, Directors recognized that
the economic program and the budget for 2005 will likely need to be revised to take into
account recent developments.
Most Directors supported the view that the policy commitments under the staff-monitored
program for 2005 continue to be in line with what would be required for a Rights Accumulation
Program (RAP). In this view, Sudan’s performance under the successive Staff Monitored
Programs since 2002 should be reflected in the timetable for arrears clearance, when
financing assurances from Sudan’s creditors become available. A number of Directors
suggested that the RAP could be waived at that time. In the meantime, staff engagement will
continue, including by stepping up Fund technical assistance in core areas that will be critical
for the effective implementation of the peace accord.
Directors commended the authorities’ prudent fiscal policy in the last few years, which has
been supported by tax reforms and the saving of oil revenues in the Oil Savings Account
(OSA). They welcomed the cautious approach set out in the 2005 budget, including the
postponement of the increase in civil service wages. Directors noted that the authorities’
decision to strengthen fiscal federalism by accelerating decentralization calls for the urgent
strengthening of state and local government capacity. Given the need to protect social and
infrastructure spending, Directors urged continued efforts at strengthening public expenditure
management and restraining non-priority spending. On the revenue side, further efforts to
boost non-oil receipts by broadening the tax base and improving tax collection will continue to
be a priority. Some Directors suggested preparing contingency measures in the event that oil
prices and donor support are lower than envisaged.
Regarding oil revenues, Directors called for increased transparency in oil sector operations.
Some Directors suggested that transparency would be enhanced through Sudan’s
participation in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
Directors commended Sudan’s continued prudent monetary policy. In light of emerging fiscal
and monetary pressures, they urged the authorities to remain vigilant and tighten monetary
conditions if inflationary risks emerge. They noted the importance of a closer coordination
between the central bank and the fiscal authorities (including at the state level) as well as the
need for establishing market-oriented operations in government securities.
Directors welcomed the recent measures to increase exchange rate flexibility and considered
the managed float exchange rate regime appropriate at the current stage of Sudan’s
development. Following the delay in launching the three-year tariff reform program, it will be
important to incorporate these reforms in the 2006 budget to help reduce distortions, increase
competitiveness, and send a strong signal to investors about Sudan’s commitment to an open
trade regime.

-4Directors agreed with the conclusions of Sudan’s Financial Sector Stability Assessment.
They welcomed the steps already taken to improve the banking system, and encouraged the
authorities to press ahead with the implementation of the Financial Sector Assessment
Program recommendations. Priorities should be to improve the ratios on nonperforming loans
and capital adequacy, and to press ahead with the privatization of public banks and the
financial sector reforms associated with the implementation of the peace agreement. Directors
welcomed the recent legislation on anti-money laundering and combating the financing of
terrorism, while encouraging further efforts to address any remaining weaknesses in the legal
framework.
Directors expressed concern about the contracting of nonconcessional debt in 2004.
They stressed that even though Sudan’s needs are high, the authorities should minimize
nonconcessional borrowing to avoid aggravating the external debt overhang and complicating
debt rescheduling negotiations. Directors expressed the strong hope that the implementation
of the planned improvements in the authorities’ debt management strategy will effectively deal
with this problem. They also stressed the importance of a comparable treatment of all bilateral
creditors.
Directors welcomed the progress made in improving economic data, as well as Sudan’s
participation in the General Data Dissemination System. They underscored the importance of
moving ahead with the adoption of Government Finance Statistics methodology and of
improving the quality of balance of payments and national accounts data.
Directors noted that the regularization of Sudan’s relations with creditors remains a critical
challenge given the country’s large stock of external debt and arrears, and will require
comprehensive efforts from all creditors. To help guide future discussions, Directors felt that it
would be useful to fully update the paper presented in 2002 on the Fundamental Issues in
Resolving Sudan’s Debt and Arrears. In this connection, while some Directors noted that it
could be premature to enter into detailed discussions of an arrears clearance strategy at this
time, some other Directors called for early concrete steps toward addressing these issues.
More generally, many Directors stressed that progress in resolving Sudan’s debt and arrears
problems requires a satisfactory solution of the Darfur crisis and implementation of the peace
agreement. With respect to the level of payments to the Fund, some Directors encouraged the
authorities to consider increasing payments in 2006 in line with Sudan’s improved debt
servicing capacity. However, other Directors felt that the current level of payments remains
broadly appropriate, given the substantial demands of implementing the peace process,
including the large social and infrastructure needs.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

Sudan: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000–04
2001

2002

2003

Est.
2004

(Annual changes in percent)
Domestic economy
Real GDP growth
End-of-period CPI Inflation
Average CPI Inflation

6.1
7.4
4.9

6.0
8.3
8.3

6.0
8.3
7.7

7.3
8.4
8.4

(In percent of GDP)
Financial variables
Total revenue
Total expenditure
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
Overall balance (cash) 1/
Broad money (change in percent)
Reserve money (change in percent)

11.0
11.9
9.6
2.3
-0.9
24.7
3.7

12.1
13.0
9.9
3.1
-0.8
30.3
22.0

16.8
15.8
12.7
3.1
1.0
30.3
26.6

21.5
20.2
14.8
5.4
1.3
30.8
27.8

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, c.i.f.
External current account balance 2/
In percent of GDP
Real effective exchange rate (end of
period, change in percent)

1,699
-2,031
-1,289
-9.9
8.0

1,949
-2,153
-918
-6.2

2,577
-2,536
-827
-4.9

3,778
-3,586
-833
-4.2

-2.0

-4.5

7.7

Sources: Data provided by the Sudanese authorities, IMF staff estimates.
1/ Including accumulation in the oil savings account (OSA).
2/ On a cash basis, excluding public interest due and public transfers.

Statement by Peter Ngumbullu, Executive Director for Sudan
and John Mafararikwa Senior Advisor to Executive Director
April 29, 2005

Key points
• The Sudanese signed a comprehensive peace agreement in early January 2005 and
negotiations are underway to resolve the disturbances in Darfur.
• The authorities are calling for the removal of the remaining sanctions on Sudan to allow the
country a fast take-off.
• Permanent peace and the ongoing broad based high economic growth will help Sudan reach
the MDGs and reduce poverty if adequate external assistance, including debt relief is
delivered in a timely manner.
• The authorities are grateful for the generous donor pledges made in Oslo and urge for timely
disbursement of these resources.
• Performance under the 2004 SMP and the program for 2005 meet the strength of a RAP and
performance since 2002 has been of similar strength.
• Payments to the Fund have exceeded those needed to stabilize arrears.
• To meet immediate demands arising from the peace agreement, the humanitarian situation in
Darfur and drought relief, wage increases and other important outlays have been postponed
and payments to the Fund will remain at their level of 2004.
• Due to lack of access to development financing, Sudan has been forced to contact nonconcessional loans to finance growth enhancing investments.
• Sudan’s debt is unsustainable. The net present value of debt is 850 percent of exports, far
exceeding the 150 percent under the HIPC Initiative.
• Sudan has met all the conditions (policies and payments) of a RAP since 2002. The Fund
should now move speedily to facilitate the clearance of Sudan’s arrears and allow the
country to forgo RAP and move directly to PRGF and HIPC.
• Debt relief and access to humanitarian and development assistance is critical to sustain peace
in Sudan.

Introduction
On January 9, 2005 the Sudanese signed a comprehensive peace agreement, bringing finality
to a prolonged civil conflict, in which more than a million human beings perished and several
millions others were displaced. The authorities are engaged in negotiations to bring lasting
peace to Darfur and the rest of the country. This removes a major obstacle for socioeconomic development and effective utilization of aid. With permanent peace, Sudan now
has all the basic ingredients that enhance its potential and chance to reach the MDGs,
including a diverse resource base and a committed leadership with solid track record of
pursuing and implementing prudent macroeconomic and structural policies. In fact, the
medium-term outlook envisages real GDP growth rates of 8-9 percent, exceeding the
minimum rate for reaching the MDGs. Already between 2001-2004 real GDP growth rate
averaged 6.4 percent and is expected to accelerate to 8.3 percent in 2005.

-2These positive developments should now be followed and complemented by fast delivery of
technical assistance for human and institutional capacity building in the new environment
and adequate and timely development and humanitarian assistance. This will help cement
peace while fast tracking the country towards poverty reduction and reaching the MDGs. In
this regard, the recent donor conference in Oslo, Norway, was timely and the authorities
thank development partners for their generous pledges while urging them for timely
disbursement. The authorities are also requesting those countries that still maintain sanctions
against Sudan to remove them and assist the authorities the country make progress in dealing
with the current challenges.
The Fund has a critical role to play in unlocking development assistance and facilitating debt
relief. The authorities have been implementing RAP equivalent policies and payments under
successive Staff Monitored Programs (SMP) since 2002. With this solid performance and the
peace agreement, the authorities are requesting the Fund to facilitate clearing arrears
immediately and allow Sudan to forgo the Rights Accumulation Program (RAP) and move
speedily to a PRGF and HIPC Initiative simultaneously.
Performance in 2004 and the 2005 SMP
Performance under the 2004 SMP was broadly in line with the program. All quantitative
benchmarks were met with the exception of the contraction of non-concessional loans, which
was necessitated by lack of access to financing at appropriate terms and the need to finance
immediate needs of the economy. Structural benchmarks were broadly implemented and
some were post-poned to take into account the peace agreement and to provide room for
adequate preparation. Both the performance during 2004 and commitments under the 2005
SMP are equivalent in strength to that required under a RAP.
Output Growth
Real GDP growth accelerated to 7.3 percent in 2004, reflecting the continued implementation
of strong policies. While oil output surged, growth remains broad based, with strong
performance of agriculture manufacturing, construction, power and services sectors. This
diversification of growth provides assurances that monetary, structural and exchange rate
policies have been appropriately managed to avoid a Dutch Disease following the discovery
of oil. Real GDP growth is projected to accelerate to 8.3 percent in 2005. The major sources
of growth are the significant increase in oil production and private and public investment in
infrastructure. Nevertheless, non-oil GDP will be adversely affected by reduced crop
production due to weak rainfall in many parts of the country.
Fiscal Performance
The humanitarian and security situation in Darfur prompted the authorities to increase
expenditure through a supplementary budget. Also, reflecting the ongoing return of economic
activities to most parts of the country, capital outlays increased from 3.1 percent of GDP in
2003 to 5.4 percent in 2004. As a result, total expenditures increased from 15.8 percent of
GDP in 2003 to 20.2 percent in 2004. The authorities stepped up their effort to mobilize

-3domestic resources. The establishment of a large taxpayers’ unit improved efficiency in
revenue mobilization, while the reduction in exemptions and a new telecom license fee
broadened the tax base. As a result non-oil revenue increased from 8 percent of GDP in 2003
to 10 percent in 2004, exceeding the program target of 9 percent. The oil stabilization
account continues to serve the country well. Given the increased oil prices, the authorities
also increased their contributions to the oil stabilization account above the program target.
The overall fiscal balance recorded a surplus of 1.3 percent of GDP compared to a deficit of
1.2 percent under the program, obviating the need for new net domestic financing.
In 2005 the country is facing a number of expenditure pressures. To accommodate the peace
process, transfers to the South are increasing as well decentralization-related transfers to
other states. Given the tight domestic resource envelope, a planned civil service wage
increase and allocations to social sectors, infrastructure and general reserves have had to be
postponed until additional financing is identified. On the revenue side, in view of the increase
in international oil prices, which will also increase revenue, the OSA benchmark price was
raised to accommodate pressing needs. Further increase in revenue will rely more on
structural measures to broaden the base and improve efficiency. In the sprit of nursing the
nascent political stability and consolidating implementation of the peace agreement, raising
taxes has not been considered as an option in 2005, and for the same reasons, the excise tax
on domestic petroleum products was reduced to mitigate the social impact of the ongoing
increase in oil prices. In anticipation of a clearer picture emerging from the ongoing
formation of a National Government, demand on transfers to cope with the return of
displaced persons, progress in Darfur, the extend of donor support, among others, it is
anticipated that a supplementary budget would be appropriate around the middle of the year
to accommodate unfunded expenditure needs while identifying additional financing.
Monetary policy
High FDI inflows and oil export revenues posed challenges for liquidity management during
the first half of 2004. however, in the second half of the year, monetary conditions were
tightened through open market operations, foreign exchange sales, increase in reserve
requirements and calling back of loans extended to banks. Consequently broad money
growth decelerated and inflation was contained at 8.4 percent, slightly above the 7.7 percent
of 2003. Banking system indicators improved, with the ratio of nonperforming loans falling
and profitability and capital adequacy ratio increasing.
In 2005, average inflation is projected to be contained at 7.5 percent. The authorities are
gearing for potential monetary shocks emanating from the introduction of a new currency,
aid flows, oil export receipts, large capital inflows and a structural increase in the demand for
money associated with the reintegration of the South. These developments will require active
monitoring by the BOS and closer coordination with the central government and the
government of the South. The authorities will review the situation in mid-year and will need
technical assistance to cope with these challenges.

-4External sector
Oil exports grew by 50 percent and non-oil grew by a strong 37 percent. The country also
benefited from higher transfers from abroad and FDI inflows. As a result, the current account
deficit declined to 4.1 percent of GDP and foreign exchange reserves increased from 1.5
months of imports at end-2003 to 2.9 months at end-2004. Measures were taken to enhance
exchange rate flexibility; the band for daily exchange rate fluctuations was widened to ±3
percent while some restrictions on the amount of foreign exchange traded were removed.
Although the local currency appreciated somehow against the US$, this did not jeopardize
competitiveness, given that it was underpinned by strong fundamentals and prudent monetary
and exchange rate policies. The export sector therefore remains vibrant and competitive, as
reflected by high growth of non-oil exports.
Oil and non-oil exports, especially cotton and meat, are projected to grow rapidly in 2005.
However, imports are expected to grow faster, led by post-conflict related needs as well as
investment related imports. Notwithstanding the continued capital inflows, and projected
humanitarian aid and project financing, the outlook is clouded with potential exogenous
shocks emanating from uncertainties in oil prices, the extend of peace related needs, the
vagaries of the weather and the timing of aid delivery. In this context, the authorities are
prepared to take contingency measures and will continue increasing international reserves.
Structural Reforms
The authorities enhanced their agenda for structural reforms. A comprehensive review of tax
exemptions was completed and this will be followed by a streamlining of the tax incentives
regime. Tax privileges of four major oil distribution companies lapsed at end-2004 and will
not be renewed. A medium-term tariff reform program was developed and the timing of
implementation will take into account the revenue consequences in the face of huge resource
demands from the peace agreement. Oil sector transparency was further improved; and, the
Sudan Petroleum Corporation (SPC) was audited and the audits of the subsidiaries are in
progress. Preparations are underway to align SPC accounts with the country’s commercial
accounting standards.
Structural reforms will be deepened in 2005. In the fiscal area, the autonomy of the cash
management system will be enhanced, and a single treasury account for the ministry of
finance will be set-up while those for the rest of the ministries will be done in 2006. Work on
the GSF classification methodology in the budgetary accounts will be accelerated in 2005
and completed by 2006. The South is taking-off with the GFS classification. The tax base
will be further broadened by setting up of a medium-size taxpayers’ unit while transparency
in the oil sector will be further improved. In the monetary area, capacity will be strengthened
in managing monetary operations, especially effective short-term liquidity forecasting and
coordination with fiscal operations. The authorities are broadly in agreement with the FSAP
recommendations and intend to formulate an action plan to implement them. External sector
reforms will continue, including further tariff reform that will take into account the need to
minimize revenue losses, fulfilling commitments under AFTA and COMESA and advancing

-5preparations to join the WTO. The authorities are urging for the removal of trade sanctions to
improve effectiveness in their operations and policies.
Payments to the Fund
Sudan has maintained a good record of payments to the Fund. In 2004, US$32.4 million was
paid to the Fund, compared to US$30 million envisaged under the program. These payments
were US$12.5 more than what is needed to stabilize arrears to the Fund. While oil receipts
increased in 2005, peace and other demands have added pressure on the domestic resource
envelope, arising from the substantial and immediate budgetary pressures from the peace
agreement with the south, expenditure increase in the Darfur for enforcing peace and
humanitarian assistance, relief to a number of areas that have been hit by drought, and more
resources are needed to deepen the ongoing nationwide decentralization process, especially
in light of the peace agreement, and uncertainties remaining about future oil receipts and the
extend of donor support. The authorities therefore intend to maintain payments to the Fund
in 2005 at the level of 2004.
Need for External Assistance
Sudan has implemented difficult reforms without external financial support. This situation
has forced the authorities to contract some non-concessional loans for critical investments in
the oil sector, electricity generation and water supply, which has contributed to boosting
economic growth. To avoid compounding the debt problem and debt relief negotiations, the
authorities are requesting for faster progress towards clearing arrears, debt relief and access
to concessional financing. In making payments to creditors, the authorities have been giving
preference to the Fund, other multilaterals and creditors that are providing new financing.
The Joint Assessment Mission, comprising the Bank, UN, Donors, the Fund and the
authorities (North and South) estimated Sudan’s post-conflict needs for the first phase of the
peace agreement (2005-2007) at US$7.9 billion. Of this amount, US$5.3 billion will come
from domestic sources leaving a financing gap of US$2.6 billion. To fill this gap, donors
pledged a total of US$4.5 billion in Oslo, Norway on April 11-12, 2005. Of this amount,
US$1.9 billion is for development assistance and US$2.6 billion is for direct delivery for
humanitarian support. The World Bank has established two trust accounts to help manage
and disburse external assistance. The authorities are grateful to the donors for their generous
pledges and they will make an effort to address some of the concerns expressed by donors to
secure disbursement. However, streamlining of donor conditionality is needed for the timely
delivery of these resources which are critical to sustain peace and economic development.
External Debt Burden and Arrears Clearance
Sudan’s external debt is unsustainable. Total outstanding debt exceed US$25 billion, most of
which is in arrears. The net present value of debt is estimated at US$24 billion, about 850
percent of exports of goods and services, far exceeding the 150 percent threshold under the
HIPC Initiative. Oil output’s contribution to growth is expected to peak in 2006 but to
subsequently decline thereafter. To alleviate the debt burden and allow Sudan to consolidate

-6peace and development, the Fund should move expeditiously to facilitate the clearance of
Sudan’s arrears, paving the way for more comprehensive and deeper debt relief. Given
Sudan’s strong track record of policies and payments, and the urgency for debt relief, there is
a valid case for Sudan to skip the RAP altogether, and move directly to the PRGF and bring
forward the decision point under the HIPC initiative. The Paris Club should also be
advancing the discussion of modalities for providing debt relief to Sudan and such
discussions should invite and incorporate non-Paris Club creditors with substantial exposure
to Sudan. In the case of Sudan, deep and faster debt relief is possible only if all creditors
move to provide debt relief in tandem and at comparable terms. The BWI staffs and donors
should also help provide technical assistance to strengthen local capacity to speed-up debt
relief negotiations.
Technical Assistance Needs
The authorities are grateful for the extensive technical assistance provided by the Fund since
Sudan began implementing SMPs. This has helped to build institutions, enhanced capacity
for macroeconomic management, and strengthened the coverage, timeliness and quality of
the statistical database, among other benefits. The signing of the peace agreement and the
resumption of economic activities country-wide, especially the reintegration of the South will
pose new challenges to existing institutions, and will stretch the existing limited
administrative capacity and will require the building of new institutions as well as extensive
training of locals. In this regard, the authorities are requesting technical assistance in the
areas of revenue administration, fiscal federalism, strengthening government financial
management, GFS classification, introduction of the new currency, liquidity forecasting, etc.
The authorities presented their full list of TA needs and training requirements to the relevant
departments within the Fund during the Spring meetings and hope that their request will be
accorded high priority given their good track record of implementing TA recommendations.
Conclusion
The Sudanese authorities intend to cease the opportunity provided by the comprehensive
peace agreement with the South to bring peace to the whole country and embark on an
ambitious economic and social development agenda that will lead the country towards the
MDGs, while maintaining macroeconomic stability. This objective can only be met within
the context of an enabling external environment and with adequate technical and financial
support from the international community. Sudan has established a long and solid track
record of policy implementation and deserves to be fast-tracked in clearing arrears,
qualification for PRGF and access for debt relief under the HIPC initiative. The Oslo donor
conference set the appropriate pace and scope for external assistance and the authorities urge
the Fund to fully restore its relations with Sudan, assume its catalytic role for international
support and provide technical assistance. Removal of sanctions and provision of market
access will allow Sudan to accelerate economic development.

