August 2004
IMF Country Report No. 04/257

© 2004 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

San Marino: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for San Marino
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with San Marino, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on May 11, 2004, with the officials of San Marino on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 2, 2004. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of July 28, 2004 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 28, 2004 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for San Marino.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SAN MARINO
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2004 Consultation with San Marino
Approved by Alessandro Leipold and Anthony Boote
July 2, 2004

1

•

Consultation discussions: April 29–May 11, 2004

•

Staff team: Mr. Prati (head, RES), Mr. Anayiotos and Ms. Sgherri (both EUR).
Mr. Lombardi (OED) participated in the meetings.

•

The team met with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Finance,
Industry, Public Health and Social Security, Labor, and Tourism. It also met
with the President, the Director General, and the Head of the Supervision
Division of the Central Bank, as well as representatives of financial institutions,
public enterprises, labor unions, the employers’ and self-employed associations.
There was an audience with the Captains Regent, the co-heads of state.

•

In concluding the last Article IV consultation on December 5, 2001,1 Directors
welcomed the authorities’ objective to return the budget to balance over the
next two years and strengthen banking supervision, but called for ambitious
reforms of the pension and health care systems.

•

The authorities released the mission’s concluding statement and have indicated
their intention to publish the staff report.

•

Progress has been made, but there are important shortcomings in many parts of
San Marino’s statistical database. San Marino does not subscribe to the GDDS.

San Marino is on the 24-month consultation cycle. The Executive Board was notified of a delay
in the current consultation cycle due to staff constraints.

-2Contents

Page

Executive Summary...................................................................................................................3
I. Background.............................................................................................................................4
II. Policy Discussions.................................................................................................................5
A. Economic Developments and Outlook .....................................................................5
B. Fiscal Policy ..............................................................................................................7
C. Factor and Product Markets ....................................................................................13
D. Financial Sector.......................................................................................................13
E. Statistical Issues.......................................................................................................15
F. Other Issues .............................................................................................................16
III. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................16
Text Boxes
1. Policy Recommendations and Implementation .............................................................5
2. Taxation of Italian Commuters ......................................................................................6
3. EU Savings Tax .............................................................................................................7
Tables
1. Basic Data ....................................................................................................................19
2. Central Administration Operations. Accrual Basis, 1992–2004..................................20
3. Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability .....................................................21
Figures
1. Inflation, Exchange Rates and Interest Rates, 1990–2003 ..........................................22
2. Contribution of Manufacturing to the Economy..........................................................23
3. Contribution of the Financial Sector to the Private Sector Employment,
Income and Profits .......................................................................................................24
4. Bank Deposits and Managed/Administered Funds, 1998–2003..................................25
5. Banking Sector Indicators............................................................................................26
6. Real GDP Growth, 1990–2003 ....................................................................................27
7. Employment and Unemployment, 1989–2003 ............................................................28
8. Unit Labor Costs Compared, 1990–2003 ....................................................................29
9. Fiscal Developments, 1992–2003................................................................................30
10. Pension System, 1998–2003 ........................................................................................31
11. Bank Profitability, 1998–2003.....................................................................................32
12. Bank Efficiency, 1998–2003 .......................................................................................33
13. Capital Ratios and Non-Performing Loans, 1998–2003..............................................34
Appendices
I. Fund Relations .............................................................................................................35
II. Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................36
III. Debt Sustainability.......................................................................................................38

-3EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The economy has slowed considerably since 2000 with the fading of key competitive advantages
that had contributed to past rapid development. Returning to a high growth path is feasible but
requires decisive fiscal, structural, and financial sector reforms, which the
government―supported by a broad parliamentary majority―is well placed to implement.
In the period 2000-2002, average GDP growth decelerated to 2¾ percent from a pace almost
three times as high in the 1990s. While this was a better performance than that of contiguous
regions, Italy, and the euro area, it trailed behind that of other small European countries.
Manufacturing and commerce faltered in the midst of inflexible labor markets, narrowing tax
advantages, and greater price competition from nearby areas. In the financial sector, a flurry of
new entrants, and the repatriation of Italian deposits on the heels of a tax amnesty, eroded
profitability. Against this background, GDP is expected to rise by 2 percent in 2004, after stalling
in 2003. Downside risks are related to Italy’s new tax on commuters’ income and prospective
EU-related changes in savings taxation, which may depress employment and deposit growth.
To restore a positive net asset position and the ability to buffer adverse external shocks, the
authorities aim at maintaining the budget in balance or in surplus over the medium term,
while preserving tax rate advantages―a key determinant of growth in the past. After years of
recurrent fiscal deficits, the government achieved a surplus of 1½ percent of GDP in 2003 by
containing the public sector wage bill and improving the administration of indirect taxes. This
turnaround began improving the net asset position of the central government, which had
deteriorated by more than 15 percent of GDP in a decade. To sustain fiscal consolidation with
unchanged or lower tax rates, remaining tax administration problems need to be addressed and
generous entitlement programs reformed. Population aging and downside risks to employment
growth heighten the urgency of a far-reaching pension reform.
To deliver higher growth in the medium term, further labor and product market reforms are
needed. Cutbacks in public sector employment and moderate growth in public sector wages have
recently improved the functioning of the labor market. To attract foreign investment, remaining
hiring restrictions on nonresidents should be eliminated and fixed-term contracts for
Sammarinese workers be allowed. Resisting pressures to reintroduce tax exemptions and
adhering to the government’s stated goal of substituting rules for political discretion in key areas
of economic activity would also be important.
To create the conditions for further development of the financial sector while safeguarding its
soundness, the authorities should step up efforts to upgrade financial legislation and improve
supervisory practices. While Sammarinese banks remain relatively more efficient, better
capitalized, and with fewer nonperforming loans than comparators, declining profitability raises
risk-taking incentives. Measures needed include increasing the frequency of on-site inspections
and transferring the right to grant and revoke licenses to an independent supervisory and
regulatory authority. AML/CFT provisions have been strengthened, TA from LEG on financial
legislation has been scheduled for 2005, and the authorities have expressed interest in an FSAP.

-4I. BACKGROUND
1.
San Marino is a landlocked republic in central Italy with a population of about 30,000
and an area of 23.5 square miles, which makes it the third-smallest country in Europe after the
Vatican City and Monaco (Table 1).
2.
San Marino uses the euro as official currency and operates in a customs union with
the European Union. Inflation and interest rate developments are coupled with those of Italy
(Figure 1). Its workforce is very mobile, with Italian commuters accounting for about 35 percent
of private sector employment.
3.
In common with many other small cities in the surrounding Italian regions, San
Marino has important tourism and commercial sectors, but its manufacturing and
financial activities are much larger. While manufacturing employment is on a declining trend,
it still accounts for more than 40 percent of total employment—a share above that of Italy and
adjacent areas, and much higher than in other industrial and small countries (Figure 2). The
Sammarinese financial sector accounts for only 4 percent of private employment but its salaries
and profits are, respectively, 10 and 16 percent of the total (Figure 3). Deposits and managed
funds in Sammarinese banks are about ten times GDP against a ratio of two-three times GDP in
Italy and neighboring zones (Figure 4). The size of the Sammarinese financial system in percent
of GDP is also large by international standards, although the system is smaller than those of, for
example, Luxembourg, Andorra, Monaco, Liechtenstein, and the Cayman Islands (Figure 5).
In 2003, nonresidents’ funds were US$6.6 billion, corresponding to about half of deposits and
60 percent of managed funds. Although these sizeable nonresidents’ funds are reminiscent of an
Offshore Financial Center (OFC), no internationally compiled list of OFCs includes San Marino.
4.
San Marino faces several policy challenges related to the erosion of competitive
advantages and consequent heightened vulnerability to external shocks:
•

While average growth rates since 2000 exceeded those recorded in contiguous regions,
Italy, and the euro area, they fell short of those achieved by San Marino in the 1990s and
were lower than in other small European countries—such as Luxembourg, Andorra,
Cyprus, and Monaco—which expanded rapidly even during the global slowdown (Figure
6). Narrowing tax differentials, greater labor market flexibility in Italy, and new price
competition from shopping centers in nearby areas were mostly responsible for the
slowdown.

•

After a decade of recurrent deficits, the government made major strides toward correcting
fiscal imbalances reaching a surplus of 1½ percent of GDP in 2003. However, the
problems of poor revenue performance and generous entitlement programs remain largely
unaddressed, raising doubts about prospects for a sustained improvement in the
government’s net financial asset position and its ability to buffer adverse external shocks.

•

A reduction of public sector employment from past high levels and a moderate growth in
public sector wages have improved the functioning of the labor market in recent years,
but these changes risk being reversed and labor market flexibility remains insufficient.

-5•

In the financial sector, increased competition and tax amnesties in Italy―together with
prospective changes in EU savings taxation―have moderated growth in nonresidents’
accounts and put pressure on profits that may raise risk-taking incentives.

5.
Implementation of past policy advice has generally been positive (Box 1) although
political instability delayed the fiscal adjustment and reforms that appeared imminent at
the time of the last Board discussion. Unusual political instability continued after the early
elections of June 2001 with four changes in the composition of the governing coalition in less
than two years. A new government with a more stable parliamentary majority—including all
main parties in Parliament―took charge in December 2003 and is expected to last until the
next 2006 elections.
Box 1. San Marino: Policy Recommendations and Implementation
San Marino acceded to Fund membership in 1992 with the aim, among others, of benefitting
from the international policy debate and opening up to international scrutiny and advice on best
practices. The authorities believe they have benefited both from the Fund’s policy
recommendations and technical assistance.
Implementation of the Fund’s advice has been gradual but ongoing. In the fiscal area, it
includes the reduction of the size of the public sector, and the return of the central government
budget to balance in 2003. Reforms of the pension and health-care systems are being
considered. A strengthened legal framework against money laundering and terrorism financing
is in place and bank supervision and regulation is being enhanced.
San Marino has also made recourse to the Fund’s technical assistance (TA). Recently, the
authorities received a STA multi-sector mission and a STA Monetary and Financial Statistics
mission. The authorities have advanced a formal request for TA in GFS compilation, are
scheduled to receive TA from LEG on banking and other financial and regulatory legislation,
and are expected to request an FSAP.

II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
6.
Against this background, the discussions focused on the short- and medium-term outlook
and the fiscal, structural, and financial sector policies that might offset the recent loss of
competitive advantages and put San Marino back on a high growth path.
A. Economic Developments and Outlook
7.
After the rapid development of the 1990s with real growth rates averaging
7½ percent per year, growth slowed to a third of that rate in 2000–02. It is likely to have
remained sluggish also in 2003, with the unemployment rate rising above that of neighboring
regions for the first time since 1990 (Figures 6 and 7). The slowdown was particularly severe in
commerce and tourism (Figure 2, bottom panel), whose contribution to growth turned negative in
the wake of intense price competition from surrounding areas and fewer tourists in the Italian
resorts on the Adriatic coast. Lower profits of manufacturing and services and cuts in the public
sector wage bill led to smaller but still positive contributions to growth of these sectors. By

-6contrast, the contribution of the financial sector surged thanks to rapid employment growth
offsetting lower profit margins.
8.
There is broad agreement, in official and private sector circles, that both permanent
and transitory factors have accounted for the weakening of the economy. Lower corporate
tax rates in Italy have narrowed the tax differential that had previously attracted business to San
Marino and the spread of fixed-term contracts in Italy has reduced the advantage of the fixedterm contracts with which Sammarinese firms hire Italian commuters. At the same time, a 20022003 Italian tax amnesty on undeclared capital held abroad (scudo fiscale) resulted in outflows of
about €760 million (11 percent of 2001 nonresidents’ funds, Figure 4), while languishing Italian
consumption has contributed to depress commerce and tourism and the appreciation of the euro
has curbed the competitiveness of manufacturing firms.2
Box 2. Taxation of Italian Commuters
Italy’s 2004 budget law stipulates that, starting January 1, 2004, Italian commuters working in
San Marino would pay taxes in Italy after deducting €8,000 from their taxable income and
claiming a tax credit for taxes paid in San Marino. This contrasts with the full exemption from
Italian income taxes that Italian commuters had enjoyed since 1987. In passing the budget law,
the Italian parliament rescinded a preliminary agreement with San Marino according to which
Italian commuters could deduct as much as €24,000 from taxable income. By contrast, Italian
commuters to Switzerland and the Vatican City are fully exempt from Italian income taxes
under bilateral treaties.

9.
Looking forward, the authorities recognized that there were risks associated with
upcoming changes in the taxation of income and savings, but downplayed their immediate
impact. In relation to Italy’s decision to tax labor income earned in San Marino (Box 2), they
indicated that they intended to press Italy to comply with a preliminary agreement granting a
higher tax exemption to commuters and to point to the disparity of treatment with Switzerland
and the Vatican City. The staff stressed that, if these approaches were unsuccessful, the wage
pressures likely to be associated with the introduction of the new tax would erode San Marino’s
current unit labor cost advantage of about 10 percentage points (Figure 8). Most financial sector
representatives agreed with the authorities’ assessment that the increase in withholding taxes on
interest income foreseen by the agreement with the EU (Box 3) would not trigger an immediate
outflow of funds and alternative tax-exempt savings instruments were likely to be developed in
the medium term (see Section II.D).

2

While 90 percent of Sammarinese exports are to Italy, euro appreciation has had an indirect
negative effect on those Sammarinese firms that produce intermediate goods for Italian firms
exporting outside the euro area.

-7Box 3. EU Savings Tax
The EU Council of Economic and Finance Ministers (EcoFin) approved in June 2003 a
directive (2003/48/EC) aimed at reducing the evasion of capital income taxes. The
directive provides that—subject to certain transitional exemptions—EU member states shall
exchange information to ensure that interest payments are taxed in the state in which the
account holder is resident. The directive will come into force not earlier than January 1, 2005
and at least six months after the EcoFin decides its implementation and that: (i) five non-EU
members (i.e., Switzerland, Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco, and San Marino) have agreed
with the European Community (EC) to adopt “measures equivalent” to those contained in the
directive; and (ii) the United States are committed to the exchange of relevant information.
Austria, Belgium, and Luxembourg will receive information from the outset but will
provide it only at the end of a seven-year transitional period. During this period, the three
countries shall retain their banking secrecy laws but will levy a 15 percent withholding tax on
interest payments, rising to 20 percent after 3 years, and to 35 percent after 6 years (although
this higher rate might not be reached if some EU countries have lower rates).
The five non-EU members have recently concluded agreements with the EC under
similar terms to those of Austria, Belgium, and Luxembourg. Unlike the latter, they can opt
out of the automatic exchange of information at the end of the seven-year transitional period by
maintaining a 35 percent withholding tax. The EcoFin has approved the implementation of the
Savings Tax Directive, although the timing remains uncertain, as a Swiss referendum ratifying
this decision could potentially delay the scheme’s entry into force.

10.
In the short term, market participants expected an improved global outlook to
benefit both Italy and San Marino. Foreign demand would drive the recovery in
manufacturing and tourism, and an upward trend in interest rates would raise the profitability of
the banking system. The upturn in employment in the first quarter of 2004 (1.3 percent year-onyear) bodes well for the upcoming recovery.
11.
The authorities recognized that, in the medium term, San Marino needed to adapt
to the changed external environment by identifying new sources of growth and improving
its capacity to buffer shocks. Several market participants stressed that further development of
the services and financial sectors was of the essence to wean the economy from its dependence
on the manufacturing sector, as foreign competition places pressure on the Sammarinese and
Italian economies to de-industrialize. To facilitate this transformation and restore the capacity of
fiscal policy to react to cyclical downturns and external shocks, the authorities agreed that fiscal
consolidation—accompanied by labor market and financial sector reforms—was a priority.
B. Fiscal Policy
12.
Remarkable fiscal adjustment took place in 2003 with the central administration
balance moving from a deficit of 2.2 percent in 2002 to a surplus of 1.6 percent of GDP.
This turnaround followed a decade of budget deficits and a large reassessment of past tax arrears
in 2001―due to new criteria for assessing the risk of insolvency of taxpayers with overdue
taxes―that transformed a slight net asset position into a net liability position of 11 percent of

-8GDP in 2003. To finance the cash deficit, the government ran down its deposits with the banking
system and, since the mid 1990s, borrowed short-term (Table 2 and Figure 9).3
13.
The reserves of the pension system rose appreciably over the past decade despite
pension expenditure systematically exceeding social security contributions (Figure 10).
Although the deficits of the funds of shopkeepers, artisans, and entrepreneurs more than offset
the surplus (until 2002) of the dependent workers’ fund, reserves reached 13.8 percent of GDP at
end-2003 thanks to other revenues (mid panel of Figure 10).
14.
The government aims at ensuring a budget in balance or surplus over the medium
term. The authorities noted that fiscal adjustment was under way—with a better-thantargeted 2003 outcome (the original target was a deficit of 1.6 percent of GDP) and parliament
approving a budget close to balance for 2004 and balanced-budget targets for 2005-2006. While
the measures that have underpinned the 2003 adjustment (reductions in the public sector wage
bill and improved indirect tax administration) are likely to have permanent effects and could lead
to a better-than-targeted 2004 outcome,4 it was agreed that improving the fiscal position on a
sustainable basis remained a challenge in view of the remaining shortcomings in tax collection
and the generosity of entitlement programs.
8

50
Revenues 1/
(In percent of GDP)

Direct taxes
Non-tax revenue

Indirect taxes
Asset sales

40

Revenue from Taxation in Financial Sector
(staff estimates; in percent of GDP)

7

6

Corporate profits

Interest on deposits

Interest on repos

Financial foreign activities

5

30
4

20

3

2

10
1

0

0

1992

1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
1/ Net of tax reimbursements

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Source: Sammarinese authorities and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes the one-time 2002 tax on foreign financial assets and a 4% withholding tax on interest from foreign-issued
bonds.

15.
Staff drew attention to the poor revenue performance as a glaring budget weakness
that the 2003 outcome had only begun to remedy (text figure). Total revenues net of
reimbursements fell by about 7½ percent of GDP from 1992 to 2003 reflecting a collapse of non3

Appendix III presents a debt sustainability analysis. The rising level of debt under historical
averages (line A1) reflects a 10-year average of the primary deficit of 2.2 percent of GDP.
Maintaining the budget surplus at its 2003 level would allow San Marino to repay its debt
by 2006 (line A2). The accounts of individual public enterprises and the methodology for
reclassifying the central administration accounts are presented in San Marino―Statistical
Appendix and Selected Issues, forthcoming.

4

In addition, the 2004 budget foresaw a 1 percent of GDP adjustment from the original 2003
target. Tables 1 and 2 show a weakening of the fiscal position in relation to the 2003 outturn
because they are based on 2004 budget figures.

-9tax revenues, a large contraction of the import tax (monofase 5)—which accounts for over
90 percent of indirect taxes, and lower direct taxes. Taxes on the financial sector more than
halved in the midst of reduced profitability and lower interest rates (text figure).
16.
In response to this worrying revenue trend, the authorities outlined a strategy based
on expanding the tax base while trying to preserve tax rate advantages—a key determinant
of growth in the past. They noted that the prolonged downward trend of tax revenues reflected
lapses in tax collection and long-lasting effects of past legislative initiatives (e.g., widespread tax
exemptions).6 As a consequence, they had stopped granting new tax exemptions in 2002,
changed notification requirements to enhance compliance with property-income tax, and
improved estimates of import tax reimbursements. New norms limited the scope for
accumulating tax arrears and put the Central Bank in charge of collecting overdue taxes.7 Staff
supported these measures and suggested making them more effective by giving the tax collection
agency access to financial information on non-complying taxpayers―a controversial measure
that some considered an infringement of banking secrecy―and by reducing the incentives to
underreport incomes, linking pension benefits to paid contributions.
17.
In light of its greater concern for the effects of the new tax treatment of Italian
commuters on employment, staff stressed that this change cast a shadow on future revenue
prospects. Higher Italian taxes on commuters’ incomes were likely to affect San Marino’s tax
revenues and social security contributions not only by reducing employment and income growth
but also by increasing incentives to underreport commuters’ salaries.
18.
There was general agreement that the immediate impact on tax revenues of the EUrelated withholding tax on nonresidents’ interest would be minimal. Although financial
institutions may take some time to devise alternative savings instruments with tax-exempt returns
(see Section II.D), they were confident that, in the short run, the first new level of the
withholding tax rate (15 percent) would not be so high as to trigger a substantial outflow of
funds.. As long as the tax base remains broadly unchanged, San Marino’s tax revenues may even
increase. While the agreement stipulates that 75 percent of the proceeds from the withholding tax
be remitted to the country of residence of the investor, it also provides that any other tax levied
on the same income shall be credited against it. This implies that, if San Marino decided to
increase all its withholding taxes on interest—currently at 11 percent for bank deposits, 8 percent
5

The monofase is a single-stage indirect tax that is levied on imports and reimbursed if goods are
subsequently re-exported. It replaces the more commonly used VAT. The higher monofase
proceeds in 2003, which account for most of the improvement in net revenue that year, are
mainly due to new procedures for determining the amount of reimbursements.
6

In 2002, seven percent of manufacturing firms were exempt from taxation with an estimated
revenue loss of about 3 percent of GDP. Artisans also benefited from liberal tax exemptions.
7

While it is clearly unusual for a Central Bank to be in charge of collecting overdue taxes, there
was a need to remove this task from undue political interference, which, in the past, had led to a
large accumulation of overdue taxes.

- 10 for long-term certificates, 4 percent for foreign bonds, and 2 percent for repos—to 15 percent, it
could retain all the proceeds from the saving tax. A reason for not following this course of action
would be the risk that Sammarinese depositors might then prefer banking in EU countries with
lower withholding taxes. However, with the Italian withholding tax rate at 12.5 percent, the tax
differential is unlikely to be large enough to bring about an outflow of Sammarinese funds in the
short term.
19.
As revenues plummeted during the 1990s, the authorities compressed
expenditures—mostly capital expenditure and the public sector wage bill. Between 1992
and 2003, total expenditures fell by about 9½ percent of GDP (text figure) with lower capital
expenditures explaining half of the adjustment. A tight hiring freeze reduced public sector
employment in line with that of other small advanced economies (text figure) and contributed,
together with responsible wage negotiations and limited use of overtime, to trimming the wage
bill by almost 1½ percent of GDP. Current transfers to the public sector fell by a similar amount,
also reflecting lower personnel costs in public enterprises and the Social Security Institute (SSI),
which is responsible for health and pension expenditure. Staff welcomed the progress in reducing
the size of the public sector. It indicated, however, that there was scope for further reductions as
average public sector wages remained about 25 percent above those in the private sector.
40

50
Expenditure 1/
(In percent of GDP)

Wages & salaries

Transfers to public sector

Other current expenditure

Capital expenditure

35

Public Sector Employment, 2002 1/
( In percent of total employment)

30

40

25
20

30

15
10

20

5
0

10

Luxembourg

Cyprus

Switzerland

San Marino

Italy

Malta

Sources: San Marino's Ufficio Programmazione Economica e Centro Elaborazione Dati e
Statistica ; United Nations, Statistical Bulletin; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Public Administration and Defence; Compulsory Social Security; Education; Health
and Social Work.

0
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
1/ Net of tax reimbursements

20.
Staff noted that the reduction in expenditure of the last decade risked giving a
misleadingly positive picture of public expenditure control. Transfers to the SSI have
12
exceeded budget estimates in recent years
Transfers to SSI
Outturn
(In percent of GDP)
(text figure). The authorities recognized that
Budget estimates
10
it would be difficult to sustain the savings
in the medium term without containing
8
public health and pension expenditure.
6

4

2

0
1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

m
an

m

nc
e

G
er

Fr
a

gi
u

nd

al
ta

Be
l

M

o

er
la

itz

Sw

Ita
ly

M
ar
in

Sa
n

a

A
us
tri

la
nd
xe
m
bo
ur
g
Lu

Ire

Cy
pr

us

21.
The authorities described several initiatives to pare the costs of the public health
system. Savings on the wage bill of the SSI have stabilized health expenditure in percent of
GDP—albeit at a comparatively high level (text 9 Public Health Expenditure
8
(in percent of GDP; year 2000)
figure)—without curtailing public health
7
services. In recent months, the government has
6
renegotiated price conditions with suppliers,
5
and limited the list of pharmaceutical products
offered free of charge to the best-price
4
medicines within each category. Since 2003,
3
the budget provides a fixed allocation to the SSI 2
for health expenditure, after years in which it
1
was almost fully financed with ex-post budget
0
transfers, while draft legislation institutes an
Health Authority and specifies professional
Source: Human Development Indicators 2003.
requirements for health administrators.

y

- 11 -

22.
Staff supported these initiatives but argued that they might not be sufficient to stem
the rapidly growing demand for health services. It observed that using only cost reductions to
contain transfers to the SSI could be insufficient and that it might become necessary to introduce
co-payments on selected services and pharmaceutical products in the near future. The authorities
resisted this suggestion, arguing that they were confident that the ongoing reforms would keep
demand pressures under control and expressing skepticism that uniform co-payments could
discourage the relatively well-to-do Sammarinese patients from requesting superfluous exams
and medications.
23.
Even under past favorable employment trends, generous pension benefits and
population aging would require increasing transfers to the SSI over time. Staff simulations
show that, without reforming the pension system, its deficits would lead to a buildup of public
debt to between 20 and 65 percent of GDP by 2020 depending on employment growth (text
figures). Moreover, prospects of slowing employment growth on the heels of Italy’s taxation of
commuters’ incomes, and of the future likely declining role of labor-intensive manufacturing
industries, heighten the urgency of pension reform. At present, transfers from the government
and other SSI resources are needed to finance pension expenditure of over 6 percent of GDP and
continue accumulating reserves, despite a healthy worker-to-retiree ratio of 4:1 boosting
contributions (Figure 10).

- 12 70

0

Public Debt (In percent of GDP)

60

Pension Fund Balance (In percent of GDP) 4/

-1
High growth 1/
Baseline 2/
Low growth 3/

50
40

-2
-3

30

-4

20

-5

10

-6

0

High growth 1/
Baseline 2/
Low growth 3/

-7
2003

2008

2013

2018

2003

2008

2013

2018

1/ Annual labor productivity growth 2 percent; inflation 2 percent; wage growth 4.1 percent; employment growth 3.2 percent; real
interest rate 3.4 percent; real GDP growth 5.2 percent.
2/ Annual labor productivity growth 1.1 percent; inflation 2 percent; wage growth 3.1 percent; employment growth 2 percent; real
interest rate 3.4 percent; real GDP growth 3.1 percent.
3/ Annual labor productivity growth 0.5 percent; inflation 2 percent; wage growth 2.5 percent; employment growth 0.5 percent;
real interest rate 3.4 percent; real GDP growth 1 percent.
4/ Deficits of the pensions funds in the three scenarios are based on " Pensions and Population Aging "--Republic of San Marino:
Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix, IMF Country Report No. 01/226, December 2001.

24.
In response to the mission’s observation that pension reform measures recently
approved by Parliament were underwhelming,8 the authorities indicated that a major
reform was in the offing. The details of the reform plan are yet to be revealed and will be
negotiated with the trade unions, the employers’ association, and other professional
organizations before being presented to parliament. San Marino would introduce a two-pillar
system. The first pillar would remain compulsory and pay-as-you-go, but the computation of
pension benefits would be linked to lifetime contributions (replicating the system introduced in
Italy in 1995) as opposed to the current link to the average of the retiring individuals’ reported
incomes over the last 5 years (dependent workers) or 10 years (self-employed). The second pillar
would be fully-funded. Staff supported the idea of introducing a contribution-based system
because it would reduce incentives to underreport incomes that do not count for computing
pension benefits. However, it noted that, in previous occasions, the Fund had considered San
Marino well placed to introduce a fully-funded system and that the authorities could usefully
consider making also the first pillar fully-funded. To finance the closing of the existing pay-asyou-go system, staff suggested reducing the benefits of those workers that were further away
from retirement—by raising their effective average retirement age (currently at 60) or
introducing equivalent actuarially-fair benefit reductions—and using part of accumulated
reserves.
25.
While it was agreed that San Marino would benefit from refinancing high-interest
bank loans with the proceeds of a debut Eurobond issue, the staff had reservations about
increasing the amount issued to finance infrastructure projects. The 2004 budget law
foresees placing a bond of up to €120 million (about 10 percent of GDP) and up to 10-year
maturity. Staff argued that, until tax compliance problems were solved, and without considering
8

Parliament increased the retirement age of new workers hired after January 1, 2002, from 60 to
65 and the contribution rate for artisans and shop-owners from 18.5 to 19.5 percent starting
January 1, 2003. In the short run, the impact of these changes will be small.

- 13 user fees, even projects that stimulated growth might not generate the revenues needed to pay
back the debt. Staff also encouraged the government to verify whether renegotiating the highinterest loans with the banking system would not be a lower-cost alternative to bond issuance.
C. Factor and Product Markets
26.
The authorities pointed to several developments and initiatives that have increased
the flexibility of the labor market. First, containing public sector employment and wage
growth has not only critically contributed to fiscal adjustment but has also eliminated a longstanding source of wage-drift and loss of competitiveness. Second, the government is trying to
remove any presumption that the public sector might resume acting as employer of last resort by
reforming the public administration and giving managers autonomy in hiring decisions. Third, a
new regulation of nonresidents’ hiring speeds up the authorization process while reducing the
scope for political interference. The staff supported these measures.
27.
In the face of the higher cost of labor that is likely to result from Italy’s new tax on
Italian commuters’ income earned in San Marino, labor market policies should be geared
decisively toward attracting investment. In this context, staff recommended eliminating
remaining hiring restrictions on nonresidents that could discourage expanding or opening
businesses in San Marino. Introducing fixed-term contracts matching the flexibility offered by
Italian contracts would also help offset a critical advantage that neighboring regions now offer.
The authorities indicated that they were ready to consider their introduction only after an
experimental phase, planned to start shortly.
28.
The staff welcomed the law stopping new tax exemptions since 2002 and encouraged
the authorities to continue reducing state intervention in the economy. To foster economic
efficiency and minimize budgetary outlays, staff stressed the need to limit also subsidized credit,
which cost about 0.5 percent of GDP in 2001. The authorities emphasized their goal of replacing
the current political discretion with clear and transparent rules in key areas of economic activity
ranging from licensing new businesses to managing the public health system.
D. Financial Sector
29.
Banks’ profitability suffered a setback in 2001-03 reflecting increased competition
from new entrants and a decrease in managed funds due to the Italian “scudo fiscale”
(Figures 4 and 11). In contrast to the declining number of banks in the euro zone and Italy, the
number of banks operating in San Marino has increased from 4 in 2000 to 10 in 2003, with two
more about to open, following a less restrictive licensing policy.9 About forty non-bank financial
intermediaries have started operations over the last three years. Given that Sammarinese
financial institutions cannot open branches abroad―particularly in Italy―until the supervisory
and regulatory framework is brought in line with EU requirements, they have all been competing
in the local market, squeezing profits. In addition, as Italian investors repatriated funds in the
9

The owners of these new banks are all Sammarinese. At present, only two of the original four
banks have a foreign (Italian) ownership.

- 14 wake of the “scudo fiscale”, income from commissions and fees dropped. Sammarinese banks
remain, however, relatively more efficient, better capitalized, and with fewer non-performing
loans than comparators (Figures 12-13). The authorities also indicated that the exposure of the
Sammarinese banking system to Parmalat was negligible.
30.
Market participants concurred that the heightened competitive environment had
enhanced the number and quality of services offered but that declining profitability was
bound to raise risk-taking incentives. They agreed, however, that the small loan portfolios and
limited trading activity of Sammarinese institutions did not leave much scope, at the moment, for
taking risky positions that could endanger their solvency. Most financial sector representatives
saw greater potential risks in underperforming institutions possibly accepting deposits or funds
under management from “dubious” clients. To safeguard against these vulnerabilities—in
accordance with FATF recommendations—staff emphasized that it was essential that “knowyour-customer” measures be implemented with particular attention and vigor.
31.
The authorities and most financial sector representatives were confident that a
withholding tax on interest income of 15 percent—entailed by the agreement with the EU—
would not cause a significant outflow of funds. The further increase of the tax up to 35 percent
by 2010 would have a greater impact but by then the Sammarinese financial system was
expected to devise savings instruments with tax-exempt returns. The scope of the directive is
also deemed to be limited, as it concerns only private individuals and certain categories of
savings products. For example, only interest payments shall be subject to the exchange of
information or the withholding tax, whereas income from share dividends, unit trusts, pension
funds, or insurance policies shall be excluded. The agreement with the EU on the taxation of
savings will also remove a significant element of uncertainty that has been hanging over the
Sammarinese financial system, reassuring investors that banking secrecy laws will be retained.
32.
There was agreement that San Marino needed to revamp the financial sector’s
legislative and regulatory framework and improve supervisory practices. The government
saw the formation of the Central Bank of San Marino (CBSM) as an essential building block of
its financial sector strategy and was committed to a quick approval of the Central Bank law,
following the July 2003 operational merger law of the Istituto di Credito Sammarinese
(ICS)―the former central bank―and the Office of Bank Supervision (OBS). The staff argued
that this law—besides meshing the banking and supervision divisions of the CBSM effectively—
should grant adequate supervisory and regulatory powers to the CBSM. In addition, it should, in
line with international best practices, establish a governance structure that ensures its operational
independence from the government and the banking sector, a stable source of financing, and
clear lines of accountability to Parliament. To address the conflict of interest arising from the fact
that commercial banks held a share of ICS’s—and thus now of CBSM’s―capital, the law is
expected to stipulate that the banks will be deprived of the associated voting rights and have no
representatives in the CBSM’s Board. Staff encouraged the government to take this opportunity
to accord the right to grant and revoke licenses to the supervisory authority, as is a matter of
course in several other countries. The existing law accords this authority to the government, with
the CBSM providing only a non-binding opinion. The staff questioned the capacity of the CBSM
to act as lender-of-last-resort and manage and administer deposit insurance because the small
size of the CBSM’s balance sheet, and of the government budget, in relation to bank deposits
could prevent the CBSM from carrying out these functions, which are not as critical as in other

- 15 banking systems in view of the higher capitalization and liquidity of assets of Sammarinese
banks. While some officials agreed with this assessment, it remained unclear whether the
upcoming law will limit the CBSM’s functions accordingly.
33.
To maintain the competitiveness of the Sammarinese financial system and to create
the conditions for its safe expansion as past tax advantages wither, the authorities pointed
to stepped-up efforts to upgrade the regulatory and legislative framework. The CBSM is
increasing its supervisory staff—to be doubled by end-2004—and is setting up a credit registry.
In March 2003, San Marino adopted the “1988 Capital Accord” of the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (Basel I) and has since issued the regulations implementing the related
capital adequacy requirements, while the regulations on market risk and derivatives remain to be
issued. A new law will introduce mutual funds to be registered in San Marino. The authorities
will receive technical assistance on banking and other financial and regulatory legislation from
LEG and agreed with the staff that they should undertake a Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) at the earliest opportunity to assess their supervisory structures. Parliament has
recently approved new AML/CFT provisions to bring San Marino further into line with
international standards, while the authorities completed the Fund questionnaire on the current
status of efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing.10
34.
Staff stressed the importance of improving supervisory practices. Current practices
based on frequent exchanges of information and advice have established a climate of mutual trust
between the supervisory authority and the Sammarinese financial institutions and have served
San Marino well, potentially contributing to its appeal as a financial center. Staff saw a need,
however, to supplement this approach with more frequent on-site inspections, especially given
the recent proliferation of banks and non-bank financial institutions which had made it more
difficult for supervisors to rely exclusively on personal contacts and data reporting. Furthermore,
the evolution and practice of financial sector supervision and regulation in San Marino could
benefit from best practices prevailing in other small financial centers.11
E. Statistical Issues
35.
While several initiatives to improve the statistical database were underway and the
authorities emphasized their objective of increasing the transparency of the fiscal accounts,
10

San Marino is a member of the MONEYVAL Committee of the Council of Europe, a FATFstyle regional body, and as such committed to mutual evaluations in anti-money laundering
matters. This committee evaluated San Marino in February 2000 and again in March 2003 to
verify implementation of the recommendations of the first evaluation and additional criteria later
introduced. San Marino responded to FATF Eight Special Recommendations and Questionnaires
on Terrorist Financing. In view of its membership in MONEYVAL, the AML/CFT assessment
of an FSAP may be carried out by MONEYVAL on the basis of the common AML/CFT
methodology.

11

See “Financial Sector Developments and Prospects―The Role of Regulation and Supervision”
in the Republic of San Marino—Selected Issues, forthcoming.

- 16 there was agreement that statistical deficiencies continued to hamper effective economic
policy formulation. The Statistical Office is making some notable efforts to collect indicators on
current economic conditions (e.g., electricity consumption) but there is still a delay of 1½ years
in the release of national accounts. The ongoing compilation of a set of experimental
consolidated accounts for the public sector according to GFS methodology for 2002 is an
important endeavor that would result—in line with the authorities’ commitment at the time of
the 2001 Board meeting—in a full set of public sector accounts consistent with Eurostat’s
ESA95 standards. Until these consolidated data are produced on a regular and timely basis,
however, fiscal accounts remain nontransparent and require substantial reclassifications.12 In line
with the recommendations of the February 2004 STA TA mission on monetary and financial
statistics―which led to the publication of a country page for San Marino in the June 2004 issue
of IFS―the staff encouraged the CBSM to: (i) compile and disseminate monthly monetary and
financial data, and, in particular, a broad money survey; and (ii) carry out a Financial Soundness
Indicators (FSI) self-assessment, moving toward frequent and timely reporting of FSIs. The
authorities also expressed interest in participating in the GDDS and requested technical
assistance to prepare metadata.
F. Other Issues
36.
Sammarinese financial institutions have no exposure in foreign currency. Banks’
clients have negligible amounts of foreign-currency credit lines (4 percent of loans) and deposits
(less than 2 percent of total deposits) for operational purposes.
37.
In 2003, San Marino’s official development assistance (ODA) was less than
0.01 percent of GDP.
III. STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
After the exceptional performance of the 1990s, growth has slowed since 2000 and
San Marino now faces new and more testing conditions. It can reform its economy, offset the
recent loss of competitive advantages with efficiency gains and, building on its several strengths,
lay the groundwork for returning to a high growth path. Alternatively, without reforms, the
erosion of its competitiveness will continue, vulnerability to external shocks will be heightened,
and its growth rates will tend to converge toward those of neighboring areas.
39.
While relatively protracted political uncertainty has delayed the required policy
response, the new government is rising to the occasion. It has committed to implement an
ambitious reform agenda and is actively negotiating a series of international agreements. The
improved short-term outlook creates the conditions for persevering resolutely with this course.
Returning to a high-growth path will, however, require concerted action in several areas.
40.
After the decisive fiscal correction of 2003, a budget surplus will need to be
maintained until the net financial position of the central administration turns positive and
long-standing fiscal problems are resolved. Reductions in the public sector wage bill―so far
12

See San Marino―Statistical Appendix and Selected Issues, forthcoming.

- 17 the cornerstone of the government’s fiscal strategy―are welcome and will need to be
supplemented with significant improvements in tax administration and a scaling back of
generous entitlement programs. The 2004 budget takes important but insufficient steps in this
direction. The tax collection agency should have more information on non-complying taxpayers
and, while recent administrative measures have stabilized health expenditure in relation to GDP,
the government should stand ready to introduce monetary disincentives if these steps fail to curb
the growing demand for health services.
41.
Pension reform needs to be far-reaching. The reserves of the pension system and past
employment growth should not lull the public into a false sense of security. Even if past high
employment growth rates continued, generous benefits and population aging will endanger the
long-term solvency of the system. The predominantly downside risks to the employment outlook
imply that pension reform should not be postponed further, and the broad Parliamentary majority
of the government creates a window of opportunity. A comprehensive reform should link
pensions to social security contributions over the entire working life, thus reducing incentives to
underreport incomes and improving the balance of those pension funds that have been in deficit
for years.
42.
San Marino could consider using its substantial pension reserves to smooth the
transition from a pay-as-you-go to a fully-funded system. Reducing pension benefits and
raising the effective average retirement age would also be needed to finance the closing down of
the pay-as-you-go system. San Marino should eschew, however, depleting the reserves to
prolong unduly the generous benefits of the current system.
43.
There is a need to continue reforming labor and product markets. The priority is to
eliminate bureaucratic hindrances and reduce state interventions that stunt business activity. The
government has made considerable progress by rolling back the public sector wage bill;
appropriately-designed welfare programs—rather than forced hires that reduce the efficiency of
public enterprises and the central government—should take care of the unemployed. Much
remains to be done, however, including introducing fixed-term labor contracts for Sammarinese
workers, liberalizing further nonresidents’ hiring, streamlining the bureaucracy, and speeding up
administrative procedures.
44.
Resolute pursuit of the government’s stated goal of substituting rules for political
discretion in key areas of economic activity would also be of significant import. Extending
this approach to banks and nonbank financial institutions—whose licenses should be granted and
revoked by an independent supervisory authority—would underscore the change in policy and
enhance the attractiveness of San Marino as a financial center.
45.
The authorities should create the conditions for a further development of the
financial sector while safeguarding its soundness. This sector is at a turning point. It might
slim down to a level commensurate to the needs of the local economy—as international pressures
curtail tax incentives for nonresidents to invest in San Marino. Or it can reach the size typical of
a full-fledged financial center, able to attract substantial funds because of its efficiency, the range
of services offered, modern financial legislation, and a nimble supervisory and regulatory agency
ensuring the stability of the system without imposing an excessive burden. In this scenario, the

- 18 contribution to income growth of the financial sector could rise to the level prevailing in other
small financial centers.
46.
The regulatory and legislative framework of the financial sector should be enhanced
to allow Sammarinese institutions to extend the scope of their activity outside San Marino.
In this context, the ongoing adoption of Basel I—to be completed as early as possible with the
issuance of market risk and derivatives regulations—and the intention to undertake an FSAP are
welcome.
47.
The supervisory authority needs to gear up for the broader range of services and
products that Sammarinese financial institutions will offer. As the government introduces
new legislation on insurance, mutual and pension funds, and other financial sector products or
activities, the CBSM should stand ready to provide technical support and professional
supervisors. The objective should be to create the conditions for Sammarinese institutions to
compete on an equal footing with those operating in Italy and other small financial centers.
48.
In the meantime, the CBSM should remain vigilant and apply the highest
supervisory standards. The key challenge is preventing losses of reputation and outflows of
funds that a scandal or financial problem—even in a small institution—would trigger. There is a
need to guard against the possibility of excessive risk-taking as profits wither under intense
competitive pressure, following the sharp increase in licenses to banks and nonbank financial
institutions. Supervisors should adapt their practice to this new environment by increasing the
frequency of on-site inspections while the small size of San Marino would allow to continue
keeping the supervisory and regulatory burden to a minimum.
49.
San Marino’s statistical database has improved but serious shortcomings remain.
The availability of reliable statistics on current economic conditions and up-to-date transparent
government accounts is not only important to external observers but is key to designing
appropriate economic policies and preparing realistic budgets. Despite its size, San Marino has
the resources necessary to devote additional efforts to the compilation of general government
accounts in line with Eurostat’s ESA95 methodology and timely national account statistics, as
well as the collection of indicators enabling estimates of GDP growth. The authorities should
also assign clear responsibilities to ensure the consistency of the data published by the Ministry
of Finance and the CBSM.
50.
San Marino is urged to move toward providing ODA in line with the UN-recommended
target (0.7 percent of GNP).
51.

It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on a 24-month cycle.

- 19 Table 1. San Marino: Basic Data, 1996-2004
Total area (sq. km.):
Population (December 2003):
GNP per capita (current US$, 2002):
Life expectancy (2000):

61.2
29,241
34,902
77 (male)
84 (female)
4 per thousand

Infant mortality (2002):

Output and Prices
Real GDP 1/
Employment
Unemployment rate (end of year)
Inflation rate (annual average)
Wages
External Accounts 2/
Trade balance (in millions of US$)
Exports 3/
Imports 3/
Number of tourists (in millions)
(Percent change)
Average length of visit (in days)
US$ exchange rate (end of period) 4/
Nominal effective exchange rate index (Italy) 5/
Real effective exchange rate index (Italy) 5/

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

4.9
2.6
4.9
4.9
9.3

6.9
3.3
4.2
2.0
5.0

7.5
4.3
4.0
1.8
4.2

9.0
4.5
3.2
1.6
3.9

2.2
2.8
3.0
2.6
1.9

5.5
5.8
2.4
2.8
-0.5

0.3
3.1
3.9
2.3
3.7

0.0
0.8
4.5
2.5
5.7

2.0
1.8
2.9
2.1
...

22.6
218.7
215.8

-27.0
234.6
238.3

-12.2
202.4
203.8

-21.1
197.4
200.0

-44.6
193.8
199.5

-38.0
186.8
191.5

-100.9
177.6
187.9

...
...
...

...
...
...

3.3
3.3
3.3
-0.7
-1.1
-1.3
1.3
2.1
1.5
1,530.57 1,759.19 1,653.10
75.59
75.8
76.0
84.77
85.2
85.9

3.1
-3.6
1.5
0.995
74.1
84.1

3.1
-2.5
1.4
1.075
70.7
80.7

3.0
-1.2
1.6
1.135
71.2
81.7

3.1
2.2
1.5
0.954
72.1
83.5

2.8
-8.3
1.5
0.884
75.3
88.1

2.6
-7.1
1.5
0.812
76.6
89.8

27.3
27.8
-0.6
6.0
5.3

Fiscal variables 3/ 6/
Central government net revenue
Central government net expenditure
Central government balance
Central government deposits
Gross public debt

31.5
34.2
-2.7
16.0
3.7

31.2
33.2
-2.0
13.1
4.0

34.2
32.6
1.7
8.4
4.1

28.1
31.0
-3.0
10.8
3.9

28.2
31.3
-3.2
2.2
4.3

27.7
31.3
-3.6
0.0
5.5

27.4
29.6
-2.2
5.2
5.3

30.1
28.4
1.6
6.2
4.9

Interest rates 7/
Loans
Repurchase agreements
Time deposits
Italian lending rate

14.5
7.6
6.2
12.1

11.4
5.9
4.7
9.7

9.5
4.3
3.7
7.9

7.9
2.6
2.5
5.6

9.2
3.9
2.6
6.3

8.8
4.0
2.9
6.5

8.0
3.9
2.7
5.8

7.1
2.0
1.6
4.8

...
...
...
...

Net foreign assets 3/ 7/
Deposit money banks
Central bank 8/

81.6
26.8

80.8
24.0

63.7
19.2

70.6
17.1

55.1
16.5

51.6
14.5

130.0
16.0

106.8
19.9

...
...

Fitch IBCA country rating 9/

AA

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Data for 2003-04 are Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/
6/
7/
8/
9/

Fund staff estimate for 2003 and 2004.
Based on national account data.
In percent of GDP.
Lira per US$ up to 1998 and euro per US$ thereafter.
Annual average.
Accrual basis. Budget figures for 2004 and preliminary outturn for 2003.
End of period.
The central bank (CBSM) has no foreign liabilities.
Long-term, foreign currency rating. Italy's Fitch IBCA rating is AA-.

- 20 Table 2. San Marino: Central Administration Operations, Accrual Basis, 1992-2004
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Revenues 1/
Tax
Direct 1/
Import Tax 1/
Other indirect taxes
Non-Tax 1/ 2/
Asset Sales

143.9
101.5
42.4
49.3
9.8
40.0
2.3

157.2
116.5
45.9
61.0
9.7
39.4
1.2

172.4
129.2
56.0
61.4
11.8
41.2
2.0

174.8
128.3
53.2
62.8
12.2
45.3
1.2

191.2
139.5
58.6
68.9
12.0
45.4
6.3

206.4
157.1
70.0
74.4
12.7
47.0
2.3

247.7
177.8
80.2
84.9
12.7
45.4
24.5

Expenditure 1/
Current expenditure
Wages & Salaries
Transfers to Public Sector
o/w ISS
Transfers to Private Sector
Interest Payments
Others 3/
Capital expenditure
Transfers to Public Sector
Others

145.8
118.5
41.6
54.7
36.4
...
...
22.2
27.3
12.1
15.2

164.3
141.5
48.7
53.3
43.4
...
...
39.5
22.8
10.3
12.6

193.3
153.3
56.3
57.9
47.6
...
...
39.2
40.0
10.3
29.7

200.2
159.6
60.4
72.2
47.0
6.7
1.5
18.8
40.7
10.4
30.3

207.4
171.6
64.9
75.0
49.3
6.8
1.9
23.0
35.8
13.7
22.1

219.6
186.3
71.4
61.3
52.5
7.9
2.6
43.2
33.3
14.8
18.5

Balance

-2.0

-7.2

-20.8

-25.4

-16.2

Financing
Net Debt Financing
Change in Deposits
Change in Net
Government Arrears

2.0
-0.2
-18.7
20.9

7.2
2.3
-3.5
8.3

20.8
0.1
1.7
19.0

25.4
1.8
-18.1
41.7

16.2
4.8
19.5
-8.2

Memorandum Items:
Tax reimbursements
Reassessment of old arrears

59.4
1.2

66.2
3.4

82.5
3.4

108.4
44.7

Revenues 1/
Tax
Direct 1/
Import Tax 1/
Other indirect taxes
Non-Tax 1/ 2/
Asset Sales

37.5
26.5
11.1
12.9
2.6
10.4
0.6

36.2
26.8
10.6
14.0
2.2
9.1
0.3

35.7
26.8
11.6
12.7
2.4
8.5
0.4

Expenditure 1/
Current expenditure
Wages & Salaries
Transfers to Public Sector
o/w ISS
Transfers to Private Sector
Interest Payments
Others 3/
Capital expenditure
Transfers to Public Sector
Others

38.0
30.9
10.9
14.3
9.5
...
...
5.8
7.1
3.2
4.0

37.8
32.6
11.2
12.3
10.0
...
...
9.1
5.3
2.4
2.9

Balance

-0.5

Financing
Net Debt Financing
Change in Deposits
Change in Net
Government Arrears

0.5
-0.1
-4.9
5.4

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
Preliminary

2004
Budget

224.7
170.9
81.3
74.5
15.2
44.5
9.3

236.6
182.5
79.2
87.3
15.9
46.6
7.5

252.6
196.7
96.7
82.3
17.7
53.2
2.7

256.4
198.2
104.1
71.8
22.3
56.5
1.7

288.0
219.7
100.0
94.9
24.9
65.7
2.6

271.9
208.8
101.1
86.3
21.4
59.7
3.5

235.5
198.8
79.0
81.8
51.0
8.8
3.4
25.8
36.8
12.7
24.0

248.7
221.9
84.4
98.1
68.2
8.4
2.8
28.3
26.7
11.2
15.5

265.7
235.6
91.6
99.4
70.4
8.9
2.5
33.2
30.1
15.0
15.0

285.3
240.2
91.9
109.9
76.6
6.3
2.4
29.8
45.1
12.7
32.4

276.8
251.9
90.5
123.0
92.0
9.7
2.4
26.4
24.9
3.1
21.8

272.4
250.6
91.2
123.7
84.3
8.0
2.2
25.5
21.8
7.9
13.9

277.6
254.2
91.7
115.7
77.0
7.6
2.9
36.4
23.3
6.1
17.2

-13.2

12.2

-23.9

-29.0

-32.7

-20.4

15.7

-5.6

13.2
4.0
10.5
-1.2

-12.2
3.4
26.2
-41.8

23.9
1.6
-26.1
48.4

29.0
4.9
68.5
-44.3

32.7
13.8
17.9
1.0

20.4
-1.0
-48.1
69.6

-15.7
-2.2
-11.4
-2.1

5.6
5.6
0.0
0.0

158.4
12.1

188.4
27.0

183.9
-14.9

236.3
13.6

180.6
3.7

224.4
-80.1

216.4
15.9

226.5
1.5

251.1
0.0

31.4
23.1
9.6
11.3
2.2
8.1
0.2

31.5
23.0
9.7
11.4
2.0
7.5
1.0

31.2
23.8
10.6
11.3
1.9
7.1
0.3

34.2
24.6
11.1
11.7
1.8
6.3
3.4

28.1
21.3
10.2
9.3
1.9
5.6
1.2

28.2
21.7
9.4
10.4
1.9
5.6
0.9

27.7
21.6
10.6
9.0
1.9
5.8
0.3

27.4
21.2
11.1
7.7
2.4
6.0
0.2

30.1
22.9
10.4
9.9
2.6
6.9
0.3

27.3
20.9
10.1
8.6
2.1
6.0
0.4

40.0
31.8
11.7
12.0
9.8
...
...
8.1
8.3
2.1
6.1

36.0
28.7
10.9
13.0
8.5
1.2
0.3
3.4
7.3
1.9
5.4

34.2
28.3
10.7
12.4
8.1
1.1
0.3
3.8
5.9
2.3
3.6

33.2
28.2
10.8
9.3
7.9
1.2
0.4
6.5
5.0
2.2
2.8

32.6
27.5
10.9
11.3
7.1
1.2
0.5
3.6
5.1
1.8
3.3

31.0
27.7
10.5
12.3
8.5
1.0
0.3
3.5
3.3
1.4
1.9

31.6
28.1
10.9
11.8
8.4
1.1
0.3
4.0
3.6
1.8
1.8

31.3
26.4
10.1
12.1
8.4
0.7
0.3
3.3
4.9
1.4
3.6

29.6
26.9
9.7
13.2
9.8
1.0
0.3
2.8
2.7
0.3
2.3

28.4
26.1
9.5
12.9
8.8
0.8
0.2
2.7
2.3
0.8
1.5

27.8
25.5
9.2
11.6
7.7
0.8
0.3
3.7
2.3
0.6
1.7

-1.7

-4.3

-4.6

-2.7

-2.0

1.7

-3.0

-3.5

-3.6

-2.2

1.6

-0.6

1.7
0.5
-0.8
1.9

4.3
0.0
0.4
3.9

4.6
0.3
-3.3
7.5

2.7
0.8
3.2
-1.3

2.0
0.6
1.6
-0.2

-1.7
0.5
3.6
-5.8

3.0
0.2
-3.3
6.0

3.5
0.6
8.2
-5.3

3.6
1.5
2.0
0.1

2.2
-0.1
-5.1
7.4

-1.6
-0.2
-1.2
-0.2

0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0

(Million of euros)

(Percent of GDP)

Memorandum Items:
Tax reimbursements
15.5
15.2
17.1
19.5
26.1
28.5
25.4
29.5
21.5
24.6
23.1
23.6
25.2
Reassessment of old arrears
0.3
0.8
0.7
8.0
2.0
4.1
-2.1
1.7
0.4
-8.8
1.7
0.2
0.0
Sources: Department of Budget and Planning, Relazione Previsionale e Programmatica ; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Net of tax reimbursements.
2/ Includes custom duties, state monopolies, other special revenues, revenues from financial assets, interests on credits and deposits.
3/ Includes purchases of goods and services, remunerations for consultancies, contribution to interest payments on publicly subsidized loans, and transport costs.

- 21 -

Table 3. San Marino: Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability, 1998-2003 1/
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

35.0

47.8

46.4

42.4

44.7

35.8

105.0

81.6

88.7

45.3

53.9

62.8

Financial Sector Risk Indicators
Risk-based capital asset ratio 2/
Profits of the banking sector (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Rate of return on average equity
banking sector 3/

5.1

4.9

5.0

4.4

4.1

4.1

Loan /deposit ratio

25.4

23.3

27.0

27.3

34.3

39.7

Non-performing loans/total loans

1.6

1.4

1.1

1.3

1.1

1.1

Loan Loss Provision / Net Interest Revenue

6.7

8.6

8.8

7.5

7.8

...

Foreign assets of the banking sector (in billions of euros, eop) 3/

3.7

4.4

4.6

5.1

4.6

4.4

Foreign liabilities of the banking sector (in billions of euros, eop) 3/

3.3

3.9

4.1

4.5

3.3

3.4

19.4

23.2

22.7

29.3

31.2

29.7

Cost-income ratio of the banking system

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; Bankscope; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF Research department.
1/ The interpretation of some of the indicators is affected by the launch of the EMU in 1999.
2/ On a consolidated basis and after distribution of profits.
3/ Banking institutions.

- 22 -

Figure 1. San Marino: Inflation, Exchange Rates and Interest Rates, 1990-2003
9

9

Consumer Price Inflation (In percent)

8

8

San Marino minus Italy
San Marino

7

7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
-1

-1
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003
120

120

Exchange and Interest Rates
100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

US$/lira to 1998 and thereafter euro
Nominal effective (lira up to 1998, thereafter euro)

20

20

Real effective (lira up to 1998, thereafter euro)
0

0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

20
18

20
Average lending rate

Interest Rates ( In percent)

16

18
16

Time deposits

14

14
San Marino minus Italy
average lending rate 1/

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; ISTAT; Bank of Italy; IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund
staff estimates.
1/ The smaller size of Sammarinese firms in relation to Italian firms explains the stable positive spread
between lending rates.

- 23 -

Figure 2. San Marino: Contribution of Manufacturing to the Economy 1/ 2/
45
Employment in manufacturing industry, 2002
(percent of total employment)

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Hong

a
, Chin
Kong

Luxe

rg
mbou

s
Cypru

pore
Singa

Switz

d
erlan

Malta

d
Irelan

Employment in manufacturing industry
(percent of total employment)

65

a
Italy
magn
ia Ro
Emil

France
Italy
United Kingdom

55

he
Marc

arino
San M

Germany
San Marino
United States

45
35
25
15
1969
7

1972

1975

1978

5.9%

6
5

2
1
0

1984

1987

1990

1993

1996

1999

2002

Contribution to real GDP growth 3/
(percent; two year averages)

MANUFACTURING

2.9 %

4
3

1981

PUBLIC SECTOR

MANUFACTURING

SERVICES

`
PUBLIC SECTOR

COMMERCE & TOURISM

SERVICES

FINANCIAL SECTOR

COMMERCE & TOURISM

1999-00

2001-02

-1

1.0%
MANUFACTURING
PUBLIC SECTOR
SERVICES
FINANCIAL SECTOR
COMMERCE & TOURISM

-2
2003-04 4/

Sources: International Labor Organization (ILO); Sammarinese authorities; SVIMEZ; ISTAT; and Fund
staff estimates.
1/ Data for 2003-04 are Fund staff estimates.
2/ Manufacturing includes construction.
3/ Other sectors (not labeled) include agriculture, transport and communication.
4/ Fund staff estimates.

- 24 -

Figure 3. San Marino: Contribution of the Financial Sector to Private Sector Employment,
Income and Profits, 2003
Breakdown of Private Sector Employment by Economic Activity

Services, Transport, and
Communication
19%

Financial sector
4%

Agriculture
1%
Manufacturing
41%

Construction
11%

Commerce and Tourism
22%

Breakdown of Private Sector Dependent Labor Income by Economic Activity.
Financial sector
10%

Services, Transport, and
Communication
18%

Manufacturing
52%

Commerce and Tourism
9%
Costruction
11%

Breakdown of Private Sector Gross Profits by Economic Activity, 2002
Financial sector
16%
Services, Transport, and
Communication
24%

Manufacturing
48%

Commerce and Tourism
8%

Costruction
4%

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

- 25 -

Figure 4. San Marino: Bank Deposits and Managed/Administered Funds, 1998-2003
(In percent of GDP)
1200

1200

San Marino

Italy

Deposits

Deposits

Managed/Administered Funds
1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

Managed/Administered Funds

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1200

1200

Emilia-Romagna

Marche

Deposits

Deposits

Managed/Administered Funds

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

Managed/Administered Funds

0

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1998

1999

2000

Sources: Bank of Italy; and Central Bank of San Marino, Financial Statements 2003.

2001

2002

2003

- 26 -

Figure 5. San Marino: Banking Sector Indicators, 1998-2002
(5-year average, in percent of GDP)
4000
Total Liabilities 1/

3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

nd
s
Is
la

an

bo
ur
g
Ca

ym

in

Li
ec

Lu
xe
m

ht
en
ste

M

on
ac
o

nd
rla
itz
e

Sw

Si
ng
ap
or
e
Sa
n
M
ar
in
o
Be
rm
ud
a

A
nd
or
ra

K
on
g

nd

H
on
g

Ire
la

Cy
pr
us

al
ta
M

Ita

ly

0

3000
Total Deposits 1/

2500
2000
1500
1000
500

m
bo
ur
g

in

Li
ec

Lu
xe

ht
en
ste

on
ac
o
M

A
nd
or
ra

nd

Sw

itz

er
la

nd
s
Is
la

ud
a
Ca
ym

an

Be
rm

po
re

us

Si
ng
a

Cy
pr

K
on
g

H
on
g

la
nd
Ire

al
ta
M

in
o
M
ar

Sa
n

It a

ly

0

70
Profit Before Tax 1/

60
50
40
30
20
10

in
te
ns
te

bo
ur
g
m

Lu
xe

Li
ec
h

nd
s
Is
la

Ca
ym
an

An
do
rra

o
on
ac
M

ar
in
o
M

Sa

n

K
on
g

H
on
g

Be
rm
ud
a

nd
er
la

po
re

Sw
itz

Si
ng
a

Ire
la
nd

s
Cy
pr
u

al
ta
M

Ita

ly

0

Sources: Bankscope; World Economic Outlook; United Nations; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ To ensure comparability, data for San Marino are also from Bankscope and differ from those in Figure 4.
Specifically, total liabilities and deposits do not include managed/administered funds, although related
commissions and fees contribute to profits.

- 27 -

Figure 6. San Marino: Real GDP Growth, 1990-2004 1/
(In percent)
16

Real GDP Growth

14

San Marino
Italy
Emilia-Romagna
Marche

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
1990
9

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Comparing Average Growth Rates

8
7
6
5
4

Average growth rate 1990-1999

Average growth rate 2000-2002 2/

3
2
1
0
San Marino

Italy

Emilia-Romagna

Marche

9
8

Average Growth Rates, 2000-02

7
6
5
4
3
2
1

or

ra

3/

d
A
nd

Ire
la
n

g
on
K
g

Ho
n

m
bo
ur
g

xe

ru
s

Lu

Cy
p

3/
on

ac
o

3/
M

ten
ste
in

ap
or
e

Li
ec
h

Si
ng

M
ar
in
o

Ita
ly

M
alt
a

Sa
n

Ca
ym
an

Be
rm

ud
a

3/
Is
la
nd
s3
/
Sw
itz
er
la
nd

0

Sources: United Nations; Sammarinese authorities; SVIMEZ; ISTAT; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ For San Marino and the Italian regions data are ESA79 until 1995 and ESA95 thereafter. For San
Marino, old and new data do not overlap.
2/ Data for 2003-04 are Fund staff estimates.
3/ Average for 2000-01.

- 28 -

Figure 7. San Marino: Employment and Unemployment, 1990-2003
7

Commuters (in percent of resident private workforce; right axis)
Annual growth

6

50
45
40

5
Employment
(In percent)

4

35
30
25

3

20
2
15
1

10

0

5
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
10

10
9
8
7

Unemployment Rates
(In percent)
San Marino
Emilia-Romagna
Rimini
Marche

9
8
7

6

6

5

5

4

4

3

3

2

2
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Sources: Sammarinese authorities; SVIMEZ; and ISTAT.

- 29 -

Figure 8. San Marino: Unit Labor Costs Compared, 1990-2003 1/
(In percent of Italy, Emilia-Romagna, or Marche)

115

115

Average Wage for
Dependent Employment
(In percent of )

110

Average Labor Costs for
Dependent Employment
(In percent of)

110

105

105

100

100

95

95

90

90

85

85
80

80

Italy

Italy
75

Emilia-Romagna

70

70
1993

1996

1999

Emilia-Romagna
Marche

Marche
1990

75

2002

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

115

115

GDP per Employed
(In percent of )

110

Unit Labor Cost 2/
(In percent of )

110

105

105

100

100

95

95

90

90

85

85

80

80
Italy

75

Italy

Emilia-Romagna

75

Emilia-Romagna

Marche

Marche
70

70
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; SVIMEZ; and ISTAT.
1/ Data before 1995 are on an ESA 79 basis; afterwards they are on an ESA 95 basis. For San Marino,
data for 2003 are available only for wages and employment. Labor costs are assumed to have grown at
the same rate as wages, as there were no changes in payroll taxes.
2/ Labor cost per employee divided by output per employed.

2002

- 30 -

Figure 9. San Marino: Fiscal Developments, 1992-2003
(Central administration; in percent of GDP)
2

Government Balance (accrual basis)

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

10

Net Asset Position
5
0
-5
-10
-15
1992

1993

1994

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25

1995

1996

Financial Assets

Bank Deposits
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

Public Debt
1997

1998

Net Government Arrears
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

2002

2003

6
5

Debt stock

Long-term debt

Short-term debt

4
3
2
1
0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

1999

- 31 -

Figure 10. San Marino: Pension System, 1992-2003
(in percent of GDP)
8
Social security (SS) contributions 1/
Pension expenditure
SS contributions of dependent employees
Pension expenditure on dependent employees

6

4

2

0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Other revenues and expenditures

General expenditure 2/
Intra-fund outlays 3/
Yield
Government transfers
Imputed contribution 5/
Intra-fund transfers 4/

0.5
0.0
-0.5
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

15
Reserves

10

5

0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Source: Ufficio Programmazione Economica e Centro Elaborazione Dati e Statistica.
1/ Net of reimbursements.
2/ Portion of administrative expenditures borne by SSI.
3/ Amount of resources used to cover the deficit of voluntary pension funds.
4/ Surplus of the funds for family allowances and social service activities.
5/ SS contributions computed on the yearly allowances paid to dependent workers (i.e., sick leave,
unemployment benefits, etc.)

- 32 -

Figure 11. San Marino: Bank Profitability, 1998-2003
Profitability declined markedly ...
3.5
3.0

EU15
Italy
Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

Return on Average Assets (ROAA)
(In percent)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1998

1999

2000

2001

35
30

2002

2003

EU15
Italy
Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

Return on Average Equity (ROAE)
(In percent)

25
20
15
10
5
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

...even with relatively good net interest margin.
6
5

EU15
Italy
Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

(In percent)

4
3
2
1
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Sources: Department Supervision of the Central Bank of San Marino; and Bankscope.
1/ Banca delle Marche, Cassa di Risparmio di Rimini, Cassa di Risparmio di Cesena, Cassa di
Risparmio di Ravenna and Banca Popolare dell'Adriatico.

- 33 -

Figure 12. San Marino: Bank Efficiency, 1998-2003
Cost income ratios are lower in San Marino ...
120
EU15
Italy
Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

(In percent)
100

80

60

40

20

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

... and value added is higher than Italian banks.
250,000

Value added per employee, 2002
(In U.S. dollars)

200,000

150,000

100,000

50,000

Italy

Italian Comparators

San Marino

Sources: Department Supervision of the Central Bank of San Marino; and Bankscope.
1/ Banca delle Marche, Cassa di Risparmio di Rimini, Cassa di Risparmio di Cesena, Cassa di
Risparmio di Ravenna and Banca Popolare dell'Adriatico.

- 34 -

Figure 13. San Marino: Capital Ratios and Non-Performing Loans, 1998-2003

Banks remain well capitalized with Tier 1 capital ratios well above Italian comparators.
70

EU15
Italy
Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

(In percent)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Non performing loans remained low and well below Italian comparators.
12

EU-15

(In percent)

Italy

10

Italian Comparators 1/
San Marino

8

6

4

2

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Sources: Department Supervision of the Central Bank of San Marino; and Bankscope.
1/ Banca delle Marche, Cassa di Risparmio di Rimini, Cassa di Risparmio di Cesena, Cassa di
Risparmio di Ravenna and Banca Popolare dell'Adriatico.

- 35 -

APPENDIX I

San Marino: Fund Relations
(As of April 30, 2004)

I. Membership Status: Joined 9/23/92. Article VIII.
II. General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III. SDR Department:
Allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
17.00
12.90
4.10
SDR Million

Percent Quota
100.00
75.88
24.13
Percent

0.51

N/A

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None
V. Financial Arrangements: None
VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None
VII. Exchange Rate and Trade Arrangements: Prior to 1999 the currency of San Marino was the
Italian lira. Since January 1, 1999 San Marino uses the euro as its official currency. A Monetary
Agreement between the Italian Republic, on behalf of the European Community, and the Republic of San
Marino, authorizes San Marino to use Euro notes and coins as the official currency. The central monetary
institution is the Banca Centrale della Republica di San Marino. Foreign exchange transactions are
conducted through commercial banks without restriction at rates quoted in Italian markets. There are no
taxes or subsidies on purchases or sales of foreign exchange. San Marino may adopt the international
security exchange restrictions applied by the EU by deciding to apply EC Regulations.13 The basis of the
EU’s trade relationship with San Marino is the Agreement on Cooperation and Customs Union between
the European Economic Community and the Republic of San Marino, which was signed in 1991 and
entered into force on April 1, 2002, following ratification by all parties. Council Decision 2002/45/EC
approves the Agreement and its accompanying Protocol.
VIII. Article IV Consultation: San Marino is on a 24-month consultation cycle; the last consultation
discussions with San Marino were held in September 2001 and concluded on 12/5/2001 (EBM/01/124).
IX. CTF
X.

Technical Assistance
Year
Dept.
Purpose
1997
STA
Multisector assistance
2004
STA Monetary and Financial Statistics

Date
3/97
1/29–2/4, 2004

XI. Resident Representative: None.

13

European regulations are not directly applicable to San Marino as a result of Article 249 of the
Treaty Establishing the European Community, but they may well be applied at San Marino’s
initiative. Restrictions are in the process of being notified.

- 36 -

APPENDIX II

San Marino: Statistical Issues
Progress has been made, but there are important shortcomings in many areas of San Marino’s
statistical database due to difficulties in compiling basic data (stemming mainly from an
absence of border controls) and a limited number of adequately trained personnel. The
authorities recognize these deficiencies, and requested and received a STA multi-sector TA
mission in 1997, and a STA Monetary and Financial Statistics TA mission in 2004. Authorities
have recently requested TA in GFS compilation.
Since 1992 the authorities have produced an experimental set of national accounts. Data
for 1995–99 have been calculated in accordance with ESA95. However, output data are
published with two-year delay and sectoral value added is not available. As of 2004, consumer
prices are collected directly at the source and published monthly with short delay. In addition, a
first survey on consumer and business confidence is about to be completed.
The relevant cash and accrual data are collected but complete government finance statistics are
unavailable and central government accounts are not presented according to standard IMF
classifications. The central government budget is written so as to close at par, which implies that
standard financing items, such as amortization, are included as an expenditure while ”borrowing
requirement” is included among the revenues. In the event, however, revenue shortfalls have
been financed by (i) drawing down deposits at the central bank; (ii) changes in volumes of
payables/receivables; and (iii) new loans. The deficit/surplus concept monitored by the
authorities (the avanzo/disavanzo d’esercizio) is the difference between the end of year result
and the budget. This concept is different from a standard central government balance on an
accrual basis, as it includes arrears and yet-to-be-collected revenues among accrued
expenditures. The GFS database includes annual data for 1995 for the consolidated central
government, compiled by the 1997 Multisector Statistics mission.
Regarding monetary statistics, the authorities have, since May 1997, provided balance sheet
data on the commercial banks and the monetary authorities to the STA’s EIS database. These
data are provided on a quarterly basis, with approximately a six-week reporting lag. The
authorities introduced laws and took some measures improving coverage and timeliness of
banks’ reporting, and the CBSM has improved sectorization (allowing for reliable identification
of all transactions of the central government and the social security fund in monetary statistics)
and expanded data collection to cover the offshore asset management activities of banks. A
previous weakness of the data relating to the breakdown of deposits (and other assets and
liabilities) between residents and nonresidents has been remedied. The authorities have changed
banks’ reporting requirements to obtain a breakdown of data on short-term credit by public and
private sector components. However, there is no broad money survey, data on nonbank financial
intermediaries are lacking, and CBSM’s data on public sector deposits and banks’ credits to the
public sector do not match those of the Treasury.
San Marino does not compile balance of payments accounts. It has not committed the required
resources, as the currency union with Italy (now superseded by the use of the euro) has made the
balance of payments relatively unimportant as a policy consideration.

None

Confidentiality

Internal

Electronic

None

Electronic

Annual

Annual

September 2003

4/
2001

Exports/
Imports

None

Publication

None

Publication

Statistical Office Statistical Office

Quarterly

Monthly

April 2004

December 2003

Consumer
Price
Index
3/

Current
Account
Balance

2002 3/

GDP/GNP

None

Publication

Budget
Document

Annual

Annual

None

Publication 1/

Statistical Office

Annual

Annual

September 2003 May 2004

2002

Overall
Government
Balance

1/ San Marino officially adopted the euro as its currency since January 1, 1999, but the Italian lira remains the circulating currency. Exchange rate data for the euro are available on a continuous basis
through Reuters/Bloomberg services.
2/ The Central Bank of San Marino (CBSM) does not engage in the full range of central bank functions because of the use of the euro as legal tender.
3/ San Marino does not produce official estimates of the balance of payments. National accounts data for 1994 and earlier are based on staff estimates and data provided by the authorities.
4/ National accounts data.
5/ San Marino reports data on monetary authorities’ current accounts and time deposits at nonresident banks in euros and foreign currencies. However, these assets do not serve the same policy
purposes of international reserves in other countries because San Marino does not have an independent monetary or exchange rate policy

Internal

Electronic

Electronic

Mode of Reporting

CBSM

CBSM

CBSM

Reuters

Source of Data

Quarterly

May 31, 2004

March 2004

Interest
Rates

Quarterly

Quarterly

Frequency of Reporting Daily

2/

Broad
Money

Quarterly

Quarterly

Quarterly

March 2004

Daily

Frequency of Data

2/

Central
Bank
Balance
Sheet

May 31, 2004

5/
March 2004

Reserve/
Base
Money

May 31, 2004

6/5/04

1/
5/31/04

Date Received

Date of Latest
Observation

Exchange
Rates

International
Reserves

San Marino: Core Statistical Indicators
as of June 17, 2004

- 37 APPENDIX II

12.1
0.0
0.2

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

Gross financing need 6/
in millions of U.S. dollars

9.0
9.3
7.7
-14.2
1.6
4.3
2.6

4.4
37.6

14.0

-0.2
2.6
2.6
28.1
30.7
-0.1
-0.1
0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.8

2.2
7.9
5.3
-7.4
2.6
4.4
3.2

4.9
38.1

15.4

0.4
3.3
3.2
28.2
31.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.9

4.3
0.0

5.5
6.7
3.9
-5.3
2.8
4.6
3.3

5.0
40.9

19.9

1.2
3.3
3.3
27.7
31.1
-0.1
-0.1
0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.1

5.5
0.0

0.3
4.7
2.3
19.0
2.4
-5.2
1.9

5.3
46.7

19.2

-0.3
2.0
1.9
27.4
29.4
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.3

5.3
0.0

Actual
2000 2001 2002

3.9
0.0

1999

5.2
10.6
6.6
-1.7
4.0
0.8
2.2

10-Year
Historical
Average
3.3
4.2
5.9
10.8
4.0
3.0
1.8

10-Year
Standard
Deviation

2.0
6.2
4.1
...
2.1
-0.4
0.3

3.3
40.1

17.3

-0.2
0.4
0.3
27.3
27.5
0.1
0.1
0.2
-0.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

4.7
0.0

3.1
6.2
4.2
...
2.0
3.2
-0.3

2.6
33.1

16.1

-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
27.8
27.5
0.0
0.0
0.2
-0.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

4.5
0.0

3.1
6.2
4.2
...
2.0
3.2
-0.3

2.4
33.1

15.3

-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
27.8
27.6
0.0
0.0
0.2
-0.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

4.3
0.0

3.1
6.2
4.2
...
2.0
3.1
-0.3

2.3
33.2

14.5

-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
27.8
27.6
0.0
0.0
0.2
-0.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

4.0
0.0

2007

4.9
4.9
4.9
4.9
4.9
4.9

4.9
4.9
4.9

5.4
5.8
10.3
8.9
4.7
14.7

6.6
2.6
4.9

5.9
8.1
16.3
13.8
4.5
14.6

8.9
0.8
4.8

5.7
10.2
16.2
13.7
4.3
14.5

11.2
-0.8
4.7

5.5
12.3
16.1
13.6
4.0
14.3

13.6
-2.4
4.6

5.3
14.5
16.0
13.5
3.8
14.2

15.9
-3.9
4.5

3.1
6.2
4.2
...
2.0
3.1
-0.2

2.2
33.3

13.8

-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
27.8
27.6
0.0
0.0
0.2
-0.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.8
0.0

2008

II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio

0.0
4.6
2.1
...
2.5
-4.0
-1.9

1.2
12.5

16.3

-0.4
-1.8
-1.9
30.1
28.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

4.9
0.0

Projections
2005 2006

I. Baseline Projections

2003 2004

2.4
5.9
3.8
...
2.1
1.4
-0.4

0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1

0.2
... 9/
0.2

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 10/

Projected
Average

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 11/
0.0

1/ Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - π(1+g) - g + αε(1+r)]/(1+g+π+gπ)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate; π = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate; α = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and ε = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as αε(1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
8/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
9/ The calculation of the debt-stabilizing primary balance produces a non-sensical outcome when the imputed nominal interest rate (i.e. the nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock) turns negative.
10/ Real depreciation is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).
11/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and primary balance) remain at the level in percent of GDP/growth rate of the last projection year.

B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2004 and 2005
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2004 and 2005
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2004 and 2005
B4. Combination of 2-4 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004 10/
B6. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004

B. Bound Tests

A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2004-08 8/
A2. Primary balance under no policy change in 2004-08
A3. Reduction in GDP growth (relative to baseline) of one standard deviation

A. Alternative Scenarios

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 7/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

7.5
12.8
11.0
6.4
1.8
0.0
-2.2

0.1
-2.0
-2.2
34.2
32.1
0.1
0.1
0.4
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.2

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions

4.1
0.0

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

1998

Table 4. San Marino: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 1998-2008
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

- 38 APPENDIX III

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
July 28, 2004
1.
This statement reflects information that became available after the staff report was
issued. It does not change the thrust of the staff appraisal.
2.
The authorities have revised the 2003 fiscal data, raising the surplus of the central
administration to 2.4 percent of GDP (up from a preliminary 1.6 percent of GDP). Lower
transfers to the Social Security Institute (SSI)―mainly reflecting lower-than-projected
personnel costs and purchases of goods and services of the public health system―fully
account for the revision (see attached Table 2). This revision increases the likelihood that
carry-over effects of the 2003 adjustment will allow an overperformance relative to the
deficit target of about one half percent of GDP for 2004, as suggested in paragraph 14 of the
staff report.

-2-

Table 2. San Marino: Central Administration Operations, Accrual Basis, 1992-2004
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Revenues 1/
Tax
Direct 1/
Import Tax 1/
Other indirect taxes
Non-Tax 1/ 2/
Asset Sales

143.9
101.5
42.4
49.3
9.8
40.0
2.3

157.2
116.5
45.9
61.0
9.7
39.4
1.2

172.4
129.2
56.0
61.4
11.8
41.2
2.0

174.8
128.3
53.2
62.8
12.2
45.3
1.2

191.2
139.5
58.6
68.9
12.0
45.4
6.3

206.4
157.1
70.0
74.4
12.7
47.0
2.3

247.7
177.8
80.2
84.9
12.7
45.4
24.5

Expenditure 1/
Current expenditure
Wages & Salaries
Transfers to Public Sector
o/w SSI
Transfers to Private Sector
Interest Payments
Others 3/
Capital expenditure
Transfers to Public Sector
Others

145.8
118.5
41.6
54.7
36.4
...
...
22.2
27.3
12.1
15.2

164.3
141.5
48.7
53.3
43.4
...
...
39.5
22.8
10.3
12.6

193.3
153.3
56.3
57.9
47.6
...
...
39.2
40.0
10.3
29.7

200.2
159.6
60.4
72.2
47.0
6.7
1.5
18.8
40.7
10.4
30.3

207.4
171.6
64.9
75.0
49.3
6.8
1.9
23.0
35.8
13.7
22.1

219.6
186.3
71.4
61.3
52.5
7.9
2.6
43.2
33.3
14.8
18.5

Balance

-2.0

-7.2

-20.8

-25.4

-16.2

Financing
Net Debt Financing
Change in Deposits
Change in Net
Government Arrears

2.0
-0.2
-18.7
20.9

7.2
2.3
-3.5
8.3

20.8
0.1
1.7
19.0

25.4
1.8
-18.1
41.7

16.2
4.8
19.5
-8.2

Memorandum Items:
Tax reimbursements
Reassessment of old arrears

59.4
1.2

66.2
3.4

82.5
3.4

108.4
44.7

Revenues 1/
Tax
Direct 1/
Import Tax 1/
Other indirect taxes
Non-Tax 1/ 2/
Asset Sales

37.5
26.5
11.1
12.9
2.6
10.4
0.6

36.2
26.8
10.6
14.0
2.2
9.1
0.3

35.7
26.8
11.6
12.7
2.4
8.5
0.4

Expenditure 1/
Current expenditure
Wages & Salaries
Transfers to Public Sector
o/w SSI
Transfers to Private Sector
Interest Payments
Others 3/
Capital expenditure
Transfers to Public Sector
Others

38.0
30.9
10.9
14.3
9.5
...
...
5.8
7.1
3.2
4.0

37.8
32.6
11.2
12.3
10.0
...
...
9.1
5.3
2.4
2.9

Balance

-0.5

Financing
Net Debt Financing
Change in Deposits
Change in Net
Government Arrears

0.5
-0.1
-4.9
5.4

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004
Budget

224.7
170.9
81.3
74.5
15.2
44.5
9.3

236.6
182.5
79.2
87.3
15.9
46.6
7.5

252.6
196.7
96.7
82.3
17.7
53.2
2.7

256.4
198.2
104.1
71.8
22.3
56.5
1.7

288.5
219.7
100.0
94.9
24.9
66.2
2.6

271.9
208.8
101.1
86.3
21.4
59.7
3.5

235.5
198.8
79.0
81.8
51.0
8.8
3.4
25.8
36.8
12.7
24.0

248.7
221.9
84.4
98.1
68.2
8.4
2.8
28.3
26.7
11.2
15.5

265.7
235.6
91.6
99.4
70.4
8.9
2.5
33.2
30.1
15.0
15.0

285.3
240.2
91.9
109.9
76.6
6.3
2.4
29.8
45.1
12.7
32.4

276.8
251.9
90.5
123.0
92.0
9.7
2.4
26.4
24.9
3.1
21.8

265.4
243.6
91.2
116.2
76.8
8.0
2.2
26.0
21.8
7.9
13.9

277.6
254.2
91.7
115.7
77.0
7.6
2.9
36.4
23.3
6.1
17.2

-13.2

12.2

-23.9

-29.0

-32.7

-20.4

23.1

-5.6

13.2
4.0
10.5
-1.2

-12.2
3.4
26.2
-41.8

23.9
1.6
-26.1
48.4

29.0
4.9
68.5
-44.3

32.7
13.8
17.9
1.0

20.4
-1.0
-48.1
69.6

-23.1
-2.2
-18.8
-2.1

5.6
5.6
0.0
0.0

158.4
12.1

188.4
27.0

183.9
-14.9

236.3
13.6

180.6
3.7

224.4
-80.1

216.4
15.9

226.5
1.5

251.1
0.0

31.4
23.1
9.6
11.3
2.2
8.1
0.2

31.5
23.0
9.7
11.4
2.0
7.5
1.0

31.2
23.8
10.6
11.3
1.9
7.1
0.3

34.2
24.6
11.1
11.7
1.8
6.3
3.4

28.1
21.3
10.2
9.3
1.9
5.6
1.2

28.2
21.7
9.4
10.4
1.9
5.6
0.9

27.7
21.6
10.6
9.0
1.9
5.8
0.3

27.4
21.2
11.1
7.7
2.4
6.0
0.2

30.1
22.9
10.4
9.9
2.6
6.9
0.3

27.3
20.9
10.1
8.6
2.1
6.0
0.4

40.0
31.8
11.7
12.0
9.8
...
...
8.1
8.3
2.1
6.1

36.0
28.7
10.9
13.0
8.5
1.2
0.3
3.4
7.3
1.9
5.4

34.2
28.3
10.7
12.4
8.1
1.1
0.3
3.8
5.9
2.3
3.6

33.2
28.2
10.8
9.3
7.9
1.2
0.4
6.5
5.0
2.2
2.8

32.6
27.5
10.9
11.3
7.1
1.2
0.5
3.6
5.1
1.8
3.3

31.0
27.7
10.5
12.3
8.5
1.0
0.3
3.5
3.3
1.4
1.9

31.6
28.1
10.9
11.8
8.4
1.1
0.3
4.0
3.6
1.8
1.8

31.3
26.4
10.1
12.1
8.4
0.7
0.3
3.3
4.9
1.4
3.6

29.6
26.9
9.7
13.2
9.8
1.0
0.3
2.8
2.7
0.3
2.3

27.7
25.4
9.5
12.1
8.0
0.8
0.2
2.7
2.3
0.8
1.5

27.8
25.5
9.2
11.6
7.7
0.8
0.3
3.7
2.3
0.6
1.7

-1.7

-4.3

-4.6

-2.7

-2.0

1.7

-3.0

-3.5

-3.6

-2.2

2.4

-0.6

1.7
0.5
-0.8
1.9

4.3
0.0
0.4
3.9

4.6
0.3
-3.3
7.5

2.7
0.8
3.2
-1.3

2.0
0.6
1.6
-0.2

-1.7
0.5
3.6
-5.8

3.0
0.2
-3.3
6.0

3.5
0.6
8.2
-5.3

3.6
1.5
2.0
0.1

2.2
-0.1
-5.1
7.4

-2.4
-0.2
-2.0
-0.2

0.6
0.6
0.0
0.0

(Million of euros)

(Percent of GDP)

Memorandum Items:
Tax reimbursements
15.5
15.2
17.1
19.5
26.1
28.5
25.4
29.5
21.5
24.6
23.1
23.6
25.2
Reassessment of old arrears
0.3
0.8
0.7
8.0
2.0
4.1
-2.1
1.7
0.4
-8.8
1.7
0.2
0.0
Sources: Department of Budget and Planning, Relazione Previsionale e Programmatica ; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Net of tax reimbursements.
2/ Includes custom duties, state monopolies, other special revenues, revenues from financial assets, interests on credits and deposits.
3/ Includes purchases of goods and services, remunerations for consultancies, contribution to interest payments on publicly subsidized loans, and transport costs.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/82
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 4, 2004

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with San Marino
On July 28, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with San Marino.1
Background
Growth of San Marino’s economy has slowed considerably since 2000 with the fading of
competitive advantages that had contributed to past rapid development. In the period 2000–
2002, GDP growth decelerated to an average of about 2.8 percent, about one-third the pace
achieved in the 1990s and below the growth rates of other small European countries over the
last three years. Manufacturing and commerce faltered in the midst of inflexible labor markets,
narrowing tax advantages, and greater price competition from nearby areas. In the financial
sector, a flurry of new entrants, and the repatriation of Italian deposits in the wake of a tax
amnesty, eroded profitability. Against this background, GDP is expected to rise by 2 percent in
2004, after stagnating in 2003.
After years of recurrent fiscal deficits, the government achieved a surplus of about 1.5 percent
of GDP in 2003 owing to cutbacks in public sector employment, moderate growth in public
sector wages, and better administration of indirect taxes. As a result, the net asset position of
the central government—which had deteriorated by more than 15 percent of GDP in a decade—
began to improve. For 2004, the carry-over effects of the 2003 adjustment and additional
Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of
the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed
during the July 28, 2004 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report.
1

-2measures in the budget should allow an overperformance relative to the deficit target of a half
percent of GDP. Despite this positive short-term outlook, slow revenue growth and rising social
security spending are a source of concern over the medium term. Total revenues of the central
government fell by about 7.5 percent of GDP from 1992 to 2003, while pension expenditure
grew by about 3.8 percent of GDP over the same period.
Recent initiatives improved the functioning of the labor and product markets, although some
rigidities remain. The reduction in the public sector wage bill eliminated a long-standing source
of wage-drift and loss of competitiveness, while new regulations accelerated the procedures to
authorize nonresidents’ hiring.
In the financial sector, Sammarinese banks remain somewhat more efficient and better
capitalized, and have fewer nonperforming loans, than comparators. A heightened competitive
environment enhanced the quality of services offered, but also put pressure on profits. In view
of these trends, the authorities’ have started to revamp the financial sector’s legislative and
regulatory framework by adopting Basel I and merging the Istituto di Credito Sammarinese
(ICS)—the former central bank—and the Office of Bank Supervision. Parliament recently
approved new provisions for anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism
(AML/CFT) to bring San Marino further in line with international standards.
Executive Board Assessment
They welcomed the indications that an economic recovery appears to be underway, and
commended the government for its intention to pursue an ambitious reform agenda aimed at
returning San Marino to a high growth path. They observed that important synergies could arise
from maintaining a budget surplus, introducing a comprehensive reform of the pension system,
eliminating residual labor and product market rigidities, and upgrading the regulatory and
legislative framework of the financial sector.
Directors noted that, in the short run, the improved global outlook would benefit both San
Marino and its main trading partners, creating conditions favorable to pressing ahead with
reform plans. Foreign demand could be expected to drive a recovery in manufacturing and
tourism, while an upward shift in interest rates should raise the profitability of the banking
system. Directors nevertheless pointed to the taxation of Italian commuters—as a result of the
introduction of a bilateral treaty between San Marino and Italy—and prospective EU-related
changes in savings taxation as possible downside risks for employment and growth.
Directors commended the decisive fiscal correction of 2003 and encouraged the authorities to
continue improving the net financial position of the central administration, within their overall
objective of achieving budgets in balance or surplus over the medium term. This would
ultimately restore the government’s ability to buffer adverse external shocks. Achieving this goal
would require further reductions in the public sector wage bill, supplemented by significant
improvements in tax administration and a scaling back of generous entitlement programs.
Directors welcomed the decision to eliminate substantial tax exemptions, but highlighted the
importance of giving the tax collection agency access to financial information on non-complying

-3taxpayers. Directors also praised the ongoing initiatives to improve public expenditure
management. They welcomed also the recent administrative measures aimed at reducing costs
in the public health system, and suggested that the government should stand ready to introduce
monetary disincentives should these measures fail to curb the growing demand for health
services.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to press ahead with a reform of the pension
system. They observed that even if past high employment growth continued, generous benefits
and population aging would lead to widening deficits and substantial increases in the public
debt. Directors endorsed a comprehensive and far-reaching reform that would link pensions to
social security contributions over the entire working life, thus reducing incentives to underreport
incomes and improving the financial situation of those pension funds that had been in deficit for
years. Some Directors saw scope for an even more ambitious reform, taking advantage of the
substantial reserves for introducing a fully-funded system.
Directors called for a deepening of labor and product market reforms. A number of Directors
noted that matching the enhanced labor market flexibility of neighboring Italian regions was key
to continue attracting foreign investment. In this connection, they encouraged the authorities to
introduce fixed-term contracts for Sammarinese workers and liberalize further rules governing
the hiring of nonresidents. More generally, Directors urged the authorities to pursue with
determination their stated goal of substituting rules for political discretion in key areas of
economic activity.
Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to upgrade the financial sector’s legislative and
regulatory framework with the aim of enhancing its competitiveness while safeguarding its
soundness. They called for a quick approval of the law creating the new Central Bank of San
Marino (CBSM), whose governance structure should ensure a stable source of financing, clear
lines of accountability to Parliament, and operational independence from the government and
the banking sector. Several Directors encouraged the government to take this opportunity to
transfer the authority to license financial institutions to the CBSM.
Directors emphasized the importance of enhancing supervisory practices, with more frequent
on-site inspections and vigorous enforcement of international standards. They welcomed the
ongoing expansion of supervisory staff, which could help ensure that declining profitability did
not lead to increased risk-taking by banks. Some Directors observed that the EU-related
increase in withholding taxes would reduce the appeal of traditional banking and stressed that
the CBSM needed to gear up for the broader range of services and products that would be
offered. Directors welcomed San Marino’s intention to request a Financial Sector Assessment
Program (FSAP) and commended its commitment to counter money laundering and the
financing of terrorism.
Directors welcomed the progress made in improving San Marino’s statistical database, but
expressed concern that important shortcomings remained. They encouraged the authorities to
devote additional efforts to the compilation of timely national account statistics and general
government accounts in line with Eurostat’s ESA95 methodology.

-4Directors urged San Marino to move toward providing official development assistance in line
with the UN-recommended target.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

San Marino: Selected Economic Indicators
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004 1/

9.0
4.5
3.2
1.6
3.9

2.2
2.8
3.0
2.6
1.9

5.5
5.8
2.4
2.8
-0.5

0.3
3.1
3.9
2.3
3.7

0.0
0.8
4.5
2.5
5.7

2.0
1.8
2.9
2.1
...

Central government balance

-3.0

-3.2

-3.6

-2.2

2.4

-0.6

Central government deposits
Gross public debt

10.8
3.9

2.2
4.3

0.0
5.5

5.2
5.3

7.0
4.9

6.7
5.3

7.9
2.5

9.2
2.6

8.8
2.9

8.0
2.7

7.1
1.6

...
...

Trade balance (in millions of US$)

-21.1

-44.6

-38.0

-100.9

...

...

Exports (in percent of GDP)
Imports (in percent of GDP)

197.4
200.0

193.8
199.5

186.8
191.5

177.6
187.9

...
...

...
...

Real economy (change in percent)
Real GDP 2/
Employment
Unemployment rate (in percent)
Consumer prices (percent change, period average)
Wages
Public finance (in percent of GDP) 3/

Interest rates (end of period)
Loans
Time deposits
Balance of payments 4/

Fund position (as of May 31, 2004)
Holding of currency (in percent of quota)

75.88

Holding of SDRs (in percent of allocation)
Quota (in millions of SDR)

n.a.
17.00

Exchange Rate
Exchange rate regime

Uses euro

Present exchange rate (July 22, 2004)

US$ 1.2268 per euro

Nominal effective (lira, 1990=100) 5/

74.1

70.7

71.2

72.1

75.3

76.6

Real effective (lira, 1990=100) 5/

84.1

80.7

81.7

83.5

88.1

89.8

Sources: Sammarinese authorities; Fund staff estimates and projections; and International Financial Statistics database.
1/ Fund staff estimates, unless otherwise noted.
2/ Data for 2003 are Fund staff estimates.
3/ Data are on an accruals basis. Budget figures for 2004 and final outturn for 2003.
4/ Based on national account data.
5/ Annual average. Data for 2004 are average through end-March.

Statement by Pier Carlo Padoan, Executive Director for San Marino
July 28, 2004

At the outset, I want to convey my authorities' deepest appreciation for the work done by the
mission headed by Mr. Prati. As with previous missions, my Sammarinese authorities have
greatly benefited from Staff advice and continue to enjoy a fruitful relationship with the
Fund.
Recent Developments
Recent data suggest that the economic recovery is under way, reflecting an improved
international economic environment. In May, unemployment decreased to 3.17 percent
against 4.09 in the same period of 2003 while imports have picked up increasing to 6 percent
in the first quarter of the year against the same period in 2003.
Recently, the authorities have started a thorough discussion in the country and with their
international partners on how best to promote economic growth in San Marino in light of
ever-increasing international cooperation that could benefit their small and open economy by
strengthening its competitiveness vis-à-vis its current and potential trading partners.
Along these lines, the administration has been very active in the area of international
cooperation, and has pursued a number of agreements in the area of economic cooperation
with Austria, Croatia, Italy and Ukraine. Other agreements with the aim to avoid double
taxation are currently being pursued with Belgium, Austria, Croatia and Malta, while
negotiations are about to start with Cyprus, Luxembourg and Slovenia.
With reference to the taxation of savings of non residents, an agreement – whose main
aspects are described in the Staff report – has been reached, in principle, with ECOFIN,
which will be finalized in the months ahead with the EU Commission and the member States.
Fiscal Policies
Following a decade of budget deficits resulting in a deterioration of the underlying fiscal
position, the authorities have enacted a fiscal adjustment plan bringing the central
government balance into surplus to 2.4 percent of GDP in 2003 against a deficit of 2.2
percent the year before. This outcome is part of a wider strategy aimed at ensuring a
fundamentally sound fiscal position of the central government as the fiscal adjustment will
continue in the years ahead with essentially balanced-budget targets.
In this setting, the authorities have been considering a series of measures aimed at
strengthening tax administration and collection while improving the management of public
expenditures. In this respect, they are establishing an accounting inspectorate body for
strengthening the management of the public administration.

-2The Financial Sector and Anti-Money Laundering Surveillance
The authorities envisage a greater role for the financial sector in contributing to the
Sammarinese economic growth. As noted by Staff, its currently limited dimensions are
indicative of a potentially likely expansion in the future that the authorities encourage in full
compliance within the current international regulatory framework.
The authorities envisage the development of the Sammarinese financial sector on three
pillars. First, they have proceeded to strengthen the institutional framework, by merging the
supervisory agency with the Central Bank, as outlined in the Staff report. The hiring of new
human resources is expected to further strengthen the role of the Central Bank vis-à-vis the
supervision of banking and financial markets.
The second pillar is centered on the adequacy of the supervisory framework. The Central
Bank introduced early this year a new supervisory framework on capital adequacy based on
Basle I to be complemented later this year by a regulation on market and derivates risks. The
latter is being currently developed by the Central Bank’s supervisory wing and it is expected
to be completed by the end of the summer.
The third pillar refers to opening the system to a greater international scrutiny in order to
benefit from the introduction of international best practices. In this setting, the authorities see
as potentially helpful an FSAP mission, as noted in the Staff report. This issue has been
preliminary discussed within the Finance Ministry and the Central Bank and it has been
brought on the agenda of the forthcoming general meeting of the Government (Congresso di
Stato) on August 2, at which time the authorities will be able to provide a formal response to
the Staff invitation to undertake an FSAP.
Importantly, the development of the Sammarinese financial sector has occurred in the context
of a strengthened Anti-Money laundering surveillance. The authorities have subscribed to all
the relevant international agreements like the 1990 Strasbourg Convention and are a member
of the Council of Europe Select Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money
Laundering Measures. They are constantly engaged with other international partners to
support initiatives aimed at anti-money laundering and have opened themselves up to greater
scrutiny. Just recently, a report from a Moneyval mission hosted by San Marino in 2003 has
been finalized and will be discussed in January 2005.
The authorities are currently extending the notification requirements for anti-money
laundering purposes to a number of parties other than banks and financial firms in
accordance with the EU regulation (Directive 97/2001). Furthermore, the Central Bank –
with the assistance of Italy’s anti-money laundering agency Ufficio Italiano Cambi – has
applied for membership to the Egmont Group. It is expected that such a membership will
become operational by mid-2005.

