June 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/220

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

February 9, 2005

February 25,
2005

January 29, 2001

Samoa: 2005 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Statement; Public
Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive
Director for Samoa
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2005 Article IV consultation with Samoa, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2005 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on March 22, 2005, with the officials of Samoa on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on May 13, 2005. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

a staff statement of June 17, 2005 updating information on recent developments.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its June 17, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Samoa.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of marketsensitive information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be
sent by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SAMOA
Staff Report for the 2005 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2005 Consultation with Samoa
Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Michael Hadjimichael
May 13, 2005
•

The consultation discussions were held in Apia during March 9–22, 2005. The staff
team comprised Mr. Leigh (Head), Messrs. Chamon and Semblat (all APD) and was
assisted by Mr. Craig and Ms. Morant (Pacific Financial Technical Assistance CentrePFTAC in Fiji). Ms. Adolph (OED) attended the policy discussions.

•

The mission met Prime Minister Tuilaepa Malielegaoi, Minister of Revenue Anasii
Leota, Financial Secretary Petana, the Governor of the Central Bank of Samoa (CBS)
Scanlan, representatives of financial institutions, public enterprises, tourism and other
private sector enterprises and major donors.

•

In concluding the last Article IV consultation on June 2, 2003, Directors noted that
Samoa’s combination of sound economic management and structural reform had led to
robust growth, low inflation, sound public finances, and a comfortable external position.
Directors urged the authorities to maintain prudent macroeconomic policies and move
ahead with structural reforms to improve public sector efficiency and reduce barriers to
investment.

•

Samoa accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in 1994 and
maintains an exchange system free from restrictions on payments and transfers for
current international transactions.

•

The authorities have indicated their intention, as in the past, to publish the staff report
and the background documents.

-2-

Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4
I

A Decade of Economic Transformation ........................................................................5

II.

Recent Economic Developments ...................................................................................8

III.

Report on the Discussions..............................................................................................9
A. Overview...................................................................................................................9
B. Outlook and Vulnerabilities ......................................................................................9
C. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................11
D. Monetary and Exchange Rate Management ...........................................................16
E. Financial Sector Issues ............................................................................................17
F. Structural Reform Policies.......................................................................................18
G. Other Issues.............................................................................................................19

IV.

Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................19

Boxes
1.
Recent Structural Reforms and Unfinished Agenda......................................................7
2.
Importance of Workers Remittances ...........................................................................12
3.
Polynesian Airlines ......................................................................................................15
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000/01–2005/06.................................22
Balance of Payments, 2000/01-2005/06 ......................................................................23
Financial Operations of the Central Government, 2000/01–2005/06..........................24
Monetary Survey, 2000/01-2004/05 ............................................................................25
Medium-term Outlook, 2000/01–2009/10 ...................................................................26
Vulnerability Indicators, 2000/01–2003/04 .................................................................27

Figures
1.
Regional Comparators (Averages 2000-2004) ............................................................28
2.
Selected Economic Indicators, 1999/00–2004/05........................................................29
3.
External Sector Developments, 1999/00-2004/05 .......................................................30
4.
Monetary and Financial Indicators, 1999/00–2004/05 ................................................31
5.
Regional Competitiveness Indicators, 1999–2005 ......................................................32
6.
Medium-Term Outlook, 2001/02–2009/10..................................................................33

-3-

Annexes
I.
Fund Relations .............................................................................................................34
II.
Support from the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre................................35
III.
Relations with the World Bank Group.........................................................................36
IV.
Relations with the Asian Development Bank ..............................................................38
V.
Statistical Issues ...........................................................................................................39
VI.
Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................42
VII. Progress on Millennium Development Goals ..............................................................43
VIII. Public Information Notice............................................................................................44

-4-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Setting
•

Samoa’s decade of economic reforms has yielded several years of strong
performance, but the record in more recent years has been uneven.
¾ Real GDP growth has picked up (3½ percent in 2003/04 and 3 percent projected
for 2004/05) driven largely by the boom in the construction sector, but remains below
levels attained through 2000/01. Inflation rose significantly in 2004 but has slowed
down in recent months. The trade deficit widened in 2003/04.
¾ The government has made further progress on structural reforms. However, there
are still substantial reforms which need to be tackled.

•

The near term outlook on growth is moderately favorable. Overall growth is
projected at 3 percent in 2005/06 underpinned by robust growth in the services and
construction sectors. Agriculture is expected to slowly recover, while improvements in
the fishing sector remain uncertain.

•

The authorities remain committed to macroeconomic stability and reform, but face
a number of immediate domestic challenges to sustaining that positive record.
¾ There are strong calls for a large public sector wage increase ahead of the elections
scheduled for early 2006. The costs of restructuring the loss-making Polynesian
Airlines are also likely to impose a significant burden on the 2005/06 budget (to be
presented to Parliament at end-May 2005).

Key Policy Issues
•

This year’s consultation discussions focused on how to contain the immediate risks
to macroeconomic stability and deepen structural reforms to rekindle growth.
¾ On fiscal policy, to limit the impact of any wage increase on the budget, wage policy
should be developed in line with the ongoing civil service reform and the upward
adjustment be phased in such that after the initial moderate increase subsequent wage
increases be linked to performance. The government should also find ways to limit
the burden of the restructuring costs of Polynesian airlines on the forthcoming
2005/06 budget.
¾ With regards to financial sector issues, strengthening the National Provident
Fund’s (NPF’s) investment guidelines and supervisory framework is recommended.
¾ On structural reform policies, it is essential that Samoa continue to deepen its
implementation of the state-owned enterprises (SOE) reform and tackle the other
impediments to private sector development (including the functioning of the land
market). The recent initiative taken by the government on land market reform (a
politically sensitive issue) to facilitate the leasing of unused communal land
represents a significant step on their reform agenda.

-5-

I. A DECADE OF ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
1.
Samoa embarked upon a remarkable economic transformation in the mid-1990s.
Prior to that, Samoa was one of the weakest performers among the Pacific Island countries. A
history of economic mismanagement compounded by a number of major shocks in the
early 1990s, including two cyclones, had led to recurrent episodes of acute macroeconomic
imbalances and a prolonged period of stagnation. These challenges prompted a major review
of economic policy, culminating in the introduction of a comprehensive reform program
in 1995/96 starting with important reforms in the public and financial sectors and of the tax
and tariff systems.
2.
With continued commitment to sound macroeconomic and reform policies,
Samoa became one of the best managed economies in the Pacific Island region. The
economy registered solid growth, low inflation, improved public finances and international
reserve levels, and outperformed comparator countries both within and outside the region.
Real GDP per Capita, 1990–2004
The level of public debt (in relation to
(Index 1990=100)
150
150
GDP) has steadily declined from over
Samoa
90 percent to about 50 percent. Samoa
140
140
Caribbean
also made progress toward the
Islands
130
130
Millennium Development Goals
120
120
(MDGs). Political stability, close
Pacific
consultation with stakeholders, and
110
110
Islands
extensive efforts to foster a broad
100
100
Developing
consensus for reform were integral to the
Countries
90
90
program’s steady implementation and
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
success. The reforms, while developed
Source: World Economic Outlook.
and owned by the Samoan authorities,
also reflected policies recommended by the Executive Board in the context of Article IV
consultations. The authorities’ concerted efforts at expenditure restraint, in particular the
scaling back the level of public funding for major construction projects, is also consistent
with staff advice during the 2003 Article IV consultation mission.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Per Capita and Human Development Index (HDI) in Samoa and Comparator
Countries
HDI Rank 1/
Tonga
Caribbean Average 2/
Samoa
Fiji
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Papua New Guinea

63
73
75
81
124
129
133

GDP Per Capita in
US$ (2003)

Real GDP Per Capita Annual
Growth Average 1994–2003

1609
5614
1672
2088
498
1361
614

1.1
1.8
3.6
2.1
-2.6
-0.8
-2.6

Sources: UN Human Development Report, 2004, and IMF.
1/ Rank out of 177 countries.
2/ Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.

-6-

3.
The 2005 Article IV consultation provides a good opportunity—at a time when
Samoa has just launched the Strategy for the Development of Samoa (SDS-2005/07)—
to take stock of the progress made in recent years and consider the challenges ahead.
¾

Despite the notable progress over the last decade, overall macroeconomic
performance weakened in recent
S amoa's Pre- and Post-Reform Real GDP Growth
years, the export base remains
5.0%
Post-reform
narrow (mainly fish, automotive
parts, and tourism), and the economy 4.0%
Recent-Years
remains vulnerable to external
3.0%
shocks. Real GDP growth slowed
Pre-reform
suggesting that the efficiency gains
2.0%
from the reforms over the last decade
1.0%
were neither fully sufficient to
sustain a higher growth nor did they
0.0%
1990 to 1995
1996 to 2001
2002 to 2004
adequately diversify the economy
Sources: Fund staff estimates.
and substantially reduce its
vulnerability to shocks. Inflation has also risen (and is now above the regional
average—Figure 1). Preserving a sound macroeconomic framework will be critical to
reducing Samoa’s vulnerabilities to shocks.

¾

Over the last decade, Samoa has successfully launched a wide-range of structural
reforms (Box 1) that have laid the
Credit to the Private Sector
(In percent of GDP)
foundation for an enabling
80
environment for private sector
70
development. As a result, private
60
sector activity has expanded at a
Samoa
Tonga
Vanuatu
Fiji
faster pace than in other Pacific
50
Mauritius
ECCU
Island economies. Going forward,
40
Samoa needs to tackle additional
30
reforms (paragraphs 32–33) to
20
consolidate the gains made over the
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
last decade and boost long-term
growth prospects.

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

Source: IMF International Financial Statictisc and WEO.

ECCU includes Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent.

4.
The authorities remain committed to macroeconomic stability and reform that
has earned them a good reputation within the region over the past decade, but also face
a number of immediate domestic challenges to sustaining that strong record. The
Remuneration Tribunal (which was appointed by the Prime Minister under the Remuneration
Tribunal Act of 2003 and comprises of 2 former public servants and one official from the
private sector) has recently called for a large wage increase (about 40 percent) for the public
sector ahead of the elections scheduled for early 2006. The costs of restructuring Polynesian
Airlines are also likely to impose a significant burden on the budget. Moreover, there have
been calls for tax breaks to further stimulate private sector investment. Skillful economic
management will be required to limit the impact of these domestic pressures on
macroeconomic stability.

-7Box 1. Recent Structural Reforms and Unfinished Agenda
Recent Progress:
• Public sector reform: The authorities have made significant progress on civil service
reforms—in particular, the substantial restructuring of Ministries and downsizing of some
functions have taken place, most notably in the Ministry of Public Works. A gradual
reduction in staffing levels has been achieved through natural attrition. A major review of
the functions of each Ministry by the Public Service Commission is expected in the second
half of 2005 with a view to refocusing them on their core functions.
• Public enterprise reform: The enactment of the Public Bodies Act in 2001 laid the
groundwork for the SOE policy framework. Under this program, the government’s priority
is to divest its minority shareholdings in various enterprises and privatize enterprises that
are of no strategic public interest. Thus, the government sold its minority holdings in three
small companies in 2004 and announced the privatization of Samoa Shipping Services,
Agriculture Store and Samoa Broadcasting Corporation. For enterprises that are of strategic
public interest, the government will adopt a corporatization program which aims to give
these SOEs a stronger commercial focus, strengthen their corporate governance and
financial reporting. These SOEs would be expected run as efficiently as similar private
sector businesses and should at least achieve cost recovery and eventual self-sufficiency
within a defined period, as described by their corporate plans. A Telecom Bill that is
expected to be approved by Parliament by end-June 2005 aims to create a more competitive
telecommunications sector underpinned by an appropriate regulatory framework.
• Tax and tariff reform: These reforms have improved the efficiency of the tax system and
liberalized the trade regime. In 1994, Samoa introduced a value-added tax on goods and
services at 10 percent (this was raised to 12½ percent in 2002) and abolished most excise
taxes. Since 1998, the maximum tariff rate has been reduced from 60 percent to 20 percent,
the tariff schedule has been simplified to four rates and rates of 35–42 percent have been
reduced in several steps to 8 percent. The mission’s discussions with the private sector
suggest that they welcomed the reduction in tariff rates, and tariff levels do not constitute a
barrier to private investment in Samoa. There are no significant nontariff barriers.
• Financial sector reform: Supervision of the financial sector has been enhanced by
bringing nonbanks and insurance companies under the supervisory framework of the
central bank. The regulatory framework for offshore banks have also been tightened.
Unfinished agenda: Going forward, the SDS (2005–2007) emphasizes:
• Deepening of SOE reform: Over the medium term, there are plans to consider placing
some SOEs under private sector operators with management contracts while retaining
government ownership, as an additional avenue to improve the financial position of the
large loss-making SOEs.
• Reforming the Land market: The government plans to look at the viability of the Land
Leasing Committee to facilitate negotiations between owners of unused communal land and
investors that are interested in leasing such land for commercial purposes.

• Improving the investment climate: This will require better infrastructure (including
service delivery by energy, water and ports utilities) and easing the regulatory burden (by
simplifying the number of procedures and the time it takes to establish a business).

-8-

II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
5.
Although growth has slowed from rates attained through 2000/01, economic
activity has started to pick up. Real
Samoa: Contribution to Real GDP Growth, 1999/01–2003/04
(In percentage points of contribution to total GDP growth, unless
GDP growth increased to 3½ percent
otherwise indicated)
8
in 2003/04 from about 1¾ percent
7
in 2002/03.1 The slowdown in the
6
5
manufacturing sector, poor performance
4
of the fishing sector and cyclone Heta’s
3
2
damage in January 2004 (which hit hard
1
the agriculture sector), was more than
0
offset by the robust growth in the services -1
-2
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Total 1/
and construction sectors. Based on data
-3
1999/00
2000/01
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
through end-December 2004, growth is
Sources: Samoan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Annual percentage change, includes government sector.
projected to be 3 percent for 2004/05.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3

6.
Inflation rose in 2003/04 but has come down in recent months (Figure 2).
Headline inflation (12 months average) rose to 8 percent in 2003/04, up from 4¼ percent
in 2002/03 and reached double digits in 2004 following cyclone Heta’s impact on food prices
and the increase in import prices (including fuel prices). However, inflation has declined in
recent months and is projected to be about 7½ percent (12 months average) in 2004/05.
7.
The external trade deficit widened in 2003/04. This reflected sluggish export
growth and higher import growth which was driven by the boom in the construction sector
(largely externally financed). Structural weaknesses rather than exchange rate
competitiveness, were the main factors behind the weak export performance (paragraph 26).
The widening of the trade balance was more than offset by the increase in remittances
in 2003/04 and as a result the external current account deficit narrowed. Based on data
through end-December 2004, the current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is
projected to widen to 12¾ percent of
Samoa: Excess Liquidity in the Banking System, 1998–2005
(In millions of Tala)
GDP in 2004/05 reflecting continued
60
weak export growth and higher import
growth related to the construction boom.
50
40

8.
The Central Bank of Samoa
(CBS) eased monetary policy in order to
support economic activity following
cyclone Heta in January 2004.2 The CBS
injected substantial liquidity into the
banking system through open market

30
20
10
0
Jan-98

Jan-99

Jan-00

Jan-01

Jan-02

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Source: Samoan authorities.

1

Throughout this report, economic statistics are presented on a fiscal year basis unless otherwise stated. The
fiscal year in Samoa begins on July 1.
2

Monetary policy is conducted in the context of an adjustable peg exchange rate arrangement supported by
capital controls with the tala linked to a transaction-weighted (trade, remittances and tourism receipts) basket of
currencies.

-9-

operations in central bank securities. Broad money and credit to the private sector rose
significantly as a result, growing by 13 percent and 17 percent respectively in the year to
June 2004. In the second half of 2004, private sector credit growth weakened reflecting the
slowdown in key export sectors such as fishing. As a result, the level of excess liquidity in
the banking system rose.
9.
Fiscal performance has been broadly stable since 2002/03 reflecting continued
expenditure restraint. The fiscal deficit
Samoa: Overall Fiscal Balance, 1998/99-2004/05
(In percent of GDP)
outturn of 0.9 percent of GDP for 2003/04
1.0
was lower than budget (1½ percent of
0.5
GDP). Although revenues were slightly
0.0
below budget in 2003/04, this was more
-0.5
than offset by the continued expenditure
-1.0
restraint. The 2004/05 budget targets a
-1.5
deficit of 0.9 percent of GDP and its
-2.0
execution is broadly on track based on
-2.5
preliminary 2004/05 mid-year figures.
1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Budget
Provided these estimates are confirmed, no Sources: Samoan authorities; and staff estimates.
Note: 2004/05 data is budget.
additional measures will be needed to
achieve the 2004/05 budget targets.
III. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS
A. Overview
10.
Discussions focused on how to contain the immediate risks to macroeconomic
stability as well as on the structural policy priorities needed to rekindle growth over the
medium term. The mission cautioned the authorities that the pursuit of an expansionary
fiscal policy carries clear risks both to macroeconomic stability and the government’s
economic reform program. The authorities concurred with the thrust of the staff’s assessment
of the economic outlook, the risks and the challenges ahead. Thus, discussions focused
correspondingly on how best to adapt the stance of macroeconomic policies given the risks
and the immediate domestic challenges. The mission also discussed reform measures that are
needed to achieve robust and sustainable private sector led growth over the medium term.
B. Outlook and Vulnerabilities
11.
The staff and the authorities project real GDP growth of 3 percent in 2005/06.
Growth in tourism and continued strong construction activity (largely driven by the projects
for the 2007 South Pacific Games to be held in Samoa) will provide a boost to economic
activity.3 Agriculture is expected to slowly recover, while improvements in the fishing sector
remain uncertain.

3

A major tourist resort being built near Apia’s international airport is expected to be opened in July 2005.

- 10 -

12.
Over the medium term, like other Pacific Island countries, Samoa’s remoteness,
limited resource base and the high cost of transportation from key markets will continue to
hamper growth. Thus, the mission noted that to encourage private sector led growth, it is
essential to keep domestic costs low through continued macroeconomic stability and
structural reforms. Deeper SOE and land market reforms are critical if the private sector is to
serve as the engine of growth. The improvements in public sector efficiency associated with
the SOE reform would raise total factor productivity and facilitate the economy’s adjustment
to shocks. Land market reform is also a potential source of growth particularly for the
tourism sector (most of the target sites for tourism development are on communal land). The
staff acknowledges the uncertainties regarding a sustainable medium-term growth for a small
island economy like Samoa where economic activity is volatile and sensitive to various
shocks (including natural disasters). This said, assuming that these reform efforts are
successful, 3½ percent average growth over the medium term is achievable.
13.
There are, however, risks to this outlook. On the upside, stronger-than-expected
performance of the tourism sector could lead to higher growth. On the other hand, continued
high oil prices and more generally the external economic environment could also influence
the outcome. In particular, an economic slowdown in Australia, New Zealand and the United
States, the home of the majority of émigré Samoans, could reduce the growth of remittances.
14.
Samoa also remains vulnerable to both external shocks and natural disasters. In
the absence of policy adjustment, these shocks could pose a threat to macroeconomic
stability. Under a nonadjustment scenario developed by staff (in which fiscal policy is
expansionary reflecting partly large public sector wage increases coupled with external
shocks including continued high oil prices), the medium-term macroeconomic situation will
worsen with lower growth, higher inflation, and a debt-to-GDP ratio close to 70 percent of
GDP by 2009/10 (Table 5) This weaker macroeconomic position together with reduced
capital inflows reflecting the stalling of structural reforms, would put a significant strain on
the international reserves. The staff’s debt sustainability analysis shows that while isolated
shocks to the economy would not negatively impact the debt ratios, a combination of shocks
(including zero growth, a 30 percent devaluation of the tala and a natural disaster such as a
cyclone) under a nonadjustment scenario would raise the debt to GDP ratio close to
100 percent, broadly the level where it was before the macroeconomic stabilization program
of the mid-1990s.4 Given its vulnerability to a number of shocks, the mission urged the
authorities to consider raising the reserve target (from its current level of 4 months of import
cover to about 5 months). This would help to mitigate the impact of external shocks and
natural disasters on the economy.

4

At 48 ½ percent of GDP, Samoa’s external debt-to-GDP ratio is higher than the regional average of about
40 percent but is significantly lower than those of heavily indebted low income countries. Moreover, almost all
of the debt is contracted with multilaterals (Asian Development Bank and the World Bank) and bilateral donors
on concessional terms and largely used to finance development spending in the budget. The accompanying
selected issues paper discusses in detail medium-term debt sustainability.

- 11 -

15.
The authorities noted their efforts to promote the diversification of exports
(including the Samoa Tourism Development plan) and to strengthen the resilience of
the economy to external shocks. They reiterated that remittances will continue to provide
the most stable source of balance of payments inflows and that the continued stability of
remittance flows will serve as an important buffer against adverse shocks (Box 2). 5 They
also consider the tourism sector as a promising engine for growth. This sector is very
underdeveloped compared to some of the Pacific Island economies, suggesting that there is
large scope for growth. They noted that a successful joint venture between Polynesian
Airlines and Virgin Blue, which is expected to lower the high cost of air fares (one of the
main impediments to tourism in Samoa) will boost prospects for the sector. The authorities
also mentioned that Samoa and New Zealand have recently reached an agreement which will
enhance Samoa’s market access to the latter’s economy for higher-value added goods
(organic crops and processed food) and help to diversify its export base. This could also help
fill the void left by garment exports.6 The authorities expressed their intention to review the
reserve target given the economy’s vulnerability to shocks.
C. Fiscal Policy
16.
The staff recommended that the deficit target should be about 0.9 percent of
GDP in the 2005/06 budget. The proposed target takes into account reasonable prospects for
growth and the need to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to about 40 percent (the regional
average) over the medium term (Figure 1). The deficit target also assumes that
the 2005/06 budget will need to bear some of the restructuring costs of Polynesian Airlines
(about ¾ percent of GDP) and therefore implies a modest fiscal tightening in 2005/06.
17.
The authorities indicated their intention to press for a prudent 2005/06 budget.
As a revenue measure, the staff proposed that the government consider the removal of the
exemption on Value Added Goods and Services Tax (VAGST) on electricity consumption,
except for low income households, which is expected to yield revenues of about ½ percent of
GDP. The authorities noted that additional revenues to the budget could come from putting in
place a revenue sharing arrangement on betting duties and enforcing the current dividend
policy for SOEs.
18.
The mission cautioned against granting tax breaks for the private sector since
this risks eroding the revenue base. The authorities have given some tax breaks to
encourage private sponsorship of the 2007 South Pacific Games. Moreover, there have been
calls for tax breaks to further stimulate private sector investment. Samoa’s tax revenue

5

The accompanying selected issues paper discusses in detail the role of remittances in the Samoan economy
and the economics of migration (drawing on the experience of other countries).
6

The garment factory closed down in early 2005 following the expiration of the multifiber agreement.
Garments accounted for only about 4 percent of exports and Samoa is not among the countries considered to be
vulnerable to the phasing out of the ATC quotas.

- 12 -

Box 2. Importance of Workers Remittances
•
Samoa is one of the highest recipients of remittances as a share of GDP. Remittances
amounted to about 24 percent of Samoa’s
15 Largest Recipients of Remittances as a Share of
GDP in 2004, and constitute a critical
GDP (1990-2003 Average) 1/
component of the balance of payments
45
40
flows. Samoa’s current account deficit
35
30
would likely be unsustainable in the
25
20
absence of remittances.

•
Remittances affect households
through a number of channels.
Remittances could have an adverse
effect on the labor supply of recipients
if used as a substitute for labor income.
On the other hand, remittances may also
complement labor if used for productive
investments. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that remittances in Samoa tend
to finance consumption. Remittances
also help households to provide
schooling (education) for their children
and cope with adverse shocks.

Jo
rd
H
an
er
ze
go
vi
na
K
ir
Ca iba
ti
pe
V
er
de
W
es
t B Alb
an
an
ia
k
&
Y
em
G
az
en
,R a
ep
.o
El
Sa f
lv
ad
or
M
ol
do
va
G
re
na
da
Ja
m
ai
ca

n

oa
Bo
s

ni
a

&

Sa
m

Le
ba
no

ho

ng
a

To

Le
so
t

•
Remittance flows are relatively
stable. Due to particular aspects of
Samoan culture, expatriates tend to
maintain very strong ties with their
families, villages and churches, even in
the case of second generation migrants.
These strong ties combined with the
continuing flow of new migrants ensure
the reliability of remittances.

15
10
5
0

1/ Source: WEO, Spring 2005, Chapter II

Remittances as a Share of GDP
25%
23%
21%
19%
17%
15%
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Sources: Samoa authorities and Fund staff estimates.

•
Migration of skilled workers can have a positive impact on the economy through its
effects on remittances and trade networks. It is likely that expatriate workers face higher skillpremia than those that remain in Samoa (for example, economies of scale may limit the
opportunities for more skilled individuals in such a small economy). If so, additional education
investments can translate into higher returns for the economy even if some of the more educated
workers move abroad (through their remittances). “Exporting” human capital (as opposed to just
raw labor) may well provide higher returns than investment in some of the traditional agricultural
exports which are subject to terms of trade shocks and long-term cycles. High-skilled expatriates
can also help build networks that facilitate international trade and investment in Samoa.
•
Efforts should be made to minimize transaction costs and encourage the use of the
formal financial sector for channeling remittances as some of the remittances are transferred
through informal channels (“hawala-type”). This would contribute to financial development.

- 13 -

(about 22½ percent of GDP), which
relies largely on indirect taxes, falls just
below the average for selected tourismbased island economies.
19.
Expenditure restraint—in
particular on wage policy—is crucial
for achieving the proposed deficit
target for the 2005/06 budget.

30
25

Selected Tourism Based Economies: Tax Revenue, 2003
(In percent of GDP)

Average

30
25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

¾

Mauritius Vanuatu Bahamas Samoa
Dominica Tonga
Jamaica
The authorities argued that
Sources:
World
Development
Indicators;
and
Fund
staff
estimates.
Samoa’s wage bill is low
compared to other Pacific Island
countries. They mentioned that a review of public servants’ wages and salaries was
last done in 1997 and public servants have not received a general wage increase
since 2001. It was noted that given the political realities a sizable wage increase was
inevitable. However, the authorities assured the mission that the wage increase
recommended by the Remuneration Tribunal is unlikely to be supported by the
government and that a more modest increase is likely to be approved.

¾

The staff noted that although Samoa’s wage bill is lower than that of several other
tourism-based island economies, a large wage increase is likely to have a significant
demonstration effect on the
Selected Tourism Based Economies: Wage Bill, 2003
(In percent of GDP)
private sector and would put
14
14
pressures on both inflation and
12
12
Average
the balance of payments. Thus,
10
10
the mission recommended that
8
8
wage policy be developed in line
6
6
with the ongoing civil service
4
4
reform. To limit the impact of
any wage increase on the budget,
2
2
the mission recommended that
0
0
Maldives Mauritius Samoa Bahamas
Jamaica
Tonga Vanuatu
the government put in place a
Sources: World Development Indicators; and Fund staff estimates.
moratorium on the filling of all
vacancies other than essential
positions. The staff noted that this could be complemented with phasing in the wage
increase such that after the initial moderate increase subsequent wage increases be
linked to performance.

¾

The authorities and the staff agreed that expenditure restraint will also require
adequate control of subsidies and transfers to SOEs. Thus, the mission welcomed the
progress made by the government toward a comprehensive restructuring of
Polynesian Airlines (with IFC assistance). The mission advised the government to
find ways to limit the burden on the 2005/06 budget including by spreading out the

- 14 -

costs over time. The authorities
noted that additional expenditure
savings could be made by
allowing the Electricity Power
Corporation (EPC) to adjust
tariffs in line with fuel prices.
The cabinet subsequently
approved a 15 percent increase of
electricity tariffs to take effect
May 2005, which will go toward
reducing the need for a
government subsidy to EPC.

Government Spending, 2004
(In percent of GDP)

30

Wages and salaries
Capital spending

25

30

Interest payments
Subsidies and transfers

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0
Vanuatu
Source: Fund staff estimates.

Fiji

Tonga

Samoa

Papua New
Guinea

20.
The authorities noted that the cost of restructuring Polynesian Airlines remains
uncertain at this stage. Preliminary estimates prepared by experts put the likely cost in the
range of 1½–4 percent of GDP, although the government considers that this may be too high
and plans to conduct an independent review. The estimated cost includes the required capital
injection into the planned airline joint-venture, the penalty cost of an early termination of the
Polynesian Airlines jet lease and the cost of taking over the airline’s debts which are
government guaranteed (Box 3).
21.
Over the medium term, there is a need to strengthen tax administration, reduce
less productive spending and reorient expenditures toward social and infrastructure
sectors. The authorities noted that the amalgamation of the Inland Revenue and Customs into
a new Ministry is expected to facilitate a more efficient tax administration and improve tax
compliance. The staff expressed its
Samoa: Spending on Education and Health, 1997/98-2004/05
support for the authorities’ commitment
9.5
100
In millions of tala (left axis)
to the establishment of a Large Taxpayer
90
In percent of GDP (right axis)
9.0
80
Unit (LTU) and the introduction of a
70
single Tax Identification Number in line
8.5
60
with the 2003 Fiscal ROSC. The mission
50
also recommended this be used as an
8.0
40
30
opportunity to review and modernize
7.5
20
the 1974 income tax legislation. The
10
authorities concurred that the areas
7.0
0
1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
identified by the mission for
Budget
Sources: Samoan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
strengthening tax administration are
Note: 2004/05 data is budget.
broadly consistent with their own
priority needs for technical assistance.7 The authorities also noted that greater rationalization
of expenditures would enable reorienting spending toward social sectors (education and
health) and infrastructure which are important for long-term growth.

7

They indicated their intentions to seek technical assistance from PFTAC in the above mentioned areas.

- 15 -

Box 3. Polynesian Airlines
•
Despite some recovery in the mid-1990s, government-owned Polynesian Airlines has for
a long time been experiencing financial difficulties. In 1994 following an ill-designed expansion,
Polynesian Airlines became technically insolvent. In response, the government embarked on a
restructuring of the airline, with a new management team brought in, and the government taking
over the debt (about 16 percent of 1994/95 GDP). This plan succeeded in turning the airline around.
However, following another ill-devised expansion and the decline in regional tourism after the
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the airline is once again experiencing financial difficulties.
•
Problems at Polynesian Airlines have been a persistent burden to the budget. During the
second half of the 1990s, excessive budgetary burden by Polynesian Airlines led the government to
cut back on the much needed spending on education and health. To keep the airline operating, about
3 percent of GDP was allocated in the 2001/04 budgets and 0.9 percent of GDP are provisioned in
the 2004/05 budget. In addition, the government has had, in the past, to take over the airline’s debt,
(current debt to banks and obligations for aircraft leasing are government guaranteed).
•
A plan for the restructuring of Polynesian Airlines was announced on
December 22, 2004 and was recently approved by the Cabinet. An advisory committee
supported by the IFC, recommended to the Cabinet that Virgin Blue be chosen as the preferred
partner for a new joint-venture airline to be set up with the government. The contractual document
for the joint-venture is expected to be signed by end-June 2005 and if successful, the new airline is
expected to become operational in the latter part of 2005. Virgin Blue’s interest in Polynesian
Airlines stems from its regional ambition in the South Pacific and its strategy of expanding its
network, following similar deals in Fiji.
•
Under the proposed plan, Polynesian Airlines is expected to become profitable. Under
this plan, the current operations of Polynesian airlines would be divided into two entities: the joint
venture would take over the long-haul operations while the short-haul and ground handling
operations would remain with Polynesian airlines. With the joint venture operating within a “lowcost airline,” the long-haul operations, which had been traditionally the loss-making side of
Polynesian airlines, are expected to become profitable. At the same time, short-haul and ground
operations could benefit from the synergies with the joint venture and the increased activity that the
joint venture would bring in.

•
The restructuring of Polynesian Airlines could entail sizable costs to the budget. Under
the proposed plan, the government is expected to inject ½ percent of GDP as capital into the jointventure. In addition, it may have to bear the penalty cost of early termination of the lease of the jet it
currently operates, and the costs of assuming the airline’s debts which are government guaranteed.
Some of these costs will have to be borne by the 2005/06 budget, but some spreading-out of the
penalty costs for the early termination of the jet lease over a few years is currently envisaged.
In 2001 when Polynesian Airlines returned one of their jets prior to the expiration of the lease, they
managed to spread out the penalty costs over a few years.

- 16 -

22.
The mission encouraged the authorities to draw up a credible medium-term
fiscal consolidation plan in the forthcoming 2005/06 budget. At present, annual budgets
do not include medium-term fiscal forecasts and there is no explicit discussion of fiscal
sustainability. The government’s budget rule consists of a ceiling on the overall deficit of
3½ percent of GDP. Given that a full-fledged Medium-Term Budget Framework (MTBF)
will take time to develop, the mission recommended that the 2005/06 budget signal the
government’s intention to move toward a MTBF by laying out the broad parameters of the
government’s medium-term fiscal strategy. The authorities agreed to include a simplified
MTBF in the 2005/06 budget and present a more detailed program in the 2006/07 budget.8
D. Monetary and Exchange Rate Management
23.
Monetary policy needs to be less accommodating in the near term given
reasonable prospects for growth and the need to support the peg. If the risks to the
forthcoming 2005/06 budget were to materialize and balance of payments pressures emerge,
the authorities should stand ready to tighten monetary policy. The staff noted that the ability
of the government to contain the fiscal position would be a critical factor in determining
whether such a tightening would be necessary. The CBS concurred noting that this advice
was broadly in line with their own thinking on monetary policy stance for 2005/06. The CBS
is expected to outline its monetary policy framework for the coming fiscal year once
the 2005/06 budget is announced at end-May 2005.
24.
The authorities noted that the current pegged exchange rate regime has served
well as a nominal anchor. They emphasized that the policy of periodically making
adjustments in the value of the tala within a ±2 percent band by the CBS, appears to have
struck an appropriate balance between maintaining external competitiveness, and preserving
the exchange rate peg’s role as an anchor for inflation. The peg to a basket of currencies has
also helped to avoid sharp movements in the nominal effective exchange rate of the tala.
25.
The mission noted that the stalling of export growth is of some concern. Fishing
remains the largest export industry but this sector has not performed well in recent years in
part due to unfavorable weather conditions. Despite successful shifts toward new export
crops, improvements in the agricultural sector are likely to be gradual. The staff noted that
regional competitiveness indicators including export market share (Figure 5), do not signal an
overvaluation of the tala nor do they suggest that Samoa has lost its competitiveness within the
region. The recent appreciation of Samoa’s real effective exchange rate mainly reflects the
surge in food prices in early 2004 (following cyclone Heta); underlying nonfood prices and
costs have not risen significantly relative to major trading partners.
26.
The authorities (and the private sector) agreed with the staff that the underlying
structural weaknesses in the economy have contributed to the stalling of export volume
growth. Structural problems include periodic power outages in some parts of the country,
poor infrastructure including inefficient landing and docking facilities at the ports (which has
8

An AsDB funded consultant is assisting the authorities on the sectoral strategy of the MTBF. PFTAC also
plans to assist the authorities on the MTBF based on the staff’s medium-term macroeconomic framework.

- 17 -

Other Regional Competitiviness Indicators 1/
Paved roads (in percent of total roads) (1999)
Cost of a three minutes local call (in U.S. dollars) (2002)
Government wage bill (in percent of total expenditure)
Prevailing import tariff rates (in percent) (2003) 2/
Number of days to start a business
Cost of starting a business, US$

Fiji

Samoa

Tonga

Vanuatu

49
0.05
39.9
0-27
45
873

42
0.03
21.7
0-20
73
380

27
0.05
44.0
0-45
39
227

24
0.22
53.5
0-55
39
1,899

Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2004; UNDP, Human Development Report, 2004;
World Tourism Organization and South Pacific Tourism Organization, World Bank: Doing Business
in 2004: Understanding Regulation, and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Data for 2004, unless otherwise indicated.
2/ Excludes effective rates from specific import duties and ad valorem rates on selected luxury items.

affected fish exports), obstacles to leasing communal land and using such land as collateral
for loans and the lengthy review process for foreign investments and for starting a business.
Thus, the staff noted that addressing the structural weaknesses is critical to reinvigorating and
diversifying the export base. The authorities responded that the SDS (2005–2007) has laid
out several initiatives to tackle these structural weaknesses and improve the investment
climate. In particular, they noted that the restructuring of energy, water and ports utilities, if
successful, would improve the quality of the service delivery to the private sector and help
revitalize key export industries such as fishing. They also plan to establish a “one-stop shop”
for starting businesses and for foreign investors.
E. Financial Sector Issues
27.
The financial sector remains sound and significant progress has been made in
strengthening the supervisory framework. The four commercial banks are adequately
capitalized and are in compliance with the 15 percent capital adequacy requirement. The
CBS stated that the current practice of conducting its examinations through external auditors
and extensive off-site monitoring, along the lines of the New Zealand model, remains
effective. They also noted that the information sharing between the CBS, external auditors
and the foreign banks (whose parent banks maintain strong internal controls on their
subsidiaries) remains useful and reduces the need for extensive on-site monitoring. 9
28.
Samoa continues to make progress on the tightening of the regulatory
requirements for offshore banks and strengthening the framework for Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). The international
banking bill was approved by Parliament in April 2005 and includes the provision to require
all offshore banks to establish a real physical presence in Samoa and to set up an
International Financial Authority as the new supervisory agency for the offshore banks. In
March 2005, an AML/CFT bill was submitted to the Attorney General’s Office for review
9

Two of the four existing banks (ANZ and Westpac) are subsidiaries of major Australian banks. They have a
joint market share of over 75 percent of banking system’s assets.

- 18 -

and certification before tabling for Parliamentary approval. This bill is expected to go toward
making Samoa compliant with the AML/CFT requirements and the 40 + 8 recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
29.
The mission recommended a review of both the National Provident Fund’s
(NPF’s) role in the economy and its investment guidelines. The NPF’s nonperforming
loans are high, reflecting increasing activity in its noncore functions. Its assets are skewed in
favor of short-term loans to members and various public sector related projects.10 The staff
noted that investment policies of National Provident Funds are designed to confine the
pension fund’s exposure to risk-free assets, and are therefore constrained by tight investment
guidelines. The staff also urged the CBS to strengthen the NPF’s supervisory framework..
30.
The authorities concurred that it was timely to review the NPF’s investment
guidelines. They agreed with the staff’s view that the significant exposure of NPF’s assets to
members’ borrowings, most of which is used to finance consumption, was less than
desirable. They noted that the NPF’s investment framework is constrained by the lack of
long-term investment opportunities in the domestic market. Thus, the government has
recently given the NPF the authority to invest abroad 16 million tala (1½ percent of GDP or
7 percent of NPF’s total assets) and to date about 2 million tala has been invested overseas.
The authorities expressed their interest in receiving technical assistance to strengthen the
NPF’s risk management and investment framework and enhance its financial soundness.
F. Structural Reform Policies
31.
Public sector reform: The mission commended the authorities for the progress made
on civil service reform in recent years (Box 1). The staff expressed its support for the plans
by the Public Service Commission to review the functions of each Ministry by the end
of 2005 with a view to refocusing them on their core functions.
32.
Public enterprise reform: The public sector still dominates the economy with the
state accounting for about 40 percent of both GDP and total employment. The mission
expressed its support for the general thrust of the government’s SOE policy framework,
which focuses on the corporatization of all SOEs, in particular those that are of strategic
public interest (power, ports and water), and privatization of enterprises in the nonstrategic
sectors (Box 1). The mission encouraged the government to accelerate the enactment and the
implementation of the Companies Act in line with the Public Bodies Act which requires
SOEs to be run on strict commercial principles. The authorities agreed and noted that
supporting legislation for the Companies Act (which includes bankruptcy and litigation
provisions) is being developed. The staff welcomed the progress made by the authorities
toward the introduction of more competition in the telecom sector supported by an
appropriate regulatory framework.11
10

Members of the provident fund can borrow from the NPF an equivalent of about 50 percent of their
outstanding balances (using their balances as collateral).
11

The World Bank is assisting the authorities on developing the regulatory framework.

- 19 -

33.
Land market reform: The authorities and the staff agreed that land market reform is
important for private sector development. The staff emphasized the need to find ways to
build an institutional and legal framework capable of sustaining an efficient lease market,
which safeguards the interests of the local community while ensuring protection to the
investor. The authorities expressed their intentions to explore the possibility of facilitating
the leasing of some unused communal land for private investment purposes after extensive
public consultations. However, they noted that the constitution bars the sale of communal
land for commercial purposes. Therefore, they would need to proceed cautiously on land
market reform given the political sensitivity.
34.
Trade liberalization: The mission commended the authorities for the progress made
on trade reform as well as toward WTO accession which is expected to be concluded by the
end of 2005. Samoa is a founding member of the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement
(PICTA), which aims to eliminate all intra-regional tariffs by 2012. Samoa is also a
participant in the negotiations currently under way for new access to the European Union
(EU) market through reciprocal Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) under the
Cotonou Agreement, expected to take effect in 2008. The authorities noted that Samoa stands
to benefit from EPAs although it may face supply constraints and challenges in meeting the
strict EU standards. They also argued that given the very low level of imports from the EU to
Samoa (about 1 percent), the impact of the EPA on tax revenues is expected to be minimal.
G. Other Issues
35.
While Samoa has made important progress in strengthening the reporting of
economic statistics, further improvements in their timeliness and quality would allow
for more comprehensive economic analysis and surveillance. Samoa formally adopted the
Fund’s General Data Dissemination Standards (GDDS) in November 2003. The national
accounts and the consumer price index were rebased in 2003 based on the 2002 household
income and expenditure survey (HIES). The CBS is expected to complete its transition to
Balance of Payments Manual 5 by end-June 2005. Further improvements are needed in other
areas, notably the fiscal accounts to address weaknesses in terms of the quality and timeliness
of available data. Thus, the mission supported the authorities' request to PFTAC for technical
assistance in the migration to the Fund’s Government Financial Statistics Manual
(GFSM) 2001. Improved budget disclosure of medium-term forecasts and assumptions, tax
expenditures, fiscal risks and contingent liabilities would also be beneficial.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
36.
Over the last decade, Samoa has transformed itself into one of the best managed
economies in the Pacific Island region. The economy has registered solid growth with low
inflation, public finances have improved significantly and official reserves have been raised
to more comfortable levels. Human development indicators are also amongst the highest in
the region. The authorities deserve to be commended for good macroeconomic management.
37.
Despite this notable progress, the record in more recent years has been uneven
and the authorities also face immediate challenges to sustaining that strong record.
Decisive action is needed to limit the large domestic pressures on the 2005/06 budget and

- 20 -

prevent the emerging risks to macroeconomic stability which could threaten the hard-won
gains made over the last decade. Skillful economic management will be required to limit the
impact of these pressures on macroeconomic stability.
38.
Prudent fiscal policy stance should be continued in the forthcoming 2005/06
budget. The fiscal deficit should be limited to about 0.9 percent of GDP given the need to
reduce the debt level. Prudent wage policy is crucial to achieving this deficit target. To limit
the impact of any wage increase on the budget, a moratorium on the filling of all vacancies
other than essential positions will be required and any wage increase phased in. Further
progress needs to be made by the government toward a comprehensive restructuring of
Polynesian Airlines. Given that the restructuring costs are likely to be large, ways should be
found to limit the burden on the 2005/06 budget including by spreading out the costs over
time. The granting of large scale tax breaks for the private sector which would erode the
revenue base should be avoided.
39.
Strengthening tax administration and reorienting expenditures toward social
and infrastructure sectors remain a policy priority over the medium term. The
authorities’ commitment to strengthening tax administration especially the establishment of a
Large Taxpayer Unit should be pursued and it would be desirable to modernize the 1974
income tax legislation. Greater rationalization of expenditures would enable reorienting
spending toward education, health and infrastructure sectors which are important for
medium-term growth. The intention to include a simplified medium-term budget framework
in the 2005/06 budget is welcome.
40.
Monetary policy needs to be less accommodating in the near term. If the risks to
the 2005/06 budget were to materialize and balance of payments pressures emerge, the
authorities should stand ready to tighten monetary policy. The ability of the government to
contain the fiscal position would be a critical factor in determining whether such a tightening
would be necessary.
41.
The current pegged exchange rate regime has served well as a nominal anchor.
The policy of periodically making small adjustments in the value of the tala appears to have
struck an appropriate balance between maintaining external competitiveness, while
preserving the exchange rate peg’s role as an anchor for inflation. Structural weaknesses such
as poor infrastructure services by key utilities, rather than exchange rate competitiveness
appear to have largely contributed to the weak export performance. Addressing these
structural weaknesses is critical to reinvigorating and diversifying the export base.
42.
The Central Bank is commended for recent measures taken to strengthen the
supervision framework. The approval of the international banking bill which includes a
provision to require all offshore banks to establish a real physical presence in Samoa and to
set up an International Financial Authority as the new supervisory agency for offshore banks
is helpful. The progress made in strengthening the AML/CFT framework is also welcome.
43.
The National Provident Fund’s role in the economy and its investment guidelines
should be reviewed. Given its high level of nonperforming loans, reflecting increasing
activity in its noncore functions, there is a need to review its investment guidelines as well

- 21 -

strengthen its supervisory framework. A financially-sound pension fund will be needed for
dealing with the fiscal pressures which can arise when the population ages.
44.
It is important that Samoa continues to carry forward its public sector reforms
and move ahead to tackle the other impediments to private sector development. The
authorities are commended for the progress made on civil service reform in recent years.
Progress toward the creation of a more competitive telecommunications sector underpinned
by an appropriate regulatory framework, and WTO accession which is expected to be
concluded by the end of 2005, is commendable. Deeper SOE and land reform are critical for
private sector development. Thus, the government should accelerate the enactment and
implementation of the Companies Act and of the supporting legislations which will
strengthen the corporatization program for SOEs. The government should engage in
consultations with the public in order to find ways to build an institutional and legal
framework capable of sustaining an efficient lease market for unused communal land, which
safeguards the interests of the local community while ensuring protection to the investor.
45.
While data provision for surveillance purposes is still adequate overall, staff’s
analysis was affected by shortcomings in certain areas. Samoa’s formal adoption of the
IMF’s General Data Dissemination Standards (GDDS) is welcome. Improved quality and
timeliness of fiscal data and disclosure of medium-term budget forecasts and assumptions
and fiscal risks are encouraged.
46.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Samoa take place
on a 24-month cycle. The authorities welcomed the possibility of an interim staff visit,
which could focus on the 2006/07 budget and the medium-term budget framework.

- 22 -

Table 1. Samoa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000/01–2005/06 1/
Population (2003):
179,058
GDP per capita (2001): US$1,672
Quota:
SDR 11.6 million
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06
Proj.
Proj.

(12-month percent change)
Output and inflation
Real GDP
Change in CPI (end period)
Change in CPI (period average)

7.1
1.1
1.9

4.4
9.8
7.4

1.8
1.6
4.3

3.5
17.2
7.9

3.0
-2.9
7.5

3.0
2.0
3.0

32.5
33.4
-0.9

40.1
41.0
-0.9

37.9
38.8
-0.9

0.0
0.9

0.5
0.4

0.6
0.3

(In percent of GDP)
Central government budget
Revenue and grants
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance
External financing
Domestic financing

31.9
34.3
-2.3
0.5
1.7

33.8
35.9
-2.1
1.4
0.7

32.8
33.4
-0.6
0.5
0.1

(12-month percent change)
Money and credit
Broad money (M2)
Net foreign assets 2/
Net domestic assets 2/
Private sector credit
Three-month CBS rate

20.1
0.7
64.5
21.0
5.7

3.6
1.3
6.8
9.9
5.8

6.6
-9.2
27.7
11.4
5.2

12.7
4.0
20.9
17.1

5.2

10.5

8.8

10.4
10.5

3.2
13.3

8.6
5.2

9.0
5.2

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Balance of payments
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, c.i.f
Current transfers (net)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance excluding official transfers
(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance

14.5
120.4
64.0
0.1
0.1
-20.7
-8.8
1.5

14.4
134.3
72.9
-1.6
-0.6
-23.8
-9.6
4.2

12.9
132.9
79.6
8.3
2.9
-13.4
-4.7
-5.7

14.1
149.5
98.8
15.2
4.4
-9.6
-2.8
2.2

12.7
174.8
125.2
8.7
2.2
-49.9
-12.7
9.6

12.3
188.4
110.9
-7.0
-1.6
-54.6
-12.9
1.1

External reserves and debt
Official reserves (gross) 3/
(In months of next year's imports of goods and services)
External Public debt 4/
(In percent of GDP)
External debt-service ratio (in percent) 5/

45.7
3.6
143.5
61.4
8.8

54.4
4.2
153.4
62.0
9.1

51.5
3.4
169.1
59.6
8.7

66.8
3.6
177.3
51.5
7.9

76.4
3.9
190.4
48.5
6.0

77.5
4.0
198.8
46.9
5.3

Exchange rates
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, end period)
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, period average)
Nominal effective exchange rate (1990 = 100) 6/
Real effective exchange rate (1990 = 100) 6/

3.5
3.4
100.9
93.4

3.3
3.5
99.7
99.7

3.0
3.2
98.4
97.5

2.9
2.9
98.8
112.8

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of Tala)

804.2

858.2

913.8

989.0

1059.4

1118.5

Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year beginning July 1.
2/ Change in percent of beginning period broad money.
3/ Excludes reserve accumulation by commercial banks
4/ Includes publicly guaranteed debt. The government took over Polynesian Airlines debt in August 1994.
5/ In percent of exports of goods and services.
6/ IMF, Information Notice System Index; end of period.

- 23 Table 2. Samoa: Balance of Payments, 2000/01–2005/06
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted)
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Proj.

2005/06
Proj.

0.1
0.1

-1.6
-0.6

8.3
2.9

15.2
4.4

8.7
2.2

-7.0
-1.6

Merchandise trade balance 1/
Exports, fob
Imports, cif 2/

-105.9
14.5
120.4

-119.9
14.4
134.3

-120.0
12.9
132.9

-135.4
14.1
149.5

-162.1
12.7
174.8

-176.1
12.3
188.4

Services and income balance
Services, net
Travel, net
Other services, net
Investment income, net

42.1
44.7
38.2
6.5
-2.6

45.5
45.8
39.7
6.1
-0.3

48.7
52.2
45.3
6.9
-3.5

51.8
52.3
58.5
-6.2
-0.5

45.6
52.4
62.3
-9.9
-6.7

58.2
64.6
66.9
-2.3
-6.4

Current transfers, net
Official transfers, net
Private transfers, net

64.0
20.8
43.2

72.9
22.3
50.6

79.6
21.7
57.9

98.8
24.8
74.0

125.2
58.6
66.6

110.9
47.7
63.2

1.4
1.2
3.8
2.5
-2.9
3.1

5.8
3.6
7.3
3.7
-2.5
4.7

-14.0
1.7
5.8
4.2
-2.3
-13.3

-13.0
-3.9
0.1
4.0
-1.2
-8.0

0.9
1.9
7.0
4.5
-1.1
0.0

8.1
1.9
0.0
5.3
0.0
7.0

1.5

4.2

-5.7

2.2

9.6

1.1

45.7
3.6
-20.7
-8.8
143.5
61.4
8.8
233.8

54.4
4.2
-23.8
-9.6
153.4
62.0
9.1
247.3

51.5
3.4
-13.4
-4.7
169.1
59.6
8.7
283.8

66.8
3.6
-9.6
-2.8
177.3
51.5
7.9
344.6

76.4
3.9
-49.9
-12.7
190.4
48.5
6.0
392.4

77.5
4.0
-54.6
-12.9
198.8
46.9
5.3
423.7

Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)

Financial and capital account, net
Official loans, net
Disbursements
Repayments
Government guaranteed loans, net
Private sector capital (including errors and omissions)
Overall balance
Memorandum items:
Gross official reserves 3/
(In months of next year's imports of goods and services)
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP)
External debt 4/
(In percent of GDP)
External debt-service ratio 5/
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Excludes trade data for Yasaki Samoa Limited and imports by foreign diplomatic missions located in Samoa.
2/ Imports in 2001/02 include exceptional capital imports (8 shipping vessels and machinery for the extension of the port)
amounting to $8.6 million.
3/ Excludes reserve accumulation by commercial banks.
4/ Estimated on the basis of calendar-year data.
5/ As a percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services.

- 24 Table 3. Samoa: Financial Operations of the Central Government, 2000/01–2005/06
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04
Budget
Actual

2004/05
Budget

Proj.

2005/06
Proj.

(In millions of tala)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
External grants 1/

262.4
197.4
174.8
22.5
65.1

290.8
198.7
182.7
16.0
92.1

303.5
229.3
206.5
22.8
74.2

318.4
251.4
224.1
27.3
67.0

317.7
246.5
219.7
26.8
71.2

426.3
268.0
239.5
28.5
158.3

425.3
267.0
237.6
29.3
158.3

424.4
298.6
267.2
31.3
125.8

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Development expenditure 1/
Net lending

281.7
164.6
103.1
13.9

308.6
183.3
104.2
21.1

309.1
202.2
86.9
20.0

332.4
208.0
93.5
30.9

326.6
204.5
86.6
35.5

434.8
232.2
176.4
26.2

434.8
232.2
176.4
26.2

434.4
252.8
155.8
25.8

Current balance
Overall balance

32.7
-19.2

15.4
-17.8

27.1
-5.6

43.3
-14.1

42.0
-8.9

35.7
-8.5

34.7
-9.5

45.7
-10.1

18.3
4.3
13.3
8.9
14.0
12.0
2.0

17.8
11.8
23.9
12.1
6.0
-3.5
9.5

5.6
4.7
16.6
11.9
0.9
-6.2
7.0

14.1
13.1
26.5
13.4
1.0
0.0
1.0

8.9
0.3
12.1
11.9
8.6
17.6
-9.0

8.5
5.1
18.1
13.0
3.5
0.0
3.5

9.5
5.1
18.1
13.0
4.5
0.0
4.5

10.1
6.7
20.1
13.4
3.4
3.4
0.0

Financing
External financing, net
Disbursement
Amortization
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Nonbanks and others

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
External grants

31.9
24.0
21.3
2.7
7.9

33.8
23.1
21.2
1.9
10.7

32.8
24.8
22.3
2.5
8.0

32.7
25.8
23.0
2.8
6.9

32.5
25.2
22.4
2.7
7.3

43.6
27.4
24.5
2.9
16.2

40.1
25.2
22.4
2.8
14.9

37.9
26.7
23.9
2.8
11.2

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Development expenditure
Net lending

34.3
20.0
12.6
1.7

35.9
21.3
12.1
2.5

33.4
21.9
9.4
2.2

34.2
21.4
9.6
3.2

33.4
20.9
8.9
3.6

44.4
23.7
18.0
2.7

41.0
21.9
16.6
2.5

38.8
22.6
13.9
2.3

Overall balance

-2.3

-2.1

-0.6

-1.4

-0.9

-0.9

-0.9

-0.9

2.2
0.5
1.6
1.1
1.7
1.5
0.2

2.1
1.4
2.8
1.4
0.7
-0.4
1.1

0.6
0.5
1.8
1.3
0.1
-0.7
0.8

1.4
1.3
2.7
1.4
0.1
0.0
0.1

0.9
0.0
1.2
1.2
0.9
1.8
-0.9

0.9
0.5
1.8
1.3
0.4
0.0
0.4

0.9
0.5
1.7
1.2
0.4
0.0
0.4

0.9
0.6
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.0
0.3

Financing
External financing, net
Disbursement
Amortization
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Nonbanks and others

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ The jump in external grants in 2004/05 is attributed to several projects in connection with the organization of the 2007 South Pacific Games.

- 25 -

Table 4. Samoa: Monetary Survey, 2000/01–2004/05
End of Period:

2000/01
Actual

2001/02
Actual

2002/03
Actual

2003/04
Actual

2004/05
Dec
Mar

Sep
Actual

Jun
Proj.

(In millions of tala; unless indicated otherwise)
Net foreign assets
Monetary authorities 1/
Commercial banks

179.9
157.2
22.7

182.2
175.7
6.5

165.5
151.9
13.6

172.1
186.2
-14.0

193.3
202.6
-9.4

220.1
213.6
6.5

205.0
205.0
0.0

190.0
190.0
0.0

Net domestic assets

128.3

137.0

175.0

211.5

207.2

198.4

219.0

233.8

178.2
-89.5
17.7
0.1
249.9
-49.9

197.0
-93.0
15.1
0.1
274.7
-59.9

237.1
-99.2
29.3
0.9
306.1
-62.1

290.4
-81.6
13.4
0.0
358.5
-78.9

287.2
-89.2
12.6
0.0
363.8
-79.9

279.8
-81.6
10.0
0.0
351.4
-81.4

301.9
-81.6
10.0
0.0
373.5
-82.9

317.7
-81.6
10.0
0.0
389.3
-83.9

308.3
88.7
23.3
65.3
219.6
40.4
156.6
22.7

319.2
92.3
26.1
66.2
226.9
45.5
171.4
10.1

340.4
93.8
26.2
67.6
246.6
45.5
184.8
16.3

383.6
112.6
28.4
84.2
271.0
49.4
209.4
12.2

400.5
116.6
29.8
86.8
284.0
53.8
220.0
10.2

418.5
124.9
38.9
86.0
293.6
51.5
232.4
9.8

424.0
122.3
34.2
88.1
301.7
55.7
246.0
21.7

423.8
124.6
31.5
93.2
299.1
54.5
244.6
14.3

20.1
10.0
21.0

3.6
4.1
9.9

6.6
1.7
11.4

12.7
20.0
17.1

12.4
14.8
17.0

17.5
23.0
13.0

10.6
5.8
14.6

10.5
10.7
8.6

0.5
19.6

0.7
2.8

-5.2
11.9

2.0
10.7

5.5
-1.1

6.7
-2.2

11.6
12.9

4.7
5.8

2.7
9.3

2.7
9.4

2.7
9.7

2.6
8.8

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

2.5
8.5

2.5
8.5

Domestic credit
Government (net)
Nonfinancial public enterprises
Nonmonetary financial institutions
Claims on private sector
Other items (net)
Broad money
Narrow money
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits
Quasi-money
Savings deposits
Time deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Memorandum items:
Growth of monetary aggregates (percent per annum) 2/
Broad money
Narrow money
Private sector credit
Contribution to broad money growth (in percent) 2/
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Velocity
Broad money
Narrow money
Source: Central Bank of Samoa.

1/ Includes Treasury's monetary accounts.
2/ For quarterly data, the annual change is calculated relative to the respective quarter of the previous year.

- 26 Table 5. Samoa: Medium-Term Outlook, 2000/01–2009/10
Projections
2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08

2008/09

2009/10

(Annual percentage change)
Growth and inflation
Real GDP growth
CPI inflation (period average)

7.1
1.9

4.4
7.4

1.8
4.3

3.5
7.9

3.0
7.5

3.0
3.0

3.5
3.0

3.5
3.0

3.5
3.0

3.5
3.0

37.9
26.7
11.2
38.8
-0.9

33.9
26.7
7.2
34.2
-0.3

33.8
26.7
7.1
33.8
0.0

33.7
26.7
7.0
33.4
0.3

33.6
26.7
6.9
33.1
0.5

7.9
8.5

7.9
8.5

7.9
8.5

7.9
8.5

(In percent of GDP)
Fiscal accounts
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (including grants)

31.9
24.0
7.9
34.3
-2.3

33.9
23.2
10.7
36.0
-2.1

32.8
25.2
8.0
33.4
-0.6

32.5
25.2
7.3
33.4
-0.9

40.1
25.2
14.9
41.0
-0.9

(Annual percentage change)
Monetary survey
Broad money
Private credit

20.1
21.1

3.6
9.9

6.6
11.4

12.7
17.1

10.5
8.6

8.8
9.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Balance of payments 1/
Current account (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP)
Merchandise trade balance
Exports, fob
Imports, fob 2/
Services and income, net
Current transfers, net
Of which: Official transfers, net
Financial and capital account, net
Of which: Government loans, net
Overall balance

External debt and reserves
Gross external public debt (percent of GDP) 3/
External debt-service ratio 4/
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(In months of next year's imports of goods and NF services)
Memorandum items:
Non-adjustment/external shocks scenario:
Real GDP growth
CPI inflation (period average)
(in percent of GDP):
Overall fiscal balance (including grants)
Current account (excluding official transfers)
Reserves (in months of imports)
External Public Debt

-20.7
-8.8
-105.9
14.5
120.4
42.1
64.0
20.8

-23.8
-9.6
-119.9
14.4
134.3
45.5
72.9
22.3

-13.4
-4.7
-120.0
12.9
132.9
48.7
79.6
21.7

-9.6
-2.8
-135.4
14.1
149.5
51.8
98.8
24.8

-49.9
-12.7
-162.1
12.7
174.8
45.6
125.2
58.6

-54.6
-12.9
-176.1
12.3
188.4
58.2
110.9
47.7

-39.2
-8.9
-185.2
13.4
198.6
81.0
96.9
31.9

-31.5
-6.7
-189.6
17.3
206.8
88.1
103.1
33.1

-28.3
-5.7
-196.4
20.8
217.1
96.1
109.7
37.7

-25.6
-4.9
-202.7
21.6
224.3
102.1
116.8
41.8

1.4
-1.7

5.8
1.0

-14.0
-0.7

-13.0
-5.1

0.9
0.9

8.1
1.1

13.9
1.9

5.0
0.0

0.5
1.5

-4.5
1.5

1.5

4.2

-5.7

2.2

9.6

1.1

6.6

6.6

10.0

11.6

61.4
8.8
45.7
3.6

62.0
9.1
54.4
4.2

59.6
8.7
51.5
4.3

51.5
7.9
66.8
4.0

48.5
6.0
76.4
3.9

46.9
5.3
77.5
4.0

44.6
5.0
84.1
4.1

42.4
4.6
90.8
4.2

39.7
4.1
100.7
4.5

36.9
3.9
112.4
5.0

7.1
1.9

4.4
7.4

1.8
4.3

3.5
7.9

3.0
7.5

2.0
11.0

1.0
8.0

1.0
8.0

1.0
5.5

1.0
5.5

-2.3
-8.8
3.6
61.4

-2.1
-9.6
4.2
62.0

-0.6
-4.7
4.3
59.6

-0.9
-2.8
4.0
51.5

-0.9
-12.7
3.9
48.5

-4.0
-13.4
3.6
48.4

-3.1
-9.6
3.2
51.6

-4.2
-7.5
3.0
55.6

-5.5
-6.5
2.6
60.7

-6.8
-5.7
2.3
66.8

Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities; and Fund staff projections.
1/ Baseline projections include the cost of settling Polynesian Airlines' external obligations which are government guaranteed.
2/ Excludes the import of a ferry in January 1999 (US$11.5 million), and the import of an airplane in November 2000.
3/ Includes publicly guaranteed debt. The reduction in the debt-toGDP ratio from 2005/06 to 2009/10 is almost entirely driven by the higher nominal GDP.
4/ In percent of GNFS exports.

- 27 Table 6. Samoa: Vulnerability Indicators, 2000/01–2003/04
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2000/01

2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Financial sector risk indicators
External Public and publicly guaranteed debt

61.4

62.0

59.6

51.5

Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)

20.1

3.6

6.6

12.7

Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)

21.1

9.9

11.4

17.1

Share of deposits in broad money (percent)

85.1

88.7

87.5

89.4

Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits (percent)

8.0

3.4

5.2

3.4

Non-performing loans of the banking system (in percent of total loans)

0.2

1.8

2.2

3.5

24.8

22.5

26.4

26.0

Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)

-15.5

-0.8

-10.3

9.4

Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars)

19.2

11.6

-1.0

12.5

Terms of trade (percent change, 12-month basis)

-2.9

-3.4

0.3

0.8

Current account balance

-0.1

-1.1

2.9

4.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

45.7

54.4

51.5

66.8

3.6

4.2

3.4

3.6

14.8

17.1

15.1

17.4

Debt-service ratio (percent of exports of goods and services)

8.8

9.1

8.7

7.9

External interest payments (percent of exports of goods and services)

1.6

2.2

2.0

2.0

External amortization payments (percent of exports of goods and services)

8.9

7.8

8.4

8.4

Exchange rate (tala per U.S. dollar, end of period)

3.5

3.3

3.0

2.9

Capital adequacy ratio of the banking system
External indicators

Capital and financial account balance
Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross official reserves (in months of next year's GNFS imports)
Gross official reserves (percent of broad money)

Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

20

40

60

0

Sources: Samoa authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
Marshall Islands

Solomon Islands

Samoa

-16
20

-20
0

5

4

3

2

1

0
100

120

Gross Foreign Reserves
(months of imports)

Kiribati

Marshall Islands

Micronesia

Palau

Average

PNG

Tonga

Solomon Is.

Samoa

Average

Kiribati

Fiji

Vanuatu

8

Micronesia

40

Marshall Islands

Samoa

Fiji

10

Samoa

6

CPI Inflation
(annual percent change)

Average

60

Vanuatu

100
80

Solomon Islands

0

Fiji

140

Samoa

Central Government Balances
(percent of GDP)

Solomon Islands

8

Papua New Guinea

0

Kiribati

-2

Tonga

6

Marshall Islands

4
Micronesia

Palau

12

Fiji

-1
Palau

2

Vanuatu

Marshall Islands

Micronesia

Samoa

Kiribati

Tonga

Real GDP Growth
(annual percent change)

Tonga

80
Vanuatu

Tonga

Marshall Islands

7

Palau

External Debt
(percent of GDP)
Papua New Guinea

Tonga

-4

Papua New Guinea

Average

Papua New Guinea

5

Average

Solomon Islands

-12

Vanuatu

Average

Solomon Islands

4

Micronesia

-8
Fiji

Micronesia

3

Kiribati

0

Palau

1

Vanuatu

2

Palau

4
Kiribati

6

Fiji

- 28 -

Figure 1. Samoa: Regional Comparators
(Averages, 2000-2004)

14

-2

160

Central Government Expenditure
(percent of GDP)

7

- 29 Figure 2. Samoa: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999/00-2004/05
8

40

REAL GDP GROWTH
35

7

40

INFLATION
(12 month percentage change)

35

30

30
Headline
Nonfood
Food

6
25
5

20

4

25
20

Cyclone
Heta

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

3

2

1

-10

0
1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

1999

2004/05

-10
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Proj.
16
14

115

0

16

INTEREST RATES
(percent per year, end of period)

EXCHANGE RATES

14

1

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

4

5

2

2

0

0

110

2
3

105

100

6
95

7
-2

-2

Nominal
Real

-4

8

-4

-6

9

-6

-8

-8

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

90
Tala/NZ (LHS)
Tala/US (LHS)
REER, 1990=100 (RHS)
NEER, 1990=100 (RHS)

10
1999

Source: Samoa Authorities and Fund staff estimates.

85
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

- 30 Figure 3. Samoa: External Sector Developments, 1999/00-2004/05
5

200
EXTERNAL TRADE AND CURRENT ACCOUNT
(In millions of US dollars)

0

20

20
EXPORT RECEIPTS
(In millions of US dollars)

180

Coconut Cream
Garments
Other
Fresh fish

160
15

15

10

10

5

5

140
-5

120
100

-10

Imports
(RHS)

-15

Current account
excl. official
transfer
(LHS)

80
60
40

Exports(RHS)

20

1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.

1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.
80

80

0

0

0

-20

15

70

TOTAL EXTERNAL DEBT
(In percent of GDP)

PUBLIC DEBT AND DEBT SERVICE

70

70

65

60

60

60

14
13
12

50

50

55

40

40

50

30

30

45

20

20

40

10

10

35

0

0

30
1999/00

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Sources: Samoa authorities, and Fund staff estimates.

2005
Proj.

External debt
(in percent of GDP, left
scale)

11
10
9
8

Debt service
(in percent of GNFS exports,
right scale)

7
6
5

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Proj.

- 31 Figure 4. Samoa: Monetary and Fiscal Indicators, 1999/00-2004/05
30

30

40

MONETARY AGGREGATES
(year-on-year percent change)

20

20

CONTRIBUTION TO BROAD MONEY GROWTH
(year-on-year percent change)

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

10

10

0

0

-10

-10
Private sector credit
Broad money (M2)
Net foreign assets

-20

-20

-10

-20

1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.

-10

-20
1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.

50

45

Broad money
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets

1

1
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BALANCE
(In percent of GDP)

CENTRAL GOVERNMENT BUDGET
(In percent of GDP)
45
40
Total expenditures and net
lending

40

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

35
35

30

Total revenues
including grants

30

25
25
20
20

Current expenditures

15

10

15
1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.

-3

-3
1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05
Proj.

Source: Samoa Authorities; World Bank; and Fund staff estimates.

- 32 Figure 5. Samoa: Regional Competitiveness Indicators, 1999-2005
125

125

0.025

PRICE COMPETITIVENESS

Fiji
Samoa
Tonga
Vanuatu

115

0.003
MARKET SHARE
(in percent)

0.020

0.002

0.015

0.002

0.010

0.001

115

105

105

95

95

Pacific island exports/world
exports (left axis)
Samoa exports/world exports
(right axis)

0.005

0.001

Real Effective Exchange Rates
(2000=100)
85

85

Jan-99

Jan-00

Jan-01

Jan-02

Jan-03

Jan-04

0.000

Jan-05

30

30

0.000
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

10

10

TOURISM RECEIPTS
(in percent of GDP)

DOMESTIC INTEREST RATE SPREAD
(end of year)
Tonga
Fiji
Samoa
Vanuatu

9

25

25

9

20

20

8

8

15

15

7

7

10

6

6

5

5

5

0

4

10

Tonga
Fiji
Samoa
Vanuatu

5

0
1999

2000

2001

2002

Source: Samoa authorities, and Fund staff estimates.

4
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

- 33 Figure 6. Samoa: Medium-Term Outlook, 2001/02-2009/10
6

6

0

GDP GROWTH
(Annual percentage change)

0

CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE
(In percent of GDP)
5

5

-2

-2
Current baseline

Current baseline
4

4

-4

-6

-6

-8

-8

-10

-10

-12

-12

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
2001/02

2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

2009/10

FISCAL DEFICIT
(In percent of GDP)

-14
2001/02

1

1

0

Non-adjustment
scenario

-4

Non-adjustment scenario

-14
2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

6

2009/10
6

RESERVES
(In months of imports)

0

Current baseline
-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

-4

-4

-5

-5
Current baseline

-6

Non-adjustment scenario

2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

5

4

4

3

3

-6

-7

-7
2001/02

Non-adjustment scenario

5

2009/10

2
2001/02

Source: Samoa Authorities and Fund staff estimates.

2003/04

2005/06

2007/08

2
2009/10

ANNEX I

- 34 SAMOA––FUND RELATIONS
(As of March 31, 2005)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 12/28/1971; Article VIII
General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency
Reserve position in Fund

SDR Million
11.60
10.92
0.69

%Quota
100.0
94.12
5.98

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
1.14
2.43

%Allocation
100.00
213.11

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:

II.

V.

None

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Approval
Expiration
Date
Date
Type
Stand-by
07/09/1984
07/08/1985
Stand-by
06/27/1983
06/26/1984
Stand-by
08/17/1979
08/16/1980

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund:

VII.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:

Amount Approved
(SDR million)
3.38
3.38
0.75

Amount Drawn
(SDR million)
3.38
3.38
0.00

None

The exchange rate of the tala is pegged to a trade and payments weighted basket of currencies formally
within a ±2 percent band. The basket is a composite of the currencies of Samoa’s most important trading
partners and countries that are major sources of private transfers from abroad––New Zealand, Australia,
the United States, Fiji, and Euro countries. The period average exchange rate for March 2005 was SAT
1.00 = US$0.374.
VIII

Article IV Consultation:

The 2003 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Apia during March 3–17, 2003. The Executive
Board discussed the staff report (IMF Country Report No. 03/195) and concluded the consultation on
June 2, 2003.
IX.

Technical Assistance:

The Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) has provided assistance on budgetary
management, tax administration, banking supervision and balance of payments statistics. MFD has
provided assistance on monetary policy operations, foreign reserves management, banking and insurance
supervision and other central banking issues. MFD arranged a regional seminar in Fiji in March 2005 on
indirect monetary management approach in countries with shallow bond markets to identify the common
concerns and issues in the Pacific Island region. The conclusions from this seminar will serve as the basis
for further technical assistance to the region (including Samoa). STA has provided help with national
accounts statistics, and FAD with tax administration.
X.

Resident Representative: None

- 35 -

ANNEX II

SAMOA—SUPPORT FROM THE PACIFIC FINANCIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTRE1
The Centre’s assistance to Samoa since 1998 has included 24 advisory missions. Samoa also sent
24 officials to regional seminars and workshops. PFTAC organized 5 attachments.
Public Financial Management
A Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) against the Fund’s Code of Good Practice
on Fiscal Transparency was completed in consultation with the authorities in May 2004 and published
on the Fund Website. In November 2004, PFTAC sponsored a week long delegation of three officials
from the Samoa Ministry of Finance, together with officials from Fiji and Tonga, to the Australian
Commonwealth Government Departments of Finance and Treasury. The purpose of the delegation was
to hold discussions on the public financial management framework and practices, as well as providing
an opportunity to establish ongoing professional contacts between officials of all participating countries.
Tax Administration and Policy
In early 2002, the advisor undertook an introductory visit to Samoa to discuss tax policy and
administration related issues with the authorities. The authorities recently expressed interest in PFTAC
providing advice on issues associated with the possible establishment of a large taxpayer unit and
introduction of a single tax identification number. The adviser will travel to Samoa in June 2005 for this
purpose. Samoa is an inaugural member of the Pacific Islands Tax Administrators Association (PITAA)
and will host the second annual meeting scheduled for October 2005.
Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision
The PFTAC advisor and a legal consultant from the Fund’s Legal Department visited the Central Bank
of Samoa (CBS) in September 2003 to follow up on matters arising from the Offshore Financial Center
assessment conducted in 2002. The mission reviewed proposed legislation affecting financial
institutions, including a new Insurance Act. An MFD expert visited the CBS in November 2004 to
review draft insurance prudential statements and provide training in financial analysis of insurance
operations. An MFD consultant also visited the International Companies Office in late 2003 to assist
with implementing anti-money laundering measures.
Economic and Financial Statistics
The CBS started working on a BPM5 basis for Balance of Payments estimates in 2003. In June 2004, the
PFTAC Statistics advisor visited to review the implementation progress, and assisted with the pilot
testing of business surveys. More work is required to compile the international investment position but
transition to BPM5 by end 2005 is on target. Samoa joined the GDDS Project in November 2004. Plans
are also afoot to move Government Finance Statistics, produced by the Ministry of Finance, towards
GFSM2001 in early 2005.

1

Prepared by the staff at the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) in Suva, Fiji.
PFTAC is a multi-donor technical assistance institution, financed by IMF, ADB, AusAID and NZAID,
with the IMF as Executing Agency. The Centre's aim is to build skills and institutional capacity for
effective economic and financial management that can be sustained at the national level. Member
countries are: Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru,
Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.

- 36 -

ANNEX III

SAMOA––RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP1
Since Samoa became a Bank member in June 1974, 13 IDA credits totaling US$70.5 million
have been made covering the agriculture, power, telecommunication, finance, transport, and
health sectors.
The Bank’s operations in Samoa are guided by the Bank’s broader Pacific Regional Strategy,
currently under development, which has a focus on two main pillars: public expenditure
management (in the social sectors, infrastructure and natural hazard management) and private
sector development.
The Bank’s current lending activities in Samoa are as follows:
Health Sector Management. The Bank is supporting the government’s reform program
aimed at ensuring equitable access to a modern, effective, efficient, and environmentally
friendly health service, delivered in close collaboration with the private sector and NGOs.
Implementation is within a sector coordination framework involving other donors (AusAID).
Infrastructure Asset Management Phase 2. The objective of the program—to be carried
out in two phases over a period of eight years—is to assist Samoa in achieving transport and
coastal infrastructure assets that are economically, environmentally, and socially sustainable
and managed by an effective partnership of all stakeholders.
Infrastructure Emergency Recovery The Bank is assisting Samoa to recover from the
damage caused by Cyclone Heta and reduce the vulnerability of its people to prevailing
natural hazards through: (a) Recovery of coastal resilience to erosion, flooding, and landslide
hazards (b) Nurturing the recovery of fragile coastal ecosystems through sustainable
practices; and (c) Rehabilitation of damaged land transport communications.
Telecommunications and Postal Sector Reform. The Bank is assisting Samoa to improve
the performance of its telecommunications and postal sectors by increasing competition and
private sector participation; strengthening institutional and regulatory capacities; and
enhancing the provision of telecommunications and postal services, particularly in rural
areas.
In addition the Bank is developing a broader program of assistance in private sector
development. The Bank has held initial discussions on the dissemination and potential
follow-up to the ‘Costs of Doing Business’ report. The Government has requested support to
implement regulatory reform to promote private sector development. The Bank is in the
process of mobilizing this assistance.

1

Prepared by the World Bank staff.

ANNEX III

- 37 -

Table 1. Samoa: IBRD/IDA Lending Operations

Year of Approval

Value

Available
Balance

(In millions of U.S. dollar equivalent)
Completed projects (IDA)
First highway
Agricultural development
Second agricultural development
Development Bank
Multiproject
Afulilo hydroelectric dam (ADB)
Telecommunications (ADB)
Emergency road rehabilitation
Afulilo hydroelectric dam supplement (ADB)
Emergency road rehabilitation supplement
Infrastructure asset management

1975
1979
1980
1985
1986
1987
1989
1990
1993
1993
1999

4.4
8.0
2.0
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.6
14.0
1.0
5.1
14.4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Projects underway (IDA)
Health sector management
Telecommunications and Post Reform
Second Infrastructure Asset Mgmt.
Cyclone ERP

2000
2002
2004
2004

5.0
4.5
12.8
4.5

4.8
4.6
13.7
4.5

Total

87.8

27.6

Total debt outstanding

61.7

Source: Data provided by the World Bank.

ANNEX IV

- 38 SAMOA––RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 1

The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) operations in Samoa started in 1969. Up
to 2004, 30 loans totaling US$120.9 million for 27 projects and technical assistance totaling
US$22.0 million for 79 projects have been provided.
AsDB’s operational strategy for Samoa directly supports the Government's Strategy for the
Development of Samoa (SDS) 2003-2005. It contributes to AsDB’s overarching goal of
poverty reduction, and is consistent with AsDB’s Poverty Reduction Strategy, as well as
AsDB’s new Pacific Strategy. First, the AsDB strategy for Samoa aims to enhance access to,
and quality of, basic social services by (i) improving access to, and quality of, education;
(ii) enhancing the environment and public health of Apia (water and sanitation); and
(iii) meeting the growing power demand with improved efficiency, viability, and reliability.
Second, the strategy aims to improve the environment for the private sector by (i) ensuring
sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies; (ii) rationalizing state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
and enhancing their efficiency and effectiveness; and (iii) improving the institutional and
policy framework for the private sector.
One loan was approved in 2003 for the Sanitation and Drainage Project amounting to
US$8.0 million. Four TA grants were approved in the same year for a total of
US$1.725 million. No loan was planned for 2004. However, three TA grants were processed
in 2004 in the areas of privatization support, preparation of an education policy and strategy
for 2006–2013, and strengthening SOEs corporate governance, for a total of US$700,000.
Samoa: AsDB Loan Approvals and Disbursements, 2000–2005
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2000

2001

2002

2003

10.5

6.0

0.0

8.0

0.0

0.0

0.3

3.6

0.8

1.9

2.8

0.09

104.4

109.8

111.0

120.8

121.6

121.1

Cumulative disbursements 2

90.9

94.5

95.3

97.2

100.0

100.09

Net loan amount undisbursed

13.5

15.3

15.7

23.6

21.0

21.01

Loan approvals
Loan disbursements
Cumulative loan amount available 2

1

Prepared by the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) staff.

2

Balance as of March 2005, cumulative since operations began with Samoa in 1969.

2004 Mar-2005

- 39 -

ANNEX V

SAMOA: STATISTICAL ISSUES
A number of significant improvements in the compilation of basic macroeconomic data have
been made in recent years with technical assistance from the Fund, including through the Pacific
Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC), the Secretariat for the Pacific Community and
the Asian Development Bank. Statistics in Samoa compare well with those available in other
Pacific Island countries. National accounts and government finance statistics (GFS) are the
responsibility of a special statistics unit within the Treasury, while balance of payments and
financial statistics are the responsibility of the Central Bank. The Statistics Department compiles
the CPI and will soon start publishing monthly merchandise trade statistics based on Customs
records (they are currently published by the Central Bank on a nonstandard basis).
Real sector
The real sector data reported for publication in IFS are the consumer price index (CPI) and the
values of exports and imports. In addition, IFS publishes the index of manufacturing production
and GDP volume at 1995 prices.
Quarterly and annual GDP estimates have been developed on a production basis (broken down
by the standard industrial classification (SIC)) and are compiled in both nominal and real terms.
Estimates are available within two to three months after the end of each quarter. During the last
few years a number of initiatives have contributed to an improvement in the quality and
reliability of national accounts statistics. The 2002 Household Income and Expenditure Survey
(HIES) has been successfully completed. An annual Agriculture Census was initiated in 2002 and
the results will be utilized to revise estimates of agriculture production. The authorities have also
expressed their intention to report expenditure–side national accounts within the next two years
and some experimental estimates of gross capital formation are already available.
Ongoing efforts, however, are needed to further improve the quality and coverage of accounts. In
particular, data available on the activities of the automotive parts plant and merchandise trade
(especially fishing exports) are inconsistent between data sources.
The CPI was rebased in 2003 on the results of the 2002 HIES. The CPI is now released monthly
rather than quarterly. Work is in progress on establishing an underlying inflation index excluding
local food and other erratic items.
Quarterly employment statistics and average earnings from 1994 onwards are compiled and
published annually, utilizing data collected by the National Provident Fund (the compulsory
pension fund, which collects contributions from employees and all employers on behalf of
workers in the formal sector). More work is needed to ensure consistency with the national
accounts classification.
Government finance
Government finance statistics (GFS) based on the 1986 Manual are published quarterly within
three months by the Treasury Statistics Unit. Considerable improvements have been made to the
system in recent years; however, data quality remains hampered by difficulties in
misclassification of accounts, particularly net lending and external grants, and current and
development expenditure. The underlying budgetary system is not coded to GFS headings. A
transition plan for moving to GFSM 2001 over the next two years (but on a cash basis) has been
developed with assistance from PFTAC. Further technical assistance and training in GFS
compilation is needed to ensure that this is achieved. Samoa does not report government finance
data to either the GFS Yearbook or the International Finance Statistics (IFS).

- 40 -

ANNEX V

Monetary statistics
Comprehensive data on the monetary sector are published monthly in the Selected Economic
Indicators and quarterly in the Central Bank of Samoa Bulletin. Data for the accounts of the
Central Bank of Samoa (CBS) and the deposit money banks and interest rates are reported to the
Fund for publication in IFS on a regular and timely basis. Recently the broad monetary aggregate
has been extended to include foreign currency deposits held by residents, which have risen
rapidly in recent years, due to the relaxation of exchange control regulations.
Monthly data are also collected and published on the lending activities of other credit institutions.
There are no published data at present on offshore financial institutions, which are supervised at
arms length by the Central Bank. The staff encourages the CBS to start reporting the banking
survey data to the Fund as soon as technically possible.
Balance of payments
Annual and quarterly balance of payments data are regularly published in the quarterly CBS
Bulletin and annual data are reported for publication by the Fund in the IFS and Balance of
Payments Statistics Yearbook. The old BPM4 standards are broadly followed. In general, data
reported for the current account are fairly comprehensive, although exports are thought to be
underestimated; duty free imports are excluded; and the activities of a major automotive parts
plant are reported net under services. Direct investment income flows are excluded and official
grants are not included under current transfers.
The data published for the financial account are limited to elements of Other Investment (loan
liabilities of the government and monetary authorities), and incomplete data on bank transactions
and repayments on long–term loans received by the private sector. No data are published on
Direct Investment, Portfolio Investment, and other private sector financial transactions.
The CBS has made significant progress in its transition plan to move to BPM5 standards with the
help of PFTAC and the move is expected to be completed by June 2005. Among the
modifications expected are the change of the classification of official grants from the capital
account to the current account, and the transition to the international standard for merchandise
trade statistics, based on Customs data.
The official reserves in Samoa are defined in a nonstandard manner as net foreign assets of the
central bank, the Treasury and commercial banks. The authorities are urged to consider switching
to a more standard definition comprising the gross foreign assets of the central bank and the
Treasury.
Cooperation
In recent years, PFTAC has provided technical assistance in order to improve the quality of
statistics; the latest mission was in June 2004. The SPC and ADB have also provided assistance
with surveys, national accounts and CPI. The staff and PFTAC have recommended closer
coordination between the CBS, the Statistics Department and the Treasury Department (the
agency responsible for compiling external debt statistics, grant aid, and other international
transactions of the government) to improve the quality and accuracy of all economic statistics.

ANNEX V

- 41 -

Samoa: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of May 4, 2005)

Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data6

Frequency
of
Reporting6

Frequency
of
publication6

02/05

03/05

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

02/05

04/05

M

M

M

Broad Money

02/05

04/05

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

02/05

04/05

M

M

M

03/05

04/05

M

M

M

01/05

03/05

M

M

M

9/04

01/05

Q

Q

Q

GDP/GNP

12/04

03/05

Q

A

Q

Gross External Debt

2004

03/05

Q

A

Q

Exchange Rates
International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System
Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government
Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt
External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

ANNEX VI

- 42 SAMOA: SOCIAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS

Same region/income group
2003 1/
East
Lower
Asia &
Middle
Pacific
income

1985

1997

2003 1/

Population
Total population, mid–year (millions)
Growth rate (percent annual average)
Urban population (percent of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

0.16
0.0
21.1
5.2

0.17
0.6
21.9
4.5

0.18
1.1
22.3
4.0

1,855
1.0
37.9
2.1

2,655
0.9
49.7
2.1

Income
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)

660
57

1,390
113

1,600
131

1,080
..

1,480
..

Public expenditure
Health (percent of GDP)
Education (percent of GDP)

..
3.2

4.0
..

4.8
4.5

1.9
3.2

2.6
4.0

100
101
100

103
104
101

111
112
111

112
113
111

Gross primary school enrollment rate
(percent of school-age population)
Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water
(percent of population)

80

..

99

76

81

Immunization rate
(percent aged 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT

81
89

99
96

99
96

70
78

78
84

63.9
62.6
65.2

68.6
65.4
71.9

69.4
66.5
72.5

69.4
67.7
71.3

69.3
67.1
71.7

..

22

20

32

32

..
..

235
170

242
151

184
129

214
135

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Adult (15–59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)

Source: 2004 World Development Indicators, World Bank.
1/ Data corresponds to 2003 or to the latest year for which it is available.

ANNEX VII

- 43 -

SAMOA: PROGRESS ON MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

1990

1995

Latest Data
2001-03

Target
2015

Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)

6

17

4.2

1/

Goal 2: Achieve Universal Primary Education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group)

112.3

97.0

94.9

100.0

112.5

106.9

103.6

100.0

0.0

4.1

6.1

...

42.0
33.0

29.0
24.0

24.0
19.0

14.0
11.0

35.0
76.0

15.0
95.0

30.0
100

2/
...

…
…

…
42

0.0
30.4

3/
3/

Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)

46.1
...
0.8
...
...

3.5
4.0
0.8
90.0
97.0

37.1
4.1
0.8
99.0
99.0

4/
4/
4/
4/
4/

Goal 8: Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)

25.6
...

46.4
0.6

130.5
6.7

...
...

Goal 3: Promote Gender Equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education
(percent)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament
(percent)
Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (percent of life
births)
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases
HIV prevalence rate among 15-24 old pregnant women
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

Source: World Bank; World Development Indicators Database, April 2004.
1/ Goal is to halve 1990 rate.
2/ Goal is to reduce 1990 ratio by three-quarters.
3/ Goal is to have it halted by 2015 and begun to reverse.
4/ Goal is to reverse the loss of environmental resources.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative
June 17, 2005

1.
This statement describes the 2005/06 budget which was presented to Parliament
on May 31, 2005 after the staff report was circulated to the Executive Board on May 16,
2005. The proposed deficit target (4 percent of GDP) for 2005/06 turned out to be much
larger than the staff’s recommendation (0.9 percent of GDP), which reinforces the concerns
expressed in the staff appraisal.
2.
The higher deficit target reflects the large costs of restructuring the loss-making
Polynesian Airlines and the public sector wage increase approved by the government,
and to a lesser extent the increase in pension benefits.
•

Of the 2½ percent of GDP that has been allocated for the restructuring costs of
Polynesian Airlines, about ½ percent of GDP is for the capital costs of the new joint
venture with Virgin Blue to be paid upfront, and 2 percent of GDP is for the penalties
to be imposed for the early return of the airline’s jet to the leasing company. The
budget assumes that the authorities will make the full bullet payment for these
penalties in 2005 instead of spreading out the costs over time. The inaugural flight of
the airline for the new joint venture is expected to take place around September 2005.

•

The government has approved an average wage increase of about 35 percent for
public servants to be phased in over a period of three years (this compares to the
increase of about 40 percent recommended by the Remuneration Tribunal for
2005/06). The wage increase will cost the 2005/06 budget about 1¼ percent of GDP
and about 1 percent of GDP each for the 2006/07 and 2007/08 budgets.

•

The government has also approved an increase of monthly pensions for senior
citizens from 100 tala to 125 tala to take effect July 1, 2005 which is expected to cost
the 2005/06 budget about ¼ percent of GDP.

3.

The budget contained some offsetting measures:

•

The government will enforce the 50 percent dividend policy for all state-owned
enterprises in 2005/06 which is expected to yield revenues of about ¼ percent of
GDP. There were no other new revenue measures announced in the budget.

•

A number of cost-cutting measures were announced in the budget mainly targeted at
reducing operational costs of government departments, including the removal of all
vacancies and new positions except where appointments are pending, reduction of
travel costs for public servants, enforcement of the policy on the use of government
vehicles, and standardization of allowances for board members in public bodies.
These measures could yield savings of about ¼ percent of GDP.

4.
Although the impact of the 2005/06 budget on reserves and interest rates is likely
to be manageable, the expanded deficit should have a non-negligible macroeconomic
impact on the economy, especially on the balance of payments.

-2•

If the full payments for the restructuring of Polynesian Airlines are made in 2005, this
will lower gross reserves from the current level of 4 months of imports to about 3½
months of imports. Thus, the reserve level at end-2005 would stay broadly unchanged
from the end-2004 level. While a higher reserve coverage ratio is desirable, the
payments do not significantly undermine Samoa’s reserve position.

•

The budget also announced that about 2½ percent of GDP of the deficit target would
be financed domestically (through issuance of treasury bonds of 5, 10 and 15 year
maturities). However, given the level of excess liquidity in the banking system as
discussed in the staff report (paragraph 8), which currently stands at about 4 percent
of GDP, the impact of this on interest rates is likely to be minimal.

•

Excluding the reform costs for the restructuring of Polynesian Airlines, the 2005/06
budget deficit target becomes 1½ percent of GDP. This compares with about ¼
percent of GDP recommended by the staff (excluding restructuring costs for the
airline the staff tentatively included in its recommendation). The inflation and growth
impact of the higher deficit (about 1 percent of GDP) is likely to be small, especially
if a significant part of the wage increase leaks into imports. However, this implies that
there would be a non-negligible impact on the balance of payments, reinforcing the
staff’s concerns and strengthening the case for monetary tightening as recommended
in the staff appraisal (paragraph 40).

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/80
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
June 27, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2005 Article IV Consultation with Samoa
On June 17, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Samoa.1
Background
Samoa embarked upon a remarkable economic transformation in the mid-1990s and has
transformed itself into one of the best managed economies in the Pacific Island region over the
last decade. The economy registered solid growth, low inflation, improved public finances and
international reserve levels, and outperformed comparator countries both within and outside the
region. Samoa also made significant progress toward the Millennium Development Goals
(MDG). Political stability, close consultation with stakeholders, and extensive efforts to foster a
broad consensus for reform have been integral to the program’s steady implementation and
success.
Despite this notable progress, overall macroeconomic performance weakened in recent years,
the export base remains narrow (mainly fish, automotive parts, and tourism), and the economy
remains vulnerable to external shocks. There are still substantial reforms which need to be
tackled to consolidate the gains made over the last decade and boost Samoa’s long-term
growth prospects.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2Although growth has slowed down from levels attained through 2000/01, economic activity has
started to pick up. Real GDP growth increased to 3½ percent in 2003/04 from about 1¾ percent
in 2002/03. The slowdown in the manufacturing sector, poor performance of the fishing sector
and cyclone Heta’s damages in January 2004 (which hit hard the agriculture sector), was more
than offset by the robust growth in the services and construction sectors. Growth is projected to
be 3 percent for 2004/05. Inflation (year-on-year) rose to double digits in 2004 following cyclone
Heta’s impact on food prices, but has declined in recent months and is expected to turn
negative by the end of 2004/05. Inflation (12 months average) is projected to be about
7½ percent in 2004/05. The trade deficit widened in both 2003/04 and 2004/05 reflecting
sluggish export growth, and high import growth which was driven by the boom in the
construction sector. Structural weaknesses rather than exchange rate competitiveness, have
led to the weak export performance.
Real GDP growth is projected at 3 percent in 2005/06 underpinned by robust growth in the
services and construction sectors. Agriculture is expected to recover slowly, while
improvements in the fishing sector remain uncertain. Headline inflation (12 months average) is
projected to decline to 3 percent in 2005/06. The current account deficit (excluding official
transfers) is projected at about 13 percent of GDP in 2005/06 due to continued weak export
growth and the increase in construction-related imports.
The fiscal deficit outturn of 0.9 percent of GDP for 2003/04 was lower than budget (1½ percent
of GDP). Although revenues were slightly below budget in 2003/04, this was more than offset by
continued expenditure restraint. The 2004/05 budget targets a deficit of 0.9 percent of GDP. At
end December 2004, the government’s fiscal position recorded a deficit of about ½ percent of
GDP based on preliminary 2004/05 mid-year figures. The forthcoming 2005/06 budget is likely
to face a number of domestic pressures most notably the strong calls for a large wage increase
in the public sector. The costs of restructuring Polynesian Airlines are also likely to impose a
significant burden on the forthcoming 2005/06 budget. The staff proposes that the fiscal deficit
be contained at 0.9 percent of GDP for the forthcoming 2005/06 budget given the need to
gradually reduce the debt level. Prudent wage policy is crucial to achieving this deficit target.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for good macroeconomic management and for
continued efforts to undertake structural reforms. They welcomed the recent pickup in growth
and the decline in inflation following a significant increase in 2004 that largely reflected the
impact of cyclone Heta on food prices. Directors considered that over the medium term,
Samoa’s economic prospects remain favorable, provided that macroeconomic stability is
maintained and structural reforms are deepened to facilitate private sector development.
Directors emphasized that maintaining fiscal discipline will be essential to further reducing
public indebtedness and enhancing Samoa’s flexibility to respond to external shocks. In this
regard, Directors expressed concern about the increased deficit target in the 2005/06 budget to
about 4 percent of GDP from about 0.9 percent of GDP in 2004/05. The increase reflects to a
large extent the costs allocated for the restructuring of Polynesian Airlines, but also a large

-3public sector wage increase. Directors welcomed the progress made toward the restructuring of
Polynesian Airlines, and stressed that further progress needs to be made toward its
comprehensive restructuring. With regard to the wage increase, they noted risks for both
macroeconomic stability and the government’s economic reform program, and urged the
authorities to follow a prudent wage policy in future budgets. They welcomed the planned phase
in of the wage increase over three years, and the authorities’ consideration of a performancebased system in lieu of automatic wage increases in the future. Directors emphasized that
expenditure restraint would allow the public debt to GDP ratio—which remains high by regional
standards—to decline gradually over the medium term.
Directors encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts toward strengthening tax
administration, and in particular to establish a Large Taxpayer Unit and to modernize the 1974
income tax legislation. Directors also noted that a better rationalization of expenditures would
enable a reorientation of spending toward the education, health, and infrastructure sectors,
which are crucial for medium-term growth. Directors welcomed the authorities’ plans to include
a medium-term budget framework in the 2006/07 budget.
Directors considered that Samoa’s adjustable peg exchange rate regime has served well as a
nominal anchor. They agreed that the policy of periodically making small adjustments in the
value of the tala has struck an appropriate balance between maintaining competitiveness and
preserving the exchange rate peg’s role as an anchor for inflation. Directors also welcomed the
authorities’ intention to tighten monetary policy in view of the potential balance of payments
pressures that could arise from the large budget deficit in 2005/06.
Directors commended the Central Bank of Samoa for the recent measures taken to strengthen
the supervision framework. They noted that the approval of the international banking bill, which
requires all offshore banks to establish a physical presence in Samoa, will enhance the
development of the financial sector. Directors welcomed the progress made in strengthening
Samoa’s framework for Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism.
Directors commended the authorities’ interest in improving the investment guidelines of the
National Provident Fund (NPF). They noted that given its high level of nonperforming loans,
which reflects increasing activity in non-core functions, there is a need to strengthen the NPF’s
supervisory framework. Directors noted that a financially-sound pension fund will be needed to
deal with the fiscal pressures that can arise when the population ages.
Directors acknowledged the progress made in a number of key areas of structural reform, such
as civil service reform, telecommunications sector liberalization, and WTO accession talks.
They welcomed the authorities’ commitment to implement the reforms outlined in the Strategy
for the Development of Samoa. They emphasized that it is important for Samoa to continue to
move forward its public sector reform agenda and tackle impediments to private sector
development. In particular, they noted that deeper reforms of state-owned enterprises and land
reform are important to enhance private sector development. This will require enacting and
implementing the Companies Act and its supporting legislation, and engaging in consultations
with the public to build an institutional framework for an efficient lease market for communal

-4land. Directors commended the authorities’ plan to encourage investment in tourism, where
Samoa has a comparative advantage.
Directors noted that Samoa has made important progress in strengthening the reporting of
economic statistics, and welcomed its adoption of the IMF’s General Data Dissemination
System (GDDS). Nevertheless, they encouraged the authorities to improve the quality and
timeliness of fiscal data and the disclosure of assumptions and risks in the annual budget.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

Samoa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000/01–2005/06 1/
2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05
Proj.

2005/06
Proj.

3.5
17.2
7.9

3.0
-2.9
7.5

3.0
2.0
3.0

32.5
33.4
-0.9
0.0
0.9

40.1
41.0
-0.9
0.5
0.4

37.9
38.8
-0.9
0.6
0.3

12.7
4.0
20.9
17.1
5.2

10.5
10.4
10.5
8.6
5.2

8.8
3.2
13.3
9.0
5.2

(12-month percent change)
Output and inflation
Real GDP
Change in CPI (end period)
Change in CPI (period average)

7.1
1.1
1.9

4.4
9.8
7.4

1.8
1.6
4.3
(In percent of GDP)

Central government budget
Revenue and grants
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance
External financing
Domestic financing

31.9
34.3
-2.3
0.5
1.7

33.8
35.9
-2.1
1.4
0.7

32.8
33.4
-0.6
0.5
0.1
(12-month percent change)

Money and credit
Broad money (M2)
Net foreign assets 2/
Net domestic assets 2/
Private sector credit
Three-month CBS rate

20.1
0.7
64.5
21.0
5.7

3.6
1.3
6.8
9.9
5.8

6.6
-9.2
27.7
11.4
5.2
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Balance of payments
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, c.i.f
Current transfers (net)
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance excluding official transfers
(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance

14.5
120.4
64.0
0.1
0.1
-20.7
-8.8
1.5

14.4
134.3
72.9
-1.6
-0.6
-23.8
-9.6
4.2

12.9
132.9
79.6
8.3
2.9
-13.4
-4.7
-5.7

14.1
149.5
98.8
15.2
4.4
-9.6
-2.8
2.2

12.7
174.8
125.2
8.7
2.2
-49.9
-12.7
9.6

12.3
188.4
110.9
-7.0
-1.6
-54.6
-12.9
1.1

External reserves and debt
Official reserves (gross) 3/
(In months of next year's imports of goods and services)
External Public debt 4/
(In percent of GDP)
External debt-service ratio (in percent) 5/

45.7
3.6
143.5
61.4
8.8

54.4
4.2
153.4
62.0
9.1

51.5
3.4
169.1
59.6
8.7

66.8
3.6
177.3
51.5
7.9

76.4
3.9
190.4
48.5
6.0

77.5
4.0
198.8
46.9
5.3

Exchange rates
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, end period)
Market rate (tala/U.S. dollar, period average)
Nominal effective exchange rate (1990 = 100) 6/
Real effective exchange rate (1990 = 100) 6/

3.5
3.4
100.9
93.9

3.3
3.5
99.7
99.7

3.0
3.2
98.4
97.5

2.9
2.9
98.8
112.8

...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of Tala)

804.2

858.2

913.8

989.0

1059.4

1118.5

Sources: Data provided by the Samoan authorities; and IMF Staff estimates.
1/ Fiscal year beginning July 1.
2/ Change in percent of beginning period broad money.
3/ Excludes reserve accumulation by commercial banks
4/ Includes publicly guaranteed debt. The government took over Polynesian Airlines debt in August 1994.
5/ In percent of exports of goods and services.
6/ IMF, Information Notice System Index; end of period.

Statement by Jong Nam Oh, Executive Director for Samoa
and Evelyn Adolph, Advisor to Executive Director
June 17, 2005
Key Points
•

Owing to the comprehensive reform program launched in the 1990s, Samoa’s
economic development compares very favorably with its peer Pacific island
countries.

•

Macroeconomic performance remains sound and the medium-term outlook favorable.

•

The macroeconomic risks to the medium-term outlook, including the 2005 budget,
are manageable. The DSA shows that absent a combination of extreme shocks, the
debt outlook is sustainable. The authorities recognize, however, that vulnerabilities
associated with being a small island economy requires a safer debt position.

•

The one-off cost to the 2005 budget of restructuring Polynesian Airlines will end
annual budgetary subsidies and transfers to the airline (averaging 1 percent of GDP
over the last few years). More significantly, it represents an important structural
reform achievement that could serve as an example for the region.

•

Their intention to tighten monetary policy to contain the balance of payments
pressures associated with this higher budget deficit is also in line with staff’s advice.

•

The authorities are committed to implementing their ambitious structural reform
agenda spelled out in the Strategy for the Development of Samoa (SDS), which
addresses key outstanding structural reform measures identified by staff.

•

Samoa’s financial system is sound and well-supervised. Consistent with staff’s
recommendations, the authorities are interested in strengthening the investment
guidelines of the National Provident Fund to enhance its financial soundness.

•

The authorities value the objective and quality assessment of their policies provided
in the context of the Fund’s Article IV consultations process. They expressed strong
interest in a staff interim visit.

1.
Samoa suffers from physical and economic characteristics that restrict economic
development. These include smallness in size and population, geographic remoteness and
isolation, narrow productive sectors, vulnerability to terms of trade fluctuations, and
susceptibility to natural disasters. Nevertheless, implementation of structural reforms and a
history of prudent economic and financial management since the 1990’s have enabled
economic development in Samoa, which compares very favorably with its peer Pacific island
countries. More importantly, the authorities remain committed to maintaining their track
record of prudent economic policies to ensure macroeconomic stability and growth.
Furthermore they intend to build on the achievements to date on the structural reform front
by addressing key outstanding issues.

-22.
GDP growth increased to 3½ percent in 2004 from 1¾ percent in 2003. Inflation also
stabilized in recent months, after having picked up in early 2004 - reflecting increased import
and food prices following cyclone Heta. The current account balance is estimated to have
deteriorated by end-December 2004, reflecting strong imports for the construction sector and
continued weak export growth. Staff and authorities agree on a favorable outlook of 3
percent growth in 2005/06.
Commitment to macroeconomic stability
3.
Noting the risks to this favorable outlook, the authorities remain committed to the
continued implementation of sound economic management to ensure macroeconomic
stability and growth.
4.
Reflecting fiscal restraint and continued strong revenue performance, fiscal
performance up to 2004 has been encouraging as the overall deficit declined to less than 1
percent of GDP since 2002/03. Public debt also declined from 60 percent of GDP in 2001 to
48.5 percent in 2004/05. The administration’s budget submitted to the parliament, while
representing an increase in the target fiscal deficit, is in our authorities’ view manageable.
The wage increase and the cost of restructuring Polynesian Airlines will result in a slightly
higher debt-to-GDP ratio, but will not lead to an unsustainable debt outlook. However, the
authorities are also aware that the vulnerabilities of a small island economy requires a safer
debt outlook.
5.
The one-off cost to the 2005 budget of restructuring Polynesian Airlines will end
costly budgetary subsidies and transfers to the airline, which have averaged 1 percent of GDP
over the last few years.
6.
The authorities have requested a wage increase of 35 percent in the 2005/06 budget
(instead of 40 percent recommended by the Remuneration Tribunal). Consistent with their
discussions with staff, this will be phased in over three years to minimize the impact in one
given year. The authorities view the wage increase as long overdue, with public sector
wages having remained the same since 2001. Moreover, Samoa’s public wage bill as a share
of GDP is significantly lower than the regional average. The authorities are considering
staff’s advice to develop a performance-based system, which would see future wage
increases based on productivity.
Monetary policy and financial sector soundness
7.
The reserve position is expected to remain at comfortable levels, even taking into
account the impact of the higher budgetary deficit for 2005/06. The monetary authorities
signaled their intention to tighten monetary policy to contain the budgetary risks to
macroeconomic performance.
8.
Samoa’s financial system is sound and well-supervised. Consistent with staff’s
recommendations, the authorities are interested in strengthening the investment guidelines of
the National Provident Fund. Nevertheless, Samoa is a good illustration of how market size
and remoteness make sound policies insufficient for attracting private foreign capital. In
such cases, securing sufficient capital for supporting productive activities is a real concern.

-3Structural reforms to strengthen private sector-led growth
9.
The reform program launched in the early 1990’s has laid much of the ground work
for economic development. The authorities now face the challenge of enhancing the
environment for private sector-led growth, as outlined in the SDS 2005-07. In particular, the
SDS outlines the need to promote the investment climate, improve the availability of land for
private investment, and the deepening reform of state-owned enterprises.
10.
Programs are already underway to help improve the investment climate (such as a
reform of key utilities and improving the regulatory regime). The establishment of a onestop shop facility is also viewed as important.
11.
The authorities also recognize the importance of land reform aimed at improving the
capacity to use land for collateral and investment. The government’s recent initiative to
facilitate the leasing of unused communal land for productive uses is an important progress in
this regard.
12.
The government has made significant progress in public enterprise reform in the
context of its SOE policy framework. These include the divestment of the government’s
minority interest in a number of enterprises, and the announcement of the privatization of the
Samoa Shipping Services, the Agriculture Store, and the Samoa Broadcasting Corporation.
Enterprises of strategic public interest will be subjected to the corporatization program to
give them a stronger commercial focus. The authorities will continue with their efforts to
further improve the operations of the remaining SOEs, including by contracting private
operators for management of the remaining SOEs.
13.
Due to the remoteness of Pacific island countries, high transport costs represent one
of the most important obstacles to their development. Highly subsidized state-owned airlines
are thus very common in the Pacific. For Samoa, subsidies and transfers to Polynesian
Airlines averaged 1 percent of GDP over the last few years. The joint venture with Virgin
Blue holds promise of improving the operations and finances of Polynesian Airlines.
Samoa’s success in addressing this problem could serve as an example for parts of the region
where transport bottlenecks remain and subsidies to state-owned airlines still burden the
budget. The recent push to shift to a more regional approach for coordination in addressing
the chronic problems of transport could benefit from this model.
14.
The tourism sector is viewed as offering great potential, especially as a means of
providing employment. The authorities’ efforts to develop the tourism sector are bearing
fruit, which is evident in the growth of the sector’s share of GDP from 4 percent in 2001 to
17 percent in 2003.
Conclusion
15.
Finally, the authorities value the objective and quality assessment of their policies
provided in the context of the Fund’s Article IV consultations process. They expressed
strong interest in a staff interim visit, as the next Article IV is not expected to take place until
2007.

-416.
On behalf of our Pacific Island authorities, we would like to thank staff for the
interesting paper on Pacific Island Regional Issues. The paper covers many important issues.
In our view, the paper merits substantive consideration by the Executive Board in the context
of efforts to strengthen regional surveillance.

