March 2005
IMF Country Report No. 05/111

© 2005 International Monetary Fund

February 28, 2005
December 15, 2004

March 14, 2005
January 29, 2001
2004
January 29, 2001

Republic of Yemen: 2004 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information
Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
the Republic of Yemen
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2004 Article IV consultation with the Republic of
Yemen, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2004 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on December 15, 2004, with the officials of the Republic of
Yemen on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time
of these discussions, the staff report was completed on February 28, 2005. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its March 14, 2005 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

•

a statement by the Executive Director for the Republic of Yemen.

The document listed below have been or will be separately released.
Statistical Appendix
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publicationpolicy@imf.org.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $15.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2004 Consultation
with the Republic of Yemen
Approved by Lorenzo Pérez and Martin Fetherston
February 28, 2005

The 2004 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Sana’a from December 1 to 15, 2004. The
mission met with the ministers of finance, planning and development, oil and mineral resources, civil
service, labor and social affairs, and electricity, the governor of the central bank, and other
government officials. The mission also met with managers of several oil companies in Yemen as well
as with heads of commercial banks, representatives of the labor unions, and donors.
The staff team comprised Messrs. Chami (head), Ben Ltaifa, Abdih, Ms. Ivanova, and Ms. Kargbo
(all MCD), Ms. Jacobs (FAD), and Mr. Ahmed (PDR). The mission was assisted by Mr. Benon, the
Middle East Technical Assistance Center (METAC) revenue administration advisor, who joined the
mission for about one week.
At the conclusion of the 2003 Article IV consultation, Directors noted that while short- and
medium-term fiscal and external sector positions are likely to remain manageable, strong reforms will
be needed to deal with long-term challenges. Directors welcomed the authorities’ reform package
announced in October 2003 as a first step toward ensuring long-term sustainability. They expressed
concern, however, about the re-emergence of inflation and recommended some tightening of
monetary policy.
The last Fund arrangements (supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) and
the Extended Fund Facility (EFF)) expired in October 2001. Performance under a Staff Monitored
Program (SMP) during 2002 was mixed. A higher-than-expected decline in oil production during
2003–04 raised concerns about oil prospects, putting additional strains on the economy, and requiring
even more rapid fiscal and external sector adjustments than previously envisaged.
Yemen accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in 1996, and maintains a system
free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions.
Yemen has consented to the publication of the staff report.

-2-

Contents

Page

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................3
I.

Introduction...................................................................................................................4

II.

Background...................................................................................................................4

III.

Policy Discussions ........................................................................................................7
A. The Economic Outlook .........................................................................................8
B. Fiscal Policy........................................................................................................13
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ...............................................................17
D. Key Structural Reforms ......................................................................................19

IV.

Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................25

Boxes
1.
Oil Sector: Recent Developments and Prospects..........................................................5
2.
Required Fiscal Adjustment for Long-Term Sustainability .......................................10
3.
Fiscal Reforms Toward Long-Term Sustainability ....................................................11
4.
Social Protection and Adjustment Efforts ..................................................................16
5.
Public Expenditure Management (PEM) and Reforms ..............................................21
Tables
1.
Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05.....................................................................28
2.
Central Government Finance, 2003–09 .....................................................................29
3.
Monetary Aggregates, 2000–05..................................................................................32
4.
Balance of Payments, 2002–09...................................................................................33
5.
Macroeconomic Summary Indicators, 2000–09.........................................................34
6.
Required Fiscal Adjustment and Long-Term Sustainability ......................................35
7.
Macroeconomic Summary Indicators, 2000–09.........................................................36
8.
Macroeconomic Framework, 2000–09 .......................................................................37
9.
Millennium Development Goals, 1990–02.................................................................38
Appendices
I.
Fund Relations ............................................................................................................39
II.
External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) ..........................................41
III. World Bank Relations.................................................................................................49
IV. Statistical Issues..........................................................................................................51
V.
Technical Assistant Program ......................................................................................55
VI. Priority PEM Reform Areas .......................................................................................57

-3-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Recent Developments—Macroeconomic performance weakened in 2004. Oil production declined by
5.9 percent, reducing overall growth to 2.7 percent. Core inflation increased to 14.5 percent by yearend because of expansionary macroeconomic policies and the impact of adverse weather conditions
on food prices. A supplementary budget authorized increased spending, leading to a fiscal deficit of
4.5 percent of GDP. An increase in import demand mitigated most of the export gains resulting from
higher oil prices, leaving the current account balance broadly unchanged. Because of higher oil
exports, international reserves increased to about $5.1 billion or 16.4 months of imports.
The Economic Outlook—While the near-term outlook remains manageable, the expected rapid
decline in oil production raises serious concerns about long-term sustainability. Unless new and large
discoveries are made, oil reserves are expected to be depleted in about 12–14 years. Using a target
debt-to-GDP ratio of 50 percent as an anchor to fiscal policy, staff’s analysis suggests that a
cumulative adjustment in the non-oil primary deficit of about 22.5 percent of GDP is needed by 2016
to bring Yemen closer to a sustainable long-term path. This requires a comprehensive and credible
fiscal strategy supported by policies that can stimulate economic growth and diversify production
away from oil.
Macroeconomic Policies—If adhered to, the 2005 budget appears broadly appropriate. However,
staff projected that the deficit may end up higher, mainly because of larger subsidy and development
spending. Staff stressed the need for a stricter budgetary discipline in 2005 than in previous budgets
to avoid overspending by line ministries. Staff welcomed the authorities’ decision to raise petroleum
prices beginning in 2005, and called for eliminating the subsidy within two years according to an
automatic price adjustment formula, and for strengthening social protection mechanisms to mitigate
any possible impact on the poor. Central bank officials did not see a need to raise interest rates, as
suggested by the staff, arguing that the increase in inflation was mainly supply driven. Given the
expected deterioration in the current account and the need to develop non-oil sectors, staff called for
greater exchange rate flexibility to maintain external competitiveness.
Structural Reforms—The government submitted an improved general sales tax (GST) law to
parliament, which is expected to be introduced in July 2005. In view of the slow progress in public
expenditure management and its importance for achieving fiscal sustainability, staff discussed with
the authorities the prioritization and sequencing of the remaining measures that should be completed
over the next 18 months. Staff also stressed the need to improve Yemen’s business environment,
which is important for investment and growth. Staff welcomed the continued civil service reform
efforts but stressed that such efforts may be compromised by any ad hoc wage increases that are not
part of the national wage strategy.
Staff Appraisal—In view of the expected decline in oil production, staff believes that strong and
sustained reform efforts must be undertaken soon to maintain macroeconomic stability in the medium
and long term. The fiscal strategy should be based on raising non-oil revenue, including through the
implementation of the GST, removing subsidies, reducing the wage bill and defense spending, and
improving public expenditure management and tax administration. Staff calls for a stricter budgetary
discipline in 2005 and for a tighter monetary policy to curb continuing inflationary pressures. In view
of the expected decline in oil production, staff is of the view that a truly flexible exchange rate would
lead to a depreciation of the rial over time and avoid large and disruptive depreciations in the future.

-4-

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Yemen’s strong adjustment efforts that began in the mid-1990s have stalled in
recent years. Achievements under Fund-supported programs from 1996 to 2001 included
macroeconomic stabilization, price liberalization, exchange rate unification, trade
liberalization, and the reduction in external debt. Recently, the reform process has been held
back by mounting opposition as the remainder of the reform agenda began to encroach on the
interests of very powerful groups. The lack of broad-based political consensus for reform,
fueled in part by a perception of rampant corruption, has not helped.
2.
With oil depletion looming closer on the horizon, the government unveiled in
October 2003 a reform package aimed at pushing the reform process forward and
breaking the political deadlock. The package, which was designed to be adopted or rejected
in its entirety, contained some popular measures, such as wage increases for civil servants
and tariff reduction, in the hope of winning parliamentary support. However, in 2004, under
political pressure, the government granted a public sector wage increase without any tangible
progress in civil service reform; delayed the introduction of an amended GST Law by one
year to July 2005; and postponed the adjustment in petroleum prices.
3.
Strong commitment at the highest political level is needed to reignite and sustain
reforms in the coming years. With the approaching presidential elections in 2006, it is
critical that reforms be implemented soon. Otherwise, the adjustment process may be
significantly delayed, putting at risk the achievements of the past.
II. BACKGROUND
4.
A steeper-than-expected decline in oil production in 2004 and a downward revision
of the long-term production path raise serious concerns about sustainability. Oil
production was estimated to have declined by 5.9 percent last year and is projected to decline
by 4.7 percent in 2005 as the recovery from aging large fields diminishes. The prevailing
opinion, within government and oil company circles, is that, while small discoveries are
possible, they will not be sufficient to replace the loss from large oil fields. At current
production levels, proven oil reserves could be depleted in five years. With more realistic
lower production rates, the depletion horizon can be extended by 12–14 years (Box 1).
5.
Recent developments point generally to a deterioration in macroeconomic
indicators.
•
Real GDP growth was estimated to have declined to 2.7 percent in 2004, mainly
because of the slowdown in oil production. Non-oil GDP growth is expected to have reached
4.1 percent, supported by stronger activity in the construction, transportation, and trade

-5-

Box 1. Oil Sector: Recent Developments and Prospects
A sharp decline in production in two maturing large fields in 2004 is feared irrevocable. There
are nine producing blocks in Yemen, the largest of which are Marib and Masila—together
contributing about three-fourths of total production. Production in these two blocks is now expected
to drop sharply in the next decade.
The authorities and oil companies feel that there is a possibility of discovering new small fields,
but they do not believe that this will be sufficient to replace the loss from the existing large
fields. They conjecture that, based on geological data, they are unlikely to find large new oil fields in
the near future. However, there is a general optimism about discovering small fields with about
50 million barrels in reserves.
In the absence of major new discoveries, reserves would be depleted in about 12–14 years.
According to the Production and Exploration Authority (PEPA) estimates, proven (and fully
recoverable) oil reserves are at 750 million barrels. However, if we add the estimates of recoverable
probable and possible reserves, the level of reserves could almost double to 1.4 billion barrels.
The reserves-to-production ratio—which indicates how long reserves would last if production were to
continue at the current pace of 146 million barrels per year—is only 5 years for proven; and 10 years
for proven, probable, and possible. Under more realistic declining production schedules, reserves
could be extended, but not for long. The figure below shows the production paths under three
different assumptions: (a) only proven reserves are considered (P); (b) proven, probable, and possible
(3P); and (c) a more realistic assumption consistent with other countries’ experiences under which we
assume that there is a 50 percent chance that the probable and possible reserves become proven
(P+2P*Prob). Under the first and third scenarios, production will drop by more than 90 percent and
under the second scenario, by about 60 percent by 2016. Under the third scenario, which is used in
our projections, oil revenue and exports will be virtually depleted by 2018.

Million barrels per year

Oil Production under Different Assumptions on Reserves
140

P

120

3P

100

P+2P*Prob

80
60
40
20
0
2004

2009

2014
Year

2019

2024

-6Non-Oil and Oil Real GDP Growth, 1998−2004
9

Non-oil real GDP
growth

7
5
(In percent)

sectors, and fueled by domestic demand
stemming from continued fiscal expansion
and higher public sector wages. However,
over the long term, non-oil growth is likely
to taper off as oil production declines, and
with it government spending, unless
important reforms reverse the tide and boost
private investment (Table 1).

3
1
-1

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-3

Oil real GDP growth

-5

•
The fiscal deficit was estimated at
about 4.5 percent of GDP in 2004, about
1 percent higher than the original budget
target due to higher development spending
and the petroleum subsidy as authorized by the
supplementary budget that was adopted late in
the year (Table 2).

-7

Budgetary Indicators
45
40
35

Total revenues
and grants

30
25

Total expenditures & net lending

(In percent of GDP)

20

•
Broad money grew at a rapid pace
during the better part of 2004 until it was reined
in during November-December—ending the
year with a growth rate of 15 percent. Money
growth was driven largely by a buildup in net
foreign assets (on account of high oil exports)
and an expansion of credit to the private sector
(33 percent) mainly to finance trade (Table 3).

15

Overall budget balance
(cash basis)

10
5
0
-5
-10

Non-oil primary balance (commitments, including grants)

-15
-20
-25
-30
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Monetary Aggregates
1,100
1,000
900
800

Net foreign assets

700
600
500
400
300

Credit to private sector

200
100
0
-100

Net claim on
government

-200
-300
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Measures of Inflation
20
18
Headline
inflation

16
14
(In percent)

•
The external current account deficit
remained broadly unchanged in 2004. A
pickup in the demand for imports mitigated
most of the export gains resulting from higher
oil prices (oil export volumes were actually
lower than expected). International reserves
increased to reach about $5.1 billion, or
16.4 months of imports, despite record sales
of foreign exchange ($740 million) by the

(In billions of Yemeni Rials)

•
Core inflation (excluding qat) picked
up partly as a result of expansionary
macroeconomic policies and partly because of
the impact of adverse weather conditions on
food prices. The end-year core CPI inflation
rate reached 14.5 percent compared with
12.1 percent in 2003, while the headline
inflation rate was at 10 percent.

12
10
8
Core inflation

6
4
2
0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

-7-

External current account developments

Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) to respond to
increased demand for import financing (Table 4).

4,800
4,400
4,000

•
The nominal exchange rate remained
fairly stable vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar in 2004 and
depreciated against other currencies (by 9 percent
against the euro). This depreciation was not
sufficient to make up for inflation differentials
with Yemen’s trading partners, leading to an
appreciation of the real effective exchange rate by
3.5 percent over the 11 months through November
2004.

Imports of goods and
services
Exports of
goods and services

3,600

(In millions of U.S. dollars)

3,200
2,800
2,400
2,000

Current account balance

1,600
1,200
800
400
0
-400
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

N om inal and E ffective Exchange R ate Indices
January 1998= 100
N om inal E xchange R ates Index
(Y em en i R ials per U .S. d ollar)
January 1998-N ovem ber 2004

Effective Exchange R ates Indices
(January 1998=10 0)
Janua ry 1998-N ovem b er 2004
145

130

R eal effective
exchange rate

120

140
135
130

110

125
120

100

115
110

90

105
100

80

95

N om inal effective
exchange rate

70

90
85

04
nJa

03
nJa

02
nJa

01
nJa

00
nJa

99
nJa

98
nJa

04
nJa

03
nJa

02
nJa

01
nJa

00
nJa

n-

99

80

Ja

Ja

n-

98

60

S ources: Y em eni authorities; and Fu nd staff estim ates.

6.
In early January, parliament approved the 2005 budget conditional on the
government adopting a set of wide-ranging measures. These include: (a) submitting to
parliament a national wage strategy to be implemented fully by 2007; (b) providing
additional resources for social safety nets to reduce the impact of higher petroleum prices; (c)
reducing customs duties to the levels of neighboring countries; (d) fighting smuggling
through better border control; and (e) adopting policies that would encourage growth in
non-oil sectors such as fisheries and tourism.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
7.
The 2004 Article IV discussions revisited almost all the themes raised in recent
consultations—in particular the need for strong fiscal and structural reforms to address
long-term challenges—but with particular emphasis on the additional challenges created
by the downward revision of the oil production path. The mission stressed that the shorter

-8-

time horizon for oil production will require even stronger adjustment to preempt serious
fiscal and external imbalances that could threaten macroeconomic stability. Policies to spur
non-oil sector growth would also be critical.
8.
While the near-term outlook is manageable, staff suggested that macroeconomic
policies for 2005 and the immediate future be guided by the serious longer-term concerns.
Staff stressed the benefits of casting macroeconomic policies in a coherent framework that
focuses on these long-term prospects.
9.
The authorities indicated that they had launched a public information campaign to
highlight the long-term risks of declining oil production and the benefits of reforms. They
hoped that these efforts would lessen the strong opposition to reform that has so far
prevented the government from taking action. They also noted that the package of reforms
that was originally proposed in October 2003 is an integral part of the 2005 budget, which
was under discussion in parliament during the mission and which has since been approved.1
A. The Economic Outlook
10.
To illustrate the medium- and long-term outcomes under different policy choices,
staff prepared two scenarios: a nonadjustment scenario and an adjustment scenario. The
first is based on unchanged policies and the second aims at deriving the fiscal adjustment
required to maintain the debt-to-GDP ratio at a sustainable level (below).
A nonadjustment scenario
11.
A nonadjustment medium-term scenario shows clearly that Yemen’s fiscal and
external positions are unsustainable (Table 5). Without policy adjustments, the share of
budgetary oil revenue to GDP drops from 25 percent in 2004 to 8.5 percent by 2009; the
petroleum subsidy remains at about 6 percent of GDP; and the budget deficit increases to
about 21.9 percent of GDP by 2009. If imports continue to grow modestly to sustain
domestic demand, the current account deficit could exceed 13 percent of GDP in 2009, and
gross international reserves are likely to be virtually depleted in about five years. Extending
this scenario beyond the medium term, the debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to increase to
181 percent of GDP by 2014 and to 289 percent of GDP by 2025 (Table 6).
An adjustment scenario
12.
With the expected decline in oil production, it would be preferable to have a longterm anchor to the fiscal framework that would sustain the economy beyond oil. Staff
1

The main elements of this package are: adjusting petroleum product prices, introducing the
GST; adopting a national wage strategy in the context of the ongoing civil service reform;
and reducing customs tariff rates on vehicles and other easily smuggled goods.

-9-

assumed that maintaining the debt-to-GDP ratio at 50 percent (which is about the current
level) could provide such an anchor and would be an important element in preparing Yemen
to face the long-term challenges posed by the expected depletion of oil resources.
13.
Staff’s analysis suggests that a cumulative adjustment of about 22.5 percent of
GDP in the non-oil primary budget deficit is needed by 2016 (when oil is virtually
depleted) to bring Yemen closer to a sustainable long-term path (Box 2). This estimate is
derived by comparing the sustainable primary balance path required to maintain the debt-toGDP ratio at 50 percent with the primary balance under the nonadjustment scenario.2 The
comparison shows that a significant fiscal adjustment is needed upfront to maintain
sustainability and help smooth the transition to a non-oil economy.
14.
To realize such a large adjustment over the long term, a comprehensive fiscal
strategy would be required. Given Yemen’s very low tax-to-GDP ratio (7.5 percent of GDP),
raising tax revenue and strengthening tax administration at first are essential.3 Experience in
other countries suggests that an expenditure cutting strategy would also tend to offer a great
likelihood of effecting an enduring change in the budget, and is perceived as more durable
and credible.
15.
Staff identified several fiscal measures to compensate for some of the loss in oil
revenue (Box 3). The set of measures could realistically generate about 12–15 percent of
GDP. The authorities agreed with these measures, but noted that some of them would
probably not be implemented in the period envisaged by the staff. In particular, officials
pointed out that imposing an excise tax on petroleum products soon after the elimination of
the subsidy is likely to be very difficult.
16.
Fiscal measures should be supported by policies that stimulate economic growth
and diversify the production base away from oil, easing the pains of adjustment. Particular
attention should be given to the fishery sector, which has great potential for creating large
employment and remains largely unexploited.4 While the recent adoption of a new strategy
for fisheries (which divides territorial water into different zones and determines the size of
2

While not a panacea, the 50 percent of debt-to-GDP target allows one to evaluate the size of
adjustment required over the medium and long term, although it may be considered high for
a low-income country like Yemen, with weak institutional capacity. Under the current debt
structure, a debt-to-GDP ratio of 50 percent is roughly equivalent to a net present value of
debt-to-GDP of 30 percent.
3

Experience has shown that countries with relatively low initial revenue-to-GDP ratios were
more successful in their adjustment efforts.
4

Yemen possesses a long coast of more than 2,500 kilometers with access to some
700,000 squared kilometers of territorial water.

- 10 -

Box 2. Required Fiscal Adjustment for Long-Term Sustainability
In theory, the government is deemed solvent if it can generate future primary surpluses sufficient to service its
outstanding debt. This definition does not preclude protracted large budget deficits provided that primary surpluses can
be generated in the future. In practice, such an approach may require large future adjustments, which may not be
feasible or desirable, economically and politically. A more operational definition (WEO 2003) suggests that a given
debt level is sustainable if it implies that the government’s budget constraint (in NPV terms) is satisfied without
unrealistically large future corrections in the primary balance.
We use different target debt-to-GDP ratios to assess debt sustainability and determine the required adjustment needed to
achieve this target. According to recent studies, a sustainable debt level for emerging markets ranges between
15 percent to 50 percent of GDP. The poor quality of institutions in Yemen militates for a debt ratio closer to the lower
bound of this range. However, given that Yemen is a poor country that is facing a rapid decline in oil production, a
50 percent target seems more
We assume that the deficit is financed by domestic and foreign borrowing or by
realistic.
seignorage. Evolution of debt in this case can be described as follows:
The difference between
d
d
f
fUSD
sustainable and nonadjustment
(1)
Dtd + Dt fUSD S t − Dtd−1 − Dt fUSD
−1 S t + H t − H t −1 = it Dt −1 + it Dt −1 S t − PBt
primary balance is the
where Dt fUSD is foreign debt expressed in U.S. dollars, St is exchange rate (units
cumulative adjustment
required in any given year.
of domestic currency per one unit of foreign currency), H t is the stock of base
The results are then tested
money, itd is nominal interest rate charged on domestic debt, it f is the interest rate
against staff’s estimates of
on foreign debt denominated in foreign currency, and PB is the primary balance.
fiscal adjustment in terms of
Denoting by lower case letters ratios of variables to current nominal GDP, (1)
revenue and expenditure
becomes:
measures. Results are
summarized in Table 6.
d f (1 + g S )
d td−1
ht −1
(2)
⎡⎣1 + itd ⎤⎦ + t −1
⎡1 + it f ⎤⎦ − d td − d t f − ht +
pbt =
(1 + gY )
(1 + gY ) ⎣
(1 + gY )
In the nonadjustment
scenario, the debt-to-GDP
If the government wants to reduce its total debt-to-GDP ratio from d 0 to d n in n
ratio is projected to rise to
years with equal reduction per year, debt-to-GDP ratio at time t ( dt ) can be
181 percent of GDP by 2014,
at which time oil production
written as debt-to-GDP ratio at time t-1 ( dt −1 ) plus a constant reduction, namely,
and revenue drop by
dt = dtd + dt f = dt −1 + c = dtd−1 + dt f−1 + c where c satisfies c = ( d n − d 0 ) n . Assuming that
94 percent. During the next
reserve money stock is growing at the same rate as nominal GDP, we obtain the
10 years, the non-oil primary
following expression for primary balance in period t:
deficit is projected to average
dt f−1 ⎡⎣(1 + it f ) (1 + g S ) − (1 + gY ) ⎤⎦ ht −1 gY
25 percent of GDP (equivalent
dtd−1
(3)
d
⎡
⎤
pb
i
g
=
−
+
−
−c
t
t
Y ⎦
to 29 percent of non-oil GDP).
(1 + g ) ⎣
(1 + g )
(1 + g )
t

t

t

t

t

t

t

t

Yt

Yt

Yt

For debt-to-GDP ratios
The first three terms of equation (3) give the primary balance necessary to
between 15 and 50 percent of
maintain the debt-to-GDP ratio constant at the level of the previous period, and
GDP, sustainable non-oil
the constant c is the additional adjustment needed every year to bring the debt
primary deficits over the
ratio to the desired level in n years.
next 12 years would have to
average between 15 and
12 percent of GDP
(17 percent and 14 percent of non-oil GDP, respectively). This is significantly lower than the current non-oil primary
deficit of 27.5 percent of GDP (39 percent of non-oil GDP).
Achieving sustainability would require a total adjustment of 22.5 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary deficit
over the next 12 years. Fiscal adjustment per year would have to average about 1.9 percent of GDP and postponing
adjustment would require large primary surpluses at the time of reserves depletion, thereby increasing the adjustment
costs. Staff identified fiscal measures that can be implemented over the long run that could amount to 12–15 percent of
GDP (Box 3).

- 11 -

Box 3. Fiscal Reforms Toward Long-Term Sustainability
Yemen needs to embark on a large fiscal adjustment path to move to a post-oil economy within 15 years.
To be successful, the adjustment needs to be comprehensive and front-loaded. Experience has shown that
adjustment could be achieved with growth friendly policies that have a high social rate of return. A
comprehensive fiscal strategy, based on both revenue and expenditure measures, as well as a substantial
improvement in tax administration and public expenditure management are needed. An ill-designed adjustment
that lacks credibility would likely lead to policy reversal. Priority reforms include:
Tax policy and administration. Given Yemen’s development needs and the low tax revenue in Yemen (about
10 percent of non-oil GDP), the fiscal adjustment will require a substantial increase in non-oil revenue:

•
Introducing the General Sales Tax (GST). Based on international experience, a 10 percent GST rate
should generate between 3 and 5 percent of GDP. If the draft GST law is approved as recently amended by the
government—simple to administer and with limited exemptions—it could generate between 3 percent to
3.5 percent of GDP in a few years, some 1–1.5 percent of GDP over the existing TCPS.
•

Eliminating custom exemptions and fighting smuggling. Customs exemptions and other exemptions
under the investment code should be reduced to a minimum. The low collection rate—less than half of the
simple average tariff rate—suggests that customs revenue could potentially increase by at least 1 percent of
GDP, if supported by better border enforcement to fight smuggling—estimated at 20 percent of total imports.

•

Applying an excise tax on petroleum products. This will have to wait until the elimination of the
petroleum subsidy. An excise tax of 5 percent introduced in 2007—raised to 10 percent beginning in 2010—is
projected to generate up to 1.5-2 percent of GDP in revenue. While politically difficult, excises are potentially
an important source of revenue in the long term. Higher excises, by reflecting the social costs, would also lead
to a more efficient use of energy.

•

Strengthening the tax and customs administrations. Initial efforts should focus on the Large
Taxpayer Office (LTO). However, the LTO will have to be supported by further strengthening and coordination
with the customs administration. This could generate about 0.5 percent to 1 percent of GDP over the long term.
Expenditure policy and public expenditure management. Reforms should focus on:

•

Eliminating petroleum product subsidies. This will save the budget about 6 percent of GDP, which
could be used in part to mitigate the impact of removing the subsidy on the poor and the rest to finance priority
pro-growth spending as well as social expenditures, such as health and education.

•

Reducing the civil service wage bill. At more than 7 percent of GDP, the civilian wage bill is
1–2 percentage points higher than in comparator countries. The reduction in the bill should be achieved through
retrenchment rather than a wage freeze. This reform should go hand in hand with a comprehensive review of the
wage strategy.

•
Containing defense spending. Even taking into account domestic security needs, defense outlays
could gradually decline to a level of about 3–4 percent of GDP (slightly above the average in countries outside
the Middle East), realizing a saving of 1–2 percent of GDP.
The above measures could generate about 12–15 percent of GDP. If these measures are supported by a
strong supply response, this adjustment would likely be sufficient to ensure sustainability in the long run.
However, if the reform process slows down and the above measures do not generate the needed savings, then
there will be no choice but to take some extraordinary measures, including cutting development spending and
raising taxes.

- 12 -

boats in each of these zones) is a step in the right direction, it should be followed by a
complete survey of fish resources and by strengthening monitoring mechanisms to reduce
reported corruption and piracy. Transshipment activities (especially in the port of Aden) and
tourism are potentially other important sources of growth. However, developing non-oil
sectors requires, above all, improvement in the security situation and in the business
environment.
17.
Fiscal adjustment should be accompanied by institutional and structural measures.
First, improving public expenditure management is an important step in the consolidation of
the fiscal strategy. Second, designing and carrying out fiscal policy in a medium-term
framework would enhance the credibility of the government and reduce public opposition to
reforms. Third, core allocation of critical and poverty-related expenditures should be
protected from ad hoc cuts and should be tracked over time to assess progress. Fourth,
measures to strengthen revenue administration should be accelerated.
18.
While the adjustment scenario could generate a cumulative adjustment of
17.6 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary balance (by 2016), this would not be sufficient
for debt sustainability (Table 6), suggesting a need for additional corrective measures.
Under the adjustment scenario, a cumulative adjustment gap of some 5 percent of GDP in the
non-oil primary deficit would remain by 2016. To close this gap, some difficult measures are
needed including reducing development spending (say by some 1–2 percent of GDP), cutting
the wage bill by 1–2 percentage points of GDP, increasing the GST rate (from the current
proposed rate of 10 percent), and introducing new taxes (which could generate about
1 percent of GDP). Because of the potentially adverse impact on growth and poverty
reduction, reduction of pro-poor spending should be resisted until all other possible avenues
are explored. The possible negative impact of raising taxes on growth will also need to be
assessed. External assistance, preferably in the form of grants, would make the adjustment
process less painful.
19.
There are several risks to the long-term scenario and the outcome will depend on
how these risks play out. The most important downside risks are the political economy
obstacles that cast doubt on the feasibility of implementing such a large fiscal adjustment. It
is possible that powerful vested interest groups, who have been successful in blocking
reforms—since they reduce rent-seeking activities— could still hold back reform efforts.
Other downside risks include lower oil prices, slower growth that could result in part from
the proposed fiscal adjustment, and faster depletion of oil resources. On the upside, new oil
discoveries, high oil prices, and potential exploitation of natural gas (which is now being
discussed with foreign investors) could improve economic prospects.
20.
Yemen’s external debt indicators are expected to deteriorate over the long term
with the depletion of oil exports unless sufficient additional efforts are made to diversify
and increase non-oil exports. Debt sustainability in Yemen is primarily driven by the
projected path of oil production, which accounted for 94 percent of export revenue and
nearly 70 percent of fiscal revenue in 2004. Even under optimistic growth rates in non-oil
exports and non-oil budgetary revenue, the projected decline in oil production for the outer

- 13 -

years sharply reduces export and budgetary revenue, casting doubt on long-term debt
sustainability (Appendix II).
B. Fiscal Policy
21.
Staff expressed concern about the deterioration in the fiscal position in 2004 at a
time when more fiscal discipline was clearly needed. While the increase in petroleum
subsidy—which was not reduced as originally planned—explains in large part the increase in
the fiscal deficit, it was unfortunate that the supplementary budget was used also to increase
other expenditure categories, including defense, wages, and development. The authorities
explained that these were necessitated by the precarious security situation, the political
decision to increase public sector wages, and overspending by some line ministries.
22.
While the 2005 budget represents a strong adjustment effort, it is questionable
whether the fiscal target can be attained given some of the budget’s unrealistic allocations
and the risk of a further delay in implementing the required measures. The budget targets a
deficit of 3 percent of GDP, representing a drop of 9 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary
balance (Table 2). However, even if petroleum prices are adjusted in early 2005, the staff
projected the deficit to end up close to 5 percent of GDP, mainly because of higher subsidy
and development spending. Moreover, in view of the conditions imposed by parliament,
which may not be fulfilled soon, there is a risk that the reform package would be caught
again in a political stalemate, with a possible surge in the deficit to more than 8 percent of
GDP. Under all circumstances, staff stressed that if a supplementary budget is needed, it
should be subject to stringent budgetary discipline and be contained to respond only to the
budgetary impact of unforeseen developments or external shocks.
23.
The authorities renewed their commitment to the phasing out of the petroleum
product subsidy beginning in 2005. The proposed price adjustment in 2005 consists of
almost doubling the diesel price (to Yrls 33) and increasing the prices of gasoline and
liquefied petroleum gas by 45 percent and 40 percent, respectively—in line with the
government’s proposal of last year.5 The impact of this measure is to reduce the subsidy by
about 3 percent of GDP if fully implemented at the beginning of the year. However, the
authorities noted that these price adjustments could be lower if there is a need for a
compromise with political partners and parliament.

5

This would bring most domestic prices very close to international prices especially for
gasoline, while the price of diesel fuel would still be at 85 percent of the international price.

- 14 -

The 2005 Budget
The 2005 budget is based on the following measures and assumptions: (a) significant reduction in petroleum
subsidy; (b) an increase in the wage rate by 10-15 percent; (c) reduction in customs rates on cars and some other
goods that can easily be smuggled; (d) a $30 per barrel oil price, more realistic price assumption than in
previous budgets; (d) implementation of an amended GST law beginning July 2005 although no revenue impact
is assumed; (e) lower development spending compared to recent years (about 1.8 percent of GDP); and (f) a
decline in oil revenue by 7.6 percent of GDP.
Yemen: Fiscal Aggregates
(as share of GDP)

Total revenue and grants
Oil revenue

2000
39.2
27.9

2001
35.3
25.3

2002
33.6
22.3

2003
33.1
23.6

Proj.
2004
35.0
25.2

Budget
2005
27.0
17.6

Proj.
2005
30.6
20.1

Total expenditure
Petroleum subsidies
Development expenditure

31.2
5.7
5.4

32.8
3.8
7.5

34.8
3.0
7.1

38.2
5.0
9.7

39.4
6.4
8.8

30.0
1.6
7.0

35.3
3.3
8.1

Primary non-oil fiscal balance
(commitment basis)

-17.6

-20.5

-21.5

-26.9

-27.5

-18.7

-22.2

Source: Ministry of Finance, and Fund staff projections.

24.
Staff suggested that the remaining gap between domestic and international
petroleum product prices be phased out during the 2005–06 period, according to a
well-defined automatic price adjustment formula. This formula would have two
components: the first consists of quarterly price adjustments, and the second would pass
through the absolute change in the international price to domestic prices.6 If oil prices fall
over the next two years, this would mitigate the required adjustment in the price. However,
the authorities argued against setting a formula for fear of increased smuggling ahead of
future price increases. While there is merit to this argument, staff considered that with the
substantial increase planned for 2005, the incentive for smuggling will be significantly
reduced.
25.
The electricity subsidy, which has been small so far, could become a heavy burden
on the budget if not addressed soon. According to an agreement with the World Bank and
the Fund, the budget pays a subsidy of Yrls 6 billion a year until 2007 to the electricity
company until it builds more efficient power plants. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the
actual subsidy may be higher than budgeted and could grow further in the next few years.
6

If the subsidy is to be eliminated over the next two years, each quarterly adjustment would
eliminate one eighth of the gap until it is fully eliminated. The domestic price should not be
reduced until the subsidy is fully eliminated.

- 15 -

Staff expressed concerns and suggested that, among other things, serious consideration be
given to revising the tariff structure to protect only the poorest segment of the population.7
The authorities agreed with this assessment, but noted that, in view of the heavy reform
agenda, this particular issue was not one of their top priorities at this time.

Revenues and Expenditures 1999–2009
(In percent of GDP)
Expenditures and Net Lending

Revenues and Grants
45

40

28

35

24

30

20

25

25

16

20

20

12

Nontax
revenue

40
35
30

Total revenues
(right scale)

Tax revenue

15
10

Oil revenue

5
0
1999

2002

2005

15

8

10

4

5

0

2008

1999

40
36
Total Expenditure
(Right scale)

32
28
24

Development
Expenditure

20
16

Total subsidies

12
8

Civilian wages &
salaries
2002

4
0
2005

2008

Source: Yemeni authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

26.
The planned increase in petroleum product prices requires strengthening of social
protection mechanisms to mitigate any possible impact on the poor. A poverty and social
impact analysis conducted by the World Bank and DFID indicates that less than 2 percent of
the subsidy reaches the poor. However, the study suggested that removing the subsidy would
have an impact on food and transport prices and, thus, may have a regressive impact given
the large proportion of income that the poor spend on food. In order to ease such an impact,
the targeting and the coverage of the Social Welfare Fund (SWF), which distributes a cash
subsidy to very poor families, should be improved. More generally, further efforts should be
made to protect the most vulnerable groups from the long-term adjustment required for
achieving sustainability (Box 4).

7

The first segment of Yemen’s tariff structure, which is targeted at the poor, is too generous
compared to other countries and imposes a large cost burden on the budget.

- 16 -

Box 4. Social Protection and Adjustment Efforts
The success of fiscal adjustment will largely depend on how well it protects the most vulnerable
groups and how it is perceived by the public at large. About 42 percent of Yemen’s population
live below the poverty line, with an estimated 33 percent unable to meet the minimum daily calorie
intake requirement. Protection mechanisms that are fair, transparent, and well targeted will mitigate
the possible adverse impact of adjustment on the poor and facilitate the political acceptance of
reforms.
The elimination of petroleum subsidy and the subsequent fiscal adjustment measures are
expected to have an adverse impact on the poor. For example, although a large portion of the
petroleum subsidy benefits the rich, its removal will likely be felt more by the poor through, inter alia,
higher transportation costs and food prices—the latter representing a disproportionately much higher
portion of the poor’s household budget.
According to a World Bank study, about 60 percent of the direct diesel subsidy used by
households is captured by the two top (income) deciles, while less than 2 percent goes to the two
lowest deciles. At the same time, the aggregate impact of eliminating subsidies is regressive
because of the dominance of the indirect impact. It is estimated that, for households using diesel as
fuel, the impact of bringing diesel price to its economic price in percent of their expenditure would
reach about 14 percent and 5 percent for the lowest and highest deciles, respectively. Similarly, for
those using LPG (used more widely by the poor), the impact is about 13 percent and 2 percent for the
lowest and highest deciles, respectively.
The authorities should focus mainly on strengthening the existing social safety nets (see below)
while exploring with NGOs and representatives of the poor other mechanisms to respond to the
potential impact of other adjustment measures. Additional efforts should aim at strengthening
capacity at the subnational level, essential in the delivery of social safety net programs. Delivery
instruments should take into account administrative and financial constraints, and could include:
targeted cash transfers, public works programs, social funds, and microfinance.
******
The Social Welfare Fund (SWF) is the government’s primary safety net and provides direct cash
assistance (with a limit of Yrls 2,000 or about $11 per family per month) to 650,000 beneficiaries.
While at its inception it suffered from ill targeting and poor governance, according to the ministry of
labor and social welfare targeting has improved and 80 percent of the most recent 200,000
beneficiaries are indeed poor, according to the formula used. The main delivery mechanism for the
SWF, covering 58 percent of the total benefit transfer, is the postal system.
The Social Development Fund (SDF) provides assistance for long-term development projects.
These are aimed at providing social and economic services—including education, health care, water
supply, and microfinance—creating jobs and enhancing the capacity of local communities. Recently,
the SDF has developed a five-year $137 million National Small and Micro-Enterprises Development
Strategy focusing on poverty alleviation in both rural and urban areas. The SDF’s involvement with
SME development has been met with limited success owing to the reluctance of banks to extend
credit to SMEs.

- 17 -

C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
27.
Central bank officials did not see a need to raise interest rates, arguing that the
pick up in inflation was mainly supply driven. They claimed that most of the increase in the
inflation rate was due to the rise in food prices, which were affected by adverse weather
conditions, and, hence, raising interest rates—as suggested by staff—would not help in
combating inflation. They were also concerned about the impact of higher interest rates on
investment and growth. They assured the mission though that they would monitor the
situation very closely and intervene when necessary, including by raising the benchmark
minimum rate on savings deposits.
28.
Staff expressed concerns about inflation running at double digits, and indicated
that the surge in prices during the past year reflected more than the transient effect of
adverse weather conditions. Staff stressed the need for monetary policy to focus primarily
on price stability and for interest rates to reflect market forces. Staff indicated that the rise
in food prices did not explain fully recent inflationary trends, which were influenced to a
large extent by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. While at times there may be a
need for the central bank to balance multiple and conflicting objectives, now that core
inflation is running at close to 15 percent and macroeconomic stability is in jeopardy, more
focus should be placed on price stability.8 Staff suggested that mopping up excess liquidity
by issuing a large amount of treasury bills should push their interest rate sufficiently high to
encourage banks to compete by paying higher interest rates on deposits. At this time, the
minimum rate should become nonbinding and should then be liberalized.9 Until the
benchmark is eliminated, the CBY should use it more actively to signal the stance of
monetary policy and maintain a positive real interest rate. Officials at the central bank
maintained that removing the benchmark rate would lead to a sharp drop in the interest rate
on deposits, because of lack of competition between banks, and would encourage speculative
behavior including against the domestic currency.
29.
While a flexible exchange rate is the declared official policy, discussions with the
central bank and its recent policy choices suggested a revealed preference for more
exchange rate stability than is warranted by a free float. Officials at the central bank
reaffirmed their adherence to an independently floating exchange rate and strongly contested
8

A tighter monetary policy in 2005 is needed to contain the trend inflation at 12 percent—
inflation that excludes the impact of higher fuel prices on the CPI, which is estimated at a
one-off increase of 6 percent. This is consistent with the monetary program that targets broad
money growth of 13.5 percent and credit to the privates sector of 25 percent.
9

In the staff’s view, the minimum interest rate on savings deposits—which has been fixed at
13 percent since 2001—has distorted market signals and has outlived its usefulness, since it
was originally intended to mobilize deposits in the mid-1990s, when inflation was running
very high and sharp exchange rate depreciations were all too frequent.

- 18 -

any suggestion that they were pursuing a managed float. They asserted that interventions
have been aimed primarily at dampening exchange rate volatility and at supporting to some
extent the objective of price stability particularly given the rapid and strong pass through
from exchange rate depreciations to prices. Officials, however, seemed to be content with the
stability of the rial against the U.S. dollar, which, in their view, is the main anchor for public
expectations. While staff supports the occasional need for the CBY to intervene in the
foreign exchange market to minimize large speculative swings, the CBY should not resist
strong and persistent pressures indicative of underlying fundamental changes.
Notwithstanding the depreciation of the dollar in 2004, the value of the rial failed to fall
sufficiently against other currencies to compensate for inflation rate differentials with
Yemen’s key trading partners, leading to a real exchange rate appreciation of the rial by
3.5 percent. Although this appreciation does not suggest serious competitiveness problems at
this time—especially in view of the very narrow non-oil export base—if it continues, it will
undermine the development of non-oil sectors.
30.
Staff argued that, in a longer-term context, greater exchange rate flexibility will
serve Yemen well because of the expected deterioration in the external current account
and the need to develop non-oil sectors. External competitiveness should be maintained,
including through low inflation and appropriate exchange rate policy, to develop the non-oil
sectors and diversify the production base away from oil. With declining oil exports and
consequently international reserves, the exchange rate is expected to depreciate. The CBY
should not resist such a potential movement in the rate to avoid sharp disruptive
depreciations in the future.10
Gross Own International Reserves and Oil Exports 1999-2009
Although reserves seem
(In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated)
comfortable now, seen in a longerCentral Bank Gross own international reserves (in
months of imports, right scale)
Projections
term context, they may not be
sufficient to meet future demand if
imports are to be sustained at a
level that is commensurate with
poverty-reducing growth. A
Total oil exports
managed gradual depreciation of
(U.S. dollar, left scale)
the rial could be an option in the
future to achieve the required
Gross own international reserves, (U.S.
depreciation.
Dollar, left scale)
5,500

20

5,000

18

4,500

16

4,000

14

3,500

12

3,000

10

2,500

8

2,000

6

1,500

4

1,000
500

2
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

31.
The discussion on a
Sources: Yemeni authorities and Fund staff estimates and projections.
possible change in the monetary
policy framework did not go too
far. The discretionary nature of the existing framework—reacting to developments after they
10

While a large real exchange rate depreciation could help in developing non-oil sectors, it
would have adverse balance sheet effects and worsen external debt indicators.

- 19 -

occur—has proved to be ineffective in maintaining low inflation. Staff suggested that, in
view of the instability of money demand, it would be useful for the CBY to adopt a
framework based on a clear inflation objective, a monetary rule (perhaps interest-based),
market-determined interest rates, and a flexible exchange rate. Recognizing the limited
technical capacity at the CBY, moving to such an approach should be gradual and extend
over three to five years. The authorities were reluctant to engage in a discussion on this issue,
citing the lack of skills and the shallow nature of the financial markets, as well as the
negligible role that interest rates play in the conduct of monetary policy in Yemen.11 They
suggested that the forthcoming MFD mission on liquidity forecasting and management could
look into these issues.12
D. Key Structural Reforms
Tax reform
32.
Staff welcomed the speedy revision of the draft GST law and hoped that it will be
adopted soon by parliament. The revised draft includes several improvements: (a) reduction
of exemptions; (b) elimination of the tax on production and consumption; (c) unification of
the GST registration threshold; and (d) development of special refund procedures. At the
same time, the mission pointed out the case for: (a) eliminating the few remaining
unnecessary exemptions (e.g., electricity); (b) converting higher GST rates on specific goods
(cigarettes, cigars, and qat) into a uniform GST rate of 10 percent plus an excise; and
(c) shortening the time for processing refunds to one month. The authorities took note of
these observations and indicated that these would be addressed at a later stage. They were
hopeful that the current draft would be approved by parliament without amendments. Since
major improvements were made in the draft, staff agreed that there was no need to reopen the
discussions on the draft GST law at this stage, but warned that delays in adopting the
proposed amendments are likely to result in further delays in the implementation of the GST
and reduce the effectiveness of the METAC assistance.13

11

The role of interest rates, according to the CBY, is also limited by the fact that Islamic
banks, which are growing in importance, do not accept interest and do not deal with treasury
bills.

12

At the request of the authorities, a Monetary and Financial Systems Department (MFD)
mission on liquidity forecasting and management and on developing technical capacity at the
central bank will visit Yemen in early April of 2005.

13

The mission was assisted by Mr. Benon, the METAC revenue administration advisor, who
prepared a comprehensive assessment of the new draft GST Law, which was shared and
discussed with the authorities during the mission.

- 20 -

33.
Staff emphasized the importance of strengthening the large taxpayers’ office and
preparing customs administration for the implementation of the GST, which is expected in
July. The METAC could provide some technical assistance to help strengthen the LTO
organization and procedures, and finalize the preparation of GST administration once it is
adopted. The apparent lack of awareness of customs officials of GST procedures should be
quickly addressed. There is also a need to undertake a public relations campaign to explain
the nature and impact of the GST to minimize its exploitation by businesses toward raising
prices.
Public expenditure management
34.
There was agreement on the need to improve public expenditure management as a
condition for achieving a sustainable fiscal adjustment over the long term. Staff was
encouraged by the use of macroeconomic indicators and indicative ceilings in the preparation
of the 2005 budget. However, it underscored the importance of strengthening internal
expenditure control mechanisms, including by developing a commitment control system and
adhering strictly to budgetary allocations. The authorities acknowledged the difficulties they
face in controlling some line ministries and executing agencies from exceeding their
allocations. In view of the large number of remaining reforms in this area, staff discussed the
prioritization and sequencing of these measures as suggested in Box 5.14
Civil service reform, labor market, and business environment
35.
The ministry of civil service continued to set forth strong foundations for civil
service reform, but the pace must be accelerated before the momentum is lost. Staff was
encouraged by the completion of the civil service database and by the voluntary self
declaration of multi-dippers (those who receive more than one salary) in light of the amnesty
granted by the ministry.15 It reiterated that reform efforts should concentrate on pilot
agencies and ministries that could be showcased to generate political and public support for
this reform. The retrenchment effort should be scaled up soon before mounting political
opposition curtails the government program.

14

The mission shared with the authorities tables comparing Yemen to other countries in the
region. The comparison clearly shows that Yemen is lagging behind in terms of nearly all
public expenditure management areas (Appendix VI).

15

Due to technical delays, the issuing of biometric cards (used to identify public sector
employees) should begin in early 2005.

- 21 -

Box 5. Public Expenditure Management (PEM) and Reforms
Progress in public expenditure management and reforms has been slow in spite of extensive technical assistance (TA)
provided by the Fund and donors. Recent reforms include, in particular, the adoption of a macroeconomic framework in
the preparation of the 2005 Budget, and the subsequent use of indicative expenditure ceilings in negotiations with line
ministries and spending agencies.
There remains a set of priority measures aimed at streamlining the budget presentation, strengthening expenditure
controls, and improving fiscal transparency. The authorities indicated their intention to gradually dissolve a number of
extra-budgetary funds and other “special accounts” in a move to create a fully-fledged Treasury Single Account. The
adoption of a functional classification of expenditures according to GFS2001, while important for budgetary planning
purposes and tracking poverty-related expenditures, is not one of the top priorities of the government at this time.
The project of creating an integrated and computerized financial management information system (AFMIS), with
the assistance of the World Bank, is seriously lagging behind. Efforts are being made by the World Bank to put this
project back on track.
Staff stressed that a prioritized and sustained progress in PEM reform is crucial to fiscal adjustment. Several reforms
are yet to be undertaken, including the development of a commitment control system (CCS) and further strengthening of
internal expenditure control mechanisms. Compared to countries in the region, Yemen lags behind in nearly all PEM reform
areas (see Appendix VI). Given the large number of reform measures, there is a need for prioritization and sequencing, as
proposed in the table below (a ranking of 1 has the highest priority).
PEM Reforms
Reform Areas

A. Budget execution and
audit

B. Budget preparation and
coverage of the budget

C. Fiscal reporting and
publication of fiscal data

Reform Objectives

Ranking

Time Frame

1. Strengthening internal expenditure control
mechanisms, including the development of a
commitment control system (CCS).

1

12-18 months

2. Introducing a fully functional treasury single
account (TSA).

2

6–12 months

3. Strengthening the external audit function.

3

1–2 years

1. Expanding budget coverage, while limiting the
number of extra-budgetary funds.

1

6–12 months

2. Developing an adequate functional classification
of the budget.

2

6–12 months

3. Improving the macroeconomic foundations of
the budget.

2

Ongoing

4. Allowing for a “top-down” and “bottom-up”
approach to preparing the budget.

2

Ongoing

1. Improving reporting on fiscal performance.

2

3–6 months

2. Expanding the comprehensiveness of fiscal
reports.

4

6–12 months

- 22 -

36.
Staff stressed that ad hoc wage increases which are not part of the national wage
strategy will undermine the ongoing civil service reform. While the proposed wage increase
of 10–15 percent in 2005 aims at garnering the political support for the petroleum price
increase, it reduces the incentives for employees to leave the public sector, and makes it
more expensive for the Civil Service Fund to absorb excess labor and finance either their
retirement or their severance packages. Given the need to reduce the wage bill by 1–
2 percent of GDP over the long term—to help in the adjustment efforts and to bring it in line
with other low-income countries—retrenchment and close monitoring of hiring and
promotion policies are critical steps.
A Comparison of Public Sector Wage Bill with that of Selected Country Groups
Central Government Wages as Percentage of GDP

Wages as Percentage of Total Expenditures

12
Euro area

Yemen
10

Middle-income
countries Baltics,

8

Russia
and
other

Low-income
countries

35

MENA
Emerging
market
economies

6

Yemen
30
25

Low-income
countries

Middle-income
countries

20
15

4
10

2

5

0

0

Sources: Yemeni authorities, and Fund staff estimates.

37.
Greater attention should be given to labor market issues and unemployment. While
there are no official statistics on unemployment, it is reported to be very high. Staff and the
authorities agreed on the need to redesign the education curricula and enhance vocational
training to reduce the severe mismatch in existing skills and better cater to market demand.
This is all the more important in view of the adverse impact of national employment
programs in the region, especially the Saudization program, on unemployment in Yemen.16
Staff expressed hope that the revision to the labor code, which introduces more flexibility in
hiring foreign labor by private investors when local skills are lacking, could be adopted soon.
38.
Strong efforts are needed to improve Yemen’s business environment, which, as
confirmed by recent studies, is plagued with several problems. A recent study by the
16

National employment programs aim at replacing foreign labor by nationals over time
according to specific employment targets in various job categories. Given the large number
of Yemenis working in Saudi Arabia, this could exacerbate the unemployment problem in
Yemen.

- 23 -

World Bank ranks Yemen as one of the world’s ten most expensive countries in terms of
business startups. Staff called for streamlining procedures and reducing costs to encourage
private sector investment, growth, and bring more businesses into the formal sector.17
Yemen. The Cost of Starting a Business in Yemen and Selected Middle
Eastern Countries, as of January 2004

Country
Yemen
Lebanon
Saudi Arabia
Egypt
Jordan
Morocco
Oman

Number of
Procedures

Time it
Takes
(days)

Official Fees
(percent of income
per capita)

Minimum Capital
Requirement
(percent of income
per capita)

12
6
12
13
11
5
9

63
46
64
43
36
11
34

269
131
69
63
52
12
4

1561
82
1549
815
1147
718
100

Source: Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth, The World Bank, 2005.

39.
Staff suggested that the government appoint a high-level committee of highly
respected statesmen to look into governance and corruption issues. Discussions with
different parties, including parliamentarians, business leaders, and labor unions, pointed
clearly to an urgent need to fight corruption. Dealing with this issue would in all likelihood
facilitate the political acceptance of reforms, contributing to improving the business
environment. A weak judiciary and inefficient public service are also serious impediments to
private sector development.18

17

Yemen could follow the path of a number of countries that reformed business start-up
procedures in the recent past. For example, Ethiopia reduced official registration fees from
five times its per capita income to 0.7 and new registrations went up by 48 percent. Morocco
and Slovakia implemented similar reforms, resulting in new registrations increasing by
21 percent and 12 percent, respectively.

18

In the context of a general plan for reforming the commercial judiciary process and
upgrade its performance, the government has adopted a project to modernize and develop the
commercial courts in Sana’a and in four other governorates: Aden, Hadramout, Taiz, and
Hudeaida.

- 24 -

Financial sector issues
40.
Officials at the CBY felt that the quality of its banking supervision and its
enforcement of prudential regulations are sound. They indicated that banks are adequately
monitored (both through off-site and on-site inspections), especially with the recent
strengthening of personnel in the banking supervision unit. However, staff considered that
the quality of bank assets remained low, characterized by high concentration and
dollarization of credit.
41.
Progress in implementing the recommendations of the 2001 Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) has been limited. In 2003, the CBY amended its accounting
standards to conform to the latest international standards. In early 2005, the authorities
launched a new initiative to modernize commercial courts. However, a project to adopt a new
central bank law has been deferred indefinitely.19 In addition, there were no changes to report
on the existing framework for anti-money laundering (AML) and the combating of financing
of terrorism (CFT) since the last consultation.
External sector issues
42.
The CBY should improve further its reserve and external debt management.
Reserves are currently invested mainly in short-term liquid U.S. dollar dominated assets.
While this is a sensible strategy, it may be worthwhile exploring, with the help of a reputable
investment firm, the possibility of investing part of Yemen’s large reserves in longer-term
assets with a higher rate of return, taking into account the risks stemming from the
longer-term outlook. Staff welcomed the progress made in using the debt management
system (DMFAS) within the CBY and recommended that it should be shared with other
ministries and agencies that deal with external debt.
43.
Yemen’s trade regime remains relatively open. Negotiations on World Trade
Organization (WTO) accession are proceeding well. It is expected that Yemen would join the
WTO in four to five years. While accession to the WTO is not expected to lead to higher
market access or significantly increased trade in the near term, the authorities saw important
potential gains from this upcoming accession, including increased investor confidence and an
improved business environment.20 The authorities did not see that an agreement could be
reached any time soon in joining the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). They confirmed that
Yemen would begin reducing its tariffs in 2005 toward their full elimination by 2010 for the
countries of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA). As for the diagnostic trade
19

The monetary authorities fear that submitting this piece of legislation to parliament may
lead to changes in the banking law that would reduce the independence of the central bank.

20

For example, the dispute settlement mechanism within the WTO provides additional
security to foreign investors.

- 25 -

integration study that was prepared in 2003 under the Integrated Framework for TradeRelated Technical Assistance, the authorities indicated that they had prepared a detailed
work plan to implement its recommendations.
Other issues
44.
The final draft of the first PRSP progress report covering 2003 has recently been
approved by the cabinet. Given the delay in producing this report, and the preparation for the
combined new PRSP, which has already started, and the five-year development plan
covering 2006–10, staff suggested, after consultation with the World Bank, producing only
one progress report covering both 2003 and 2004, with the expectation that the new PRSP
would be produced by the end of 2005. The authorities agreed to this suggestion. The
mission stressed that the progress report be focused and candid, accounting for both
accomplishments and setbacks. It should also be more forward looking, drawing lessons
from the first year of implementation and assessing whether any changes in the strategy are
needed. More important, the mission recommended that the new PRSP set realistic and wellprioritized targets, taking into account resource limitations including foreign financing.
45.
While Yemen’s data are satisfactory for conducting surveillance, there are several
areas where improvements are needed to enhance the quality of economic analysis. This is
true for fiscal, national accounts and prices, and balance of payments data, in particular. Staff
also underscored the importance of coordination and the flow of information among different
government agencies. The authorities agreed with this assessment and requested further
technical assistance on national accounts and balance of payments statistics.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
46.
Yemen’s long-term prospects are clouded by the expected rapid decline in oil
production and the continued delays in undertaking needed reforms. Unless significant
discoveries are made, oil reserves could be depleted in about 12–15 years, leading to serious
long-term sustainability problems. While the near-term outlook remains manageable—
supported by a high level of international reserves—Yemen’s high dependency on oil
dictates that short-term policies need to be cast in a longer-term coherent framework.
Decisive actions now could go some way in redressing policy credibility, following a few
years of inaction, including on the package that was announced in October 2003, and of
which almost none of the measures has yet been implemented.
47.
Failure to undertake strong reform efforts soon will put at risk the achievements of
the past and lead to macroeconomic instability. A strong and orderly adjustment now will
obviate the need for a drastic and disorderly adjustment in the future. Sustained efforts,
however, will need to be supported by strong commitment to reforms at the highest political
level. The fact that the ruling party has an overwhelming majority in parliament and that
there is still some time—although not much of it—before the presidential elections of 2006,
provides a window of opportunity for taking actions now. Otherwise, staff is apprehensive

- 26 -

that the political landscape will worsen, putting off the reform process and adding to the
burden of adjustment.
48.
It is encouraging that the authorities have taken the reform process one notch
forward by launching a public information campaign to highlight the risks of inaction and
by making the reform package an integral part of the 2005 budget. But significant risks
remain. These risks stem mainly from political economy considerations and from the
conditions imposed by parliament for the approval of the 2005 budget, which may take some
time to address and may be used to block the reform process. Staff hopes that the adjustment
process can be reignited in a way that will maintain social cohesion and avoid a further
polarization of the political climate. Initiating actions to improve governance and enhance
transparency should facilitate public acceptance of reforms.
49.
At this critical juncture, there is a need to have a long-term anchor to guide fiscal
policy and bring Yemen closer to a sustainable path. Maintaining a debt-to-GDP ratio of
50 percent can provide such an anchor. This requires a cumulative adjustment of at least
15 percent of GDP in the non-oil primary deficit over the next 12 years. This assessment
provides a useful guide—but certainly not the only one—for policymaking in the difficult
period ahead.
50.
The sheer magnitude of the necessary fiscal adjustment requires a comprehensive
and credible fiscal strategy. While in the first instance the strategy should rely on mobilizing
non-oil revenues—in view of Yemen’s low tax revenue—expenditure cuts should lend
support to the strategy and enhance its chances of success. The main elements of the strategy
are raising tax revenue, adopting the GST Law, removing subsidies, reducing the wage bill
and defense spending, improving public expenditure management, and strengthening tax and
customs administration.
51.
Demand management policies should be supported by policies aimed at improving
the supply response of the economy. Developing some promising sectors such as fisheries,
transshipments, and tourism will boost non-oil growth and ease the pain of adjustment. In
addition to developing strategies to promote these sectors, the authorities should adopt
structural policies that can improve the business climate and encourage investment and
growth. Particular efforts should be devoted to reducing the high cost of starting a business in
Yemen and removing impediments to the development of the private sector.
52.
Staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to significantly reduce the non-oil
primary deficit in 2005, although this may be difficult to achieve. In view of the expected
sharp decline in oil revenue (7.5 percent of GDP), and the difficulty of fully compensating
for it in one year, staff is of the view that the original fiscal target for 2005 seems unrealistic
and achieving it will likely pose serious challenges. Staff also considers that the proposed
increase in the wage rate in the budget—while desirable to improve governance and fight
corruption—is premature as it undermines the ongoing civil service reform. Should a
supplementary budget be adopted, staff recommends that it be contained to respond to

- 27 -

unexpected developments and exogenous shocks and not to be used to increase spending in a
manner that undermines the integrity of the budgetary process.
53.
The authorities’ decision to raise petroleum prices beginning in 2005 should be
followed by a clear plan to remove the subsidy within two years. After the initial increase in
2005, staff recommends that Yemen adopt an automatic price adjustment formula to adjust
prices on a quarterly basis until the full elimination of the subsidy. This formula will insulate
price adjustments from constant political bargaining and will mitigate these adjustments if
the oil prices fall over the next two years.
54.
The planned adjustment in petroleum prices and the sheer magnitude of the
long-term adjustment more generally require strong social protection mechanisms. Social
and poverty impact analysis shows that, while the petroleum subsidy is not benefiting the
poor, its elimination may lead to increases in food prices and disproportionably hurt the most
vulnerable groups. Because of this, and the potential impact on the most vulnerable groups
from the longer-term adjustment required for sustainability, the coverage and targeting of the
SWF should be improved and the Social Development Fund should be supported.
55.
Staff is concerned about the surge in inflation and calls for a tighter monetary
policy to curb continuing inflationary pressures. While the central bank may need at times
to strike a delicate balance between conflicting objectives, price stability should take
precedence, especially when inflation is running close to 15 percent and macroeconomic
stability is in the balance. To enhance the role of interest rates in the conduct of monetary
policy, the central bank should liberalize the minimum benchmark rate on savings accounts
so that interest rates reflect market forces.
56.
In the staff’s view, greater exchange rate flexibility should help in achieving
long-term sustainability. With the expected rapid decline in oil exports and foreign reserves,
the CBY should not resist pressures on the exchange rate to depreciate over time so as to
avoid large and disruptive depreciations in the future. A flexible exchange rate policy should
be supported by other structural reforms that enhance competitiveness and boost growth in
non-oil sectors
57.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation discussions take place on the
standard 12-month cycle.

- 28 -

Table 1. Republic of Yemen: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000–05
2000
Production and prices
Nominal GDP at market prices
Real GDP at market prices
Real non-oil GDP
Real oil GDP
GDP deflator
Core consumer price index (annual average) 1/
Core consumer price index (12-month) 1/
Crude oil production (1,000 barrels/day)
Crude export oil price (weighted average, U.S. dollar/barrel) 2/
Government finance
Total revenue and grants
Oil revenue
Non-oil revenue
Grants
Total expenditure
Current
Development
Overall balance including grants (commitment basis)
Primary non-oil fiscal balance (commitment, including
grants, excluding oil and gas revenues)
Monetary data
Broad money
Credit to private sector
Benchmark deposit interest rate (percent per annum.)
Velocity (Non-oil GDP/M2)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which : Crude oil
Imports, f.o.b.
Services, income, and transfers (net)
Services (net)
Interest obligations
Current transfers (net)
Of which : Workers remittances
Official transfers
Net factor income
Current account
Own current account (excluding oil companies)
Capital and financial accounts, including errors and omissions
Overall balance
Memorandum items:
Central bank gross foreign reserves
Central bank own gross foreign reserves 3/
In months of imports 3/
Current account, including grants (in percent of GDP)
Debt service ratio (obligation basis), after rescheduling
Official external debt, after rescheduling 4/
Terms of trade (1996 = 100)
Exchange rate (e.o.p.) (Yrls per U.S. dollar)
Real effective exchange rate (1995 = 100) 5/
Nominal GDP at market prices
In billions of Yemeni rials
In millions of U.S. dollars
Per capita GDP (in U.S. dollars)
Population (in thousands)

Est.
2001

Est.
2002

Est.
2003

Proj.
2004

Proj.
2005

17.5
2.7
4.1
-5.9
14.4
12.0
14.5
400
34.76

16.6
2.9
4.0
-4.7
13.4
16.4
18.0
381
37.5

(Change in percent)
31.3
4.4
3.5
9.4
25.7
10.0
7.6
434
28.2

4.5
4.6
5.2
1.3
-0.1
10.7
14.6
434
23.0

9.0
3.9
4.6
0.4
4.9
6.8
4.5
433
24.6

16.1
3.1
4.0
-1.8
12.5
11.9
12.1
425
27.9

(In percent of GDP)
39.2
27.9
10.0
1.3
31.2
25.8
5.4
8.0

35.3
25.3
9.8
0.3
32.8
25.2
7.5
2.6

33.6
22.3
9.7
1.6
34.8
27.7
7.1
-1.2

33.1
23.6
9.1
0.4
38.2
28.6
9.7
-5.2

35.0
25.2
9.6
0.2
39.4
29.6
8.8
-4.4

30.6
20.1
9.7
0.8
35.3
26.5
8.1
-4.7

-17.6

-20.5

-21.5

-26.9

-27.5

-22.2

15.0
33.5
13.0
2.1

13.5
25.0
...
2.1

(12-month change in percent)
25.1
21.3
13.0
2.4

18.7
25.8
13.0
2.2

18.0
14.3
13.0
2.1

20.0
26.3
13.0
2.0

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
3,805
3,423
-2,635
96
-630
-51
1,400
1,223
72
-610
1,265
1,026
103
1,368

3,302
2,895
-2,771
-24
-718
-52
1,273
1,228
42
-763
507
394
255
761

3,584
3,134
-3,083
33
-633
-48
1,384
1,230
148
-867
535
453
217
752

3,923
3,417
-3,422
-374
-748
-57
1,201
1,137
64
-1,067
128
-2
455
583

4,510
3,893
-3,884
-499
-757
-57
1,280
1,168
112
-875
126
36
559
685

4,864
4,192
-4,556
-356
-762
-57
1,231
1,114
117
-633
-47
-567
59
12

2,915
2,822
12.3
13.2
6.0
4,832
167.2
164.0
164.6

3,677
3,569
14.9
5.3
6.3
4,870
133.0
173.3
182.0

4,428
4,056
17.0
5.4
4.6
4,852
138.1
178.9
189.4

5,011
4,445
16.0
1.1
3.9
4,978
141.2
184.3
178.8

5,772
5,108
16.4
1.0
3.9
5,075
164.1
185.8
183.4

5,820
5,091
14.6
-0.3
4.2
5,178
176.5
...
...

1,539.4
9,561
546
17,507

1,608.1
9,533
528
18,046

1,753.5
9,985
537
18,601

2,035.5
11,211
585
19,173

2,390.8
12,904
653
19,763

2,788.7
14,566
715
20,370

Sources: Yemeni authorities; staff estimates and projections.
1/ Core CPI is defined as CPI excluding qat.
2/ Oil price is different from the WEO price because Yemeni oil is traded at a discount.
3/ Gross reserves minus commercial bank and pension fund foreign exchange deposits held with the central bank. Imports are for the current
year and exclude oil and gas sector imports.
4/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt including central bank foreign liabilities. Debt service ratio is measured as a percent of exports of
goods and services.
5/ The real effective exchange rate for 2004 is the average over eleven months through end-November.

- 29 -

Table 2. Republic of Yemen: Central Government Finance, 2003–09
Actual

Proj.

Budget

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2003

Actual
Jan.–
Oct. 04

2004

2005

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Total current revenue and grants
Total current revenue
Oil and gas revenue
Of which : Crude oil exports
Non-oil revenue
Tax
Direct
Indirect
Of which : Customs revenues
Nontax
Grants

672.9
664.5
480.2
316.4
184.3
145.3
68.3
77.0
42.4
39.0
8.3

665.4
660.6
474.8
301.7
185.8
145.5
...
...
43.0
40.3
4.8

836.9
831.2
602.8
360.7
228.4
179.5
74.6
104.9
51.6
48.9
5.7

754.3
735.8
490.6
284.6
245.1
191.7
85.6
106.1
51.1
56.7
18.5

854.2
831.7
560.2
340.3
271.5
208.9
90.1
118.9
57.5
62.5
22.5

844.5
817.4
415.3
246.3
402.0
320.4
127.0
193.4
80.7
81.7
27.2

877.8
847.6
381.3
219.2
466.4
374.1
144.6
229.5
96.9
92.2
30.2

947.0
913.2
365.0
204.4
548.2
440.3
158.8
281.5
116.1
107.9
33.8

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Civilian wages and salaries
Materials and services
Operation and maintenance
Defense
Interest obligations
Domestic
External
Transfers and subsidies
Subsidies
Petroleum cash subsidies
Financial support electricity
Current transfers
Development capital expenditure
Net lending

778.2
581.2
143.2
51.7
9.3
148.1
38.0
29.2
8.8
177.1
106.9
100.9
6.0
70.3
197.1
0.0

717.6
526.8
111.6
42.4
3.8
127.8
41.2
33.7
7.5
188.7
127.9
123.4
4.5
60.7
167.0
23.7

942.7
707.7
171.6
60.0
10.1
155.0
50.8
40.1
10.6
243.4
158.5
152.5
6.0
84.9
210.0
25.0

836.4
621.3
193.5
84.5
11.5
111.5
52.2
42.7
9.5
149.1
50.2
44.2
6.0
98.9
196.0
19.1

984.5 1,057.8 1,133.3 1,280.0 1,445.5
738.4
784.3
832.2
943.3 1,068.7
193.5
207.2
221.7
242.7
265.7
84.5
101.3
118.4
137.0
156.6
11.5
24.8
41.1
46.1
51.8
162.3
179.8
195.2
215.2
232.3
71.5
88.9
111.8
146.5
190.0
60.5
77.1
99.1
130.9
173.9
10.9
11.8
12.7
15.5
16.1
196.1
164.7
124.4
131.8
145.4
97.2
55.1
6.0
0.0
0.0
91.2
49.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
0.0
0.0
98.9
109.6
118.4
131.8
145.4
227.0
263.5
291.1
326.6
366.8
19.1
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

-105.3
0.0
10.3
-95.0

-52.2
0.0
0.0
-52.2

-105.7
-18.0
0.0
-123.7

-82.2
0.0
0.0
-82.2

-130.3
0.0
0.0
-130.3

-211.2
0.0
0.0
-211.2

-288.7
0.0
0.0
-288.7

-402.2
0.0
0.0
-402.2

-498.5
0.0
0.0
-498.5

80.3
-36.9

30.0
0.0

50.9
0.0

82.2
0.0

130.3
0.0

211.2
0.0

288.7
0.0

402.2
0.0

498.5
0.0

External (net)
Bilateral and multilateral loans (net)
Disbursements
Amortization obligations
Exceptional financing

15.8
15.5
31.1
-15.6
0.0

48.2
48.2
27.9
20.3
-4.2

27.2
21.9
41.3
-19.5
0.0

31.1
35.3
50.8
-15.4
0.0

31.1
35.3
50.8
-15.4
0.0

60.4
60.4
83.0
-22.7
0.0

70.7
70.7
97.6
-26.8
0.0

87.3
87.3
119.4
-32.2
0.0

93.0
93.0
127.6
-34.6
0.0

Domestic (net)
Bank
Nonbank
Pension funds
Public enterprises
Others

101.5
83.9
17.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

-18.2
-54.5
36.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

23.8
-20.0
43.8
0.0
0.0
0.0

51.1
1.1
50.0
44.0
6.0
0.0

99.2
49.2
50.0
44.0
6.0
0.0

150.9
90.7
60.2
35.0
5.0
20.2

218.0
131.2
86.8
50.0
10.0
26.8

314.9
189.5
125.4
50.0
10.0
65.4

405.5
244.3
161.2
60.0
10.0
91.2

-14.7

-22.2

-72.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

33.1
32.6
23.6
15.5
9.1
7.1
3.4
3.8
2.1

27.8
27.6
19.9
12.6
7.8
6.1
...
...
1.8

35.0
34.8
25.2
15.1
9.6
7.5
3.1
4.4
2.2

27.3
26.5
15.7
9.4
10.8
8.5
3.6
4.9
2.2

24.7
23.9
12.1
7.2
11.7
9.4
3.7
5.6
2.4

22.8
22.1
9.9
5.7
12.1
9.7
3.8
6.0
2.5

21.9
21.2
8.5
4.7
12.7
10.2
3.7
6.5
2.7

(In billions of rials)

Overall balance (commitment)
Pending obligations 1/
External interest paid
Overall balance (cash)
Financing
Privatization

Discrepancy 1/

846.6
821.8
486.0
291.9
335.8
263.2
110.5
152.7
69.4
72.6
24.8

(In percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Oil and gas revenue
Of which : Crude oil exports
Non-oil revenue
Tax revenue
Direct
Indirect
Of which : Customs revenues

27.0
26.4
17.6
10.2
8.8
6.9
3.1
3.8
1.8

30.6
29.8
20.1
12.2
9.7
7.5
3.2
4.3
2.1

- 30 -

Table 2. Republic of Yemen: Central Government Finance, 2003–09
Actual

Actual
Jan.–
2003 Oct. 04

Nontax revenue
Grants (cash)

Proj.

Budget

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2004

2005

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

1.9
0.4

1.7
0.2

2.0
0.2

2.0
0.7

2.2
0.8

2.3
0.8

2.4
0.8

2.4
0.8

2.5
0.8

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Civilian wages and salaries
Materials and services
Operation and maintenance
Defense
Of which : MIG purchase
Interest obligations
Transfers and subsidies
Subsidies
Petroleum cash subsidies
Financial support electricity
Current transfers
Other current expenditure
Development expenditure
Net lending

38.2
28.6
7.0
2.5
0.5
7.3
...
1.9
8.7
5.2
5.0
0.3
3.5
0.7
9.7
0.0

30.0
22.0
4.7
1.8
0.2
5.3
...
1.7
7.9
5.4
5.2
0.2
2.5
0.5
7.0
1.0

39.4
29.6
7.2
2.5
0.4
6.5
0.7
2.1
10.2
6.6
6.4
0.3
3.6
0.7
8.8
1.0

30.0
22.3
6.9
3.0
0.4
4.0
...
1.9
5.3
1.8
1.6
0.2
3.5
0.7
7.0
0.7

35.3
26.5
6.9
3.0
0.4
5.8
...
2.6
7.0
3.5
3.3
0.2
3.5
0.7
8.1
0.7

34.1
25.3
6.7
3.3
0.8
5.8
...
2.9
5.3
1.8
1.6
0.2
3.5
0.6
8.5
0.3

33.1
24.3
6.5
3.5
1.2
5.7
...
3.3
3.6
0.2
0.0
0.2
3.5
0.6
8.5
0.3

33.3
24.5
6.3
3.6
1.2
5.6
...
3.8
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.4
0.6
8.5
0.3

33.5
24.8
6.2
3.6
1.2
5.4
...
4.4
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.4
0.6
8.5
0.2

Overall balance (commitment)
Overall balance (commitment, excluding grants)
Pending obligations 1/
External interest paid (arrears) 1/
Overall balance (cash)

-5.2
-5.6
0.0
0.5
-4.7

-2.2
-2.4
0.0
0.0
-2.2

-4.4
-4.7
-0.8
0.0
-5.2

-2.9
-3.6
0.0
0.0
-2.9

-4.7
-5.5
0.0
0.0
-4.7

-6.8
-7.6
0.0
0.0
-6.8

-8.4
-9.2
0.0
0.0
-8.4

-10.5
-11.3
0.0
0.0
-10.5

-11.6
-12.3
0.0
0.0
-11.6

Financing 7/
External (net)
Domestic (net)
Bank
Nonbank
Discrepancy 1/

3.9
0.8
5.0
4.1
0.9
-0.7

1.3
2.0
-0.8
-2.3
1.5
-0.9

2.1
1.1
1.0
-0.8
1.8
-3.0

2.9
1.1
1.8
0.0
1.8
0.0

4.7
1.1
3.6
1.8
1.8
0.0

6.8
1.9
4.9
2.9
1.9
0.0

8.4
2.1
6.4
3.8
2.5
0.0

10.5
2.3
8.2
4.9
3.3
0.0

11.6
2.2
9.4
5.7
3.7
0.0

-3.7

-0.7

-2.5

-1.7

-2.9

-4.7

-6.0

-7.4

-7.9

-26.9

-20.3

-27.5

-18.7

-22.2

-19.6

-17.3

-16.6

-15.6

-29.2

-22.2

-29.9

-21.2

-25.6

-23.3

-21.4

-21.2

-20.8

-21.1
10.1
-5.0
56.1
2,035.5
9.2

-15.0
8.7
-5.2
...
2,391
...

-19.8
10.7
-6.4
45.1
2,391
10.0

-13.8
9.5
-1.6
45.8
2,789
...

-17.7
10.3
-3.3
47.5
2,789
10.3

-17.0
10.8
-1.6
50.4
3,100
10.7

-16.4
11.3
0.0
56.0
3,425
10.8

-17.0
11.3
0.0
62.5
3,843
10.8

-17.1
11.6
0.0
69.9
4,315
10.8

12.9
10.1
2.7
0.6
54.2
-38.2
46.9
46.3
33.5
22.1

11.1
8.7
2.4
0.3
42.9
-29.0
39.8
39.5
28.4
18.0

13.7
10.7
2.9
0.3
56.4
-39.3
50.0
49.7
36.0
21.6

14.2
11.3
2.9
1.0
39.9
-20.9
29.8
28.8
14.6
8.7

14.1
11.3
2.8
0.9
38.8
-19.3
26.6
25.7
11.6
6.6

14.5
11.6
2.8
0.9
38.2
-17.8
25.0
24.1
9.6
5.4

Memorandum items:
Primary balance (commitment) 2/
Primary non-oil balance (commitment,
including grants) 3/
Non-oil balance (commitment,
excluding grants)
Non-oil balance (commitment, excluding
grants and crude oil exports)
Tax revenue, as percent of non-oil GDP
Net domestic oil revenue 4/
Public and publicly guaranteed debt 5/
GDP (at market prices in billions of Yrls)
Social expenditures (in percent of GDP) 6/

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Non-oil revenue
Tax revenue
Nontax revenue
Grants (cash)
Total expenditure and net lending
Primary non-oil balance (commitment including grants)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Oil and gas revenue
Crude oil exports

12.1
9.5
2.8
0.9
41.3
-25.7
37.2
36.3
24.2
14.0

13.4
10.3
3.1
1.1
48.6
-30.6
42.2
41.0
27.7
16.8

13.8
10.8
3.0
1.0
43.5
-25.0
34.9
33.8
20.0
12.0

- 31 -

Table 2. Republic of Yemen: Central Government Finance, 2003–09
Actual

Actual
Jan.–
2003 Oct. 04

Proj.

Budget

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

Proj.

2004

2005

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

12.9
10.1
4.8
5.4
3.0
2.7
0.6

11.1
8.7
...
...
2.6
2.4
0.3

13.7
10.7
4.5
6.3
3.1
2.9
0.3

12.1
9.5
4.2
5.2
2.5
2.8
0.9

13.4
10.3
4.4
5.9
2.8
3.1
1.1

13.8
10.8
4.6
6.3
2.9
3.0
1.0

14.2
11.3
4.5
6.8
2.8
2.9
1.0

14.1
11.3
4.4
7.0
2.9
2.8
0.9

14.5
11.6
4.2
7.4
3.1
2.8
0.9

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Civilian wages and salaries
Materials and services
Operation and maintenance
Civil Service Fund
Defense
Of which : MIG purchase
Interest obligations
Transfers and subsidies
Subsidies
Petroleum cash subsidies
Financial support electricity
Current transfers
Other current expenditure
Development expenditure
Net lending

54.2
40.5
10.0
3.6
0.6
0.0
10.3
...
2.6
12.3
7.4
7.0
0.4
4.9
1.0
13.7
0.0

42.9
31.5
6.7
2.5
0.2
0.0
7.6
...
2.5
11.3
7.6
7.4
0.3
3.6
0.7
10.0
1.4

56.4
42.3
10.3
3.6
0.6
0.0
9.3
1.0
3.0
14.6
9.5
9.1
0.4
5.1
1.0
12.6
1.5

41.3
30.7
9.5
4.2
0.6
0.0
...
...
2.6
7.4
2.5
2.2
0.3
4.9
0.9
9.7
0.9

48.6
36.4
9.5
4.2
0.6
0.0
8.0
...
3.5
9.7
4.8
4.5
0.3
4.9
0.9
11.2
0.9

43.5
32.3
8.5
4.2
1.0
0.0
7.4
...
3.7
6.8
2.3
2.0
0.2
4.5
0.7
10.8
0.4

39.9
29.3
7.8
4.2
1.4
0.0
6.9
...
3.9
4.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
4.2
0.7
10.3
0.4

38.8
28.6
7.4
4.2
1.4
0.0
6.5
...
4.4
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.0
0.7
9.9
0.3

38.2
28.2
7.0
4.1
1.4
0.0
6.1
...
5.0
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8
0.6
9.7
0.3

Overall balance (commitment)
Overall balance (commitment, excluding grants)
Overall balance (cash)

-7.3
-7.9
-6.6

-3.1
-3.4
-3.1

-6.3
-6.7
-7.4

-4.1
-5.0
-4.1

-6.4
-7.5
-6.4

-8.7
-9.7
-8.7

-10.2
-11.1
-10.2

-12.2
-13.1
-12.2

-13.2
-14.0
-13.2

Financing
External (net)
Domestic (net)
Bank
Nonbank
Discrepancy 1/

5.6
1.1
7.1
5.8
1.2
-1.0

1.8
2.9
-1.1
-3.3
2.2
-1.3

3.0
1.6
1.4
-1.2
2.6
-4.4

4.1
1.5
2.5
0.1
2.5
0.0

6.4
1.5
4.9
2.4
2.5
0.0

8.7
2.5
6.2
3.7
2.5
0.0

10.2
2.5
7.7
4.6
3.1
0.0

12.2
2.6
9.5
5.7
3.8
0.0

13.2
2.5
10.7
6.4
4.3
0.0

(In percent of non-oil GDP)
Non-oil revenue
Tax revenue
Direct
Indirect
Of which : Customs revenues
Nontax revenue
Grants (cash)

Memorandum items:
Primary balance (commitment) 4/
Primary non-oil balance (commitment,
including grants)
Non-oil GDP (at market prices in billions of Yrls)
Social expenditures (in percent of non-oil GDP) 8/

-5.3

-0.9

-3.6

-2.4

-4.0

-6.1

-7.2

-8.7

-9.0

-38.2
1,435
13.0

-29.0
1,673
…

-39.3
1,673
14.3

-25.7
2,026
…

-30.6
2,026
14.2

-25.0
2,429
13.7

-20.9
2,839
13.0

-19.3
3,299
12.6

-17.8
3,788
12.3

Memorandum item:
Expenditure, excluding interest, subsidy, and MIGs
adjustment

44.2
2.1

31.8
-10.1

42.9
11.0

36.2
-6.7

40.2
4.0

37.6
-2.6

35.8
-1.8

34.4
-1.4

33.1
-1.2

Non-oil balance plus domestic oil revenue
Modified fiscal adjustment in percent of non-oil GDP

-29.4
-29.4

-19.6
5.2

-27.9
-27.9

-18.1
-18.1

-23.2
-18.3

-20.7
2.5

-18.8
1.9

-18.8
0.0

-18.6
0.3

Sources: Ministry of finance; ministry of planning; and staff estimates.
1/ In 2003–04 the increase reflects pending payments associated with project accounts.
2/ Revenue excluding grants minus expenditures excluding interest obligations.
3/ Overall balance (commitment including grants) excluding interest obligations and oil and gas revenue.
4/ Domestic oil revenue net of cash petroleum subsidies.
5/ External debt includes expected debt relief and projected stock-of-debt operations as well as expected future disbursements. Domestic
debt includes net outstanding lending to government by the central bank and commercial banks, and treasury bills and repurchases held by the
bank and nonbank sector.
6/ Classification based on the ministry of finance bulletin (it may not include all expenditures in health or education).
7/ Includes an acquisition of equity in Aden Container Facility of an amount of $200 million.

- 32 -

Table 3. Republic of Yemen: Monetary Aggregates, 2000–05
Dec.
2000

Actual
Dec.
2001

Actual
Dec.
2002

Actual
Dec.
2003

Actual
Oct.
2004

Actual 1/
Dec.
2004

Proj. 3/
Dec.
2005

(End-of-period stock; in billions of Yemeni rials)
Broad money (M2)
Money
Currency
Demand deposits
Quasi-money
Foreign currency deposits

474.5
247.2
197.1
50.1
81.1
146.2

563.0
282.7
212.8
69.9
96.3
184.0

664.7
306.4
239.3
67.1
139.1
219.1

797.4
347.5
268.8
78.7
179.4
270.5

879.5
364.5
279.1
85.4
228.0
287.0

917.3
390.5
297.9
92.6
239.5
287.2

1,041.5
469.2
334.5
134.7
241.9
330.4

Net foreign assets
Central bank
Commercial banks

487.3
393.3
94.0

652.1
536.2
115.9

838.2
689.6
148.6

971.5
816.6
154.9

1090.1
929.3
160.7

1,117.6
962.2
155.4

1,204.9
1,030.4
174.5

Net domestic assets
Credit to government (net)
Total budget financing (net)
Central bank
Commercial banks
Credit to nongovernment (net) 1/
Private sector
Other items (net) 1/
Valuation adjustment
Other items (net)
Capital and reserves
Other (net)

-12.8
1.3
-1.9
-65.1
63.1
76.2
75.7
-90.3
-17.4
-73.0
-20.5
-52.5

-89.0
-49.7
-47.8
-102.6
54.8
85.8
95.3
-125.2
-38.0
-87.2
-26.9
-60.4

-173.6
-119.4
-71.8
-147.0
75.2
109.4
108.9
-163.6
-74.0
-89.6
-30.7
-58.9

-174.1
-45.6
12.1
-100.3
112.366
138.2
137.6
-266.7
-124.4
-142.3
-34.7
-107.6

-210.5
-96.2
-42.4
-192.0
149.642
179.1
176.9
-293.4
-133.2
-160.3
-43.8
-116.5

-200.3
-64.8
-7.9
-166.4
158.5
183.5
183.6
-319.0
-151.8
-167.2
-47.9
-119.3

-163.5
-24.2
41.3
-167.2
208.5
231.5
229.6
-370.8
-203.6
-167.2
-47.9
-119.3

18.3
-3.3
-2.5
5.8

9.5
4.0
5.4
5.0

(Change in percent of initial M2)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Total budget financing (net) 5/
Credit to private sector

75.7
-50.6
-45.2
3.5

34.7
-16.1
-9.7
4.1

33.1
-15.0
-4.3
2.4

20.0
-0.1
12.6
4.3

14.9
-4.6
-6.8
4.9

(Twelve-month change in percent)
Broad money (M2)
Of which : Rial broad money
Credit to private sector

25.1
22.7
21.3

18.7
15.4
25.8

18.0
17.6
14.3

20.0
18.3
26.3

16.3
20.1
33.7

15.0
19.6
33.5

13.5
12.9
25.0

Memorandum items:
Velocity of M2 (GDP/M2)
Non-oil velocity (ratio non-oil GDP/M2)
Credit to private sector/GDP
Currency/deposits

3.7
2.4
4.9
71.1

3.2
2.2
5.9
60.8

2.9
2.1
6.2
56.3

2.8
2.0
6.8
50.9

...
...
7.4
46.5

2.8
2.0
7.7
48.1

2.8
2.1
8.2
47.3

52.7

52.5

51.5

51.2

47.8

46.4

46.7

41.9

43.1

41.0

46.5

44.8

44.7

44.8

197.6
11.1

237.9
11.4

266.0
11.6

249.7
12.9

271.9
14.5

255.6
15.2

253.9
18.2

Dollarization 1 (foreign currency deposits as percent
of total deposits)
Dollarization 2 (private sector credit in U.S. dollars
as percent of total private sector credit)
Official gross reserves/reserve money
Stock of treasury bills/GDP
Sources: Central Bank of Yemen; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes valuation adjustment.

- 33 -

Table 4. Republic of Yemen: Balance of Payments, 2003–09
(In million of U.S. dollars)

Current account
Current account excluding oil company transactions 1/
Goods and services
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: Crude oil
Government share
Oil companies' share
Non-oil exports
Imports, f.o.b.
Services, net
Income
Of which: Oil company profits
Interest income, net
Current transfers
Of which: Workers' remittances, net
Capital and financial account
Financial account excluding oil company transactions
Direct investment, net
Outflow
Inflow
Trade credits, net
Medium- and long-term loans, net
Disbursements
Amortization paid
Commercial banks
Other private capital, net

Est.
2003

2004

2005

128
-2
-246
502
3,923
3,417
1,741
1,677
234
-3,422
-748
-827
-872
44
1,201
1,137
299
430

126
36
-132
625
4,510
3,893
1,969
1,924
260
-3,884
-757
-1,022
-1,072
50
1,280
1,168
559
366

-47
-567
-453
308
4,864
4,192
1,766
2,426
290
-4,556
-762
-825
-902
77
1,231
1,114
59
295

-644
-1,149
-1,324
-676
4,255
3,553
1,432
2,122
344
-4,932
-648
-578
-765
187
1,259
1,135
179
379

-131
-881
750
-19
126
171
-46
14
309

193
-711
904
0
96
223
-127
-26
296

-236
-1,345
1,109
0
103
265
-163
-50
242

-200
-1,140
940
0
80
253
-173
-45
344

Projections
2006
2007

2008

2009

-1,183
-1,876
-2,095
-1,569
3,731
3,007
1,155
1,852
384
-5,300
-525
-363
-549
185
1,275
1,145
246
389

-1,625
-2,579
-2,715
-2,305
3,438
2,680
984
1,696
428
-5,743
-410
-202
-351
148
1,293
1,156
385
477

-1,951
-3,120
-3,181
-2,835
3,372
2,471
865
1,605
476
-6,208
-345
-92
-207
115
1,322
1,178
421
475

-143
-818
675
0
58
266
-208
-47
378

-92
-523
431
0
73
282
-209
-49
453

-54
-308
254
0
82
299
-208
-52
444

Errors and omissions

156

0

0

0

0

0

0

Overall balance

583

685

12

-464

-938

-1,240

-1,531

Financing
Central bank gross foreign assets (- increase)
Debt relief 2/
Change in overdue obligations (increase +)
Financing gap (+ deficit)
Memorandum items:
Current account including grants (percent of GDP)
Of which : Official grants (percent of GDP)
Capital account
Central bank gross foreign assets
Central bank own gross foreign reserves 3/
(months of imports) 4/
Official external debt (after rescheduling) 5/
Official external debt (percent of GDP) 5/
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and services) 5/
Change in outstanding Fund credit (US$ millions), increase (+)

-583

-685

-12

464

938

1,240

1,531

-583
0
0
0

-761
75
0
0

-48
0
0
36

306
0
0
158

742
0
0
196

984
0
0
255

1,291
0
0
240

1.1
0.6
2.2
5,011
4,445
16.0
4,978

1.0
0.9
4.9
5,772
5,108
16.4
5,075

-0.3
0.8
1.2
5,820
5,091
14.6
5,178

-4.2
0.8
1.8
5,514
4,794
12.4
5,258

-7.3
0.8
2.3
4,772
4,037
9.4
5,316

-9.3
0.8
2.9
3,788
3,037
6.4
5,389

-10.6
0.8
2.9
2,497
1,731
3.3
5,472

44.4
3.9
29.1

39.3
3.9
-38.8

35.5
4.2
-55.4

34.1
4.6
-60.8

32.6
5.3
-84.9

30.9
5.2
-68.1

29.8
4.8
-65.5

Sources: Central Bank of Yemen, and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Oil sector includes oil companies share of exports less oil sector imports, expenses and repatriation.
2/ Debt relief in 2004 from Bulgaria and Japan.
3/ Includes central bank SDR holdings, foreign exchange held abroad, foreign securities, gold, silver and foreign currencies; excludes
commercial bank required foreign exchange reserves with the central bank against their foreign currency deposits and pension fund reser
4/ Imports are c.i.f. for current year and exclude oil sector imports. Include high grade oil imports for the refineries beginning 2005.
5/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt including central bank foreign liabilities.

0

0

1,608
9,533

14.9

12.3

1,539
9,561

3,569

2,822

1/ Core CPI is defined as the overall CPI less the CPI for qat.
2/ Oil price is different from the WEO price because Yemeni oil is traded at a discount.

Source: Yemeni authorities and staff estimates.

Memorandum items
Nominal GDP (in billions of Yrls)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

5.3
1,531

2.6
-20.5
25.3
3.8

4.6
5.2
14.6
434
23.0

Actual
2001

13.2
1,944

8.0
-17.6
27.9
5.7

Fiscal indicators
Overall government balance (commitment basis)
Non-oil primary balance (commitment basis)
Oil revenue
Petroleum product subsidy

External sector
Current account (including official transfers)
Government oil-exports (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Central bank own gross reserves
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
Central bank own gross reserves
(in months of imports)
External sector financing gap (in millions
of U.S. dollars)

4.4
3.5
7.6
434
28.2

Economic growth and prices
Real GDP (percentage change)
Real non-oil GDP (percentage change)
Core consumer price index (in percent, e.o.p.) 1/
Crude oil production (1,000 barrels/day)
Crude export oil price (U.S. dollar/barrel) 2/

Actual
2000

3.1
4.0
12.1
425
27.9

Est.
2003

2.7
4.1
14.5
400
34.8

2004

2.9
4.0
18.0
381
37.5

2005

2.7
4.5
12.0
342
35.0

1,754
9,985

0

17.0

4,056

5.4
1,562

-1.2
-21.5
22.3
3.0

2,035
11,211

0

16.0

4,445

1.1
1,741

-5.2
-26.9
23.6
5.0

2,391
12,904

0

16.4

5,108

1.0
1,969

-4.4
-27.5
25.2
5.8

2,789
14,566

36

14.6

5,091

-0.3
1,766

-4.7
-22.2
20.1
3.3

3,100
15,428

378

12.2

4,794

-5.0
1,432

-12.0
-24.6
15.7
6.1

3,425
16,310

616

9.0

4,037

-9.1
1,155

-16.0
-24.2
12.1
5.9

2.7
4.4
12.0
303
33.0

Projections
2006
2007

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

3.9
4.6
4.5
433
24.6

Actual
2002

Non-adjustment Scenario

Table 5. Republic of Yemen: Macroeconomic Summary Indicators, 2000–09

3,843
17,431

849

6.1

3,037

-11.6
984

-18.9
-23.9
9.9
5.9

3.0
4.3
11.0
277
32.0

2008

4,315
18,378

933

3.1

1,731

-13.4
865

-21.9
-24.2
8.5
6.1

3.0
4.0
10.0
255
31.5

2009

- 34 -

45
-2.3
25.2
-27.5

17.5
2.7
14.5
0.8
12.4
87.6
2.9
1.1
15.0

41
-2.1
20.1
-22.2

16.6
2.9
18.0
5.9
15.0
85.0
3.3
1.2
15.0

2005

45
-2.3
-27.5

45

-3.8

0.0
0.0

41
-2.1
-22.2

50
-5.9
-26.0
-3.8
-3.9

1/ Inflation is assumed to be lower under the adjustment scenario.
2/ Assumes the fiscal reforms described in the text.

Financing gap to maintain the 50 percent
debt-to-GDP target (7) = (2) -(4)
Required additional adjustment per year to maintain
the 50 percent debt-to-GDP target

Cumulative adjustment (5) = (4) - (1)
Adjustment per year

Projected debt-to-GDP ratio
Projected primary balance
Adjustment non-oil primary balance (4)

Adjustment scenario 2/

Projected debt-to-GDP ratio
Required primary balance
Required non-oil primary balance (2)
Required cumulative fiscal effort (3) = (2) - (1)
Required fiscal adjustment per year

Benchmark scenario: debt-to-GDP ratio is stabilized at 50 percent

Projected debt-to-GDP ratio
Projected primary balance
Projected oil revenue
Non-oil primary balance (1)

Nonadjustment scenario

Nominal GDP growth rate
Real GDP growth rate
Core CPI Inflation (e.o.p.)
Depreciation (e.o.p.)
Domestic debt share
Foreign debt share
Average interest rate
Interest rate on foreign debt
Interest rate on domestic debt

Assumptions for nonadjustment scenario 1/

2004

0.4

5.0
5.0

46
-3.9
-19.6

50
-3.6
-19.3
5.3
9.2

50
-8.9
15.7
-24.6

11.2
2.7
12.0
4.0
26.6
73.4
4.9
1.2
15.0

2006

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2.8

6.9
2.0

52
-5.2
-17.3

50
-2.4
-14.5
9.7
4.4

62
-12.1
12.1
-24.2

10.5
2.7
12.0
5.0
36.8
63.2
6.3
1.2
15.0

11.7
1.8
10.0
15.0
51.0
49.0
8.2
1.1
15.0

16.3
1.9
15.0
15.0
50.5
49.5
8.1
1.0
15.0

5.2
1.5

3.7

8.6
1.3

66
-7.1
-15.6

50
-2.0
-10.4
13.8
2.8

93
-15.8
8.5
-24.2

2.5

7.7

9.9
1.2

77
-7.6
-14.9

50
0.1
-7.2
17.6
3.8

115
-17.5
7.3
-24.8

-2.4

5.3

10.9
1.0

88
-7.6
-14.1

50
-2.5
-8.8
16.2
-1.4

133
-18.8
6.3
-25.0

(In percent of GDP)

12.3
3.0
10.0
8.0
48.9
51.1
8.0
1.2
15.0

3.7

7.3
0.4

58
-6.7
-16.6

50
-2.9
-12.9
11.0
1.3

76
-14.0
9.9
-23.9

12.2
3.0
11.0
5.0
43.8
56.2
7.3
1.3
15.0

0.8

6.1

11.8
0.9

100
-8.3
-14.0

50
-2.6
-7.9
17.9
1.7

153
-20.5
5.3
-25.9

16.4
2.0
15.0
15.0
48.4
51.6
7.8
1.0
15.0

-1.8

4.3

12.4
0.6

112
-8.1
-13.2

50
-4.4
-8.9
16.7
-1.2

167
-21.2
4.5
-25.6

21.9
2.2
20.0
20.0
46.0
54.0
7.4
0.9
15.0

2013

(Percentage change unless indicated otherwise)

2007

Table 6. Republic of Yemen: Required Fiscal Adjustment and Long-Term Sustainability

0.4

4.7

13.2
0.7

124
-8.6
-13.2

50
-4.6
-8.5
17.9
1.1

181
-22.5
3.9
-26.4

22.3
2.4
20.0
20.0
44.5
55.5
7.1
0.9
15.0

2014

-1.6

3.1

13.9
0.7

136
-8.3
-12.5

50
-6.0
-9.4
17.0
-0.9

192
-23.0
3.4
-26.4

27.6
2.5
25.0
25.0
42.3
57.7
6.8
0.8
15.0

2015

1.8

4.9

17.6
3.8

155
-8.6
-10.3

50
-4.1
-5.4
22.5
5.5

211
-26.6
1.3
-27.9

23.8
0.8
25.0
25.0
39.2
60.8
6.3
0.8
15.0

2016

- 35 -

0

0

1,608
9,533

14.9

12.3

1,539
9,561

3,569

2,822

1/ Core CPI is defined as the overall CPI less the CPI for qat.
2/ Oil price is different from the WEO price because Yemeni oil is traded at a discount.

Source: Yemeni authorities and staff estimates.

Memorandum items
Nominal GDP (in billions of Yrls)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)

5.3
1,531

2.6
-20.5
25.3
3.8

4.6
5.2
14.6
434
23.0

Actual
2001

13.2
1,944

8.0
-17.6
27.9
5.7

Fiscal indicators
Overall government balance (commitment basis)
Non-oil primary balance (commitment basis)
Oil revenue
Petroleum product subsidy

External sector
Current account (including official transfers)
Government oil-exports (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Central bank own gross reserves (in millions
of U.S. dollars)
Central bank own gross reserves (in months
of imports)
External sector financing gap (in millions
of U.S. dollars)

4.4
3.5
7.6
434
28.2

Economic growth and prices
Real GDP (percentage change)
Real non-oil GDP (percentage change)
Core consumer price index (percent, e.o.p.) 1/
Crude oil production (1,000 barrels/day)
Crude export oil price (U.S. dollar/barrel) 2/

Actual
2000

3.1
4.0
12.1
425
27.9

Est.
2003

2.7
4.1
14.5
400
34.8

2004

2.9
4.0
18.0
381
37.5

2005

2.7
4.5
12.0
342
35.0

1,754
9,985

0

17.0

4,056

5.4
1,562

-1.2
-21.5
22.3
3.0

2,035
11,211

0

16.0

4,445

1.1
1,741

-5.2
-26.9
23.6
5.0

2,391
12,904

0

16.4

5,108

1.0
1,969

-4.4
-27.5
25.2
5.8

2,789
14,566

36

14.6

5,091

-0.3
1,766

-4.7
-22.2
20.1
3.3

3,100
15,428

158

12.4

4,794

-4.2
1,432

-6.8
-19.6
15.7
1.6

3,425
16,310

196

9.4

4,037

-7.3
1,155

-8.4
-17.3
12.1
0.0

2.7
4.4
12.0
303
33.0

Projections
2006
2007

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

3.9
4.6
4.5
433
24.6

Actual
2002

Adjustment Scenario

Table 7. Republic of Yemen: Macroeconomic Summary Indicators, 2000–09

3,843
17,431

255

6.4

3,037

-9.3
984

-10.5
-16.6
9.9
0.0

3.0
4.3
11.0
277
32.0

2008

4,315
18,378

240

3.3

1,731

-10.6
865

-11.6
-15.6
8.5
0.0

3.0
4.0
10.0
255
31.5

2009

- 36 -

5.3
-2.0
36.4
-38.4
-6.1
13.4

13.2
5.6
42.0
-36.4
-7.0
14.6

Current account (including official transfers)
Net exports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Net factor income
Net current transfers

1/ Core CPI is defined as the overall CPI less the CPI for qat.
2/ Oil price is different from the WEO price because Yemeni oil is traded at a discount.

Source: Yemeni authorities and staff estimates.

1,608.1
1,105.1
35.0
32.8
2.6
-22.7
178.3
1,531.1
3,569.0
14.9

26.2
10.1
16.1

31.8
13.4
18.4

Gross national savings from disposable income
Public sector
Private sector

1,539.4
980.6
37.9
31.2
8.0
-19.9
146.0
1,943.5
2,822.3
12.3

102.0
81.0
15.7
65.3
20.9
7.5
13.4

94.4
75.8
14.1
61.7
18.6
5.4
13.2

Gross domestic expenditures
Consumption
Public sector
Private sector
Gross fixed investment
Public sector
Private sector

Memorandum items
Nominal GDP (billions of Yrls)
Nominal non-oil GDP (billions of Yrls)
Government revenue, excluding grants
Government expenditures, net lending
Overall government balance (commitment)
Overall non-oil government balance (commitment)
Non-oil exports (millions of U.S. dollar)
Government oil-exports (millions of U.S. dollar)
Central bank own gross reserves (in U.S. dollars)
Central bank own gross reserves (in months of imports)

4.6
5.2
4.5
-0.1
10.7
14.6
434
23.0

4.4
3.5
31.3
25.7
9.7
7.6
434
28.2

2001

Economic growth and prices
Real GDP (percentage change)
Real non-oil GDP (percentage change)
Nominal GDP (percentage change)
GDP deflator (annual percentage change)
Core consumer price index (percent, p.a.) 1/
Core consumer price index (percent, e.o.p.)
Crude oil production (1,000 barrels/day)
Crude export oil price (weighted average, U.S. dollar/barrel) 2/

2000

1,753.5
1,232.7
32.0
34.8
-1.2
-23.5
214.9
1,561.9
4,055.5
17.0

5.4
-1.3
38.7
-40.2
-7.2
13.9

25.8
7.5
18.3

101.3
80.9
16.7
64.1
20.5
7.1
13.4

3.9
4.6
9.0
4.9
6.8
4.5
433
24.6

2002

2,035.5
1,434.5
32.6
38.2
-5.2
-28.8
233.5
1,740.7
4,445.3
16.0

1.1
-2.2
37.7
-39.9
-7.4
10.7

24.2
5.3
18.9

102.2
79.1
16.7
62.4
23.1
9.7
13.4

3.1
4.0
16.1
12.5
11.9
12.1
425
27.9

2003

1.0
-1.0
37.6
-38.6
-7.9
9.9

23.1
5.0
18.0

101.0
78.9
16.2
62.8
22.1
8.8
13.3

2.7
4.1
17.5
14.4
12.0
14.5
400
34.8

2004

2,390.8
1,672.7
34.8
39.4
-4.4
-29.6
260.2
1,968.9
5,107.8
16.4

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2,788.7
2,026.2
29.8
35.3
-4.7
-24.8
289.7
1,765.8
5,091.3
14.6

-0.3
-3.1
36.0
-39.1
-5.7
8.5

21.6
3.5
18.1

103.1
81.2
16.4
64.8
21.9
8.1
13.8

2.9
4.0
16.6
13.4
16.4
18.0
381
37.5

2005

Table 8. Republic of Yemen: Macroeconomic Framework, 2000–09

3,099.7
2,429.0
26.5
34.1
-6.8
-22.5
343.8
1,431.8
4,793.5
12.4

-4.2
-8.6
30.2
-38.8
-3.7
8.2

19.8
1.7
18.2

108.6
84.6
16.3
68.2
24.0
8.5
15.5

2.7
4.5
11.2
8.3
14.8
12.0
342
35.0

2006

3,424.5
2,838.8
23.9
33.1
-8.4
-20.6
383.9
1,155.0
4,037.0
9.4

-7.3
-12.8
25.5
-38.3
-2.2
7.8

17.7
0.1
17.7

112.8
87.8
16.2
71.6
25.0
8.5
16.5

2.7
4.4
10.5
7.6
12.0
12.0
303
33.0

Projections
2007

3,842.8
3,298.9
22.1
33.3
-10.5
-20.4
428.2
984.5
3,037.4
6.4

-9.3
-15.6
22.3
-37.9
-1.2
7.4

16.7
-2.0
18.7

115.6
89.6
16.0
73.5
26.0
8.5
17.5

3.0
4.3
12.2
8.9
11.5
11.0
277
32.0

2008

4,315.1
3,788.4
21.2
33.5
-11.6
-20.0
476.3
865.4
1,730.8
3.3

-10.6
-17.3
20.9
-38.2
-0.5
7.2

16.4
-3.1
19.5

117.3
90.3
15.7
74.6
27.0
8.5
18.5

3.0
4.0
12.3
9.0
10.5
10.0
255
31.5

2009

- 37 -

- 38 -

Table 9. Republic of Yemen: Millennium Development Goals, 1990–02
1990

1995

1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below $1 a day (percent)
Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (percent)
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20 percent
Prevalence of child malnutrition (percent of children under 5)
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (percent)
2. Achieve universal primary education
Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group) 2/
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (percent)
Youth literacy rate (percent ages 15–24)
3. Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys in primary education (percent)
Ratio of girls to boys in secondary education (percent)
Women to men parity index, as ratio of literacy rates (percent ages 15–24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (percent) 8/
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (percent)
4. Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate 0–1 year (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (percent of children under 1 year old)
5. Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (data from most recent year
available from 1995–2002)

8. Develop a global partnership for development
Youth unemployment rate (percent of total labor force ages 15–24)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 100 people)
Personal computers (per 100 people)
General indicators
Adult literacy rate (percent of people ages 15 and over)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Aid (percent of GNI)

2000

2002

10.0
2.3
7.4 1/
33.0 5/
51.7

57.4

67.1

50.0

67.9 6/7/

0.4
0.3
8.9
4.0

7.6
1.0

142.0
98.0
69.0

126.0
89.0
46.0

1400.0 9/

0.6
0.4

0.6
0.4

6.8
1.0

6.3
1.0

5.8
1.0

66.0

117.0
84.0
71.0

114.0
83.0
65.0

1471.0

570.0
22.0 10/

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV (percent ages 15–49) 1/
Contraceptive prevalence rate (percent of women ages 15–49)
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
Tuberculosis prevalence rate (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (percent)
7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Forest area (percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (percent of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (percent of population)
Access to secure tenure (percent of population)

1998

36.0
1.0
332.0

178.0
56.0
0.9

308.0
0.7

270.0
0.8

263.0
0.5

69.0
21.0

1.1

145.0
49.0

69.0
30.0

1.3

40.0
6.7
53.0

Source: World Bank, Statistics Yemen
1/ Survey year: 1998. Refers to consumption shares by percentiles of population. Ranked by per capita consumption
2/ Unesco Institute for Statistics (UIS) estimation.
3/ 1990–92 average.
4/ 1995–97 average.
5/ 1999–2001 average.
6/ UNESCO Institute of Statistics estimates.
7/ Data for 2000–04.
8/ ILO estimate.
9/ No national data on maternal mortality available. Estimates derived from model.
10/ Data refer to the most recent year available during the period 1995–2002.

1.6
0.2

2.1
0.2

4.9
0.7

46.0
5.8
57.0

6.2
58.0

- 39 -

APPENDIX I

Republic of Yemen: Fund Relations
As of December 31, 2004
I. Membership Status: Joined May 22,1990;

Article VIII

II. General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Holdings exchange rate

SDR million
243.50
276.99
0.01

Percent Quota
100.00
113.75
0.01

III. SDR Department
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR million
28.74
33.03

Percent Allocation
100.00
114.91

IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans
Extended arrangements
PRGF arrangements

SDR million
35.50
208.75

Percent Quota
13.76
85.73

V. Latest Financial Arrangements

Type
EFF
ESAF/PRGF
Stand-By

Approval
date

Expiration
date

Amount approved
(SDR million)

Amount drawn
(SDR million)

10/29/97
10/29/97
3/20/96

10/28/01
10/28/01
6/19/97

72.9021
264.7522
132.38

46.50
238.75
132.38

VI. Projected Obligations to Fund Under the Repurchase Expectations Assumptions

Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

2005
37.75
1.95
39.70

2006
40.83
1.54
42.37

Forthcoming
2007
2008
56.58 45.20
1.06
0.58
57.64 45.78

21

Amount available after reduction in access by SDR 33 million in February 2001.

22

Amount available after reduction in access by SDR 26 million in February 2001.

2009
28.38
0.26
28.65

- 40 -

VII.

APPENDIX I

Safeguards Assessment

Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) was
subject to the transitional procedures with respect to the EFF arrangement which expired
on October 28, 2001. The assessment, which was completed on May 23, 2001, concluded
that CBY’s external audit mechanism was not fully adequate at the time, and
recommendations to address the shortcomings were reported. A review of information
necessary to conduct a full safeguards assessment of the CBY has been initiated, with a
view to completing the assessment prior to approval of a new PRGF arrangement.
VIII. Exchange Arrangements
The currency of Yemen is the Yemeni rial. Yemen maintains an independently floating
exchange rate system.
Yemen has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of
Agreement and maintains an exchange system that is free of multiple currency practices
and restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international
transactions.
IX.

Article IV Consultation

The latest Article IV consultation was concluded on December 22, 2003. Yemen is on the
standard 12-month consultation cycle.
X.

FSAP Participation

FSAP (with the World Bank), October–November 2000.
XI.

Technical Assistance

(See ANNEX I)
XIII. Resident Representatives
None.

- 41 -

APPENDIX II

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN: EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS (DSA)
1.
This note examines the sensitivity of Yemen’s external and public debt dynamics
under the staff’s baseline scenario to a number of standardized shocks in the debt
sustainability framework for low-income countries. The baseline scenario assumes that the
government implements reform measures such as the elimination of the fuel subsidy, the
introduction of GST, or undertakes structural measures to improve the business environment
and enhance non-oil sector growth the medium and long term.
A. The Current Situation
2.
Yemen’s total external public debt was $5.1 billion at end-2004 (39 percent of GDP),
of which $1.3 billion is owed to the Russian Federation. Other external debts (46 percent of
total external debt) are mostly from multilateral creditors, primarily the World Bank, at
highly concessional terms. Domestic public debt, all denominated in local currency,
accounted for about 5.6 percent of GDP at end-2004.
3.
The baseline scenario underlying the DSA is based on the medium-term framework
under the adjustment scenario in the staff report. It assumes that future borrowings to meet
the external financing requirements are made at a highly concessional rate given the
impending vulnerabilities of the economy.
B. Public Debt Sustainability
4.
Under the baseline scenario, although the total public sector debt starts at acceptable
levels in 2004 (45 percent of GDP, see Table 1), it increases over the medium term to reach
69.9 percent in 2009. This is mainly due (as discussed before) to the tapering of revenues and
grants with more than 10 percent of GDP from 2004 to 2009. Public sector debt stocks in
NPV terms start at 27.4 percent in 2004, but rise rapidly to 51.1 percent of GDP in 2009. The
NPV of the debt-to-revenue ratio is projected to rise from 78.2 percent in 2004 to
232 percent in 2009 and to 804 percent in 2023.
5.
Stress tests (Table 2 and Figure 1) show that Yemen’s fiscal sustainability will
depend on the implementation of actions to sustain and improve fiscal adjustment and
growth, particularly in the non-oil economy. The main results are the following:
6.
Given the fact that Yemen was able to substantially improve its fiscal position during
the second half of the 1990s,23 it is possible under scenario (1), that assumes real GDP
growth and the primary balance at historical (low) averages, to improve the NPV of debt-to-

23

Improvement as measured in the change in the primary balance from a deficit of
11.4 percent of GDP in 1994 to a primary surplus of 4.4 percent in 2001.

- 42 -

APPENDIX II

GDP to 36 percent in 2009,24 compared to 51 percent in the baseline scenario. However, in
2009 the debt service-to-revenue ratio would be almost 10 percent lower than in the baseline
scenario. Under scenario (2), where the primary balance is kept unchanged from 2003
onwards to “historic averages” scenario mentioned above, the NPV of debt-to-GDP would
increase to 49 percent and the debt-to-revenue ratio to 222 percent in 2009.
7.
Scenarios (1) and (2) discussed above are however not feasible given: (a) the
dependency of public finances on oil revenues; and (b) the expected depletion of oil reserves
by 2016.
8.
A more realistic stress would be to impose a shock to real growth (lowering it
permanently by reducing it to the historical average minus one standard deviation). Under
this scenario a significant deterioration in all debt ratios would take place. In 2009, the NPV
of debt-to-GDP would reach 55 percent; the NPV of debt-to-revenue would increase to
251 percent; and debt service would absorb 25 percent of revenue.
C. External Debt Sustainability
9.
Under the baseline scenario, although the external debt stock in NPV terms starts at a
modest level (22 percent of GDP in 2004) and remains there over the medium term
(35 percent in 2013), debt indicators measuring Yemen’s ability to service external debt
deteriorate significantly over the long term as Yemen runs out of oil. The NPV of the debtto-exports would increase to about 340 percent, and the debt service-to-exports ratio to
20 percent by 2023. The risks to the debt dynamics primarily stem from the fact that oil, the
largest source of export earnings for Yemen, is expected to virtually run out by 2016,
generating a spike in sustainability indicators. Subsequently, debt indicators improve with
the growth in non-oil exports.
10.
External debt dynamics are most vulnerable to the decline in exports. A shock to
export growth equal to the size of one standard deviation under the stress tests (B2) raises the
NPV of debt-to-exports ratio to about 560, and debt service would absorb 36 percent of
exports in 2013. This scenario clearly demonstrates that, without a strong commitment to
export diversification, Yemen’s external debt would be unsustainable.
11.
A lack of concessional new borrowing will also aggravate the external sustainability
by pushing up the NPV-to-export ratio to over 270 by 2013.25

24

The public debt-to-GDP ratio in 2009 would be at 69.9 percent of GDP under the baseline
scenario (see Table 1).

25

Given that growth and capital account surplus were high in the past, primarily reflecting
the performance of the oil-economy, the scenario with historical averages delivers
implausible debt ratios.

4.4
0.9
-12.0
-0.7
25.7
19.1
0.6

4.6
1.1
22.8
0.8
-0.1
10.8
0.6

30.8
25.5
25.5
...
46.8
87.1
72.1
15.9
-3.7
3.9
1.0
24.7
-0.8
4.9
11.2
0.6

29.0
25.7
25.7
...
51.8
86.4
76.6
13.5
4.2

-5.0
-2.0
-0.8
33.6
1.6
32.8
-1.2
-0.8
1.4
-2.2
-0.4
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-3.0

52.8
49.5

2002

3.1
1.2
31.7
-0.2
12.5
14.4
0.6

31.7
23.7
23.7
...
48.7
95.8
71.8
8.0
3.0

0.3
-0.8
3.3
33.1
0.4
36.4
-4.1
-4.0
-2.4
-1.6
-0.1
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1

53.1
45.1

2003

5.6
1.6
-1.5
26.9
18.4
10.3
0.6

1.4

103.0

Average 5/

Historical

1/ Central government debt (net).
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues including grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/ 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Of which: External

Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/

Of which: Foreign-currency denominated
Of which: External
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)

32.2
24.9
24.9
...
73.2
82.2
63.5
35.0
27.6

-1.0
-2.9
-4.7
35.3
0.3
30.6
2.4
2.0
4.6
-2.6
0.4
1.0
-0.6
0.0
0.0
-0.6
0.0
1.8

-37.9
-34.0
-10.3
39.2
1.3
28.9
-19.2
-18.8
-14.7
-4.1
-0.4
1.0
-4.5
0.0
0.0
-4.5
0.0
-3.9

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Of which : Grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which : Contribution from average real interest rate
Of which : Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Denominator = 1+g
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

NPV of public sector debt

57.8
52.5

58.8
51.5

2001

Public sector debt 1/
Of which: Foreign-currency denominated

2000

Actual

2.7
1.1
22.1
70.2
16.6
20.0
0.0

6.7

50.5

Deviation 5/

Standard

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2.7
1.2
9.1
...
14.4
2.4
0.6

27.4
21.8
21.8
...
51.7
78.2
62.2
11.7
9.3

-8.0
-4.8
1.3
35.0
0.2
36.3
-5.5
-5.0
-3.6
-1.4
-0.5
1.0
-0.6
0.0
0.0
-0.6
0.0
-3.2

45.1
39.5

2004

2.9
1.2
28.1
...
13.4
-9.0
0.6

28.4
20.1
20.1
...
42.2
92.8
65.6
10.2
0.7

0.7
-0.4
1.4
30.6
0.8
32.1
-1.8
-2.7
-1.5
-1.3
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1

45.8
37.4

2005

2.7
1.1
22.9
...
8.3
-0.9
0.6

32.8
20.4
20.4
...
48.2
120.1
74.7
13.2
-1.0

4.6
3.3
3.6
27.3
0.8
30.9
-0.4
0.0
1.1
-1.2
-0.3
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

50.4
38.0

2006

2.7
1.1
16.9
...
7.6
-2.0
0.6

38.1
20.5
20.5
...
54.2
154.5
83.3
16.4
-0.8

5.6
5.1
4.9
24.7
0.8
29.5
0.2
0.1
1.4
-1.3
0.2
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

56.0
38.4

2007

Table 1. Republic of Yemen: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2000–23

3.0
1.2
11.8
...
8.9
2.0
0.6

44.4
20.5
20.5
...
60.5
194.3
89.9
20.4
-0.1

6.4
5.8
6.4
22.8
0.8
29.2
-0.6
-0.6
1.1
-1.7
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6

62.5
38.6

2008

2004–09

3.0
1.1
9.1
...
9.0
1.7
0.6

2.8
1.1
16.3
...
10.3
-1.0
0.6

2009–23

...
7.0
3.2
...

...
7.0
7.4
0.6

...
6.6
2.7
0.6

8.4

161.8

3.4
0.5
7.4

237.2
804.1
432.8
67.7
-6.8

...

153.0
82.3
82.3

16.1
16.1
9.2
19.0
2.2
28.3
6.9
6.9
16.1
-9.2
...
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

258.4
187.8

2023 Average

3.9
0.1
7.4

3.2
0.5
7.3

113.8
390.4
166.3
35.5
-2.5

...
67.2
232.7
93.0
23.7
-0.5

...

10.6
11.4
8.1
19.9
1.0
28.0
3.3
3.3
6.7
-3.4
...
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.9

120.2
75.6

77.7
33.1
33.1

4.1

54.9

2013

51.1
20.4
20.4

7.4
7.3
6.9
21.9
0.8
28.9
0.3
-0.2
1.6
-1.8
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

69.9
39.2

2009 Average

Projections

- 43 APPENDIX II

- 44 -

APPENDIX II

Table 2. Republic of Yemen: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public Sector Debt , 2003–2023

hide hide hide

Actual
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Projections
2008 2009 2010 2011

2012

2013

2023

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

32

27

28

33

38

44

51

58

65

71

78

153

31
31
31

27
29
28

27
31
30

29
35
35

31
40
41

34
44
48

36
49
55

37
53
63

38
57
71

38
60
79

38
63
86

31
84
189

31

28

29

33

38

44

51

57

64

70

76

146

31
31
31
31

32
30
38
34

37
32
37
34

41
36
41
39

46
41
45
44

52
47
51
50

58
54
57
56

65
61
63
63

72
67
67
70

79
74
71
77

86
80
77
83

164
157
161
160

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2003
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

96

78

93

120

155

194

233

273

311

360

390

804

95
95
95

77
83
80

90
102
97

107
130
127

127
161
165

147
193
208

163
222
251

175
249
296

184
273
339

195
304
396

195
317
432

169
440
980

95

79

94

121

155

194

231

269

305

352

380

771

95
95
95
95

92
84
107
97

120
104
122
112

148
132
150
141

185
167
184
177

226
207
223
218

265
245
259
257

307
285
294
298

346
322
323
336

399
373
361
388

430
403
389
418

862
827
848
841

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2003
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline

8

12

10

13

16

20

24

28

31

34

35

68

8
8
8

12
12
12

9
10
9

11
14
13

12
16
17

14
19
21

15
20
25

17
23
29

18
25
33

19
28
37

19
28
39

21
44
80

8

12

9

12

16

20

23

27

30

34

35

65

8
8
8
8

12
12
12
12

13
11
10
15

18
15
13
14

18
16
17
17

21
20
21
21

24
23
24
24

28
27
28
28

32
30
32
31

35
34
35
35

36
35
36
36

72
69
68
70

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2003
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard
deviations in 2004–05
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004
Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of
the projection period).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

- 45 -

APPENDIX II

Figure 1. Repblic of Yemen: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2003–2023 1/
(In percent)
200

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

180
160
140
120
100

Baseline
Most extreme stress test

80
60
40
20
0

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
1200

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
1000

800

600

Baseline
Most extreme stress test

400

200

0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
90

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

80
70
60
50

Baseline

40

Most extreme stress test

30
20
10
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2013.
2/ Revenue including grants.

9.6

9.5

4.6
-4.6
1.1
-13.7
5.2
...

...
...
...
...
6.4
6.4
-0.6
-6.4

51.1
51.1
0.5
-7.8
-5.9
1.1
36.0
37.2
-13.4
6.3
-2.7
0.7
0.6
-2.3
2.5
8.4
0.0

2001

Standard

10.0

3.9
0.8
1.0
11.5
10.1
...

26.1
68.0
26.1
68.0
3.8
3.8
-0.7
-3.3

48.6
48.6
-2.5
-10.7
-5.8
0.7
38.4
39.1
-13.9
7.3
-3.0
-1.8
0.5
-1.9
-0.4
8.2
0.0
2.5

-0.6

1.4
16.9
0.2
32.0
6.6
...

4.0

-17.9

5.1
8.1
1.1
13.1
6.7
...

4.3

-5.0

2002 Average 6/ Deviation 6/

Historical

11.2

3.1
8.9
1.2
9.2
11.4
36.4

24.1
64.5
24.1
64.5
3.4
3.4
-0.2
2.5

44.4
44.4
-4.2
-4.1
-1.6
1.5
37.3
38.8
-10.7
7.6
-1.6
-0.9
0.5
-1.4
…
-0.1
0.0

2003

Est.

12.9

2.7
12.1
1.2
15.1
11.5
31.6

21.9
58.6
21.9
58.6
3.4
3.4
-0.5
3.7

39.3
39.3
-5.1
-5.8
-1.4
0.3
37.3
37.6
-9.9
8.2
-3.8
-0.6
0.4
-1.0
…
0.7
-0.6

2004

14.6

2.9
9.7
1.2
8.1
14.6
35.5

20.7
57.9
20.7
57.9
2.8
2.8
0.1
2.9

36.4
36.4
-3.0
-0.7
-0.1
2.4
35.7
38.1
-8.5
5.9
0.0
-0.6
0.4
-1.0
…
-2.2
0.0

2005

15.4

2.7
3.2
1.3
-11.3
5.0
42.6

20.8
69.6
20.8
69.6
4.0
4.0
0.6
3.8

36.3
36.3
-0.1
2.3
3.7
7.9
29.9
37.8
-8.2
4.0
-0.9
-0.5
0.5
-0.9
…
-2.4
0.0

2006

16.3

2.7
3.0
1.4
-10.9
4.5
42.1

21.0
83.4
21.0
83.4
5.0
5.0
1.1
6.7

36.4
36.4
0.1
4.9
6.8
12.2
25.2
37.4
-7.8
2.4
-1.4
-0.4
0.5
-0.9
…
-4.8
0.0

2007

17.4

3.0
3.7
1.7
-6.6
5.7
43.4

21.0
95.4
21.0
95.4
6.3
6.3
1.4
8.9

36.3
36.3
-0.1
6.2
8.8
14.9
22.0
37.0
-7.4
1.3
-2.1
-0.5
0.6
-1.0
…
-6.3
0.0

2008

18.4

3.0
2.4
1.6
-1.1
6.5
42.6

21.2
102.6
21.2
102.6
6.6
6.6
1.7
9.8

36.5
36.5
0.3
7.5
10.1
16.6
20.7
37.3
-7.2
0.6
-2.1
-0.5
0.6
-1.0
…
-7.2
0.0

2009

Projections
2003–09

2.8
6.8
1.3
0.6
8.8
38.6

21.5
76.0
21.5
76.0
4.5
4.5
0.6
5.5

37.9
37.9
-1.7
1.5
3.7
8.0
29.7
37.7
-8.5
4.3
-1.7
-0.5
0.5
-1.0
…
-3.2
-0.1

Average

17.2

3.2
-4.8
1.5
-3.7
-1.6
51.8

35.1
199.4
35.1
199.4
11.6
11.6
1.5
1.9

64.9
64.9
8.6
5.7
10.5
19.9
17.6
37.5
-9.0
-0.4
-3.8
-1.0
0.9
-1.8
…
2.9
0.0

2013

13.1

3.9
-6.1
1.1
6.8
3.2
51.5

88.1
335.8
88.1
335.8
19.7
19.7
1.3
0.8

168.1
168.1
11.4
0.3
12.1
31.1
26.2
57.3
-17.9
-1.0
-7.2
-4.6
1.7
-6.3
…
11.0
0.0

2023

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments devided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Source: Staff simulations.

Memorandym item:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (U.S. dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

4.4
21.6
0.9
53.4
9.6
...

...
...
...
...
6.1
6.1
-1.2
8.6

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions

50.5
50.5
-22.4
-30.3
-13.8
-6.4
41.6
35.2
-14.6
7.2
-1.5
-15.0
0.5
-2.5
-13.0
7.9
-0.6

External debt (nominal) 1/
Of which: Public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
Of which: Exceptional financing

2000

Actual

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 3. Republic of Yemen: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2000–2023 1/

2010–23

3.4
-5.1
1.3
-0.2
1.0
50.5

53.6
282.7
53.6
282.7
16.2
16.2
1.5
2.3

101.0
101.0
9.4
4.3
11.7
24.3
18.9
43.3
-12.0
-0.6
-5.3
-2.2
1.2
-3.4
…
5.1
0.0

Average

- 46 APPENDIX II

- 47 -

APPENDIX II

Table 4. Republic of Yemen: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2003-23
(In percent)
Est.
2003

2004

2005

Projections
2006 2007 2008

24

22

21

21

21

24
24

22
22

18
22

12
22

24
24
24

22
28
27

20
36
31

24
24
24

23
25
30

65

2013

2023

21

35

88

6
23

0
24

0
48

0
146

20
35
31

21
35
31

21
35
31

34
51
52

87
105
130

20
28
28

20
28
28

20
29
29

20
28
29

34
46
48

87
110
120

59

58

70

83

95

199

336

65
65

59
60

49
60

40
75

22
92

0
109

0
274

0
558

65
65
65

59
106
59

58
188
58

70
224
70

83
265
83

95
300
95

199
549
199

336
758
336

65
65
65

61
72
59

55
87
58

66
104
70

79
124
83

91
142
95

192
286
199

331
460
336

3

3

3

4

5

6

12

20

3
3

3
3

3
3

4
4

4
5

4
7

1
15

0
36

3
3
3

3
5
3

3
6
3

4
10
4

5
12
5

6
14
6

12
36
12

23
54
23

3
3
3

3
4
3

3
4
3

4
6
4

5
7
5

6
9
6

12
18
12

22
31
23

45

45

45

45

45

45

45

45

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2004–05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2004–05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2004-23 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2004-23 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004–05
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard
deviation in 2004–05 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt
creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the
same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its
baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

- 48 -

APPENDIX II

Figure 2. Republic of Yemen: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2003–2023
(In percent)
140

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
120
100
80
60
40

Baseline

20

Most extreme stress test

0
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

1200

NPV of Debt-to-Exports Ratio
1000
800
600
400

Baseline

200

Most extreme stress test
0
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

70

Debt Service-to-Exports Ratio
60
50
40
30
20

Baseline

10

Most extreme stress test
0
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

- 49 -

APPENDIX III

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN: WORLD BANK RELATIONS
A. Partnership in Yemen’s Development Strategy
1.
World Bank assistance to the implementation of Yemen’s Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) has progressed, and the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY03–06
program of lending and policy dialogue is being implemented as envisaged.
2.
The four main objectives of the CAS are: (a) better public sector governance; (b) an
attractive environment for private investment; (c) building and protecting human capital; and
(d) ensuring environmental stability, particularly in the critical area of water. The
implementation of the CAS is progressing well with $387.4 million committed between
FY03 and the second quarter of FY05 for seven credits. These include two credits for
agriculture/rural development, two for infrastructure/urban development, one for water, one
for the innovative and successful social funds for development, and one for basic education
development program. Two additional projects (Second Rural Access Program, and Second
Vocational Training) are expected to be approved this Fiscal Year (FY05).
3.
The Bank’s key non-lending support included completion of analysis of public
expenditure management, civil service modernization, and country financial accountability
assessment, petroleum price policy reform, household energy supply and use, development
of national gender strategy, environmental safeguard requirements, and strategic plans for
long-term development of coastal aquifers. The Bank is also assisting Yemen in preparing a
progress report on PRSP by providing early comments as the draft is being prepared.
Coordination among donors has become more regular and has elaborated into subgroups
dealing with specific sectors (civil service, water, education, etc.). Collaboration with, and
support for, civil society organizations has also deepened, both directly (e.g., NGO capacity
building grants) and indirectly (e.g., credits for projects employing NGOs).
B. Status of the Portfolio
4.
As of December 31, 2004, the International Development Association (IDA) had
approved 132 credits for Yemen for a commitment value of $2.2 billion
(net of cancellations), of which about $1.7 billion have been disbursed. The current portfolio
has 19 projects with total commitments of $816 million (net of cancellations), of which
$648.5 million are undisbursed. About 26 percent of the portfolio, by value, is dedicated to
the water sector, 19 percent to education, almost 15 percent to health and other social sectors,
over 16 percent to public administration, 9 percent to agriculture, 8 percent to transportation,
6 percent to energy, and 1 percent to financial sector.
5.
Overall portfolio performance and management remain satisfactory. Out of
19 projects in the portfolio, only two (Civil Service Modernization and Health Reform
Support) are rated unsatisfactory/problem projects. The Bank and the government are making
efforts to address issues affecting the implementation of these projects. A Country Portfolio
Performance Review (CPPR) was held in Sana’a in May 2004. Disbursements in FY04 was

- 50 -

APPENDIX III

about $91 million; this, however, translated into a lower disbursement ratio (about
16.5 percent) than in FY03 that was 20 percent. The disbursement ratio is expect to improve
by end of FY05.
6.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) has three active investments in grain
processing, ceramic tile manufacturing, and bottled water, totaling $11 million. Problems
with the investment environment limit IFC activities in Yemen and (as in the case of the
grain processing project) impede implementation and profitability. However, the IFC has a
very clear developmental role to play in the country and has devoted considerable resources
to promote business there. Several large projects are currently under consideration. In
addition, the IFC received approval for a new regional facility that will provide technical
assistance in Yemen to help improve the business environment, strengthen the financial
sector, and stimulate the growth of SMEs.
C. Bank-Fund Collaboration in Specific Areas
7.
Bank and Fund staffs consult regularly and coordinate their activities. A major
activity over the past year was assistance to the Yemeni experts who produced the PRSP and
subsequently collaboration on a Joint Staff Assessment of the PRSP. In addition, the staffs
have worked closely together on civil service reform and government financial management,
and in particular, budgeting and public expenditure modernization. Collaboration on these
issues is expected to intensify. Bank and Fund staffs have also collaborated on financial
sector development issues, with the aim of restoring financial stability (by now largely
achieved) and removing constraints on economic development.
Contact Persons:
Questions may be addressed to:
Mr. Thirumalai G. Srinivasan, (202-473-1288)
Ms. Roseleen K. Mba-Kalu, (202-473-5060)

- 51 -

APPENDIX IV

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN: STATISTICAL ISSUES
1.
In view of wide-ranging statistical deficiencies, the authorities are making an effort to
improve data compilation with technical assistance from the Fund and other donors. The
Republic of Yemen has participated in the General Data Dissemination System since
April 26, 2001. While some progress has been made, significant work remains to be done
before major improvements can be seen.
2.
The most reliable and timely data are those on the monetary sector produced by the
Central Bank of Yemen (CBY). To strengthen monetary statistics further, the multisector
mission in August 2000 recommended that (a) repurchase agreements be treated as
collateralized loans; (b) all nonstandard loans be reclassified as claims on the relevant sector;
(c) counterparty for several monetary accounts need to be accurately identified; and (d) a
number of monetary accounts should be disaggregated so as to enable the CBY to present the
position for each financial instrument. In June 2003, the authorities began reporting to STA
a more disaggregated set of data that allowed for their improved sectoral and instrument
classification in monetary statistics. Based on this more detailed data reporting, a revised
series of monetary statistics starting December 1999 was published beginning with the
August 2003 issue of IFS.
3.
The CBY disseminates data on total official reserve assets with a lag of one week and
is in the process of compiling the reserve template with data on reserve and foreign currency
liquidity. The authorities should aim to disseminate the reserve template with a monthly
periodicity and a lag not exceeding one month.
4.
Although important progress have been achieved in terms of coverage, classification,
and compilation methods of national accounts in accordance with the System of National
Accounts 1993, significant work remains to be done to further improve data quality and
compilation methods. Based on technical assistance provided by STA in real sector statistics
from September 2001 to June 2004, the Central Statistics Office (CSO) has compiled
national accounts statistics for the years 1999–2002 that include: current accounts and the
capital account by institutional sector; goods and services account and the integrated
economic accounts for the total economy; supply and use tables (SUT). The compilation of
the SUT for 2003 is well underway, but the sectoral accounts have not been completed due to
delays experienced with the surveys. Unlike previous estimates, most of the production and
expenditure estimates are now based on direct methods that mainly use the results of recently
conducted surveys. Looking ahead, quarterly establishment sample surveys are planned for
late 2004 to provide short-term indicators for moving annual benchmark series, and a
household expenditure and income survey is scheduled for 2005. Additional work is still
needed to (i) ensure the accuracy and the speed of collecting and processing survey results;
(ii) to conduct new surveys to cover additional activities; (iii) better identify the informal
sector; and (iv) cover unorganized units and update survey samples to improve coverage.
5.
With regard to price statistics, some improvements have been made in the CPI
compilation and the production of foreign trade indices starting with the 2001–03 series.

- 52 -

APPENDIX IV

However, development of a producer price index had to be postponed due to the limited
human and financial resources. With the assistance of the real sector mission by STA, the
CSO has constructed a CPI that is consistent with international standards. The weights were
derived from the 1998 Households Budget Survey. The CPI has a broad geographic coverage
and a sufficient number of consumption items, although some deficiencies remain in data
collection practices. The real sector mission recommended further improving the sources of
data in general, expanding the price statistics to cover different areas, and enhancing training
and internal coordination within the CSO.
6.
Regarding the fiscal accounts, data reliability is uncertain, and timeliness is weak,
particularly for detailed revenue and expenditure items. There are also discrepancies between
reported budget data and below-the-line financing data obtained from the monetary statistics.
Since the beginning of 2000, fiscal data have been prepared according to the GFS economic
classification, and monthly reports are available, albeit irregularly, at the subchapter level.
Further progress, particularly in providing expenditure data based on GFS functional
classification on a chapter and subchapter level, as recommended by FAD technical
missions, is expected to be made following the installation of the proposed integrated
information system (AFMIS). The authorities have not reported data for publication in the
Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (GFSY) from 2000 onwards. The latest data are
estimates for 1999 published in the 1999 GFSY. A GFS mission visited Sana’a in January
2004.
7.
The CBY, which compiles balance of payments statistics, is responsible for data
collection from various sources, implementation of the proper methodology, and
dissemination of the data. More recently, the CBY has started preparing the international
investment position (IIP) statement in the framework of the Balance of Payments Manual,
fifth edition (BPM5). The tasks are performed on a rather ad hoc basis, mostly relying on
survey-based questionnaires whose response rate is generally poor. Also, the quality of the
questionnaires themselves is poor due to the limited expertise and experience in developing
such material. Further compounding the weak quality of the statistics are inadequacies in
documented sources and methods, and financial and material resources dedicated to balance
of payments compilation. The CBY publishes quarterly external debt statistics within one
quarter of the reference period for the banking sector, general government, and monetary
authority.
8.
A STA mission on balance of payment statistics in January 2003 found that little
progress had been made in implementing the recommendations of either the IMF’s resident
advisor on balance of payments statistics (1998–2000) or the 2002 multisector statistics
mission. The coverage of the oil industry transactions remains weak. The quality of the
questionnaires is poor, with questionnaires on FDI and selected items in services being either
discontinued or not followed up. The shortage of qualified staff dedicated to data compilation
as well as weak coordination between the CBY and other government agencies (such as the
customs authority, the CSO, and the ministry of oil and mining resources) were also
responsible for the slow progress. The mission recommended that a new work program be

- 53 -

APPENDIX IV

carried out over a period of 22 months. The plan calls for, among other things, better
coordination between the CBY and other government agencies for more timely and effective
data collection and compilation, improved staffing and training, and the reinstitution of
discontinued surveys. Further technical assistance may be required for designing and
implementing surveys aimed at improving data collection on workers’ remittances. Yemen
recently began submitting quarterly BOP and IIP data (for 2003) for publication in IFS and
the Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.

- 54 -

APPENDIX IV

Republic of Yemen: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(as of January 31, 2005)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

Frequency
of
6
publication

Exchange Rates

12/31/04

1/18/05

D

W

W

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities
1
of the Monetary Authorities

12/31/04

1/18/05

W

W

W

Reserve/Base Money

12/31/04

1/18/05

M

M

M

Broad Money

12/31/04

1/18/05

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

12/31/04

1/18/05

M

M

A

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

12/31/04

1/18/05

M

M

A

12/04

12/04

M

M

M

12/31/04

1/18/05

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
4
Financing – General Government

10/04

12/04

M

M

A

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of
3
Financing – Central Government

10/04

12/04

M

M

A

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

10/04

12/04

M

M

A

External Current Account Balance

2004

12/04

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2004

12/04

A

A

A

GDP/GNP

2003

12/04

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

12/04

1/06/05

M

M

A

Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index

1

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and
state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

- 55 -

APPENDIX V

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN: TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM26
a.

UNDP/IMF Program:
BCS—Computerization needs of the ministry of finance, April 1995
FAD—Long-term expert (LTE) on customs and administration reform since
August 1996
FAD—General sales tax and tax administration, June 1997
FAD—Short-term expert (STE) on budget management, February–March and
November–December 1997
FAD—STE on tax identification number system and computerization,
February and July–August 1997
FAD—STE on input tax credit mechanism, July–August 1997
MED—STE on dept management, November 1996–June 1997

b.

IMF
FAD—Tax policy and customs administration, April 1995
FAD—Budget control and reporting, July–August 1995
FAD—Personal income tax reform and preparations for general sales tax, June 1996
FAD—Social safety net: food subsidies, Social Welfare Fund, and pension funds,
July 1996
FAD—Modernization of tax administration, August 1997
FAD—Customs and tax reform, March 1999
FAD—Budget management reform, April 1999
FAD—Pension reform, May 1999
FAD—Introduction of GST, September 1999
FAD—Pension Reform, January 2000
FAD—Introduction of GST, February 2000
FAD—Pension Reform, April 2000
FAD—Pension Reform, August 2001
FAD—Reform of the Budgetary Process, April 2002
FAD––Public expenditure management expert installation, September 2002
FAD––Tax policy, tax administration and customs reform, October–November 2002
INS—Techniques of financial analysis and programming, March 1996
INS—Techniques of financial analysis and programming, October 1997
MAE—Financial sector reform, May 1995
MAE—STE on Treasury bill issuance, November–December 1995
MAE—Operation of a floating exchange rate system, December 1995

26

Mission; unless otherwise indicated.

- 56 -

APPENDIX V

MAE—LTE on monetary policy, January 1996–July 1999
MAE—STE on monetary policy, November 1997 and February 1998
MAE—STE on central bank information technology, March and August 1996
MAE—Monetary and financial market overview, February–March 1998
MAE—LTE on central bank accounting and computerization,
November 1995–January 1998
MAE—Central bank legislation, banking supervision, and monetary
operations, February 1998
MAE—Monetary operations, foreign reserves management, and organization and
management April 1999
MAE—Monetary operations, October–November 2000
MAE—FSAP (with World Bank), October–November 2000
MAE—Foreign reserves management, February–March 2001
STA—STE on national accounts and price statistics, March 1996
STA—Balance of payments statistics, July–August 1997
STA—STE on balance of payments statistics, November 1997
STA—National accounts and prices, September 1998
STA—National accounts and prices, April 1999
STA—National accounts and prices, October 1999
STA—National accounts and prices, April 2000
STA—Multisector statistics, August 2000
STA—Balance of payments statistics, January 2003
STA—Government Finance Statistics, January 2004
c.

UNDP/IMF/DFID Program:
FAD—LTE on general sales tax, January 1998–December 2000.
FAD—LTE on tax administration, January 1998–December 2000.
FAD—LTE on budget management, March 1998–June 2001, and
September 2002–January 2004.
MAE—LTE on bank supervision, May 1997–May 2001.
MED—LTE on debt management, July 1997–March 2001.
STA—LTE on balance of payments statistics, February 1998–February 2000.
FAD—Peripatetic experts on customs reform, July 1999–July 2001.
STA—Peripatetic expert on national accounts, September 2001–August 2002.
MAE—Peripatetic expert on foreign reserves management since April 2002.

- 57 -

APPENDIX VI

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN: PRIORITY PEM REFORM AREAS27
Budget Preparation and Coverage of the Budget

Reform Areas
YMN
DZA
EGY
IRN
JOR
MAR
OMN
SND
SYR
Number of countries

MT macro and fiscal
forecasts are used as
basis for planning
budgeting
(with thorough
analysis)

Budget preparation
follows top-down
& bottom-up
approach

Budget
classification
includes adequate
functional
classification

Comprehensive
coverage of
central
government
budget

√
√
√

√

√
√

√
√
√

√

5

5

4

√
√

√

√
√
√

√
√

4

4

Some coverage of
general government
in budget or fiscal
reports
√
√
√

Budget Execution Control and Audit

Reform Areas
YMN
DZA
EGY
JOR
MAR
OMN
SDN
Number of countries

Control of central
government over local
governments is strong

Adequate mechanisms of
accounting & control
(internal audit) exists

Government operates a
Treasury Single Account
(TSA)

Existence of a national
independent external
audit body

√
√
√
√
√

2

√
√
√
√
3

3

√
2

Fiscal Reporting and Publication of Fiscal Data
Reform Areas
YMN
DZA
EGY
IRN
JOR
LBN
MAR
OMN
SND
Number of countries

Regular reporting on fiscal
performance

Timeliness and public
availability of fiscal reports

√
√
√
√
√
√
√
7

√
√
√
√
√
√
6

Comprehensiveness of fiscal
reports
√
√

√
√
√
√
6

Note: (X equals yes or “moderately well”) and YMN = Yemen; JOR = Jordan; EGY = Egypt; OMN = Oman; SYR = Syria;
DZA = Algeria; IRN = Iran; MAR = Morocco; SND = Sudan; and LBN = Lebanon.
27

These results are taken from the study done by Ahmad, Calcoen, Danninger, and Sabharwal, 2004, “Institutions
and the Public Sector in Reforming the Public Finances in Middle Eastern and North African Countries” (draft) for
the 2004 MENA Conference in Washington, DC and the Regional Conference on Fiscal Reforms in the Arab
Countries, Beirut.

Statement by A. Shakour Shaalan, Executive Director for the Republic of Yemen
March 14, 2005

1At the outset, I would like to convey the Yemeni authorities’ appreciation to the staff
and management for their continuing candid and constructive engagement in Yemen. They
view the consultation process as well as the provision of technical assistance as being of
great value to the country. The authorities are in broad agreement with the analysis and the
thrust of the policy recommendations contained in the comprehensive staff report.
Background
2Yemen undertook ambitious macroeconomic and structural reform efforts since the
mid 1990s, bringing about major improvements in the economy. Accomplishments under
Fund-supported programs, in the form of Stand-By and Extended Arrangements and
subsequently the PRGF over the period 1996-2001, included macroeconomic stabilization,
exchange rate unification, trade liberalization, and the reduction in external debt. Further
significant advances in structural reforms included the fiscal area, the civil service, the
banking sector, and public enterprise privatization. Yemen, still a developing democracy
often confronted with precarious security situations, continues to muster strong public and
political support to the wide-ranging reform program pursued. Looking ahead, the authorities
are determined to maintain this consensus building approach to reform, which, sometimes,
might have led to inevitable compromises, but which, they strongly believe, has served the
country well.
Recent Developments
3Following the favorable economic performance supported by the completion of the
PRGF program in 2001, a number of weaknesses emerged, including a slowdown in
economic growth and reemerging inflationary pressures. Unexpected adverse circumstances,
namely a steeper than expected decline in oil production in 2004 accounted for the former,
while the latter was largely due to the impact of adverse weather conditions on food prices.
In spite of these factors, the overall fiscal deficit narrowed by 0.8 percent in 2004, although it
was still 1 percent above its target. The external current account deficit remained broadly
unchanged as increasing export revenues resulting from higher oil prices offset an increase in
import demand. Higher oil exports boosted the central bank’s own gross foreign reserves to
about U.S. dollars 5.1 billion (16.4 months of imports), despite a drop in oil production.
Moreover, the non-oil GDP grew by 4.1 percent and is expected to further rise in the medium
term. Given the internal circumstances and regional uncertainty, this is a commendable
achievement.
4The short-term outlook for the economy is broadly manageable. While the downward
revision of Yemen’s long-term oil production path introduces new challenges, the prospect of
natural gas exploitation could improve the economic outlook. To address these challenges,
the authorities are already planning a comprehensive economic strategy supported by policies
aimed at promoting growth and diversifying the economy’s production base. In a move to

-2muster public support for these efforts, they have launched a public communication
campaign aimed at explaining the benefits of these reforms in light of the long-term risks
stemming from declining oil production. They are hopeful that they will mobilize the
necessary effort to gradually implement the reform agenda.
Fiscal Policy and Reform
5The authorities fully integrated an ambitious reform package in the 2005 budget,
which was approved by parliament in early January, pending the adoption by the government
of the following measures in order to ensure effective implementation: submitting to
parliament a national wage strategy to be implemented fully by 2007, reducing customs
duties to the level of neighboring countries, providing additional resources for social safety
nets to reduce the impact of higher petroleum prices, fighting smuggling through better
border control, and adopting policies that would encourage growth in non-oil sectors such as
fisheries and tourism. I am pleased to report that the two major conditions related to the wage
strategy and customs duties’ reduction are currently being finalized and on the way to be
implemented. The government is hopeful that the remaining conditions will soon be fulfilled.
In an effort to reverse the recent deterioration in the fiscal trend relative to end of year budget
targets, the 2005 budget is targeting a 9 percent decline in the non-oil primary deficit, which
will reduce the overall deficit to 3 percent of GDP.
6The centerpiece of the reform effort consists in phasing out the petroleum product
subsidy beginning in 2005. The price adjustment aims at bringing most domestic prices,
especially gasoline, in line with international prices, while the price of diesel fuel would
increase to 85 percent of the international price. In line with a proposal the government made
last year, diesel prices would almost double to reach Yrls 33, and gasoline and liquefied
petroleum gas prices would increase by 45 percent and 40 percent, respectively. Swift and
full implementation of these measures would result in halving the fuel subsidy to about
3 percent of GDP, and improving the fiscal stance. In addition, the authorities are determined
to eliminate fuel price subsidies totally, with a view to reducing their distortionary effect and
their heavy burden on the budget. In view of the adverse impact the removal of the fuel
subsidy is expected to have on the most vulnerable groups of society, the authorities
recognize the need to strengthen existing social safety nets, including improving the targeting
and coverage of the Social Welfare Fund and supporting the Social Development Fund, while
enhancing capacity at the national level.
7The Yemeni authorities are thankful for the staff’s elaborate medium and long-term
fiscal scenario and the fiscal adjustment measures put forward. The adjustment will reduce
the non-oil primary budget deficit by 12-15 percent of GDP over the next 12 years. While the
authorities agree with the proposed measures, they note the difficulty of ensuring the timely
implementation of some of them. In particular, they are concerned about the imposition of an
excise tax on petroleum products as early as 2007, immediately after the elimination of the
subsidy.
8Major components of the fiscal adjustment effort, namely the GST and public
expenditure management measures, have already received the government’s attention. The

-3authorities are of the view that a broad-based and simple tax is key to improving revenue
performance. In this respect, the government completed a revision of the draft GST law,
which is now with parliament for approval. It is hoped that the draft law will be approved
without amendments. Major improvements included in the draft comprise a streamlining of
exemptions, the elimination of the tax on production and consumption, the unification of the
GST registration threshold, and the development of special refund procedures. In addition,
the authorities took note of further enhancing measures suggested by staff, such as the
elimination of the few remaining exemptions, lowering higher GST rates while imposing an
excise on specific goods, and shortening the time for processing refunds to one month. They
intend to address those measures at a later stage.
9The Yemeni authorities agreed with staff on the need to improve public expenditure
management as a condition for achieving a sustainable fiscal adjustment over the long term.
In this respect, the 2005 budget preparation process was significantly improved by the use of
macroeconomic indicators and indicative ceilings. However, as the authorities recognize the
importance of further strengthening internal expenditure control mechanisms, including by
developing a commitment control system and strictly adhering to budgetary allocations, they
discussed with staff the prioritization and sequencing of the remaining reform measures.
Continuous technical assistance provided by the Fund and donors has been very helpful,
particularly in streamlining the budget presentation and improving fiscal transparency. The
authorities indicated their intention to gradually consolidate a number of extra-budgetary
funds and other special accounts into the budget, in a move to create a Treasury Single
Account.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
10The authorities are committed to a monetary targeting framework to achieve price
stability. In light of the recent increase in inflation, they confirm their close monitoring of the
situation and their intention to intervene when necessary. In this respect, they are open to
increasing the benchmark deposit rate. However, they see no immediate need for such an
action, given that they deem the recent pick-up in inflation mainly supply driven. Moreover,
they are concerned over the effect of higher interest rates on investment and growth.
11With regard to intervention in foreign exchange markets, the authorities remain of the
view that such interventions should be limited to smoothing short-term fluctuations,
especially that they concur with staff that a flexible exchange rate that reflects real market
forces would serve the economy well as the non-oil export base expands.
Financial Sector and Other Structural reforms
12The authorities recognize the importance of implementing the 2001 FSAP
recommendations. While acknowledging that further steps should be adopted, the Central
Bank of Yemen upgraded its accounting practice to the latest international standards and a
new initiative to modernize commercial courts was launched recently.

-413The authorities are committed to supporting the necessary fiscal effort by adopting
policies aimed at promoting economic growth and diversifying the production base. They
have recently adopted a strategy for fisheries as they agree with staff on the serious
employment opportunities provided in the sector. Transshipments activities and tourism are
potentially other important sources of growth. In this context, the World Bank port cities
project aims, at encouraging growth and creating jobs in the port cities of Aden, Honeidah
and Mukalla. The development of non-oil sector activities remain, however, dependent on
the improvement in the security situation and the business climate, which I will discuss
below. The Yemeni authorities intend to adopt structural measures to accompany the fiscal
adjustment and other pro-growth policies. These include preserving a core allocation of
critical and poverty-related expenditures.
14The authorities remain committed to removing impediments to private sector activity.
Plans to reform the civil service are progressing steadily with the completion of the civil
service database and the amnesty law resulting in a voluntary self declaration of multi-salary
recipients. Moreover, Yemen remains committed to maintaining an open trade regime. It is
expected to join the WTO in four to five years as negotiations on accession are steadily
progressing. In a move to combat unemployment, the authorities are hopeful that the
improved labor code, aimed at introducing flexibility in the market, would soon be adopted.
They agreed with staff on the need to redesign the education curricula and enhance
vocational training to better respond to market demand.
Conclusion
15Yemen’s near-term outlook remains broadly manageable. However, the authorities
recognize that there is no room for complacency in view of the medium- and long-term
challenges posed by a rapid decline in oil production and the continuous need to undertake
necessary reforms. I would like to reiterate the commitment of the Yemeni authorities to
pursuing fiscal reforms and accompanying policies aimed at improving the supply response
of the economy. They very much appreciate staff’s valuable advice and technical assistance,
and look forward to continuous intensive support from the Fund in the period ahead.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 05/40
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 24, 2005

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2004 Article IV Consultation with the
Republic of Yemen
On March 14, 2005, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with the Republic of Yemen.1
Background
An expected rapid decline in oil production poses serious long-term economic challenges for
Yemen. The authorities have carried out a public information campaign to highlight the risks of
inaction and to facilitate the political and public acceptance of reform measures, some of which
are now part of the 2005 budget.
Economic growth slowed in 2004 due to a sharp contraction in the oil sector. Oil production
declined by 5.9 percent, reflecting diminishing recovery from aging large oil fields as well as the
absence of significant new discoveries. Given the slowdown in oil production, real GDP growth
is estimated to have declined to 2.7 percent in 2004 compared with 3.1 percent in 2003. Non-oil
GDP growth is estimated to have reached 4.1 percent in 2004, supported by stronger activity in
the construction, transportation, and trade sectors, and fueled by domestic demand stemming
from continued fiscal expansion and higher public sector wages.
The end-year core CPI inflation (excluding qat) increased from 12.1 percent in 2003 to
14.5 percent in 2004, owing largely to expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, as well as
higher food prices caused by adverse weather conditions. The nominal exchange rate remained
stable vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar in 2004, and the real effective exchange rate appreciated by
3.5 percent over the 11 months ending November 2004.
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

-2-

The 2004 fiscal deficit was estimated at 4.5 percent of GDP, about 1 percent higher than the
original budget. The larger than expected deficit was due to higher development spending and
larger petroleum subsidy due mainly to higher oil prices and the postponement of the envisaged
increase in petroleum prices. An increase in imports and strong capital inflows mitigated most of
the export gains resulting from higher oil prices, leaving the current account balance broadly
unchanged. Because of higher oil exports and strong capital inflows, international reserves
increased to about $5.1 billion or 16.4 months of imports at end-2004.
Money grew by 15 percent in 2004. It was largely driven by the accumulation of net foreign
assets as well as a sharp rise in private sector credit (33.5 percent mainly to finance trade).
The benchmark interest rate on saving deposits, the anchor of other interest rates, has
remained constant since 2001 at 13 percent.
Some progress has been made in structural reforms. The revised General Sales Tax (GST) law
submitted to parliament in late 2004 included several improvements designed to protect the
integrity and simplicity of this tax. On public expenditure management, the authorities used, for
the first time, macroeconomic indicators and indicative ceilings in the preparation of the 2005
budget, but very little has been done to improve internal expenditure control mechanisms, or to
improve budget execution or fiscal reporting. The ministry of civil service continued to lay strong
foundations for civil service reform and completed the civil service database. In light of the
amnesty granted to multi-dippers (those collecting more than one salary) several hundreds of
those came forward voluntarily.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors considered that Yemen is at a crucial crossroads, facing the long-term
challenges arising from the expected rapid decline in oil production. While noting the slow pace
of reform in recent years, Directors welcomed the authorities’ plans to develop a comprehensive
strategy aimed at promoting growth and diversifying the productive base. They also welcomed
the authorities’ renewed efforts to mobilize public support for reforms—including through a
public information campaign—and to make the reform package part of the 2005 budget.
Directors underscored the importance of strengthening fiscal adjustment and deepening
structural reforms to ensure fiscal and external sustainability, with macroeconomic policies
guided by long-term considerations, as well as to strengthen the non-oil sector.
Directors noted that, while the short-term outlook remains manageable, without policy
adjustments, the long term fiscal and external positions are clearly unsustainable. They
observed that an indicative target for debt-to-GDP could provide a useful long-term anchor for
fiscal policy. Several Directors took note of the staff’s estimate that, to maintain the debt-to-GDP
ratio at its current level, a fiscal adjustment of more than 20 percent of GDP in the non-oil
primary fiscal deficit will be required over the next 12 years. Directors concurred that, to achieve
an adjustment of such magnitude, there will be a need for strong and front-loaded fiscal
adjustment, along with a range of structural reforms to facilitate Yemen’s smooth transition to a
non-oil economy. They welcomed the authorities’ recognition of the challenges ahead and their
commitment to undertake the necessary policy response, which is also important for attracting
additional donor assistance and foreign investment. Some Directors also encouraged the

-3authorities to further explore the country’s natural gas reserves as part of their efforts to meet
the challenges posed by the declining oil sector.
Directors underscored the need for a strong, credible, and comprehensive fiscal strategy, and
recommended the implementation, without delay, of critical measures, such as the General
Sales Tax, the removal of the petroleum product subsidy, and the reduction in the wage bill
through retrenchment rather than a wage freeze. They also emphasized the importance of
improving public expenditure management and strengthening tax and customs administration
for the success of the reform effort.
Directors emphasized that public expenditure management reforms should aim mainly at
strengthening expenditure controls and enhancing fiscal transparency. Recognizing the large
number of needed measures, Directors expressed strong support for clear prioritization and
sequencing. They underscored that policies to dissolve extra budgetary accounts and “special
funds” leading to the creation of a fully-fledged Treasury Single Account (STA) will be essential.
Directors also emphasized the importance of enhancing expenditure discipline by developing a
commitment control system to help contain budgetary overcommitments. Poverty reduction
strategy priorities should be reflected in the national budget to ensure that the envisaged
sectoral plans can be implemented. Efforts should also be made to adopt a functional
classification of expenditures and to improve tracking of poverty-related spending.
Directors welcomed the latest amendments to the GST law—now in parliament—intended
mainly to limit exemptions and to simplify the GST structure, and expressed hope that it will be
adopted soon. Directors called for strengthening the Large Tax Payers Office (LTO) as an
important step in mobilizing more tax revenue. They also welcomed the authorities’ intention to
phase out the petroleum product subsidy and suggested that this be done on the basis of an
automatic price adjustment formula. Some Directors noted that the introduction of the excise tax
on petroleum products following the elimination of the subsidy might need to be phased in
gradually.
In view of the planned adjustment in petroleum prices, Directors underscored the importance of
strengthening social protection mechanisms to mitigate the impact on the poor. They supported
policies that would improve the targeting and the coverage of the Social Welfare Fund (SWF),
which distributes cash subsidies directly to poor families. They also called for further efforts to
protect the most vulnerable groups from the long term adjustment required for achieving
sustainability. An explicit link between the dividend of oil price reform and increased pro-poor
spending was considered beneficial in this connection.
Directors noted that fiscal adjustment alone will not be sufficient to achieve long-term
sustainability. Complementary macroeconomic and structural policies to stimulate growth and
diversify the production base away from oil will also be required. Particular attention should be
given to sectors with a strong potential comparative advantage and large job creation prospects,
including fisheries, transshipment activities, and tourism.
In this context, Directors called on the authorities to adopt policies that would improve the
business environment, including reducing costs of business startups and streamlining
procedures to encourage private sector investment. They also considered that addressing

-4governance issues and tackling corruption should enhance the climate for both domestic and
foreign investment. Directors welcomed the continued civil service reform efforts, but stressed
that ad hoc wage increases, which are not part of the national wage strategy, may undermine
these efforts.
Regarding recent macroeconomic and policy developments, Directors expressed support for the
authorities’ fiscal policy in the context of the 2005 budget. Directors particularly welcomed the
planned significant reduction in the petroleum product subsidy and the improvement in tax
revenue expected from the introduction of the GST by mid-year. However, they noted that the
adjustment target under the 2005 budget, equivalent to about 9 percent of GDP in the non-oil
primary deficit, may be ambitious. They stressed that, under all circumstances, if a
supplementary budget is to be adopted later in the year, it should be subject to stringent
budgetary discipline and be designed to respond only to unforeseen developments or external
shocks.
Directors expressed concern about the surge in prices and considered that monetary policy
should be geared to containing inflationary pressures. They called for a tightening of monetary
policy, and took note of the authorities’ readiness to closely monitor the situation and intervene
when necessary. While recognizing the occasional need for the central bank to balance multiple
objectives, Directors emphasized that price stability should remain the primary focus of the
monetary authorities, especially when macroeconomic stability is in the balance. To enhance
the role and effectiveness of monetary policy, they called on the monetary authorities to
liberalize the minimum benchmark rate on saving deposits. Directors encouraged the authorities
to make further progress in implementing the recommendations of the 2001 Financial Sector
Assessment Program, and in strengthening the AML/CFT framework.
Directors emphasized the importance of exchange rate flexibility to achieve long-term
sustainability. With the expected decline in oil production and international reserves, the central
bank should not resist signals in the foreign exchange market emanating from changes in
underlying economic fundamentals. A flexible exchange rate policy, supported by structural
reforms, should improve external competitiveness and boost growth in non-oil sectors, easing
the transition to a post-oil economy.
Directors took note of the efforts under way to improve the quality and availability of statistics.
However, they emphasized the need for further improvements in national accounts and price
statistics, balance of payments data, and government finance statistics, to enhance the quality
of economic analysis.
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

-5-

Republic of Yemen: Basic Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000–2004
(Quota = SDR 243.5 million)
Population: 19.8 million (2004)
Per Capita GDP: US$653 (2004)

2000

2001

2002

2003

Proj.
2004

3.1
4.0
-1.8
12.1

2.7
4.1
-5.9
14.5

(Change in percent)
National income and prices
Real GDP
Real non-oil GDP
Real oil GDP
Core consumer price index (end-of-period) 1/

4.4
3.5
9.4
7.6

4.6
5.2
1.3
14.6

3.9
4.6
0.4
4.5

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
External sector
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: crude oil
Imports, f.o.b.
Current account, incl. grants (in percent of GDP)
Overall balance (deficit -)

3,805
3,423
-2,635
13.2
1,368

3,302
2,895
-2,771
5.3
761

3,584
3,134
-3,083
5.4
752

3,923
3,417
-3,422
1.1
583

4,510
3,893
-3,884
1.0
685

(In percent of GDP)
Financial variables
Overall fiscal balance, commitment basis (deficit -)
Primary non-oil fiscal balance, commitment basis (deficit -)

8.0
-17.6

2.6
-20.5

-1.2
-21.5

-5.2
-26.9

-4.4
-27.5

(12-month change in percent)
Broad money
Credit to private sector
Benchmark deposit interest rate (percent per annum)
Central bank own gross foreign reserves 2/
In millions of U.S. dollars
In months of imports

25.1
21.3
13.0

18.7
25.8
13.0

18.0
14.3
13.0

20.0
26.3
13.0

15.0
33.5
13.0

2,822
12.3

3,569
14.9

4,056
17.0

4,445
16.0

5,108
16.4

Sources: Yemeni authorities; and IMF Staff estimates and projections.
1/ Core CPI is defined as CPI excluding qat.
2/ Gross reserves minus commercial bank and pension fund foreign exchange deposits held with the central bank.
Imports are for the current year and exclude oil and gas sector imports.

