January 2007
IMF Country Report No. 07/30

© 2007 International Monetary Fund

[Month, Day], 2001
[Month, Day], 2001

August 2, 2001
January 29, 2001
August 2, 2001

Mongolia: 2006 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Public Information Notice on
the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Mongolia
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2006 Article IV consultation with Mongolia, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

the staff report for the 2006 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on September 12, 2006, with the officials of Mongolia on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on December 18, 2006. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF;

•

a Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its January 10, 2007 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation; and

•

a statement by the Executive Director for Mongolia.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
To assist the IMF in evaluating the publication policy, reader comments are invited and may be sent
by e-mail to publcationpolicy@imf.org.

Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org • Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
MONGOLIA
Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2006 Article IV Consultation
Approved by Daniel Citrin and Adnan Mazarei
December 18, 2006
•

The 2006 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Ulaanbaatar during
August 30-September 12. The staff team comprised Messrs. Kronenberg (Head), Marciniak,
S. Lee (all APD), Wu (PDR), and Klemm (EP-FAD) and was assisted by Mr. Jang
(Resident Representative). Mr. H.C. Lee (OED) attended some of the policy meetings. The
staff team closely liaised with overlapping MCM and STA technical assistance missions.

•

The 2005 Article IV Consultation and discussion of the Ex-Post Assessment of LongerTerm Program Engagement were completed on September 21, 2005,
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pn/2005/pn05140htm. Directors considered that a
successor PRGF arrangement could provide a useful framework for the authorities to carry
forward their reform agenda.

•

Discussions on a new PRGF-supported program were conducted in February and May 2006.
Resuming program discussions would be contingent upon adopting a 2007 budget
consistent with ensuring fiscal sustainability.

•

Mongolia’s flexible exchange rate regime has served well in absorbing external shocks and
the existing arrangement should be maintained.

•

Mongolia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on
February 1, 1996, and has maintained an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the
making of payments and transfers for current international transactions.

•

Mongolia’s statistical framework is generally adequate for surveillance and program
monitoring purposes. Efforts are underway with STA support to address the remaining
weaknesses in the areas of monetary and government finance statistics.

•

The authorities are expected to approve the publication of the Staff Report, as occurred for
the last consultation, and all accompanying documents.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary................................................................................................................... 3
I.

Background....................................................................................................................... 4

II.

Recent Economic Developments and the Near-Term Outlook ........................................ 6

III. Policy Discussions............................................................................................................ 8
A. Overview of Policy Issues and Macroeconomic Framework.................................. 8
B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................ 9
C. Monetary Policy .................................................................................................... 11
D. External Policies.................................................................................................... 12
E
Central Bank Governance and Financial Sector Reforms ..................................... 13
F. Structural Reforms, Poverty Reduction, and Statistical Issues ............................. 14
IV. Staff Appraisal................................................................................................................ 15
Boxes
1.
Mining Sector Prospects................................................................................................... 5
2.
The Evolving Fiscal Framework ...................................................................................... 7
Figures
1.
Economic Developments, 2001-06 ................................................................................ 18
2.
Fiscal Indicators, 2001-06 .............................................................................................. 19
3.
Monetary Developments, 2001-06 ................................................................................. 20
4.
External Developments, 2001-06 ................................................................................... 21
Tables
1.
Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003-07 .................................................. 22
2.
Summary Operations of the General Government, 2003-07.......................................... 23
3.
Monetary Aggregates, 2003-07 ...................................................................................... 24
4.
Balance of Payments, 2003-11 ....................................................................................... 25
5.
External Debt and Debt Service, 2003-11...................................................................... 26
6.
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2003-11................................................... 27
7.
Indicators for Vulnerability and Financial Soundness, 2001-05 ....................................28
Annexes
I.
Debt Sustainability Analysis .......................................................................................... 29
II. Fund Relations................................................................................................................ 38
III. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... 41
IV. Relations with the Asian Development Bank................................................................. 43
V. Statistical Issues.............................................................................................................. 44
VI. Millennium Development Goals .................................................................................... 48

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
•

Mongolia’s economic performance has been very strong in recent years. Annual
real GDP growth has averaged 7 percent since 2002, underpinned by a run up on copper
and gold prices; inflation has been reduced to mid-single digit levels; and the budget
and current account balances recorded growing surpluses in 2005-06.

•

The fiscal position is expected to weaken in 2007 due to social spending and wage
increases, tax cuts, and somewhat lower copper prices.

•

Although inflation currently is moderate, there is a clear risk that continued rapid
monetary growth and fiscal stimulus could increase inflationary pressures.

•

The nominal and real effective exchange rates of the togrog have appreciated
moderately, reflecting the strong balance of payments and improvement in the
terms of trade. International reserves have increased to nearly 3½ months of imports of
goods and services.

•

The authorities have taken initial steps to strengthen central bank governance, in
line with Fund recommendations.

Key Issues and Policy Discussions
•

Mongolia’s mineral resource endowment and its location between two large, fastgrowing economies provide a good basis for sustained medium-term growth.
Nevertheless, the economy remains vulnerable to external shocks, including the
possibility of declining copper prices, and poverty remains troublingly high.
Overcoming these vulnerabilities will require continued macroeconomic stability, as
well as improvements in infrastructure and structural reforms to promote private sector
development.

•

Fiscal policy needs to preserve the recent reduction in the public debt burden. To
do so, there is a need to target social welfare spending more effectively and move
forward with civil service reforms. Some of the tax cuts coming into effect in 2007—
particularly the 5 percentage point VAT cut—may need to be partly reversed in the
future, if copper prices fall as much as the WEO projections.

•

Monetary policy should aim at mopping up excess liquidity. Also, the central bank
should continue its governance reforms, ensure prudent management of its international
reserves, develop an exit strategy from gold operations over the medium term, and fully
enforce prudential supervision, particularly of banks with rapid lending growth.

4
I. BACKGROUND
1.
Mongolia is experiencing an unprecedented period of strong economic
performance (Table 1 and Figures 1-4). Real GDP growth has averaged 7 percent since 2002,
aided by sharp increases in copper and gold prices and a recovery of livestock herds after three
devastating winters. As incomes have grown, the expansion has spilled over to other sectors of
the economy, including construction, financial services, and the retail sector. After a brief
upward spike in 2005, inflation has been brought back down to the mid-single digits, and the
budget and external current account balances have moved into surplus. International reserves,
which were heavily drawn down in late 2003 in connection with the settlement of Mongolia’s
pre-1991 debt to Russia, have been reconstituted to more comfortable levels. Near-term
economic prospects remain favorable, with growth likely to be sustained by still-high minerals
prices and large-scale foreign investment in a major new mining project (Box 1). Despite these
significant achievements, poverty remains high (36 percent), and much remains to be done to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
2.
Looking ahead, the authorities’ ability to achieve strong growth over the longer
term will require the sustained implementation of policies to support macroeconomic
stability, address structural weaknesses, and reduce Mongolia’s vulnerability to large
external shocks. In particular, there is a need to keep public debt on a stable or downward
path. Achievement of these objectives could be made more difficult if copper prices were to
decline significantly over the medium term, as currently projected. Other vulnerabilities include
a still-high level of public debt, a harsh climate, a large, landlocked and sparsely populated
territory, and weak economic infrastructure.
3.
The current coalition government was formed in January 2006. It comprises the
Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party (MPRP) and members from three smaller parties.
Although the MPRP gained an absolute (one-seat) majority in Parliament following a local byelection in September 2006, the coalition has remained intact. The Democratic Party (DP),
which was a member of the governing coalition prior to January 2006, is now the main
opposition party. The government’s ability to set and implement its economic reform agenda
has sometimes been constrained by the willingness of individual members of Parliament,
including some from the governing parties, to break ranks with their party leadership on
important issues. Recent examples include Parliament’s actions to impose a windfall tax on
copper and gold revenues, cut the VAT rate, and increase untargeted social spending, all of
which were initially opposed by the government. The next national elections are slated for mid2008.
4.
The authorities have expressed strong interest in a new PRGF arrangement. In
preliminary discussions, the staff has taken the position that the government should save most
of the large revenue windfall from high commodity prices in order to achieve fiscal
sustainability without requiring large future cuts in government expenditure, which could
disrupt medium-term growth prospects. The staff has also highlighted the need for further
reforms to improve central bank governance and strengthen the financial system. Mongolia’s
track record under the previous PRGF arrangement that expired in July 2005 was mixed, with
only two reviews completed. Although the authorities have, in some instances, been unable to
implement fully the policies recommended by Executive Directors at last year's Article IV

5

Box 1. Mongolia: Mining Sector Prospects
Background: Mongolia’s non-fuel mineral sector has been the main pillar of Mongolia’s development. It is the
fourth largest sector, contributing 25 percent of GDP but accounting for about 70 percent of export earnings and
16 percent of tax revenue. Its output, however, is highly vulnerable to mineral price volatility and its direct
contribution to employment has been limited (2.4 percent of labor force), due to its highly capital intensive nature.
Dutch disease risks are limited because of idle capacity, including high unemployment but continued appreciation of
the togrog in connection with increasing capital flows and foreign exchange earnings may impact nonmineral sector
competitiveness in the longer run.
There has been an upturn in mineral exploration since 2001, in the wake of the discovery of the large Oyu Tolgoi
copper/gold deposit and in response to strong world prices for copper and gold since 2004. Exploration, however,
has been hampered by poor infrastructure and uncertainties on the new mining tax regime.
Stability Agreements/Investment Contracts. These are important for some mining companies to remove long-term
uncertainties on mining taxation, thereby strengthening foreign investors confidence. Eight mining companies have
entered Stability Agreements under the previous 1997 Minerals Law. Under the 2006 Minerals Law, such
agreements renamed Investment Contracts link agreements’ maturities to the investment’s size.
Copper output (30 percent of exports in 2005), is currently derived exclusively from the Erdenet mine but is
expected to be boosted in the medium term by the coming on stream of the Oyu Tolgoi mine and the development of
the Tsagaan Suvarga deposit.
Erdenet. Mongolia’s largest mine, has been in operation since 1978 under a Russian-Mongolian government joint
venture. The mine produces copper concentrate together with molybdenum and is also engaged in a variety of nonmining activities (e.g., farming) and provides extensive local social support. The mine’s output has been declining
and is expected to deteriorate further as copper grade decreases with depth. However, investments are underway to
compensate the output decline by producing higher value copper cathode. Erdenet’s annual copper concentrate
output is about 130,000 tons; its ore reserves of 1.54 billion tons have a 30-year lifespan.
Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold deposit (Ivanhoe). Discussions are underway between the government and Ivanhoe, a
Canadian company, to reach agreement on an investment contract that would pave the way for beginning mining the
Oyu Tolgoi deposit in 2009. Initial annual copper concentrate output would be 300,000 tons with a 1 million ton
peak to be reached within six years. Its copper ore reserves would provide for a 40-year lifespan.
Gold output (31 percent of exports in 2005) is also widely mined by Mongolian and Mongolian-Russian joint
ventures, comes as a by-product of the Erdenet copper mine and is subject to widespread artisanal mining (“ninjas”
miners). Gold prospects depend on timely development of the Oyu Tolgoi (Ivanhoe) and Gatsuurt (Boroo) deposits,
both of which are critically hinging upon finalizing investment contracts with the government.
Other minerals. Mongolia is also a significant producer of fluorite under Mongolrostsvetmet, a Russian-Mongolian
joint venture and Mongolia’s second largest mining company. In addition, the Tumurtiinovoo zinc mine, a ChineseMongolian joint venture has been operational since 2005 with an expected 14-year lifespan. Phosphate mining from
the Burenkhaan deposit is in the process of being developed. In the longer term, considerable coal reserves from the
Tavan Tolgoi deposit (5 billion tons), and the Turmurtei iron deposit (229 million tons), as well as identified natural
gas and petroleum reserves are expected to provide further growth impetus.

6
consultation, they consider that Fund advice and support continue to provide a critically
important policy framework which facilitates the development of consensus and political
support for reforms.
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND THE NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK
5.
Recent economic performance has been very robust, with strong, broad-based
growth, declining inflation, growing budget and balance of payments surpluses, and
improving confidence in the banking system. Real GDP is estimated to have risen by
7 percent in 2006, the same as the average pace achieved during 2002-05. The minerals sector
has been a key engine of growth, supported by record high prices for copper and gold, some
increases in production volumes, and investment at the new Ivanhoe copper and gold mine,
which has not yet come on stream. Outside the mining sector, growth has also been supported
by favorable weather conditions, buoyant residential and commercial construction, and rapid
growth in financial services. Growth is projected to remain at about 7 percent in 2007.
6.
After spiking higher in the first half of 2005, inflation has since slowed to a
moderate rate. The year-on-year inflation rate jumped from 10½ percent in December 2004 to
17½ percent in June 2005, due partly to a temporary shortage in the supply of meat which sent
prices soaring. As the supply shock was reversed, inflation declined to 1.8 percent (year-onyear) in July 2006, the lowest level in four years. With the impact of the supply shock falling,
inflation subsequently picked up to 6.5 percent in October 2006, reflecting increases in the
prices of petroleum products, and rapid monetary growth.1
7.
The fiscal position has improved markedly in recent years, driven by the rapid run
up in copper prices and by faster-than-expected economic growth (Table 2, Box 2, and
Figure 2). The overall budget balance shifted from a deficit of 4 percent of GDP in 2003 to a
surplus of 3 percent in 2005, which is now projected to widen to 9 percent of GDP in 2006.
Underlying the dramatic improvement in fiscal performance has been a sevenfold increase in
mining revenues between 2003 and 2006 due to both sharply higher copper and gold prices, as
well as the imposition of a new windfall tax on copper and gold in June 2006. Meanwhile, total
expenditure has fallen from 42 percent of GDP in 2003 to an estimated 31½ percent in 2006,
despite the 2006 introduction of a 30 percent wage increase and an expansion of social welfare
transfers. Delays in the execution of some investment projects also slowed the pace of
spending. As fiscal performance has improved, the net present value (NPV) of public debt
dropped from 80 percent of GDP at end-2003 to 45 percent at end-2005. It is expected to fall
further to 35 percent at end-2006.
8.
Monetary aggregates have been growing rapidly (Table 3 and Figure 3). Reserve
money growth picked up from 20 percent (year-on-year) in December 2005 to 27 percent in
September 2006. The acceleration in reserve money reflected strong foreign exchange inflows,
which more-than-offset a substantial decline in net central bank credit to government. For the
banking system as a whole, broad money increased by 38 percent in the year to September
1

The determinants of inflation in Mongolia are examined in the Selected Issues Paper, Chapter I.

7
Box 2. Mongolia: The Evolving Fiscal Framework
Mongolia’s fiscal framework has evolved significantly since the beginning of 2006. Changes include the addition
of new spending measures in the amended budget passed in June, a new mining law, and new personal income tax,
corporate income tax, and VAT laws which go into effect on January 1, 2007.
The “windfall” tax introduced in June 2006 is intended to capture a higher share of the revenues accruing to
mining companies from high export prices. The 68 percent tax rate applies to copper revenues from prices
exceeding the sum of a base price (US$2,600 per ton) and smelting costs (projected at US$1,580 per ton), and gold
revenues from prices exceeding US$500 per ounce.
In addition to the “windfall” tax, the new mining regime enacted in July 2006 provides for: (i) a doubling of
royalties on metals from 2.5 percent to 5 percent; (ii) an increase in mining license fees and a shortening of the
license’s duration to discourage speculation and under-utilization of mining licenses; and (iii) a doubling (up to 30
years) of the maximum duration for investment contracts, which may include stability clauses on the tax regime.
The mining law also establishes the possibility of government equity participation up to 34 percent in mines
deemed to be “strategic deposits,” and up to 50 percent for strategic deposits discovered with government support.
A Development Fund was also established to ensure that revenues from the “windfall” tax are allocated as follows:
(i) one third of total for saving; (ii) one third for capital expenditure; and (iii) one third for children and family
allowances.
On the expenditure side, the amended 2006 budget contained several important measures: (i) wages and salaries
were raised by 30 percent (retroactive to February 1); (ii) minimum pensions were increased, and the pensions paid
to retirees under different systems were aligned; (iii) domestically-financed investment was budgeted to morethan-double; and (iv) social welfare transfers were raised through an increase in the monthly child allowance and
the elimination of its means testing, the introduction of lump sum allowances for newlyweds and newborns, and a
modest school lunch program.
The amended 2006 budget officially calls for an overall deficit of 3.4 percent of GDP. However, this estimate
does not reflect the increase in the mining royalty rate. It also treats all revenue accruing to the Development Fund
as expenditure, although on a consolidated central government basis, this is not the case. Taking account of these
factors, the staff and authorities project that the budget will record a surplus of about 9 percent of GDP in 2006.
The 2007 budget calls for an overall deficit of 5 percent of GDP. Reflecting the new tax laws that go into effect
on January 1, tax revenues are projected to cost some 3.9 percent of GDP. These measures include: (i) a cut in the
VAT rate from 15 percent to 10 percent and the abolition of a range of VAT exemptions at an estimated cost of
1.7 percent of GDP; (ii) unification of the personal income tax (PIT) at the lowest of the previous rates
(10 percent) at an estimated cost of 0.5 percent of GDP; (iii) a five percentage point cut in each of the two corporate
income tax (CIT) rates along with a thirty-fold increase in the higher rate’s threshold, the elimination of tax
holidays for foreign investors, the introduction of loss carry-forward provisions, and the use of investment tax
credits in priority sector, at an estimated cost of 1.7 percent of GDP; and increases in excises on vehicles and
gambling for an estimated revenue gain of 0.1 percent of GDP. On the expenditure side, the 2007 budget provides
for a further 30 percent increase in civil service wages and a 0.8 percent increase in civil service employment, a
substantial additional increase to the child allowance, and an increase in capital spending by 4.4 percent of GDP to
address infrastructure needs in areas such as roads and housing.
Looking beyond 2007, Parliament calls for the overall deficit to remain constant at 4 percent of GDP through 2009,
which is the deficit ceiling in the government’s Medium-Term Budget Framework (MTBF).

8
2006, driven entirely by foreign assets. Net domestic assets of the banking system declined in
the year to September 2006, as a sharp drop in net credit to government exceeded the impact of
rapid growth in credit to the private sector. The subdued response to date of inflation to this
rapid monetary growth reflects an ongoing process of reintermediation as incomes have risen
and confidence in the banking system has improved and the gradual appreciation of the
exchange rate, which has helped keep a lid on the prices of imported goods.
9.
The external current account surplus (including official transfers) is expected to
widen from 1½ percent of GDP in 2005 to 5 percent of GDP in 2006 (Table 4 and Figure
4). The increase in the surplus has been driven by a marked improvement in the terms of trade,
which more than offset a pick up in import volume growth and higher investment income
payments. With increased inflows of direct investment in the mining sector and a recovery in
disbursements of concessional official loans, gross international reserves are expected to reach
US$626 million (3½ months of imports of goods and services) by end-2006, while the NPV of
external public debt is expected to fall to 32 percent of GDP, half the level at end-2003.
Looking ahead to 2007, the current account balance is expected to revert to a deficit (2 percent
of GDP) owing to strong growth in investment imports financed by increased foreign direct
investment. Gross official reserves are projected to reach 4 months of import cover at end2007.
10.
Exchange rate developments have reflected the improvements in the terms of trade
and capital inflows. The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the togrog has appreciated by
about 18 percent since end-2004. In terms of the U.S. dollar, the togrog depreciated by
½ percent in 2005 but appreciated by 4½ percent during the first nine months of 2006.
III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS
A. Overview of Policy Issues and Macroeconomic Framework
11.
With its ample mineral endowment and location between two large, fast-growing
economies, Mongolia has the potential to achieve strong, sustainable growth. At the same
time, the economy remains very vulnerable to external shocks, including the possibility of
substantially lower copper prices over the medium term. The discussions, therefore, focused on
policies to safeguard recent gains in macroeconomic stability, improve the governance of
public sector institutions, strengthen confidence in the financial system, and promote private
sector development. The mission encouraged the authorities to save most of the large revenue
windfall from high commodity prices to keep public debt on a sustainable path, and it advised
the Bank of Mongolia to rein in the rapid pace of monetary growth to bolster confidence in the
financial system and prevent an upturn in inflation.
12.
The authorities noted that economic performance has significantly surpassed
expectations in recent years. While partly the result of favorable external factors, this strong
performance has also reflected the sustained implementation of far-ranging structural and
financial sector reforms and the government’s cautious approach to budget planning. While the
authorities remained strongly committed to macroeconomic stability, they also stressed that
Mongolia would require large-scale infrastructure investments to achieve its growth potential.

9
13.
The staff’s medium-term scenario (Annex I) envisages that real GDP growth can
average 6-7 percent over the medium term, if appropriate policies are pursued. Inflation is
targeted to be contained to 5 percent throughout the period, provided that fiscal and monetary
discipline is maintained. Mongolia’s external debt is still moderately high, but debt dynamics
have improved markedly in recent years. To keep the debt burden manageable, the authorities
should continue borrowing solely on concessional terms. Under a baseline scenario providing
for sustained output and export growth and continued access to concessional borrowing,
Mongolia’s external debt ratios would decline in the long term. However, debt distress
indicators could deteriorate and become unsustainable under a variety of plausible shocks,
especially under a severe terms of trade shock.
B. Fiscal Policy
Copper Price and Revenue
10.0

7000
Copper price (left scale)
Threshold (left scale)
Copper revenue (right scale)

8.0

5000
6.0

4000
3000

4.0

2000

Percent of GDP

US$ per metric tonne

6000

2.0

1000
0

0.0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and Fund staff estimates.

Gold Price and Revenue
1.4

800
700
600

Gold price (left scale)
Threshold (left scale)
Gold revenue (right scale)

1.2
1.0
0.8

Percent of GDP

900

US$ per troy ounce

14.
The latest data suggest that the
budget surplus could widen to 9 percent of
GDP in 2006. There are two main reasons for
the sharp revision from the 3½ percent of
GDP deficit in the amended budget. First,
copper prices have remained much stronger
than the authorities expected at the time of the
amended budget, and collections of the
windfall tax and other mining revenues have
been correspondingly larger.2 Secondly,
capital spending has continued to fall far short
of the amounts budgeted, due in part to
teething problems with the introduction of
new government procurement procedures.

15.
In sharp contrast, the 2007 budget
400
0.6
projects an overall deficit of nearly
300
0.4
5 percent of GDP. While a part of this
200
0.2
100
deterioration would be due to a decline in
0
0.0
copper prices, the nonmineral deficit would
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and Fund staff estimates.
also widen from 4½ percent of GDP in 2006
to 16½ percent in 2007. 3 With growth
remaining robust, most of the deterioration in the fiscal balance would reflect policy measures
in the budget which include: (i) cuts in the Value Added Tax (VAT), the personal income tax
(PIT), and the corporate income tax (CIT) which will go into effect on January 1 (Box 2) (a
revenue loss of 4 percent of GDP); (ii) a large increase in the untargeted child
500

2

The amended 2006 budget copper price assumption is US$5,200 per ton, while the actual price has generally
remained above US$7,000 per ton for the second half of the year.
3

The authorities assume that the average copper price in 2007 will be US$6,000 per ton. Although this is
somewhat higher than the September WEO projection, actual prices in recent months have remained around
US$7,000.

10
allowance (from 1 percent of GDP in 2006 to about 4 percent of GDP in 2007); (iii) a
20 percent increase in civil services wages (30 percent increase for those earning minimum
wage) and an increase in civil service employment (raising the wage bill by 1 percent of GDP);
and (iv) a sharp pickup in capital spending (4½ percent of GDP).
16.
The mission considered that the loosening of fiscal policy implied by the budget
would stimulate demand at a time of generally high resource utilization which would be
ill-advised. Moreover, the budget would set in motion spending policies that could be difficult
to reverse over the medium term. The mission believed that it would be feasible and desirable
to contain the overall deficit to 2 percent of GDP (a nonmineral deficit of 13½ percent) in 2007.
Such a deficit could be financed entirely by concessional foreign borrowing.
17.
Most of the short-term fiscal adjustment recommended by the mission could take
place on the expenditure side. The mission encouraged the authorities to focus new spending
on infrastructure improvements and poverty reduction. Therefore, the mission recommends that
the very large increase in the child allowance be scaled back and means testing for the benefit
be reintroduced.4 It is also crucial to accelerate the pace of civil service reform. Given the large
wage increases granted in 2006 and 2007, the mission recommended that the authorities cap the
size of the civil service at current levels until the authorities implement the civil service census
and functional ministerial reviews that are being conducted with World Bank assistance.
Notwithstanding Mongolia’s large infrastructure needs, the mission believes that the country
lacks the implementation and absorptive capacities to raise public investment spending by more
than 2 percentage points of GDP in the near term.
18.
On revenues, the mission welcomed the important steps taken in the 2007 budget
to reduce distortions in the tax system, including the elimination of VAT exemptions and
tax holidays. However, it suggested that the authorities should be prepared to reverse some of
the tax rate cuts if minerals prices fall by more than the authorities now project. The mission
emphasized that the cuts in nonminerals taxes will make the budget increasingly sensitive to
conditions in the minerals sector. With copper prices projected to decline in 2007 and over the
medium term, the tax cuts could put pressure on the fiscal position. Should this occur, the
mission recommended that the authorities reverse at least part of the 5 percentage point cut in
the VAT rate. At the same time, the authorities should ensure that the mining tax regime leaves
Mongolia an internationally competitive producer. The authorities’ request for technical
assistance from the Fund on mining taxation was, therefore, timely. The mission also strongly
encouraged the authorities to resist proposals that had been made by some members of
Parliament to compensate for the tax cuts by raising import duties.
19.
The mission stressed that fiscal policy should be firmly grounded in a transparent
medium-term framework designed to ensure sustainability, reduce the economy’s
vulnerabilities to shocks, and avoid procyclical impulses to demand. To reduce
vulnerability to a downturn in copper prices, it would be prudent to bring the nonmineral deficit
back down to around 7 percent of GDP over the medium term. This would be consistent with a
4

The child allowance contained in the 2007 budget would provide the equivalent of 10 percent of per capita GDP
to 40 percent of the population.

11
gradual reduction in the NPV of public debt to below 30 percent of GDP. The mission noted
that achievement of such a medium-term objective is likely to require concerted policy action
to maintain a broad tax base and contain the growth in spending, as noted above.
20.
The authorities pointed out that budget performance had exceeded expectations by
wide margins in recent years, and they said the government remained committed to
following prudent fiscal policies. However, they also emphasized the importance of
infrastructure improvements, low tax rates, and social consensus to sustain strong growth. For a
resource-rich low-income country, the authorities considered that a budget deficit on the order
of 4 percent of GDP would be sustainable and appropriate over the medium term. While
acknowledging the need for social programs to focus on poverty alleviation, they considered
that there was also a need for the population at large to share the dividends from strong growth
and high minerals prices.
21.
The staff team recognized that fiscal performance had been consistently stronger
than expected, but it noted that continued large deviations between budget projections
and outturns could eventually have an adverse impact on policy credibility. To help
improve transparency, the authorities should consolidate (both numerically and conceptually)
the Development Fund with the rest of the budget and clarify how much of the windfall
revenues it intends to spend, over what timeframe, and for what purposes. They should also
fully align spending of the Development Fund with overall spending priorities. There is also a
need to base budget projections on more realistic assessments of capacity constraints and
estimates of the pace at which the government will be able to able to implement investment
projects.
C. Monetary Policy
22.
Although inflation has come down from the double-digit rates hit in 2005, the
authorities and mission team agreed that continuation of the current rapid growth in
broad money would eventually feed into higher inflation. A relaxation of fiscal policy,
excessive wage increases, or a depreciation of the exchange rate could further add to
inflationary pressures. Against this background, the mission encouraged the authorities to
contain reserve money growth to 15 percent in 2007 to keep inflation in the mid-single digits.
The authorities agreed that these targets for inflation and reserve money were feasible and
appropriate. To achieve this objective, the BOM should increase the issuance of CBBs at
market-clearing interest rates.
23.
Institutional strengthening can help improve the effectiveness of monetary policy
instruments. The government, in turn, should ensure that the central bank remains
adequately capitalized. The government’s recent action of converting a noninterest-bearing
central bank advance to government into interest-bearing bonds was a positive step in this
regard.5 The mission also recommended that the BOM should better integrate the operations of
5

The BOM had provided a 10-year noninterest-bearing advance to the government of US$100 million and a
US$37 million, interest free, short-term loan at end-2003 to help finance the government’s settlement of the pre1991 Transferable Ruble debt.

12
its International and Monetary Policy Departments to ensure that changes to reserve money
driven by purchases of gold from domestic producers are appropriately sterilized. A technical
assistance mission by MCM to advise on monetary policy instruments is scheduled to take
place in December 2006.
24.
The authorities noted the recent decision by the BOM and 10 commercial banks to
establish the Mongolian Mortgage Corporation (MIC). The MIC is expected to provide
well-secured lending to the private sector and facilitate the development of a secondary market,
which were both seen as important for sustained economic development. The mission
welcomed the plans to broaden the capital market but cautioned that the BOM should refrain
from providing guarantees or large liquidity injections to support MIC operations.
D. External Policies
25.
Mongolia’s flexible exchange rate has facilitated adjustment to large real shocks.
Commodity exports account for more than two thirds of Mongolia’s total merchandise exports,
and export performance has been closely associated with the movements in the terms of trade.
Despite the real appreciation of the togrog over the past two years, the external position looks
sustainable, and inflation is lower than it would have been under a less flexible exchange-rate
regime. Given these factors, the level of the exchange rate appears to be broadly appropriate
and the authorities and mission team agreed that foreign exchange market interventions should
remain limited to the smoothing of short-term volatility.6 Recent business surveys conducted by
USAID and the World Bank have highlighted inefficient government administration,
burdensome tax and customs regulations, inadequate infrastructure, and corruption as the
business community’s main concerns for competitiveness. Therefore, the staff team stressed
that maintaining competitiveness and promoting export diversification over the medium term
will require a combination of sound macroeconomic policies and continued progress in
structural reforms aimed at streamlining regulation and eliminating corruption.
26.
Given the relatively high level of external debt and the large amount of borrowing
that will continue to be needed to improve infrastructure and strengthen growth
prospects, the mission advised the authorities to continue borrowing exclusively on
concessional terms. The mission also recommended that the government should refrain from
granting external loan guarantees on behalf of domestic borrowers, and it welcomed the
government’s ongoing efforts to strengthen the collection of on-lent funds. The authorities
stressed that they remained committed to prudent debt management, and they endorsed the
assessment under the joint Bank-Fund debt sustainability analysis (Annex I). While the
authorities had no immediate plans to tap international capital markets, the central bank saw
potential benefits in establishing a good credit rating based on actual experience in the market.
27.
Important steps have been taken to settle some longstanding disputes with foreign
creditors. The pre-1991 transferable ruble debts to Russia and Poland have been settled and
discussions are also underway on the arrears of post-1991 Russian debt. Loan arrears to an
6

Foreign exchange market operations are described in the accompanying Selected Issues Paper, Chapter III.

13
Italian supplier were cleared in mid-2006 but two longstanding Finnish suppliers’ credits
remain under dispute.
28.
Mongolia maintains open trade and investment regimes, but pressures for
increased protection are on the rise. The authorities expressed concerns about the potential
negative impact on local industries that could result from lowering the export tax on cashmere,
and Mongolia’s WTO commitment to eliminate the tax by January 2007 is likely to be missed.
Some parliamentarians also favor offsetting part of the revenue loss from the VAT rate decline
by increasing import duties. The staff urged the authorities to adhere to their original schedule
to eliminate the raw cashmere export tax and to resist pressures to raise import duties.
E. Central Bank Governance and Financial Sector Reforms
29.
Weaknesses in central bank governance, in areas including central bank oversight,
banking supervision, and the management of international reserves have been viewed as
potential risks to financial stability. The mission was, therefore, encouraged to note that the
BOM had made a good start in implementing reforms to strengthen its governance structures.
In September 2006, the BOM appointed two non-executive directors to its Board of Directors,
in line with technical assistance advice from the Fund. The authorities are also examining
possible changes in the Central Bank Law to shift key decision-making authority from the
Governor to the Board of Directors, another Fund staff recommendation. The mission
welcomed these steps and encouraged the authorities to move forward with other governance
reforms, including the strengthening of the BOM’s external Supervisory Board, which conducts
oversight of the central bank. While commending recent progress in strengthening the BOM
governance, the staff encouraged the BOM to move toward full compliance with the 2003
Safeguards Assessment.
30.
Prudent management of international reserves is crucial for safeguarding financial
stability. The staff team stressed that international reserves should be held in low risk,
unencumbered assets, and it noted that the BOM’s exposures in the gold market could raise
risks in this respect. In view of the still-limited capacity and appetite of banks to engage in
complex gold operations, there was agreement that an immediate withdrawal of the BOM from
domestic gold purchases was not necessarily desirable. However, the BOM should begin
preparing a timely exit strategy from the market. Meanwhile, the mission advised the BOM to
adopt more prudent guidelines for its gold risk exposures and to cease immediately from taking
risky positions in gold derivatives and other speculative instruments.
31.
Progress has been made in strengthening the banking system, although important
risks still remain. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) of the banking system were reduced from
23½ percent of total loans at end-2000 to 9 percent at end-2005, and the ratio has remained
relatively stable in 2006. However, NPLs at some small and medium-sized banks have
increased, and their profitability has deteriorated. The mission noted that it can be more
difficult to detect incipient loan quality problems when loan growth is very rapid, and it
encouraged the authorities to intensify their supervision of banks with high credit growth or
rising NPLs. Contingency plans should also be drawn up for the resolution of problem banks,
and the mission advised the authorities to proceed very cautiously with plans to introduce a
bank deposit insurance scheme.

14
32.
The authorities said they were taking additional steps to strengthen banking
supervision. Several banks with rapid credit growth were already subject to intensified
supervision, and the BOM is strengthening its capacity to enforce fit and proper requirements
for major bank shareholders. In addition, all 16 banks have complied with the doubling of the
minimum capital requirement set by the BOM. The authorities also reported that some progress
had been achieved in identifying final borrowers in a fraud scheme involving letters of credit
from a Korean supplier.
33.
Solvency problems have emerged at a number of saving and credit cooperatives
(SCCs). The Financial Regulatory Commission (FRC) was established in 2006 to supervise
these and other nonbank financial institutions. The FRC is reviewing applications for licenses
from SCCs, some of which have already been rejected, and it has initiated on-site
examinations. The FRC also plans to intensify the supervision of securities firms, insurance
companies, and other nonbank financial institutions. The mission stressed that SCCs and other
nonbank financial institutions should be excluded from any deposit insurance scheme for the
banking system, if one is developed.
34.
The mission welcomed the recent adoption the AML/CFT Law and the authorities’
plans to establish a Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) within the BOM. It noted that some
issues still needed to be addressed to ensure full compliance with FATF recommendations. The
authorities stressed their intention to strengthen further the AML/CFT framework as needed to
meet international standards.
F. Structural Reforms, Poverty Reduction, and Statistical Issues
35.
Tax administration, regulatory and public enterprise reforms have been designed
to help strengthen private sector development. The adoption of the Anti-Corruption Law is
also expected to pave the way for removing a major impediment to doing business in Mongolia,
although the law still needs further strengthening to meet international requirements. The
authorities have endorsed the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) to improve
governance in mineral resources management. Public enterprise reforms are being pursued.
Savings Bank was recently privatized, bidding is underway for the privatization of Gobi
Cashmere, and enterprises in the energy sector are slated to undergo comprehensive
restructuring under a forthcoming World Bank-supported energy sector reform project.
36.
Socio-Economic Guidelines have been recently finalized with a view to
strengthening the poverty reduction strategy. To address high poverty and widening income
gaps, the staff reiterated that poorly targeted social welfare programs, such as the universal
child allowance and lump-sum awards to newlyweds and newborns, seriously diluted resources
for poverty alleviation.
37.
Mongolia accords high priority to the collection and dissemination of economic
statistics, and efforts are underway to further upgrade the statistical base. Work is well
underway to expand the coverage of national accounts data. An STA mission in
September 2006 made good progress in reconciling discrepancies on domestic bank financing
in the monetary data and government finance statistics. Mongolia is participating in the pilot
program for the introduction of the Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 2001

15
methodology. The authorities have requested World Bank and Fund support to implement their
Program of Official Statistics Development (2006-2010).
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL
38.
Mongolia is experiencing a period of unprecedented strong economic performance.
Real GDP growth has averaged 7 percent since 2002, and inflation has been brought back down
to the mid-single digits. The budget surplus is expected to widen to over 9 percent of GDP
in 2006. The external current account is also in surplus, public debt ratios have declined, and
international reserves have been rebuilt to more comfortable levels.
39.
Looking forward, the economy faces both significant opportunities and risks.
Mongolia’s rich endowment of mineral resources and its location between two large, fastgrowing economies provide a good foundation for strong, sustained growth. Nevertheless,
daunting medium-term challenges need to be addressed: infrastructure is weak, the territory is
landlocked and sparsely populated, the climate can be extremely harsh, and poverty remains
troublingly high. Moreover, the large run up in copper prices on the world market, which has
helped fuel the recent vigorous expansion, could be at least partly reversed in coming years.
Overcoming these obstacles to sustained growth will require policies conducive to maintaining
macroeconomic stability, improving infrastructure, reducing structural rigidities and other
impediments to private sector development, and effectively utilizing the strong natural resource
base.
40.
The fiscal position has improved markedly in recent years due to strong economic
growth, a sharp increase in mining sector revenues, and improved tax administration
However, maintaining these gains, with public debt remaining on a gradually declining path
may require policy adjustments, particularly if copper prices decline significantly over the
medium term, as expected. The loosening of fiscal policy implied by the 2007 budget would be
ill-advised. It could also set in motion spending policies that could be difficult to reverse over
the medium term. Therefore, the staff considers that it would be feasible and desirable to
contain the overall budget deficit to 2 percent of GDP in 2007.
41.
On the revenue side, the challenge will be to maintain a broadly based tax regime
that does not discourage investment and growth and is not overly sensitive to commodity
price shocks. Many of the elements of the tax reform package coming into effect on
January 1, 2007, including the elimination of tax holidays, the introduction of loss carry
forward, and the deductibility of a fuller range of business expenses, are consistent with this
objective and with past technical and policy advice from the Fund. However, the government’s
decision to place increased reliance on mining taxation while cutting nonmining taxes entails
risks. To maintain medium-term fiscal sustainability, the authorities may need to undo some of
the tax rate cuts, particularly if copper prices decline significantly. Reversing part of the
5 percentage point cut in the VAT rate would be the least distortionary way to accomplish this.
The government should also keep the mining regime under close review to ensure that it is
appropriately designed to limit risks to the public sector balance sheet to maintain an
internationally competitive fiscal regime.

16
42.
Expenditure reform should also be an important part of a sustainable fiscal policy
strategy. Government expenditure in Mongolia accounts for a higher share in GDP than in
many other low income countries. Although this is warranted, to some degree, by structural
factors, there is a need to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of government. Social
welfare programs need particular attention. The universal coverage of some welfare benefits,
such as the awards for newlyweds and newborns, and the child allowance, is placing a strain on
the budget, limiting the government’s ability to focus on poverty alleviation for the most
vulnerable groups. The staff encourages the authorities to reintroduce means testing, where
possible, for social welfare programs. Meanwhile, the very large increase in the child allowance
provided in the 2007 budget should be scaled back significantly, and further reductions may be
needed in the future. The staff also urges the authorities to move forward more forcefully with
civil service reforms to pay for increases in public sector wages.
43.
Rapid monetary growth is an indication of reintermediation and improving
confidence in the banking system. However, a continuation of monetary growth at recent
rates will eventually feed into higher inflation. To preclude this, the authorities should step up
sales of central bank bills in order to slow the growth in reserve money. The staff welcomes the
BOM’s request for technical assistance from the Fund to develop additional monetary policy
instruments and strengthen liquidity management.
44.
Mongolia’s flexible exchange rate regime, prudent external borrowing policies,
and open trade regime have facilitated orderly adjustment to external shocks, and these
policies should be retained. The strengthening of the togrog has been warranted by
commodity price developments and the strong balance of payments. Achieving this through
flexibility in the nominal exchange rate has helped keep inflation lower than it might otherwise
have been. Intervention in the foreign exchange market should remain limited to smoothing
short-term movements. To prevent an increase in the external debt service burden, the
government and central bank should continue to refrain from nonconcessional external
borrowing. The staff encourages the authorities to reach prompt agreement with foreign
creditors on outstanding obligations and debt disputes. The staff also urges the authorities to
phase out the export duty on raw cashmere and to resist calls to raise import duties to protect
domestic industries.
45.
The authorities have made a good start at strengthening central bank governance.
The recent appointment of non-executive members to the BOM’s Board of Directors was a
positive step that should be followed by actions to shift more decision-making authority from
the BOM Governor to the Board of Directors. Prudent management of international reserves is
crucial for safeguarding Mongolia’s financial stability. This should include a reduction in gold
risk exposures and preparation of an exit strategy from the gold market .
46.
Further actions are needed to strengthen the financial system. Rapid credit growth
and the case of the fraudulent LCs illustrate the need for vigilant enforcement of prudential
regulations. High priority should be given to the monitoring of banks with fast credit growth
and rising NPLs, strengthening banks’ governance, and establishing contingency plans for
problem banks. High bank lending rates reflect the still-high risk premia in the market. The
staff urges the authorities to continue resisting calls for administrative measures to reduce these

17
rates. The public sector should not bail out insolvent savings and credit cooperatives, and these
institutions are not to be included in any future insurance deposit scheme for banks.
47.
The staff welcomes actions to strengthen the institutional environment for private
sector development. Important recent steps include the adoption of the Anti-Money
Laundering Law and the Anti-Corruption Law, although the latter still needs further
strengthening. Recent progress in privatization of two of the remaining large public enterprises
is also welcome. Further efforts, however, are needed to strengthen the operations of the
remaining public enterprises, mainly in the energy sector.
48.
The staff welcomes efforts underway to strengthen data quality for surveillance
purposes, including the broadened coverage of national accounts, reconciliation of
discrepancies between fiscal and monetary data, and Mongolia’s participation in the
GFSM 2001 pilot project. Further technical assistance will be important to the success of
these efforts.
49.
The staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation with Mongolia take
place on the standard 12-month cycle.

22
Table 1. Mongolia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003-07
Nominal GDP (2005): $2,066 million
Population (2005): 2.56 million
Per capita GDP (2005): $806
Poverty incidence: 36 percent 1/
Quota: SDR 51.1 million
2003 2/

2004

2005

Real sector
Real GDP growth
Mineral
Nonmineral
Consumer prices (period average)
Consumer prices (end-period)
GDP deflator

6.1
-2.3
7.1
5.1
4.7
11.6

10.8
34.3
8.1
8.3
11.0
18.0

7.0
10.9
6.5
12.1
9.5
20.7

General government budget
Revenue and grants
Expenditure and net lending
Current balance
Primary balance
Overall balance (including grants)
Nonmineral overall balance
Net domestic bank credit to government

37.6
41.8
7.5
-3.0
-4.2
-7.0
9.4

37.0
39.1
8.6
-0.9
-2.1
-6.3
-3.2

33.7
30.7
9.3
3.8
2.9
-1.5
-5.8

Money and credit
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Of which: claims on nonbanks
Broad money
Reserve money
Broad money velocity (GDP/BM) 5/
Annual interest rate on central bank bills (percent) 6/

-24.9
191.6
147.0
90.3
49.7
14.7
2.1
15.0

22.0
19.5
23.0
43.7
20.3
16.8
2.3
15.8

92.4
9.6
22.3
40.1
37.3
19.7
2.3
3.7

Balance of payments
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
(In percent of GDP)
Current account balance (including official transfers) 7/
(In percent of GDP)
Trade balance
(In percent of GDP)
Exports, f.o.b.
(Percent change)
Imports, cif
(Percent change)
Foreign direct investment
Gross official international reserves (end-period)
(In months of next year's imports of goods and services)

-148
-11.5
-99
-7.7
-199
-15.5
627
19.7
827
9.8
132
178
1.5

-60
-3.7
27
1.6
-149
-9.2
872
39.0
1,021
23.5
129
208
1.6

-59
-2.8
29
1.4
-155
-7.5
1,069
22.5
1,224
19.8
258
333
2.1

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

6.6
5.4
1.1

23.1
15.1
7.0

13.6
11.0
2.3

...
...
...
...

Trade prices
Export prices (U.S. dollar, percent change)
Import prices (U.S. dollar, percent change)
Terms of trade (percent change)

2006
Amended
Est.
Budget

2007
Budget 3/
Proj. 4/

(Percent change)
6.8
...
...
5.6
7.0
24.1

7.0
5.2
7.3
5.6
7.0
24.1

8.6
...
...
...
5.0
...

7.0
5.2
7.3
5.3
5.0
6.5

40.6
31.7
16.4
9.6
9.0
-4.5
-12.1

35.9
40.9
6.8
-4.4
-5.0
-16.3
2.6

35.5
37.5
7.8
-1.4
-2.0
-13.6
-0.9

85.5
-9.7
-5.0
39.2
34.9
16.5
2.2
5.8

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

33.7
30.5
26.8
20.9
32.5
15.0
1.9
...

55
2.0
145
5.2
16
0.6
1,548
44.8
1,532
25.2
329
626
3.4

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

-159
-5.2
-67
-2.2
-169
-5.5
1,635
5.6
1,804
17.7
499
800
3.9

40.4
11.6
25.8

...
...
...

0.0
-0.5
0.5

(In percent of GDP)
33.2
36.6
6.5
-2.6
-3.4
-11.1
-1.6
(Percent change)
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

(In millions of US dollars; unless otherwise indicated)

(In millions of US dollars; unless otherwise indicated)

Public and publicly guaranteed debt
Total public debt (In percent of GDP) 8/9/
Domestic debt (In percent of GDP)
External debt 7/
(In percent of GDP)
(In percent of total public debt)
Net public debt (In percent of GDP)
NPV of total public debt (In percent of GDP) 8/9/10/
Debt service
(In percent of exports of goods and services)

113.0
14.8
1,237
98.2
86.9
105.2
79.5
284.0
34.0

93.0
7.6
1,361
85.4
91.8
88.0
59.9
91.2
7.5

68.3
4.2
1,308
64.1
93.9
62.4
44.7
42.8
2.9

...
...
...
...
...
50.1
...
...
...

53.6
2.6
1,405
51.0
95.1
41.2
34.6
41.8
2.1

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

50.6
2.0
1,480
48.6
96.1
36.9
32.5
49.8
2.4

Exchange rate
Togrogs per US dollar (end-period)
Togrogs per U.S. dollar (period-average)
Real effective exchange rate (end-period; percent change)

1,170
1,147
-6.8

1,209
1,193
0.8

1,221
1,205
7.7

...
...
...

1,164
1,186
...

...

...
...
...

Nominal GDP (billion togrogs)
Nominal GDP (million U.S. dollars)

1,474
1,285

1,926
1,615

2,489
2,066

3,306
2,788

3,306
2,788

3,768
3,092

3,768
3,092

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Share of households below national poverty line, 2003 Household Income and Expenditure Survey.
2/ The outturn for 2003 reflects the impact on fiscal, monetary and external accounts of the $250 million settlement of the TR debt.
3/ As approved by Parliament, but subject to ratification by the President.
4/ Fund staff projections based on policy recommendations.

5/ Seasonally adjusted figures for broad money velocity.
6/ Annualized yield on end-period auction of 14-day bills; as of end-September 2006.
7/ From 2004 onwards, revised estimates for remittances in the current account, offset by adjustments, mainly in the capital account.
8/ Includes IMF loans, guarantees and arrears.
9/ Includes treasury bills outstanding, and gross claims of the BoM on the government.
10/ Based on 5 percent discount rate from 2004 onwards.

23
Table 2. Mongolia: Summary Operations of the General Government, 2003−07
2003

2004

2005

2006
Amended
Budget

2007
Est.

Budget 1/

Proj. 2/

(In billions of togrogs)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (incl. grants)
Nonmineral overall balance

553.9
615.8
-61.9
-103.1

713.1
753.7
-40.6
-120.4

837.9
764.6
73.3
-37.9

1,097.6
1,209.2
-111.6
-367.9

1,343.4
1,046.5
296.8
-149.3

1,353.0
1,542.9
-189.9
-615.5

1,336.2
1,412.8
-76.6
-511.1

Financing
Foreign (net)
Domestic (net)

51.1
-115.8
166.9

33.8
81.0
-47.1

3.5
89.8
-86.2

111.6
148.8
-37.2

-296.8
87.1
-384.0

189.9
78.2
111.7

76.6
94.5
-17.9

Total revenue and grants
Current revenue
Mineral revenue
Nonmineral revenue
Tax revenue and social security contributions
Income taxes
Enterprise income tax
Personal income tax
"Windfall" tax
Social security contributions
Sales tax and VAT
Excise taxes
Customs duties and export taxes
Other taxes
Nontax revenue
Capital revenue and grants

37.6
37.0
2.8
34.2
28.6
6.6
4.7
2.0
0.0
4.4
8.3
4.0
2.2
3.1
8.4
0.6

37.0
36.7
4.1
32.5
30.3
7.5
5.1
2.4
0.0
4.3
8.5
3.6
2.3
4.1
6.4
0.4

33.7
33.4
4.5
29.0
27.8
7.2
4.8
2.3
0.0
3.8
7.3
3.2
2.3
4.1
5.6
0.2

33.2
33.0
7.8
25.3
26.6
9.6
4.8
2.1
2.6
3.2
6.3
2.7
1.7
3.2
6.4
0.2

40.6
40.5
13.5
27.0
33.8
15.1
7.0
2.1
5.9
3.2
6.8
2.8
2.1
3.9
6.6
0.2

35.9
35.8
11.3
24.5
30.0
12.1
4.5
1.8
5.8
3.6
5.4
2.7
2.3
4.0
5.8
0.1

35.5
35.3
11.5
23.8
29.5
11.6
4.1
1.8
5.7
3.6
5.3
2.8
2.2
4.0
5.8
0.1

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Purchase of goods and services
Subsidies to public enterprises
Transfers
Interest payments
Contingency allocation

41.8
29.5
7.9
11.9
0.6
7.9
1.2
...

39.1
28.0
7.2
11.3
0.6
7.7
1.2
...

30.7
24.1
6.2
9.3
0.3
7.4
0.8
0.0

36.6
26.5
6.0
11.7
0.4
7.7
0.8
0.0

31.7
24.1
5.9
9.4
0.4
7.8
0.6
0.0

40.9
28.9
7.1
8.8
0.4
12.0
0.6
0.0

37.5
27.5
6.8
8.8
0.4
10.8
0.6
0.0

Capital expenditure and net lending
Capital expenditure
Domestically-financed
Foreign-financed
Net lending
On-lent foreign project loans
Domestic lending minus repayments

12.3
6.1
4.6
1.6
6.1
5.7
0.4

11.1
5.4
4.3
1.2
5.7
5.5
0.1

6.6
3.6
3.2
0.4
3.0
3.6
-0.6

10.0
6.3
5.0
1.3
3.7
4.2
-0.5

7.6
5.4
5.1
0.3
2.2
2.7
-0.5

12.0
10.3
9.3
0.9
1.8
2.4
-0.7

10.0
8.2
7.3
0.9
1.8
2.4
-0.7

Current balance (excl. privatization receipts)
Primary Balance
Overall balance (incl. grants)
Nonmineral overall balance

7.5
-3.0
-4.2
-7.0

8.6
-0.9
-2.1
-6.3

9.3
3.8
2.9
-1.5

6.5
-2.6
-3.4
-11.1

16.4
9.6
9.0
-4.5

6.8
-4.4
-5.0
-16.3

7.8
-1.4
-2.0
-13.6

Discrepancy between deficit from above and below the lin

-0.7

-0.3

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Financing
Foreign (net)
External borrowing (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
External arrears
Domestic (net)
Banking system (net)
Nonbank
Privatization receipts
Other nonbank (net)

3.5
-7.9
-7.9
13.1
20.9
0.0
11.3
9.4
1.9
1.5
0.5

1.8
4.2
3.5
4.9
1.4
0.7
-2.4
-3.2
0.8
0.8
-0.1

-2.1
3.6
3.4
4.4
1.0
0.2
-5.7
-5.8
0.0
0.2
-0.2

3.4
4.5
4.5
5.8
1.3
0.0
-1.1
-1.6
0.5
0.5
0.0

-9.0
2.6
2.6
3.3
0.7
0.0
-11.6
-12.1
0.5
0.5
0.0

5.0
2.1
2.1
3.4
1.3
0.0
3.0
2.6
0.4
0.4
0.0

2.0
2.5
2.5
3.4
0.9
0.0
-0.5
-0.9
0.4
0.4
0.0

7.4
-8.0
-6.6
113.0
98.2
14.8
7.8
105.2
79.5
1,474

11.2
-7.7
-6.2
93.0
85.4
7.6
5.0
88.0
59.9
1,926

13.3
-2.0
-0.9
68.3
64.1
4.2
5.9
62.4
44.7
2,489

23.4
-16.3
-15.1
55.4
52.8
2.6
5.3
50.1
35.7
3,306

33.2
-6.6
-5.7
53.6
51.0
2.6
16.0
37.6
34.6
3,306

31.5
-23.1
-22.2
50.6
48.6
2.0
11.2
39.4
33.1
3,768

32.6
-19.2
-18.3
50.6
48.6
2.0
10.5
40.1
32.5
3,768

(In percent of GDP)

Memoranda items:
Mineral revenue/total revenue and grants (in percent)
Nonmineral overall balance 3/
Nonmineral primary balance 3/
Total public debt (incl. IMF)/GDP
Foreign debt (incl. IMF)/GDP
Domestic debt/GDP
Governments deposits
Net public debt
NPV of total public debt
Nominal GDP

Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Including Development Fund operations. As approved by Parliament, but subject to ratification by the President.
2/ Fund staff projections based on policy recommendations.
3/ In percent of nonmineral GDP.

24
Table 3. Mongolia: Monetary Aggregates, 2003-07
2003
Dec.

2004
Dec.

2005
Mar.

June

2006
Sept.

Dec.

Mar.

Jun.

Sept.

Dec.

2007
Dec.

Est.

Proj. 1/

(In billions of togrog; end of period)
Monetary survey
Broad Money
Currency
Deposits

704
131
572

846
144
703

892
133
760

1,009
177
832

1,112
174
937

1,162
152
1,009

1,205
145
1,061

1,463
198
1,265

1,528
189
1,339

1,567
165
1,402

2,076
189
1,887

Net foreign assets
Net international reserves
Bank of Mongolia
Commercial banks
Other foreign assets, net

232
278
151
128
-47

283
294
198
96
-11

330
342
222
120
-12

377
389
253
136
-12

480
488
310
178
-8

544
551
364
187
-7

555
564
411
153
-9

791
782
449
333
10

945
942
595
347
3

1,009
1,015
696
319
-7

1,348
1,355
907
447
-7

Net domestic assets
Domestic credit
Net credit to government 2/
Claims on nonbanks
Of which:
Claims on public enterprises
Claims on the private sector
Nonperforming loans
Other items, net

472
601
152
449

564
740
94
646

562
747
65
682

632
805
48
757

632
828
7
821

618
904
-1
905

650
946
-50
996

672
983
-121
1,103

583
910
-267
1,177

558
859
-400
1,260

728
1,089
-434
1,523

16
390
37
-129

13
552
71
-176

14
581
76
-185

22
647
76
-174

21
701
82
-197

34
776
79
-286

29
858
90
-296

30
966
89
-311

33
1,011
110
-326

...
...
...
-301

...
...
...
-361

Reserve money

201

235

253

296

297

281

308

376

377

328

377

Net foreign assets
Net international reserves
Other assets, net

151
151
0

199
198
1

224
222
1

254
253
1

315
310
5

372
364
8

415
411
4

469
449
20

609
595
14

704
696
7

915
907
7

Net domestic assets
Net credit to government
Claims on deposit money banks
Minus: Central bank bills (net)
Other items, net
Of which : precious metals

50
128
13
76
-15
8

36
106
22
69
-23
6

30
84
22
70
-7
12

41
87
19
82
16
34

-18
45
18
84
3
37

-91
52
18
126
-35
10

-107
-2
18
110
-13
11

-93
-72
18
69
30
51

-233
-190
18
84
23
43

-376
-323
18
104
33
...

-538
-367
18
167
-22
...

Monetary authorities

(In percent; except otherwise indicated)

Memoranda items:
Annual broad money growth
Annual growth of credit to nonbanks 3/
Annual reserve money growth

49.7
90.3
14.7

20.3
43.7
16.8

20.6
34.1
10.5

24.3
33.5
20.4

34.4
34.7
16.3

37.3
40.1
19.7

35.1
46.0
21.7

45.0
45.7
27.2

37.4
43.3
26.8

34.9
39.2
16.5

32.5
20.9
15.0

Velocity, seasonally adjusted

2.1

2.3

2.6

2.5

2.4

2.3

2.6

2.2

2.1

2.2

1.9

Broad money/Reserve money
Nonperforming loans/total loans (percent)
Excess reserves (billions of togrogs)

3.5
8.2
6.4

3.6
10.9
3.0

3.5
11.2
33.9

3.4
10.0
18.3

3.7
10.0
5.2

4.1
8.8
15.3

3.9
9.0
58.0

3.9
8.1
18.4

4.1
9.3
18.4

4.8
...
...

5.5
...
...

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fund staff projections based on policy recommendations.
2/ Valued at actual exchange rates and gold prices.
3/ Includes nonperforming loans.

25
Table 4. Mongolia: Balance of Payments, 2003-11
(In millions of US dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
2003
Current account balance (including official transfers)
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Copper
Gold
Imports, c.i.f.
Services, net
Receipts
Payments
Income, net
Official medium- and long-term interest payments
Transfers, net
Official
Private
Financial and capital account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Loans
Medium- and long-term, net
Disbursements
Public
Private
Amortization
Public
Private
Short-term, net
Currency and deposits, net
Commercial banks, net
Other
Trade credits, net

Gross official reserves (end-period)
(In months of next year's imports of goods and services)
Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) 3/

2007

Est.

Proj. 1/

2008

2009

2010

2011

Proj. 1/

27

29

145

-67

-479

-255

-174

-213

-149
872
284
240
-1,021
-46
338
-383
-48
-15
146
87
36
10
129
-53
49
75
157
129
29
-82
-18
-64
-27
-120
0
-119
4

-155
1,069
326
331
-1,224
65
414
-350
-106
-15
134
88
3
88
258
0
-14
61
91
90
1
-31
-22
-9
-75
-162
-72
-91
7

16
1,548
648
318
-1,532
66
447
-380
-191
-16
140
90
25
153
329
0
82
90
130
110
20
-40
-20
-20
-8
-266
-120
-146
8

-169
1,635
623
399
-1,804
61
471
-409
-224
-17
147
92
26
248
499
0
48
78
126
105
21
-48
-27
-21
-30
-309
-110
-199
10

-554
1,483
419
441
-2,037
50
497
-447
-251
-18
156
94
27
575
727
0
73
103
157
135
22
-55
-33
-21
-30
-237
-40
-197
12

-492
1,426
415
372
-1,917
68
524
-456
-119
-19
165
96
27
379
395
0
74
104
162
139
23
-58
-37
-22
-30
-105
-40
-65
15

-161
1,835
533
646
-1,995
72
552
-480
-393
-20
181
98
28
368
360
0
83
113
174
150
24
-61
-38
-23
-30
-95
-60
-35
20

-76
1,993
483
821
-2,069
66
580
-514
-522
-21
190
100
29
365
360
0
81
111
175
150
26
-65
-42
-23
-30
-97
-60
-37
21

31

-5

9

0

0

0

0

0

0

-98

32

126

298

181

96

124

194

152

98
97
3
94
1
0
...

-32
-37
-7
-30
5
0
...

-126
-131
-6
-125
5
0
...

-298
-298
-6
-292
0
0
...

-181
-181
-6
-174
0
0
0

-96
-96
-5
-91
0
0
0

-124
-124
-6
-118
0
0
0

-194
-194
-5
-190
0
0
0

-152
-152
-4
-148
0
0
0

-11.5
-7.7
19.7
9.8

-3.7
1.6
39.0
23.5

-2.8
1.4
22.5
19.8

2.0
5.2
44.8
25.2

-5.2
-2.2
5.6
17.7

-17.7
-14.8
-9.3
12.9

-10.1
-7.3
-3.9
-5.9

-6.9
-4.5
28.7
4.1

-7.4
-5.1
8.6
3.7

12.3
4.2
6.6
5.4

13.8
7.7
23.1
15.1

7.8
7.9
13.6
11.0

3.1
12.2
40.4
11.6

5.6
18.3
0.0
-0.5

4.1
14.2
-12.9
-1.1

1.4
-4.4
-5.2
-1.6

33.4
5.4
-3.5
-1.3

9.8
3.2
-3.5
-0.6

-15.5

-9.2

-7.5

0.6

-5.5

-17.2

-14.1

-4.1

-1.8

178
1.5
34.0

208
1.6
7.5

333
2.1
2.9

626
3.4
2.1

800
3.9
2.4

891
4.5
2.8

1,009
4.9
3.2

1,198
5.6
2.6

1,346
5.9
2.6

Financing
Increase in net official reserves (-)
Use of IMF credit (+)
Increase in gross official reserves (-)
Arrears accumulation (+) / payments (-) (net) 2/
Exceptional financing / rescheduling
Financing gap

Trade balance (in percent of GDP)

2006

-99

Overall balance

Export volume growth
Import volume growth
Export price index change
Import price index change

2005

-199
627
162
157
-827
-49
208
-257
-12
-12
74
49
38
-30
132
50
-187
-170
176
101
74
-346
-264
-82
-17
-21
-21
0
-4

Errors and omissions

Memoranda items:
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Exports, f.o.b. (annual growth)
Imports, c.i.f. (annual growth)

2004

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fund staff projections based on policy recommendations.
2/ Arrears on post-1991 Russian debt. Excluding disputed amounts with Finland.
3/ Public external debt service only.

26
Table 5. Mongolia: External Debt and Debt Service, 2003–11
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Proj. 1/

Est.

(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
Nominal Debt Stock 2/
IMF
Non-IMF
of which: current outstanding
Multilateral
Official bilateral
Treasury bill in US$ to nonresident
Commercial
of which: additional

1,237
49
1,188
1,188
669
456
50
13
0

1,361
44
1,317
1,317
797
507
0
13
0

1,308
36
1,271
1,271
770
488
0
13
0

1,405
29
1,376
1,265
772
493
0
0
111

1,480
23
1,457
1,241
763
478
0
0
216

1,582
19
1,563
1,211
750
461
0
0
352

1,681
13
1,668
1,176
734
442
0
0
492

1,792
8
1,783
1,140
718
421
0
0
644

1,896
5
1,892
1,097
700
398
0
0
794

284
272
12

91
75
16

43
28
15

42
26
16

50
33
17

56
38
18

62
43
19

63
43
20

67
45
21

Debt Service on Existing Debt
Amortization
Medium and long term
Multilateral
Official Bilateral
Commercial
Interest
Medium and long term
Multilateral
Official Bilateral
Commercial

21
21
10
11
0
12
12
6
6
0

25
25
11
14
0
15
15
7
8
0

28
28
12
16
0
15
15
7
8
0

26
26
13
13
0
15
15
7
7
0

33
33
16.7
16.5
0
14
14
7
7
0

38
38
20
18
0
14
14
7
7
0

43
43
24
19
0
14
14
7
6
0

43
43
23
20
0
13
13
7
6
0

45
45
23
22
0
13
13
7
6
0

Debt Service on TR settlement
Amortization
Russia
Slovakia
N. Korea
Treasury Bill
Interest
Russia
Treasury Bill

251
250
1
0
0
0
0
0

50
0
0
0
50
1
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

1
0
1

2
0
2

4
0
4

5
0
5

7
0
7

8
0
8

Memoranda items:
Total debt service
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of GDP

34.0
22.1

7.5
5.6

2.9
2.1

2.1
1.5

2.4
1.6

2.8
1.7

3.2
1.8

2.6
1.6

2.6
1.6

Total debt stock
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of GDP

148.1
98.2

112.5
85.4

88.2
64.1

70.5
51.0

70.3
48.6

79.9
49.8

86.2
49.1

75.1
46.4

73.7
45.9

Net present value of debt
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of GDP

808
96.8
64.2

834
68.9
52.3

827
55.8
40.3

872
43.7
31.7

929
44.1
30.5

1,001
50.6
31.5

1,072
55.0
31.3

1,151
48.2
29.8

1,228
47.7
29.7

Total Debt Service (including TR debt resolution)
Amortization
Interest

Debt Service on New Borrowing
Amortization
Interest

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding TR11.4 billion debt to Russia settled in December 2003 with an upfront payment of U.S. $250 million.

27
Table 6. Mongolia: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2003–11
2003

2004

2005

2006
Est.

2007

2008

2009
Proj. 1/

2010

2011

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated)

Real sector
Nominal GDP (in billions of togrogs)
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Per capita GDP (in U.S. dollars)
Real GDP (percent change)
Mineral real GDP
Nonmineral real GDP
GDP deflator (percent change)
Consumer prices (period average; percent change)
Consumer prices (end-period; percent change)

1,474
1,285
513
6.1
-2.3
7.1
11.6
5.1
4.7

1,926
1,615
637
10.8
34.3
8.1
18.0
7.9
10.6

2,489
2,066
806
7.0
10.9
6.5
20.7
12.5
9.2

3,306
2,788
1,075
7.0
5.2
7.3
24.1
5.6
7.0

3,768
3,092
1,179
7.0
5.2
7.3
6.5
5.3
5.0

4,055
3,228
1,217
7.0
5.2
7.2
0.6
5.0
5.0

4,504
3,477
1,296
7.0
6.5
7.1
3.8
5.0
5.0

5,231
3,917
1,443
11.0
30.0
8.4
4.6
5.0
5.0

5,780
4,199
1,529
6.0
4.6
6.2
4.2
5.0
5.0

Total revenue and grants
Mineral revenue
Nonmineral revenue
Capital revenue and grants

37.6
2.8
34.2
0.6

37.0
4.1
32.5
0.4

33.7
4.5
29.0
0.2

40.6
13.5
27.0
0.2

35.5
11.5
23.8
0.1

31.4
4.3
26.9
0.1

29.4
4.2
25.0
0.1

27.8
3.9
23.8
0.1

27.3
2.7
24.5
0.1

Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest payments
Other
Capital expenditure and net lending
Current balance
Overall balance (including grants)
Nonmineral overall balance

41.8
29.5
7.9
11.9
1.2
8.5
12.3
7.5
-4.2
-7.0

39.1
28.0
7.2
11.3
1.2
8.3
11.1
8.6
-2.1
-6.3

30.7
24.1
6.2
9.3
0.8
7.7
6.6
9.3
2.9
-1.5

31.7
24.1
5.9
9.4
0.6
8.1
7.6
16.4
9.0
-4.5

37.5
27.5
6.8
8.8
0.6
11.2
10.0
7.8
-2.0
-13.6

35.5
26.5
6.7
8.6
0.7
10.5
9.0
4.7
-4.1
-9.6

32.4
24.4
6.6
8.2
0.7
8.9
8.0
4.9
-3.0
-7.3

30.8
22.8
6.3
7.5
0.6
8.4
8.0
4.9
-3.0
-7.2

30.4
22.4
6.3
7.2
0.6
8.3
8.0
4.8
-3.1
-6.9

Foreign financing (including gap financing)

-7.9

4.2

3.6

2.6

2.5

3.2

3.0

2.8

2.6

49.7
2.1

20.3
2.3

37.3
2.3

34.9
2.2

32.5
1.9

24.2
1.6

20.7
1.4

17.3
1.4

15.1
1.4

19.7
9.8
-11.5
-7.7

39.0
23.5
-3.7
1.6

22.5
19.8
-2.8
1.4

44.8
25.2
2.0
5.2

5.6
17.7
-5.2
-2.2

-9.3
12.9
-17.7
-14.8

-3.9
-5.9
-10.1
-7.3

28.7
4.1
-6.9
-4.5

8.6
3.7
-7.4
-5.1

178
1.5

208
1.6

333
2.1

626
3.4

800
3.9

891
4.5

1,009
4.9

1,198
5.6

1,346
5.9

113.0
14.8
98.2
1,237
79.5
64.2
7.8
34.0

93.0
7.6
85.4
1,361
59.9
52.3
5.0
7.5

68.3
4.2
64.1
1,308
44.7
40.3
5.9
2.9

53.6
2.6
51.0
1,405
34.6
31.7
16.0
2.1

50.6
2.0
48.6
1,480
32.5
30.5
14.4
2.4

51.3
1.6
49.8
1,582
32.6
31.5
12.2
2.8

50.2
1.1
49.1
1,681
31.7
31.3
10.8
3.2

47.2
0.8
46.4
1,792
29.6
29.8
9.0
2.6

46.3
0.5
45.9
1,896
29.0
29.7
7.5
2.6

1,779
364

2,863
409

3,676
445

6,300
610

6,000
670

4,000
705

3,200
745

2,800
785

2,400
805

General government accounts

Monetary sector
Broad money (percent change)
Velocity (GDP/M2)

Balance of payments
Exports (percent change)
Imports (percent change)
Current account balance (excluding official transfers)
Current account balance (including official transfers)
Gross official reserves
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in months of next year's imports of goods and services)

Debt indicators
Total public debt
Domestic debt
External debt
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
NPV of total public debt
of which: external debt
Government deposits in the banking system
External public debt service 2/

Memoranda items
Copper prices (US$ per ton)
Gold prices (US$ per ounce)

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Fund staff projections based on policy recommendations.
2/ In percent of exports of goods and services.

28
Table 7. Mongolia: Indicators for Vulnerability and Financial Soundness, 2001-05
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Key Economic and Market Indicators
Real GDP growth (in percent)
CPI inflation (end of period; in percent)
Short-term interest rate (in percent) 1/
Exchange rate, Togrog/US$ (end of period)

1.1
7.9
8.8
1,102

4.2
1.7
8.0
1,125

6.1
4.7
15.0
1,170

10.8
10.6
15.8
1,209

7.0
9.2
3.7
1,221

External Sector
Exchange rate regime
Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 2/
Direct investment (in percent of GDP)
Export growth (US$ value, percent change)
Real effective exchange rate (end of period; 2000=100)
Gross international reserves (in US$ million)
NPV of external debt (in percent of GDP)

-7.6
4.2
-2.4
104.6
206.8
57.7

Floating
-9.6
6.9
0.1
99.2
271.5
59.5

-7.7
10.2
19.7
92.4
177.7
64.2

1.6
8.0
39.0
93.2
207.8
52.3

1.4
12.5
22.5
100.6
333.2
40.3

General Government
Overall balance (in percent of GDP)
Primary balance (in percent of GDP)
General government financing (in percent of GDP)
Foreign (net)
Domestic (net)
Financial Sector
Capital adequacy ratio
Tier I capital ratio
Total regulatory capital/risk-weighted assets
Total regulatory capital/total assets
Asset quality
Foreign exchange loans/total loans
NPLs/total loans
Provisions/NPLs 3/
Earnings and profitability
Return on (average) assets
Interest margin/gross income
Non-interest expenses/gross income
Personnel expenses to non-interest expenses
Liquidity
Loans to deposits
Liquid assets/total assets
Liquid assets/short-term liabilities 4/

-5.4
-3.9

-5.9
-4.3

-4.2
-3.0

-2.1
-0.9

2.9
3.8

5.9
-0.5

6.6
-0.9

-7.9
11.3

4.2
-2.4

3.6
-5.7

21.6
24.6
14.2

17.7
20.0
12.4

18.5
20.4
13.4

17.4
20.0
15.6

15.8
18.2
13.6

35.2
7.9
85.8

32.5
7.0
74.0

42.8
8.2
57.6

45.6
10.9
53.9

47.0
8.8
63.8

5.9
41.3
55.4
26.0

4.3
39.8
50.3
22.4

3.1
35.9
49.1
22.3

2.5
31.5
58.8
26.7

2.2
30.9
54.3
28.5

92.8
41.3
80.6

100.0
39.9
90.9

113.1
35.3
83.5

116.6
31.6
28.8

121.8
36.0
37.7

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Annual interest rate on central bank bills at the end of period.
2/ Including official transfers.
3/ NPLs includes past due loans.
4/ Short-term liabilities are defined as the sum of current account and demand deposits.

29
ANNEX I. Mongolia—Debt Sustainability Analysis
A. Introduction
1.
This appendix presents the joint debt sustainability analysis (DSA) of the IMF and
the World Bank staff. Mongolia is rated as a medium performer with regard to its policies
and institutions under the joint IMF-WB DSA framework for low-income countries (LICs)7.
The debt sustainability is analyzed in relation to the threshold indicators for countries in this
category.
B. Baseline scenario
Assumptions
2.
The baseline scenario is built on the assumption of sustained output and export
growth. Real GDP is assumed to grow by 7 percent in 2006 as well as from 2007 to 2009,
partly underpinned by the ongoing development of the Oyu Tolgoi (Ivanhoe) Mine. Real
GDP growth is expected to reach 11 percent in 2010 when the main Ivanhoe Mines’
production starts, and declines to 6-5.5 percent between 2010 and 2014, before further
slowing down to 5 percent after 2015. The growth scenario assumes the start up of additional
new mining sector and infrastructure projects and the continued development of the service
sector over the medium term and beyond. Regarding the fiscal projections, the 2007 overall
budget deficit is assumed to be 2 percent of GDP. This is 3 percentage points lower than the
2007 budget proposal of the Government and assumes that the additional policy measures
recommended in the Article IV document are implemented. In the balance of payments,
export growth is expected to remain strong in 2006, followed by a slowdown in 2007-09, as
copper prices revert to their long-term trend, in line with WEO assumptions. Export growth
would then pick up substantially in 2010 when the main Ivanhoe Mine begins production.
Imports will also be higher, mainly of equipment associated with mining operations and
infrastructure development. Beyond 2015, export growth is assumed to be 6.5-7.5 percent,
while imports are assumed to grow at about 7 percent over the long term.
3.
New borrowing is assumed to be only on concessional terms. New borrowing is
projected to remain at around US$150 million annually over the medium term, and to
increase by about 2½ percent annually over the longer term. The average concessionality
level of new external borrowing is assumed at around 40 percent, which is slightly lower than
the current level.
Fiscal DSA (Table 1a)
4.
Under the baseline scenario, public sector debt remain on a downward trend
(Table 1a). Public debt falls from about 68.3 percent of GDP at end-2005 to 46.3 percent at
7

In the LIC DSA framework, the quality of a country’ s policies and institutions is measured by the World
Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) index, and classified into three categories: strong,
medium and poor. Compared to last year, the overall CPIA index for Mongolia has remained unchanged.

30
end-2011 and continues to decline thereafter. In net present value (NPV) term, however,
public debt, which temporarily decreases to 84.4 percent of revenues in 2006, is expected to
rebound to 110.6 percent by the end of the decade, mainly because of the sharp decline in
mineral revenue. The debt service-to-revenue ratio is also expected to follow the same
pattern, declining below 3.3 percent in 2006 followed by steady increase through the entire
forecast period. The NPV of government debt as a share of GDP, however, declines to
30 percent by the end of this decade and remains below 30 percent thereafter (Figure 1).
External DSA (Table 2a)
5.
The NPV of the debt-to-GDP ratio (40 percent at end-2005), which is the only
indicator initially above its threshold, is expected to decline to 32 percent in 2006,
mostly as a result of the substantial nominal GDP growth. Nominal GDP (in US dollar) is
expected to increase substantially in 2006 (33 percent) driven by high GDP deflator growth
as a result of the buoyant export prices. The ratio is expected to stay at similar levels in the
near term before further dropping down in the longer term. Reflecting Mongolia’s high
export-to-GDP ratio, the NPV of debt-to-export ratio would stay well below the
corresponding threshold (150 percent) during the entire projection period, although it is
expected to increase in the near term with the slowdown of export growth. Also, given that
most of the external debt is on concessional terms, the debt service ratio would stay below
3.5 percent of exports under the baseline scenario, against the 20 percent threshold. Finally,
the NPV of debt-to-revenue ratio and debt service-to-revenue ratio would also stay well
below the 250 percent and 30 percent thresholds, respectively.
C. Alternative scenarios and bound tests
Fiscal DSA (Table 1b)
6.
The debt indicators based on alternative scenarios imply that a decline in GDP
growth would be the main risk to fiscal debt sustainability (Table 2a). A decline in
growth rates to the last decade’s average would push up debt levels, so that the NPV of debtto-revenue ratio would reach around 170 percent at end-2011 and continue to increase to an
alarming level of about 270 percent at end-2026. The scenario assuming an unchanged
nonmineral primary balance,8 however, yields much lower debt indicators. This is because
this scenario does not include the recently passed tax cuts, which will apply from 2007.
7.
The bound tests confirm that the largest deterioration of debt indicators could
be observed with lower growth rates. Against this background, the authorities should
continue to strengthen competitiveness of their private sectors and improve the business
climate to support baseline growth.
8

The assumption of an unchanged primary balance, which is typically used in debt sustainability assessments to
represent a scenario without policy reforms, is not considered relevant for Mongolia, because export prices are
currently exceptionally high and the budget has a substantial surplus. Instead, the no-reform scenario assumes
an unchanged nonmineral balance.

31
External DSA (Table 2b)
8.
The bound tests suggest that external debt indicators could deteriorate
considerably in the face of adverse external developments, especially terms of trade
shocks. Given that copper and gold account for more than half of Mongolia’s total exports,
the impact of exogenous shocks on these commodities is simulated as a Mongolia-specific
bound test. Specifically, the test assumes that copper and gold prices decline by 35 and
25 percent, respectively, in 2010, and each rises by 1 percent annually thereafter (case B.2 in
Table 2b). The test also assumes that as a consequence of these terms of trade shocks and
their income effects, the real GDP growth rate is reduced by 0.5 percent in 2010, and by
0.25 percent thereafter compared with the baseline scenario. Under these assumptions, both
NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio and debt-to-export ratio would deteriorate substantially: NPV of
debt-to-GDP ratio will stay above the 40 percent threshold even in the long term, and debtto-export ratio will reach 119 percent by 2026.
9.
Other adverse shocks would also lead to heavier debt burden in the medium
term, although debt level would remain manageable in the long term. For example, if the
interest rate on new borrowing is 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline (with
unchanged grace and maturity periods), the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio would reach
34 percent by 2009, before declining to 25 percent by 2026. Lower growth and current
account balance, as well as lower non-debt inflows, among others, would also lead to higher
debt distress in the medium term.
D. Conclusion
10.
Mongolia is at moderate risk of debt distress over the medium term, although
the debt burden is likely to remain sustainable over the long term, if the authorities
continue to borrow exclusively on concessional terms and the external economic
environment evolves broadly as envisaged in the baseline scenario.9 Under this scenario,
all debt indicators would stay below their respective thresholds through the medium-to-long
term. However, the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio would breach its threshold in the medium term
under various shock scenarios. In particular, debt sustainability is vulnerable to severe termsof-trade shocks. The analysis calls for continued prudent debt management and close watch
of debt sustainability. The government should also refrain from any nonconcessional
borrowing or loan guarantees.

9

This risk classification will not change if the three-year-average CPIA Index is used (2003-05) instead of the
2005 CPIA Index.

21.6
-8.4
3.0
37.6
0.6
40.6
-10.0
-5.9
-0.7
-5.3
-4.0
-1.5
-1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.0
14.8
0.0
...
...
24.7
39.3
…
57.8
-18.6
6.1
1.2
-0.9
-4.9
11.6
1.0
...

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which : grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which : contribution from average real interest rate
of which : contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

NPV of public sector debt
o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
NPV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
NPV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/
o/w external
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 3/ 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic currency debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percen
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)
10.8
1.2
-13.0
-10.1
18.0
3.5
...

7.6
0.0
...
...
3.2
20.5
…
6.3
20.8

-19.9
-22.7
0.9
37.0
0.3
37.9
-22.8
-13.9
-3.0
-11.0
-8.9
-0.8
-0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.8

93.0
85.4

2004

-24.7
-23.5
-3.8
33.7
0.2
29.9
-19.5
-8.5
-2.4
-6.1
-11.0
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.2

68.3
64.1

2005

...

4.3
1.4
-2.7
1.3
11.8
4.4

5.1

Historical
Average
5/

...

2.9
0.3
8.5
13.7
8.2
11.6

4.7

Standard
Deviation
5/

1/ Gross debt of the general government sector.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues including grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

7.0
1.1
-15.9
-14.0
20.7
-15.7
...

44.5
40.3
40.3
...
-1.9
132.2
119.8
5.6
20.9

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

113.0
98.2

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2003

Actual

7.0
1.2
-18.3
-18.6
24.1
11.1
...

34.3
31.7
31.7
...
-8.3
84.4
77.9
3.3
5.1

-14.7
-27.2
-9.6
40.6
0.1
31.0
-17.1
-6.1
-1.7
-4.5
-11.0
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.5

53.6
51.0

2006

7.0
1.2
-1.8
...
6.5
27.0
...

32.5
30.5
30.5
...
2.9
91.6
86.0
4.3
4.4

-3.0
-3.6
1.4
35.5
0.1
36.8
-4.5
-3.9
-0.4
-3.5
-0.6
-0.4
-0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

50.6
48.6

2007

-1.1
-0.9
2.3
29.4
0.1
31.7
-3.1
-3.7
-0.3
-3.4
0.6
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

50.2
49.1

2009

7.0
1.2
5.1
...
0.6
1.1
...

7.0
1.2
3.6
...
3.8
-2.5
...

33.1
32.4
31.5
31.3
31.5
31.3
...
...
5.2
4.0
105.4 110.3
100.4 106.4
5.4
5.8
2.7
3.4

0.7
1.7
3.5
31.4
0.1
34.8
-1.5
-3.6
-0.3
-3.3
2.1
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0

51.3
49.8

2008

11.0
1.2
5.9
...
4.6
5.5
...

30.6
29.8
29.8
...
4.0
110.0
107.2
5.8
5.4

-3.0
-2.9
2.4
27.8
0.1
30.2
-5.0
-5.3
-0.3
-5.0
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

47.2
46.4

2010

6.0
1.2
5.3
...
4.2
4.6
...

30.2
29.7
29.7
...
4.1
110.6
108.8
5.9
3.3

-0.9
-0.3
2.5
27.3
0.1
29.8
-2.6
-2.9
-0.3
-2.7
0.4
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

46.3
45.9

2011

Projections

Table 1a. Mongolia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2003-26

7.5
1.2
0.0
...
7.3
7.8
...

0.4

2006-11
Average

5.0
1.2
3.4
...
6.5
4.4
...

25.9
26.2
26.2
...
3.2
96.5
97.5
4.7
3.0

-1.0
-0.8
2.0
26.9
0.1
28.8
-2.7
-2.2
-0.3
-1.9
...
-0.1
-0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

38.6
38.9

2016

5.0
1.1
3.1
...
6.7
4.7
...

29.6
17.0
17.0
...
4.5
117.8
67.6
7.8
2.3

0.2
0.5
2.5
25.1
0.1
27.7
-2.0
-1.6
0.1
-1.7
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.3

36.9
24.3

2026

5.1
1.2
3.1
...
6.6
4.6
...

2.5

2012-26
Average

32

33
Table 1b. Mongolia: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt, 2006-26
Projections
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2016

2026

34

32

33

32

31

30

26

30

34
34
34

37
34
33

39
31
34

42
29
34

44
25
33

46
25
33

49
24
35

67
33
60

34
34
34
34
34

36
40
39
45
42

42
46
45
45
42

44
45
44
44
41

44
43
41
41
39

46
42
40
40
38

52
36
33
33
32

71
36
34
35
34

84

92

105

110

110

111

96

118

84
84
84

103
97
93

126
100
108

143
100
116

159
91
118

169
91
123

181
91
132

266
129
240

84
84
84
84
84

102
114
111
128
118

134
148
143
145
134

150
154
148
149
140

159
153
147
146
139

170
153
146
145
140

194
132
123
122
121

284
143
134
138
135

3.3

4.3

5.4

5.8

5.8

5.9

4.7

7.8

3.3
3.3
3.3

4.4
4.3
4.3

9.5
7.6
5.7

9.5
2.6
6.4

11.3
2.9
6.7

12.1
1.5
7.3

12.1
5.0
8.5

23.4
8.5
21.0

3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.3

4.5
4.3
4.5
4.6
4.3

8.1
13.9
12.2
6.3
15.6

11.2
16.3
12.9
7.0
10.1

12.1
10.6
9.1
7.0
8.2

13.0
9.1
8.1
7.2
7.8

14.0
6.8
5.9
6.0
6.1

26.9
11.8
9.9
9.4
10.5

NPV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary nonmineral balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007
NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary nonmineral balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary nonmineral balance is unchanged from 2006
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2007-2008
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2007
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2007
Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of 20 (i.e., the length of the projection period).
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

34

Figure 1a. Mongolia: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006-26 1/
80

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
70
60
50
40
30
20

Baseline
No Reform

10

Most extreme stress test

0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
300

NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
250

200

150

100
Baseline
No Reform

50

Most extreme stress test

0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
30

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
25

Baseline
No Reform
Most extreme stress test

20

15

10

5

0
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test is test that yields highest ratio in 2016.
2/ Revenue including grants.

1.3

1.6

10.8
14.2
1.2
44.9
29.6
...

...
...
...
...
7.5
7.5
0.0
10.1

85.4
85.4
-12.8
-30.3
-2.6
12.2
75.9
88.2
-14.6
-0.2
-8.1
-19.6
1.0
-8.4
-12.2
17.6
-0.3
9.3

2004

2.0

7.0
19.6
1.1
22.6
12.0
...

40.3
55.5
40.3
55.5
2.9
2.9
-0.3
19.1

64.1
64.1
-21.3
-32.7
-2.2
4.4
72.7
77.2
-10.9
4.3
-12.6
-17.9
0.8
-4.7
-14.0
11.5
-0.2
13.9

2005

3.8

-5.6

2.9
12.8
0.1
19.1
8.3
...

2.9

-10.2

4.3
2.2
1.2
12.4
11.3
...

5.8

3.1

Standard
Historical
Average 6/ Deviation 6/

2.8

7.0
26.3
1.2
34.5
21.6
39

31.7
43.7
31.7
43.7
2.1
2.1
-0.4
7.3

51.0
51.0
-13.1
-20.6
-5.9
-3.0
72.4
69.4
-8.3
5.5
-12.0
-2.7
0.6
-3.3
…
7.4
0.0
20.0

2006

3.0

7.0
3.3
1.2
5.6
15.7
39

30.5
44.1
30.5
44.1
2.3
2.3
-0.4
4.1

48.6
48.6
-2.4
-17.4
1.7
3.5
69.1
72.7
-7.8
6.0
-16.4
-2.7
0.5
-3.2
…
15.0
0.0
15.6

2007

3.2

7.0
-2.5
1.2
-6.0
12.2
40

31.5
50.6
31.5
50.6
2.8
2.8
-0.2
13.3

49.8
49.8
1.2
-11.1
14.5
15.9
62.3
78.1
-7.8
6.5
-22.9
-2.7
0.6
-3.3
…
12.2
0.0
10.2

2008

3.4

7.0
0.7
1.3
-1.5
-4.5
40

31.3
55.0
31.3
55.0
3.2
3.2
-0.1
7.5

49.1
49.1
-0.7
-7.3
6.9
12.4
56.9
69.3
-7.6
2.1
-11.5
-2.7
0.6
-3.2
…
6.7
0.0
6.4

2009

Projections

3.9

11.0
1.5
1.3
22.4
4.3
40

29.8
48.2
29.8
48.2
2.7
2.7
-0.1
6.6

46.4
46.4
-2.7
-9.6
4.0
2.3
61.9
64.2
-7.2
8.9
-9.3
-4.2
0.6
-4.8
…
6.9
0.0
7.3

2010

4.1

6.0
1.1
1.3
7.8
4.3
40

29.7
47.7
29.7
47.7
2.7
2.7
-0.1
5.1

45.9
45.9
-0.6
-6.2
4.6
0.2
62.2
62.4
-7.0
11.3
-8.7
-2.0
0.6
-2.6
…
5.6
0.0
5.8

2011

7.5
5.1
1.2
10.5
9.0
40

4.3

2006-11
Average

1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and r = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets (of the central bank, commercial banks, and enterprises); and valuation adjustments.
For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that NPV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)

6.1
7.3
1.1
17.9
14.2
...

...
...
...
...
33.9
33.9
0.2
-2.2

NPV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
NPV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Key macroeconomic assumptions

98.2
98.2
9.2
-13.4
6.9
19.7
66.3
86.0
-12.8
0.0
-10.4
-9.9
0.9
-4.8
-6.0
22.6
-0.1
-5.7

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing
change in gross foreign assets

2003

Actual

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 2a. Mongolia: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2006-26 1/

6.3

5.0
3.3
1.5
6.4
6.9
40

26.2
46.2
26.2
46.2
2.5
2.5
-0.1
2.5

38.9
38.9
-1.4
-3.8
1.1
-2.5
56.7
54.3
-5.2
8.8
-3.6
-1.3
0.5
-1.9
…
2.4
0.0
4.1

2016

14.4

5.0
3.5
1.6
7.4
6.8
40

17.0
36.7
17.0
36.7
2.4
2.4
-0.1
1.6

24.3
24.3
-1.4
-2.6
0.2
-0.2
46.4
46.1
-2.6
3.0
-2.0
-0.8
0.4
-1.2
…
1.2
0.0
2.6

2026

5.1
3.4
1.5
6.6
6.5
40

-3.3

-4.4

1.3

2012-26
Average

35

36
Table 2b. Mongolia: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2006-26
(In percent)
Projections
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2016

2026

32

30

31

31

30

30

26

17

32
32

39
31

43
33

44
34

45
33

46
34

42
33

24
25

32
32
32
32
32
32

32
30
35
40
35
43

35
31
40
54
36
44

35
31
40
53
36
44

33
35
38
49
34
42

33
39
37
49
34
42

29
52
33
40
30
37

19
53
21
22
20
24

44

44

51

55

48

48

46

37

44
44

56
45

68
54

77
60

73
54

74
55

74
58

52
55

44
44
44
44
44
44

44
44
44
57
47
44

51
51
51
86
46
51

55
55
55
92
50
55

48
65
48
80
44
48

48
71
48
78
44
48

46
100
46
71
42
46

37
119
37
48
34
37

2.1

2.3

2.8

3.2

2.7

2.7

2.5

2.4

2.1
2.1

2.4
2.3

3.2
2.8

3.8
3.4

3.4
3.0

3.5
3.0

4.3
3.2

4.3
3.7

B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/

2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.3

2.8
2.8
2.8
3.2
2.7
2.8

3.2
3.2
3.2
4.2
3.0
3.2

2.7
3.1
2.7
3.5
2.5
2.7

2.7
3.3
2.7
3.5
2.5
2.7

2.6
4.0
2.6
4.5
2.4
2.6

2.5
6.7
2.5
3.6
2.3
2.5

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/

40

40

40

40

40

40

40

40

2006

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Terms of trade shocks on copper and gold exports in 2010 and lower growth thereafter 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B2. Terms of trade shocks on copper and gold exports in 2010 and lower growth thereafter 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2007-08 4
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2007 5/

Debt service ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 2/
B. Bound Tests

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Assumes that copper and gold prices decline by 35 percent and 25 percent respectively in 2010 on top of the WEO assumptions of sharp decline in copper prices through 200709, and each rises by 1 percent in 2011-26. As a consequence of these terms of trade shocks, assumes that the real GDP growth rate is less by 0.5 percent in 2010 and by 0.25
percent thereafter compared to baseline scenario.
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

37
Figure 2a. Mongolia: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Under
Alternative Scenarios, 2006-26
(In percent)
60

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio
50
40
30
20
Baseline
10

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

140

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio
120
100
80
60
40
Baseline
20

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

8

Debt service-to-exports ratio

7
6
5
4
3
2

Baseline

1

Historical scenario
Most extreme stress test

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations. Thresholds for the three indicators are 40 percent, 150 percent, and
20 percent, respectively.

38
ANNEX II. Mongolia––Fund Relations
(As of November 30, 2006)
I.

Membership Status: Joined: 02/14/1991; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund Holdings of Currency
Reserve Position in Fund

SDR Million
51.10
50.97
0.14

percent Quota
100.0
99.74
0.27

III.

SDR Department:
Holdings

SDR Million
0.06

percent Allocation
N/A

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
ESAF/PRGF Arrangements

SDR Million
21.04

Percent Quota
41.17

V.

Financial Arrangements:
Type
PRGF
ESAF/PRGF
ESAF

Approval
Date
09/28/2001
07/30/1997
06/25/1993

Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn
Date
(SDR Million)
(SDR Million)
07/31/2005
28.49
12.21
07/29/2000
33.39
17.44
06/24/1996
40.81
29.68

VI.

Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and
present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Principal
0.59
4.30
3.19
4.22
3.04
Charges/interest
0.05
0.09
0.07
0.05
0.03
Total
0.65
4.39
3.26
4.28
3.07

VII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of Mongolia (BOM) was subject to a full
safeguards assessment with respect to the PRGF arrangement that was approved by the Executive
Board on September 28, 2001. An on-site safeguards assessment of the BOM was completed on
September 10, 2003. Staff recommended that the BOM implement measures to strengthen its external
audit mechanism and financial reporting framework. The BOM has so far implemented several of the
recommendations. Staff continues to monitor the BOM’s efforts to: (i) commit to the full adoption of
International Accounting Standards (IAS) and to disclose its guarantees and pledges in its financial
statements; and (ii) disclose the fair value of derivatives in its net international reserve position and
financial statements. At the conclusion of the December 2002 PRGF discussions, the BOM agreed to
implement special semi-annual audits of NIR to provide further assurance on the NIR position and to
identify any related pledges or guarantees.

39
VIII.

Exchange Arrangement:

On May 27, 1993, Mongolia moved from a fixed exchange rate against the U.S. dollar to a floating
exchange rate system. The official exchange rate is now set daily on the basis of transactions in the
interbank market. At end-November 2006, the official midpoint rate was Tog 1,164 per U.S. dollar.
The official exchange rate is applied to State budget and customs transactions, including debt-service
payments, and to trade and service transactions conducted under bilateral payments arrangements.
Mongolia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on February 1, 1996, and
maintains an exchange system that is free from restrictions on payments and transfers for current
international transactions. Mongolia imposes exchange restrictions for security reasons in accordance
with United Nations Security Council Resolution No. 92/757 concerning certain transactions with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) that have been notified to the Fund under
Decision 144-(52/51).
IX.

Article IV Consultation:

The 2005 Article IV consultation (Country Report No. 05/396) was concluded by the Executive
Board on September 21, 2005. Mongolia will be on the 12–month cycle.
X.
•
•
•
XI.

ROSC Assessments:
ROSC, Data Module, May 4, 2001 (www.imf.org)
ROSC, Fiscal Transparency Module, November 8, 2001 (Country Report No. 01/218)
ROSC, Fiscal update, May, 2005
Recent Financial Arrangements:

A three-year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in an amount equivalent
to SDR 40.81 million (80 percent of quota) with a first annual arrangement in an amount of
SDR 18.55 million (36.3 percent of quota), was approved on June 25, 1993. The second annual
arrangement in an amount of SDR 11.13 million (21.8 percent of quota) was approved on
November 23, 1994. The ESAF arrangement lapsed on June 24, 1996.
A three-year arrangement under the ESAF/PRGF in an amount equivalent to SDR 33.4 million
(65.4 percent of quota), with a first annual arrangement in an amount of SDR 11.13 million
(21.8 percent of quota), was approved by the Executive Board on July 30, 1997. The first year
arrangement lapsed on July 30, 1998. The second annual arrangement of SDR 14.8 million
(29 percent of quota) was approved on June 16, 1999. The first review under that arrangement was
completed in January 2000 and the arrangement lapsed on June 15, 2000. The ESAF/PRGF
arrangement lapsed on July 29, 2000.
A three-year arrangement under the PRGF in an amount equivalent to SDR 28.49 million
(55.8 percent of quota), with the first year of the arrangement in an amount of SDR 12.21 million
(23.9 percent of quota), was approved by the Executive Board on September 28, 2001. The first and
second review under the PRGF was completed on September 12, 2003, and the Executive Board
approved the extension of the PRGF through July 31, 2005. The arrangement expired on that date
without the completion of the third and subsequent reviews.

40
XII. Technical Assistance:
Missions:
•
Government Finance and Monetary and Financial Statistics (STA), September 2006
•
Improving Banking Supervision and Reserve Management (MCM), September 2006
•
Value Added Tax, Income Tax and Excise Tax Legislation (LEG), August 2006
•
Cooperation between Mongolia’s NSO and STA, May 2006
•
Management Structure of the Bank of Mongolia (MFD), April 2006
•
Monetary and Financial Statistics (STA), October 2005.
•
Banking supervision and payment systems (MFD), June 2005.
•
Options for Expenditure Savings and Efficiency Improvements (FAD), January 2005.
•
Banking supervision and prudential framework (MFD), October 2004.
•
Reforms of Tax Policies (FAD), October 2004.
•
Government Finance Statistics (STA), August 2004.
•
Balance of Payments Statistics (STA), July-August 2004.
•
Banking supervision and prudential framework, (MFD), May-June 2004.
•
AML/CFT Action Plan and legislative awareness, May 2004.
•
Banking supervision and accounting (MFD), October 2003.
•
Government Finance Statistics (STA), August 2003.
•
AML/CFT (MFD), June 2003.
•
Banking supervision and accounting (MAE), November 2002.
•
Revenue administration (FAD), September 2002.
•
Banking supervision and accounting (MAE), May 2002.
•
Review of treasury and intergovernmental fiscal reforms (FAD), August 2001.
•
Banking supervision and accounting (MAE), May–June 2001.
•
Money and banking statistics (STA), May 2001.
•
Government finance statistics (STA), March 2001.
•
Fiscal transparency and ROSC (FAD), March 2001.
•
Intergovernmental fiscal relations and budget reform (FAD), January 2001.
•
Visits by MAE peripatetic experts on banking supervision, payments system, monetary
policy, and accounting and audit, November 2000.
•
Consumer price statistics (STA), September–October 2000.
•
ROSC: data module (STA), May 2000.
•
Restructuring bonds and other securities (MAE), March 2000.
•
National accounts statistics (STA), February 2000.
Resident Advisors:
•
National accounts statistics (STA), August 2001–September 2003
•
Treasury reform (FAD), June 1999–November 2003
•
Balance of payments (STA), March 1999–May 2001
Technical assistance for the period May 1995–October 1999 is reported in Annex II of the Staff
Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation.
XIII. Resident Representative:
Mr. Jang has been the Fund’s resident representative in Mongolia since April 1, 2006.

41
ANNEX III. Mongolia—Relations with the World Bank Group10
Mongolia, an IDA only country, became a member of the World Bank Group in February 1991. Bank
lending to Mongolia currently represents about 11 percent of the country’s overall official
development assistance flows. The current Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), covering the period
2004-07, was approved by the World Bank Board on 29 April 2004. The CAS is broadly aligned with
Mongolia’s Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EGSPRS) and supports
policies in areas where the World Bank has a comparative advantage. The CAS uses a “results-based
approach” that relates outcomes to the country’s longer-term goals, including the MDGs.
A Governance Assistance Project was approved on May 23, 2006 to pave the way for a possible
series of annual Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs), as envisaged initially in the CAS. The
project will help improve governance in the areas of public financial management (budget execution,
debt management, civil service), transparency and accountability, anti-corruption, poverty
monitoring, and the investment climate.
The Bank’s main sectoral activities also include:
•

Public Sector and Fiscal framework. The Bank is working with the Government to strengthen
the public finance management framework and civil service administration through the
provision of analytical advice, and an investment and technical assistance project (The
Economic Capacity building Technical Assistance project).

•

Financial sector. After closure of a Financial Sector Adjustment Credit, the Bank continues
working with the government and selected commercial banks to strengthen the banking
system’s capacity in credit risk management, automated payments system and Savings Bank
resolution under the Financial Capacity Development Project (FCDP). Meanwhile, the second
Private Sector Development Credit (PSDC II) continues to provide technical assistance in
developing risk management and term-lending capacity in selected Mongolian banks, and
enhancing central bank supervision capacity, in addition to financing private sector capital
investment. A mid-term review is under way with a view to updating the Bank's assistance
program to address the new challenges, and renewing the government's long-term strategy for
financial sector reform and development.

•

Private Sector Development (PSD). The findings from an Investment Climate study initiated
in mid-2004 will feed directly into the development of a PSD strategy and measures in the
series of PRSCs to improve the business environment. New lending operations to encourage
private sector participation in infrastructure sector are also being considered for the next three
to four years.

•

Social sectors. A Poverty Assessment was completed in 2006. In education, the Bank
launched a rural education project that will build classroom libraries in all rural elementary

10

Questions may be addressed to Ms. Boyreau, 473-8541.

42
schools. In addition, the analysis of the 2005 Public Expenditure Tracking Survey was
completed. Analytical work by the Bank is underway on the quality of the educational system
in Mongolia and the implications of the ongoing transition to an 11-grade system. In social
protection, a study was carried out to assess the targeting efficiency of the social assistance
schemes and of the Child Money Program. The Bank also supported the creation of a
beneficiary data base for monitoring and evaluation of this program.
•

Rural and Urban development. The Bank is assisting the government in the development of
rural strategies and promotes secure and sustainable livelihoods through activities in pastoral
risk management, microfinance services, basic infrastructure investment (through communitydriven approaches), and the piloting of a new index-based livestock insurance product. In the
area of urban development, the focus is on city development strategy. The Bank is also
supporting the improvement of services delivery, particularly on improvement of water
supply and ger area upgrading.11

•

Infrastructure. An Information and Communication Infrastructure Development Project was
approved on June 8, 2006. The Bank is working with the government in improving the
technical and financial operation of electricity and water utilities through two projects: Energy
Project and UB2 respectively. A Renewable Energy and Access Project is expected to be
approved in November, 2006. The Infrastructure Strategy report—including sectoral
background notes is under preparation.

•

Judicial and legal reforms. The Bank is supporting efforts to enhance public confidence in the
legal system, with a focus on the judiciary system. Challenges remain in enhancing access to
justice, especially for the poor; disseminating new laws to the public; and enforcing existing
laws.

•

Supreme Audit Institutions. The Bank continues to work with the Mongolia National Audit
Office to strengthen its technical audit capacity.

IFC became a minority owner of two Mongolian banks in 2004. The IFC is also providing technical
assistance for developing a leasing industry.
MIGA: Mongolia signed the MIGA convention in 1991 and ratified it the following year. MIGA will
be able to assist the country in attracting foreign investment through its marketing and guarantee
activities.

11

A Ger is the traditional dwelling tent of Mongolian people.

43

ANNEX IV. Mongolia––Relations with the Asian Development Bank12
Mongolia became a member of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in February 1991. In
line with ADB’s poverty reduction strategy, ADB entered into a Poverty Partnership
Agreement (PPA) with the Government of Mongolia in 2000. Within the framework of the
PPA, ADB formulated in October 2005, its Country Strategy and Program (CSP) for 2006–
08. The new CSP concentrates on achieving poverty reduction by supporting (i) stable, broad
based growth and (ii) socially inclusive development. An indicative lending level of $85
million from ADB’s concessional Asian Development Fund resources is programmed for
2006-2008, supplemented by an additional $40 million from ADB’s regional fund. The CSP
formulates a program that includes assistance in agriculture, transport, education, health, and
urban development and support for administrative consolidation in support of interventions
in these sectors. A CSP Update for 2007-2009 maintains the overall directions of the CSP
while increasing the focus of projects on the Government’s own strategic objectives,
accounting for the need for better governance, the potential for increased levels of grant
funding from other agencies, and ADB’s own Medium Term Strategy II and its Managing for
Development Results Agenda. Since March 2002, Mongolia has been a full member of the
ADB-supported Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation program for the Central Asian
Republics and People’s Republic of China (PRC).
ADB has provided loans for 36 projects totaling $615.8 million in the agriculture, education,
energy, financial, health, industry, telecommunications, transport, and urban development
sectors. Fourteen loans were active at the end of 2005. ADB has also provided one private
sector equity investment in the amount of $6.1 million. Technical assistance grants have
totaled close to $60 million, and grants funded by the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction and
Japan Fund for Information and Communication Technology total $8.2 million. Most early
ADB support was in the form of quick-disbursing loans and investments in ailing
infrastructure sectors. Governance and poverty were identified as the major development
objectives in later years.
ADB allocates its concessional ADF resources to eligible member countries, including
Mongolia, based on an annual country performance assessment. The assessment focuses on
indicators of sustainable economic growth, socially inclusive development, governance and
public sector management, and portfolio performance.

12

Prepared by Asian Development Bank staff.

44

ANNEX V. Mongolia: Statistical Issues
1.

Progress to Date

The authorities have established a framework for monitoring macroeconomic
developments and made substantial improvements in all statistical areas with extensive
technical assistance, including from the Fund. Core data are provided to the Fund on a
timely basis and are adequate for surveillance, but some outstanding issues remain, as
detailed below. Mongolia has been participating in the General Data Dissemination
System (GDDS) since August 2000. A data ROSC mission visited Mongolia in May
2000 to assess data dissemination practices in relation to the GDDS; the data ROSC
report was published on the IMF website in May 2001.13
An advisor assisted the National Statistical Office (NSO) during August 2001-September
2003, in improving primary data collection and compilation systems for national
accounts (NA) and price statistics. While much was achieved, deficiencies persist in the
annual and quarterly production accounts that detract from the accuracy of the data,
including the use of inappropriate techniques to estimate capital formation and
inconsistent deflators to derive the annual estimates of GDP volumes. The advisor also
assisted the NSO in preparing a work program for developing a producer price index
(PPI), useful for deriving constant price GDP estimates.
The IMF Statistics Department is providing support to the NSO in implementing its
Program of Statistics Development for 2006–2010. It aims to strengthen the statistical
capacity in conformity with the GDDS plans for improvement and to place Mongolia in a
position to subscribe the Special Data Dissemination Standard.
Based on the recommendations of the 2000 STA mission on consumer price statistics,
the methodology utilized to compile the CPI was substantially revised in January 2001,
and included: (i) the CPI basket was updated with the results of the 1999 Household
Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES); (ii) the CPI weights were updated using the
results of the 1999 HIES and the 2000 HIES, with the latter update done in March 2002;
and (iii) the CPI was rebased from December 1995 to December 2000. The CPI was
recently rebased from December 2000 to December 2005.
For the fiscal statistics, the authorities have adopted systematic procedures for compiling
annual reports for the general government and each of its subsectors. Government
Finance Statistics (GFS) are also compiled on a monthly basis for all subsectors, except
the extrabudgetary central government. All extrabudgetary agencies and funds should be
examined to determine whether they should be included in the central government sector
or the public corporations sector. The authorities also completed an inventory of all
13

As the ROSC was not prepared on the basis of the Data Quality Assessment Framework, no ratings were given.
Consequently, the Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance (TCIRS) does not include memo items on
data quality.

45

government bank accounts and instituted stricter standards for registering bank accounts
for government agencies to facilitate reconciliation between the government accounts and
banking data. However, complete reconciliation of monetary and fiscal data and
implementation of other technical assistance recommendations are pending.
In September 2006, a government finance and monetary and financial statistics
mission found that the underreporting of government deposits by five commercial banks
to the Bank of Mongolia (BOM), coupled with the overestimation of government
deposits by the Ministry of Finance, had given rise to a significant discrepancy on the
level of bank financing to the government sector for 2005. The mission identified sources
of this discrepancy on both monetary and fiscal sides, and prepared a work plan for its
resolution. Moreover, the mission made progress on the implementation of projects in
both GFS and MFS: it advanced the Pilot Project on the application of GFSM2001
methodology with Mongolian data, and also prepared monetary data based on the
Standardized Report Forms (SRFs) which could be used in future for reporting monetary
statistics to STA.
Improvements to balance of payments statistics have been made subsequent to a shortterm technical assistance mission to the BOM in 2004. The coverage of balance of
payments statistics has been expanded through the introduction of a survey of enterprises.
Key improvements include: implementation of a revised standard format for balance of
payments reporting; implementation of 19 new surveys to improve the collection of
external statistics in weak areas, including surveys of enterprises, travel, workers’
remittances, the international investment position, private sector external debt, the cost
and insurance component of imports c.i.f., services, income, aid transfers, foreign direct
investment, government debt forgiveness, and the foreign exchange reporting system; and
preparation of a balance of payments sources and methods manual. In addition, a working
group with key official and private data providers and users has been established and
commercial bank staff has been given training in data reporting.
2.

Outstanding Issues

While some progress has been made in developing a national accounts framework, the
quality of GDP estimates, particularly with respect to the current deflation methods for
constant price estimates, could be improved further. While a proper methodological
treatment of animal losses due to harsh winters has been finalized, efforts are needed to
improve coverage of the informal sector and small-scale activity, especially in the
services sector. Raw data could be refined with a view to producing reliable quarterly
estimates of GDP. Furthermore, the construction of expenditure-based national accounts
in constant price terms would serve as a useful check for the production side estimates.
Progress in implementing STA recommendations to develop a producer price index has
been limited mainly due to resource and capacity constraints.

46

There are deficiencies in the data on wages and earnings. The development of labor
market statistics through the establishment of quarterly sample surveys would help
mitigate these shortcomings. The government conducted a survey of the civil service in
May 2002, which should help to produce a detailed database on civil service employment
and wages.
The September 2006 GFS and MFS mission identified a number of issues to ensure that
the monetary statistics would conform with the Monetary and Financial Statistics
Manual, and the fiscal data with the GFSM2001 methodology. The BOM and MOF are
following up on the recommendations of the mission and, as noted above, these agencies
are also addressing the large discrepancy between the fiscal and monetary statistics for
2005.
Work has commenced on revising the register of businesses for balance of payments
statistics, which was last updated in 2002. Also, the authorities plan to produce and
publish a complete international investment position statement in the period ahead.
3.

Publications

The NSO publishes monthly and annual Statistical Bulletins in English and Mongolian.
These bulletins include data on population, employment, national accounts, prices,
household income and expenditure, central and local government revenue and
expenditure, and external trade. The BOM publishes a monthly Statistical Bulletin
(within 15 days of the end of the month, which includes summary statistics for the central
bank, consolidated balance sheet of commercial banks, and interest and exchange rate
data) and Annual Reports.

3

4

2005

Gross External Debt

Feb 2006

May 2006

11/13/05

9/5/06

A

A

M

Q

A

M

M

M

W

M

W

M

W

D

D

Frequency
of
6
Data

A

A

M

Q

A

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

2

A

A

M

Q

A

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

D

Frequency
of
6
publication

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA)

1

2005

Oct. 2006

Exports and Imports of Goods

GDP/GNI

Q2 2006

Feb 2006

11/08/2006

Oct. 2006
2005

11/08/2006

11/09/06

11/14/06

11/14/06

11/14/06

11/14/06

11/14/06

11/14/06

11/30/06

Date
received

Oct. 2006

Oct. 2006

External Current Account Balance

Stocks of Central Government and Central Government-Guaranteed Debt

5

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – Central Government

3

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition of Financing – General Government

Consumer Price Index

10/31/06

10/31/06

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking System

2

10/31/06

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Interest Rates

10/31/06

Broad Money

10/31/06
10/31/06

1

11/29/06

Reserve/Base Money

International Reserve Assets and Reserve Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Exchange Rates

Date of
latest
observation

ANNEX V. Mongolia: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of November 30, 2006

47

48

ANNEX VI. Mongolia―Millennium Development Goals
1990
Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 1/
Population below $1 a day (in percent)
Prevalence of undernourishment (in percent of population)
Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (in percent)
Poverty headcount, national (in percent of population)
Malnutrition prevalence, underweight children (in percent of children under 5)
Achieve universal primary education 2/
Net primary enrollment ratio (in percent of relevant age group)
Primary completion rate, total (in percent of relevant age group)
Youth literacy rate (in percent ages 15-24)
Promote gender equality and empower women 3/
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (in percent)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (in percent)
Ratio of young literate females to males (in percent ages 15-24)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)

1995

1998

2001

2004

(2015 target = halve 1990 $1 a day poverty and malnutrition rates)
..
14
27
..
..
..
..
45
..
28
..
3
8
..
..
..
36
43
..
36
..
..
13
13
..
90
..
..

(2015 target = net enrollment to 100)
..
90
90
..
87
91
..
..
..

84
96
98

25
109
..
48

(2005 target = education rate to 100)
..
8
11
..
117
112
..
..
..
47
48
49

11
108
102
49

Reduce child mortality 4/
Immunization, measles (in percent of children ages 12-23 months)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

(2015 target = reduce 1990 under 5 motality by two thirds)
92
85
93
95
96
78
64
..
50
41
108
87
..
65
52

Improved maternal health 5/
Births attended by skilled health staff (in percent of total)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

(2015 target = reduce 1990 maternal mortality by three fourths)
..
..
94
97
99
..
..
..
110
..

Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases 6/
Contraceptive prevalence rate (in percent of women ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (in percent)

(2015 target = halt, and begin to reverse, AIDS, etc.)
..
..
60
67
220
..
..
..
..
7
60
73

69
192
80

Ensure environmental sustainability 7/
Access to an improved water source (in percent of population)
Access to improved sanitation (in percent of population)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (in percent of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (in percent of total land area)

63
..
5
7
..

(2015 target = various)
..
..
..
..
4
3
..
..
..
..

..
..
3
7
..

62
59
..
7
12

Develop a global partnership for development 8/
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services)
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Total debt service (in percent of exports of goods, services and income)
Unemployment, youth female (in percent of female labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth male (in percent of male labor force ages 15-24)
Unemployment, youth total (in percent of total labor force ages 15-24)

6
0
32
..
..
..
..
..
..

(2015 target = various)
93
87
10
5
34
48
0
1
3
8
10
6
..
..
..
..
..
..

87
7
132
17
17
7
21
20
20

104
3
184
80
124
3
..
..
..

2
400
1.0
36
63
..
2,480
120

2
600
1.5
37
65
98
2,500
162

General indicators
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$, in billions)
Gross capital formation (in percent of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (in percent of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (in thousands)
Trade (in percent of GDP)

4
..
..
38
63
..
2,106
77

3
330
0.7
32
64
..
2,275
97

3
460
1.1
35
65
..
2,398
124

Source: World Bank: World Development Indicators Database , and UNDP and NSO: Living Standard Measurement Survey 2002/2003.
1/ Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day, and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
2/ Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
3/ Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
4/ Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
5/ Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
6/ Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS and the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
7/ Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources. Halve, by 2015, the proportion of
people without sustainable access to safe drinking water.
8/ Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Address the special needs of the least developed countries. Address
the special needs of landlocked countries and small island developing states.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 07/11
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 29, 2007

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2006 Article IV Consultation with
Mongolia
On January 10, 2007, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Mongolia.1
Background
Mongolia’s macroeconomic performance in 2005-06 has been robust, underpinned by a run-up
on copper and gold prices, declining inflation, and budget and external current account
surpluses. Real GDP growth in 2005-06 is estimated at 7 percent, in line with the average pace
since 2002. The mineral sector has been a key engine of growth, supported by favorable
weather conditions, and buoyant recovery in the construction and services sectors. Inflation has
eased to about 7 percent in October 2006 (year-on-year), following a spike at about
17½ percent in June 2005. The current account balance (including official transfers) recorded a
surplus (1.4 percent of GDP) in 2005, which is expected to widen further to 5.2 percent of GDP
in 2006. Gross international reserves have been rebuilt from their end-2003 low level in the
aftermath of the settlement of the pre-1991 Russian debt, and are expected to reach this year
about 3.4 months of next year’s imports of goods and services.
The fiscal position has improved markedly in 2005-06. The budget deficit, which had narrowed
significantly during 2000-04, switched to a 2.9 percent of GDP surplus in 2005 for the first time
ever, and is expected to widen to 9.0 percent of GDP in 2006. This reflected a sevenfold
increase in mining revenue since 2003 in concert with a 10 percentage point of GDP decline in
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities.

2
total expenditure over the period, despite a 30 percent public sector wage increase and a
significant expansion in social welfare transfers in 2006. Mirroring the improved fiscal
performance, the debt burden has eased significantly, with the net present value (NPV) of public
external debt halved from 64 percent of GDP end-2003 to an estimated 32 percent at end-2006.
The 2007 budget calls for a significant easing in the fiscal policy stance, reflecting large tax cuts
and further increases in wages and social welfare transfers.
Monetary aggregates have expanded rapidly in recent years, driven by strong foreign exchange
inflows and improved confidence in the banking system. Broad money and reserve money
growth accelerated to 37.3 percent and 19.7 percent, respectively, in 2005 and are expected to
slow only slightly in 2006. Private credit continued to expand rapidly (40 percent) in 2005, and is
expected to rise broadly at the same pace in 2006. Fast private credit growth in 2006, however,
has been broadly offset by a sharp decline in net credit to government, as government deposits
built up markedly and debt to the central bank was partly redeemed. The subdued inflationary
response to date to rapid monetary growth primarily reflects a strong reintermediation process
and a gradual exchange rate appreciation.
Strides have been made in strengthening the banking system, but vulnerabilities remain.
Nonperforming loans (NPLs) were reduced from 23.4 percent of total loans at end-2000 to
8.8 percent at end-2005, and the ratio has remained broadly stable in 2006. To safeguard the
soundness of the banking system, the enforcement of prudential requirements has been
intensified, especially for banks with rapid credit growth. Actions are also underway, under the
newly-created Financial Regulatory Commission, to address the solvency of a number of credit
and saving cooperatives and to strengthen the supervisory framework for nonbanks.
On the structural front, progress has been made to strengthen central bank governance and
promote private sector development. The Bank of Mongolia appointed in September 2006 two
non-executive directors to its Board of Directors, thus paving the way for further changes to shift
decision-making authority from the Governor to the Board of Directors. An AML/CFT Law was
adopted in mid-2006, providing for the establishment of a Financial Intelligence Unit within the
Bank of Mongolia. An Anti-Corruption Law aimed at strengthening the business environment
was also adopted at that time. Public sector reform is proceeding, with the recent privatization of
the Savings Bank and bidding underway for the Gobi cashmere factory.
Mongolia’s medium-term outlook for sustained growth and poverty reduction is broadly
favorable, but subject to risks. With its considerable mineral endowment and location between
two large and fast-growing economies, Mongolia has the potential to achieve real GDP growth
averaging 6-7 percent of GDP over the medium term. Inflation could be contained to below
5 percent, provided that appropriate fiscal and monetary policies are in place. The main
challenge, however, will be to ensure fiscal sustainability through sound management of the
country’s mineral resources and steadfast expenditure restructuring, especially civil service
reform and social expenditure restraint. Assuming continued fiscal consolidation, Mongolia’s
external debt ratio would decline substantially over the medium term. In addition to policy risks,
medium-term prospects are vulnerable to adverse weather conditions, and terms-of-trade
shocks triggered by sharp declines in copper and gold prices and soaring oil prices.

3

Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for Mongolia’s robust economic performance in
recent years, including vigorous growth, a decline in inflation, the emergence of fiscal and
current account surpluses, and reduced debt ratios. Mongolia’s mineral wealth and improved
macroeconomic stability provide a good foundation for sustained growth. Nevertheless,
challenges remain to mitigate the economy’s vulnerability to shocks, including harsh weather
and a decline in copper prices, and to reduce the high poverty rate. Directors encouraged the
authorities to focus on managing mineral wealth efficiently, improving infrastructure and the
business environment, and targeting poverty alleviation policies carefully, in the context of
continued macroeconomic stability.
Directors welcomed the marked improvement in the fiscal position in recent years. They
cautioned, however, that the loosening of the fiscal stance in the 2007 budget could jeopardize
fiscal sustainability and revive inflationary pressures. To ensure that public debt remains on a
declining path, the non-mineral fiscal deficit should be reduced by containing the growth in the
civil service wage bill, better targeting social welfare spending, and moving forward with civil
service reforms. Directors stressed the importance of realistically planning and prioritizing
capital spending. They recommended that the authorities consider formulating a medium-term
fiscal framework, which could facilitate consistency in budget preparation.
Directors broadly supported the recent efficiency-enhancing tax reform, including the elimination
of most VAT exemptions and new tax holidays, but observed that some tax cuts might need to
be partially reversed to ensure fiscal sustainability, starting with the cut in the VAT rate. Also,
cuts in non-mining tax rates could increase the sensitivity of revenues to commodity price
shocks. Directors encouraged the authorities to keep the mining regime under review to ensure
an internationally competitive tax regime, and they supported Fund technical assistance in this
area.
Directors welcomed signs of improving confidence in the banking system, including significant
reintermediation. They cautioned, however, that continued rapid monetary growth could raise
inflationary pressures, and called for increased sales of central bank bills to absorb excess
liquidity. They welcomed Fund technical assistance to upgrade the monetary policy framework
and develop sound liquidity management instruments.
Directors commended recent steps to strengthen central bank governance, including the
appointment of outside members to the Bank of Mongolia’s Board of Directors, and they
encouraged the authorities to move forward with plans to shift decision-making authority to the
Bank of Mongolia’s Board of Directors. Directors called for upgrading the management of

4
international reserves, including reducing gold risk exposures and preparing a strategy to exit
the gold market over the medium term.
Directors emphasized that, despite recent progress, the financial system remains vulnerable. As
rapid credit growth can cause loan quality to deteriorate, enforcement of prudential regulations
at weaker banks should be strengthened. Directors counseled the authorities against using
administrative measures to lower bank lending rates, bailing out insolvent savings and credit
cooperatives, or including these cooperatives in any future bank deposit insurance scheme.
Directors considered that Mongolia’s flexible exchange rate has facilitated orderly adjustments
to external shocks, and that the recent appreciation of the togrog reflects the improving external
position. They supported the authorities’ plan to continue limiting interventions in the foreign
exchange market to smoothing short-term volatility. While welcoming Mongolia’s continued
commitment to an open trade regime, Directors encouraged the authorities to phase out the
export duty on raw cashmere and resist pressures to raise import duties to protect domestic
industries. Directors underscored the importance of maintaining a prudent debt management
strategy, with most Directors emphasizing reliance on concessional borrowing. Directors also
looked forward to the resolution of remaining outstanding obligations to foreign creditors.
Directors supported actions to foster good governance and private sector development,
including the adoption of Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Corruption Laws, and the
privatization of two large public enterprises. They urged the authorities to proceed further with
energy sector reform.
Directors welcomed the progress made in strengthening data quality for surveillance, and called
for continued efforts to improve national account, fiscal, and monetary data.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5

Mongolia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2003-06
2003

2004

2005

2006
Est.

Real Sector (percent change)
Real GDP growth
Mineral
Nonmineral
Consumer prices (end-period)

6.1
-2.3
7.1
4.7

10.8
34.3
8.1
11.0

7.0
10.9
6.5
9.5

7.0
5.2
7.3
7.0

General Government Budget (in percent of GDP)
Revenue and grants
Mineral revenue
Nonmineral revenue
Expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (including grants)
Nonmineral overall balance

37.6
2.8
34.2
41.8
-4.2
-7.0

37.0
4.1
32.5
39.1
-2.1
-6.3

33.7
4.5
29.0
30.7
2.9
-1.5

40.6
13.5
27.0
31.7
9.0
-4.5

Money and Credit (percent change)
Broad money
Domestic credit
Of which: claims on nonbanks
Reserve money
Interest rate on central bank bills (percent per annum) 1/
Balance of Payments
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Including official transfers
Excluding official transfers
Exports, f.o.b.
Mineral (in percent of total exports)
Nonmineral (in percent of total exports)
Imports, c.i.f.
Terms of trade (percent change)
Gross international reserves (end-period)
(in months of next year’s imports of goods and services)
Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt (in percent of GDP)
Total public debt
External debt
Domestic debt
NPV of external debt
External debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services)
Exchange Rate
Togrogs per US dollar (end-period)
Real effective exchange rate (end-period; percent change)

49.7
20.3
37.3
34.9
147.0
23.0
22.3
-5.0
90.3
43.7
40.1
39.2
14.7
16.8
19.7
16.5
15.0
15.8
3.7
5.8
(in millions US dollars; unless otherwise indicated)

-7.7
-11.5
627
58.5
41.5
827
1.1
178
1.5

1.6
-3.7
872
65.1
34.9
1,021
7.0
208
1.6

1.4
-2.8
1,069
71.0
29.0
1,224
2.3
333
2.1

5.2
2.0
1,548
...
...
1,532
25.8
626
3.4

113.0
98.2
14.8
64.2
34.0

93.0
85.4
7.6
52.3
7.5

68.3
64.1
4.2
40.3
2.9

53.6
51.0
2.6
31.7
2.1

1,170
-6.8

1,209
0.8

1,221
7.7

1,164
...

Sources: Data provided by the Mongolian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Annualized yield on end-period auction of 14-day bills; as of end-September 2006.

Statement by Richard Murray, Executive Director for Mongolia
and Hyun Cheol Lee, Advisor to the Executive Director
January 10, 2007

Overall Economic Performance and Medium-Term Outlook
Mongolia’s recent economic performance has been solid. Real GDP growth has averaged
7 percent annually since 2002. After the Russian debt settlement in December 2003, total
debt has declined steadily and substantially. Since 2004, the external current account has
shifted into surplus. In 2005 the overall and primary fiscal balance moved markedly into
surplus. Inflation peaked in mid-2005 mainly owing to the devastating weather conditions
and the consequent meat shortage. The solid economic performance is mainly attributable to
the record-high world copper and gold prices as well as the authorities’ commitment to
prudent macroeconomic policies in line with the policy recommendations and technical
assistance by the Fund and Bank.
In 2006, Mongolia’s economy has shown even more solid performance. It is commendable
not just because the growth was fueled by “unprecedented” high mineral prices, but because
the growth was also broad-based, in particular in non-mineral sectors, such as construction
and financial services. By mid-year, inflation had declined to the lowest level (1.8 percent
y-o-y) in four years and now remains at a moderate level in the order of 6 percent. The
overall fiscal balance is estimated again as a solid surplus and the NPV of total public debt
continues on its downwards projectory.
The near-term outlook for the economy remains very positive. As the mineral sector has been
the main engine of Mongolia’s growth, economic prospects will be substantially affected by
commodity price developments. While the WEO projection of copper prices in 2007 is
US$5,500 per ton, the authorities assume that the average copper price in 2007 will be
US$6,000 per ton. The authorities’ projection is also supported by the fact that the 15-month
future (buyers) price for copper recorded on January 2, 2007 in the London Metal Exchange
was US$6,050 per ton. While the projected price may look much lower than recent market
prices, it still is more than three-times the price level during 2000 to 2003. The staff’s
medium-term scenario envisages that real GDP growth can average 6-7 percent over the
medium-term, if appropriate policies are pursued. Furthermore, in addition to already-rich
mineral production, Mongolia has a long list of projects for development, including
Oyu Tolgoi (copper and gold), Burenkhaan (phosphate), Tavan Tolgoi (5 billion tons of coal),
Turmurtei (229 million tons of iron), as well as yet to be developed natural gas and
petroleum reserves.

2

Fiscal policy
The staff assesses Mongolia’s 2007 fiscal stance as a “loosening of fiscal policy.” However,
it should be recalled that the amended 2006 budget had projected the overall fiscal deficit at
3½ percent of GDP, whereas the overall fiscal outcome for 2006 is significantly better than
budgeted, mainly due to substantially stronger-than-expected world mineral prices, a surge in
windfall tax collections and the under execution of capital spending. This 2006 surplus
outcome is obviously not sustainable as the commodity price cycle matures in 2007 and
beyond. The 2007 budget projects an overall deficit of 3.9 percent of GDP1. Mongolia’s
Parliament calls for the overall deficit to remain constant at 4 percent of GDP through to
2009, which would allow a sharing of the benefits of the terms of trade across the community,
while still maintaining a steady decline in public debt to GDP.
On the public expenditure side, the staff argues against the large increase in child allowances.
However, the Mongolian authorities have established the Development Fund specifically for
the deposit of the windfall tax proceeds, and the authorities have agreed in principle to
allocate expenditures from the Development Fund to areas such as infrastructure and child
allowance only after the revenues to the Fund are accumulated. Mongolia is a sparsely
populated country with a high poverty ratio. Only 2.5 million people are living in a country
with the territory equal to one-sixth of that of China. Mainly due to a nomadic life style, the
authorities had no resident registration system until recently. The child allowance has helped
establish the resident registration system as well as the tax paper database. More importantly,
it shifts part of the windfall from the highly non labor-intensive mineral sector (employing
only 2.4 percent of the labor force) to all under 18 year olds in a non-discriminating manner.
In that sense, the child allowance is redistributive rather than “untargeted” as the staff states.
Means testing would require a substantial administrative apparatus for a relatively small
fiscal saving.
The 2007 budget provides for a 20 percent increase in civil service wages. While the private
sector salary and consumer prices have increased substantially in recent years, public sector
salaries have been suppressed. Even with the proposed increase, the absolute level of the
public sector wages is still relatively low. The Mongolian authorities recognize the need for
on-going public sector reform as part of medium term improvements for the delivery of
public sector services.
On the revenue side, it should be noted that the authorities have taken measures for
broadening the non-mineral tax base and cutting tax rates. It should help diversify and
increase efficiency of the economy through reducing distortions in the tax system. The
1

It is based on the final 2007 budget approved by Parliament. The 5 percent fiscal deficit of GDP in 2007 in the
staff paper is calculated by the staff using Fund methodology.

3
reforms are intended to create favorable conditions for entrepreneurs, individuals and foreign
and domestic investors and are viewed by the authorities as an important step towards
supporting economic growth and the future expansion of the tax base. The staff recommends
that the authorities reverse at least part of the 5 percentage point cut in the VAT rate. This
simply seems to be politically impracticable at this stage and would risk unraveling other
parts of tax reform. Nevertheless, the Mongolian authorities are keeping the whole tax area
under review and are seeking FAD technical assistance on addressing the mineral tax issues.
In terms of further addressing medium to longer term fiscal sustainability, the Mongolian
authorities agree with the approach of seeking to stabilize usable revenues and to provide for
the accumulation of financial resources that would make up for the depletion of national
resources. Moreover, the authorities recognize the steady upward trend in budget
expenditures, and are planning to implement budget expenditure reforms which aims at
ensuring a rational allocation of budget financing.
Monetary policy and Financial System
The authorities share the staff’s concern that the current rapid growth in broad money could
fuel higher inflation. They note, however, that rapid monetary growth is an indication of
deepening intermediation and improving confidence in the banking system. The authorities
note the staff’s recommendations that the Bank of Mongolia (BOM) should increase the
issuance of CBBs at market-clearing interest rates as a monetary policy tool.
The BOM has taken many important steps to strengthen its governance structure. Two
non-executive directors were appointed to the BOM’s Board of Directors. The authorities
agree with the staff that the shift of weight from the Governor to the Board of Directors and
strengthening of the external Supervisory Board will help improve the central bank
governance.
The authorities maintain ongoing commitments to the flexible exchange rate, including
limiting foreign exchange market interventions to the smoothing of short-term volatility. The
exchange rate regime has let the economy cope with terms of trade movements through the
cycle. As the staff rightly pointed out, international reserves should be held in low risk,
unencumbered assets. In this regard, the authorities agree that the BOM should phase down
the domestic gold purchases as practicable in the medium to long term.
Progress in strengthening the banking system is one of the most notable developments of the
economy in 2006. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) of the banking system as a whole have been
substantially reduced during recent years. High priority will be given to monitoring banks
with fast credit growth and bank lending rates should continue to reflect market forces. The
authorities agree with the staff that the plans to introduce a bank deposit insurance scheme
should be preceded with in a very cautious manner. Against this background, the BOM has

4
now requested to subscribe to the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and for the
assessment to commence as soon as possible.
Structural reforms
All structural reform measures are geared toward improving the climate for private
investment and diversifying the economy. The Anti-Corruption Law was newly adopted.
Privatization of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) is slowly but steadily being pursued. In
particular, SOEs in the energy sector are planned for comprehensive restructuring under a
Bank-supported energy sector reform project.
In order to strengthen the poverty reduction strategy, the Socio-Economic Guidelines have
been finalized. The authorities are trying to have social welfare programs more targeted in
line with the Fund recommendations.
Public Debt
The authorities are trying to reach agreements with bilateral creditors on disputed claims.
Loan arrears to an Italian supplier were cleared in mid-2006. Bilateral discussions are
underway with Russia on the arrears of post-1991 Russian debt (US$16.7 million in principal
as of end-2005). The authorities are seeking to reach agreement with Finnvera, the export
credit guarantee agency of Finland, to normalize a loan dating back to the early 1990s.
According to the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) by the Fund and Bank staff, under the
baseline scenario, all public and publicly guaranteed external debt indicators would be in
downward trends and stay well below their respective thresholds through the medium-to-long
term.
Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Sustainability Analysis
NPV of debt
Debt Service
in percent of
in percent of
Exports
GDP
Exports
Thresholds for Medium Performer
150
40
20
2007 Baseline Projections
44
30
2.3
2016 Baseline Projections
46
26
2.5
*source: Fund staff paper
The staff should be commended for the DSA, which will be very useful in informing public
debate on the need for continuing fiscal prudence particularly given the risks of debt distress
in the face of adverse external developments, particularly terms of trade shocks. The
authorities have noted the Fund advice on refraining from non-concessional external

5
borrowings. They have also pointed out, however, the benefits of some market exposure on
external borrowings at some point in the future in order to establish a good credit rating.
AML/CFT
Last year Mongolia passed the legislation for anti-money laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). To further strengthen the AML/CFT framework in
compliance with international standards, the authorities recently set up a Financial
Intelligence Unit within the BOM. The Legal Department is having dialogue with the
authorities about possible technical assistance.
Statistics
While there are still outstanding issues like the quality of GDP estimates, the authorities have
achieved continued improvement in statistics. For further progress, the authorities are
seeking ongoing technical assistance from the Fund’s Statistical Department.

