- 11 -

global slowdown, with risks heightened by the September attacks in the United States.
The program of the new administration envisages a sizable cutback in the public sector, tax
reform, progress in the product and labor markets, and infrastructure improvements—aiming
to revive Italy’s decade-long lackluster growth. Achieving this goal is a formidable challenge:
it implies, among other things, a narrowing of wide regional imbalances, a substantial increase
in Italy’s still-low employment level, and an effective approach to the fiscal pressures that
stem from a high public debt and rapidly aging population.
9.
The economic setting at the time of the discussions—and especially during the
follow-up visit in October—added to these challenges, as the likelihood of more
extended domestic and global weakness became clearer and risks increased. The staff
advised letting fiscal stabilizers operate on the revenue side and proceeding urgently with
structural reforms, particularly in public spending—lest the priority of fiscal consolidation,
which the authorities have rightly embraced, jeopardize their bold agenda of tax cuts.
A. The Near-Term Economic Outlook
10.
The authorities confirmed during the October staff visit that clearer signs of a
slowdown had emerged, and that risks of protracted weakness had risen after the
September attacks. Over the summer, a further weakening was evident in most external and
domestic indicators (Figure 5). This prompted a reassessment of growth even before the
September 11 attacks. Their impact would depend on how quickly the uncertainties—tending
to drag down business and consumer confidence—would be resolved, and on the extent and
timing of a rebound in the United States. Among the authorities, some saw the Italian
economy less vulnerable to the shock than other euro-area countries: Italy’s trade (relative to
GDP) with the United States was somewhat below the euro-area average; and international
financial market linkages and stock market capitalization were lower than for the euro area.
Others and staff stressed, however, additional idiosyncratic risks: tourism, a relatively
important sector in Italy, was likely to suffer (although it depended only in part on air travel);
the country’s export product mix included a relatively large share of luxury goods, which
may be particularly affected by weakening foreign demand; and a growth rebound in Italy
during 2002 depended importantly on the investment effect of temporary tax relief under the
so-called “Tremonti-bis” law2—whose impact would become more precarious, if uncertainty
and weak business sentiment persist.
11.
The staff’s new baseline projection, subject to major uncertainties, envisages
GDP growth of 1.8 percent in 2001 and 1.4 percent in 2002—similar to October

2

The “Tremonti-bis” provides temporary, broad-based investment incentives: 50 percent of
investment in 2001 and 2002 in excess of average investment during the previous five years is
deductible from corporate income taxes. The law covers all firms and independent workers,
and it applies also to investment in training and professional development.

-2percent a year earlier. Still, demographic and regional imbalances in the labor market remain
pervasive, with unemployment much higher in the South and among women and the young.
In 2000, further progress was made on fiscal consolidation—the general government deficit
met the targeted 1.5 percent of GDP, and public debt declined in relation to GDP to 110
percent. For 2001, however, achieving the deficit target of 0.8 percent will be difficult in light of
sizable expenditure overruns, especially on health care expenditures and wages. At the same
time, nominal revenues are expected to meet budget targets, reflecting improved tax
administration and buoyant direct tax revenues.
In light of the worldwide economic slowdown and potential repercussions from the September
11 terrorist attacks, prospects for a recovery in the near term have dimmed. Staff expects GDP
growth to be limited to 1.8 percent in 2001 and to 1.4 percent in 2002. These projections are,
however, subject to considerable uncertainty, not least related to the unfolding of the fallout
from the September attacks. On the downside, confidence could deteriorate sharply, lowering
domestic demand, especially for investment and consumer durables; and external demand
could also weaken more than currently anticipated. On the upside, monetary easing and lower
oil prices could trigger a more robust recovery. As discussed in the Executive Board
assessment below, the outlook for growth over the medium term will depend crucially on the
pace of structural reform in general, and on further increases in labor-force participation in
particular.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for achieving macroeconomic stability,
containing inflation, reducing unemployment, lowering public debt, and moving structural
reforms forward in a number of areas. However, Directors noted that Italy’s recent growth
performance was among the weakest for industrial countries and that major fiscal and
structural challenges remain. Against this background, they welcomed the authorities’ intention
to undertake reforms aimed at reinvigorating growth and strengthening the public finances. In
particular, Directors highlighted the need to reduce the tax burden, especially the tax wedge on
labor; to mitigate the fiscal impact of population aging; and to further improve labor and
product market performance. They encouraged the authorities to implement this reform
agenda quickly and decisively, although several Directors also underlined the desirability of
building a broad consensus, especially in the current unsettled environment.
Directors considered the near-term economic outlook to be fraught with uncertainty, given the
present global slowdown. Notwithstanding recent monetary easing by the European Central
Bank, which would be supportive of a recovery in activity, they viewed monetary conditions as
remaining somewhat tight from a purely domestic perspective, noting Italy’s large output gap
and abating inflationary pressures. They considered external competitiveness as broadly
satisfactory at present.
Directors viewed favorably the reduction in the budget deficit in 2001, despite weaker than
expected real growth, although they regretted that primary expenditure had again exceeded

