January 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/23

© 2010 International Monetary Fund
January 8, 2009
29, 2001

January 28, 2009

Israel: Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation
The following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report, prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on
December 15, 2009, with the officials of Israel on economic developments and policies.
Based on information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was
completed on December 30, 2009. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the
staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN).

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Israel.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISRAEL1
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation
Prepared by the European Department
Approved by Adam Bennett and Martin Mühleisen
December 30, 2009
Content

Page

I. Staff Appraisal ...............................................................................................................3
II. Recent Developments ..................................................................................................10
III. Staff Macro Assessment ..............................................................................................18
A. Policies and Policy Frameworks––2009–11 ..........................................................18
B. Fiscal Policy and Framework.................................................................................19
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies and Frameworks .......................................24
D. Financial Stability ..................................................................................................26
Boxes
1. Banking Structure and Vulnerabilities .........................................................................11
2. Financial Sector and Credit Support Measures 2008–09 .............................................12
3. Competitiveness and the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate ........................................14
4. Deficit and Real Spending Growth Caps, or Debt and Nominal Spending Ceilings ...23
5. Is Israel Ready to Address Financial Instability, if it Occurs? ....................................27
Figures
1. An Eventful Decade, 1999–2009 .................................................................................31
2. Recent Economic Indicators, 2001–09 ........................................................................32
3. External Indicators, 2001–09 .......................................................................................33
4. Global Recession – Cross-country Comparison ..........................................................34

1

For purposes of Fund relations, the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights are considered to be under the
authority of Israel within the terms of Article XXXI, Section 2(g) of the Articles of Agreement. Information
regarding economic developments in West Bank and Gaza may be found in Macroeconomic and Fiscal
Framework for West Bank and Gaza—Fourth Review of Progress, FO/DIS/09/155, 9/14/2009. The discussions
with the Israeli authorities and the analysis in this staff report took into account the economic developments in
these territories to the extent they are relevant for purposes of completing the Article IV consultation with
Israel.

2

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Indicators of financial Market Stress ...........................................................................35
Selected Monetary and Financial Indicators, 2006–09 ................................................36
Indicators of Competitiveness......................................................................................37
Vulnerability Indicators ...............................................................................................38
Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests .....................................................................40

Tables
1. Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 2003–10 ....................................................41
2. Balance of Payments, 2006–14 ....................................................................................42
3. Financial Soundness Indicators, 2001-mid-09 .............................................................43
4. Central Government Accounts, 2004–10 .....................................................................44
5. Indicators of External and Financial Sector Vulnerability, 2003–09 ..........................45
6. Medium-Term Scenarios, 2009–14 .............................................................................46
Background Studies
I. Why Was Output in Israel so Resilient through the Global Crisis? ...........................47
II. Is Israel’s Public Debt Too High? ..............................................................................60
III. Global Regulatory Reform––Lessons from Israel......................................................70
Response of the Authorities to the Conclusions of the Mission.............................................84

3
I. STAFF APPRAISAL
Israel has had a good “great recession”
1.
In the face of global crisis, Israeli output growth was amongst the last to fall below
trend, among the mildest hit, and one of the earliest to stage a recovery. Output is projected
to have been no worse than flat overall in 2009, and was up in both Q2 and Q3 2009.
Though bonds and equities fell sharply in late 2008, there was no melt down in local
markets, even without the full swathe of emergency financial stabilization measures typical
elsewhere. Indeed, since early 2008 Israel appeared to acquire safe haven status,
experiencing sharp increases in net capital inflows and real exchange rate appreciation,
despite sustained foreign reserve accumulation. And in September 2009, the Bank of Israel
(BoI) was the first central bank globally to raise policy rates for over a year, one of several
steps it took to begin the exit from the monetary measures that had been adopted in
response to the global crisis.
2.
The economy was shielded from the global downturn by the absence of prior
housing or bank credit booms, high household savings rates, and the fact that investment
goods and consumer durables—demand for which contracted sharply—are mostly
imported from abroad. But the strength of output also owes much to the public debt
reduction and structural reforms of the past decade, as well as the specific policy responses
to the crisis. In particular, the decisive relaxation in the monetary stance including
“unconventional” measures, the accommodation of the automatic stabilizers in 2009 and its
expression in the adoption of a two year budget for 2009–10, and suitably focused
measures to stabilize credit flows were all both timely and appropriately strong.
But the economy has not been unscathed
3.
While output, consumption, and confidence are close to their Fall 2008 levels,
exports, imports, and fixed investment are far from fully recovered. Unemployment has
edged up to some 8 percent, the stock of bank credit to corporates has fallen through much
of the year, and inflation has been above target for much of that time. And though safe
haven factors that earlier put upward pressure on the currency appear to have eased along
with global financial sector stabilization, concerns about the excessive strength of the
shekel have not entirely been put to rest.
4.
On the policy side, automatic stabilizers eroded the hitherto steady progress of
deficit reduction, taking the deficit close to 5 percent of GDP in 2009. The earlier wellestablished framework of fiscal rules—comprising ceilings on deficits and on the growth of
real spending—was abandoned (appropriately) to accommodate this, but it is unclear if the
credibility of the new deficit ceilings which replaced them has been fully established. And
the BoI’s programmed foreign exchange purchases have been replaced on a transitional
basis by a regime of discretionary intervention. This will shift the IMF de facto
classification of the exchange rate regime from “free floating” to “floating”.

4
So although Israel is a global exit frontrunner, it is not yet out of the woods
5.
Public debt is back on an upward track, heading towards 80 percent of GDP by end2010. And external uncertainties remain elevated: though the WEO central projection
shows global growth of 3 percent in 2010, this is subject to 90 percent confidence margins
ranging from ½ to 5½ percent. The corresponding range for projected growth in Israel
in 2010 is 0 to 4 percent. Further ahead, significant reductions in the growth of potential
output of the major economies will likely lower Israel’s medium-term potential growth rate
by some half a percentage point annually to 3–3½ percent.
Accordingly, the challenge ahead is to implement an effective exit strategy
6.
Our core advice is to strengthen the policy frameworks to anchor long run
expectations and reinforce policy credibility. This strategy should help secure greater
flexibility to address short run shocks and support long-term growth. It has implications for
the fiscal, monetary, and the financial stability areas.
The authorities have already moved in this direction
7.
The anchoring of long run expectations should be helped by the combination of a
declining path for target ceilings on fiscal deficits supported by annual caps on real
spending growth, by the renewal of the program of US guarantees on public debt, and by
steps toward early entry to the OECD. These steps are reflected in the “two year budget”
which anticipates automatic stabilizers—thereby lowering the deficit in 2010 if growth
picks up and providing some fiscal support if it does not. On the foreign exchange regime,
the shift from preprogrammed to discretionary intervention is a transitional step
anticipating a free float. Progress has been made toward the adoption of the BoI Law which
should strengthen the outlook for the long-run monetary framework. The recent policy rate
rises represent measured and balanced steps to tighten the stance of monetary policy as the
recovery takes hold. And though the various emergency financial sector support initiatives
remain in place, take up has been limited and is expected to remain so. Various actions to
strengthen the content of supervision are in process, including the establishment of a
financial stability unit in the BoI, and proposals by the Hodak committee and regulators to
strengthen due diligence practices, bond structures, remuneration arrangements, and
investment portfolio guidelines.
Given global uncertainties, these actions could be significantly strengthened
8.
A key message that needs to be underscored to the public is that the global
environment places a high premium on avoiding actions which might compound downside
risks. This concern precludes early commitments to sizeable permanent remuneration
increases, notwithstanding the encouraging economic performance so far. In particular,
wage settlements for public sector employees due in 2010 should be tightly restrained. This
would send an appropriate signal to private sector wage setters, help keep inflation and

5
interest rates low as output strengthens, and thus promote continued good economic
performance.
9.
A further key concern is that high Israeli public debt represents an enduring
vulnerability. And far from being eased, this problem is likely aggravated by the recent
sharp increase in public deficits and debt across the developed world and by the associated
pressures on global savings. In periods of international market stress, financing costs for
high debt countries like Israel tend to rise particularly sharply, curbing scope to allow fiscal
support to cushion shocks—a concern reflected in Israel’s decision in 2009 to raise the
VAT rate to cap the headline deficit. And high debt attenuates—and may even more than
completely negate—the stabilizing impact on output of fiscal support in downturns. Given
Israel’s particular exposure to global and geopolitical shocks, these are primary concerns.
Public debt needs to come down decisively.
10.
These concerns are compounded by the likely decline in potential output growth
globally—and therefore in Israel—in the wake of the global crisis and by the likely loss of
windfall fiscal revenues associated with the prior global financial boom. For these reasons,
the difficulty of securing public debt reduction has increased. Accordingly, efforts to do so
need to be redoubled, anchored by adoption of a formal long-term anchor for policies
targeting public debt reduction, strengthened budget procedures, and efforts to improve
supply side efficiencies, including through liberalized planning rules and competitive
privatization.
Fiscal frameworks and policy could be more robust and flexible
11.
An immediate step towards these goals is to reconcile aggregate spending caps with
commitments on its component parts. Without this, the credibility of the current or any
alternative framework of fiscal rules will be compromised.
12.
Alongside, the case for adjusting the fiscal rules warrants review by Spring 2010,
when fiscal outturns, immediate prospects for global demand, and the outlook for capital
flows are likely to have become somewhat clearer.
13.
If at that time staff central or upside global scenarios are being realized, then policy
should aim to deliver deficit outturns considerably lower than the 2010 and 2011 ceilings.
Accordingly, those ceilings could be replaced in the framework of rules with a target for
public debt to provide a medium-term anchor for fiscal policy. In this context, a target of
60 percent of GDP by 2020, anticipating further reductions thereafter, with an interim
ceiling of 70 percent of GDP by the middle of the coming decade would be appropriate.
This framework should be supported by the annual publication of three year ahead fiscal
projections (detailing how policies are consistent with the debt objectives), and be formally
contingent on the strength of global supply over the medium-term. Policies should target
debt ratios below these ceilings in “central case” scenarios to anticipate uncertainties.

6
14.
If instead, by the Spring, the downside near-term global demand scenarios appear
more likely, the same overall framework of fiscal rules would still be appropriate, but some
adjustments to its execution and parameters may be needed. In the event that investor
demand for Israeli public debt remains resilient, full accommodation of fiscal stabilizers
would be appropriate, even if that causes a breach of the current 2010 and 2011 deficit
ceilings. As a direct result, the target dates for the debt and interim objectives may also
then have to be put back somewhat relative to those in the upside global scenario.
However, even in the downside scenario, should financing conditions prove challenging, a
more ambitious fiscal stance and consolidation path even than in the upside scenario might
prove to be unavoidable.
15.
This overall approach to the timing of reform of the fiscal rules, its nature, and the
execution of the 2010–11 budgets has several advantages. In the case where near-term
global demand is strong, the framework applies the associated fiscal windfall to deficit
reduction and thus guards against the possibility that the global upswing is not sustained.
This should help to strengthen policy credibility associated with the new fiscal rule,
because fiscal deficits for 2011 and 2012 would be below the current ceilings. A strong
commitment to the 2020 debt ceiling and the interim objective would be signaled by an
early down payment towards those goals. In the case where near-term global demand is
weak, the shift from deficit ceilings to the long-term debt anchor would provide additional
scope for accommodation of fiscal stabilizers. And in that context, pushing back the dates
for the debt ceilings reduces the risk of commitment to a fiscal consolidation path that is
too ambitious.
Public spending limits and tax policy objectives should be set in this context
16.
In any of these global scenarios, a debt objective should be accompanied by ceilings
on expenditures over the medium term—reflecting the authorities’ objectives for the size of
government—and these ceilings should be given at least equal status to the debt targets in
the framework of rules. They would best be expressed as a cap on nominal spending, rather
than as a cap on real expenditure growth, to strengthen transparency and the countercyclical properties of the fiscal rule. The adoption of a two year budget is a most welcome
move towards these goals, and could be taken further with the adoption of rolling three
year ahead ceilings on nominal spending, the abolition of the automatic correction
mechanism for inflation surprises, and the strengthening of medium-term planning
procedures underpinning the ceilings.
17.
Whichever specific fiscal rules are adopted, their credibility is critical. In this
regard, the planned medium-term caps on public spending raise concerns because the
implied compression of already low non-security outlays may prove to be unsustainable.
The planned reductions in headline income tax rates assume this further spending
compression, which creates a vulnerability for public debt reduction. Such precommitments
to tax reductions may therefore cast doubt over the pace of debt reduction, and this could

7
undermine or eliminate the supply side gains from the tax cuts by pushing up risk premia
and the cost of financing for firms. To avoid this, tax reductions should follow
demonstrated debt reductions consistent with the debt target and interim ceiling;
precommitments to tax cuts which assume such debt reduction may unduly compound
Israel’s vulnerabilities.
Monetary policy has provided an appropriately measured anti-inflation signal
18.
Headline inflation is near the top end of the target band, and there are no serious
imminent risks of deflation either in headline or underlying terms in any of the measures of
inflation expectations or forecasts. A resumption of economic growth has become
increasingly evident, with the moderation of the earlier downturn likely to imply a similarly
moderated upswing. In this context, and bearing in mind the history of high inflation, and
global uncertainties (both on the upside and the downside), the hikes in the policy rate—by
25bp each for September and December 2009 and again for January 2010—are
appropriately balanced.
19.
As has been recommended globally, the withdrawal from “unconventional
measures”—notably foreign exchange intervention in Israel—should be phased. Given that
policy rates had hit their effective floor, strong intervention served to maintain a
stimulative monetary stance in Israel, leaning against excessive appreciation in the face of
strong capital inflows. As the desirable monetary stance tightens and the policy rate rises,
so the role of unconventional measures in pursing monetary policy objectives should be
reduced. In this light, the decision to shift from preprogrammed to discretionary
intervention is an appropriate step, beginning the exit while still retaining the option for
continued use of the instrument for a transitional period should it prove necessary to secure
a sufficiently accommodative stance of monetary policy.
20.
But there are risks associated with this strategy. In particular, this transitional phase
of discretionary intervention could compromise the clarity of the BoI’s objectives. To
restore the free floating regime, discretionary intervention should be formally terminated
when the policy rate is well above its effective floor on a sustained basis.
21.
Until then, further sustained real appreciation of the shekel remains a concern.
Though the evidence on competitiveness is now somewhat mixed, protracted upward
pressures on the exchange rate would tilt the balance of concerns more decisively. If capital
inflows surge, discretionary intervention should not constitute the main policy response.
Rather, scope to raise reserve requirements and to strengthen consumer protection rules
should be considered, and a stronger than currently planned budget balance is a further
option. Capital controls and taxes on inflows would be inadvisable alternatives as their
effectiveness is doubtful and both would compromise Israel’s commitment to open
markets.

8
22.
The uncertain environment also reinforces the case for the prompt adoption of the
proposed draft BoI Law. The law would strengthen BoI independence, establish a
committee with power to set monetary policy, and a separate management committee to
manage the bank’s administration.
The financial sector passed through the crisis relatively well
23.
While the bond market and equity valuations suffered heavily at the peak of the
global financial crisis, banks have proved remarkably resilient despite support measures
considerably less extensive than were applied elsewhere. In the context of proactive
supervision and conservative business practices, banks have mostly eschewed exposure to
structured instruments. They also remain largely deposit funded, and are backed by a strong
comprehensive implicit government guarantee. In these circumstances, their risk-weighted
capital ratios (reflected in strong raw capital), represent an adequate standard for bank
capitalization in Israel. This should be reflected in the determination of the level and types
of capital to be set in the Basel II standards in the coming year.
But some steps to strengthen the banking prudential framework are recommended
24.
A significant upgrade of macro-prudential and financial stability analysis is needed.
Priorities for the unit in the BoI should include comprehensive banking stress tests to
provide regulators and banks with a better understanding of risks. Scenarios could include
the lower bounds of staff’s 90 percent confidence intervals for the global and the associated
Israeli projections. In addition, the BoI should begin publication of a financial stability
report, preferably semi-annually, and consideration could be given to including the stress
test results. Over the longer term, the BoI should also work with the other regulators to
broaden the analysis to cover the entire financial system and its macroeconomic linkages.
Further consideration should also be given to the introduction of an explicit deposit
insurance scheme to provide additional options to deal with the resolution of non systemic
banks
And the difficulties in non-banks call for their supervision to be reinforced
25.
Given global stabilization and increased evidence that Israel has proven resilient to
the recent global shock, asset valuations have recovered significantly from their mid-crisis
troughs. But the severity of the earlier asset price declines, the closure of the corporate
bond market, and the fall of several insurance companies’ solvency ratios to below their
regulatory floors, underscore the vulnerability of non-bank financial institutions and related
financial markets. Various steps, including the Hodak committee proposals and initiatives
by the Israeli Securities Authority (ISA) are underway to address the difficulties.
26.
Beyond these steps, however, a more fundamental strengthening of the budget,
staffing, and autonomy of the non-bank regulators would seem appropriate. To this end, the
ISA should be given full operational independence, and the Capital Markets, Insurance and

9
Savings Division (CMISD) of the Ministry of Finance should be given formal autonomy, in
line with international best practice. Such changes should maintain the full flow of
information to other supervisors and to the monetary and fiscal authorities and coordination
of strategic priorities among the various regulators should be reinforced. Concurrently, the
CMISD and ISA should significantly strengthen their transparency, going well beyond the
provision of data, through the publication of timely analysis of developments, issues, and
risks. Finally, an assessment should be made whether the emergency support measures for
the nonbank sector—even though relatively well targeted—has given rise to moral hazard.
If so, this should be reflected in the content of supervisory guidelines to be adopted.
27.
Staff recommends that Israel should remain on the standard 12–month consultation
cycle.

10
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Israel has had a good “great recession”
1.
After sustained strong macroeconomic performance over the past five years, output
is projected to be about flat in 2009, and has been rising since Q2 (Figures 1 & 2, Table 1
and Text Table 1).1 As elsewhere, exports fell sharply in the six months following the
Lehman Brothers collapse, as did fixed capital formation and consumption of durables
(Figure 3, Tables 1 and 2). But the high savings rate, the absence of housing and bank
credit booms, and the fact that the overwhelming bulk of investment goods and consumer
durables are imported all cushioned the impact of the global shock on domestic output. In
this context, banks—with little exposure to external toxic assets or to wholesale funding—
proved resilient, well-capitalized, and liquid throughout, though non-bank financial
institutions and the bond market were strained (Box 1, Table 3). This is a passage through
the great recession that many would envy (Figure 4).
Text table 1. Israel - National Accounts (chained data at 2005 prices, seasonally adjusted)
(quarter-to-quarter percentage change, unless otherwise stated)
domestic
products
(GDP)

Private
consumption
expenditure

Mar-2007
Jun-2007
Sep-2007
Dec-2007

1.4
1.4
1.2
1.5

1.8
0.8
1.7
1.2

Mar-2008
Jun-2008
Sep-2008
Dec-2008

1.4
0.9
0.2
-0.4

2.3
-0.9
0.4
-0.6

3.5
-2.5
1.3
-0.2

4.0
-0.9
-3.9
-1.2

Mar-2009
Jun-2009
Sep-2009

-0.8
0.2
0.5

-0.9
2.0
2.1

-1.1
3.0
0.3

-4.2
0.7
5.4

Government Gross fixed capital
consumption
formation

Exports of
goods and
services

Imports of
goods and
services

Net exoprts of
goods and
services 1/

Changes in
inventories 1/

1.0
3.9
1.7
2.7

1.1
-1.2
0.2
0.9

-1.3
1.4
-1.8
0.8

4.6
-1.6
0.2
-10.4

3.8
-2.5
-2.3
-6.9

0.4
0.4
1.1
-1.8

-1.9
1.3
0.1
1.2

-8.1
3.5
5.0

-12.0
1.2
12.8

1.6
0.9
-2.7

-0.3
-3.5
1.2

Quarter-to-quarter change (in percent)
0.7
2.8
3.5
1.1
3.9
1.0
-0.1
10.7
2.0
-1.1
-3.1
4.7

Source: Central Bank of Israel, Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel.
1/ Numbers for net exports of goods and services and changes in inventories refer to contributions to output
growth.

1

See Country Report No. 09/57 ((http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=22706.0) pages 6–17,
paragraphs 24-36 for discussion of Israel’s economic situations before and during the earlier phase of the crisis.

11
Box 1. Banking Structure and Vulnerabilities
The main banks’ activities are focused on traditional lending activities, funded by a large
deposit base. Exposures to liquidity risks have therefore been minimal. Holdings of non-credit
assets, including domestic equity and bond holdings, as well as ABS exposures abroad,
exposed banks to market risks and resulted in falls in profitability in 2008, but only Hapoalim
made net losses. Returns on equity have begun to recover, but remain well below pre-crisis
levels. Prudent lending practices and close supervision have kept non-performing loans at a
low level, although problem loans (including loans “on watch”) have risen somewhat. Banks
continued to raise capital ratios during the crisis, through retained profits, bond and equity
issues, and risk-weighted capital ratios have risen to over 12 percent, while Tier 1 capital has
risen to over 8 percent.
Balance sheet in dicators for Israel's five b igg est banks
Bank Leumi

Bank Hapoalim

Discount Bank

Mizrahi Bank

First Int'l Bank

Jun-09 Jun-08

Jun-09 Jun-08

Jun-09 Jun-08

Jun-09 Jun-08

Jun-09 Jun-08

F igures in percent
Share of system assets

29.7

Credits/assets
Deposits /liabilities

64.9
84.7

69.1
81.7

71.3
80.7

70.3
80.1

61.7
79.4

64.3
82.7

79.5
86.2

79.3
79.5

58.5
84.9

63.1
86.7

Credits/deposits
Bonds & sub. notes/liabilities

81.8
7.7

8.1

94.7
7.8

6.7

81.8
5.5

5.6

97.9
7.1

7.2

73.7
5.3

4.6

Equity/assets
Equity/risk-weighted assets

6.3
12.9

7.0
12.4

6.5
12.8

6.2
11.0

5.0
11.5

5.5
11.1

5.5
12.2

5.9
11.6

5.9
14.0

5.8
11.7

Return on equity

10.2

14.1

4.5

-15.3

11.0

5.6

8.7

13.4

8.8

6.8

28.2

17.7

10.7

9.4

Source: Bank of Israel

2.
These outcomes partly reflected a track record of strong policies and the timely and
appropriate policy responses to the global shock (See Figures 1 and 6).2 Interest rates were
lowered sharply towards zero from 4¼ percent, a long-standing implicit government
guarantee for banks on deposits was expressly recognized by the Minister of Finance, a
program of Bank of Israel (BoI) purchases of government bonds began from March 2009,
and various measures to support financial institutions and the bond market were announced
(See Box 2).
3.
Automatic stabilizers also went into full swing, with the downturn taking its toll on
revenue (Table 4). This took the central government budget deficit for 2008 to 2¼ percent
of GDP from balance in 2007. The scope for discretionary fiscal stimulus, however, was
impeded by the transition to a new administration. Until a budget was adopted in July 2009,
monthly spending was capped by the budget law at 1/12th of budgeted expenditure
for 2008.
2

See the first background study “Why Was Output in Israel so Resilient through the Global Crisis?”.

12
Box 2. Financial Sector and Credit Support Measures 2008–09
Corporate bonds. The government provided seed capital of NIS 1.1 billion, to be used in a 1:3
ratio with private funds, to support corporate issues for solvent firms mainly active in Israel
facing debt rollover difficulties. To date only 10 percent of the funds have been used. The
program has now been expanded to include equity investments in corporates with market
access problems.
Increasing banks’ capital. A guarantee was offered of some NIS 6 billion for bank issues of
deferred notes which would be classified as upper Tier II capital. Conditions of use were eased
and the guarantee doubled to NIS 12 billion in April, but banks have raised capital without
using the guarantee.
Credit guarantees to small- and medium-sized firms. The initial NIS 1.3 billion scheme was
expanded to NIS 2.6 billion, with a 70 percent guarantee on the loans. The funds are leveraged
in a 1:5 ratio with private funds. NIS 0.7 billion has been disbursed under the program to date.
Easing out-of-court corporate bond rescheduling procedures. The ISA provided that bond
trustees will have to convene a forum of bondholders if requested to do so by a party holding a
substantial portion of bonds. Some 50 companies are now subject to these procedures,
accounting for total debt of US$3½ billion.

4.
Given its mid-year adoption, the authorities set the budget to cover both 2009
and 2010, and it incorporates discretionary expansionary measures—despite the fact that
output had begun to recover even before the measures were announced. In particular, the
budget anticipates a 3 percent increase in real spending for 2009, relaxing for one year the
1.7 percent ceiling stipulated by the fiscal rule.3 As a partial offset, social security
contributions and the VAT rate were temporarily raised—the latter by 1 percentage point to
16½ percent, to be reversed at end-20104—and tobacco and gasoline excises were
permanently increased. Additional spending curbs are anticipated from 2011 to “correct”
for the spending increases above the 1.7 percent rule that are budgeted for 2009.
5.
A new path for the ceiling on headline deficits was adopted alongside, as well as
commitments for reductions in the headline rates of income taxes (see Text Table 2).
Neither the deficit nor expenditure ceilings, nor the income tax rate reductions, are
regarded as being contingent on realization of the accompanying projected growth rates,

3

Since 2007, declining annual deficit targets were accompanied by a cap on real spending growth of 1.7 percent
annually (excluding emergency security-related items). The former drove debt down from 100 percent of GDP
in 2003 to below 80 percent at end-2008, while the latter held revenue ratios broadly constant in this context.
4

In December 2009, in light of the upside surprises on fiscal receipts, the authorities decided to bring forward
half of the planned reduction in the VAT to the beginning of 2010.

13
Text Table 2. Budget Ceilings and Income Tax Reductions
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

1
6

1
5½

1
3

1
2

1
1½

1
1

1.7
3.0

1.7
1.7

1.7
0.4 2/

1.7
1.7

1.7
1.7

1.7
1.7

Top marginal income tax rates
Personal
46
Corporate
26

45
25

45
24

44
23

43
22

42
21

Projected GDP growth

2.5

4.0

4.1

3.9

3.8

Deficit –Percent of GDP
Old rule
New rule
Real expenditure growth 1/
Old rule
New rule

1/
2/

0.1

Excl. corrections for previous years under/overshoots, and excl. “boxes”.
This falls as accommodation of stimulus spending in 09-10 ceases.

6.
The 2009–10 fiscal deficit ceilings were supported by the announcement (in
June 2009) that the “U.S. Israel Loan Guarantee Commitment Agreement” would be
continued. This framework originated in 2003, and under its extension, new US guarantees
of $330 million will be available each year in FY2010 and FY2011, subject to agreed
conditions and deductions. These amounts will add to the unused pool of the guarantees,
and the combined sum amounts to some 10 percent of annual projected gross financing
need for 2010.
7.
These fiscal balance, monetary, and financial sector support steps for 2008–10 are
consistent with the thrust of past staff advice, although specific suggestions with regard to
the fiscal policy framework remain under discussion.
8.
In this context, both headline and core inflation remained in positive territory
throughout 2008–09, despite a brief period after the collapse of Lehman Brothers when
financial market indicators anticipated a mild short-term deflation (Figure 6, lower LHS).
And with residents—notably through banks—repatriating capital from more unsettled
jurisdictions abroad from early 2008, Israel appeared to have acquired something of a safe
haven status. The BoI in late March 2008 announced its intention to systematically raise
foreign exchange reserves by some $10 billion over two years via preannounced daily
purchases to $35–40 billion (later revised to $40–44 billion). In the event, reserves rose to
just above $60 billion in November 2009, boosting external resilience while stemming
upward pressures on the currency (See Box 3). In this context the authorities have
considered the option of providing financing to the IMF.

14
Box 3. Competitiveness and the Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate
After several years of trading in a narrow range, the CPI-based real effective exchange rate
began appreciating as the global crisis broke in the Fall of 2007, rising steadily by some 15
percent in the year to Q3 2008 (Figure 7). From then, it declined back to within sight of its
earlier range by May 2009. But it has since appreciated once more, to some 10 percent above
its long-established
pre-crisis levels.
As elsewhere, global volatility has rendered estimates of equilibrium rates even more
hazardous than usual. The CGER estimates show a wide range, with the Equilibrium Real
Exchange Rate (ERER) measure, like the CPI-REER, suggesting that the shekel is on the
strong side, while the macro balance and external stability estimates suggest otherwise.
The Macro Balance (MB) and External Sustainability (ES) measures may be particularly
difficult to interpret in the case of Israel, because its longstanding geopolitical difficulties—
inter alia—depress gross investment and boost the demand for precautionary savings. These
effects are difficult to assess quantitatively, but may account for investment ratios on the low
side—around 18 percent of GDP even in a boom year like 2007—and the sustained current
account surpluses despite considerable income “catch-up” potential in Israel relative to the
most advanced countries. MB assessments of competitiveness, which do not adjust for these
matters, may thus tend to overstate the underlying competitiveness of the shekel. The ES
measure may be similarly distorted. It indicates that Israel’s IIP would be stable at a more
appreciated exchange rate than prevailing currently, but only on the implicit assumption that
the current official inward transfers (some 1½ percent of GDP in 2008) are sustained in the
medium-term. But these inward transfers to a considerable extent reflect Israel’s geopolitical
circumstances, and competitiveness assessments may need to be made abstracting from such
distorting factors.
Accordingly, in reaching a conclusion on the overall competitiveness of the shekel, the ERER
and direct price measures are emphasized relative to the MB and ES measures. In this light the
shekel may be somewhat on the strong side, but with significant margins of uncertainty around
that assessment.

9.
With inflation expectations rising back within the target range in recent months and
the resumption of economic growth increasingly evident, the exit from the accommodative
stance of policies has already been signaled and its initial steps taken. The BoI modified its
program of systematic reserve accumulation, and ended the program of government bond
purchases. It also raised interest rates three times by 25bp each for September and
December 2009, and January 2010 to the current level of 1.25 percent, the first of these
moves representing the first increase by a central bank globally for over a year. And with
the fiscal deficit ceilings showing a deficit reduction in 2010 and larger reductions
thereafter, the authorities now anticipate that revenue buoyancy on the back of the ongoing
output recovery will deliver budget deficit outturns considerably below the ceilings—with
the deficit officially expected now to reach close to 5 percent of GDP in 2009 and to fall
in 2010.

15
But Israel certainly has not been unscathed by the global crisis
10.
While output, private consumption, and confidence are again in the neighborhood
of their Fall 2008 levels, exports, imports, and fixed investment are far from fully
recovered. The stock of bank credit to corporate has fallen through much of the year with
inflation above target for much of that time. Concerns with the strength of shekel have not
entirely been put to rest, although safe haven factors that put upward pressure on the
currency earlier have receded along with global financial sector stabilization.
11.
Unemployment has edged up, with job loss concentrated in the construction,
manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade sectors, reflecting the weak export and
consumer and investment demand. But with real wages adjusting flexibly (partly via
inflation and reduced work hours), and the depth of the downturn relatively shallow,
nominal and real unit labor costs have been subdued. And though unemployment rose to
8 percent in Q2 2009, it has since fallen back slightly.
12.
The net worth of the non-bank financial sector was hit hard by sharp declines in
equity and corporate bond values. From end-2007 to end-2008, the capitalization of the Tel
Aviv Stock Exchange fell 45 percent, while prices of non-government bonds fell
14 percent. Concerns about the creditworthiness of borrowers also led to the curtailment of
new credit. After doubling in real terms from 2004 to 2007 to form nearly half of total
credit to firms, real outstanding credit to Israeli firms from domestic non-banks, foreign
creditors and households fell 5 percent in 2008 and has remained flat in 2009.
13.
Even banks, though resilient relative to those in major countries, have curtailed the
extension of credit growth to the private sector, which has slowed in annual terms from
8½ percent in Fall 2008 to 1½ percent a year later. As non-bank financing dried up, there
was some re-intermediation of borrowing by large corporates in late 2008, but in most
months since then, non-mortgage bank lending to the private sector has fallen slightly. The
main area of bank credit growth is in mortgage lending, which picked up noticeably from
April 2008. And with the deterioration in economic conditions, loan loss provisions have
been increased from 0.3 to 0.8 percent of total loans, but the NPL ratio remains at only
1.5 percent.
14.
Adjustments to fiscal rules, however well motivated and timed, inevitably raise
issues of credibility. The increase in spending growth in 2009 is described as “temporary”
(for 2009 only, with “corrections” to follow) and the deficit ceilings anticipate early
consolidation. But the interrelated credibility of both sets of ceilings remains to be
established.
A number of economic vulnerabilities remain, notably on the fiscal side
15.
By various indicators, Israel’s vulnerabilities are modest (Figure 8, Table 5). In
comparison with others, property has not boomed, the contribution of construction and the

16
financial sectors to growth is relatively small, returns on corporate assets are only slightly
on the low side, and external debt is low. But amongst more advanced countries, inflation
is on the high side as is the general government deficit (for 2009) and public debt.
Global prospects are highly uncertain
16.
Immediate global uncertainties remain heightened—with significant implications
for small open economies. The World Economic Outlook (WEO) 90 percent confidence
interval for world GDP growth in 2010 ranges from ¼ to 5½ percent. Using standard trade
elasticities of Israeli exports and output with respect to world growth, this implies a
90 percent confidence interval for Israeli exports in 2010 ranging from -2½ to 14 percent,
and a corresponding confidence interval for Israeli output ranging from 0 to 4 percent. This
uncertainty is not just a short-term phenomenon. The strength of global potential output
growth—and hence the strength of Israeli medium-term export market growth—has also
become unclear. WEO projected global output for 2013/14 is now some 9 percent lower
than was projected in April 2008, with some of Israel’s most important trading partners
(e.g., the US and Euro area) most heavily downgraded.
Fallout from recession, vulnerabilities, and global uncertainties all cloud the outlook
17.
Staff central case projections, predicated on the WEO—the central scenario of
which is somewhat below consensus—and the Israeli authorities’ announced policy
frameworks, show GDP growth flat in 2009, rising 2½ percent in 2010 and some 4 percent
in 2011, as exports, consumption, and fixed investment, and domestic credit all recover
(see Text Table 3 and Table 5). These will be partly offset by a recovery of imports, so the
external current account deteriorates from 2009. Abstracting from one-off factors affecting
inflation in 2009 (including indirect tax changes), underlying inflationary pressures are
expected to remain subdued especially if shekel strength continues, with inflation projected
at 3½ percent in 2009, falling back to the neighborhood of 2 percent thereafter.
18.
Estimates of the risks around this central scenario are derived from the WEO fan
chart and WEO projections for global potential output. The up- and downside scenarios
assume that automatic stabilizers continue to operate unfettered, with budgeted spending
commitments unchanged. On the monetary side, the risk scenarios are broadly anticipated
so that inflation remains within the target band, on the upper end in the upside scenario,
and vice versa. While the relative brevity and shallowness of the downturn has likely left
Israel’s current potential output level intact, medium-term potential output growth may
have been dented if the corresponding potential output growth in the major global
economies has been lowered by the crisis.5

5

See the first background study “Why Was Output in Israel so Resilient through the Global Crisis?”.

17

Text Table 3. Macro Framework projections
2007
Growth
(in percent)

In percent
Of GDP

Growth
(in percent)
In percent
Of GDP

Growth
(in percent)
In percent

Global GDP
Israel GDP
Private consumption
Private fixed investment
CPI (period average)
CG Budget balance
Current account

Global GDP
Israel GDP
CPI
CG Budget balance
Current account

Global GDP
Israel GDP
CPI
CG Budget balance

2010

2011

5.2
5.2
6.3
16.1
0.5

2008 2009
Central case
3.0
-1.1
4.0
0.1
3.6
1.2
5.2
-3.6
4.6
3.6

3.1
2.5
2.3
4.2
2.3

4.2
4.0
4.0
5.0
1.8

0
2.8

-2.2
1.1

-4.1
2.0

-3.4
1.8

-5.1
3.3

90 percent upper bound
-0.4
5.5
0.5
4
4
3
-4.5
4

-3.0
4

90 percent lower bound
-2.2
0.2
-0.5
0
3
1
-6

-6

18
III. STAFF MACRO ASSESSMENT
A. Policies and Policy Frameworks—2009–11
1.
The core of the macrofinancial challenge ahead for Israel is to chart and implement
an exit from the emergency policy settings adopted in response to the global crisis. This
challenge is shared internationally, but has three distinctive aspects in this case:


as for others in the vanguard of global recovery, the exit strategy has to be designed
largely from first principles for lack of the experience of others on which to draw;



like other small open economies, strong global spillovers to Israel mean that upside
outcomes remain largely at the mercy of international developments, so the exit
strategy is largely concerned with containing domestic downside risks; and



the nature, mass, and volatility of capital inflows may be significantly affected by
being in the vanguard of global exit, with strong capital inflows likely (including
possible carry trades) sourced from those further behind, until more of the major
economies catch up.
2.
In this context, the underlying theme of staff recommendations is to strengthen the
policy frameworks to anchor long run expectations and reinforce policy credibility, thereby
both securing greater flexibility to address short run shocks and supporting long-term
growth. This approach is reflected in advice in the fiscal, monetary, and the financial
stability areas.
3.

This underlying theme is reflected in two key recommendations.



The first is that the uncertain global environment places a high premium on avoiding
actions now which might compound downside risks. This concern precludes early
commitments to sizeable permanent remuneration increases, notwithstanding the
encouraging economic performance so far. In particular, wage settlements for public
sector employees due in 2010 should be tightly restrained. This would send an
appropriate signal to private sector wage setters, help keep inflation and interest rates
low as output strengthens, and thus promote continued good economic performance.



The second is that high Israeli public debt represents an enduring vulnerability. This
problem is likely aggravated by the recent elevation of public deficits and debt
elsewhere in the world and the associated pressures on global savings. In periods of
international market stress, costs of financing for high debt countries like Israel tend
to rise particularly sharply, curbing scope to allow fiscal support to cushion shocks—
a concern reflected in Israel’s decision in 2009 to raise the VAT rate to cap the
headline deficit. And high debt attenuates—and may even more than completely
negate— the stabilizing impact on output of fiscal support in downturns. Given

19
Israel’s particular exposure to global and geopolitical shocks, these are primary
concerns. Public debt needs to come down decisively.
B. Fiscal Policy and Framework
4.
The authorities have sought to anchor short-term flexibility in greater long-term
credibility, notably in the budget framework for 2009–10 which accommodates automatic
stabilizers in anticipation of an early sustained recovery in output (See Text Table 4). This
quest for credibility is supported by the renewal of the US Government guarantee for
public debt, and by the pursuit of early entry into the OECD. Discretionary stimulus
spending is limited, temporary, and is largely offset by revenue measures, notably the
permanent excise tax increases and the temporary (till end-2010) VAT increase.
Text Table 4. Budget and Macroeconomic Outlook
(Percent of GDP)
2008

2009
Budget

2010

Staff
projected

2014 2/

Budget

Staff
projected

Staff
projected

29 3/4

29 3/4

34

31 1/4

-4

-1 1/2

Central Govt 1/
Revenue (excluding repayment of credit)
o/w due to increase in taxes 2/
Expenditure 3/ 4/
o/w due to relaxation of fiscal expenditure ceilings 5/
Budget balance

31 1/2
…
33 3/4
…
-2 1/4

28 3/4
1/4
34 1/2
1/2
-6

29

-5

29
1/2
34 1/2
1/2
-5 1/2

General Govt
Structural primary balance 4/
Gross public debt 4/

1
76 3/4

3/4
81

3/4
79 3/4

1
83 1/4

1
81

2 1/2
75 3/4

Memorandum items:
GDP growth (percent)

4 1/4

-1

0

1 1/2

2 1/2

4

34 1/4

Sources: Data provided by the Israeli authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Excludes net credit.
2/ Refers to permanent increase in excise taxes on tobacco and gasoline, and temporary increase in VAT till end-2010
3/ Assumes long-term adherence to the annual real expenditure growth ceiling of 1.7 percent, excluding emergency security-related spending.
4/ Excludes proposed govt initiatives to support the financial sector
5/ Refers to 3 percent increase in real expenditure for 2009 and delayed "correction" until 2011

However, the authorities’ approach raises concerns
5.
First, the sum of detailed spending pledges in entitlement legislation and ministries’
medium-term plans remain well in excess (by a cumulative 2 to 3 percentage points of
annual GDP by 2014) of the announced ceilings on the real growth of aggregate spending.
This raises doubts about the credibility of both sets of commitments, representing a risk of
destabilizing uncertainty at the points when these sets of commitments have to be
reconciled. And though a number of commentators regard the eventual reduction of public
debt to 60 percent of GDP as an implicit objective of the authorities, the lack of a formal
commitment on a medium-term fiscal anchor such as this compounds uncertainty about
how the conflicting expenditure commitments will be resolved. And if they are resolved at

20
the expense of public debt, the underlying vulnerabilities associated with that debt will
remain and the broader economic costs may be high.1
6.
Second, the decision to continue using a path for the headline budget balance as the
form of the fiscal rule has two potential drawbacks. First, it may unduly constrain the
leeway in the near-term for the accommodation of automatic stabilizers, should downside
global macrofinancial risks materialize. And second, it may falsely signal scope for fiscal
relaxation if a temporary boom in output in 2010 after recession drives deficits down well
below target. Regarding the former, staff projections indicate that automatic stabilizers
would take the budget deficit above the ceiling, including in 2010. Even if global
developments are within their 90 percent confidence interval, the headroom under the
deficit target may be insufficient (See Text Table 3). And if “success” relative to target is
interpreted in public debate as indicating greater-than-expected progress toward mediumterm consolidation, raising pressure for a premature relaxation of policies, then underlying
debt vulnerabilities could be aggravated.
7.
The final concern raised by the authorities’ plans is that the path for the fiscal
balance that is implicit in the deficit ceiling path will deliver a debt ratio by 2015 of some
73 percent of GDP. This implicitly puts achievement of the often-referenced goal of debt
below 60 percent of GDP well beyond 2020. More fundamentally, the underlying
vulnerabilities associated with high debt levels will remain significant over a period in
which global demand and supply uncertainties are unusually pronounced.
These matters could be addressed in a phased manner
8.
The incompatibility between spending ceilings and commitments requires—and is
amenable to—immediate action. With the administration relieved of the usual end-year
administrative tasks associated with budget preparation—thanks to the two-year budget
adopted in July—an early focused review of medium-term spending commitments to
resolve these inconsistencies would be appropriate, regardless of which global scenario
transpires.
9.
There is a strong case to review the fiscal rules by Spring 2010, when the fiscal
outturns, the immediate prospects for global demand, and the outlook for capital flows are
likely to have become clearer. Consideration could be given to a new framework in which
the deficit ceilings are replaced with rules incorporating an explicit public debt target that is
formally contingent on the strength of global supply over the medium term.
10.
Suppose staff’s central or upside global and Israeli projections are being realized.
Then policy should aim to deliver deficit outturns considerably lower than the current 2010
1

See the second background study “Is lsrael’s Public Debt too High?”.

21
and 2011 ceilings. In this context, it would be appropriate to define formally the target to
secure public debt below 60 percent of GDP by 2020—anticipating further reductions
thereafter—alongside an interim ceiling of 70 percent of GDP by the middle of the coming
decade. This would anchor fiscal policy in a long term objective and provide clear guidance
for policies along that planned debt reduction path.
11.
The interim debt objective would require and imply a phased strengthening of the
path for the structural fiscal balance by 2¾ percentage points of GDP between 2009 and
mid-2010 relative to the path that is implicit in the authorities’ current deficit ceilings. This
adjustment would appropriately reduce the vulnerabilities associated with high debt and
would raise scope for the free accommodation of stabilizers. In designing budgets under
this framework, the aim should be to secure debt ratios below these ceilings in “central
case” scenarios, in order to anticipate shocks.
12.
On the other hand, some adjustments to this approach may be needed in early 2010
if the downside near-term global demand scenarios appear more likely. In that case, if
investor demand for Israeli public debt remains resilient, full accommodation of stabilizers
would be appropriate, even if that causes a breach of the current 2010 and 2011 deficit
ceilings. And the target dates for the debt and interim objectives may have to be extended
further out. But if, in this adverse context, financing conditions prove challenging, then a
more ambitious fiscal stance and consolidation path even than currently anticipated will
prove to be unavoidable.
13.
This contingent approach to reform of the fiscal rules and the 2010–11 budget has
several advantages. In the case where near-term global demand is strong, the framework
anticipates doubt about the persistence of the global upswing and so applies the associated
fiscal windfall to deficit reduction. This helps to strengthen policy credibility given the
change of fiscal rules because fiscal deficits for 2011 and 2012 would be below the current
ceilings. By thus capitalizing on the windfall, a strong commitment to the 2020 debt target
and the interim objective would be signaled by provision of the first down payment
towards those goals. In the case where near-term global demand is weak, the shift from
deficit ceilings to the debt anchor should provide additional scope for the accommodation
of fiscal stabilizers. In this context, contingent specification of the dates for the debt
ceilings reduces the risk of commitment to a fiscal consolidation path that is unduly
ambitious.
Public spending limits and tax policy objectives should be set in this context
14.
In any of these scenarios, a debt objective should be supported by ceilings on
expenditure and by annually updated medium-term fiscal projections specifying how
policies are set to achieve the medium-term debt objectives. The latter could help to guard
against risk that excessive tax reductions might be predicated on unspecified subsequent
compensating policy steps. And given the premium on accomodating automatic stabilizers

22
in the face of considerable short-term uncertainty, this means of delivering that assurance is
preferable to adoption of deficit or deficit range targets. The expenditure ceilings would
best be expressed as a cap on nominal spending, rather than as a cap on real expenditure
growth, to strengthen transparency and the counter-cyclical properties of the fiscal rules.
The two-year budgeting framework is a step towards establishing a nominal ceiling and a
more medium-term focus to public spending planning, and could be taken further with the
adoption of rolling three-year ahead nominal spending ceilings. See Box 4 for a side-byside comparison of the case for the authorities current framework of rules compared with
the staff suggested framework.
15.
However, the planned level of medium-term caps on public spending raises
concerns because the implied compression of non-security outlays may prove to be
unsustainable. These outlays are already low. Israel is close to the OECD average ratio for
non-interest spending to GDP, but some 8 percentage points of this is security-related in
Israel’s case, which implies that non-security spending already substantially below OECD
norms. The risk that further compression may be unsustainable is compounded by the
inconsistency between the ceilings on medium term real expenditure growth and the
component commitments discussed above.
16.
Both risks underscore difficulties with the planned reductions in headline income
tax rates. Implementation of these tax reductions assumes further spending compression,
and if the tax cuts proceed without that compression, public debt reduction is put at risk.
Other tax policy steps—expansion of the income tax bases, increases in indirect taxation, or
reductions in tax expenditures—could make up shortfalls. But the potential yield and
feasibility of those steps should be reviewed at an early stage, and issues of their
distributive impact should also be taken fully into account. Given the centrality of debt
reduction to reducing macroeconomic vulnerabilities, tax cuts should only follow once debt
is firmly on a path consistent with its targets, rather than vice versa.

23
Box 4. Deficit and Real Spending Growth Caps, or Debt and Nominal Spending Ceilings
Recent fiscal rules in Israel—deficit and real spending growth ceilings—helped lower public
debt and government size in the good macroeconomic circumstances that prevailed through
mid-2008. Both rules broke down—as did many fiscal rules elsewhere—during the global
crisis (even though the impact of the crisis on Israel was relatively muted). But the new rules
adopted have the same form, only with different numbers, and so may be vulnerable to the
same risks. Alternative forms of fiscal rule may be needed.
A debt rule has three advantages over a deficit cap. It establishes as the formal goal the
ultimate purpose of the deficit ceilings (which is debt reduction), aiding transparency. Because
its purview extends beyond the business cycle, it minimizes the risk of false signals to
policymakers and the public—of failure, when automatic stabilizers correctly cushion a
downturn; and of success, when temporary growth wrongly suggests room for fiscal relaxation.
And it anticipates currently heightened global uncertainties.
Rolling three year annual nominal spending caps also have various advantages over a real
growth cap. They are countercyclical—automatically raising real spending when inflation falls
short of the assumed rate—whereas the real rule is procyclical because lower than expected
inflation in one year (implying faster than expected real spending growth) is automatically
“corrected” by spending cuts the following year, even if low inflation persists. The nominal
ceiling is also transparent, whereas the “correction” mechanism in the real rule is little
understood. And the nominal cap can be agreed quickly in annual budget negotiations,
reflecting potential growth and the BoI inflation target of 2 percent, whereas the real rule
requires annual agreement of year ahead inflation forecasts, a politicized forecasting exercise.
Both debt and nominal ceiling rules would require careful application, however. To provide
guidance, the debt target must be achievable over at most a medium term horizon—hence the
need for an interim ceiling of 70 percent in five years if the headline goal is 60 percent of GDP
by the decade’s end. In order to confirm that policy remains on track, despite shocks, full
annual three year ahead budget projections consistent with this objective would be required.
This would be a major step up in Israeli budget practices. An exit clause from the commitment
if medium term global supply deviates significantly from expectations may also be appropriate.
On the spending ceilings, a new “third” year ceiling would be added annually, and it should
“correct for any past persistent inflation over or undershoots to avoid unintended persistent
changes in government size. Security emergencies should be allowed for (as now), and
accountability in the form of a fiscal council could assess whether classification or tax changes
distort the comparison of outturns relative to ceilings. And the nominal ceiling should be
reflected in BoI interest rate decisions because it changes—strengthens—the economy’s
automatic response to supply and demand shocks..
Overall, the deficit rule could be too restrictive in the near term and flexible in the long run,
while the debt rule reverses these characteristics. If medium term debt ceilings were
accompanied by three year rolling nominal spending caps, the framework could be much more
robust and flexible than current arrangements. The two year budget framework is a key step in
this direction—establishing nominal spending allocations and planning over a two year
horizon—but it still lacks the medium-term debt anchor. Israel could go further. Sweden has
done so—their “over the cycle” deficit rule being the dual of the proposed debt ceiling—for
over 15 years. Israel could do well to follow in Sweden’s tracks.

24
C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies and Frameworks
17.
Having ended its government bond purchase program and modified the
preprogrammed foreign exchange purchases to discretionary intervention, the BoI now
faces two interrelated challenges in respect of its role in Israel’s exit strategy. First, like all
global inflation targeting central banks currently facing exceptional uncertainties, the
relative priority it attaches to avoiding inflation target under- versus overshoots is key.
Second, again like other central banks, it is working its way back from unconventional to
conventional instruments. But unlike a number of others, it faces these challenges in a
context where the domestic monetary and credit transmission mechanisms are essentially
intact—the banking system remains robust and the bond market has largely recovered—
even if credit flows continue to be muted.
Monetary policy has provided an appropriately measured anti-inflation signal
18.
Along with other central banks, the BoI has had to consider if its approach to risks
of over- and under-shooting its inflation targets should be symmetric. The case for this
stance in Israel is strong:


A resumption of economic growth has become increasingly evident, with the
moderation of the earlier downturn likely to imply a similarly moderated upswing.



Headline and core inflation measures are currently near the top end of the target band,
and there are no serious imminent risks of deflation in any of the measures of
inflation expectations or forecasts.



Israel’s relatively recent history of high inflation, and the cost of bringing it down,
has engendered a strong aversion to risking a significant pickup in inflation.



Foreign exchange intervention could, if necessary in a downside scenario, effectively
support the nominal interest rate instrument to ensure delivery of an appropriately
accommodative stance. The loss of monetary instrument effectiveness in downside
scenarios is thus less of a concern for Israel than it is in larger and more closed
economies.
19.
For these reasons, a balanced approach to target under and over-shoots is
appropriate in the Israeli context, and the policy steps taken so far reflect that assessment.
The BoI has clearly signaled its intention to contain upside risks to inflation by being the
first central bank to raise policy rates for over a year, by 25 bp each for September and
December 2009, and January 2010 to the current level of 1.25 percent. Looking ahead, that
approach remains appropriate. Given the large uncertainties about global—and therefore
Israeli—prospects, further tightening should remain cautious. But if evidence emerges that
growth has become self sustaining, then policymakers should stand ready to move swiftly
from the current accomodative stance to a neutral stance.

25
But withdrawal from unconventional measures is challenging
20.
As recommended globally, the transition back from unconventional to conventional
policies should be phased. For Israel, this largely concerns the practice of foreign exchange
intervention. Given that policy rates had hit their effective floor, strong intervention was an
appropriate tool to maintain the necessary stimulative monetary stance in Israel, leaning
against excessive appreciation in the face of strong “safe-haven” capital inflows. As the
appropriate monetary stance tightens and the policy rate rises commensurately, the role of
unconventional measures in pursuing monetary policy objectives should be reduced. In this
light, the decision to shift from preprogrammed to discretionary intervention is an
appropriate step. This serves to begin the exit while still retaining the option for continued
use of the instrument for a transitional period, in case it should prove necessary to secure a
sufficiently accommodative stance of monetary policy.
21.
But as with all unconventional measures, risks arise. In particular, this transitional
phase of discretionary intervention risks compromising the clarity of the BoI’s objectives
and the credibility of its floating foreign exchange rate regime. Israel faces highly
idiosyncratic—including geopolitical—shocks, and has a fully developed capacity to
operate independent monetary policy. Furthermore, until the most recent reforms, it
maintained a decade-long record of non-intervention in foreign exchange markets. For all
these reasons, it should not give up the status of “free floating” exchange rate regime
lightly.
22.
To address these risks, it will be critical that intervention clearly does not target a
particular exchange rate level, but remains focused on its role in delivering the appropriate
stance of monetary policy. In addition, discretionary intervention should be formally
terminated when the policy rate is well above its effective floor on a sustained basis. In this
way, this exit strategy anticipates the restoration of the free floating exchange rate regime.2
23.
However, formal termination should not rule out the option of intervening in
exceptional circumstances. Retention of this option would be consistent with the stance of
the BoI over the bulk of the past decade, and it may become increasingly necessary as
Israel continues to integrate into global capital markets.
Surges of capital inflows remain a concern, especially in this transitional phase
24.
So far, Israel has escaped the full brunt of this challenge, in contrast to some other
open economies in the vanguard of global exit. The reversal of the earlier “safe haven”
inflows as global financial markets stabilized has offset the surge of inflows from the late
global exiters. This has allowed the cessation of preprogrammed intervention to proceed
2

Even the program of reserve acquisition ending in September maintained this because it eschewed
discretionary daily intervention.

26
with relatively infrequent and modest discretionary interventions—with the exception of
the days immediately following announcement of the change of regime—without further
compromising competitiveness. In that context, the practice of discretionary interventions
will shift the Fund’s de facto classification of the exchange rate regime from “free floating”
to “floating”, with the authorities’ de jure classification unchanged as “floating.”
25.
But should this balance of outflows and inflows shift in favor of the latter, the
option to simply let the exchange rate appreciate further to absorb the inflows could be
undesirable. This is particularly so if the inflows prove temporary and set to subside when
all major economies exit from global recession. Though the evidence on competitiveness
now is somewhat mixed, protracted further upward pressure on the exchange rate would
raise the level of concern more decisively.
26.
If capital inflows surge, discretionary intervention should not constitute the main
policy response, even during this transitional phase. Rather, scope to raise reserve
requirements for banks and consumer protection rules should be considered, with the
adoption of a fiscal stance tighter than that recommended in the staff central case
constituting a further option. In this context, the case for an alternative policy response of
capital controls and/or taxes on inflows is not persuasive. The effectiveness of the former is
questionable in light of Israel’s open and integrated financial markets, and the latter
measures would likely and unnecessarily compromise the signal of Israel’s strong
commitment to open and competitive markets.
Proposed reforms to the BoI Law are welcome
27.
The central step the authorities are taking on the monetary side to underpin the
long-run credibility of their inflation targeting regime is to move towards adoption of the
new BoI Law. It will follow ECB and Bank of England precedents to increase
independence, establish a committee with power to set monetary policy, and a separate
management committee to manage the bank’s administration.
D. Financial Stability
Banks remained resilient through the global crisis
28.
The Israeli financial system has weathered the storm better than many other
countries. Problem loans have increased only moderately, the interbank market functioned
throughout, and while banks may have tightened credit conditions, slower bank credit
growth primarily appears to reflect demand factors. Given this, Israel may provide useful
lessons for the global debate on strengthening prudential frameworks, with several features
being of particular interest: the limited reliance of Israeli banks on wholesale funding or
structured products; the Glass-Steagall-like restrictions on their activities; the role of
banking supervision in avoiding a property price bubble and limiting risk exposures; the
practice of supervision when most if not all banks are systemic; and the lack of deposit

27
insurance but strong implicit comprehensive government guarantee.3 In addition, steps
were taken to ensure the authorities’ readiness to deal with any stresses which might
emerge (see Box 5).
Box 5. Is Israel Ready to Address Financial Instability, If It Occurs?
1.
Market liquidity, and ELA facilities. The Governor appropriately enjoys wide discretion to
determine the instruments, pricing, and collateral arrangements for emergency liquidity operations to
support individual banks and the banking system. Thus, any shortfalls can be rapidly addressed.
Nonetheless, a particular concern warranting review is the mandate under stock exchange listing
requirements for financial firms to rapidly announce any LOLR facilities they receive.
2.
Bank resolution framework. If the Governor, after consultation with the Supervisor, is of the
opinion that a particular banking corporation is unable to meet its obligations, he may (with the
approval of the Government) appoint, without delay, an administrator to manage the banking
corporation. It will be key to ensure legal capacity to complete such operations speedily, should they
become necessary. In this regard, it will be important to strengthen provision for preemptive bank
resolution by the regulator, notably via restriction of legal recourse for affected stakeholders to
financial compensation only.
3.
Coordination amongst the authorities. Given the more complex financial system that has
emerged due to recent reforms and the need for close cooperation between supervisors, the central
bank, and the Government, strong technical capacity to manage and resolve financial stress is needed.
A recent Memorandum of Understanding among the supervisors, as well as exercises that test
responses to crisis scenarios is welcome.
4.
Non-banks. Readiness to handle weakness in a large non-bank financial institution is unclear.
While forms of appropriate support will vary from case to case, early consideration of options and risks
that may arise is needed.

The banking system proved to be relatively resilient in the crisis
46.
The resilience of the banking system and its ability to provide additional financing
to the corporate sector and (more recently) to the household sector has helped to underpin
economic activity through the external shock. This reflects a number of strengths of the
banking system in the period ahead of the crisis. These included:


3

Neither households nor banks were exposed to a significant fall in domestic property
prices, because Israel did not experience a housing sector boom in the years before

See the third background study “Global Regulatory Reform—Lessons From Israel”.

28
the crisis; indeed, housing prices have risen through the crisis period, partly reflecting
safe haven capital inflows;


Prudent lending practices, reinforced by close supervision by the BoI, including the
use of a range of quantitative restrictions on lending, helped banks to enter the crisis
with generally strong lending portfolios, a low level of non-performing loans, and
limited exposure to bond and equity markets;4



The 2005 Bachar reforms, obliging banks to withdraw from long-term savings,
pension and insurance activities, meant that banks were not exposed to the associated
risks which adversely affected the performance of the non-bank financial sector.



A strong deposit base and the absence of funding from wholesale markets at home or
abroad. At end-2007, the Israeli banking system had a loan-to-deposit ratio of under
90 percent, so that it was insulated from disruptions in the availability of wholesale
funds during the crisis;



Israeli banks strengthened capital buffers in the period ahead of the crisis, and
continued to strengthen capital during the crisis, in accordance with BoI
requirements.

47.
The Israeli capital standards themselves also appear to be appropriate—having
delivered stability during an extraordinarily severe global crisis. However, the adequacy of
these capital standards partly reflects the broader context in which they were tested,
including the fact that banks in Israel eschewed the complex products and practices which
undermined the reliability of such standards elsewhere (Basel I and II), and the early exit of
the economy from recession. But adherence to the 12 percent risk-weighted standard—and
the associated tier 1 ratio of 7 percent and raw capital ratios of 5-7 percent—in the context
of the implicit government guarantee on banks has nevertheless proven its effectiveness,
and this should be reflected in the determination of capital requirements as Basle II is
brought in.
Nonetheless, strengthening of some areas of banking supervision is needed
48.
A significant upgrade of macro-prudential and financial stability analysis is needed.
Priorities for the new unit in the BoI should include comprehensive banking stress tests to
provide a better understanding of risks to regulators and banks. Scenarios could include the
lower bounds of staff’s 90 percent confidence intervals for the global and the associated
Israeli projections. In addition, the BoI should begin publication of a financial stability
4

As a result, banks losses during the crisis stemmed primarily from losses on their investments in domestic and
foreign securities, but for the banking system as a whole the return on equity in 2008 fell to close to zero, rather
than well below it.

29
report, preferably semi-annually, and consideration could be given to including stress test
results. Over the longer term, the BoI should also work with the other regulators to broaden
the analysis to cover the entire financial system and its macroeconomic linkages.
49.
Work on moving from GAAP to IFRS accounting standards is underway, and will
provide increased transparency and international comparability. Implementation of Basel
II, using the standard approach, is also in progress, with appropriate emphasis on Pillar II.
A particular challenge is to balance the resource needs for progress in these areas against
the needs of intensified supervision in the current environment.
50.
The global financial difficulties have also again highlighted the importance of
adequately qualified, resourced, and motivated supervisors. High turnover reflects ongoing
challenges on this front. These issues have become more acute with the global financial
crisis and, even in Israel, the increasing complexity of banking.
51.
Further consideration should also be given to introduction of an explicit deposit
insurance scheme. Clearly, any such scheme would need to reflect the fact that some banks
are too large to be covered in a pre-funded or pooled insurance framework. For the large
institutions, special arrangements would be required, recognizing their systemic
importance.5 Even so, introducing an explicit framework could more readily facilitate
consideration of other options to deal with the resolution of non-systemic banks.
Arrangements for non-bank supervision may need fundamental review
52.
Given the ongoing stabilization of world markets and increased evidence that Israel
has proven resilient to the recent global shock, asset valuations have recovered significantly
from their mid-crisis troughs. But the particular severity of the declines in the peak of the
financial crisis, the closure of the corporate bond market during the crisis, and the decline
of several insurance companies’ solvency ratios to below their regulatory floors are all
indicative of underlying fragilities in these institutions and markets.
53.
The global financial crisis has underscored the need globally to review macroprudential and regulatory frameworks. In Israel’s case, given the focus of difficulties in
non-banks, such a review should begin there. The proposals from the “Hodak Committee”,
as well as similar initiatives by the Israeli Securities Authority (ISA)—including
strengthening bond prospectuses and attaching contractual covenants and financial criteria
to bonds—provide a good starting point. But two broader issues remain.
54.
First, the presumption behind the 2005 reforms was that investors in these sectors
would face all risks, both upside and downside, with a correspondingly lighter regulatory
5

The Netherlands deposit insurance framework offers a possible model, as it has been designed to deal with a
banking system dominated by a few very large banks.

30
framework than is applied to banks. The emergency measures provided some public
assurance of returns to these investments but appropriately limited the guarantees offered.
Nevertheless, with global market sentiment improving, there is a need to review whether
that presumption remains valid—or if, in the event of sustained or renewed losses,
obligations will de facto accrue to the public sector. If so, more robust regulatory
arrangements to address consequent moral hazard concerns in non-banking operations will
be required.
55.
Second, a more fundamental strengthening of the budget, staffing, resourcing and
autonomy of the non-bank regulators is appropriate. To this end, the ISA should be given
full operational independence, and the Capital Markets, Insurance and Savings Division
(CMISD) of the Ministry of Finance should be given formal autonomy, in line with
international best practice. Such changes should maintain the full flow of information to
other supervisors and to the monetary and fiscal authorities, and coordination of strategic
priorities among the various regulators should be reinforced. Concurrently, the CMISD and
ISA should significantly strengthen their transparency, going well beyond the provision of
data, through the publication of timely analysis of developments, issues, and risks. Finally,
an assessment should be made of the risk that even the relatively well-targeted emergency
support measures for the non-bank sector has given rise to moral hazard there and, if so,
this should be reflected in the content of supervisory guidelines to be adopted.

31
Figure 1. Israel: An Eventful Decade, 1999−2009 1/
(percent, unless otherwise indicated)
...and strengthened its IIP.

Between global recessions, Israel grew strongly...
10

10
Real GDP growth
(percent)

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

125

125
IIP
(percent of GDP)

100

100

75

75
Gross IIP liabilities

50

50

25

-2

-2
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

25
Net IIP

0

0

-25

-25

-50

2009

-50
1999

Unemployment...
12

Unemployment rate

11
Israel

10

OECD

12

12

11

10

10

9

9

8

8

7

7

6
5
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Israel 2/

Israel

8

OECD

4

4

6

2

2

5

0

0
1999

8

6

…and fiscal balances proved to be highly cyclical...
12
General government deficit
(percent of GDP)
10

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

…alongside a trend depreciation in the effective exchange
rate.
105
115
Real effective exchange rate
(2000=100, CPI-based) 3/

10

8

2007

6

12
CPI inflation
(percent)

2005

6

…but inflation stayed low overall...

10

2003

8

2009

12

2001

105
95

6
95

4

4

OECD

2

2

0

0

-2

-2
1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

85
85

75
1999

75
2001

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; and IMF, Information Notice System.
1/ Estimates for 2009.
2/ From 1999 onward, international definition, accrual basis.
3/ Data for 2009 as of September.

2003

2005

2007

2009

32

Figure 2. Israel: Recent Economic Indicators, 2001−09
(percent, unless otherwise indicated)
...with consumption and investment strong...

Until recently output grew robustly...
10

10
8

Real GDP, SA
(quarter-on-quarter growth; annualized, in percent)

8
6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

Israel

3
Contributions to GDP growth (percent)

6

-4

3

-4

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

US
-6

-6

Euro area

-8

-8

-10

-10

Private consumption

-2

-2

Public consumption
Fixed investment
Net exports

05Q1

06Q1

07Q1

08Q1

-3

09Q1

07Q3

08Q1

08Q3

09Q1

09Q3

…despite marked real wage declines.

...but in global crisis unemployment has risen..
12

-3
07Q1

57

10

Labor market 1/

10
Real wages index 2/
(year-on-year growth, 12MMA)

11
6

6

2

2

-2

-2

56
10

9
55
8

7

54
-6

6

Unemployment rate
Participation rate (right scale)

5

-6
Total
Private sector
Public sector

53

-10

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Sources: Haver Analytics and OECD Economic Outlook Database.
1/ Data for 2009 as of June.
2/ Data for 2009 as of July.

-10
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

33

Figure 3. Israel: External Indicators, 2001−09
Until recently, exports outpaced imports...

20

20

Trade volume in goods indices 1/
(quarter-on-quarter change, percent)

15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

-10

-10

World
Advanced economies

0.7

0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

-15

-15
Export Volume Index
Import Volume Index

-20

-20
-25

-25
2001

4.8

...while export market share slipped from recent highs.
0.9
Market share of Israel's goods exports
(percent)
0.8

2003

2005

2007

0.3

2009

Alongside, the terms of trade have dipped.

0.3
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
The current account surplus turned...

4.8

6

6
Current account 3/
(percent of GDP)

Terms of trade 2/
(index in log)

4.6

4

4

2

2

0

0

4.6

Total
4.4

4.4
Excl. ships, aircrafts &
diamonds
Excl. ships, aircrafts,
diamonds & fuel

4.2

4.2
2001

2003

2005

2007

-2

-2
2001

2009

10
8

12
Financial account 3/
(percent of GDP)

8
6

4

4

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

FDI

-6

-8

Portfolio investment

-8

-10

-10
2001

2003

2005

115

10

6

2007

2009

2005

2007

2009

...and recently competitiveness gains have been
eroded.

…as have foreign capital inflows...
12

2003

Real effective exchange rate 4/ (2000=100, CPIbased)

115

105

105

95

95

85

85

75
2001

75
2003

Sources: Central Bureau of Statistics; Bank of Israel; and IMF staff projections.
1/ Inclusive of goods and services; data for 2009 as of quarter 3.
2/ Average for 2009 Q1 and Q2.
3/ Projection for 2009.
4/ A decrease represents depreciation. Data for 2009 as of August.

2005

2007

2009

34
Figure 4. Israel: Global Recession - Cross-country Comparison
Real GDP from Peak to Trough (Potential ouput measure) 1/
United States
United Kingdom
Turkey
Switzerland
Sweden
Spain
Slovak Republic
Portugal
Poland
Norway
New Zealand
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Korea
Japan
Italy
Ireland
Iceland
Hungary
Germany
France
Finland
Denmark
Czech Republic
Canada
Belgium
Austria
Australia
Israel
Jan 06

Jul 06

-10

Jan 07

-8

Jul 07

Jan 08

Jul 08

Output gap (in percent of 2009 potential GDP)
-6
-4
-2
0

Switzerland
Cyprus
Australia
Israel
Spain
Slovenia
Norway
Austria
New Zealand
Malta
China,P.R.:Hong Kong
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Denmark
Portugal
Belgium
Czech Republic
Euro Area
Taiwan Prov.of China
France
Iceland
Ireland
Singapore
Italy
Germany
Slovak Republic
United States
Canada
Finland
United Kingdom
Korea, Republic of
Sweden
Japan

Source: OECD, WEO, and Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel
1/ Shaded area indicates a decline in real GDP relative to the potential level.

Jan 09

2

Jul 09

4

35
Figure 5. Indicators of Financial Market Stress
Capital Raise on Tel Aviv Stock Exchange by Private Sector
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

(billions of USD)
Corporate bonds

Equity

07Q1 07Q2 07Q3 07Q4 08Q1 08Q2 08Q3 08Q4 09Q1 09Q2 09Q3 09Q4
140

110
Financial indices

90

100

80

80
60

Tel Aviv 100

70

S&P 500

60

40

1/1/2007 = 100

0
9/1/07

5/1/08

1/1/09

9/1/09

Exchange rates of Israel and other emerging
market countries vs the U.S. dollar.

190

Hungary
Iceland

170

Poland

130

Romania

Sweden

40

France

1/1/07
5.0

9/1/07

5/1/08

1/1/09

(percent)

4.0

9/1/09

Israel

Spread of 3m
Libor to 3m T-bill
rates

US
UK

2.0

Ukraine

110

1.0

90

50

U.K.

3.0

Israel

150

70

Israel

30

1/1/07

210

U.S.

50

20

230

Financial indices as a share of main
indices 1/

100

120

0.0

1/1/2007 = 100

1/1/07

9/1/07

-1.0
5/1/08

1/1/09

Sources: Bank of Israel, Bloomberg, TASE.
1/ Israel: Tel Aviv Banks / Tel Aviv 100
US: S&P Financials / S&P 500
UK: FTSE 300 Financials / FTSE 100
Sweden: OMX Nordic Banks / OMX Stockholm 30
France: ENEXT CAC Financials / CAC 40

9/1/09

1/1/07

9/1/07

5/1/08

1/1/09

9/1/09

36
Figure 6. Israel: Selected Monetary and Financial Indicators, 2006−09
The policy rate has responded to uncertain global
conditions in the context of moderate credit growth.

Recent money market strains have been limited...

7

2.3
Interest rates 1/
(percent)

6

3M

1.8

5
4

2.3

Overnight

1.8

6M
Euro 3m OIS spread

1.3

1.3

3
2

0.8

0.8

0.3

0.3

1
0
Implicit real interest rate 2/

-1

Difference between Interbank rate
and treasury bills

-0.3

Policy rate

-2

-0.3

Domestic credit

-3

-0.8

-0.8
2006

2007

2008

2009

Jan-08

Aug-08

Mar-09

Oct-09

…while equity markets plunged and then recovered.
140
140
Stock market indexes
130
130
(January 2007 = 100)

14

120

120

10

10

110

110

8

8

100

100

90

90

6

6

80

80

4

4

12

Tel Aviv 100

70

60

Tel Avivl Banks

60

0

50

-2

40

-4

50
40
2006

2007

2008

Distance to default: averages of large banks in
selected countries

2

70

Tel Aviv Finance 15

And bank default risks rose.

12

2

Israel
Germany
Sweden
Belgium

0
-2
-4

2007

2009

Inflation has risen above target...

14

2008
…but year ahead inflation expectations have
recently returned to target.

7

10

7

8

8

6

6

6

5

4

4

4

2

2

3

3

0

0

2

2

-2

1

1

-4

0

0

-6

-1

10

-2

Inflation (year-on-year growth) 1/

CPI

Inflation expectations 1/
1 year ahead
3 years ahead
Lower bound
Upper bound

6
5
4

CPI excl. housing and energy

-4
-6

Upper bound inflation target
Lower bound inflation target

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

-1
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Sources: Bank of Israel; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and Bloomberg.
1/ Data for 2009 as of September.
2/ Defined as the Bank of Israel policy rate minus inflation expectations.

37
Figure 7. Indicators of Competitiveness
120

120

REER (2000=100)

110

Real Exchange Rate
Fall 2009 CGER Assessment

110
100

Approach

RER Valuation
Conclusion

90

90

80

80

MB
ES
ERER

-4%
-13%
6%

70

70

CPI-based

100

ULC-based

60
2001
0.9

60
2002

2004

2005

2007

2008
0.9

Market Share of Israel's Goods Exports
(Percent)

0.8

MB: Macro Balance
ES: External Sustainability
ERER: Reduced form Equilibrium RER

105

Tradeable over Non-tradeable prices
(Index June 2004=100)

0.8

World

100

Advanced economies

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

95

90

0.3

0.3
1990

1996

2002

2008

85
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sources: Bank of Israel; Direction of Trade Statistics; Haver Analytics; IMF, Information Notice System; and IMF staff calculations.

Source: IFS, WEO, OECD, National statistics agency.
1/ Data as of end-2008 in percent, unless otherwise stated.

-5

15

...or finance ...

Contribution of financial sector to GDP growth
(percent)
18

12

9

6

3

0
Korea

Greece

Slovenia

Spain

Luxembourg

Israel had no boom in house prices ...

Belgium

Denmark

Finland

Sweden

Austria

Netherlands

France

United Kingdom

0

Italy

5

Norway

10

Israel

5

Germany

Average growth in house price over 5 years
(percent)

Portugal

Japan
Germany
Israel
Austria
Switzerland
Portugal
Netherlands
Korea
Luxembourg
United States
Finland
Greece
Italy
Denmark
Malta
Ireland
United Kingdom
Australia
Singapore
Norway
Sweden
Belgium
Canada
Spain
France
Iceland
New Zealand
Slovenia
China,P.R.:Hong Kong

20

Slovak Republic
Portugal
Germany
Korea
Japan
Norway
France
Austria
Belgium
Netherlands
Israel
Slovenia
Italy
Canada
Ireland
United States
New Zealand
Spain
Singapore
Australia
United Kingdom
Finland
Luxembourg
Greece
Sweden
Denmark
China,P.R.:Hong Kong
Switzerland

Luxembourg

United Kingdom

Slovenia

Spain

Belgium

Netherlands

Austria

France

Sweden

Norway

Korea

Denmark

Portugal

Finland

Germany

Greece

Italy

Israel

38

Figure 8A. Israeli Vulnerability Indicators

6

…property...

Contribution of construction to GDP growth
(percent)

15
4

3

2

1

0

-1

20

…and corporate RoE's have been adequate.
Return on assets in corporate sector
(percent)

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Netherlands

Source: IFS, WEO, OECD, National statistics agency.
1/ Data as of end-2008 in percent, unless otherwise stated.

over 3000
percent

300

200

100

0

5
Japan
United States
Switzerland
Portugal
Luxembourg
Germany
Ireland
Spain
Austria
Cyprus
Canada
China,P.R.:Hon
Slovenia
Norway
Sweden
Netherlands
Italy
Belgium
Denmark
Greece
France
New Zealand
Finland
Australia
United Kingdom
Korea
Slovak Republic
Israel
Malta
Singapore
Iceland

Luxembourg

400

United Kingdom

External Debt
(percent of GDP)

Switzerland

Portugal

Greece

Sweden

Germany

United States

Australia

Canada

Japan

450

Israel

Korea

500

External debt is relatively small...

…but fiscal deficit is relatively high indicating a
source of vulnerability...

Projected general Government Balance in 2009
(percent of 2009 GDP)

0
200

-5
150

-10
100

-15
50

-20
0
China,P.R.:Hong Kong
Luxembourg
Australia
Denmark
New Zealand
Slovenia
Slovak Republic
Korea, Rep. of
Czech Republic
Finland
Taiwan POC
Sweden
Switzerland
Cyprus
Spain
Ireland
Netherlands
Norway
United Kingdom
Malta
Austria
Portugal
France
Canada
Germany
Israel
United States
Singapore
Belgium
Greece
Italy
Iceland
Japan

Iceland
United States
Spain
Ireland
United Kingdom
Japan
France
Portugal
Greece
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Belgium
Italy
Slovak Republic
Israel
Canada
Malta
Taiwan POC
Australia
Austria
Germany
Cyprus
Netherlands
Sweden
Luxembourg
China,P.R.:Hong
New Zealand
Finland
Korea, Republic of
Switzerland
Denmark
Singapore

39

Figure 8B. Israeli Vulnerability Indicators (Continued)

25

…inflation rate has exceeded the target level...

Inflation rate
(percent)

20

350

15

250

10

150

5

50

0

...and public sector debt has stayed at high level.

250

Projected General Government Gross Debt in 2009
(percent of 2009 GDP)

40
Figure 9. Israel: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
110

20

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)
Baseline
Historical

100

110

110
Baseline:

15

Scenario:

100

76

4.2

i-rate
shock

10
80

100

5.6

Historical:
90

90

4.6

90
80
80

80
Baseline
5

70
60
2004

72

2006

2008

2010

0
2014

2012

76
70

60
2004

110

110

100

3.7

Scenario:

2.2

Historical:

3.8

100
90

Growth
shock

90

2006

2008

2010

60
2014

2012

Primary balance shock (percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock (percent per year)
Baseline:

70

90

110

110

100

Baseline:

1.5

Scenario:

0.7

Historical:

1.9

No policy change

90

100

88

90

Baseline
80

80
Baseline

2006

2008

2010

80

70

70

76

60
2014

2012

60
2004

110

110

100

100

100

90

90

80

80

70

70

Combined
shock

Baseline
70

2006

2008

2010

2006

2008

2010

60
2014

2012

2012

110
contingent
liabilities
shock

30 %
depreciation

100

88
90

83

80

60
2004

70

PB shock

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 3/

Combined shock 2/
110

90

80

76

70

60
2004

80

86
80
Baseline

76

60
2014

60
2004

76
70

2006

2008

2010

2012

60
2014

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2009, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

41
Table 1. Israel: Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 2003−10
(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 1/

1.5
-0.1
-2.6
-5.4
-5.1
10.8
-0.4
-1.9

5.0
5.3
-1.8
3.2
1.0
10.4
0.0
1.2

5.1
3.5
1.6
13.8
4.0
9.0
0.8
2.4

5.3
4.3
3.0
5.2
11.3
8.4
2.4
-0.1

5.2
6.3
3.4
10.1
15.3
7.3
0.3
3.4

4.0
3.6
2.1
1.4
4.4
6.2
1.6
3.8

0.1
1.2
1.8
-11.7
-3.3
7.8
3.4
2.6

Money and credit (period average)
Narrow money (M1) 2/
Broad money (M3) 3/

0.5
2.2

18.0
4.6

17.5
7.9

13.7
7.4

15.34
12.9

14.1
8.0

57.8
15.2

Interest rates (average, percent)
Bank of Israel policy rate

7.5

4.2

3.7

5.1

3.9

3.7

35.1
40.5
-5.3
-6.9
99.0
24.6

34.8
38.4
-3.6
-4.2
97.4
24.2

35.1
37.0
-1.9
-2.5
93.5
24.4

35.2
36.2
-1.0
-1.4
84.4
22.3

35.4
35.4
0.0
-0.8
78.1
19.5

31.6
33.8
-2.2
-2.8
76.8
16.1

29.1
34.2
-5.1
-5.7
79.9
15.0

29.8
33.9
-4.1
-4.7
80.9
14.5

Balance of payments (percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted)
Exports of goods and services
36.7
Real growth rate (percent)
8.0
Imports of goods and services
37.4
Real growth rate (percent)
-1.3
Trade balance
-0.8
Oil Imports (billions of U.S. dollars)
3.7
Net Imports (billions of U.S. dollars)
3.7
Current account
0.5
Foreign direct investment
3.4
Foreign reserves (end period, billions of U.S. dollars)
26.4

41.3
17.5
41.3
11.8
0.0
4.5
4.5
1.7
2.0
27.2

42.6
4.3
42.9
3.5
-0.3
6.8
6.8
3.1
3.2
28.3

42.9
6.0
42.4
3.3
0.5
7.5
7.5
5.0
10.1
29.4

42.8
9.3
44.0
11.9
-1.3
8.7
8.7
2.8
5.4
28.8

40.2
5.2
41.7
2.4
-1.5
13.7
13.7
1.0
4.8
42.7

29.2
-10.8
29.8
-13.7
-0.6
13.2
13.2
3.3
2.3
60.0

30.8
5.4
31.7
6.3
-0.9
…
…
2.0
2.2
59.8

11.4
12.3

Floating
3.8
...
...

Real economy
Real GDP
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross capital formation
Fixed capital formation
Unemployment rate (percent)
GDP deflator
Overall CPI (end period)

Public finance (percent of GDP)
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Central government balance
General government balance
General government debt
Of which: foreign currency external debt

Exchange rate
Exchange rate regime
Present rate per U.S. dollar (December 16, 2009)
NEER annual percent change (period average)
REER annual percent change (period average)

-3.7
-5.3

-3.4
-6.1

-0.7
-2.0

0.4
0.0

3.9
1.8

Social Indicators
GDP per capita (current U.S. dollars, 2005): 25,875; Life expectancy at birth (2005): 77.7 (male) and 81.8 (female); Infant
mortality rate (2005): 5 per 1,000 births; Physicians (2003): 3.8 per 1,000 people; Automobile ownership (2003): 284 per
thousand; CO2 emissions (tons per capita, 2003): 10.2; Population density (2006): 325 inhabitants per square kilometer;
Poverty rate: 18.5 percent 4/.
Sources: Bank of Israel, Annual Report ; Central Bureau of Statistics; IMF, World Economic Outlook; World Bank, World
Development Indicators; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ IMF staff estimates and projections.
2/ As of November 2009
3/ As of September 2009
4/ Poverty rate from National Insurance Institute of Israel.

...

2010 1/

2.5
2.3
1.8
6.0
4.0
7.4
2.2
2.1
…
…
…

…
…

42
Table 2. Israel: Balance of Payments, 2006−14
(Billions of U.S. dollars)
2006
Current account balance

2007

2008 2009 1/ 2010 1/ 2011 1/ 2012 1/ 2013 1/ 2014 1/

7.3

4.6

2.1

7.2

4.4

4.2

4.7

5.0

5.3

Merchandise
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports, f.o.b.
Civilian imports
Military imports

-3.8
43.3
47.2
44.7
2.5

-5.7
50.3
56.0
53.6
2.4

-7.2
57.2
64.4
61.9
2.5

-4.0
42.2
46.3
43.6
2.7

-5.0
47.2
52.2
49.3
2.9

-5.8
51.8
57.6
54.5
3.1

-6.1
56.3
62.4
59.1
3.3

-6.4
61.0
67.5
64.0
3.5

-6.7
65.8
72.5
68.8
3.7

Services
Exports
Imports

4.5
19.2
14.7

3.5
21.1
17.6

4.2
24.1
19.9

2.8
21.0
18.1

2.9
22.0
19.0

3.7
23.9
20.2

4.5
26.0
21.5

5.3
28.5
23.2

6.3
31.2
24.9

Factor Income
Receipts
Payments

-0.8
8.4
9.2

-0.5
10.9
11.4

-3.3
8.2
11.5

-0.1
7.5
7.6

-2.0
8.5
10.5

-2.1
8.7
10.8

-2.0
9.0
11.0

-2.2
9.3
11.5

-2.6
9.3
11.9

7.4
4.4
3.0

7.3
3.9
3.4

8.5
4.4
4.1

8.5
4.4
4.1

8.5
4.5
4.0

8.5
4.6
3.9

8.4
4.7
3.7

8.3
4.9
3.4

8.3
5.1
3.2

Capital and financial account balance 2/
Capital account
Financial account
Direct investment, net
Foreign direct investment (in Israel)
Portfolio investment, net
Other investment
Change in reserves 3/

-6.4
0.8
-7.2
-0.2
14.8
1.1
-7.7
-0.4

-2.8
0.8
-3.6
2.0
9.0
-2.5
-4.9
1.7

-4.8
1.1
-5.9
1.8
9.6
-2.3
8.7
-14.2

-7.2
0.7
-7.9
1.0
5.0
-4.0
-2.6
-2.3

-4.4
0.7
-5.1
1.0
5.0
-4.0
-2.6
0.5

-4.2
0.7
-4.9
3.0
7.0
-4.0
-2.6
-1.4

-4.7
0.7
-5.4
3.0
7.0
-4.0
-2.6
-1.9

-5.0
0.7
-5.7
3.0
7.0
-4.0
-2.6
-2.1

-5.3
0.7
-6.0
3.0
7.0
-4.0
-2.6
-2.4

Errors and omissions

-0.9

-1.8

2.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Memorandum items (percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated):
Current account balance
5.0
2.8
Civilian trade balance
-0.9
-2.0
Gross external debt
58.1
52.2
GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
145.8
167.0

1.0
-2.3
42.6
202.1

3.3
-0.6
38.8
216.2

2.0
-0.9
36.4
224.3

1.8
-1.2
33.8
234.5

1.9
-1.2
31.3
245.6

1.9
-1.1
29.1
257.0

2.0
-1.1
26.9
268.8

Net transfers
Public
Private

Source: Central Bureau of Statistics, Monthly Bulletin of Statistics.
1/ IMF staff estimates and projections.
2/ Excludes reserve assets.
3/ Negative (positive) sign denotes increase (decrease) in reserves.

43
Table 3. Israel: Financial Soundness Indicators, 2001−mid-09 1/
(Percent)
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009
June

Core Set
Deposit Takers
Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets
Regulatory Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets
Nonperforming loans net of provisions to capital
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans
Sectoral distribution of loans to total loans
Other financial corporations (OFCs)
General government
Nonfinancial corporations (NFCs)
Other domestic sectors
Nonresidents
Return on assets
Return on equity
Interest margin to gross income
Noninterest expenses to gross income
Net open position in foreign exchange to capital
Encouraged Set
Deposit Takers
Capital to assets
Gross asset position in financial derivatives to capital
Gross liability position in financial derivatives to capital
Trading income to total income
Personnel expenses to noninterest expenses
Spread between reference lending and deposit rates
(basis points)
Customer deposits to total (non interbank) loans
Foreign-currency-denominated loans to total loans

10.3
6.9
33.3
2.6

10.8
7.3
31.0
2.5

10.7
7.1
27.2
2.3

10.8
7.4
21.2
1.9

11.0
7.6
15.8
1.5

11.1
7.5
17.8
1.5

12.6
8.0
17.3
1.5

7.2
3.3
48.1
26.0
15.4
0.7
14.1
64.1
60.2
2.1

7.9
2.7
44.7
28.4
16.2
1.0
17.9
63.1
59.7
4.1

8.7
2.5
43.4
28.5
16.9
1.1
19.4
62.6
61.7
-0.5

8.7
2.2
41.9
29.3
17.8
1.0
17.6
61.9
66.2
1.8

10.2
2.0
41.5
28.4
17.9
1.2
20.0
61.0
54.5
-8.9

9.7
2.1
41.8
32.1
14.3
0.0
0.2
58.8
82.8
-15.5

8.5
2.1
41.1
34.4
14.0
0.2
4.1
59.3
67.8
-9.5

5.3
33.1
31.3
12.3
61.0

5.5
30.3
31.6
17.9
60.3

5.6
27.4
29.1
23.7
59.7

5.9
24.7
22.9
8.8
62.4

6.1
28.9
29.1
6.9
59.9

5.7
57.1
64.4
-16.5
58.4

6
29.6
37.3
…
56.3

2.0

2.7

3.0

3.5

4.1

4.3

115.6 117.7 119.5 118.2 113.0 106.7
35.4
34.5
31.4
28.1
27.0
25.3

…
110.2
24.2

Foreign-currency-denominated liabilities to total liabilities

40.1

41.5

42.5

40.7

39.8

36.2

Net open position in equities to capital

11.4

12.8

11.5

16.2

17.6

13.0

35.1
…

38.1
94.7

40.0
42.3
42.4
43.5
98.7 104.0 103.8 111.7

…
…

…
…

...
...
...

…
…
…

…
…
…
39.5

Other Financial Corporations (OFCs)
OFCs' assets to total financial system assets
OFCs' assets to Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Nonfinancial Corporations
Total debt to equity
Return on equity
Earnings to interest and principal expenses
Households
Household debt to GDP
Market Liquidity
Average bid-ask spread in the
securities markets (percentage of mid-point price)
Average daily turnover ratio in the securities markets
Real Estate Markets
Residential real estate prices (annual percentage increase)
Residential real estate loans to total loans
Commercial real estate loans to total loans

208.4 197.2 184.5 185.0
5.2
11.6
16.6
13.1
96.5 128.3 139.1 138.1
40.6

40.1

40.1

38.2

39.0

39.9

...

...

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.9

2.3

2.4

0.012
2.3

-6.1
11.9
17.9

-1.3
12.4
16.6

4.4
13.1
16.1

-4.3
13.9
16.0

3.2
12.5
16.4

10.6
13.2
16.6

12.8
14.2
16.5

Source: Bank of Israel.
1/ Problem loans include non-performing loans, rescheduled loans, loans designated for rescheduling, loans in temporary arrears
and loans under special supervision.

44
Table 4. Israel: Central Government Accounts, 2004−10
(Percent of GDP)
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Budget

Actual

Budget

Staff est.

Budget

Staff proj.

Revenue (excluding repayment of credit)
Domestic
Tax
Of which: On income and profits
On domestic goods and services
Nontax
Of which: Loans from the National Insurance Inst
Other
Foreign
Of which: Grants
Vat on defense imports
Other

35.0
32.1
27.3
14.4
12.9
4.8
1.9
2.8
2.9
1.9
0.2
0.7

35.3
32.6
27.4
14.9
12.6
5.2
2.1
3.1
2.6
1.9
0.3
0.4

35.2
33.0
27.8
15.6
12.1
5.2
2.1
3.1
2.2
2.0
0.2
0.1

36.1
34.2
29.3
16.5
12.8
4.9
2.1
2.8
1.9
1.6
0.2
0.0

32.7
30.7
26.2
14.3
11.9
4.5
2.0
2.5
2.0
1.4
0.3
0.3

31.6
30.0
25.3
13.2
12.1
4.7
2.1
2.6
1.6
1.4
0.2
0.0

28.7
27.1
23.1
11.3
11.8
4.0
1.8
2.2
1.6
1.2
0.1
0.2

29.1

29.0
27.1
23.4
10.9
12.5
3.7
1.6
2.1
1.9
1.3
0.2
0.5

29.8

Expenditure (excluding lending
and expenditure by public hospitals)
Current expenditure
Wages
Subsidies & transfers
Interest
Other
Capital expenditure

38.6

37.1

36.2

36.1

34.2

33.8

34.6

34.2

34.5

33.9

36.3
8.1
13.1
5.8
9.3
2.3

35.1
8.1
12.5
5.6
8.9
2.0

34.3
8.0
14.2
5.5
6.6
1.9

34.1
7.7
12.2
5.2
9.0
2.0

32.5
7.3
11.4
4.8
9.1
1.7

32.1
7.3
11.5
4.6
8.7
1.7

32.6
7.7
11.7
4.8
8.4
2.0

Budget balance
Budget balance ceiling 1/

-3.6
…

-1.9
…

-1.0
…

0.0
-2.0

-1.6
-1.6

-2.2

-6.0

Financing
Domestic (net)
Foreign (net)
Sale of assets (net)
Change in cash balances and other financing (net)

3.6
2.2
1.4
0.2
-0.1

1.9
-0.4
-0.4
1.5
1.2

1.0
-0.7
-0.3
0.7
1.2

0.0
-0.7
0.9
0.0
-0.2

1.6
0.9
0.7
0.6
-0.6

2.2
2.8
-1.3
0.2
0.4

6.0
4.4
1.0
0.0
0.5

5.5
4.4
0.5
0.1
0.5

Memorandum item:
Defense expenditure
Primary balance
GDP growth (percent)

9.1
2.1
5.0

8.8
3.8
5.1

...
4.6
5.2

...
5.0
5.4

7.1
3.2

7.8
2.4

6.5
-1.2
-1.0

6.9
-0.6
1.5

4.0

Sources: Data provided by the Israeli authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Set in 2006, excluding 2006 emergency security-related spending. Such spending adds about 1.0, 0.7, and 0.5 percent
of GDP to expenditures in 2006-08, respectively.

32.6
7.9
11.2
4.9
8.7
1.9
-5.1

0.1

-5.5

-4.1

2.5

60.5
-4.3
A- / A2
1.00
55.4

60.6
-8.0
A- / A2
4.48
17.6

27.2
6.2

-1.9
1.7
-3.0

4.6
3.9

2004

56.6
-15.2
A- / A2
4.49
32.8

28.3
5.9

0.6
3.1
-7.2

7.9
7.1

2005

58.1
-22.7
A- / A2
4.46
5.8

29.4
5.7

-1.4
5.0
-4.4

7.4
4.3

2006

52.2
-26.9
A / A2
4.11
22.9

28.8
4.7

-2.2
2.8
-1.7

12.9
6.7

2007

42.6
-23.3
A / A1
3.59
-46.4

42.7
6.1

1.6
1.0
-2.4

8.0
9.2

2008

Sources: Bank of Israel; Central Bureau of Statistics; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ According to WEO GEE trade deflators. June 2009 data available from Bank of Israel.
2/ includes the allocation of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) by the IMF to member countries, and the balance of the Israel's reserve tranche in the IMF.
3/ On foreign currency long-term debt.

Total gross external debt/GDP (percent)
Total net external debt/GDP (percent)
Country risk ratings (S. & P. / Moody's) 3/
Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average)
Change in Stock Market Index (end of period; 12 month percent change)

26.4
7.1

-1.4
0.5
-2.3

External Indicators
Terms of trade (average, percent change) 1/
Current account balance
Capital and financial account balance

Gross official reserves (end period, billions of U.S. dollars) 2/
Official reserves in months of imports of goods and nonfactor services

2.2
-3.1

Financial indicators
Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis)
Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis)

2003

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Table 5. Israel: Indicators of External and Financial Sector Vulnerability, 2003−09

38.9
-23.9
A / A1
3.78
75.3

61.5
11.9

11.2
3.2
-3.2

15.0
-0.6

2009

Projected
Jun-09
Nov-09
Nov-09
12/14/09

Nov-09
Projected

Jun-09
Projected
Projected

Sep-09
Sep-09

Date

45

46

Table 6. Israel: Medium-Term Scenarios, 2009−14
(Percent, unless indicated otherwise)
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

GDP growth rate
Inflation (average)

0
3 2/4

2 1/2
2 1/4

4
1 3/4

4
2

4
2

3 3/4
2

Fiscal balance/GDP 1/
Central gov't balance
General gov't structural primary balance
Central gov't expenditure/GDP
Public debt/GDP (end of period)

-5
3/4
34 1/4
79 3/4

-4
1
34
81

-3 1/2
1 1/4
33 1/4
80 1/2

-2 3/4
1 2/4
32 1/2
79 1/4

-2 3/4
2
31 3/4
77 3/4

-1 1/2
2 2/4
31 1/4
75 3/4

Current account/GDP

3 1/4

2

1 3/4

2

2

2

Foreign reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)

61 1/2

62 3/4

64

65 1/4

66 1/2

68

3 1/2
3 1/2
1 3/4
5 1/2
7
6

3 1/4
3 1/2
1 3/4
4 3/4
7
6

(Percent changes)
Memorandum Items:
Aggregate domestic demand
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross capital formation
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

-1
1 1/4
1 3/4
-11 1/2
-10 3/4
-13 3/4

2 3/4
2 1/4
1 3/4
6
5 1/4
6 1/4

3 1/2
4
1/2
6 3/4
7 1/2
7

Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ For the purpose of its budget deficit targets, the central government excludes net credit.

3 1/2
3 1/2
1 3/4
6 1/2
7 1/4
6 1/4

47
BACKGROUND STUDIES
I. WHY WAS OUTPUT IN ISRAEL SO RESILIENT THROUGH THE GLOBAL CRISIS?1
1.
The downturn in Israel was relatively mild and short during the global
downturn compared to many other countries. The economy contracted in 2008 Q4 for
two consecutive quarters for a total of 1.2 percent, and it has grown since then. This note
considers the reasons for this performance, and its implications for future output growth.
2.
The main conclusion is that like many others, Israel had strong economic
fundamentals prior to the global downturn and responded to the crisis with timely
and appropriate policies. In that context, factors which distinguish Israel from others—
and which may therefore explain the relative strength of output in Israel include the
absence of a housing bubble, that the bulk of its investment goods and consumer durables
are imported, and the resilience of the banking sector. These seem largely to account for the
relative strength of output in Israel in the face of the global shock.

15

Cross-country Quarter-on-quarter Output Growth

15

(annualized, in percent)
10

10

5

5

0

0

-5
-10

Australia

Germany

United States

Euro-area

-5

Aggregate Demand

20
15

Israel

-15

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

-5

-5

Germany
United States

-10
-10

20

(quarter-on-quarter change, annualized, in
percent)

-10

Euro-area

-15

-15

Israel

-15 -20
07Q1

07Q3

08Q1

08Q3

09Q1

09Q3

Source: OECD
1/ quarter-on-quarter growth annualized in seasonally adjusted series at
chained volumes estimates.

-20
07Q1

07Q3

08Q1

08Q3

09Q1

09Q3

Source: OECD
1/ quarter-on-quarter growth annualized in seasonally adjusted
series at chained volumes estimates.

3.
The relatively mild recession followed sharp declines in exports of goods and
services. Exports of goods and services fell by some 20 percent in real terms, still have not
recovered from the pre-crisis levels, and the declines were on the high-side compared to
other advanced countries. Furthermore, total demand on the economy (consumption,
investment, government, and exports) fell as sharply in Israel as elsewhere, but the
recession was nevertheless relatively short and mild. In that context, the output gap
deteriorated since second-half of 2008 and has turned negative later that year.

1

Prepared by W. Raphael Lam (EUR; wlam@imf.org)

48
Real GDP from Peak to Trough 1/
United States
United Kingdom
Turkey
Switzerland
Sweden
Spain
Slovak Republic
Portugal
Poland
Norway
New Zealand
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Korea
Japan
Italy
Ireland
Iceland
Hungary
Germany
France
Finland
Denmark
Czech Republic
Canada
Belgium
Austria
Australia
Israel

(potential ouput measure)

Jan 06

Jul 06

-8

Jan 07

-6

Jul 07

-4

Jan 08

Output Gap
-2

Switzerland
Cyprus
Australia
Israel
Spain
Slovenia
Norway
Austria
New Zealand
Malta
China,P.R.:Hong Kong
Netherlands
Luxembourg
Denmark
Portugal
Belgium
Czech Republic
Euro Area
Taiwan Prov.of China
France
Iceland
Ireland
Singapore
Italy
Germany
Slovak Republic
United States
Canada
Finland
United Kingdom
Korea, Republic of
Sweden
Japan

0

Jul 08

0

Jan 09

2

Jul 09

4

(in percent of 2009
potential GDP)

Cumulative Decline in Real Exports of Goods and Services

-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
Source: OECD, WEO, and Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel

(in percent)

Japan
Finland
Slovak
Italy
Slovenia
Canada
Greece
Portugal
Czech
Israel
Germany
Euro area
Austria
Sweden
Hungary
European
Spain
Belgium
Estonia
France
Switzerland
United
Turkey
Luxembourg
Denmark
Poland
Korea
United
Netherlands
Norway
NewZealand
Iceland
Ireland
Australia

1/ Shaded area indicates a decline in real GDP relative to the potential level.
-40

Source: OECD, WEO, and Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel
1/ Shaded area indicates a decline in real GDP relative to the potential level.

49
4.
Strong economic fundamentals and appropriate policy responses clearly
helped to contain the recession. Economic fundamentals were strong in Israel prior to the
crisis relative to the United States and some countries in the Euro-area (text table), with
robust economic growth over the past five years and low levels of household debt. Timely
and appropriate policies also helped to contain the contraction of demand (text table).
Expansionary monetary policies were quickly introduced in the early stage of the crisis,
alongside unfettered automatic stabilizers on the fiscal side. However, many other countries
did likewise and yet have encountered a more severe and/or prolonged contraction than
Israel.2 Therefore, these features do not appear to be sufficient to explain Israel’s relative
resilience.
Table. Selected Economic Indicators before Financial Crisis 1/
Israel
Euro-area 2/ United States
Indicators
Real output growth
Private credit growth
Increase in real residential property price
Household debt as percent of GDP
Gross national saving rate

4.4
4.2
-1.4
35.4
20.7

2.0
5.9
5.7
87.4
18.5

2.8
9.4
7.4
132.5
13.9

Source: OECD, national statistics agencies.
1/ Average between 2003-2007 where data are available.
2/ Euro-area as indicated in OECD. Some indicators use simple aveage across key
euro-area countries due to data limitation.

Table. Timely and Appropriate Policy Response to Global Contraction
Measures
Remarks
Monetary policy
Expansionary monetary stance with reduction of policy rates
Foreign exchange purchase program to increase reserves 1/
Government bond purchase program 1/

Mar 2008, Oct 2008 - Aug 2009
Mar 2008 - Aug 2009
Early 2009 - Aug 2009

Fiscal policy
"Manof" funds in helping non-bank credit market 2/
Guarantees extended to banks to increase capital ratio 3/
Ashra (ECA)
Exporters and real estate gurantees
Small and medium business fund 4/

Government commitments
(in NIS billions)
1.0 - 1.5
6.0 - 12.0
3.8
6.2
0.7

Source: Bank of Israel and Ministry of Finance, Israel
1/ The foreign exchange purchase program was modified in August 2009. Amount purchased
on government bonds was limited.
2/ Total commitments are about 4.5 NIS billion, of which about one-quarter are financed by government.
3/ It has not been disbursed as of November 2009 and banks are not expected to use it.
4/ Total commitments are about 2.6 NIS billion, of which one-fourth is financed by the government.

2

An notable example is Korea. Both countries enjoyed a sustained economic growth prior to the crisis. Saving
rates in Korea are also relatively high.

50
5.
Several additional factors may explain why Israel has been more resilient to
the recent global shock despite sharp falls in exports. They include:


Absence of a housing bubble

Residential Property Indicators
7%

Israel’s housing market has not reflected the
global surge in property prices prior to 2008. 6%
On the contrary, property prices remained
5%
subdued until the beginning of the crisis in
4%
2008, largely unwinding the previous
housing bubble in 2001–02 (figure).
3%
Moreover, the share of investment in
residential property has stayed flat for a long 2%
period preceeding the global crisis. Indeed,
1%
fixed capital investment in buildings and
0%
construction (about 40 percent of fixed
Jan-00
Jul-01
investment; 7-8 percent of GDP) has held
steady throughout the crisis. This helped to sustain output.


Real Ow ners Housing Price Index (Jan
2000=100) (RHS)

115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80

Jan-03

Jul-04

Jan-06

Jul-07

Jan-09

The bulk of investment goods and consumer durables are imported in Israel

Exports fell, as in elsewhere, in the context
of a sharp drop in global demand in late2008. But imports fell even more sharply,
largely reflecting contraction of imports of
investment goods and production inputs.
Since a large bulk of these are imported in
Israel, the collapse in global and Israeli
demand for these items during the global
shock had a relatively modest impact on
Israeli output. On the other hand, when
global demand for these items began to
recover from mid-2009, Israeli import
demand increased alongside, muting the
beneficial impact on Israeli output.


Investment in residential construction (in
percent of GDP) (LHS)

Contribution to Quarterly Real Output Growth

30

30

(in percent, annualized)

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10

-20

-20

-30

-30
Mar-06

Mar-07

Mar-08

Mar-09

Private consumption

Government consumption

Gross domestic investment

Exports of goods and services

Imports of goods and services

Real output

Source: Central Bank of Israel, and Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel.

A one-off factor helped output also

The new Intel plant—with its exports entirely in the high-technology sector—rapidly built
upt to full production during 2009. It drove the initial increase in Israel’s exports in 2009,
before a more across-the-board recovery in those exports became evident in Q3 2009. Since
the Intel plant has already reached full capacity, its potential contribution to monthly export
growth in 2010 may be limited.

51
Contribution to Export Growth

20

20

Contribution to Import Growth

20

20

(in percent, 2005 prices)

15

15

15

10

10

10

10

5

5

5

5

15

0

0

0

0

-5

-5

-5

-5

-10

-10

-10

-10

-15

-15

-15

-15

-20

-20

(in percent,2005 prices)

-20
2007Q1

2007Q3

2008Q1

2008Q3

2009Q1

2009Q3

Manufacturing exports: others
Manufacturing exports: communications, medical & sci. equip.
Manufacturing exports: electronic components & computers
Manufacturing exports: machinery and equipments
Agricultural exports
Exports - net - excl. ships, aircraft and diamonds

-20
2007Q1

2007Q3
2008Q1
2008Q3
2009Q1
2009Q3
consumer goods - nondurables
consumer goods - durables
consumer goods - transport vehicles
investment goods excl. ships and aircrafts
production inputs excl. fuel and diamonds
Import growth (excl. fuel, diamonds, ships, and aircrafts)

Source: Central Bank of Israel, and Central Bureau of Statistics, Israel



High private savings rate

Private savings rates have long been high in Israel, in contrast to the U.S. and some countries
in the Euro-area. This provided scope for households to “consumption smooth” across the
global shock by drawing down their savings. Nondurable private consumption therefore
remained stable throughout the short recession.


Resilience in the banking sector

The resilience in the banking system
Selected Indicators in Deposit-taking Institutions (in percent)
15
helped to insulate the economy from a
more severe downturn, and also likely to
12
contribute to the recent recovery since
early-2009. At the same time, the
9
relatively mild recession has sheltered the
6
potential vulnerabilities in banking sector
from becoming more acute. The banking
Regulatory capital to risk-adjusted assets (LHS)
3
Capital to assets (LHS)
system did not have significant foreign
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans (RHS)
0
exposures in assets, wholeseale funding,
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
and domestic credit quality has largely
June
Source: Central Bank of Israel
held up during the crisis (figure).3 Banks’
capital has remained above the minimum regulatory requirements.

5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

6.
All these factors above may have offset the impact on Israeli output of the high
level of public debt in the recent global shock. Countries with high public debt tend to be
3

The third background study, “Global Regulatory Reform—Lessons from Israel”,provides details on the
financial sector performance during the crisis in Israel.

52
more vulnerable to market distress, as reflected in the more than proportionate increase in
sovereign yields relative to other low-debt countries.4 Yields on Israeli government bonds
did increase sharply during market distress and yet did not pose serious challenges to the
real economy. Staff analysis indicates because Israel was not directly exposed to the core of
this particular global shock, which hit heavily on financial assets, construction sectors, and
investment demand, so high public debt did not prove to be an immediate vulnerability.
Nevertheless, high public debt remains a key concern as Israel could be susceptible to
different kinds of external demand shocks.
7.
Although the recession has been mild and recent economic growth has become
more evident, Israel’s near-term potential growth could nevertheless decline. A slow
and weak global recovery will likely reduce global—and therefore Israeli—potential
growth.
8.
Staff estimates of these effects follow. First, we estimate the level of potential
output growth for Israel. Three broad methodologies are applied by estimating the
aggregate production function, by introducing univariate filters on the actual real output,
and by estimating a structural model that incorporates the long-term inflation, capacity
utilization, and unemployment rates (Box 1).
9.
Real output is expected to be below potential for 2009. All estimation methods
suggest that the estimated output gap has deteriorated and turned negative over the past
year in the sample—even acknowledging that results are subject to end point bias. Various
filtering techniques show comparable results except for Baxter-King filter, which has
consistently underestimated the output gap because estimated potential output tracks
closely to the actual real output.
Table. Preliminary Estimation on Potential Output Growth for Israel 1/
Univariate filtering
ChristianoAggregate
HodrickFitzgerald random Baxter-King Butterworth Structural
production
walk filter
filter
filter
Prescott filter
function
model (IRIS)
Potential output growth rate (in percent)
Selected period
1995Q1 - 2009Q2
4.4
4.2
4.1
4.2
4.1
4.1
Medium term range
lower end
upper end

3.4
4.1

3.1
3.6

3.4
4.0

2.9
3.8

Source: WEO, IFS, and staff estimates.
1/ Growth rates refer to year-on-year basis on quarterly data. Actual output refers to quarterly output
at constant 2005 prices, seasonally adjusted. The second row is estimated based on projected
growth from 2009 Q4 onwards. The estimations are subject to some bias at the end points and large
degree of uncertainty with respect to the estimates of global potential output growth. Upper and lower end refer
to the 90 percent confidence bands of baseline estimates given current projections on U.S. and Euro-area growth.

4

See the second background study ‘Is Israel’s Public Debt Too High?’.

3.0
3.7

3.2
3.9

53
10.
The second step is to assess the links between potential output in Israel and
potential ouput in its major partners. A vector autoregression (VAR) is used to correlate
potential output growth in Israel with that in the major advanced economies. Variables
included in the VAR are (in that order): i) Israel’s potential output growth; ii) potential
output growth for the United States; iii) potential output growth for the Euro-area; and iii)
Israel’s unemployment rate, which proxies for the long-term production capacity as in
Blanchard and Quah (1997). The Christiano-Fitzgerald filtering technique (with same
parameters) is applied in estimating the potential output for the US and Euro-area (euro
area data available from 1999 onwards) for consistency.5
11.
The results suggest a strong tie between Israel’s potential output growth and
that in the U.S.. Variance decomposition suggests that shocks to potential output in the
US have persistent effects on Israel’s potential output and accounts for over 15 percent of
its variation, with smaller effects from the Euro-area (figure). In terms of the output gap,
cross-correlation of Israel’s output gap with the U.S. and Euro-area counterparts is
significant and persistent. The contemporaneous cross-correlation is over 70 percent, with
stronger persistent (in lags) from the U.S. output gap.
Variance Decomposition of Israel Quaterly Potential Growth over
1-20 Quarters (in percent)

Correlation of Israel with the U.S. and Euro-area Output Gaps

100

1.0

90

0.8

80

0.6

70

0.4

60

0.2

50

0.0

40

-0.2

30

-0.4

20

-0.6

10

-0.8

0

Euro-area output gap
U.S. output gap

-1.0
1 2

3 4

5

6 7

8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

Israel own potential growth

US potential growth

Euro-area potential growth

Israel unemployment rate

-12

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Quarters (in lags and in leads)

12.
Given projected declines in global potential growth, the potential growth in
Israel is likely to decline compared to the historical long-term levels (text table). The
large uncertainty surrounding global recovery means that Israel potential growth would
also be subject to high degree of uncertainty. The range of potential growth estimates vary
across methodologies. A slower projected population growth in Israel in the medium term
5

These estimates are based on in-sample coefficients on the Israel’s potential output growth with the U.S. and
Euro-area counterparts. They are then applied to the preliminary benchmark projections of the U.S. and Euroarea potential output growth for out-of-sample periods, with smoothing techniques applied to arrive at a
smoothed real potential output growth on Israel.

54
relative to previous years also contributes to lower potential growth.6 Average population
growth exceeded 2 percent in the past 15-20 years due to large immigration flows in the
90s, while the population growth is expected to be 1.5 - 1.7 percent in near term
Table. Preliminary Estimation on Potential Output Growth for Israel 1/
Univariate filtering
ChristianoAggregate
HodrickFitzgerald random Baxter-King Butterworth Structural
production
Prescott filter
walk filter
filter
filter
function
model (IRIS)
Potential output growth rate (in percent)
Selected period
1995Q1 - 2009Q2
4.4
4.2
4.1
4.2
4.1
4.1
Medium term range
lower end
upper end

3.4
4.1

3.1
3.6

3.4
4.0

2.9
3.8

3.0
3.7

3.2
3.9

Source: WEO, IFS, and staff estimates.
1/ Growth rates refer to year-on-year basis on quarterly data. Actual output refers to quarterly output
at constant 2005 prices, seasonally adjusted. The second row is estimated based on projected
growth from 2009 Q4 onwards. The estimations are subject to some bias at the end points and large
degree of uncertainty with respect to the estimates of global potential output growth. Upper and lower end refer
to the 90 percent confidence bands of baseline estimates given current projections on U.S. and Euro-area growth.

Policy implications

13.
The assessment of the causes of ouput resillience so far, and the prospect of a
decline in medium-term potential growth both have policy implications.


Israel has proved to be resilient to this particular global shock, largely because of its
limited exposure on financial and construction sectors. But it may remain vulnerable
to other external shocks, including those that may focus on the “high tech” sector—as
in 2001–02.



Furthermore, as recovery in Israel has reflected, at least to some degree, a significant
one off factor, this leaves some doubt about prospects for continued output growth,
even if global conditions continue to stabilize.



The stability of the banking sector has played a key role. Policies should aim to
maintain and deepen that strength



But the recent resilience in the economy does not mean that long-term prospects are
unaffected. If global potential growth falls, as now projected, Israel’s potential

6

Potential growth in the long term is determined by country’s production capacity, including the total-factor
productivity, capital accumulation and capacity utilization, and growth of labor force and its participation rate.
These supply-side factors do not seem to be significantly affected during the crisis, and the temporary fall in
employment and capacity utilization have begun to recover. However, potential output could be affected if
demands from external environment reduce and non-tradable prices in the country do not adjust sufficiently.
The labor productivity during the transition could be reduced.

55
growth is likely to be fall alongside. With a lower medium-term potential growth in
Israel, the task of public debt reduction will both become more important, and more
difficult. The robustness of fiscal rules and policies to be adopted should be
commensurate with this increased challenge.

56
ANNEX: EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS ON ISRAEL’S EXPOSURE TO THE RECENT GLOBAL SHOCK

14.
Israel appeared to have only limited exposure to the global financial shock that
emerged in 2008. To put this into cross-country perspectives, we construct an index to
measure a country’s exposure to global financial shocks based on its sectoral composition
on gross output. Israel scores at the lower end in the index relative to other advanced
countries, indicating a narrow exposure to the global financial shock in 2008. Higher index
number would imply the country is heavily exposed to the global financial shock.
15.
The exposure of global financial shock of a country is measured by an index
(EXi) that incorporates the country’s exposure on the sectoral shocks in this global
downturn. The index is calculated based on
 y, /y s 
EX i    i j i  j 

S 
j  Yw, j / Yw
where i and j denote country and sector. The term yi,j/yi is the percentage of country’s gross
value-added on sector j. A higher share would mean a higher exposure of the country on a
particular sector than the global level. The country sectoral exposure is then deflated by the
sectoral share of gross value-added at world level Yw,j/Yw. The second term in the bracket
represents the sector shock in face of the global financial crisis. The aggregate shock S is
measured by the decline of S&P 500 in
Relationship betw een Declines in Real Output and Exposure to Global Financial Shock
the U.S. stock market, where as sj is
5.0
the sector shock, measured by the
Israel
Index on exposure to global financial shocks
(2008)
change in the indexed stock returns on
0.0
sectors in the U.S. market.7 The
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
United States
Israel
(2002)
analysis covers the agricultural,
-5.0
manufacturing, wholesale & retail,
Iceland
Euro-area
construction, technology, services, and
-10.0
financial sectors. The overall index
y = -6.408x + 1.975
(EXi) indicates the country’s overall
R2 = 0.245
Cross-correlation = -0.49
-15.0
exposure to global financial shock. A
higher index number would imply the
Cumulative decline in real output
-20.0
country is heavily exposed to the
global financial shock.

7

Using the U.S. equities data may not be a perfect measure of the global financial shock in general. However,
the relative declines of different industries with respect to the overall equities in this particular crisis would
arguably a good proxy. Substitution effect across countries in sectors that potentially bias the measure do not
seem to be applicable given the short time frame in measuring and the synchronized declines across countries.

57
16.
Countries that score low in the index ––less exposure to global financial shock
in 2008–– tend to have less severe output contractions. Strong negative correlation
between a country’s exposure to the global financial shock and its real output growth is
about -0.5 at 5 percent significant level (figure). Israel was found to be relatively less
exposed at the present global financial shock and therefore could contribute to a more mild
recession than other countries. For illustrative purpose, Israel was more exposed in the
high-tech sector that was closely linked to previous shock in 2002-03 when it had a sharper
downturn.
17.
Regression results suggest that, besides individual country’s exposure to global
shock, declines of external trade, and vulnerabilities in the housing market are
explanatory variables to the extent of output contraction. As indicated above, the
results show a negative and in most cases significant relation between country’s index on
exposure to global financial shock and the output growth (text table). It also indicates that a
higher decline in external trade could result a higher decline in real output (positive
coefficients). However, countries with higher gross value-added in the high-tech sector, as
in Israel, is less (about 40–50 percent less) susceptible to external trade effect on output, as
the interacting term with external trade is negative and significant at 10 percent level.
Vulnerabilities in the property sector, proxied by a cumulative housing price increase, also
explain the magnitude of output declines. Credit growth to private sector prior to the crisis,
however, does not appear to be significant to contribute the declines in real output. The
analysis may not be fully conclusive on variables that explain Israel’s resilience but reflect
the possibility that Israel could be less exposed under this particular global shock.
Empirical Results 1/
Dependent variable: Cumulative real output growth
White heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors and covariance
Regression
1
2
Constant
1.20
3.09
(2.82)
(2.18)

3
0.33
(3.14)

4
2.24
(2.30)

Index on exposure to global shock

-5.87 **
(2.69)

-3.2 *
(1.93)

-5.58 *
(2.92)

-2.9
(2.17)

Percentage change in external trade

0.01 **
(0.00)

0.002
(0.00)

0.1 **
(0.04)

0.11 **
(0.03)

-0.05 **
(0.02)

-0.06 **
(0.02)

Percentage change in external trade *
degree of high-tech exposure
Nominal growth in residential property prices

-0.34 **
0.17

-0.38 **
(0.16)

Growth in bank credit to private sector

-0.02
0.08

0.002
(0.07)

Adjusted R-squared
0.24
0.44
0.28
F-statistics
6.29
7.76
5.33
No. of observations
35
35
35
1/ '*' and '**' represent statistical significance at 10 percent and 5 percent, respectively.

0.52
8.44
35

58
Box 1. Methodologies in Estimating Potential Output and Output Gaps
Three broad methodologies are applied by estimating the aggregate production function, by
introducing univariate filters on the actual real output, and by applying a structural model using
the key economic variables on prices, output, unemployment, and capacity utilization.
Quarterly data from 1995Q1 to 2009Q3 are used. The period is roughly characterized by the
following phases: 1) stable modest growth; 2) the dotcom boom at the turn of the century; 3)
burst of the dotcom bubble that resulted recession; 4) strong growth rebound supported by
benign external environment; and 5) the outbreak of the financial crisis and the subsequent
global downturn.


Aggregate production function
NIS mn

Estimates of potential output from a
standard production function
consisting of labor (L) and capital
(K) as inputs, and the total factor
productivity (Z). The production
function follows Yt  Z t K t Lt ,

Aggregate Production Function

200,000

10

180,000

8

160,000

6

140,000

4

120,000

2

100,000

0

80,000

Output gap (percent of
potential output, right scale)

-2

where Y is the output,  and 
Quarterly GDP at constant
-6
40,000
prices, SA
denote the capital and labor share
Potential output estimated by -8
20,000
production function
of output. Data on the total factor
-10
Jan-95
Jan-97
Jan-99
Jan-01
Jan-03
Jan-05
Jan-07
Jan-09
productivity, labor inputs (in
hours), and capital inputs (on
gross and net basis) are available. First, coefficients on capital and labor share are
estimated using the data from 1995-2009Q2 to be around 0.37 and 0.56, which do not
reject the constant returns to scale hypothesis. Estimated potential output captures the
below-trend output in recent global crisis, but appears to overshoot for periods after the
dot-com crisis.
60,000



-4

Univariate filtering

Filtering methods are used to separate
between permanent and transitory
movements in the real output. Filtering
techniques focus on producing a
smoothed series and recovering the
residual components of the original
series. Four different filtering
techniques on the quarterly output at
constant prices and seasonally adjusted
to arrive at the potential output level,
namely: Hodrick-Prescott filter (1997),
Baxter-King filter (1999), Butterworth
filter (Pollock (2000)), ChristianoFitzgerald random walk filter (2003).

Output Gap

10

0.05

(in percent of Potential Output)

8

0.04

6

0.03

4

0.02

2

0.01

0

0.00

-2

-0.01

-4

Hodrick-Prescott filter

-6

Butterworth filter

-8
Jan-95

-0.02

Christiano-Fitzgerald filter

-0.03

Baxter-King filter (RHS)
Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Jan-05

-0.04
Jan-07

Jan-09

59



Structural model
NIS mn

Potenital Output and Output Gap

The structural model framework is 200,000
(Christiano-Fitzgerald Random Walk Filter)
9
Output gap (RHS in percent of potential output)
based on the ongoing IRIS project 180,000
Real output from data
7
160,000
initiated in Research Department.
Potential output
140,000
The framework comprises of four
5
120,000
set of equations on the output gap,
3
100,000
inflation, unemployment, and
80,000
1
capacity utilization, each
60,000
-1
40,000
describing the dynamics of these
-3
20,000
variables as a function of their
-5
steady state levels, lags, other
Mar-95
Mar-97
Mar-99
Mar-01
Mar-03
Mar-05
Mar-07
Mar-09
variables, and a stochastic shock.
Parameters on the steady states are set at their long-term levels. Some degrees on
judgement are applied to parameters concerning the persistence and variations of the
shocks. Here uses the same set of priors as in the cross-country studies.

60

II. IS ISRAEL’S PUBLIC DEBT TOO HIGH?1
Introduction

1.
At near 80 percent
of GDP and rising, Israel’s
public debt ratio is expected
to remain one of the highest
among developed countries.
Does this matter?

140
Projected gross public debt for 2011
(percent of GDP)

120

Projected increase from 2008 to 2011

100

2008

80
60
40
20

Australia

Denmark

New Zealand

Korea

S. Africa

Switzerland

Czech Rep.

Mexico

Sweden

Turkey

Finland

Poland

Norway

Netherlands

Austria

Canada

Israel

Spain

Ireland

France

Portugal

U.K.

Germany

U.S.

Belgium

Italy

Greece

2.
The level of debt
0
constrains fiscal options in
various ways and may
compromise investor
Source: IMF WEO (October 2009).
confidence in the fiscal
outlook. The latter uncertainty is compounded by concerns about the fiscal policy
framework. The expenditure and budget deficit rules have been relaxed for 2009-2010 and
the credibility of the revised fiscal targets for 2011 and onwards is doubtful. Insufficient
medium-term budget planning and a lack of clarity about the prospect of reforming the
fiscal rules also weighs on confidence in Israel’s fiscal sustainability.

1

Prepared by M.K. Tang (EUR; mtang@imf.org)

UK

Portugal

Spain

Italy

Korea

Thailand

Israel

Poland

Mexico

Ireland

Philippines

Turkey

Indonesia

Greece

Hungary

3.
But, at present, these concerns are not reflected in government financing
strains. Israel’s sovereign
250
CDS spreads have risen since
Sovereign CDS spreads 1/
the outbreak of the global
(basis points)
200
crisis—as for most other
countries—but the increase in
150
spreads is relatively modest.
100
Moreover, against the
background of large-scale
50
investment repatriation by
0
domestic residents and the
recent tightening of monetary
policy stance, there have
1/ 5-year CDS spreads, averaged over the one-month period ending 12/21/2009.
been strong inflows of
capital, giving support to
Israeli assets. Alongside, Israel’s sovereign credit ratings have been retained at A
throughout the current crisis, in part reflecting the relative resilience of the Israeli economy.

61

Indeed, in March 2009, the government successfully issued US$1.5bn of external debt, the
largest external bond offering ever for Israel.
4.
At the same time, the existing literature on high public debt internationally has
found mixed evidence of its long-term economic implications. A large volume of work
has investigated the empirical relevance of debt overhang2. On the one hand, some
researchers report either direct or indirect evidence on debt overhang (e.g., Pattillo, Poirson
and Ricci (2003), Imbs and Ranciere (2005) and Blavy (2006)); on the other hand, using
different samples and methodologies, others find less conclusive linkages between debt and
economic performance (e.g., Cohen (1993), Warner (1992), Depetris Chauvin and Kraay
(2005), and Cordella, Ricci and Ruiz-Arranz (2005)). In a similar vein, the empirical
relationship between debt and interest rates remains debatable—Ardagna, Caselli and Lane
(2007) find significant positive effect only for countries with a very high debt level, and
Cantor and Packer (1996) and Dell’Ariccia et al. (2006) do not find very strong evidence
pointing to such an effect.
5.
These studies, however, have given little focus to the implications of high
public debt during times of great uncertainty. But for authorities interested in smoothing
shocks and stabilizing economy, risk scenarios are arguably a key consideration. Indeed, an
analysis in April 2009 WEO shows that the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus tends to be
lower for countries with a higher debt-to-GDP ratio, suggesting that a country’s ability to
mitigate economic shocks could be constrained by debt. In Israel’s case, the decision to
temporarily raise VAT in July 2009 even as the economy weakened clearly illustrated the
situation where the scope for fiscal support is limited by high debt.
6.
For Israel, risks remain despite the subdued market indicators now evident.
Israel’s government bond yields and sovereign CDS spreads have come down significantly
in recent months. Yet, as clearly demonstrated in this crisis, dramatic market repricing—
sometimes excessive—can be triggered with little warning. Notwithstanding the recent
worldwide pickup in economic activity and investor sentiment, the global recovery has yet
to gain solid footing and the outlook is still dominated by uncertainty. Small open
economies, such as Israel, that are subject to strong spillovers from global demand and
financial conditions, still face heightened risks of significant volatility.
7.
In this context, a key question is whether high public debt matters in the
context of global market strains. More specifically,does the impact of market stress on
government bond yields differ for countries with different public debt-to-GDP ratios,
controlling for other factors?
2

It refers to a situation where a high level of indebtedness raises uncertainty, crowds out investment and
inhibits economic growth.

62

8.
In empirical analysis reported below, we find significant evidence that at times
of stress, markets disproportionately penalize countries with high public debt. When
the market is stressed, high-debt countries’ bond yields tend to rise by more, and be more
susceptible to marginal increases in market anxiety. The same qualitative results obtain,
whether the level of debt is expressed as a continuous or discrete variable.
Empirical analysis

9.

Data.



The analysis focuses on a group of countries that have similar level of economic
development as Israel.3



The dependent variable is government bond yields, taken from EMBIG and
Bloomberg.



A key explanatory variable is a measure of market stress, proxied for by the VIX
index in the analysis.



Other regressors include US Treasury yields, public debt, net IIP, and government
budget balances. Except for the US yields, which are taken from Bloomberg, data for
all those variables are sourced from the WEO database.



To capture the sudden shifts in market sentiment, daily data are used for bond yields,
the VIX, and for variables constructed using VIX.
10.



Specification.

The main variables of interest are the interactive terms



VIX*Debt and



Hi_VIX*VIX*Debt,

where Debt is public debt-to-GDP ratio, and Hi_VIX is a dummy variable with a
value of one when the market is stressed (or when the VIX level is high) and zero
otherwise. The coefficient of the first interactive term indicates how the impact of a
marginal change in market volatility on bond yields varies with debtl. The coefficient

3

In particular, for the two periods studied (to be discussed later), the analysis covers countries with per capita
GDP above US$8,500 and US$10,000, respectively.

63

of the second interactive term measures the same effect but with a focus on the
periods when the market stress level is particularly high.



The global risk-free interest rates (bond yields on US 10-year Treasury), the
countries’ external position (net IIP as a percent of GDP) and financing need (fiscal
balance as a share of GDP) are included in all regressions as control variables.



Country dummies are also included to account for the different levels of yields across
countries.
11.
The study encompasses two recent distinct periods of general market
uncertainty. The first period, between mid-1997 to end-2002, corresponds to the episodes
of Russian default, collapse of LTCM, Asian financial crisis, and the burst of dotcom
bubble. The series of shocks was followed by several years of strong and stable world
growth, easy financing conditions, and low degree of market uncertainty. Worries about
potential banking losses and cracks in the global financial system started to surface in mid2007, sending market volatility higher. This marked the beginning of another period of
general market uncertainty, during which the initial turbulence in pockets of the financial
markets grew into a full-blown global financial crisis.
VIX
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
8/31/95

8/31/97

8/31/99

8/31/01

8/31/03

8/31/05

8/31/07

8/31/09

Results for mid-1997 – end-2002

12.
The analysis indicates that high-debt countries were particularly vulnerable
when the market was stressed. The impact of market volatility on bond yields was greater
for high-debt countries, but the differential effect is not statistically significant across all
time periods—stressed and non-stressed combined (Table 1, regression 1). However, when
focusing only on the periods when the market was stressed, the differential effect becomes
strongly significant (Table 1, regression 2)—i.e., at times of market unease, for countries
that have high debt-to-GDP ratio, the unfavorable impact of market fluctuation on risk
premiums is particularly pronounced.

64

13.
Expressing debt in discrete terms does not alter the basic results. In order to
account for possible non-linearities, the next set of regressions replicate the previous one,
except with countries now discretely categorized into high-debt and low-debt groups. Three
different cutoffs for debt, i.e., 55 (the median of the sample), 65, and 75 percent of GDP,
are considered. When the 55 percent of GDP cutoff is used, the coefficient of the
interactive term is positive but statistically insignificant. But when the threshold of “highdebt” is raised to 65 or 75 percent of GDP, however, the coefficient becomes both positive
and significant (Table 1, regression 3 shows the result with the cutoff at 65 percent of
GDP). Qualitatively, the indication continues to hold that high-debt countries are
disproportionately penalized by investors during times of market stress.
Table 1. Mid 1997 - end 2002 (Asia crisis, Russian default, LTCM, burst of dotcom bubble, etc.)
Dependent variable: Govt bond yields (percentage points); daily frequency; only countries with per capita GDP > US$8,500
Explanatory variables:

VIX * Debt

coeff

t value

0.014

1.19

Hi_VIX * VIX * Debt

coeff

t value

0.009

2.23

Country dummies
#Obs
# countries
R sq

0.65
0.006
0.008
0.17

12.86
0.81
1.2
2.8

***

t value

0.0045

2.26

**

**

Hi_VIX * VIX * Hi_debt
US 10 yr Treasury yield
VIX
VIX * Net IIP
* Govt balance
Hi_VIX * VIX
Hi_VIX * VIX * Net IIP
* Govt balance

coeff

0.65
0.018

12.83
5.94

***
***

0.65
0.006

12.79
4.26

***
***

-0.008
0.0009
0.058

-2.38
0.9
2.62

**

-0.002
0.0019
0.045

-1.47
1.81
2.24

*
**

**

**

Y

Y

Y

24731
20
0.91

24731
20
0.91

24731
20
0.91

Hi_VIX refers to VIX>24; Hi_debt refers to public debt > 65% of GDP
Robust standard errors, clustered by country; *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1 percent significant, respectively

Results for mid-2007 – October 2009

14.
The differential effect appears to be even stronger during the current global
financial crisis. Market stress is much higher in the current crisis than in the late 1990s,
with VIX once rising to more than three times its pre-crisis values and staying at very
heightened levels for over seven months following the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
Possibly reflecting the greater and more prolonged investor anxiety, countries with large
public debt seemed to be even more particularly vulnerable to market uncertainty in this
crisis episode. Specifically, both the magnitude and the statistical significance of the
following key findings appear to be greater for this crisis: i) debt amplifies the impact of
market volatility on countries’ risk premiums (Table 2, regression 1); ii) when the market is
stressed, the impact of market volatility on risk premiums was particularly pronounced for

65

high-debt countries (Table 2, regression 2); and iii) finding (ii) remains valid when
countries are discretely categorized into high- vs. low-debt groups (Table 2, regression 3)4.
Table 2. Mid 2007 - Nov 2009 (global financial crisis)
Dependent variable: Govt bond yield (percentage points); daily frequency; includes only countries with per capita GDP > US$10,000
Explanatory variables:

VIX * Debt

coeff

t value

0.05

2.79

coeff

t value

0.025

2.83

Country dummies
#Obs
# countries
R sq

4.84
-2.47
-1.34
1.66

0.014

2.30

**

***

Hi_VIX * VIX * Hi_debt
0.35
-0.02
-0.01
0.15

t value

***

Hi_VIX * VIX * Debt

US 10 yr Treasury yield
VIX
VIX * Net IIP
* Govt balance
Med_VIX * VIX
Hi_VIX * VIX
Med_VIX * VIX *Net IIP
* Govt balance
* Debt
Med_VIX * VIX * Hi_debt

coeff

***
**

0.32
0.01

5.44
1.22

***

0.33
0.006

5.51
1.06

***

-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
0.11
0.01

-3.84
-1.95
-1.52
1.74
1.98

***
*

-0.006
-0.005
-0.008
0.038

-4.14
-1.01
-1.22
0.81

***

0.00098

0.31

*
*

Y

Y

Y

10088
27
0.88

10088
27
0.89

10088
27
0.88

Hi_VIX refers to VIX>35; Med_VIX refers to VIX> 25.5; Hi_debt refers to public debt > 70% of GDP
Robust standard errors, clustered by country; *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1 percent significant, respectively

15.
We checked the robustness of these results in various ways—in particular,
controls for various non-debt characteristics of the sample countries are considered. If
these characteristics interact with market volatility in affecting the countries’ risk
premiums, neglecting them in the regressions might lead to biased results. Interactive terms
involving the following three variables proxying for additional fiscal risks and economic
risks are included in the baseline specifications as robustness checks.



4

Financial sector contingent liabilities. With the banking system
encountering significant strains during this crisis, many sovereigns have
brought on considerable contingent liabilities onto their balance sheets

Regression 3 of the table shows the result when the cutoff for high- vs. low-debt countries is set at 70 percent
of GDP. The qualitative finding remains when the threshold is changed to 50 (sample median), 60, or 80
percent of GDP.

66

through capital injection, asset purchases, and various guarantees. Data on the
sizes of these liabilities are taken from IMF (November 2009).5



Depth of the economic downturn. Some countries have experienced a
particularly sharp fall in output, possibly raising concerns about the short-term
outlook and even longer-term economic fragilities. The depth of the economic
downturn is measured as the difference between the currently expected growth
outturn for 2009 and the one-year ahead consensus growth forecast made
before the outbreak of the crisis.



Ageing-related fiscal costs. Expected increases in pension entitlements and
health care costs represent significant unfunded liabilities for most countries,
especially those with fast-ageing demographics. Such fiscal burdens are taken
into account by converting the OECD’s estimates of future ageing-related
fiscal spending into net present values.6

16.
The key findings are robust to inclusion of these controls. Both the size and the
statistical significance of the main coefficient estimates is indeed little affected after
controlling for the potential differential effects associated with the aforementioned
additional variables (Table 3). The indication remains that risk premiums of high-debt
countries are especially susceptible to global financial conditions when the market is
stressed.

5

“The State of Public Finances Cross-Country Fiscal Monitor: November 2009,” IMF Staff Position Note
SPN/09/25.
6

A real growth rate of 2½ percent and a real discount rate of 4 percent are assumed in the NPV calculations.

67

Table 3. Mid 2007 - Nov 2009 (global financial crisis)
Dependent variable: Govt bond yield (percentage points); daily frequency; includes only countries with per capita GDP > US$10,000
Explanatory variables:
coeff

t value

Hi_VIX * VIX * Debt

0.027

2.99

Hi_VIX * VIX * Hi_contingent liabilities
Hi_VIX * VIX * Deep_downturn
Hi_VIX * VIX * Ageing costs
US 10 yr Treasury yield
VIX
VIX * Debt
*Net II
* Govt balance
Med_VIX * VIX
Hi_VIX * VIX
Med_VIX * VIX * Debt
* Net IIP
* Govt balance

-0.007

-1.65

Country dummies
#Obs
# countries
R sq

***

coeff

t value

0.025

3.18

0.008

0.79

coeff

t value

***

0.025

2.77

**

0
0.32
0.007

-0.11
5.16
1.35

***

-0.01
-0.012
0.0099
-0.011
0.11

-1.37
-1.91
2.27
-1.44
1.63

0.33
0.006

5.44
1.12

***

0.33
0.01

5.42
1.19

***

-0.009
-0.014
0.009
-0.009
0.0897

-3.01
-2.30
1.93
-1.34
1.50

***
**
*

-0.01
-0.013
0.007
-0.009
0.083

-2.93
-2.03
1.81
-1.37
1.64

***
*
*

Y

Y

Y

10088
27
0.89

10088
27
0.89

9592
25
0.89

*
**

Hi_contingent liabilities refers to countries with financial sector assistance > 30 percent of GDP (the 25th percentile of sample countries);
Deep_downturn refers to countries with currently estimated 2009 growth at least 8 percentage points worse than pre-crisis expectations
(the 25th percentile of sample countries);
Ageing costs refers to NPV of the OECD estimates of ageing-related fiscal spending;
Hi_VIX refers to VIX>35; Med_VIX refers to VIX> 25.5
Robust standard errors, clustered by country; *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1 percent significant, respectively

17.
Having established robustness, the quantitative importance of the differential
effect is illustrated by construction of two hypothetical country cases. We consider two
hypothetical countries with net IIP and fiscal balances equal to the sample averages. But
the debt-to-GDP ratio of one is 80 percent while that of the other is slightly lower at 60
percent. Their predicted bond yields since mid-2007 to date—derived from the panel
regression’s coefficient estimates—are depicted in the following chart. During times of
relative market calm, the bond yields of these two countries track one another closely.
However, when the market is under severe strains (in the 7½ months since September
2008, when VIX consistently hit above 35), their bond yields show significant divergence.
At the beginning of the high-stress period when investors retrench their risk exposures, the
bond yields of the higher-debt country rise sharply, while those of the lower-debt
counterpart remain relatively stable. Indeed, at the peak of the stress, the bond yield
differential between these two hypothetical countries reaches as high as 50 bps.

68

6.1
5.9

Hypothetical bond yields
(percent)

High market stress
80% debt-to-GDP

5.7
5.5
5.3
5.1
4.9
60% debt-to-GDP

4.7
4.5
0.6
0.5

Bond yield differential
(percent)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
7/2/07

11/2/07

3/2/08

7/2/08

11/2/08

3/2/09

7/2/09

11/2/09

Considerations for Israel

18.
Israel’s bond yields appear to be strongly susceptible to market stress, even
after accounting for its high debt ratio. As the market stress peaked in late October 2008,
Israel’s bond yields were close to 100 bps above what the coefficient estimates from the
panel regression would suggest. On the other hand, as the global financial conditions
stabilized in recent months, Israel’s bond yields have declined rapidly, to around 100 bps
below the predicted values as of mid-November 2009. A simple statistical analysis of
Israel’s bond yield “residuals” (i.e., deviations of the actual bond yields from the predicted
values) indeed indicates that they are strongly correlated with the measure of market
stress.7

7

In a simple regression of Israel’s yield residuals on the US Treasury yields and VIX, the t-value of the
coefficient estimate on the latter explanatory variable is 13.78.

69

90

6.5

80
6.0

Actual Israel yields

70
Predicted
Israel
yields

5.5

60
50

5.0
40
30

4.5
Low-debt country yields 1/

20

4.0
VIX (RHS)
3.5
7/2/07

11/2/07

3/2/08

7/2/08

11/2/08

3/2/09

7/2/09

10
0
11/2/09

1/ Low -debt countries refer to those w ith debt below 50 percent of GDP (sample median).

19.
This particular susceptibility might reflect a combination of temporary and
long-standing factors. The peak of the global market stress coincided with increasing
expectations of a change in administration in Israel and a lack of clarity about the new
budget. At the same time, concerns about Israel’s debt sustainability and geopolitical
uncertainty—likely heightened by the rise in global risk aversion—and doubts about the
Israeli economy in the face of global downturn might have also contributed to the sharp
increase in Israel’s risk premiums in late 2008. The rapid fall in risk premiums in recent
months was likely driven by the stronger-than-expected rebound of the Israeli economy,
supported by the broader moderation of risk pricing in the global markets.
20.
Thus, the main finding suggests that for high-debt countries, such as Israel,
market stress tends to disproportionately heighten bond yields. In addition, the
“residuals” for Israel are strongly correlated with the measure of market stress, suggesting
that Israel’s susceptibility to global financial conditions may be above and beyond what is
typical for countries that are similarly indebted.
21.
While the Israeli economy exited this global crisis rapidly and strongly, the
market has not always been forgiving of Israel’s high debt and other fragilities.
Renewed shocks to the global markets have significant potential to sharply raise Israel’s
risk premiums and expose its fiscal weakness. In combination with the WEO finding that
fiscal stimulus may be attenuated—or even more than completely negated—in high public
debt contexts, this finding underscores the limited role fiscal policy can play to cushion
temporary exogenous shocks. In this light, and given Israel’s particular exposure to
exogenous shocks, steps to strengthen the potency of the fiscal instrument, notably by
adopting credible and appropriately ambitious debt reduction plans, should remain among
the most important of policy priorities.

70

III. GLOBAL REGULATORY REFORM—LESSONS FROM ISRAEL1
Introduction

1.
The Israeli financial system appears to have weathered the global financial crisis
better than those of many other developed small open economies. Consequently, the Israeli
experience may have useful experience for other countries to consider in making their
financial systems more robust to major external financial shocks. This note focuses on
factors that may have contributed to the resilience of the Israeli financial system, drawing
on comparisons with a selection of other countries whose financial systems also performed
relatively well, as well as with some that clearly did not.
2.
The first part of the note focuses on characteristics of Israel’s financial system in
the pre-crisis period that might help account for its relatively good performance during the
crisis. The analysis then narrows in on underlying features of the Israeli financial system
and prudential supervision framework that appear to have been especially important in
accounting for the resilience of the system. Finally, the discussion turns to lessons that
might be drawn from the Israeli experience for the international debate on how to modify
financial regulation in the wake of the financial crisis.
Pre-crisis Conditions
Macro-financial developments 2004–07

3.
Standard macroeconomic indicators comparing Israel’s macroeconomic
performance with a group of peer countries over the four years leading up to the financial
crisis, provide only very limited indications as to which financial systems were particularly
fragile or robust:2



All of the countries experienced good but not obviously unsustainable growth, and
low average inflation. All saw their currencies appreciate versus the US dollar (in
nominal and real terms), and most maintained interest rates positive in real terms.



All of the countries, experienced rapid increases in equity prices and, to a lesser
extent, in property prices. Israel is an exception: stockmarket increases were similar
to those in other countries, but property price increases were very subdued.

1
2

Prepared by Scott Roger (MCM; sroger@imf.org)

The peer group countries considered included Belgium, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Korea, Netherlands,
and Norway. Like Israel, all are high income, small open economies, with monetary policies primarily focused
on a price stability objective.

71

4.
The main conclusion is that the relatively good performance of the Israeli financial
system is not obviously related to Israel’s pre-crisis macroeconomic performance, except in
one respect—the very different pre-crisis performance of Israel’s housing market. Apart
from that, one has to look at other factors.
Table 1. Macro-financial developments 2004-2007
(Annual averages, in percent)
Iceland Ireland
Belgium
Real GDP growth
6.6
4.6
2.7
CPI inflation
3.3
2.6
2.4
Real interest rate1/
7.3
0.3
0.6
Nominal exchange -3.9
-4.8
-4.8
rate vs. US dollar
House price
16.7
7.2
14.3
inflation
Stockmarket
29.3
9.0
21.6
growth
Sources: Haver analytics, IFS, Datastream
Notes: 1/ 3-month interbank rate

Netherlands
3.1
1.4
1.4
-4.8

Greece
3.9
3.4
-0.5
-4.8

Norway
2.7
1.7
1.4
-5.1

Korea
4.5
2.4
1.9
-6.0

Finland
4.0
0.9
2.0
-4.8

Israel
5.2
1.6
2.2
-2.9

4.2

7.3

10.6

4.1

7.9

0.4

11.2

23.0

33.8

23.7

17.8

21.2

Financial structure and vulnerabilities

5.
The Israeli banking system is highly concentrated, with the top two banks
accounting for nearly 60 percent of banking system assets, and the top accounting for 95
percent. Until relatively recently, the banks also dominated provident funds and mutual
funds. The Bachar reforms, introduced in the mid-2005, forced the banks to shed these
kinds of activities.3 Subsequently, the non-bank financial sector has grown very rapidly, so
that by end-2007, assets of non-bank financial institutions amounted to around 110 percent
of GDP compared with banking system assets of around 140 percent of GDP.
6.
Banks are supervised by the Bank of Israel, while insurance, pension and provident
funds are supervised by the Ministry of Finance, and mutual funds and equity markets are
supervised by the Israel Securities Authority (ISA).
7.
An important feature of the banking system is that there is no formal system of
deposit insurance. Nonetheless, past government practice, notably during the banking crisis
of 1983, suggests that there is, in effect a policy of treating almost all banks as too
important to fail. A corollary of this, however, is that the Bank of Israel supervises banks
very closely.

3

See M. Sokoler, 2006, “Changes in the Israeli banking system,” in “The banking system in emerging
economies: how much progress has been made?” BIS Papers No. 28, 249-57.

72

8.
In the period following the Bachar reforms, corporate borrowing shifted rapidly
from the closely supervised banking sector to the equity and, especially, the corporate bond
market. As a result, the corporate debt-to-equity ratio and bond debt-to-GDP ratio rose
rapidly to high levels by international standards. The increased risk associated with such
leveraging would be primarily with holders of such bonds, including pensions, insurers,
and mutual funds; i.e., in the non-bank sector.
9.
A number of features of the Israeli financial system on the eve of the crisis suggest
that the banking system was better placed to cope with significant shocks than the banking
systems in most of its peers:



Israel’s banking system was relatively moderate in size, relative to GDP, compared
with several peer group countries—notably Iceland and Ireland. This has two
important implications: First, any problems in the Israeli banking system were likely
to have a smaller macroeconomic impact than similar problems in economies with
larger financial systems. Second, the smaller size of the banking system also means
that the potential fiscal cost of problems in the banking system was likely to be more
manageable, which also suggests that the implicit government backing of the banking
system would be more credible than otherwise.



In contrast with the situation in most of its peers, Israel did not experience a property
boom in the run up to the crisis, with the result that household debt, and especially
mortgage debt, was much lower in relation to incomes than in peer countries. Since
the large majority of household borrowing is from banks, Israeli banks were
correspondingly less exposed to credit risk stemming from the household sector
generally and the housing market in particular.



On the liabilities side, Israeli banks were also favorably positioned relative to peer
group countries. In most peer group countries, domestic loans significantly exceeded
deposits, so that banks were reliant on either market-based funding or external
borrowing. In contrast, the Israeli banking system appears to have had a very strong
deposit base exceeding domestic lending. As a result, the banking system was not
vulnerable to drying up of access to external or domestic sources of funds. The
surplus of deposit funds, in fact created a risk on the other side of the balance sheet,
as Israeli banks invested funds in assets abroad.



In Israel, as in the peer group countries, the strong growth of previous years had
contributed to a decline in non-performing loans (NPLs) to low levels relative to total
loans.



Although the Israeli banking sector ratios of Tier I and total capital to risk-adjusted
assets were more or less in line with those of its peers, it may be noted that during the

73

pre-crisis period it built up its capital buffers, whereas in most of its peers, capital
ratios were allowed to decline.
Table 2. Financial sector characteristics, 2007
(year-end value, in percent)
Iceland
Gross external
liabilities/GDP
Net external
liabilities/GDP
Bank assets/GDP
NBFI assets/GDP
Stockmarket/GDP
H/hold debt/disp. income
NFC debt/GDP
NFC debt/equity
Bank loans/deposits
Deposits/total assets
Private sector credit/GDP
Share of bank lending to:
households
Of which mortgages
NFCs
NBFIs
Non-residents
NPL % of gross loans
∆ in NPL rate
NPLs (net of provisions)/
Tier I capital
Bank provisions/NPLs
Bank CAR (unweighted)
∆ in unweighted CAR
Bank CAR (riskweighted)
∆ in risk-weighted CAR
Tier I CAR
∆ in Tier I CAR
Return on Assets (ROA)
Return on Equity (ROE)
Insurance solvency ratio

Ireland

Belgium

Netherlands

Greece

Norway

Korea

557.9

Finland

Israel

208.7

53.1

26.1
1040.3
158.6

476.1

326.1
228.8

50.1
150
59.9
192.1

117.5
92
108.0

52.3
226.5
115
2.9
205.4
246.6
25.8
9.6
35.7

50.3
41.5

38.5
0.8
-0.1

147.4
13.2
80.0
58

84.2
187.9
118
146.9

107.0
136
96

220

102.7
100
144.2
36.9

143.2
111.7
135.1
39.9
191.8
89.2
77.3

183
31.9
24.6
23.3
1.8
28.1
1.1
-1.5

84.1
6.9
-0.2
12.1

49.1
5.5
0.2
10.7

48.0
4.1
1.0
11.2

-0.2
10.1

-3.2

1.5
22.4

0.7
16.4

-1.6
12.1
3.3
0.4
13.2
225

61.5

49.5
34.5
47.2
1.7

56.6
50.8

4.5
-2.5

0.5
-1.1
2.4

0.7
-1.9

0.3
-0.2

41.5
10.2
17.9
1.4
-1.1

3.3
-1.0
13.2

53.4
6.9
-0.2
11.2

67.0
6.2
-1.2
11.7

205.2
9.0
2.0
12.3

8.3
-2.6
15.4

6.0
0.7
11.0

0.9
9.0
2.0
0.6
18.7

-0.8
9.2
0.4
1.0
14.8

-0.7
9.3
-0.4
0.8
17.0
244

1.2

-3.3
11.5
1.8
1.2
14.3

0.6
7.6
0.7
1.2
20.0
114

22.9
15.6

28.3
61.2

6.8

1.1
14.6

Sources: Central bank websites, Haver Analytics, Datastream, Bloomberg

Impact of the Crisis

10.
Although the Israeli economy has been adversely affected by the global financial
crisis, the financial system as a whole has weathered the crisis better than in many peer
group countries. Some key features of the way that the financial system was affected
include:

74



The Israeli economy has been less adversely affected than many peers by the global
slump in export markets despite its high degree of openness. Additionally, although
Israel’s country risk premium appears to have increased somewhat during the crisis,
the increase was less marked, and the downward pressure on the currency less severe
than in most of its peers. The less severe real and financial transmission of the crisis
to the Israeli economy helped to cushion the financial system better than in other
countries. At the same time, however, the resilience of the Israeli financial system
also helped to insulate the economy from a more severe downturn and also likely
contributed to the rapid turn around in 2009 by maintaining lending to the private
sector.



As in virtually all countries, the Israeli stock market was hit hard by the crisis, with
the Tel-Aviv market capitalization falling by over 40 percent from end-2007 to end2008, in the same range as the peer group countries. In Israel’s case, as in many other
countries, the real estate sector of the market was especially hard hit;



Pension and provident funds, insurers and mutual funds all suffered heavily as
portfolios lost value and as investors withdrew funds to invest in safer assets. In
contrast with many other countries, this included a shift into real estate, so that
property prices in Israel have risen rather than fallen in the wake of the crisis.



Corporate bond issuance in Israel essentially ceased during the depths of the crisis
and, although recovering, remains well below pre-crisis levels.



As in other countries, bank lending growth in Israel slowed sharply, partly reflecting
some apparent tightening of credit conditions, as well as weakening of demand by
some borrowers. However, with the difficulty of raising funds in the bond or equity
market, there was also some re-intermediation of bank borrowing by large corporates,
as well as an increase in demand for mortgage finance as households redirected
savings towards real assets. As a result, aggregate lending has been fairly flat rather
than falling as in many other countries.



Israeli banks, like others, experienced a sharp fall in profits. In Israel’s case, this
mainly reflected losses on their portfolios of foreign and domestic securities, rather
than losses on lending. Indeed, although there has been some increase in overdue
loans, the NPL rate has remained almost unchanged.



Measures taken during the crisis. Israeli authorities took a range of measures to
bolster confidence in the financial system, promote restoration of market liquidity,
and ensure access to finance for certain borrowers (Box 1). In Israel’s case, since
bank solvency was not an issue, the public resource use has been small. The key

75

benefit has been in promoting market liquidity and in reassuring the public of the
safety of the banking system.
Box 1: Financial Sector and Credit Support Measures 2008–09
Corporate bonds. The government provided seed capital of NIS 1.1 billion, to be used in a 1:3 ratio
with private funds, to support corporate issues for solvent firms mainly active in Israel facing debt
rollover difficulties. To date only 10 percent of the funds have been used. The program has now been
expanded to include equity investments in corporates with market access problems.
Increasing banks’ capital. A guarantee was offered of some NIS 6 billion for bank issues of deferred
notes which would be classified as upper Tier II capital. Conditions of use were eased and the
guarantee doubled to NIS 12 billion in April, but banks have raised capital without using the
guarantee.
Credit guarantees to small- and medium-sized firms. The initial NIS 1.3 billion scheme was
expanded to NIS 2.6 billion, with a 70 percent guarantee on the loans. The funds are leveraged in a
1:5 ratio with private funds. NIS 0.7 billion has been disbursed under the program to date.
Easing out-of-court corporate bond rescheduling procedures. The Israeli Securities Authority
provided that bond trustees will have to convene a forum of bondholders if requested to do so by a
party holding a substantial portion of bonds. Some 50 companies are now subject to these procedures,
accounting for total debt of US$3½ billion.

Interpreting Israeli experience

11.
The better overall performance of the Israeli financial system than those of most of
its peers in weathering the crisis, as well as the particular features of the way in which the
crisis affected the financial system, substantially reflect favorable initial conditions of the
financial system. These initial conditions, however, did not arise by chance. Instead, they
appear to be the product of a number of characteristics of the financial system, including its
regulation and supervision. These include:
Conservative funding practices

12.
A key difference between Israel’s banks and banks in many of its peers has been the
reliance of Israel’s banks on customer deposits to fund their activities. As a result, banks
have not been vulnerable to cutbacks in access to external funding or to disruption in local
markets. To some extent this may reflect special circumstances in Israel, particularly the
availability of stable, low-cost deposits from the Israeli diaspora, but it also reflects the
limited development of securities markets in Israel. Legislation to enable securitization is
only now being put in place.
13.
Although securitization, in principle, can be beneficial, the recent experience of
other countries vividly illustrates that such products can also lead to unintended but

76

potentially disastrous risk exposures and threats to systemic financial stability. This is not
an argument that Israel should not develop securitization, but it does suggest that the
authorities will also need to consider how the potential dangers of such instruments should
be mitigated through revised guidelines or practices for bank liquidity standards, as well as
in lender of last resort arrangements.
Prudent lending and asset allocation practices

14.
The Israeli banking system is characterized by a range of rules and practices
limiting the exposure of banks to various kinds of risk. These include:



Over and above limits on exposures to single borrowers, banks are constrained on
their exposure to groups of closely associated borrowers.



A limit on equity investment in foreign subsidiaries or branches.



Sectoral lending limits.

15.
The prudent lending practices are reflected in the fact that, in contrast with almost
all of its peers, Israel did not experience a housing price bubble prior to the financial crisis,
so that the financial system, including both banks and non-banks were not significantly
exposed to a slump in housing prices or the construction sector. Indeed, the vulnerability of
the construction sector was primarily to its exposure to slumps in overseas property
markets. The favorable position of the financial system in this regard was the product of
three main factors:

4



The 20 percent limit4 on the share of lending to the housing sector constrained the
ability of the banking sector to fund a housing boom, at the same time as limiting its
vulnerability to a crash in the property market. The lack of comparable restrictions in
the non-bank financial sector, however, meant that funding for the construction sector
gravitated towards that part of the financial system, so that non-bank financial
institutions became more exposed to booms and busts in the property sector.



Industry limits on loan-to-value ratios. Although such limits are fairly common in
other countries, the common limit in Israel of 70 percent is unusually low. This helps
to limit banks’ exposure to slumps in property values, as well as constraining the
ability of households to become over-extended, or to engage in speculative property
investments.

The limit is not absolute; banks can have higher exposures, but this is effectively discouraged by higher
provisioning requirements for exposures above the 20 percent mark.

77



An overhang of excess supply in the housing market that began in the early 2000s,
and which ended only in 2008. While this suggests that there was an element of good
fortune in Israel’s avoidance of a housing market bubble, it can also be argued that if
the conservative rules noted above had not been in place, the excess supply might
have been dissipated much earlier. That is, the conservative rules tend to dampen
busts as well as booms.

16.
The apparent effectiveness of these restrictions on lending to the property market
raises an interesting issue for Israeli regulators, as well as those in other countries,
particularly in the context of the introduction of Basel II. The use of simple, across-theboard quantitative rules appears to run against the grain of risk management approaches
embedded in the Basel II framework. In principle, optimal lending limits to individual
borrowers, groups, or sectors, as well as optimal investment strategies should be functions
of many variables, with the result that they will vary over time and across institutions. In
this case, imposing simple quantitative rules will be inefficient.
17.
However, perhaps there is a sound rationale for some simple quantitative limits on
portfolio choices as a form of ‘back up” on optimizing behavior by banks or potential
borrowers. The key point is that the kind of optimizing behavior implicit in the Pillar I
approach involves the management of risk. But as the financial crisis has amply
demonstrated, estimates of risk can be wildly wrong. In this case, it is important to deal
effectively with uncertainty rather than just quantified, but potentially mis-estimated risk.
This tends to point toward the need for robust rather than optimal rules. And it perhaps in
this respect that the kinds of rules used in the Israeli framework may have proved their
value.
18.
At the same time, it is important to recognize that it is possible to be too cautious.
An unduly prudent approach will undermine the efficiency of the banking system in
intermediating between savers and borrowers, to the detriment of the whole economy. In
this regard, however, the fact that Israeli banks have had rates of return on equity or assets
comparable to those of banks in peer countries suggests that the degree of prudence of
Israeli banks has not had a significantly adverse impact on efficiency.
The conservative culture of banking and banking supervision

19.
Beyond the conservative rules used in bank funding and lending, the Israeli
financial system may also be characterized as having a conservative culture of banking and
banking supervision. Banks examine carefully loans and the repayment ability of
borrowers, which has been reflected in a low NPL rate and little change in the NPL rate

78

during the crisis.5 Most banks have also been fairly cautious in their investments abroad,
though not all have been successful in avoiding significant losses on those investments.
20.
This conservative culture appears to stem from two principal sources. First, the
banking system has had crises in the past—including in 2001-03 and earlier in the
1980’s—and the lessons of those crises has not been forgotten.6 Second, a significant
proportion of senior management of Israel’s banks are themselves former bank supervisors
or government officials with a relatively conservative approach which they have brought to
their commercial activities. In some other countries, however, it is less clear that the
lessons of past crises have become ingrained in the banking culture. For Israel, as well as
other countries, this raises the question of how to ensure that the lessons of past experience
with crises are not lost with the passage of time. And since the degree of conservatism in
bank practices is largely determined by the bank’s management, how might bank
governance, including the appointment and qualifications required of senior management
be modified to promote prudent risk management behavior as part of the corporate culture?
21.
Banks in Israel are closely supervised. This reflects a number of factors which, in
turn, raise a number of issues. The first factor helping to account for the closeness of
supervision is the classic one: the potential for losses to accrue to the public in a system
with a publicly funded safety net. In Israel’s case, although there is no explicit deposit
insurance, there appears to be a common understanding that the government would act to
prevent the failure of most, if not all, banks. This implies not only comprehensive deposit
guarantees, but also some guarantee for bank shareholders. Such an extensive backing of
the banking system warrants much more intensive supervision than in a system with much
more limited government guarantees.
22.
Close supervision has also been facilitated by the concentration of the banking
system, as well as by the separation of insurance, pension and capital market activities from
traditional banking activities. With only a few banks dominating the system, it is easier for
the supervisors to gain an in-depth knowledge of the supervised institutions. This may not
hold if the dominant banks are highly complex. In the case of Israel, however, the Bachar
reforms have meant that banking activities is much simpler than would otherwise be the
case.7
5

“Problem loans”, which include loans deemed at risk, but not necessarily non-performing, have risen.

6

The 1983 financial crisis, involving bank purchases of their own stock to boost share prices and investor
confidence, eventually led to a collapse in share prices and nationalization of the main banks, while the 2001-03
crisis resulted from a combination of events, including the LTCM crisis, the dotcom stockmarket crash, war in
Lebanon.
7

For example, although the Netherlands banking system is also very concentrated, those banks are highly
complex, with extensive foreign activities, as well as heavy involvement in the insurance and pensions sectors.

79

23.
There is, however, a potential danger in close supervision. That is the danger that
the supervisors may come to identify too closely with the supervised—a sort of reversed
Stockholm syndrome. This may be especially likely in a country like Israel, where many
bank managers were former supervisors, and therefore have longstanding personal
connections with their supervisors. Yet there seems to be no evidence of this problem in
Israel. Two factors may help explain this. The first is a high level of transparency. With
high levels of transparency, whether required or informal, the scope for bending rules is
much more limited than otherwise. In addition, however, it may also be fair to describe the
bank supervision framework as having a higher degree of effective accountability than
most systems. In the aftermath of the 1983 banking crisis, the forced resignations of bank
CEOs as well as of the governor of the Bank of Israel established a level of personal
accountability that is unusual by international standards. To what extent this experience
continues to influence behavior in the banks or their supervisors is not clear. But it may be
worthwhile both in Israel and in other supervisory agencies to consider how to strengthen
the personal accountability of the supervisors for their performance.
24.
One of the most important means of enhancing accountability is through
transparency. Transparency plays a crucial role in the Bank of Israel (BoI) inflation
targeting framework, and should be applied also to the BoI’s financial stability framework.
The BoI is building up its capacity in the area of financial stability analysis, and an
important objective should be to begin publishing financial stability reports on semi-annual
basis. The requirement to publish its analysis and assessments of the stability of the
banking system would provide a healthy discipline on supervisors, both in promoting a
high standard of analysis, and in ensuring that assessments being made could be defended
in public.
25.
The conservative prudential framework applied to banking activity in Israel is also
relevant to the issue of capital adequacy, because to an important extent, a more
conservative regulatory and supervisory approach can substitute for additional capital, by
preventing losses as opposed to covering them. The level of capital ratios held by Israeli
banks appears to have been adequate in the current crisis. But it is important to be cautious
in drawing conclusions from this experience for appropriate levels of capitalization in
general, since the outcomes for banks could have been quite different had the shock to the
Israeli economy been larger or longer lasting, or if the Bachar reforms not taken place, or
had there been a housing bubble problem.
The non-bank financial sector

26.
The net worth of the non-bank financial sector was hit hard by sharp declines in
equity and corporate bond values. From end-2007 to end-2008, the capitalization of the Tel
Aviv Stock Exchange fell 45 percent, while prices of non-government bonds fell
14 percent. Concerns about the creditworthiness of borrowers also led to the curtailment of

80

new credit. The volume of issuance in both the equity bond markets, which had slowed
progressively since the beginning of the financial crisis in the second half of 2007, almost
completely ceased in the wake of the Lehman Brothers failure in 2008Q4, and only began
to recover in 2009Q2 (Figure 1).8
Figure 1: Capital raised on Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, 2007-09
10000
9000
8000

Equity

$ millions

7000
6000

Corporate bonds

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000

Q
4
20
09

Q
3
20
09

Q
2
20
09

Q
1
20
09

Q
4
20
08

Q
3
20
08

Q
2
20
08

Q
1
20
08

Q
4
20
07

Q
3
20
07

Q
2
20
07

20
07

Q
1

0

Source: TASE

27.
Several steps were taken by the authorities to boost confidence and liquidity in the
markets, including through the public-private fund to purchase corporate bonds, as well as
by cuts in interest rates, and improvements in arrangements for restructuring of bond debt
(Box 1).
28.
The performance of the non-bank financial sector during the crisis has drawn
attention to a number of weakness in the development of the sector and in its supervision.
Although Israeli pension funds outperformed those in many peer countries, falling by an
average of only 11 percent in 2008, they might have been expected to do even better in
view of the facts that the global economic slump did not hit Israel as quickly or as hard as
many of its peers and that Israeli pension and other long-term savings funds were only
lightly exposed to foreign toxic assets. Moreover, despite the relatively small fall in asset
values, losses by insurers on nostro and insured portfolios led several insurers to fall below
minimum solvency requirements, while the solvency of the insurance sector as a whole fell
to just above minimum requirements.
29.
To a large extent, these weaknesses in performance in the non-bank financial sector
may be traced back to the very recent and rapid development of the sector, spurred by the
8

Moreover, much of the pick up in the bond market reflected the needs of banks to raise capital adequacy,
rather than issuance by non-financial corporations.

81

Bachar reforms. As a consequence, players and supervisors in the sector have not had a
long period in which to gain expertise or experience that might have made the sector less
vulnerable to the crisis.
30.
The supervisory agencies have begun to take remedial actions. An important
objective of these measures is to establish a better balance of market power between
borrowers and lenders by strengthening the rights of share and bond holders. A general
view is that, following the Bachar reforms, the balance of market power shifted too far in
favor of debt issuers, especially the large groups dominating the Israeli corporate sector, at
the expense of institutional investors, and that this contributed to the high degree of market
uncertainty during the crisis. Measures along these lines include: (i) the ISA initiative to
establish more effective bond debt restructuring procedures, mainly by strengthening the
negotiating position of bond holders and trustees (Box 1); and the proposals of the Hodak
Committee to strengthen investor protection through bond covenants and stronger
disclosure requirements for bond issuers (Box 2).
The supervisory framework

1.
The current regulatory and supervisory framework, as noted earlier, involves three
supervisory entities, with responsibilities split along institutional rather than functional
lines. The experience in the pre-crisis period and during the crisis suggests that, while the
regulation and supervision of banks contributed importantly to the resilience of the banking
system, the same cannot be said of regulation and supervision of the non-bank financial
sector.
2.
Clearly, the Bachar reforms helped to insulate the banks from the losses
experienced in the non-bank financial sector. However, the very rapid shift in corporate
financing from the bank to non-bank financial sectors suggests that there was a significant
element of regulatory arbitrage from the closely supervised bank sector to the non-bank
sector with inexperienced and under-resourced regulators. The crisis highlighted a number
of deficiencies in regulation in the non-bank sector, as well as in the behavior and
transparency of players in sector. Although remedial actions are underway, an important
issue for the authorities to reflect on is how best to strengthen the regulatory and
supervisory framework without stifling financial activity and innovation.

82

Box 2: The Hodak report—Recommendations of the Committee for Establishing
Parameters for Institutional Bodies’ Investments in Non-government Bonds
Following the Bachar reforms, which forced banks to divest themselves of mutual funds and
provident funds, getting them out of long-term institutional savings and investment activities,
there was a rapid shift in non-financial corporate funding from the banking sector to nonbank financing, especially through bond financing. Between 2004 and 2007, the share of
business credit provided by the non-bank sector doubled from around one-quarter to nearly
one-half.
Despite the rapid growth of the bond market, however, it remains relatively unsophisticated
in important respects. In particular, there are concerns that lenders are insufficiently
protected, and that institutional investors are insufficiently rigorous in their evaluation of
potential investments. The Hodak committee has made recommendations focused on
improving market performance in both these areas:


The report recommends bringing the framework of covenants attached to bond issues
more into line with standard practice in more established markets. Currently, Israeli
bonds typically carry few if any covenants to protect claims of bond purchasers. The
report recommends covenants used commonly in Europe and the US be made
mandatory in Israel. These include negative pledges, and the right of bondholders to
insist on immediate repayment in the event of a variety of circumstances in which
their claims could be harmed or subordinated to other claims.

The report also recommends that institutions purchasing bonds be required to establish
meaningful processes for evaluating the bonds and their risk characteristics in relation to the
investment portfolio. The report also emphasizes the need to monitor such investments on an
ongoing basis, and recommends that bond issuers be required to make necessary information
available on a regular basis.

3.
The 2006 IMF Article IV mission examined a range of potential alternative models
of supervision, including the status quo, a shift to a functional model, such as the so-called
twin peaks model, and the single supervisor model. While the experience of other countries
during the crisis suggests that no single model is clearly superior to others in preventing a
crisis, the Israeli experience during the crisis suggests that both the ISA and the Capital
Markets, Insurance and Savings Division (CMISD) of the Ministry of Finance were
hindered in the pre-crisis period by insufficient operational autonomy, leading to underresourcing. This suggests that both institutions should be given full autonomy.
Additionally, the Israeli experience suggests that coordination and information flows
between the supervisory authorities need to be strengthened, and that information flows to
the monetary and fiscal authorities also need to be strengthened. This is especially
important in the area of macro-prudential supervision, which currently scarcely exists.

83

4.
Concurrently, the CMISD and ISA should significantly strengthen their public
transparency, going well beyond the provision of data, through the publication of timely
analysis of developments, issues, and risks. Finally, an assessment should be made of the
risk that even the relatively targeted emergency support measures for the non-bank sector
has given rise to moral hazard there and, if so, this should be reflected in the content of
supervisory guidelines to be adopted.
Lessons from Israel’s experience

5.
One feature of the Israeli experience that cannot be underscored too much is the
need to promote prudent behavior by financial institutions themselves, as well as a
conservative approach by the supervisors. Without these, even the best set of rules is
unlikely to be properly enforced. With them, weaknesses in rules become far less
important. The most challenging question is how to promote these traits and ensure that
they are not lost with the passage of time since the last crisis. For financial institutions, this
may entail carefully reviewing governance arrangements so as to ensure that senior officers
have a track record of prudent behavior, and that they are held accountable for their
decisions. For supervisors, a culture of conservatism needs to be promoted, and reinforced
by high levels of transparency and accountability.
6.
A second lesson that may be drawn from Israel’s experience is that relatively simple
quantitative guides and rules may provide effective and robust backstops for more
sophisticated risk management approaches, especially in an environment in which there is
considerable uncertainty about the true values of key risk parameters in the financial
system. The Israeli experience also suggests that the efficiency cost of applying such rules
may not be too costly in terms of financial system profitability.
7.
A further lesson from the Israeli experience is that important reforms in the
financial sector should be accompanied by corresponding modifications in financial sector
supervision, so that new activities do not either go unsupervised or overstretch the capacity
of the responsible supervisors. In this context, the Israeli experience also suggests that
having independent but accountable supervisory agencies, and a strong culture of
cooperation amongst them, may help to minimize such risks.

84
RESPONSE OF THE AUTHORITIES TO THE CONCLUSIONS OF THE MISSION

1. The authorities agreed with much of the staff analysis and policy proposals. However,
they reserved their position regarding the form of the fiscal rules, underscored their
commitment to phased reductions in income tax rates, indicated their intention to review
international practice regarding arrangements for the supervision of non-banks before
finalizing decisions on this, and underscored the specific intentions with regard to exit from
discretionary intervention on foreign exchange markets.
Macroeconomic developments and policy responses 2007–09

2.
The authorities agreed that progress in the past decade to lower public debt and the
budget deficit, to strengthen the banking sector, and to increase economic flexibility through
structural reforms had positioned Israel well to face the global crisis from the Fall of 2007.
3.
As the crisis deepened in the Fall of 2008, the policy response was led by reductions
in the policy rates by the Bank of Israel to ½ a percent, and by various “unconventional”
monetary policy measures—notably preprogrammed foreign exchange intervention. This was
supported by the accommodation of fiscal stabilizers (with medium term sustainability
anchored on a path of declining annual ceilings (adopted in mid-2009) on deficits to 2014. In
addition, there were several initiatives to stabilize the financial sector—each carefully
designed to target specific vulnerabilities while minimizing risks of moral hazard.
4.
Nevertheless, a slowdown could not be completely averted and fixed investment and
consumer durables spending fell sharply into early 2009. But as these goods are largely
imported, and the policy responses and high household savings rates supported non-durables
consumption, the overall impact on output was modest and Israel resumed growth relatively
quickly. In this context, and with inflation towards the upper end of the target band, the
monetary stance was tightened. Moreover, some unconventional actions have ceased,
intervention has switched from preprogrammed to discretionary, and fiscal deficit outturns
well below the 2009–10 ceilings are anticipated.
5.
As the new administration formed in mid-2009, well into the budget year, a single
budget to run to end-2010 was adopted, a “two-year” budget. This provided some stability in
an uncertain environment, and allowed greater focus on medium-term budgeting matters. In
that context, prior spending ceilings and the VAT rate were raised to meet immediate
spending priorities. Both actions will be reversed from end-2010.
Reform of fiscal rules

6.
The authorities noted that the premium they place on deficit reduction is evident in
the schedule of declining ceilings they have adopted. These ceilings are supported by the
caps on real spending growth—which is set to decline in 2011 to just 0.4 percent as the
correction for the spending increase in 2009 takes place. While there is no explicit medium-

85
term debt objective, it is broadly understood that an objective of 60 percent of GDP remains
desirable. The staff’s concerns about the possible rigidities in the deficits ceilings, the
specification of the spending ceilings in real rather than nominal terms, and the absence of a
formal long term anchor were recognized, however. Accordingly, the option to reform the
framework will be kept under close review in coming months, but the authorities remain
committed to their current framework until then.
Reduction in income tax rates

7.
The intent of preannounced income tax reductions is to clarify conditions for
business and investors—and so encourage early new investment. As tax burdens are likely to
rise internationally in coming years following the global crisis, the planned tax reductions
may have a particularly beneficial impact on establishing Israel as an attractive investment
destination. While the importance of public debt reduction is recognized, the commitment to
announced tax reductions will remain in place, though assessments of their impact on
investment, employment, and deficits will continue to be refined.
Supervision of non-banks

8.
Best practice in the structure of supervisory bodies and the content of supervision
remains unclear, with a variety of different models globally which will be reviewed before a
determination is made of the appropriate arrangements for Israel. Effective supervision of
non-banks is seen as a priority, not least given the risk of international and domestic
aftershocks following the recent global crisis. A key benefit of housing the CMISD within
the Ministry of Finance is that it facilitates the free flow of supervisory and market
intelligence to policymakers there. Key steps to strengthen the content of nonbank
supervision are underway, and the resourcing of those supervisors will be kept under review.
Exit from discretionary intervention in foreign exchange markets

9.
Discretionary intervention is a transitional step towards a free floating exchange rate
regime, in the context of domestic and global exit from extraordinary measures taken during
the crisis. However, when this transitional phase ends (envisaged, as suggested, when
nominal policy rates return to “normal” levels), any formal announcement to that effect will
note that the Bank of Israel reserves the right to intervene in exceptional circumstances—i.e.,
a return to the situation prior to preprogrammed reserve accumulation. With increasing
integration into global capital markets, the need for such actions to prevent disorderly
conditions cannot be ruled out, but the BoI does not and will not target any specific rate.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISRAEL
Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation—Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department
January 12, 2010

Contents

Page

Annexes
I. Fund Relations .....................................................................................................................2
II. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................................4

2
ANNEX I. ISRAEL: FUND RELATIONS
(AS OF NOVEMBER 30, 2009)
I.

Membership Status: Israel became a member of the Fund on July 12, 1954, and
accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on September 21, 1993,
and, other than solely for national and international security reasons, maintains an
exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for
current international transactions. Israel subscribes to the SDDS and is in full
observance of the SDDS’s prescriptions for data coverage, periodicity and timeliness,
and for the dissemination of advance release calendars.1

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR Million

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

928.20
743.91
184.30

SDR Department:

883.39
785.51

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None

V.

Financial Arrangements: None

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund (SDR Million):

2009
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

Forthcoming
2010
2011
0.30
0.30

0.30
0.30

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not applicable

VIII.

Safeguards Assessments: Not applicable

1

100.00
80.15
19.86

SDR Million

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

% Quota

% Allocation
100.00
88.92

2012

2013

0.30
0.30

0.30
0.30

For purposes of Fund relations, the West Bank and Gaza (WBG) fall under Israeli jurisdiction in accordance
with Article XXXI, Section 2(g) of the Articles of Agreement.

3
IX.

Exchange Rate Arrangement:
Effective August 10, 2009, the Fund has reclassified Israel’s de facto exchange rate
regime from “free floating” to “floating,” as the authorities have made discretionary
interventions on more than three occasions since July 2009. The discretionary
interventions serve as a transitional step facilitating the exit from the preprogrammed
USD purchases that began in March 2008. The authorities clarify that they do not
target any specific exchange rate. The authorities’ de jure classification remains as
“floating.”

X.

Article IV consultation:
The last Article IV consultation was concluded on February 13, 2009. Israel is on the
standard 12-month consultation cycle.

XI.

ROSCs:





XII.

Financial System Stability Assessment was conducted in 2000, issued in
August 2001.
Fiscal Transparency ROSC was conducted in 2003, issued in March 2004.
AML/CFT ROSC was conducted in 2003, issued in June 2005.
Data Module ROSC was conducted in 2005, and issued as IMF Country Report
No. 06/125 in March 2006.
Technical Assistance:

The Fund has been providing policy advice and technical assistance to the Palestinian
Authority (PA) since the 1993 Oslo Accords, and presently has a senior resident
representative based in Jerusalem. The Fund’s work in the West Bank and Gaza (WBG) has
intensified since 2007, with a focus on the macroeconomic, fiscal, and financial areas. Staff
missions to the WBG have been assisting the PA in the design and implementation of its
macroeconomic and fiscal framework in line with the objectives set out in the Palestinian
Reform and Development Plan (PRDP) presented at the Paris international donors'
conference in December 2007. The most recent progress report on that framework was
presented at the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) meeting of donors held in New York
on September 22, 2009. Technical assistance has also been stepped up since 2007, in
particular in the areas of public expenditure management, banking supervision and
regulation, and macroeconomic statistics.
XIII.

Resident Representative:
A resident representative has been in the WBG since early 1996.

4

ANNEX II. ISRAEL: STATISTICAL ISSUES
Israel is generally in observance of the Special Data Dissemination Standard, meeting
specifications for coverage, periodicity, timeliness, and dissemination of advance release
calendars. Macroeconomic statistics are of generally high quality and broadly adequate for
surveillance, although there are few shortcomings particularly in monetary and government
finance statistics. A Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes—Data Module, a
Detailed Assessments Using the Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF), and a
Response by the Authorities were published on the IMF website on March 24, 2006 (IMF
Country Report No. 06/125).
Banking statistics are not based on balance sheet reporting, but instead on a selection of data
reported by banks to the regulatory authorities. Current information does not permit full
sectorization of the economy in the monetary statistics, and more detailed information on
instruments also would be useful.
The methodology underlying the reported overall annual fiscal balance is not in conformity
with internationally accepted best practice, as interest expenditure excludes the inflation
component. The authorities are gradually moving toward implementation of the methodology
that is standard in other countries, so that the discrepancy will decline over time. Data
submitted by the Central Bureau for Statistics for the Fund’s Government Finance Statistics
broadly follows the GFSM 2001 format. However, for financial assets and liabilities, only
transaction data are submitted, but not stock data. Within-year monthly reports on central
government operations—compiled by the MoF—cover only the main aggregates of
budgetary accounts, not broken down by components.
Balance of payments and international investment position data are compiled on a quarterly
basis and follow the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. External sector data
were not examined in the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes.

Israel: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
As of December 30, 2009

Exchange rates
Official international reserve assets and liabilities 4/
Reserve/Base money
Broad money
Central bank balance sheet
Consolidated balance sheet of the banking system
Interest rates 5/
Consumer price index
Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of financing
6/—General govt 7/
Revenue, expenditure, balance and composition of financing
6/—Central govt

External current account balance
Exports and imports of goods and services
GDP/GNP
Gross external debt

Date received

Frequency
of data 1/

Frequency of
reporting 1/

Frequency of
publication 1/

Dec-09

30-Dec-09

D and M

D and M

D and M

Nov-09

8-Dec-09

M

M

M

Nov-09

20-Dec-09

M

M

M

Nov-09

20-Dec-09

M

M

M

Nov-09

20-Dec-09

M

M

M

Q3 2009

Dec-09

Q

Q

Q

Memo items:
Data quality: methodological Data quality: accuracy and
soundness 2/
reliability 3/

LNO, LO, NO, LO

O, O, O, NA, NA

Dec-09

30-Dec-09

D and M

D and M

D and M

Nov-09

15-Dec-09

M

M

M

O, O, O, O

O, O, LO, O, O

2008

Aug-09

A

A

A

O, LO, O, LO

LO, O, O, O, O

NA

NA

O, O, O, LO

LO, O, LO, O, LO

Nov-09

7-Dec-09

M

M

M

Q3 2009

30-Dec-09

Q

Q

Q

Q3 2009

15-Dec-09

Q

Q

Q

Nov-09

13-Dec-09

M

M

M

Q3 2009

16-Nov-09

Q

Q

Q

Q3 2009

15-Dec-09

Q

Q

Q

5

Stocks of central and central government-guaranteed debt 8/

Date of latest
observation

1/ Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Avaliable (NA).
2/ Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published in March, 2006. The assessment indicates whether international standards concering (respective) concepts and definitions,
scopem classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), not observed (NO), or not available (NA).
3/ Same as footnote 2/, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source data, assessment and
validation of intermediate data and statistical outputs, and revision studies.
4/ Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
5/ Both market-based and officially determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
6/ Foreign, domestic banks, and domestic nonbanking financing.
7/ The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra-budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
8/ Including currency and maturity composition.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/10
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
January 25, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2009 Article IV Consultation with Israel
On January 15, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded
the Article IV consultation with Israel. 1
Background
The economy expanded rapidly following the 2001–03 downturn, with growth averaging over
5 percent in 2004–07. Supported by strong exports and contained government spending, the
external current account remained in significant surplus while the exchange rate was largely
stable. Inflation stayed close to the target band, before soaring fuel prices led to its sharp
upward climb after mid-2007. Driven by strong fiscal tightening efforts, and also aided by rapid
economic growth, the central government fiscal accounts steadily improved from a deficit of 5¼
percent of GDP in 2003 to balance in 2007, whereas public debt was lowered from 99 percent
of GDP to below 80 percent of GDP during the period.
Trends changed, however, in the latter half of 2008, as the deepening global financial crisis took
its toll. Exports and growth slowed, reducing growth to 4 percent and the current account
surplus to 1 percent of GDP for the year. Alongside, unhindered operation of automatic
stabilizers pushed the central government deficit up to 2¼ percent of GDP in 2008. Banks—with
robust balance sheets—remained relatively resilient, although non-bank financial institutions
and the domestic corporate bond market were strained. In this context, Israel’s “safe haven”

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.
1

2
appeal rose and capital inflows surged, leading the real effective exchange rate to rise by some
15 percent between end-2007 and mid-2008.
Strong policy measures were adopted in response to the impact of the global crisis. Near-term
fiscal targets for expenditure and deficit were relaxed in the 2009–10 budget, even though an
increase in some excises and a temporary 1 percentage point rise in the Value Added Tax
(VAT) rate—programmed to be reversed at end-2010—acted as a partial offset. With headline
inflation and inflation expectations rapidly falling and shekel appreciating, the Bank of Israel
rapidly reduced policy rates from 4.25 percent in February 2008 to 0.5 percent in April 2009,
and adopted unconventional monetary measures—intervening in the foreign exchange (FX)
market and purchasing long-dated government bonds. Targeted efforts to relieve financial
market strains were also taken, including setting up public-private bond funds and offering
guarantees for bank capital raising.
In part reflecting this policy support, growth returned in the second quarter of 2009 and signs of
a sustained recovery have strengthened in recent months. In this context, fiscal receipts have
surprised on the upside, likely bringing the central government deficit to 5 percent of GDP and
debt to about 80 percent of GDP for 2009, both better than budgeted. Inflation expectations
have recently risen back to within the target band and the current account surplus has
rebounded strongly on the back of reviving exports. Against this background, the Bank of Israel
discontinued its pre-announced FX interventions and government bond purchases in Summer
2009, and began raising policy rates for September 2009, to 1.25 percent for January 2010.
And on the fiscal side, the authorities reduced the VAT rate by half a percentage point to 16
percent from end-December, bringing forward by one year half of the cut that had been planned
for end-2010.
Executive Board Assessment
Directors observed that the resilience of the Israeli economy during the global crisis reflected
strong policy responses, robust fundamentals, prudent bank supervision, public debt reduction,
and structural reforms in recent years.
Directors cautioned, however, that the global outlook remains highly uncertain, and the slower
medium-term global growth would have adverse implications for Israel’s potential growth rate.
They therefore agreed that long-term anchors in Israel’s policy frameworks should be
strengthened to allow a flexible response of policies to short-term developments and to
stimulate long-term supply. Directors welcomed the various steps that have been taken in this
direction--including the adoption of a declining target path for fiscal deficits, the recent tightening
of the monetary stance, steps towards adoption of the new Law for the Bank of Israel, and
various actions to bolster prudential supervision.
At the same time, Directors recognized that challenges remain. The credibility of the new deficit
ceiling rules has yet to be fully established. Public debt is high and is expected to rise in the
near term before resuming its downward track. Although economic growth has resumed
relatively early, upward pressures on the shekel could pose new risks. In this light, Directors

3
underscored that further efforts are needed to address downside risks—notably, moderation in
the forthcoming public sector wage settlements, including as a signal to private sector
settlements.
Directors noted the importance of strengthening the fiscal framework. Steps to reconcile
aggregate spending ceilings with the sum of undertakings on specific programs should be a
priority. A reform of the fiscal rules—with the adoption of a framework anchored by explicit
medium-term debt targets—would help establish the priority assigned to debt reduction and
allow fiscal flexibility in the short term. This should be accompanied by multi-year spending
ceilings with appropriate countercyclical properties. Strengthened medium-term budget planning
would reinforce credibility and improve spending efficiency.
Given economic recovery and the history of high inflation, Directors welcomed the steps taken
to begin withdrawal from unconventional monetary policy measures—including preprogrammed
foreign exchange intervention—and to increase interest rates. They noted the authorities’
commitment to avoid targeting specific levels of the exchange rate. Discretionary interventions
should be formally terminated, for all but the most exceptional market circumstances, once the
policy interest rate is well above its effective floor on a sustained basis. Directors urged an early
completion of all steps to adopt the Bank of Israel Law.
While noting that the Israeli banking system has weathered the crisis well, Directors saw scope
for a further strengthening of the banking prudential framework. Comprehensive banking stress
tests, regular publication of a financial stability report by the Bank of Israel, and closer
coordination among various regulators would all strengthen transparency and stability. Some
Directors recommended consideration of a formal deposit insurance scheme.
Directors welcomed the priority attached by the authorities to effective supervision of the nonbanking sector, noting a need to strengthen the budget, staff, and autonomy of the non-bank
regulators. In this context, separation of the pension and insurance regulator from the Ministry
of Finance would reflect international best practice. Regular publication of risk analyses by nonbank regulators was also encouraged.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2009 Article IV Consultation with Israel is also available

4
Israel: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2005−10
(Percent change, unless otherwise indicated)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009 1/

2010 1/

4.8
3.5
1.6
13.8
4.0
3.5
4.3
5.1

4.1
4.3
3.0
5.2
11.3
3.3
6.0
5.3

6.2
6.3
3.4
10.1
15.3
11.9
9.3
5.2

2.8
3.6
2.1
1.4
4.4
2.4
5.2
4.0

-1.1
1.2
1.8
-11.7
-3.3
-13.7
-10.8
0.1

2.8
2.3
1.8
6.0
4.0
6.3
5.4
2.5

Labor market indicators
Unemployment rate (percent)
Real wages 2/

9.0
1.0

8.4
1.3

7.3
1.7

6.2
-0.7

7.8
-2.6

7.4
…

Prices
CPI (end period)
CPI (period average)
CPI (excluding housing and energy, end period)

2.4
1.4
0.7

-0.1
2.1
1.9

3.4
0.5
1.3

3.8
4.6
4.5

2.6
3.6
…

2.1
2.3
…

Interest rates (average, percent): BOI policy rate 3/

3.7

5.1

3.9

3.7

0.8

…

Money and credit (period average)
Private sector credit 4/
Narrow money (M1) 5/
Broad money (M3) 4/

7.1
17.5
7.9

4.3
13.7
7.4

6.7
15.3
12.9

9.2
14.1
8.0

1.2
55.2
15.2

…
…
…

Public finance (percent of GDP)
Central government revenue
Central government expenditure
Central government balance 6/
General government balance 7/
General government debt

35.1
37.0
-1.9
-4.8
93.5

35.2
36.2
-1.0
-1.8
84.4

35.4
35.4
0.0
-0.8
78.1

31.6
33.8
-2.2
-2.8
76.8

29.1
34.2
-5.1
-5.7
79.9

29.8
33.9
-4.1
-4.7
80.9

Balance of payments
Trade balance (percent of GDP)
Current account (percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment (percent of GDP)
Foreign reserves (end period, billions of U.S. dollars) 3/

-3.1
3.1
3.2
28.3

-2.6
5.0
10.1
29.4

-3.4
2.8
5.4
28.8

-3.6
1.0
4.8
42.7

-1.9
3.3
2.3
61.5

-2.2
2.0
2.2
…

-0.7
-2.0
100.0

0.4
0.0
98.6

3.9
1.8
96.4

11.4
12.3
97.9

-5.7
-2.5
…

…
…
…

National accounts indicators (constant prices)
Domestic demand
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross capital formation
Fixed capital formation
Imports of goods and services
Exports of goods and services
Real GDP

Exchange rate and terms of trade indices
NEER (period average) 5/
REER (period average) 5/
Terms of trade (index, 2000=100)

Sources: Bank of Israel, Annual Report; Central Bureau of Statistics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff estimates
and projections.
1/ IMF staff projections.
2/ Data for 2009 as of August.
3/ Data for 2009 as of November.
4/ Data for 2009 as of September.
5/ Data for 2009 as of October.
6/ National definition, cash basis.
7/ International definition, accrual basis. On the difference between central and general government deficits during 2003–06: much of it
is accounted for by the difference between accrual and cash bases accounting. On the latter, the key factor is the CPI indexation
component that is paid on all NIS debt when it matures and is recorded below the line in the central government balance, but above the
line in the general government balance when it accrues.

Statement by Age Bakker, Executive Director for Israel and
Yoav Friedmann, Senior Advisor to Executive Director
January 15, 2010
At the outset, my authorities would like to express their appreciation for management and
staff’s efforts to have Israel’s Article IV Board discussion only one month after the end of the
mission. This ensures a relevant discussion by the Board and reduces staff’s need to
constantly update the report. Prompt release of the report to the public will also increase the
attention and weight it receives in the public domain. My authorities would also like to thank
staff for very interesting, candid and fruitful discussions. Staff’s suggestions and
recommendations are always taken seriously in Jerusalem.
Israel’s Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook
Given the deep global recession, its effect on external demand, and concerns about a possible
sharp reduction in domestic demand, Israel’s economic performance in 2009 was impressive.
Growth was positive, the fiscal deficit was contained, the financial sector remained sound
and resilient, and the current account surplus has widened substantially.
Many factors contributed to Israel’s relatively good economic performance in 2009. While
it is difficult to measure their weight, the main contributors to the economy’s resilience are:
fiscal discipline during the high growth years of 2004–07, strong and conservative banking
supervision, strong external position, and appropriate fiscal and monetary policy responses to
the crisis.
The flexibility shown by Israel’s labor market was another factor facilitating the absorption
of the external shock. In the business sector, real wages per employee post and average hours
worked weekly per employee went down by 3.1 percent and 2.9 percent respectively.1 That
said, an important ingredient in enhancing future growth is raising the labor participation
rate, which was on an increasing trajectory in recent years but is still low compared to OECD
countries.
The BoI revised upwards this week its GDP growth projection for 2010 by one percentage
point to 3.5 percent. The revision reflects positive new information regarding economic
activity in the second half of 2009, both globally and in Israel, and in light of improved
forecasts of global growth and world trade in 2010. The main downward risk to this
projection is a slower recovery in the global economy than that on which the forecast is
based.
Fiscal Policy
A new government was formed in Israel in April 2009, following the resignation of the
former PM in September 2008 and elections in February 2009. The new government’s
strategy to cope with the recession was based on two main elements. First, automatic
stabilizers were allowed to fully operate. The reduction in the public debt-to-GDP ratio and
1

First three quarters of 2009 compared with the same period in 2008.

2
the credibility accumulated by the fiscal authorities in the years 2003–08 allowed the
government to abandon the preannounced one percent of GDP fiscal deficit target, and plan
for a 6 percent deficit for 2009. Second, the government focused on reducing short and
medium-term uncertainties and setting the base for long-term enhanced growth. A seven-year
plan to reduce income tax and corporate tax, as well as a declining trend of fiscal deficit
ceilings for the same period was adopted as part of the Budget Law. Uncertainty regarding
fiscal operations was reduced by passing a two-year budget for the years 2009 and 2010. The
underlying assumption behind these measures is that setting out the government’s medium
and long-term programs would have positive short-term effects on the economy and
encourage early new investments. In this regard, the authorities are considering moving to a
two-year budget framework, as routine. In order to finance the short-term increase in
expenditure, reflecting a relatively mild fiscal discretionary stimulus, the government decided
to increase VAT temporarily by one percentage point and increase excise tax rates on
cigarettes and gasoline. At the beginning of 2010 VAT was reduced by 0.5 percentage points.
The authorities believe that their programs to mitigate the tight credit conditions and revive
the corporate bond market contributed to the recovery of the financial markets. Although not
utilized to any great extent, they served as a signal that the government would be in the
market if conditions warranted. As all of these programs were carefully designed and
targeted to address specific vulnerabilities, and as they resulted from an exceptional global
financial crisis, the authorities do not expect them to give rise to moral hazard difficulties.
Going forward, reducing the public debt-to-GDP ratio is a main goal in the government’s
economic agenda, although currently it is not explicitly part of the fiscal rule. Staff’s
recommendation to adopt an interim target of 70 percent debt-to-GDP ratio by the middle of
the coming decade and a target of 60 percent by 2020 clearly has merits and will be taken
into careful consideration as the process of revising the current rule unfolds. Regarding the
details on how to achieve these targets, the authorities’ view is that a somewhat stricter rule
than the one proposed by staff would better fit the Israeli economy. The authorities believe
that deviating from a rule in case of an extreme external shock, as occurred in 2007 after the
Second Lebanese War and during the current year, would not harm fiscal credibility.
While the total public debt as a percent of GDP is relatively high, its maturity structure and
currency denomination is comfortable, with an average time to maturity of 6.4 years and
about 80 percent denominated in domestic currency. In March, as a revival of the
international sovereign bond market emerged, Israel tapped the market raising US$1.5 billion
for ten years. This was Israel’s largest sovereign bond issue to date.
Monetary Policy
Monetary policy has played a crucial role in supporting the real economy throughout the
downturn and now that economic activity begins its recovery. Three monetary tools were
used to deliver a satisfactory expansionary monetary policy during the year. First, the interest
rate was reduced sharply from 4.25 percent in September 2008 to 0.5 percent in April 2009,
mitigating the economic downturn through traditional monetary channels. Second, the BoI
continued its daily purchase of US$100 million. Third, the BoI purchased a preannounced

3
daily amount of NIS 200 million of government bonds, a policy it had adopted to lower
medium and long-term interest rates.
The BoI began to unwind its exceptionally expansionary monetary policy during the third
quarter of 2009, as it became clear that a reversal of the policy was necessary to strike the
right balance between the need to moderate inflation and the need to continue to support the
real economy. In August 2009 the preannounced daily purchase of foreign currency was
replaced by a discretionary intervention policy. The BoI announced that it would intervene
only in the event of unusual movements in the exchange rate inconsistent with underlying
economic conditions. The daily purchases of government bonds were also stopped in August,
as the total amounts purchased reached the preannounced target. In September, the Bank
raised its interest rate for the first time in more than a year.
In light of the current inflation environment in Israel which is in the upper part of the price
stability range, and against the background of growth that is increasingly more firmly based,
the BoI increased its policy rate by a total of 75 basis points since it began increasing its
policy rate in September. This is part of a gradual process of returning the interest rate to a
"normal" level. Going forward, the pace of increases in the policy rate will be determined in
accordance with the degree of firmness of growth, both global and in Israel, the inflation
environment, and the rate at which the major central banks increase their interest rates.
Financial stability considerations, like the evolution of asset prices, including housing prices,
would also be taken into account as part of the lessons of the crisis.
The Financial Sector
Israel's banking system is conservative, tightly regulated and closely monitored, all of which
helped the system remain sound and resilient throughout the global financial crisis. The
banks are well capitalized and profitable. As the Israeli banks are net lenders to foreign banks
abroad, the disappearance of international inter-bank lending did not much affect the system.
The existing prudential quantitative restrictions on various exposures coupled with the
scrutiny of enhanced supervision provided robust means of limiting risk and sheltered the
banks from large losses during the crisis. The prompt demand for enhanced transparency of
banks' exposures to various foreign markets' exotic products and institutions, as well as the
authorities' urging banks to deal promptly with more risky mortgage-backed securities,
reduced the ambiguity about the quality of their assets and possible losses. Together with the
clear pronouncement by the authorities that public deposits are safe, this increased public
confidence in the banks.
A prominent step reflecting the banking supervision’s forward looking approach was its
demand in 2007 (under the Basel I regime), when economic activity was at a peak, that banks
increase their capital adequacy ratios (CAR) to 12 percent. The Supervisor was resolute that
banks achieve this target by the end of 2009 in spite of the developing crisis. By September
2009 all banks achieved this goal without the need to use government guarantees that were
offered to them.

4
Banks’ internal limits on loan-to-value (LTV) in mortgage loans and a lack of securitization
helped to prevent a property price bubble of proportions similar to those seen in other
developed countries, and reduced the risk of contagion through negative developments in the
real estate sector. However, the deterioration of highly-leveraged borrowers operating in the
construction industry abroad and a low domestic GDP growth rate adversely affected the
quality of loan portfolios of most banks – since December 2007 problem loans to total loans
rose by 1-2 percentage points in the five major banking groups, amounting to 7-9 percent of
total loans in the balance sheet, and loan-loss provision rose by 0.5 percentage point to 0.7
percent of total loans. Nevertheless, stress tests conducted by the authorities show that banks
would be resilient to a much more severe shock.
The CMISD (Capital Markets, Insurance and Savings Division), which supervises the
insurance companies, provident funds and pension funds in Israel, increased its monitoring
and oversight during the global financial crisis. It found that no institutional bodies in Israel
were in financial difficulties as a result of the crisis. Also, the recent increase by around 50%
in the minimum capital requirement (MCR) resulted in the overall impact being minor.
Currently, the level of capital of insurance companies in Israel is the highest ever. In
addition, the losses to Israeli long-term savers were only temporary. During the year 2009,
the long-term savings market in Israel covered the losses arising from the global crisis investment returns from January 2008 to November 2009 of life insurance policies, provident
funds, and new pension funds were 7.4, 5.2, and 11.9 percent, respectively.
Effective supervision of non-banks is seen as a priority by the authorities. Hence, the
authorities will learn the global lessons of the crisis before determining what change is
needed, if any, in the supervision structure of the financial sector in Israel. Meanwhile, key
steps to strengthen the current non-bank regulators are underway.

