March 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/66

© 2011 International Monetary Fund

February 17, 2011
February 1, 2011

March 4, 2011
February 17, 2011
2011
January 29, 2001

Republic of Belarus: 2011 Article IV Consultation—Staff Report; Staff Supplement;
and Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the 2011 Article IV consultation with Belarus, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the 2011 Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on February 2, 2011, with the officials of Belarus on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on February 17, 2011. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.



A staff supplement (Informational Annex) of February 17, 2011 providing background
information.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its March 4, 2011 discussion of the staff report that concluded the
Article IV consultation.

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and Proposal for Post-Program Monitoring
Prepared by the European Department in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by Juha Kähkönen and James Roaf
February 17, 2011
Executive Summary
Background. For a decade before the crisis, Belarus’s economy grew rapidly, but remained
vulnerable to external shocks. Belarus avoided output loss during the crisis and successfully
completed a Fund-supported program in March 2010. Since then it has resumed fast growth, but at the
cost of a large current account deficit which has put pressure on reserves.
Article IV discussions. The discussions were focused on policies required for attaining external
sustainability, structural reforms needed to improve long-term potential, and options for rebalancing
sources of growth. Staff and the authorities agreed on the broad medium-term objectives including
external stability, robust growth based on improved competitiveness, a higher share of the private
sector, and less overall government intervention. However, views on how to attain these objectives
differed. The authorities considered that their plan to modernize the economy, embodied in the
Program for Social and Economic Development for 2011-15, could reduce the current account deficit
over the medium term, while short-term financing needs could be met by external borrowing, FDI and
asset sales. Staff stressed the urgency of macroeconomic adjustment to bring down the current account
deficit, especially in view of the now precarious reserves position, and of market-oriented structural
reform to promote sustainable growth. Staff proposed the following policies:


Strengthening macroeconomic policies to attain external sustainability. Policies should
include fiscal and monetary tightening, cuts in lending under government programs, and
greater use of exchange rate flexibility.



Improving long-term growth potential through structural reform and rebalancing investment,
which at present is skewed towards the construction sector.



Reducing the tax burden and curbing subsidies.



Reforming the banking sector to improve financial intermediation and free the commercial
banks from quasi-fiscal activity.

Post-Program Monitoring. As outstanding credit exceeds 200 percent of quota and there is no Fund
arrangement in place the staff recommends initiating post-program monitoring.

2
Contents

Page

I. A Time of Uncertainty ............................................................................................................3
II. The Recent History................................................................................................................3
III. Outlook and Immediate Challenges .....................................................................................7
IV. Key Challenges Beyond The Short Term: What Should Belarus’s
Economy Look Like in 2015?....................................................................................................9
A. Strengthening Policies to Attain External Sustainability ..........................................9
B. Improving Long-Term Growth Potential through Structural Reforms
and Productivity-Enhancing Investment ......................................................................12
C. Reducing the Fiscal Burden and Curbing Expensive Subsidy Programs................13
D. Reforming the Banking Sector to Improve Financial Intermediation.....................13
V. Relationship with the Fund .................................................................................................14
VI. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................15
Boxes
1. Common Economic Area: Main Goals and Current Status ...........................................17
2. Banking System Stress Tests .........................................................................................18
3. Program for Social and Economic Development of Belarus in 2011-15.......................19
4. Exchange Rate Assessment............................................................................................20
Figures
1. Performance Among Peers, 2002-09 .............................................................................22
2. Output Developments, 2001-10 .....................................................................................23
3. Inflation Developments, 2008-10 ..................................................................................24
4. External Developments, 2005-11...................................................................................25
5. Monetary Developments, 2008-11.................................................................................26
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators (Baseline scenario), 2008-16 .........................................27
2. Balance of Payments, 2008-16 ......................................................................................28
3. Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2008-16 ....................................................................30
4. Monetary Authorities’ Accounts, 2008-16 ....................................................................32
5. Monetary Survey, 2008-16 ............................................................................................33
6. Banking Sector Soundness Indicators, 2006-10 ............................................................34
7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2006-10 ...............................................................35
8. Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2009-16............................................................................36
Appendixes
I. Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006-16 .............................................................................37

3
I. A TIME OF UNCERTAINTY
1.
This is a time of political and economic uncertainty for Belarus. President
Lukashenko won re-election on December 19. However, reflecting concerns about the
conduct of the election and the post-election detention of opposition leaders and supporters,
the EU and U.S. have intensified sanctions against Belarus leaders and companies.
Agreement has been reached on a Common Economic Area between Belarus, Kazakhstan
and Russia, and on new arrangements for importing oil from which Belarus will benefit.
Economic policies for the period ahead are supposed to be based on the Program for Social
and Economic Development for 2011-15 (the "five-year plan") approved by the allBelarusian People’s Congress.1 However, the five-year plan contains multiple and
inconsistent objectives, and the authorities must decide what priority to give them. Belarus
must also choose between a model based on central planning and one based on free
markets—the five-year plan embraces elements of both. More immediately, the authorities
must address pressing macroeconomic imbalances created by loose pre-election polices,
which are now putting heavy pressure on reserves.
2.
This report proposes policies for 2011 and a policy direction for the next five
years that would direct Belarus toward prosperity and stability. The staff proposes
policies which will promote sustainable growth by liberalizing the economy and rebalancing
investment to raise potential growth, and by reducing the size of government and increasing
resources available to the private sector through banks. But external stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and the need for adjustment is now urgent. The staff
therefore proposes policies that will bring down the current account deficit by containing
domestic demand and by greater use of exchange rate flexibility.
II. THE RECENT HISTORY
3.
For a decade before the crisis Belarus's economy grew rapidly, but its
vulnerability to external shocks has also increased (Figures 1-5). An average annual
growth rate of about 7½ percent consistently surprised observers given continued dominance
of the economy by state-owned banks and enterprises (only about 30 percent of GDP comes
from the private sector). The rapid growth is best explained by an educated and disciplined
workforce and by consistently high rates of investment, made possible by large annual
subsidies on energy imports and direct financial support from Russia, which eased the
balance of payments constraint on Belarus's growth. External vulnerability was always the
weakness of the Belarus growth model. Throughout the past decade growing exports were
offset by imports, keeping the current account deficit high and reserves low. The crisis
1

The All-Belarusian People’s Congress is a meeting of the Belarusian government with representatives of the
corporate sector, agriculture and trade unions customarily held before the Presidential elections in Belarus. The
five-year plan may still be revised by the President even after approval by the Congress.

4
in 2008-09 led to a sharp drop in exports, and was exacerbated by reduced subsidies on oil
and gas exported by Russia to Belarus.
4.
Belarus made progress under the Fund-supported program and resumed fast
broad-based growth in 2010, but the current account deficit remains high and reserves
low. Through exchange rate depreciation coupled with strong budgetary policies and wage
restraint during the SBA which expired in March 2010, Belarus avoided loss of output,
contained inflation, and increased gross reserves.2 Belarus achieved growth of about
7½ percent in 2010. The twelve-month CPI inflation was 9.9 percent in December, reflecting
strong domestic demand and
increasing food prices due to the
drought in Russia. The current
account deficit was 13 percent of
GDP in 2009 and is estimated at
16 percent of GDP in 2010. A
debut Eurobond ($1 billion)
issuance was more than offset by
heavy intervention—gross
reserves stood at $5 billion at endDecember (1.4 months of
imports), whereas net reserves fell
by almost $6 billion in 2010.
5.
A sharp widening of the current account deficit is partially explained by a strong
external energy shock, now partly reversed. An oil supply arrangement agreed in
January 2010 reduced implicit subsidies from Russia, through a reduction of the discount
compared to the Urals oil price from about 30 percent to about 15 percent.3 In addition, as a
result of a gradual transition towards market prices, the price of imported natural gas has
nearly quadrupled since 2006. As a result, the energy trade balance deteriorated from near
balance in 2006 to a deficit of 6.9 percent of GDP in 2009 and further to an estimated
10 percent of GDP in 2010. The new agreement with Russia on the regime for oil imports
reached in December 2010 will improve the energy balance (staff estimates by about
$1.3 billion or 2 percent of GDP) but does not fundamentally change the outlook (Box 1).

2

The 15-month, $3.5 billion SBA expired in March 2010. All the reviews were completed. Developments under
the program are also assessed in an Ex-Post Evaluation of the SBA, which has been circulated separately.

3

Belarus responded with structural changes in the oil refining industry and attempts to diversify oil supplies,
importing about 2 million tons of oil from other sources (notably Venezuela) in 2010. According to available
trade statistics, the average price for these imports has been above the price of oil imported from Russia with
full duty.

5
6.
Macroeconomic policies also played a significant role in fueling the current
account deficit. Following the expiration of the program the authorities focused on
increasing growth and on honoring the President's pledge to increase average wages in the
economy to $500 a month by the end of 2010. Problems in controlling government-supported
lending for housing, agriculture and other priority sectors had already been evident during the
program, and from April 2010 onward such lending increased sharply, resulting in an
increase in net lending under government programs (LGP) estimated at four times the annual
limit agreed during the program. Twelve-month credit growth was 38 percent in
December 2010, compared with 28 percent a year ago. The government increased the first
grade budget sector wage by a cumulative 50 percent in 2010 including a 30 percent increase
in November, and the Republican budget deficit limit was increased to 3 percent of GDP.
The National Bank of the Republic of Belarus (NBRB) reduced policy interest rates and
made only limited use of the exchange rate flexibility available to it in the ±10 percent band
during 2010. From January 1, 2011, the NBRB recentered the band at its end-2010 level and
narrowed it to ±8 percent.
7.
The authorities have financed the deficit largely through foreign currency
borrowing in international markets and from commercial banks. They placed a debut
Eurobond ($1 billion) in the international markets, issued bonds on the Russian market
(equivalent to about $250 million) in 2010 and accessed the Eurobond market again in
January 2011 ($800 million). More troublingly, during the last quarter of 2010 the NBRB
borrowed extensively in foreign exchange from domestic commercial banks in exchange for
rubel liquidity at low interest rates via so-called “deposit exchanges”. During all of 2010, the
stock of such borrowing amounted to some $3.8 billion, with $2.3 billion having been
accumulated in the final quarter of the year.

6

8.
The NBRB tightened monetary policy somewhat and allowed the rubel to
depreciate against the currency basket in early 2011. The NBRB has limited liquidity
support to banks, primarily by curtailing non-market transactions, leading to a 400 basis
points increase in interbank lending interest rates since end-December. However, this has yet
to translate into any significant change in deposit or lending rates. The rubel has depreciated
by 2½ percent against the currency basket since end-December, but remains broadly
unchanged against the U.S. dollar.
9.
The official financial soundness indicators appear adequate (Box 2), but NBRB
foreign exchange borrowing from banks poses serious risks for them. The system-wide
capital adequacy ratio was reported at 20.5 percent at end-December 2010 following
recapitalization of major state-owned banks by 1.3 percent of GDP in 2010. However, LGP
continues to put pressure on state-owned banks’ liquidity, and the NBRB increased its claims
on banks by nearly 12 percent of GDP in 2010. Banks’ NPL ratio was reported at 3.5 percent,
but compliance with the new asset classification standard adopted in 2010 has yet to be
verified through on-site inspections, which have not been carried out at major banks
since 2008. The rapid growth of bank credit in 2010 is also a source of concern: rapid credit

7
growth has been found to be a leading indicator of a banking crisis in other countries and
could threaten asset quality in Belarusian banks. With regard to NBRB foreign currency
borrowing from commercial banks, although the NBRB bears the exchange rate risk, the high
volume of this borrowing exposes the banks to serious risks, if the NBRB allows reserves to
run down.
10.
There have been some promising initiatives on structural reform but their
implementation has lagged. The approval of amendments to the Privatization Law and the
decree on the National Investment and Privatization Agency (NIPA) improved the legal and
institutional frameworks for privatization. Presidential Directive “On development of
entrepreneurial initiative and the promotion of business activities in the Republic of Belarus”
(President’s Directive) approved in late December, if implemented, would significantly
reduce state control over the economy, facilitate private sector development and make
Belarus more attractive for investors. The authorities continued price liberalization, as
indicated by the elimination of restrictions on setting trade margins, except for socially
important goods and those produced by monopolies. The authorities’ decision to set up a
Development Bank (essentially a renamed Specialized Financial Agency (SFA)) could make
financing of LGPs more transparent, but many details remain to be settled. The NIPA has not
been set up and the head of the agency has not yet been selected. The selection of state
companies which could be offered for privatization and would be attractive for investors has
also not been completed, while those companies which were offered by the authorities for
privatization failed to generate investors’ interest.
III. OUTLOOK AND IMMEDIATE CHALLENGES
11.
The staff believes that the authorities’ policies are based on overly optimistic
plans and are insufficiently tight. The authorities believe that through a combination of
external financing, higher than expected privatization proceeds, and regaining preferential
prices for oil in the framework of the CEA they can finance deficits while they increase
exports and grow their way out of debt problems. This strategy is reflected in the latest draft
five-year plan (Box 3) as well as in the authorities’ plans for 2011: the budget deficit was
relaxed to 3 percent of GDP and net LGP is expected to remain at about 6 percent of GDP.
The staff believes that the assumptions in the five-year plan are highly optimistic, and the
policies proposed for 2011 are too loose. If substantial external financing is available, the
authorities’ policies could succeed in the short term—possibly lifting output growth above
potential—but Belarus cannot run large current account deficits indefinitely.4

4

At the time of the 2009 Article IV consultation, Belarus’s medium-term potential growth rate was estimated at
5-6 percent (IMF country Report 10/16). A substantial external terms of trade shock (increase in the prices on
oil and natural gas) observed since the last Article IV consultation is likely to reduce Belarus’s potential growth
rate to below 5 percent via its effect on total factor productivity.

8
12.
The baseline projections, which reveal unsustainably large financing gaps over
the medium term, illustrate the staff’s views of the effect of expansionary policies in the
absence of significant structural reform. The estimated output growth rate in 2011 is high
at about 7 percent, nearly closing the output gap opened up during the crisis, but thereafter
Belarus is not able to maintain pre-crisis growth rates without adjustment and structural
reform. The baseline projections point to sizeable current account deficits, a decline in
identified financing (despite the $800 million Eurobond issue in January and an expected
return of FDI inflows to their pre-crisis levels) and, therefore, large financing gaps in 2011
and over the medium term. Debt sustainability analyses (Appendix I) suggest increasing
dependence on largely unidentified external financing and a debt path that could eventually
become unsustainable. In the absence of significant policy tightening that would lower the
current account deficit, gross external debt is expected to reach 75 percent of GDP and public
debt to rise to 29 percent in 2016. Financing gaps could be filled by further borrowing or
larger than expected FDI inflows over the medium term. Reflecting a projected increase in
the share of market-based financing, the average cost of financing is expected to increase
from its current low level. This strategy poses significant risks—pressures in European bond
markets could reduce availability and increase the cost of external market financing for
Belarus further. The authorities broadly agreed with the analysis, but they believe that
financing gaps can be filled partly through asset sales, thus reducing accumulation of debt,
and that export promotion policies will bring down the current account deficit over the
medium term.
13.
The staff highlighted the risk that expansionary policies cannot be sustained
even in the short term, and hence there is an urgent need for adjustment. If Belarus
loses its access to financing, the reserves could be depleted faster than expected. A loss of
reserves could lead to the loss of control over the exchange rate and initiate a destabilizing
spiral of depreciation and inflation, expose the banking system to risks (especially given the
high foreign currency exposure of banks to the NBRB) and disrupt production. To limit the
immediate risks the staff recommended tightening fiscal and monetary policies, allowing the
exchange rate to depreciate to the bottom of the band, and discontinuing provision of
liquidity to banks at non-market terms. The NBRB noted that market purchases of foreign
exchange by businesses and households had been lower in January than in December, and
therefore concluded that there was no urgent need for a change in policies. The staff stressed
the urgency of discontinuing NBRB foreign currency borrowing from commercial banks and
bringing reserves up to a more comfortable level by macroeconomic adjustment. The NBRB
agreed, and said they would not increase the stock of such borrowing at end-2011, though
they might increase borrowing within the year. The staff also recommended that the NBRB
refrains from using administrative measures to limit demand for foreign exchange, noting
that such measures could distort foreign exchange markets and could lead to exchange

9
restrictions or multiple currency practices. The authorities said that they would be careful not
to interfere with importers’ ability to purchase foreign exchange.5
IV. KEY CHALLENGES BEYOND THE SHORT TERM: WHAT SHOULD BELARUS’S
ECONOMY LOOK LIKE IN 2015?
14.
Discussions on the medium-term outlook and objectives focused on policies
required to attain external sustainability, structural reforms needed to improve
potential growth, and measures to rebalance growth. Staff and the authorities agreed on
the broad medium-term objectives for the economy: (i) external sustainability manifested by
a low current account deficit, a lower level of external debt, and a higher reserve cushion, (ii)
robust growth based on improved competitiveness, (iii) a much higher share of the private
sector in the economy, supported by a steady increase of FDI and less overall government
intervention. There was also some common ground on structural reforms to increase the role
of the private sector. However, the authorities also thought that increasing investment to
promote exports and import substitution were needed to bring down the current account
deficit. Staff pointed out the dangers of such directed investment, and suggested that the best
means of raising potential growth (by 1-2 percent) would be to improve the environment for
private businesses. Staff also underscored the need for urgent macroeconomic adjustment to
accompany structural reforms. Staff’s views—elaborated further in selected economic issues
papers accompanying this report—and the authorities’ responses are summarized below.
A. Strengthening Policies to Attain External Sustainability
15.
Macroeconomic policy adjustment is needed to reduce the current account
deficit and reduce the financing gaps present in the baseline scenario. The gas price
increase expected in 2011 and relaxation of macroeconomic policies since the end of the
program have led to an overvaluation of the REER by 12-16 percent, as estimated by external
sustainability and macro balance approaches (Box 4). Staff considered that over the medium
term the current account deficit should be lowered to some 3½ percent of GDP, the reserves
cushion should be increased to 3-4 months of imports, and external debt should be placed on
a sustainable path. The main choice is between an adjustment strategy based on substantial
exchange rate depreciation with appropriate supporting policies and a strategy based on
substantial tightening of domestic demand, with less need for depreciation. These scenarios
reduce but do not eliminate the financing gaps despite somewhat higher FDI inflows over

5

The NBRB recently introduced administrative measures with a purpose of reducing demand for foreign
exchange. They include a ban on obtaining foreign exchange for advance import payments through loans from
domestic banks and introduction of a 2-percent surcharge on forex trades in the stock exchange. The NBRB is
also considering introducing a number of other measures.

10
2012-16. Both of these strategies include structural reform as discussed in the subsequent
sections, which increase Belarus’ potential growth over the medium term.


An adjustment scenario based mainly on exchange rate flexibility (adjustment
scenario 1). This scenario emphasizes exchange rate flexibility, resulting in a sizeable
depreciation of the REER in 2011 and 2012, which increases net export contribution
to GDP in 2011, 2012 and also 2013 owing to the assumed lagged effect. Tightening
of domestic demand policies is also expected to make a significant contribution
towards eliminating the REER misalignment: the augmented general government
deficit should be tightened from 4.3 percent of GDP in 2010 (including bank
recapitalization and payments on government guaranteed debt in the amount of
2.6 percent of GDP) to a balanced budget in 2011, through freezing nominal wages
and strictly implementing government plans regarding subsides, capital expenditure
and intermediate consumption. Net LGP in 2011 should be limited to 3½ percent of
GDP (compared to about 6 percent of GDP in 2010). To improve the effectiveness of
monetary policy, provision of liquidity to banks at non-market terms should be
discontinued. Finally, the NBRB needs to keep interest rates positive in real terms
(and strongly positive for a period) to re-establish confidence in the rubel.



An adjustment scenario based mainly on a substantial adjustment of domestic
demand (adjustment scenario 2). In this alternative scenario, policies are adjusted to
contract real domestic demand by some 3.3 percent in 2011. The fiscal deficit in this
scenario would be similar (reaching a balanced budget in 2011), but the policy
adjustment needed to achieve it would be greater, because the nominal revenue would
be lower and real wages higher. Assumed fiscal policy adjustment includes
significant budget expenditure cuts, which would probably require rescinding part of
the recent wage increase, additional cuts in subsidies and transfers and expenditure on
goods and services, and raising utility tariffs closer to cost recovery levels more
rapidly than currently planned. Tight fiscal policy needs to be supported by
substantial tightening of credit policy: net LGP would need to be limited to some
1½ percent of GDP. Under this scenario, the exchange rate would depreciate
modestly in nominal terms during 2011 using the flexibility provided by the exchange
rate band.

11

16.
The authorities agreed that the current account adjustment is needed urgently
but did not like either of the scenarios. The authorities are aware of the risks that they face,
but believe that through asset sales and external borrowing they can finance the current
account deficit in 2011, and that after that the 5-year plan could deliver external stability and
strong growth without the drastic measures proposed by staff. They stressed the political
difficulty of reversing, even partially, the recent wage increase. Some policy makers
recognized that a more depreciated exchange rate would help restore external balance, but
they were concerned that a devaluation would damage confidence and erode their credibility.
17.
The staff recommended a strategy based on exchange rate flexibility and
eventually inflation targeting, as this best meets both short-term and long-term needs.
In the short term, a devaluation would produce a swift improvement in the current account
deficit without output loss. Over the longer term, Belarus would benefit from moving to a
flexible exchange rate regime supported by inflation targeting. This would make the
economy more resilient in the face of external shocks, and help maintain competitiveness.

12
The authorities accepted the desirability of moving toward inflation targeting, but
underscored the need for significant improvements in macroeconomic management to
normalize the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Staff and the authorities agreed
that significant preparatory work is needed and discussed technical assistance needs in this
area. The requirements for a successful launch of an inflation targeting regime are elaborated
in an accompanying selected issues paper.6
B. Improving Long-Term Growth Potential through Structural Reforms and
Productivity-Enhancing Investment
18.
To facilitate private sector development, improve the business environment and
attract foreign direct investment Belarus will need to make deep structural reforms in
the medium term. Developing a competitive tradable sector would require limiting state
intervention in the economy and enhancing market competition. The authorities shared staff’s
view that the process of phasing out mandatory quantitative targets, including wage and
employment targets, further price liberalization (already begun with World Bank support)
and the simplification of the tax system should continue. Moreover, they believe that small
and medium enterprises would need to become an engine of economic growth in the medium
term. To this end, the President’s Directive envisages measures which would simplify the
regulatory system, guarantee property rights and set up a modern dispute resolution system.
The Directive, if implemented, would also phase out quantitative targets and the unified
wage grading system, eliminate restrictions on trade profit margins, and establish legal
presumptions in favor of entrepreneurs in disputes with state agencies.7 An ambitious
structural reform agenda would help to address structural balance of payments problems and
improve total factor productivity. The authorities agreed that structural reforms are needed
but have not yet made final decisions on what changes should be made.
19.
Resource constraints in the post-crisis era suggest that Belarus needs to shift
investment toward equipment and machinery to strengthen long-term growth potential.
Investment has been a main driver of growth in the decade before the crisis, supported by
abundant external financing and energy subsidies from Russia. But these sources of finance
are now less secure, and recently the government housing program has skewed investment
towards structures, crowding out investment in equipment and machinery that promotes
productivity growth more than other investment due to the embodied technology.8 These
trends should and can be reversed. Tax policy can support investment in equipment and
machinery, including by raising depreciation allowances for such investment to bring them to
levels comparable to those in other countries. The scale of the government housing program
6

See Republic of Belarus—Selected Issues: Inflation Targeting in Belarus—Challenges and Options.

7

The Directive has the legal power of a law.

8

See Republic of Belarus—Selected Issues: Invest to Grow—More Buildings or More Machines?

13
could be brought down to a sustainable level by reducing the targets for housing
construction, scaling down the size of subsidies provided by the housing program, and
relying more on market-based housing finance and construction. The authorities broadly
agreed with the need to rebalance investment away from housing construction, but noted that
it would be difficult to retrain and reorient construction workers. The government has already
planned to introduce tax reform measures—including new depreciation rules—this year to
provide incentives for equipment and machinery investment.
C. Reducing the Fiscal Burden and Curbing Expensive Subsidy Programs
20.
The fiscal burden is a constraint on Belarus’s competitiveness and should be
reduced. At a level of 44 per cent of GDP in 2010 and subject to significant pressures going
forward due to rapid population aging9, the general government expenditure level is not
exceptionally high compared to peers. However, it imposes a relatively high tax burden on
the business sector.10 Tax reform to attract investment and foster economic growth should be
accompanied by reforms on the spending side in order not to widen the budget deficit. In
order to prevent future pension system imbalances, the authorities should consider increasing
the retirement age and limiting growth of pension benefits, as suggested by the recent TA
report on rationalizing expenditures.
21.
There are margins to reduce expenditure, starting from the poorly targeted and
expensive subsidies programs. Belarus spends about 14 percent of GDP in subsidies. They
are meant to reduce the cost of utilities, transportation, housing, and food for the entire
population. Therefore they favor disproportionately heavy consumers, which tend to be
relatively well-off households.11 Staff recommended reductions of housing, agricultural, and
food subsidies, increases in preferential VAT rates, and bringing utilities tariffs close to cost
recovery levels. The authorities acknowledged the need to revisit these programs and are now
planning an increase in utility tariffs by about 30 percent this year. The authorities and staff
agreed that the adjustments should be complemented by expanding the recently established
Targeted Social Assistance program.
D. Reforming the Banking Sector to Improve Financial Intermediation
22.
Transferring LGP to the Development Bank would be a major step in freeing
the NBRB from non-market support to state-owned banks. At present, banks are
9

Based on population projections, the pension system is expected to start running a deficit in 2016.

10

The tax burden on businesses is especially high by international standards: the profit tax rate is 24 percent and
employers’ contribution rate to the Social Protection Fund is 34 percent. Moreover, depreciation allowances
need to be revised and there is no provision to carry forward losses.

11

See Republic of Belarus—Selected Issues: Purpose and Scope of Government Provided Subsidies to
Households.

14
dependent on liquidity support from the NBRB to finance LGP, and the financial system in
general has become a conduit for massive quasi-fiscal activity. The authorities now plan to
create a Development Bank instead of the previously planned SFA, though the functions of
the Development Bank—to take over part of the stock of LGP and eventually all new LGP—
are similar to those of the SFA. Staff reiterated its view that the new institution should be the
sole provider of new LGP, with net lending included in the budget above the line.
23.
Creating a level playing field and competitive environment in the financial sector
will improve allocation of resources. It is crucial that state-owned banks make lending
decisions based on commercial considerations. The staff urged the authorities to renew their
efforts in privatizing major state-owned banks and to improve their corporate governance and
risk management. Development of nonbank financial institutions would offer more choice in
savings and insurance instruments for households and businesses. Removing the monopoly
on mandatory insurance enjoyed by state-owned companies would promote growth in the
insurance sector.
24.
The authorities and staff agreed that improvements in banking supervision are
needed to maintain soundness of the financial system, including in Anti-Money
Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT). The recent IMF
TA mission on banking supervision found that the supervisory approach at the NBRB
remains mostly compliance-based. Staff and the authorities agreed on the need for a
peripatetic advisor to help the NBRB in strengthening banking supervision by shifting to
risk-based framework and discussed TA options in this area. Staff also recommended
excluding banking supervision from the Presidential Decree #510 to allow supervisors
schedule bank examinations as they deem necessary.12
V. RELATIONSHIP WITH THE FUND
25.
A review of SBA performance was conducted in the framework of Ex Post
Evaluation of Exceptional Access (EPE). The review concluded that the program was
generally successful, and most program conditions were met. It notes that problems
experienced under the program reflected external shocks but also rapid directed lending, and
warns that the structural reform agenda remains largely unfinished and that macroeconomic
vulnerabilities remain in the wake of the program. The report highlights the importance of
incorporating fully ownership, including at the highest levels, in program design and
conditionality.
26.
The Fund staff will remain closely engaged with Belarus either in the context of
a potential new program, if the authorities decide to request it, or through post12

The Presidential Decree #510 stipulates that all inspections of an entity must be conducted in one month of
the year and thus limits the freedom of supervisors to schedule onsite inspections.

15
program monitoring. Staff emphasized that any follow-up program would need to focus on
both structural reforms and macroeconomic measures sufficient to produce a sustainable
current account balance and reaching understandings on a set of these policies would be a
prerequisite for such a program. The Extended Fund Facility could be an appropriate
instrument to support strong macroeconomic adjustment and extensive structural reforms. In
the meantime, staff recommends the initiation of post-program monitoring. Belarus’ capacity
to repay remains sufficient, although a large projected increase in external debt and growing
reliance on expensive market-based financing indicate the presence of significant risks.
VI. STAFF APPRAISAL
27.
Belarus made good progress in establishing the conditions for sustainable
growth during the program. Through strong economic policies during the SBA which
expired in March 2010, and with substantial external financial support, especially from the
Fund, Belarus was able to stabilize output, contain inflation, and increase gross reserves. The
current account deficit remained too high (worsened by energy price increases and by overly
expansionary credit policy) but policies adopted under the program gave Belarus the tools to
reduce it, including a more flexible exchange rate system. Progress was made in price
liberalization and in the design of institutional frameworks for financial sector reform and
privatization.
28.
Since March 2010 policies have been loosened to the extent of becoming
unsustainable and jeopardizing external stability. The authorities’ decision to pursue
over-ambitious growth and wage targets in the remainder of 2010 has left Belarus more
vulnerable. They succeeded in increasing growth from 4 percent projected by staff in March
to about 7½ percent, but at the cost of an estimated further increase in the current account
deficit to about 16 percent of GDP. The government wage increase in November 2010
contributed to inflationary pressures and further eroded competitiveness. The five-year plan
promises more of the same: high growth rates to be achieved through credit expansion,
including an ambitious housing construction program which crowds out more productive
investment.
29.
The NBRB’s extensive recourse to foreign currency borrowing from domestic
commercial banks is deeply troubling. This borrowing enabled the NBRB to maintain
gross reserves and avoid an exchange rate crisis in the run up to the December Presidential
election. But the result is that any significant further intervention would bring the level of
gross reserves below the level of the NBRB’s liabilities to domestic commercial banks,
raising questions about the NBRB’s ability to repay.
30.
The authorities need to make quickly some difficult decisions to restore external
stability. The authorities demonstrated in 2009 that they have the capacity to adjust when
they need to. A similar resolve will be needed in 2011 and the coming years to produce a
swift and decisive reduction in the current account deficit and reduce external

16
vulnerability.Fiscal and monetary policy tightening will be needed under any scenario, and
bringing lending under government programs under control remains a priority. There are
different options available to the authorities on the exchange rate: the staff has a strong
preference for using devaluation to reduce the current account deficit quickly with somewhat
less domestic adjustment, especially given the urgent need to build up foreign exchange
reserves. Continued use of exchange rate flexibility and an eventual move to inflation
targeting is also appropriate for a country as subject to external shocks as Belarus.
The decisions that the authorities make on the direction of structural reform
31.
will be important for Belarus’s medium-term prospects. The latest five-year plan contains
many positive elements, including a welcome emphasis on attracting foreign direct
investment, and the President’s Directive can almost be read as a bill of rights for
entrepreneurs. But the five-year plan also contains retrograde elements, including proposals
for import substitution that risk repeating some of the worst mistakes made by other countries
in the past. The staff has laid out an agenda for reform, supported by previous analysis during
the program and new analysis in the selected issues papers. The agenda includes economic
liberalization, a shift in investment strategy, reducing the footprint of the state, and financial
sector development. The authorities are interested in this agenda, but still attach priority to
policy levers that they can control directly, some of which are inconsistent with a more
market-oriented approach.
32.
The Fund can support Belarus through policy advice and, if requested, through
financial support. Since the last Article IV consultation, the dialogue between the staff and
the authorities has been rich, in program reviews, staff visits and jointly organized seminars,
which have also included the World Bank. The authorities have not always taken the Fund’s
advice, but they have always listened to it. This policy advisory role could be enhanced
further under post-program monitoring, which the staff recommends to initiate. Up to now,
the authorities have been generous in their praise of the support that the Fund gave them
during the crisis, but confident that they can proceed without further financial support from
the Fund. However, the staff sees a considerable need for macroeconomic adjustment and for
finance to support that adjustment, and Fund support of a program which included
sufficiently strong macroeconomic adjustment and market-oriented structural reforms would
appear to be warranted.
33.
It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12month cycle.

17
Box 1. Common Economic Area: Main Goals and Current Status
Agreements with Kazakhstan and Russia on establishment of a Common Economic Area
(CEA) were signed in December and ratified by Belarus shortly after that; other CEA
members would ratify them by 2012. The goals of the CEA would be (i) to develop common goods
and services markets and also common capital and labor markets; (ii) to promote structural reforms;
(iii) to ensure greater coordination of fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies and also customs
and tariff policies; and (iv) to create common mechanisms of targeted government support to the
economy. The November 2009 agreement on the Customs Union (CU) completed the first stage of
development of the CEA.
The CU─already in place─is likely to have only limited implications for the Belarusian
economy. The introduction of the common external tariff (CET) on July 1, 2010 did not change
significantly Belarus’s trade regime and therefore would not affect Belarus’s trade with non-member
countries. Almost 75 percent of tariff lines were harmonized with Russia before the CET was
introduced, while sensitive goods remain exempted from a CET. Kazakhstan did not have free trade
with Russia or Belarus before joining the CU, which could affect trade patterns within the union.
The introduction of the CEA could have broader consequences for Belarus. The legal foundation
of the CEA comprises 17 agreements covering various areas, including macroeconomic policy
coordination, energy sector development, labor market issues, capital and financial market
development, competition and industrial policy, government procurement, environmental regulation
and policies, and intellectual property rights. The agreement on macroeconomic policy coordination
envisages close consultations among the members on policy issues and sets indicative targets for the
general government deficit and public debt, which should not exceed 3 percent of GDP and
50 percent of GDP, respectively, while the inflation differential in members’ economies should be
kept within 5 percentage points. The members also agreed to ensure current and capital convertibility
of their currencies and expand their use in settlements. Greater integration with Russia and
Kazakhstan could benefit Belarus by energizing market reforms and economic restructuring and
providing access to a greater market. However, it would also require legal, institutional and policy
harmonization in many areas which could potentially result in some loss of autonomy in policy
making.
Belarus will benefit from lower oil import prices within the CEA. All trade restrictions, including
export duties on oil were eliminated from January 1, 2011, after Belarus ratified CEA agreements.
The agreement allows Belarus to import oil from Russia duty free, implying a discount equivalent to
about half the world price. In exchange, Belarus will transfer export duties imposed on petroleum
products produced from duty-free oil to the Russian budget. Belarus would benefit from the
substantial difference between the discount and the export duties on refined products. However, the
actual gain is likely to be smaller due to a higher premium on the price of oil imports paid to Russian
oil companies: in January this was set at $46 per ton, compared with $11 per ton prior to the new
agreement. The premium may be changed, but if it remains at the January level, the net gain to
Belarus from the oil agreement will be about $1.3 billion in 2011, or 2 percent of GDP.13
13

The gain from the agreement is calculated based on projected 2011 import and export volumes. It is the
difference between the projected oil balance under the new agreement and what the oil balance would have
been with the same export and import volumes under the 2010 export duty regime. The projected gain is net of
the transfer to the Russian budget and the premium taken by Russian oil companies.

18

Box 2. Banking System Stress Tests
According to the stress tests results, the banking system can withstand a variety of single
shocks, but state-owned banks are vulnerable to a combined shock scenario with their
capital adequacy ratio falling below the 8 percent threshold in this case. The banking
system remains sufficiently capitalized under different scenarios, but is most exposed to a
credit risk event (15 percent increase in the share of the problem assets) when the system-wide
capital adequacy ratio drops to 12.7 percent. State-owned banks are particularly vulnerable to a
combined shock scenario (increase in problem assets, depreciation of rubel and increase in
interest rates) with their capital adequacy ratio falling to 7.4 percent, below the required
8 percent in this case.
Support from the NBRB has considerably improved the liquidity position of state-owned
banks compared to late 2009. The extension of maturity on some NBRB refinancing and
opening of long-term credit lines at end-2009 significantly improved liquidity at state-owned
banks. Their current liquidity ratio remains above the 70 percent threshold under stress test
assumptions (20 percent withdrawal in clients' liabilities and 50 percent withdrawal in
nonresidents' liabilities). Foreign and medium-sized banks are more vulnerable to a shock from
withdrawal of nonresidents’ liabilities, with their current liquidity ratios falling below
70 percent in this scenario.

Stress Testing Results
(Based on end-July, 2010 data)

All banks

State
owned
banks

Actual capital adequacy ratio (minimum required 8 percent)

19.8

17.5

Increase in the share of problem assets by 15 percentage points
Depreciation of BYR by 20 percent
Upward shift in the BYR yield curve by 10 percent
5% upward shift in yield curve in foreign currency
Combined scenario for all four events

12.7
19.9
18.4
19.3
10.9

9.5
17.6
16.0
16.9
7.4

235.7

285.7

Foreign
Banks
24.8

Private
Banks
36.1

Largest
Banks
17.2

Medium
banks

Small
banks

23.6

46.1

Stressed Capital Adequacy Ratio

Actual current liquidity ratio (minimum required 70 percent) 1/

19.5
25.1
23.6
24.7
18.5

32.6
36.2
34.8
36.1
31.4

9.4
17.3
15.9
16.6
7.5

18.2
24.1
22.2
23.5
17.1

42.5
46.4
44.5
46.9
41.9

152.0

165.2

277.4

134.5

195.7

114.1
52.6

183.9
118.5

Stressed Current Liquidity Ratio
20 percent withdrawal in clients' liabilities
50 percent withdrawal in nonresidents' liabilities

201.2
73.8

241.7
80.9

130.7
61.0

143.1
130.5

235.5
78.8

Source: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus.
1/ The current liquidity ratio is the ratio of assets with a remaining maturity of less than one month to liabilities with a remaining maturity of
less than one month.

19
Box 3. Program for Social and Economic Development of Belarus in 2011-15
The Program for Social and Economic Development for 2011-15 (the "five-year plan") sets
bold targets and calls for ambitious reforms but does not address macroeconomic
imbalances.
Structural reforms would enhance the economy’s potential, if supported by
macroeconomic adjustment, but some measures could result in waste. Deregulation,
institution building and developing market incentives envisaged under the five-year plan are
critical for private sector development, although macroeconomic instability could undermine
the impact of these reforms. The program of export promotion and import substitution through
economic modernization and developing new industries could result in developing sectors
which are not consistent with Belarus’s comparative advantage.
The plan is not grounded in a coherent macroeconomic framework. Projections of GDP
growth significantly exceed Belarus’s growth potential. Achieving rapid growth through credit
expansion, fiscal easing and boosting household incomes would undermine external
adjustment. The new Prime Minister has proposed that the plan be revised with a view of
strengthening measures which would narrow the current account deficit.
Achieving the social goals of the five-year plan is unlikely and would be costly.
Households’ incomes are set to increase by 70-76 percent over five years in 2015 (Table
below). The five-year plan envisages further significant wage and pension increases and the
continuation of government support for housing construction and a subsidization of household
utility tariffs, albeit at a diminishing rate.

Main Economic Targets for 2011–15
(Change in percent, unless otherwise indicated)
2015 over 2010
Real incomes

70-76

GDP
Labor productivity
Industrial production
Agricultural output
Investment in fixed capital
Sales of innovative goods
(percent of total industrial sales)

62-68
63-68
54-60
39-45
90-97
20-21

Source: Program for Social and Economic
Development of Belarus in 2011–15.

20
Box 4. Exchange Rate Assessment
Past improvements in price and cost competitiveness contributed to a recovery of export
volumes in 2010, but these improvements are likely to have recently leveled off. Following
a significant improvement in early 2009, competitiveness was supported during the crisis
period by relatively moderate inflation and wage growth, as well as gradual depreciation of the
nominal exchange rate. As a result, and boosted further by renewed momentum in potassium
markets, year-on-year growth in non-energy export volume turned positive and increased
significantly in 2010. However, several factors, including large wage increases and loose
macroeconomic policies fueling future inflation towards the end of 2010, are likely to weigh on
competitiveness looking forward.

The current account deficit remains persistently high and external vulnerabilities are on
the rise. The current account deficit increased further during the crisis period reflecting
increases in energy prices and macroeconomic policies aimed at boosting domestic demand. As
a result, and despite more dynamic exports, goods trade continues to show a large deficit.
Recent intensification in vulnerabilities is reflected in falling international reserves despite
significant recourse to external financing.

21

Two forward-looking approaches—the macroeconomic balance and the external
sustainability approach—both point to significant real effective exchange rate (REER)
overvaluation.14 Based on the two approaches, the sustainable deficit level (the current
account norm) is estimated to be about 3.5 percent of GDP. Based on current policies, the
medium-term current account deficit is expected to amount to 9.4 percent of GDP in 2016,
suggesting that the REER is overvalued by about 12 to 16 percent. While these approaches
provide useful quantitative estimates of misalignment, they should be interpreted with some
caution. Uncertainty about effectiveness of exchange rate adjustment is particularly high in the
case of Belarus: the economy is characterized by significant state control and rigidities that
dampen the role of price signals, relative to a market based economy. This assessment
nevertheless suggests that further depreciation of the nominal exchange rate is needed. The size
of the nominal exchange rate adjustment depends crucially on the strength of other
macroeconomic policies.
Authorities views. Authorities disagreed with the staff’s assessment that the rubel is
significantly overvalued, arguing that structural reforms to increase competitiveness would
boost exports and policies aimed at import substitution would dampen imports, resulting in a
lower current account deficit over the medium term.

14

For information on methodology see Lee, J., G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, Ostry, J., Prati, A. and Antonio, L. (2008):
“Exchange Rate Assessments: CGER Methodologies”, IMF Occasional Paper 261 and for an application to
Belarus case, see Kovtun, D. (2009): “Is There a Need for Further Adjustment in the Exchange Rate?”, Selected
Issues Paper.

22

Figure 1. Belarus: Performance Among Peers, 2002–09 1/

20

Growth in Belarus outperformed the peers' growth
in recent years.
Real GDP Growth (Percent)

20

50
40

10

10

30
0

0

-10

Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

Belarus refrained from running high budget
deficits...
General Government Balance (Percent of GDP)

15
10

5

5

0

0

20

10

10

0

0

-10
-15

200
150

20

Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP)

-10
-15

20
10

0

0

-30
-40

-10
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

200
150
100

50

50

0

0
-50

-50

200

150

-20

Total Credit Growth (Percent)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

10

-10

...but credit growth has been among the highest
compared with the peers.

-5

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Contrary to the peers, Belarus's current
account deficit has continued to widen...

-10

-10

100

Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

30

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

10

-5

40

20

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

15

50

Inflation (Percent)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

-10

-20

-20

After a period of high inflation,inflation stabilized
close to the levels of the peers.

...with external debt catching up with the levels of
the peers.
External Debt (Percent of GDP)
Belarus
CEE median
CIS median
Min (5th percentile)
Max (95th percentile)

200

150

100

100

50

50

-20
-30
-40

0

0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ CEE includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Rep., Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovak Rep., and Turkey . CIS includes Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Rep., Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. The 5th and 95th percentiles
include the entire CEE and CIS samples excluding Belarus.

Figure 2. Belarus: Output Developments, 2001–10
The economy contracted briefly during the crisis, but recovered quickly.

30

Contributions to GDP Growth (Percent)
Consumption
Investment
Net exports
Inventories and discrepancy
Real GDP growth

15

30

Construction became the main driver of GDP growth during
the crisis and broad-based growth resumed in 2010.

15

15

Contributions to GDP Growth (Percent)
Other services
Construction
Industry
Agriculture
Real GDP growth

10
15

10

5

5

0

0

0

0

2008Q1

2008Q3

2009Q1

2009Q3

2010Q1

Inventories declined from the recent peak.

18

Inventories and Production
Change in inventories / industrial production

14

Stock of inventories / industrial production (right scale) 1/

-5

-5

2010Q3

2008Q1

90
80

2008Q3

2009Q1

2009Q3

2010Q3

Growth of investment in construction remained
high through the crisis and thereafter.

60

Fixed Asset Investment Growth
(Constant prices, percent)

60

40

Fixed asset
investment
Construction

30

Machinery and
equipment

50

70

10

2010Q1

50
40
30

60

6

20

20

10

10
0

2

50

-2

40

0

30

-10

-6
2008

2009

2010

Sources: National Statistical Committee; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.
1/ Lagged 12-month moving average of industrial production.

-10
2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

24

-15

-15

Figure 3. Belarus: Inflation Developments, 2008–10

25

20

Consumer inflation has recently picked up again
following the path of rising producer prices...
Inflation (Year-on-year percent change)
CPI

25

50

15

15

10

10

5

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

5
-10

Prices of nonfood goods remained steady during the crisis and
subsequent recovery, but food prices rebounded recently.
Components of CPI Inflation (Year-on-year percent change)
Food
Nonfood goods

Machinery

-20
Jan-08 May-08 Sep-08 Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09 Jan-10 May-10 Sep-10

25

200

20

180
160

15

10

Electric power

Chemicals

0

Services
15

Fuel

Wage increases have accelerated since the beginning of 2010.
Nominal Average Monthly Wage Index (Jan., 2008 = 100)
Belarus
Russia
Ukraine

-10
-20

25

0
Jan-08 May-08 Sep-08 Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09 Jan-10 May-10 Sep-10

20

Selected Components of PPI Inflation (Year-on-year percent change)

20

PPI

25

...driven primarily by increasing prices
in electric power, fuel and chemicals.

200
180
160

140

140

120

120

100

100

10

5

5

0
Jan-08 May-08 Sep-08 Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09 Jan-10 May-10 Sep-10

0

Sources: National Statistical Committee; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.

80
Jan-08 May-08 Sep-08 Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09 Jan-10 May-10 Sep-10

80

Figure 4. Belarus: External Developments, 2005–11
The rubel has fluctuated against the dollar
in a narrow band since April 2010...

2,600

20

Exchange Rates

850
24

2,700

900
2,800

28

2,900

32

5 percent more
appreciated
10 percent more
than parity
appreciated than
parity

850
8 percent more
appreciated
than parity

1100

1000
5 percent more
depreciated
than parity
10 percent more
depreciated
than parity

1050
8 percent more
depreciated
than parity

Russian ruble per U.S. dollar (rhs)

7
6

40
May-09

Oct-09

Feb-10

Jul-10

Nov-10

...contributing to reserve losses...
Gross Reserves
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

1150

1150
Jan-09

7

35

6

30

1100

May-09

Oct-09

Feb-10

Jul-10

Nov-10

...and a sharp increase in external debt from a low base.

35

External Debt
(Percent of GDP)

30
Public

5

5

25

4

4

20

20

3

3

15

15

2

2

10

10

1

1

5

5

0
Jan-09

0

0

25

Private

Proj.
May-09

Oct-09

Feb-10

Jul-10

Nov-10

0
2005

Sources: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus; Bloomberg; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

26

3,100
Jan-09

900
950

1000

36

Belarusian rubel per U.S. dollar

800

Rubel Against the Basket

950

1050
3,000

...and remained close to the central parity of the basket.

800

26

Figure 5. Belarus: Monetary Developments, 2008–11
Both LGP and non-LGP components of credit to
economy continued to expand rapidly...

80

Credit at Current Exchange Rates (Year-on-year
growth rate)
Growth contribution from non-LGP

70
60

Growth contribution from LGP
Credit to economy

50

80
70

50
40

30

30

20

20

10

10
0
Jan-10 May-10 Sep-10

Policy rates were reduced
back to pre-crisis levels in 2010...

50

NBRB Policy Interest Rates and
the Interbank Rate (Percent)
Overnight interbank rate
Refinancing rate
Overnight credit from the NBRB to banks
NBRB deposit rate

40

30

20

30

NBRB Credit to Banks
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels)

25

50

40

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

0
Jan-08

16
12

0
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

...and real interest rates have declined.

16

Real Overnight Interbank Rate
(Percent)

12

8

8

4

4

0

0

-4

-4

30

20

10

10

0
Jan-08

24

25

...accomodated by substantial
liquidity support from the NBRB.

60

40

0
Jan-09 May-09 Sep-09

30

0
Jul-08

Feb-09

Sep-09

Apr-10

Nov-10

Household deposits have continued to grow...
Household Deposits (Trillions of Belarusian rubels)

22

24

22

20

20

18

18

16

16

14
Jan-09

14
Jun-09

Dec-09

May-10

Nov-10

-8
Jan-08

62
60

-8
Jul-08

Jan-09

Jul-09

Jan-10

Jul-10

...while dollarization has recently increased.
Dollar Household Deposits to Total Household
Deposits at Constant Exchange Rates (Percent)

62
60

58

58

56

56

54

54

52

52

50

50

48
Jan-09

48
Jun-09

Dec-09

Sources: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates and calculations.

May-10

Nov-10

27

Table 1. Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators (Baseline scenario), 2008–16

2008

2009
Prel.

2010

2011

2012

Est.

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
National accounts
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Consumption
Nongovernment
Government
Investment
Of which: fixed
Net exports 1/
Consumer prices
End of period
Average
Monetary accounts
Reserve money 2/
Rubel broad money
Growth of credit to the economy at constant
exchange rates

10.2
17.8
12.5
16.3
0.3
28.2
23.8
-9.4

0.2
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-2.9
5.0
1.5

7.6
10.3
7.0
8.6
1.3
16.1
16.6
-4.3

6.9
4.7
5.7
6.9
1.0
2.9
3.0
1.4

4.8
4.7
5.8
6.9
1.0
2.9
3.0
-0.6

4.8
4.3
5.1
6.2
0.0
2.9
3.0
-0.2

4.8
4.2
4.9
6.0
0.0
2.9
3.0
0.0

4.7
4.2
4.9
5.9
0.0
2.9
3.0
-0.2

4.6
4.2
5.0
5.9
0.0
2.9
3.0
-0.2

13.3
14.8

10.1
13.0

9.9
7.7

10.5
11.0

9.0
9.1

7.5
8.2

7.0
7.2

6.0
6.5

5.0
5.5

11.7
22.5

-11.3
1.0

229.8
27.5

-0.2
13.2

9.3
20.3

14.8
23.2

8.0
16.6

10.3
15.9

7.8
15.1

50.0

27.7

38.2

24.8

22.5

17.7

17.0

15.8

15.4

(Percent of GDP)
External debt and balance of payments
Current account
Trade balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Gross external debt
Public 3/
Private (mostly state-owned-enterprises)
Savings and investment
Gross domestic investment
Government
Nongovernment
National saving
Government 4/
Nongovernment 4/
Public sector finance
Republican and local government balance
General government balance 5/
Revenue
Expenditure 6/
Of which:
Wages
Subsidies and transfers
Investment
Gross public debt

-8.6
-10.3
54.0
-64.3
25.0
6.8
18.1

-13.0
-14.1
43.4
-57.5
44.9
18.1
26.7

-16.0
-16.9
46.3
-63.2
52.4
21.2
31.2

-14.1
-11.7
51.3
-62.9
57.3
24.3
33.0

-13.4
-10.8
50.9
-61.8
61.9
26.1
35.8

-12.6
-10.1
51.5
-61.5
67.3
27.3
39.9

-11.5
-9.0
51.7
-60.7
71.2
28.2
43.0

-10.5
-8.1
51.7
-59.8
73.6
28.9
44.7

-9.4
-7.1
51.7
-58.8
74.5
29.0
45.5

37.6
10.0
27.6
29.0
6.5
22.6

37.3
8.1
29.2
24.3
7.4
16.9

42.8
8.4
34.4
26.8
4.0
22.7

39.5
6.0
33.5
25.4
3.8
21.6

38.3
5.6
32.7
24.8
3.4
21.4

37.0
5.3
31.7
24.4
3.1
21.3

35.7
5.0
30.7
24.1
3.0
21.1

34.5
4.5
30.1
24.1
3.0
21.1

33.4
4.5
29.0
24.0
3.0
21.0

0.0
-3.5
50.6
54.1

-1.8
-0.7
45.7
46.4

-2.6
-4.3
41.9
46.3

-3.0
-2.2
40.9
43.1

-2.7
-2.2
40.1
42.2

-2.4
-2.1
39.6
41.8

-2.0
-1.9
39.3
41.3

-1.5
-1.5
39.0
40.5

-1.3
-1.5
38.8
40.2

6.6
11.5
10.0
10.7

6.7
11.7
8.1
20.0

7.1
8.4
8.4
22.4

8.0
7.8
6.0
25.5

8.0
7.4
5.6
26.9

8.0
7.0
5.3
28.9

8.0
6.7
5.0
28.5

8.0
6.3
4.5
29.8

8.0
6.0
4.5
29.2

…
324.4
1.0
0.0
8.5
1.5
40.3
-20.3
4.7

…
359.6
1.1
0.0
9.1
1.5
39.0
-19.1
4.1

(Annual percentage change, unless indicated otherwise)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
Nominal GDP (trillions of rubels)
Terms of trade
Real effective exchange rate
Official reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
Months of imports of goods and services
Percent of short-term debt
In absence of exceptional financing
Financing gap (billions of U.S. dollars)

60.8
129.8
8.6
1.6
3.1
1.2
40.4
…
…

49.2
137.4
-8.0
-4.5
5.7
1.8
63.2
…
…

54.7
163.0
-1.0
-4.9
5.0
1.4
42.5
…
…

…
197.4
3.8
1.2
6.2
1.5
46.2
1.6
4.6

…
227.3
1.3
0.9
6.8
1.5
45.0
-3.8
5.9

…
257.8
0.9
0.0
7.3
1.5
43.2
-10.3
7.0

…
290.2
1.0
0.0
7.9
1.5
41.7
-16.2
6.5

Quota (2009): SDR 386.4 million (595.8 million U.S. dollars)
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ The high growth in 2010 is due primarily to the increase of NBRB's FX liabilities to commercial banks. The NBRB is currently revising the methodology of
compiling the monetary base: the FX deposits will be removed from the monetary base.
3/ Gross consolidated external debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).
4/ The reduction in government saving and a corresponding increase in nongovernment saving in 2010 include bank recapitalization and layouts related to public
guaranteed debt in amount of 2.5 percent of GDP performed in 2010.
5/ Refers to the augmented balance of the general government shown in Table 3.
6/ Refers to the augmented expenditure of the general government.

28

Table 2. Belarus: Balance of Payments, 2008–16
2008

2009

Prel.

2010
Q1

Q2

Prel.

Prel.

2011

Q3

Annual

Prel.

Est.

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.

(Millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account
Trade balance (goods)
Energy balance
Nonenergy balance
Exports
Energy
Nonenergy
Imports
Energy
Nonenergy
Services
Receipts
Payments
Income, net
Transfers, net 1/
Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Overall FDI, net
Portfolio investment, net
Trade credits, net
Loans, net
Government and monetary authorities, net
Banks, net
Other sectors, net
Other (excluding arrears), net 2/
Errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Reserves ("-" denotes an increase)
Net use of Fund resources
Other donors and exceptional financing items
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Stock of reserves 3/
Reserves (months of next year's imports of goods and
services)
Reserves (percent of short-term debt)
Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage
change of period average, "+" denotes appreciation)
Export volume (annual percentage change)
Import volume (annual percentage change)
Domestic demand growth (annual percentage change)
Partner country growth (percent) 4/
Russia
EU

-5,230

-6,389

-1,259

-1,971

-2,141

-8,750

-6,237
-2,000
-4,237
32,805
11,866
20,939
-39,042
-13,865
-25,176
1,624
4,188
-2,564
-788
171

-6,957
-3,378
-3,579
21,361
7,844
13,517
-28,318
-11,222
-17,096
1,440
3,482
-2,042
-1,114
242

-1,129
-1,056
-72
5,303
1,274
4,029
-6,432
-2,330
-4,102
457
983
-526
-626
39

-2,197
-1,130
-1,067
5,971
1,467
4,504
-8,168
-2,597
-5,571
445
1,119
-674
-250
31

-2,315
-1,491
-824
6,322
1,532
4,790
-8,637
-3,023
-5,614
374
1,167
-793
-250
50

-9,249
-5,494
-3,756
25,318
6,199
19,119
-34,568
-11,693
-22,875
1,696
4,477
-2,782
-1,362
166

-9,989 -10,185 -10,187 -10,101

-9,922

-7,616 -8,040 -8,161 -7,977 -7,829
-3,831 -4,051 -4,592 -4,668 -4,749
-3,785 -3,989 -3,569 -3,309 -3,079
33,519 37,855 41,729 45,664 49,875
10,759 11,026 11,066 11,164 11,292
22,760 26,829 30,663 34,500 38,582
-41,135 -45,895 -49,890 -53,641 -57,704
-14,590 -15,077 -15,658 -15,832 -16,042
-26,545 -30,818 -34,232 -37,809 -41,662
2,042
2,404
2,874
3,325
3,800
5,327
6,281
7,180
8,079
9,036
-3,285 -3,877 -4,305 -4,754 -5,237
-1,873 -2,530 -3,093 -3,737 -4,275
-1,795 -1,823 -1,805 -1,798 -1,796

-9,243

-7,520
-4,730
-2,790
54,563
11,494
43,069
-62,083
-16,224
-45,859
4,325
10,088
-5,763
-4,922
-1,805

4,163
137
4,026
2,150
5
289
2,085
1,266
603
519
-503

5,221
160
5,061
1,782
19
657
1,266
926
21
319
1,337

770
35
735
1,060
-10
78
-107
-18
246
-335
-285

967
31
937
88
-22
277
701
198
349
154
-106

2,363
35
2,328
101
981
432
632
41
541
49
182

6,992
135
6,857
1,306
1,179
1,256
3,006
714
2,126
164
110

5,802
133
5,669
1,907
1,245
600
1,917
394
1,041
481
0

5,023
151
4,872
2,168
0
400
2,304
561
1,156
587
0

5,323
165
5,158
2,366
0
400
2,391
487
1,243
661
0

5,661
180
5,481
2,580
0
400
2,502
468
1,365
668
0

6,051
197
5,855
2,817
0
400
2,638
441
1,526
671
0

6,520
215
6,305
3,081
0
400
2,824
441
1,701
682
0

-60
-1,127

375
-793

287
-202

459
-545

237
459

714
-1,044

0
-3,441

0
-4,966

0
-4,862

0
-4,526

0
-4,049

0
-3,402

1,127
1,003
0
124

793
-2,443
2,838
398

202
-463
665
0

545
545
0
0

-459
-459
0
0

1,044
577
665
-198

-1,190
-1,190
0
0

-935
-553
-382
0

-2,180
-525
-1,655
0

-1,925
-568
-1,356
0

-697
-613
-84
0

-661
-661
0
0

…

…

…

…

…

…

4,631

5,901

7,042

6,451

4,746

4,063

3,061
1.2

5,653
1.8

6,074
…

5,525
…

5,985
…

5,031
1.4

6,221
1.5

6,774
1.5

7,299
1.5

7,868
1.5

8,481
1.5

9,142
1.5

40.4
1.6

63.2
-4.5

…
…

…
…

…
…

42.5
-4.9

46.2
1.2

45.0
0.9

43.2
0.0

41.7
0.0

40.3
0.0

39.0
0.0

1.5
14.3
17.8

-11.5
-12.6
-1.1

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

0.6
4.1
10.3

16.3
9.1
4.7

4.7
4.7
4.7

4.9
4.2
4.3

5.0
4.1
4.2

4.9
4.2
4.2

4.9
4.3
4.2

5.2
0.4

-7.9
-4.1

…
…

…
…

…
…

3.8
1.8

4.5
1.5

4.4
1.7

4.3
1.8

4.2
1.8

4.0
1.7

4.0
1.7

29

Table 2. Belarus: Balance of Payments, 2008–16 1/ (concluded)
2008

2010

2009
Q1
Prel.

Prel.

Q2
Prel.

2011

Q3
Prel.

2012

Annual
Est.

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.

(Percent of GDP)
Current account

-8.6

-13.0

-2.3

-3.6

-3.9

-16.0

-14.1

-13.4

-12.6

-11.5

-10.5

-9.4

-10.3
-3.3
-7.0
54.0
19.5
-64.3
-22.8

-14.1
-6.9
-7.3
43.4
15.9
-57.5
-22.8

-2.1
-1.9
-0.1
9.7
2.3
-11.8
-4.3

-4.0
-2.1
-2.0
10.9
2.7
-14.9
-4.7

-4.2
-2.7
-1.5
11.6
2.8
-15.8
-5.5

-16.9
-10.0
-6.9
46.3
11.3
-63.2
-21.4

-11.7
-5.9
-5.8
51.3
16.5
-62.9
-22.3

-10.8
-5.5
-5.4
50.9
14.8
-61.8
-20.3

-10.1
-5.7
-4.4
51.5
13.6
-61.5
-19.3

-9.0
-5.3
-3.7
51.7
12.6
-60.7
-17.9

-8.1
-4.9
-3.2
51.7
11.7
-59.8
-16.6

-7.1
-4.5
-2.6
51.7
10.9
-58.8
-15.4

Capital and financial accounts
Capital account
Financial account
Overall FDI
Portfolio investment, net
Trade credits, net
Loans, net
Government and monetary authorities, net
Banks, net
Other sectors, net
Other (excluding arrears), net 2/

6.9
0.2
6.6
3.5
0.0
0.5
3.4
2.1
1.0
0.9
-0.8

10.6
0.3
10.3
3.6
0.0
1.3
2.6
1.9
0.0
0.6
2.7

1.4
0.1
1.3
1.9
0.0
0.1
-0.2
0.0
0.4
-0.6
-0.5

1.8
0.1
1.7
0.2
0.0
0.5
1.3
0.4
0.6
0.3
-0.2

4.3
0.1
4.3
0.2
1.8
0.8
1.2
0.1
1.0
0.1
0.3

12.8
0.2
12.5
2.4
2.2
2.3
5.5
1.3
3.9
0.3
0.2

8.9
0.2
8.7
2.9
1.9
0.9
2.9
0.6
1.6
0.7
0.0

6.8
0.2
6.6
2.9
0.0
0.5
3.1
0.8
1.6
0.8
0.0

6.6
0.2
6.4
2.9
0.0
0.5
2.9
0.6
1.5
0.8
0.0

6.4
0.2
6.2
2.9
0.0
0.5
2.8
0.5
1.5
0.8
0.0

6.3
0.2
6.1
2.9
0.0
0.4
2.7
0.5
1.6
0.7
0.0

6.2
0.2
6.0
2.9
0.0
0.4
2.7
0.4
1.6
0.6
0.0

Errors and omissions
Overall balance

-0.1
-1.9

0.8
-1.6

0.5
-0.4

0.8
-1.0

0.4
0.8

1.3
-1.9

0.0
-5.3

0.0
-6.7

0.0
-6.0

0.0
-5.1

0.0
-4.2

0.0
-3.2

1.9
1.7
0.0
0.2

1.6
-5.0
5.8
0.8

0.4
-0.8
1.2
0.0

1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0

-0.8
-0.8
0.0
0.0

1.9
1.1
1.2
-0.4

-1.8
-1.8
0.0
0.0

-1.3
-0.7
-0.5
0.0

-2.7
-0.6
-2.0
0.0

-2.2
-0.6
-1.5
0.0

-0.7
-0.6
-0.1
0.0

-0.6
-0.6
0.0
0.0

...

...

…

…

…

…

7.1

7.9

8.7

7.3

4.9

3.8

Trade balance
Of which: energy balance
Nonenergy balance
Exports
Of which : energy exports
Imports
Of which: energy imports

Financing
Reserves ("-" denotes an increase)
Net use of Fund resources
Other donors and exceptional financing items
Financing gap
Sources: Belarus authorities; and IMF staff estimations.

1/ Values for 2011-16 include transfer of export duty on oil products to the Russian budget.
2/ Includes 2009 SDR allocation.
3/ Reserve targets for 2011-16 are set relative to months of imports.
4/ Based on latest projection available.

30

Table 3. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2008–16
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

Dec.

Sep.

Prel.

Prel.

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Dec.
Proj.

Est.

1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other
Revenue of budgetary funds

50.9
4.2
6.0
11.4
3.9
1.3
10.6
7.8
5.7

46.6
4.3
4.6
12.1
3.6
1.6
8.0
7.7
4.7

34.6
3.7
4.1
11.2
3.2
1.3
3.9
4.9
2.2

48.8
5.4
5.6
16.2
4.4
1.9
5.8
6.7
2.9

55.7
6.2
7.1
19.4
5.3
1.4
7.1
6.6
2.6

62.6
7.1
7.8
22.3
6.1
1.6
8.0
7.2
2.6

70.2
8.0
8.8
25.3
6.9
1.9
9.1
7.8
2.6

78.3
9.0
9.9
28.5
7.7
2.1
10.2
8.3
2.6

86.8
10.1
11.1
31.8
8.7
2.3
11.4
8.8
2.6

95.4
11.2
12.3
35.3
9.6
2.6
12.6
9.2
2.6

Expenditure (economic classification) 1/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending
Other

50.9
8.6
2.3
8.7
0.7
14.9
13.0
2.6
0.0

49.0
9.3
2.5
8.7
1.1
16.0
11.2
0.4
0.0

37.2
7.9
2.1
6.6
0.8
10.1
8.7
0.9
0.0

53.0
11.5
3.1
10.0
1.1
13.7
13.6
-0.1
0.0

61.7
15.7
4.4
11.8
2.1
15.5
11.8
0.5
0.0

68.7
18.1
4.9
12.8
3.0
16.9
12.6
0.4
0.0

76.4
20.5
5.5
13.8
4.4
18.1
13.6
0.4
0.0

84.3
23.1
6.2
14.7
6.0
19.4
14.4
0.4
0.0

91.6
25.8
7.0
15.6
7.7
20.6
14.5
0.4
0.0

100.0
28.6
7.7
16.4
9.2
21.6
16.1
0.4
0.0

Balance (economic classification) 2/

0.0

-2.4

-2.5

-4.2

-6.0

-6.1

-6.1

-5.9

-4.8

-4.6

Bank restructuring measures
Net lending to financial institutions
Outlays related to guaranteed debt

2.0
4.3
…

0.0
…
…

0.0
…
…

2.1
…
2.1

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Augmented balance

-6.3

-2.4

-2.5

-8.3

-6.0

-6.1

-6.1

-5.9

-4.8

-4.6

2. Social protection fund
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

14.7
13.0
1.7

16.1
14.7
1.4

13.9
12.9
1.0

19.6
18.3
1.3

25.1
23.4
1.6

28.5
27.3
1.2

32.0
31.4
0.6

35.8
35.5
0.4

39.9
40.0
-0.1

44.0
44.7
-0.6

1.7

-1.0

-1.6

-2.9

-4.4

-4.9

-5.5

-5.6

-4.9

-5.2

-4.6

-1.0

-1.6

-7.1

-4.4

-4.9

-5.5

-5.6

-4.9

-5.2

0.0

-0.3

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4.6
1.3
3.0
0.3
-1.6
0.2
-1.8
...
1.9

1.3
1.9
3.6
-4.2
-3.9
-3.5
-2.2
1.8
-0.3

1.6
0.8
3.0
-2.2
-2.6
-1.4
-1.7
0.5
0.3

6.7
1.1
2.6
3.0
2.8
3.2
-1.0
0.6
0.2

4.4
3.5
14.9
-14.0
-14.1
-14.2
0.1
...
0.1

4.9
3.2
12.0
-10.2
-10.2
-10.3
0.1
...
0.0

5.5
3.6
14.3
-12.3
-11.9
-12.0
0.1
...
-0.4

5.6
3.9
13.6
-11.9
-11.8
-11.9
0.1
...
-0.2

4.9
4.3
10.5
-10.0
-9.8
-9.9
0.1
...
-0.2

5.2
4.4
9.4
-8.5
-8.4
-8.5
0.1
...
-0.1

…

…

7.3

16.6

15.9

16.8

17.0

18.6

19.0

21.2

…

…

5.8

9.5

11.5

11.9

11.5

13.0

14.1

16.0

Balance of the general government
Augmented balance of the general government
Statistical discrepancy
3. Financing (cash) 2/
Privatization
Foreign financing, net 3/
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank
Deposit money banks (including SPF)
Revaluation effect
Nonbank 4/
Memorandum items:
Fiscal deficit including lending under
government programs
Of which: lending under government
programs

31

Table 3. Belarus: Fiscal Indicators and Projections, 2008–16 1/ (concluded)
(Percent of annual GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010

Dec.

Sep.

Prel.

Prel.

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Dec.
Proj.

Prel.

1.State (republican and local) budget
Revenue
Personal income tax
Profit tax
VAT
Excises
Property tax
Customs duties
Other
Revenue of budgetary funds

39.3
3.2
4.6
8.8
3.0
1.0
8.2
6.0
4.4

33.9
3.1
3.4
8.8
2.6
1.2
5.8
5.6
3.4

21.3
2.3
2.5
6.9
2.0
0.8
2.4
3.0
1.4

29.9
3.3
3.4
10.0
2.7
1.1
3.5
4.1
1.8

28.2
3.2
3.6
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.6
3.4
1.3

27.5
3.1
3.4
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.5
3.2
1.1

27.2
3.1
3.4
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.5
3.0
1.0

27.0
3.1
3.4
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.5
2.9
0.9

26.7
3.1
3.4
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.5
2.7
0.8

26.5
3.1
3.4
9.8
2.7
0.7
3.5
2.6
0.7

Expenditure (economic classification) 1/
Wages and salaries
Social protection fund contributions
Goods and services
Interest
Subsidies and transfers
Capital expenditures
Net lending
Other

39.2
6.6
1.8
6.7
0.6
11.5
10.0
2.0
0.0

35.7
6.7
1.8
6.3
0.8
11.7
8.1
0.3
0.0

22.8
4.9
1.3
4.1
0.5
6.2
5.4
0.6
0.0

32.5
7.1
1.9
6.1
0.7
8.4
8.4
0.0
0.0

31.2
8.0
2.2
6.0
1.1
7.8
6.0
0.3
0.0

30.2
8.0
2.1
5.6
1.3
7.4
5.6
0.2
0.0

29.6
8.0
2.1
5.3
1.7
7.0
5.3
0.2
0.0

29.0
8.0
2.1
5.1
2.1
6.7
5.0
0.1
0.0

28.2
8.0
2.1
4.8
2.4
6.3
4.5
0.1
0.0

27.8
8.0
2.1
4.6
2.6
6.0
4.5
0.1
0.0

Balance (economic classification) 2/

0.0

-1.8

-1.5

-2.6

-3.0

-2.7

-2.4

-2.0

-1.5

-1.3

Bank restructuring measures
Net lending to financial institutions
Outlays related to guaranteed debt

1.5
3.3
…

0.0
…
…

0.0
…
…

1.3
…
1.3

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

Augmented balance

-4.8

-1.8

-1.5

-5.1

-3.0

-2.7

-2.4

-2.0

-1.5

-1.3

2. Social Protection Fund
Revenue
Expenditure
Balance (cash)

11.3
10.0
1.3

11.7
10.7
1.1

8.5
7.9
0.6

12.0
11.2
0.8

12.7
11.9
0.8

12.5
12.0
0.5

12.4
12.2
0.2

12.3
12.2
0.1

12.3
12.3
0.0

12.2
12.4
-0.2

1.3

-0.7

-1.0

-1.8

-2.2

-2.2

-2.1

-1.9

-1.5

-1.5

-3.5

-0.7

-1.0

-4.3

-2.2

-2.2

-2.1

-1.9

-1.5

-1.5

0.0

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3.5
1.0
2.3
0.2
-1.2
0.1
-1.3
…
1.5

1.0
1.4
2.6
-3.0
-2.8
-2.5
-1.6
1.3
-0.2

1.0
0.5
1.8
-1.4
-1.6
-0.9
-1.0
0.3
0.2

4.1
0.6
1.6
1.8
1.7
2.0
-0.6
0.3
0.1

2.2
1.8
7.5
-7.1
-7.1
-7.2
0.1
…
0.1

2.2
1.4
5.3
-4.5
-4.5
-4.5
0.0
…
0.0

2.1
1.4
5.5
-4.8
-4.6
-4.7
0.0
…
-0.2

1.9
1.4
4.7
-4.1
-4.0
-4.1
0.0
…
-0.1

1.5
1.3
3.3
-3.1
-3.0
-3.1
0.0
…
-0.1

1.5
1.2
2.6
-2.4
-2.3
-2.4
0.0
…
0.0

…

…

4.5

10.2

8.0

7.4

6.6

6.4

5.8

5.9

…

…

3.5

5.8

5.8

5.2

4.5

4.5

4.3

4.4

10.7
129.8

20.0
137.4

…
…

22.4
163.0

25.5
197.4

26.9
227.3

28.9
257.8

28.5
290.2

29.8
324.4

29.2
359.6

Balance of the general government
Augmented balance of the general government
Statistical discrepancy
3. Financing (cash) 2/
Privatization
Foreign financing, net 3/
Domestic financing, net
Banking system
Central bank
Deposit money banks (including SPF)
Revaluation effect
Nonbank 4/
Memorandum items:
Fiscal deficit including lending under
government programs
Of which: lending under government
programs
Gross public debt 5/
GDP (trillions of Belarusian rubels)

Sources: Ministry of Finance; SPF; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Includes changes in expenditure arrears.
2/ The actual deficits include all the closing expenditure for the year carried out in January of the following year and correspond to the authorities fiscal
year reports. The deficits include January closing expenditure in the year they were actually paid.
3/ Includes unidentified financing that is assumed to be filled by government borrowing from abroad.
4/ Includes statistical discrepancy up to 2008.
5/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed external debt).

Table 4. Belarus: Monetary Authorities' Accounts, 2008–16
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)
2008

2009

2011

2010
Mar.

Dec.

Prel.

Prel.

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.

7.7
7.3
3.8
2.2
1.2
0.4

6.8
6.6
3.6
1.7
1.3
0.2

6.7
6.6
3.7
1.7
1.2
0.1

22.5
11.2
4.5
4.0
2.8
11.3

22.5
11.0
4.9
4.4
1.7
11.5

24.6
13.0
5.6
5.1
2.3
11.5

28.2
15.8
6.7
6.1
3.1
12.4

30.5
18.2
7.4
7.0
3.7
12.3

33.6
20.7
8.2
8.0
4.5
12.9

36.2
23.5
8.9
9.2
5.4
12.8

Net foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
Net foreign assets (convertible)
Billions of U.S. dollars
Foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
Of which gross international reserves
Billions of U.S. dollars
Foreign liabilities
Billions of U.S. dollars
Of which : use of IMF credit (billions of U.S. dollars)

7.0
3.2
5.8
2.6
8.0
3.6
6.7
3.1
1.0
0.4
0.0

5.8
2.0
5.1
1.8
16.9
5.9
16.2
5.7
11.1
3.9
2.9

5.5
1.8
4.7
1.6
18.9
6.3
18.1
6.1
13.4
4.5
3.4

0.2
0.1
-2.7
-0.9
18.0
6.0
15.1
5.0
17.8
5.9
3.5

3.8
1.2
0.9
0.3
22.0
7.2
19.0
6.2
18.1
5.9
3.5

6.7
2.2
3.8
1.2
23.7
7.7
20.8
6.8
17.0
5.5
3.1

17.4
5.3
14.2
4.3
27.2
8.3
24.0
7.3
9.8
3.0
1.4

23.6
7.2
20.4
6.2
28.9
8.8
25.7
7.9
5.3
1.6
0.1

27.1
7.9
23.8
6.9
32.4
9.4
29.1
8.5
5.3
1.5
0.0

29.1
8.6
25.8
7.6
34.3
10.1
31.0
9.1
5.3
1.5
0.0

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Net credit to local government and state enterprises
Net credit to central government
Claims on government (loans and government
securities)
Deposits of central government
Credit to economy
Credit to banks
National currencies
Foreign currencies
Billions of U.S. dollars
Credit to nonbanks
Claims on private sector
Credit to nonfinancial public enterprises
Credit to other financial institutions
Other items, net

0.7
1.2
-4.0
0.0
-4.0
1.7

1.0
3.1
-7.6
0.0
-7.6
9.3

1.2
3.3
-9.5
0.5
-10.0
11.4

22.4
26.6
-4.6
1.1
-5.7
11.6

18.7
22.9
-18.8
1.1
-19.9
11.8

17.8
22.5
-29.1
1.1
-30.2
10.6

10.8
15.9
-41.1
1.1
-42.3
5.9

6.9
12.5
-53.0
1.1
-54.1
1.4

6.5
12.7
-62.9
1.1
-64.0
1.1

7.2
13.9
-71.4
1.1
-72.6
1.1

5.7
5.2
3.4
3.1
0.3
0.1
1.8
1.8
0.0
0.0
-0.6

17.0
10.8
8.6
8.2
0.4
0.1
2.2
2.2
0.0
0.0
-2.1

21.3
12.8
10.6
10.2
0.4
0.1
2.2
2.2
0.0
0.0
-2.1

17.3
31.2
28.0
26.0
1.9
0.6
3.3
3.0
0.3
0.0
-4.2

31.7
41.7
39.5
38.2
1.3
0.4
2.2
2.0
0.2
0.0
-4.2

40.9
51.6
50.2
49.3
0.9
0.3
1.4
1.3
0.1
0.0
-4.7

48.1
57.1
56.1
55.5
0.6
0.2
1.0
0.9
0.1
0.0
-5.1

55.5
65.5
64.9
64.4
0.4
0.1
0.6
0.6
0.1
0.0
-5.6

65.1
75.6
75.2
74.9
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.0
0.0
-6.2

73.7
85.4
85.1
84.9
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.0
0.0
-6.8

11.7
6.3
3.7

-11.3
6.6
3.5

14.0
6.9
3.6

229.8
6.2
3.2

-0.2
6.5
3.4

9.3
6.3
3.3

14.8
5.8
3.1

8.0
5.6
3.0

10.3
5.4
2.9

7.8
5.2
2.8

2.8
0.23
10.2
13.3

3.1
0.21
0.2
10.1

3.1
0.22
…
6.4

2.4
0.20
7.6
9.9

2.7
0.20
6.9
10.5

2.8
0.19
4.8
9.0

2.8
0.18
4.8
7.5

2.9
0.17
4.8
7.0

2.9
0.16
4.7
6.0

2.9
0.15
4.6
5.0

Memorandum items:
12-month percent change in reserve money 1/
Velocity of rubel money
Velocity of broad money (including foreign exchange part) at
constant exchange rates
Ruble broad money multiplier
Currency-to-deposit ratio
Real GDP growth (annual)
End-of-period CPI inflation (year-on-year percent change)
Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ The NBRB's methodology for reserve money compilation includes long-term FX deposits placed by commercial banks in the NBRB as well as liabilities issued by NBRB for
the purposes of mopping up liquidity. The high growth in 2010 is due primarily to the increase of NBRB's FX liabilities to commercial banks. A recent STA TA mission advised
the NBRB to remove these items from the monetary base to bring the methodology in line with the best practice.

32

Reserve money 1/
Rubel reserve money
Currency outside banks
Required reserves
Time deposits, NBB securities, and nonbank deposits
Foreign currency reserve money

Table 5. Belarus: Monetary Survey, 2008–16
(Trillions of Belarusian rubels, unless otherwise indicated; end-of-period)
2008

2009

2011

2010
Mar.

Dec.

Prel.

Prel.

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj. 1/

31.0
34.8
20.5
3.8
16.0
0.7
10.2
0.2
26.2

38.1
39.0
20.7
3.6
16.6
0.5
16.2
1.1
32.8

38.4
38.6
20.3
3.7
15.7
0.9
16.6
1.5
32.4

50.3
50.3
26.4
4.5
20.9
1.0
22.1
1.7
43.0

57.4
57.0
29.9
4.9
23.9
1.2
25.5
2.0
49.4

69.4
68.8
36.0
5.6
29.0
1.4
31.0
2.4
60.0

85.8
82.3
44.4
6.7
36.0
1.7
38.5
3.0
74.5

100.5
96.6
51.7
7.4
42.3
2.0
45.2
3.5
87.6

116.9
110.0
60.0
8.2
49.5
2.3
52.9
4.1
102.4

135.2
127.7
69.0
8.9
57.5
2.7
61.4
4.7
118.9

Net foreign assets
Billions of U.S. dollars
NFA of central bank
NFA of deposit money banks

3.1
1.4
7.0
-3.9

-0.2
-0.1
5.8
-6.0

-0.5
-0.2
5.5
-6.0

-12.6
-4.2
0.2
-12.7

-12.4
-4.1
3.8
-16.3

-13.1
-4.3
6.7
-19.9

-8.0
-2.4
17.4
-25.4

-6.2
-1.9
23.6
-29.7

-9.3
-2.7
27.1
-36.4

-12.7
-3.8
29.1
-41.8

27.9
39.2
-9.8
-7.2
7.0
14.3
-2.6
48.9
54.5
11.4
37.2
0.4
-11.3
-13.0
1.7

38.4
52.9
-15.7
-14.7
12.0
26.7
-1.0
68.6
69.6
17.0
50.8
0.8
-14.5
-16.2
1.7

38.9
54.1
-17.9
-16.9
13.9
30.8
-1.0
72.0
72.2
17.4
53.8
0.9
-15.2
-16.7
1.5

62.9
82.4
-13.7
-14.5
14.0
28.5
0.8
96.1
96.2
21.8
72.6
1.7
-19.6
-21.7
2.1

69.9
92.7
-27.8
-28.6
14.2
42.7
0.8
120.5
120.1
26.8
91.5
2.2
-22.8
-24.3
1.5

82.5
109.7
-38.0
-38.8
13.0
51.8
0.8
147.7
147.1
31.7
113.4
2.7
-27.2
-29.0
1.8

93.9
127.0
-49.9
-50.7
8.3
58.9
0.8
176.9
173.2
36.3
137.3
3.2
-33.1
-35.4
2.3

106.6
145.1
-61.7
-62.4
3.8
66.2
0.8
206.8
202.6
40.5
162.5
3.8
-38.5
-41.2
2.7

126.2
170.8
-71.5
-72.2
3.5
75.8
0.8
242.3
234.6
45.1
192.7
4.4
-44.6
-47.7
3.2

147.9
199.3
-79.9
-80.7
3.5
84.2
0.8
279.2
270.8
49.3
224.8
5.1
-51.4
-55.0
3.7

26.1

12.1

17.9

29.1

13.3

20.6

19.6

17.4

13.9

16.1

50.0

27.7

29.1

38.2

24.8

22.5

17.7

17.0

15.8

15.4

…

…

…

29.7

27.7

22.5

17.7

17.0

15.8

15.4

…

…

…

45.4

22.7

22.5

17.7

17.0

15.8

15.4

32.4

15.9

21.4

25.7

13.0

12.4

9.5

9.3

9.2

9.9

12.9

12.2

12.3

14.3

14.2

14.1

13.8

13.7

13.5

13.5

…

32.0

33.4

41.5

53.0

64.9

76.4

89.4

103.5

119.5

46.6

50.7

51.7

51.5

51.3

51.2

49.4

49.6

48.4

48.7

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Net credit to general government
Net credit to central government
Claims on central government
Deposits of the central government
Net credit to state and local governments
Credit to economy
Memo: Credit to economy at constant exchange rates
Credit to public nonfinancial corporations
Claims on private sector
Claims on other financial corporations
Other items, net
Capital
Other net assets
Memorandum items:
12-month percent change in broad money at constant
exchage rate
12-month percent change of credit to economy at
constant exchange rate
12-month percent change of LGP at constant exchange
rate
12-month percent change of non-LGP credit at constant
exchange rate
12-month percent change of real credit to economy at
constant exchange rate
Deposits of the central and local governments in
commercial banks at constant exchange rate
Stock of loans under government programs at constant
exchange rate
Dollarization ratio at constant exchange rate
Sources: National Bank of Belarus; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Projections are shown at current exchange rates.

33

Broad money (M3)
Memo: Broad money (M3) at constant exchange rates
Rubel broad money (M2)
Currency in circulation
Domestic currency deposits
Domestic currency securities
Foreign currency deposits
Bank securities in foreign currency
Memorandum items: total deposits

34

Table 6. Belarus: Banking Sector Soundness Indicators, 2006–10
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Mar.

Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital (percent of risk-weighted assets)
Regulatory Tier I (percent of risk-weighted assets)
Total capital (percent of total assets)

Jun.

Sep.

Dec.

24.4
17.4
17.9

19.3
14.0
16.0

21.8
16.9
18.6

19.8
14.4
16.7

19.7
15.1
16.1

19.8
14.8
14.8

19.0
13.9
14.0

20.5
14.9
13.7

2.8
51.3
6.1
33.8
25.4

1.9
61.5
3.8
37.6
22.4

1.7
70.0
2.3
30.9
22.6

4.2
44.9
12.4
29.6
24.9

5.0
43.1
15.1
28.7
23.8

4.9
44.4
15.2
27.2
23.3

4.0
55.7
10.3
26.4
23.0

3.5
61.9
7.3
21.7
22.8

27.3
14.6
7.7
2.2
27.8
20.4

26.9
14.4
8.1
2.7
27.5
20.5

27.4
15.5
7.0
3.3
28.1
18.7

30.7
17.2
7.2
3.4
25.1
16.4

30.5
17.5
7.0
3.5
25.2
16.3

29.0
17.8
7.0
3.8
25.7
16.8

28.1
17.7
7.0
4.0
25.3
17.8

27.2
18.0
7.2
4.2
25.5
17.8

1.7
9.6

1.7
10.7

1.4
9.6

1.4
8.9

1.5
9.3

1.5
9.9

1.7
11.1

1.7
11.8

Liquidity
Liquid assets to total assets
Instant liquidity ratio 2/
Current liquidity ratio 3/
Loans to deposits
Foreign currency deposits to total deposits
Foreign currency liabilities to total liabilities

24.1
128.9
96.7
135.0
34.7
41.2

22.6
104.1
98.8
144.3
38.2
44.7

23.2
108.8
102.0
170.8
38.9
38.7

28.4
237.9
172.7
189.2
49.5
44.0

26.9
443.7
204.5
206.6
51.4
43.9

28.4
424.6
235.7
206.4
48.3
41.5

28.7
438.0
211.4
207.5
48.7
41.1

29.2
450.1
225.3
206.4
51.4
41.6

Market risks
Net open position in FX (percent of capital)

-8.1

-3.0

8.5

-11.6

0.8

6.4

0.1

-1.4

Asset composition and quality
NPLs (percent of total loans)
Provisions (percent of NPLs)
NPLs net of provisions (percent of regulatory capital)
Foreign currency loans (percent of total loans)
Loans to state-owned enterprises (percent of total) 1/
Sectoral distribution of loans (percent of total)
Industry
Agriculture
Trade
Construction
Households
Other
Profitability
Return on assets (after tax)
Return on equity (after tax)

Source: National Bank of the Republic of Belarus.
1/ State-owned enterprises are defined here as those with 100 percent state share.
2/ Ratio of demand assets to demand liabilities. The prudential minimum is 20 percent.
3/ Ratio of assets to liabilities with a remaining maturity of less than 1 month. The prudential minimum is 70 percent.

35

Table 7. Belarus: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 2006–10
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Est.

CPI inflation (end year)

6.6

12.1

13.3

10.1

9.9

Export volume of goods (percent change)
Import volume of goods (percent change)

8.3
21.7

5.2
7.2

1.5
14.3

-11.5
-12.6

0.6
4.1

Current account balance (percent of GDP)

-3.9

-6.7

-8.6

-13.0

-16.0

Capital and financial account balance (millions of U.S. dollars)
Of which
Foreign direct investment, net
Trade credits, net
Official Liabilities, net
Liabilties of the banking sector, net
Non-bank private liabilities (excl. trade credits) 1/

1,778

5,312

4,163

5,221

6,992

351
158
-50
535
493

1,790
690
2,106
1,075
722

2,150
289
1,241
531
495

1,782
657
4,939
483
304

1,306
1,256
1,181
2,274
112

Gross official reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
Months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of broad money

1,383
0.5
15.1

4,182
1.2
32.6

3,061
1.2
19.4

5,653
1.8
41.5

5,031
1.4
30.0

Gross total external debt (millions U.S. dollars)
Percent of GDP
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services

6,847
18.5
30.8

12,551
27.7
45.4

15,168
25.0
41.0

22,071
44.9
88.8

28,684
52.4
96.3

Gross short-term external debt (millions of U.S. dollars)
Percent of gross total external debt
Percent of gross official reserves

4,382
64
317

7,365
59
176

7,571
50
247

9,343
42
165

12,025
42
239

Debt service ratio (percent) 2/
REER appreciation (CPI based, period average)

2.4
-0.9

3.1
-3.9

4.1
1.6

5.9
-4.5

5.4
-4.9

Capital adequacy ratio (percent) 3/
Nonperforming loans (percent of total)
Banks' net open FX position (percent of regulatory capital)

24.4
1.2
-8.1

19.3
0.7
-3.0

21.8
1.7
8.5

19.8
4.2
-11.6

20.5
3.5
-1.4

Real broad money at constant exchange rates (percent change) 4/
Real credit to economy at constant exchange rate (percent change) 4/

29.7
47.4

25.8
32.5

11.3
32.4

1.8
15.9

17.4
25.7

Sources: Belarus authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes loans, currency and deposits and other flows.
2/ Interest plus medium- and long-term debt repayments in percent of exports of goods and services.
3/ Regulatory capital in percent of risk-weighted assets.
4/ Deflated by the CPI.

36

Table 8. Belarus: Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2009–16 1/
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Fund repurchases and charges
Millions of SDRs
Millions of U.S. dollars
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of total debt service 2/
Percent of quota
Percent of gross international reserves

8
13
0.1
0.9
2.1
0.2

43
67
0.2
4.1
11.2
1.3

54
82
0.2
2.5
13.9
1.3

301
461
1.0
10.9
77.8
6.8

1,117
1,711
3.5
27.5
289.1
23.4

894
1,368
2.5
20.3
231.4
17.4

57
87
0.1
1.2
14.7
1.0

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Fund credit outstanding
Millions of SDRs
Millions of U.S. dollars
Percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services
Percent of quota
Percent of gross international reserves

1,832
2,898
11.7
474.0
51.3

2,270
3,485
11.7
587.3
69.3

2,270
3,491
9.0
587.3
56.1

2,021
3,099
7.0
522.9
45.7

941
1,441
2.9
243.4
19.7

55
84
0.2
14.2
1.1

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0

24,843

29,796

38,846

44,135

48,909

53,743

58,911

64,651

1,479
386
611
5,653
1.543
1.582

1,606
386
593
5,031
1.526
1.536

3,269
386
594
6,221
1.540
1.538

4,213
386
593
6,774
1.535
1.534

6,221
386
592
7,299
1.533
1.532

6,749
386
591
7,868
1.531
1.530

7,059
386
591
8,481
1.530
1.528

7,669
386
590
9,142
1.527
1.526

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and nonfactor services (millions of
U.S. dollars)
Debt service (millions of U.S. dollars)
Quota (millions of SDRs)
Quota (millions of U.S. dollars at eop exchange rate)
Gross international reserves (millions of U.S. dollars)
U.S. dollars per SDR (period average)
U.S. dollars per SDR (eop)

Appendix I. Table 1. Belarus: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006–16
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Projections

Actual

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

18.5

27.7

25.0

44.9

52.4

57.3

61.9

67.3

71.2

73.6

74.5

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

1.5
-0.2
3.5
4.1
60.2
64.3
-1.0
-2.7
0.4
-1.4
-1.7
1.7

9.2
-0.3
6.1
6.2
61.0
67.2
-3.6
-2.8
0.6
-1.3
-2.1
9.5

-2.8
-1.7
7.8
7.6
60.9
68.5
-3.3
-6.2
0.8
-2.1
-4.9
-1.0

19.9
15.3
12.0
11.2
50.5
61.7
-3.5
6.9
1.0
-0.1
5.9
4.5

7.6
9.3
14.8
13.8
54.5
68.3
-2.2
-3.3
1.2
-3.1
-1.4
-1.7

4.9
8.4
11.9
8.5
59.4
68.0
-2.7
-0.8
2.2
-3.0
...
-3.6

4.6
8.3
10.8
7.6
59.4
67.0
-2.7
0.2
2.7
-2.4
...
-3.6

5.3
7.0
9.6
6.5
60.3
66.8
-2.8
0.3
3.0
-2.7
...
-1.7

3.9
5.8
8.2
5.3
60.8
66.1
-2.8
0.4
3.3
-3.0
...
-1.9

2.4
4.6
7.0
4.2
61.0
65.2
-2.8
0.4
3.4
-3.0
...
-2.2

1.0
3.5
5.8
3.0
61.2
64.3
-2.8
0.5
3.6
-3.1
...
-2.5

External debt-to-exports ratio (percent)

30.8

45.4

41.0

88.8

96.3

96.4

104.3

111.5

117.1

120.5

121.7

Gross external financing need (billions of U.S. dollars) 4/
Percent of GDP

5.1
13.9

8.0
17.7

13.6
22.4

14.9
30.3

19.0
34.8

23.2
35.5

26.1
35.1

29.5
36.3

31.3
35.4

33.1
34.3

35.2
33.3

57.3

52.1

47.7

43.9

40.6

37.8

6.9
11.7
5.1
30.4
18.9
-11.9
2.7

4.8
8.4
5.3
13.6
12.0
-10.8
2.7

4.8
4.1
5.3
10.8
8.9
-9.6
2.8

4.8
4.0
5.4
9.9
7.7
-8.2
2.8

4.7
4.3
5.3
9.6
7.8
-7.0
2.8

4.6
4.5
5.4
9.7
7.8
-5.8
2.8

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/

-5.5

-8.1

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (percent)
GDP deflator in U.S. dollars (percent change)
Nominal external interest rate (percent)
Growth of exports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Growth of imports (U.S. dollar terms, percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net nondebt creating capital inflows

10.0
11.2
2.7
22.3
33.2
-3.5
1.0

8.6
12.7
3.8
24.2
28.0
-6.1
3.6

10.2
21.7
4.1
33.9
36.7
-7.8
3.3

0.2
-19.1
3.3
-32.8
-27.0
-12.0
3.5

7.6
3.3
3.0
19.9
23.0
-14.8
2.2

1/ Derived as [r - g - r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; r = change in domestic GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate, e = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value
of domestic currency), and a = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-r(1+g) + ea(1+r)]/(1+g+r+gr) times previous period debt stock. r increases with an appreciating domestic currency (e > 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels of the last projection year.

37

Baseline: external debt

Debt-stabilizing
noninterest current
account 6/

38

Appendix I. Figure 1. Belarus: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of the
Baseline Scenario 1/ (External debt in percent of GDP)
90

Baseline and Historical Scenarios
Gross financing need under
baseline
(right scale)

50

Baseline

70

90

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)
Interest rate
shock

75
40

Historical

90

70

76
75

70

Baseline

50

30

50

20

30

50

38
30

10
2006

90

2008

2010

2012

2014

10
2016

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

90

10
2006

90

2008

2010

70

75

70

5.3
5.7

Historical:

2.8

2012

2008

2010

Baseline:

4.8

Scenario:

3.1

Historical:

7.4

2012

90
86

70

75

2014

50

50

30

30

10
2016

10
2006

50

2008

2010

Baseline:

-8.3

Scenario:

-10.8

Historical:

-5.4

2012

2014

30

10
2016

Real Depreciation Shock 3/

Combined Shock 2/
90
Combined
shock
70

83

90

75

50

130

130
30 %
depreciation

110
90
50

110
90

70

75
Baseline

50
30

122

70

Baseline

70
50

30
30

10
2006

70

Baseline

50

10
2006

10
2016

2014

Current
account
shock

Baseline

30

30

Noninterest Current Account Shock
(Percent of GDP)

79

Growth
shock

Baseline:
Scenario:

2008

2010

2012

2014

10
2016

10
2006

30

2008

2010

2012

2014

10
2016

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes represent
average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is
also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2011.

Appendix I. Table 2. Belarus: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006–16
(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual
2006

2007

2008

Projections
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

8.9
6.5

10.7
7.0

20.0
18.6

22.4
21.4

25.5
24.6

26.9
26.1

28.9
28.3

28.5
28.1

29.8
29.5

29.2
28.9

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which: contribution from real interest rate
Of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/

-1.9
-0.9
-1.8
49.1
47.3
-1.1
-1.1
-0.4
-0.7
0.0
2.0
1.2
0.0
0.9
-1.0

2.5
-3.4
-0.8
49.5
48.6
-0.8
-0.8
-0.3
-0.5
0.0
-1.8
-2.6
0.0
0.8
5.9

1.7
1.9
3.0
50.6
53.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.0
-0.7
0.1
0.6
-1.0
0.0
1.5
-0.2

9.4
0.8
-0.1
45.7
45.6
2.3
0.2
0.2
0.0
2.1
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
0.0
8.5

2.4
2.6
3.6
41.9
45.6
-1.7
-2.5
-1.2
-1.3
0.8
0.6
-0.6
0.0
1.3
-0.2

3.1
-3.8
0.9
41.2
42.1
-2.9
-2.9
-1.6
-1.3
...
-1.8
-1.8
0.0
0.0
6.9

1.4
-3.0
0.4
40.5
40.9
-2.0
-2.0
-1.0
-1.1
...
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
0.0
4.4

1.9
-3.0
-0.2
40.2
40.1
-1.5
-1.5
-0.3
-1.1
...
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
0.0
4.9

-0.4
-3.4
-0.9
40.1
39.2
-1.2
-1.2
0.1
-1.2
...
-1.4
-1.4
0.0
0.0
3.0

1.3
-3.7
-1.8
39.9
38.2
-0.6
-0.6
0.6
-1.2
...
-1.3
-1.3
0.0
0.0
5.0

-0.6
-3.7
-2.1
39.8
37.7
-0.4
-0.4
0.9
-1.2
...
-1.2
-1.2
0.0
0.0
3.1

Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/

13.0

18.1

21.1

43.9

53.5

62.0

66.5

71.8

71.1

74.6

73.3

Gross financing need 6/
Billions of U.S. dollars

-1.2
-0.5

-0.2
-0.1

4.1
2.5

1.0
0.5

4.6
2.5

3.5
2.3

3.7
2.7

5.3
4.3

4.6
4.0

3.7
3.6

3.3
3.5

25.5
25.5

23.3
36.1

21.4
42.3

18.7
48.9

17.8
56.4

16.1
63.8

6.9
5.7
-7.6
...
13.3
-1.3
0.9

4.8
6.0
-3.9
...
9.8
2.1
0.4

4.8
7.2
-1.0
...
8.2
2.7
-0.2

4.8
8.0
0.6
...
7.4
2.5
-0.9

4.7
9.3
2.5
...
6.8
2.0
-1.8

4.6
9.5
3.6
...
5.9
3.3
-2.1

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2011–16

-1.9

39

6.4
2.3

Baseline: public sector debt 1/
Of which: foreign-currency denominated

Debt-stabilizing
primary balance
9/

-5.0
-1.2

Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in U.S. dollar value of local currency, percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, percent)
Primary deficit

10.0
5.5
-5.3
0.6
10.8
9.1
-1.8

8.6
7.7
-5.1
-0.5
12.8
11.8
-0.8

10.2
8.5
-12.6
-2.3
21.2
21.5
3.0

0.2
7.7
2.0
-23.2
5.7
-14.7
-0.1

7.6
4.0
-6.2
-4.6
10.2
7.6
3.6

1/ Gross debt of general government (including guarantees) and of monetary authorities.
2/ Derived as [(r - (1+g - g + (1+r]/(1+g++g)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate;  = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate;  = share of foreign-currency denominated debt; and e
= nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

40

Appendix I. Figure 2. Belarus: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests of
Baseline Scenario 1/ (Public debt in percent of GDP)
Baseline and Historical Scenarios

50

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

40

Historical
29

Baseline

30

6

50

5

40

5

30

Interest Rate Shock (Percent)
46
Interest rate
shock

40

30
29

Baseline
20

16

10

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

20

4

10

3
2016

2014

Growth Shock (Percent per year)

50

4

50

0
2006

80

20

2008

2010

40

Growth
shock

30

60

Baseline
20

0.4
11.3

Historical:

-19.4

2012

2014

Baseline:

0.9

Scenario:

0.1

Historical:

-0.8

No policy
change

30
29

Baseline:
Scenario:

40

0
2006

2008

2010

Baseline:

4.8

Scenario:

3.1

Historical:

7.4

2012

2014

10

0
2016

Combined Shock 2/

50

50

Combined
shock

40

41

40

30

20

2008

2010

2012

2014

2014

40

20

0
2016

50

30 %
depreciation

44

40

40

30

30
29

Baseline

10

0
2006

2012

29

Real Depreciation and
Contingent Liabilities Shocks 3/

29
20

10

2010

33

39

30
Baseline

50

2008

80

60

Baseline

20

0
2006

0
2016

64

Primary
balance
shock

20

10

10

Primary balance shock (percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario

42
40

50

0
2016

20

20
Contingent
liabilities
shock

10

0
2006

2008

2010

2012

10

2014

0
2016

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the boxes represent
average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is
also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2011, with real depreciation defined
as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation
and Proposal for Post-Program Monitoring—Informational Annex
Prepared by the European Department in Consultation with
Other Departments and the World Bank
February 17, 2011

Contents

Page

I.

Fund Relations .............................................................................................................2

II.

World Bank Relations ..................................................................................................7

III.

Statistical Issues .........................................................................................................11

2
ANNEX I. BELARUS: FUND RELATIONS
As of January 31, 2011
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 10, 1992; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:

SDR million

Percent of Quota

386.40
2,655.92
0.02

100.00
687.35
0.01

SDR million

Percent of Allocation

368.64
368.65

100.00
100.00

SDR Million

Percent of Quota

2,269.52

587.35

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Stand-By Arrangements

V.

VI.

Financial Arrangements:
Type

Approval
Date

Expiration
Date

Amount Approved
(SDR million)

Amount Drawn
(SDR million)

Stand-By
Stand-By

01/12/2009
09/12/1995

03/30/2010
09/11/1996

2,269.52
196.28

2,269.52
50.00

Projected Payments to the Fund1/ (SDR million; based on existing use of resources
and present holdings of SDRs):
Forthcoming
2012
2013
2014
2015
Principal
248.92
1,080.02
885.84
54.74
54.10
52.5
37.72
8.61
0.56
Charges/Interest
54.10
301.42
1,117.74
894.45
55.30
Total
1/ When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the
amount of such arrears will be shown in this section.
2011

3
VII.

Safeguards Assessments:

Voluntary (non-program related) assessment of the NBRB was completed in April 2004. The
assessment concluded that significant vulnerabilities existed in the safeguards framework,
especially in the areas of the legal structure and independence, external and internal audit, and
in financial reporting. The assessment made specific recommendations to correct the identified
shortcomings.
An update assessment of the NBRB, which was completed in May 2009 in connection with the
Stand-By Arrangement approved on January 12, 2009, found little progress in addressing
previously identified vulnerabilities. The assessment determined that risks have increased
since the voluntary 2004 assessment and recommended the following measures:






Adopting a new law that provides operational and financial independence for the
NBRB to ensure the effectiveness of the NBRB’s internal and external audit
mechanisms and the control systems,
Conducting special audits of NIR and NDA data to reduce the risk of misreporting,
Divesting the NBRB’s investment in non-financial subsidiaries, and
Publishing the audited IFRS financial statements.

The NBRB is taking steps to address the weaknesses. Special audits of NIR and NDA data for
March, June, September and December 2009 test dates were completed.
VIII.

Exchange Arrangements:

As of August 20, 1994, the rubel became the unit of account replacing the Belarusian ruble,
which was formally recognized as the sole legal tender only on May 18, 1994. The conversion
took place at the rate of 10 Belarusian rubles = 1 rubel. The authorities decided to drop three
zeroes from the rubel denomination as of January 1, 2000.
In mid-September 2000, the official exchange rate was unified with the market-determined
rate resulting from daily auctions at the Belarus Currency and Stock Exchange. Since then, the
official rate on any day is equal to the closing rate of the previous trading day. On
January 1, 2008 the exchange rate was set in the framework of horizontal corridor for the
U.S. dollar around central parity. The earlier arrangement, introduced in 2006, entailed
reference to two horizontal corridors around central parity for the Russian ruble (±4 percent)
and U.S. dollar (±2.5 percent).
The de jure exchange rate arrangement is a pegged exchange rate within a horizontal band.
Since January 2, 2009, the exchange rate of the rubel has been pegged to a basket of
currencies, including the euro, the U.S. dollar, and the Russian ruble. Initially, the band was
set at ±5%. As of June 22, 2009 the band was expanded to ±10% relative to the value of the
basket at the time of its introduction (960 rubels per currency basket). Effective January 1,

4
2010, the central exchange rate of the band was adjusted to the rubel actual rate (1,036 rubels
per currency basket) from the initial rate. As of January 1, 2011 the band was narrowed to
±8% and the central exchange rate of the band was adjusted to 1054.7 rubels per currency
basket. However, for more than 6 months, the rubel has remained within a 2% band against the
U.S. dollar, and the de facto exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified as “stabilized”.
The NBRB does not publish data on its interventions.
On November 5, 2001, Belarus accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of
the IMF’s Articles of Agreement. During the same month, the NBRB suspended all ad hoc
exemptions from the 30 percent surrender requirement. The NBRB introduced administrative
measures with a purpose of reducing demand for foreign exchange in January 2011. They
include a ban on obtaining foreign exchange for advance import payments through loans from
domestic banks and an increase in the surcharge on forex trade to 2 percent in the stock
exchange. Staff is currently reviewing the recently adopted measures to assess their
jurisdictional implications. Based on currently available information, Belarus does not
maintain exchange restrictions or multiple currency practices.
IX.

UFR/Article IV Consultation:

Belarus is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation was concluded
on October 21, 2009 and a report was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=23493.0.
Article IV discussions took place in the course of two missions. The discussions started in
November 2010 and, following significant developments in December 2010, were
continued during the second mission in early 2011:


Initial Article IV consultation mission. A staff team comprising Messrs. Jarvis
(head), Ding, Kovtun and Ms. Lis (all EUR), Messrs. Bibolov (MCM), Forni (FAD),
and Turunen (SPR) visited Minsk during November 3–16, 2010. The team met with the
Prime Minister, Mr. Sidorsky; the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Kobyakov; the
Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus, Mr. Prokopovich; the
Minister of Finance, Mr. Kharkovetz; the Minister of Economy, Mr. Snopkov; the
Deputy Head of the Presidential Administration, Mr. Anfimov, and other senior
officials. Mr. McGettigan (EPE mission chief) joined the mission during November 1011. Ms. Koliadina, the Resident Representative, assisted the mission.



Article IV consultation continuation mission. A staff team comprising Messrs. Jarvis
(head), Kovtun and Ms. Lis (all EUR), Messrs. Bibolov (MCM), Forni (FAD), and
Turunen (SPR) visited Minsk during January 25–February 3, 2011. The team met with
the Prime Minister, Mr. Miasnikovich; the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Rumas; the
Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus, Mr. Prokopovich; the

5
Minister of Finance, Mr. Kharkovetz; the Minister of Economy, Mr. Snopkov; the
Deputy Head of the Presidential Administration, Mr. Kobiakov, and other senior
officials. Ms. Koliadina, the Resident Representative, assisted the mission.
Stand-By Arrangement. A 15-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of
SDR 1.6 billion (US$2.5 billion, 418.8 percent of quota) was approved by the Executive Board
(EBS/09/1) on January 12, 2009. An augmentation of the SBA was approved on June 29, 2009
in conjunction with the completion of the first review (EBS/09/99), bringing the Fund’s
financial support to SDR 2.3 billion (US$3.5 billion, 587.3 percent of quota). The final review
was completed on March 26, 2010. Total disbursements under the program amounted to
SDR 2.3 billion (US$3.5 billion).

X.

FSAP Participation, ROSCs, and OFC Assessments:

Two FSAP missions took place in 2004 and an FSSA report was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18367.0.
The detailed assessment reports were disseminated in May 2006 for the Basel Core Principles
for Effective Banking Supervision on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19246.0, for the Transparency of
Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19248.0, and the Technical Note Deposit Insurance on http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=19250.0. The
detailed assessment report was disseminated in May 2007 for Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism.
An FSAP update mission took place in September 2008. An FSSA update report was
published in January 2009 (IMF Country Report No 09/30,
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=22656.0)
The fiscal ROSC was published on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=17839.0 and the data ROSC on
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.cfm?sk=18013.0.

XI.

Technical Assistance, 2006–10:
Department
Counterpart
MCM
MCM

Subject
Banking supervision: on-site inspections
Banking Supervision: early warning system, risk
management

Timing
September 2010
March -April 2010

6
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM
MCM

Strengthening central bank autonomy
NBRB refinancing of banks
Banking regulation: loan classification and
provisioning
Monetary policy: forecasting and policy analysis
Exchange rate regime, foreign exchange operations
FSAP Update
Financial stability and external debt management
Banking supervision: financial stability issues,
stress-testing
Building a system for forecasting and policy
analysis

March 2010
November 2009
April 2009
February-March 2009
December 2008
September 2008
January 2008
July 2007
June 2008
October 2007
July 2007
May 2007
April 2007
March 2007

MCM
MCM
MCM

Strengthening forecasting and policy analysis
Banking supervision: on-site inspection
Banking supervision: stress-testing, financial
stability

MCM

Insurance supervision

MCM

Monetary policies analysis and forecasting

MCM

Banking supervision: on-site inspection

January 2007

MCM

Improving monetary policy

January 2007

FAD

Tax administration

September 2010

FAD

Tax policy

April 2010

FAD

Expenditure rationalization

March 2010

FAD

Tax system reform

October 2009

FAD

Introduction of a medium-term fiscal framework
(MTF)

March-April 2009

FAD

Program budgeting reform implementation

FAD

Fiscal diagnostic mission

September 2006

STA

Multitopic Statistics Mission

October -November 2010

STA

National accounts statistics

January 2008

STA

Balance of payments and external sector statistics

January 2008

STA

Government finance statistics

September-October 2007

STA

National accounts statistics

October 2006

March 2007
February 2007

March 2008
November 2007
May 2007

7
ANNEX II. BELARUS: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
The World Bank Group Strategy
1. The recent World Bank Group (WBG) Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Belarus
for FY 2008-2011 was approved on December 4, 2007. The FY08-11 CAS envisioned a
modest but a scaled-up engagement with Belarus, including up to US$100 million in annual
lending volumes to support the country in addressing global environment and energy
challenges, enhancing the competitiveness of its economy to assure rising incomes, and
protecting the welfare of the most vulnerable. Analytic and advisory work comprised a core
element of the program.
2. In the wake of the crisis and in recognition of the accelerated pace of structural reforms
undertaken by the government, a CAS Progress Report increased lending during the final two
years of the CAS to US$250 million per annum and deployed a wider range of instruments,
including Development Policy Lending (DPL). This includes a US$200 million DPL in
FY10, as well as a US$150 million Road Upgrading and Modernization project, an
approximately US$30 million Additional Financing for the Post-Chernobyl Recovery project,
and about US$100 million DPL-1 (first in a programmatic series) in FY11. To date, the Bank
lending commitments in Belarus total US$865 million, with US$22.8 million provided as
grants.
3. The IFC strategy aims at providing advisory services and investment operations to foster
private sector development. IFC’s advisory services under the Belarus Regulatory
Simplification and Investment Generation Program (August 2010-January 2013) focus on
improvement of business environment and investment climate, particularly regulatory
simplification related to business operations, as well as on building government capacity for
investment generation. IFC’s recently launched Belarus Food Safety Improvement advisory
project endeavours to increase the competitiveness of Belarusian food producers by
improving their food safety practices, raising awareness and facilitating wider
implementation of best international food safety management practices. To date, the IFC
investment commitments in Belarus total approximately US$300 million; divided almost
equally between financial markets and the real sector. IFC’s investments will continue to
focus on financial markets, general manufacturing, climate change and agribusiness sectors
and expected to exceed $100 million per year.
IMF-World Bank Collaboration in Specific Areas
4. The Bank and the Fund teams work closely in calibrating and delivering their assistance.
The IMF plays a key role at the macro level, while the World Bank focuses on the structural
agenda, energy efficiency, social and environmental issues. Discussions under the IMF SBA
and preparation of the first IBRD DPL, joint work with the Government working group on
structural reforms issues, preparation of the high-level seminar on structural reforms in
March 2010, preparation of the Joint WBG-IMF comments on the draft Presidential
Directive on Economic Liberalization are the most recent examples of close cooperation and
coordination between the Bank and the Fund.

8
Areas in Which the World Bank Leads
5. Structural reforms, social issues, and private business development. In FY10, the
Bank delivered a series of Economic Policy Notes, background materials and discussions for
which have informed the preparation of the first DPL. The Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM) and the first (in a series of two) programmatic Public Expenditure Review (PER-I)
will be the key analytical products in FY11. Additionally, the Bank will continue to be
engaged in technical assistance to help improve the targeting of social assistance programs
and ensure pension system sustainability in Belarus. Technical assistance (TA) on
privatization will be another key product in FY11, including through the Belarus Austrian
Technical Assistance – Trust Fund for Privatization (US$ 5 million). The privatization TA is
focused on providing advice on legal and institutional instruments and implementation
capacities to successfully launch and roll-out a privatization program that is both on par with
international best practice and able to be tailored to the particular industry/business. The IFC
delivers an active advisory program around challenges facing the private sector and
international “best practices” for improving the business regulatory environment.
6. Energy sector. Currently, three energy efficiency projects are being implemented in
Belarus with World Bank’s financial support: the Post Chernobyl Recovery Project (US$50
million), the Additional Financing for the Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project (SIRP)
(US$15 million), and the Energy Efficiency Project (EEP) (US$125 million). The Additional
Financing Loan for the Post Chernobyl Recovery Project (US$30 million) has been approved
by the Board on September 28, 2010, and is expected to become effective in January 2011.
7. Environment. The Bank supports Belarus’ efforts in strengthening its environment
institutions, addressing key public health challenges, and complying with its international
commitments. Two TA projects are currently under implementation: (i) the IDF Grant for
Enhancing Institutional and Legal Framework for Environmental Permitting in Belarus
(US$0.44 million); and (ii) the GEF Grant Project (US$5 million) for Persistent Organic
Pollutant (POPs) Stockpile Management and Technical/Institutional Capacity Upgrading.
Progress is being made towards achieving improved water, wastewater and solid waste
management services under the Water Supply and Sanitation Project (US$60 million) and the
Solid Waste Management Project (US$42.5 million).
8. Transport Infrastructure Development. A 2010 Transport Policy Note contributes to
the dialogue on policy and investment options in the transport sector. A Road Upgrading and
Modernization project (US$ 150 million) has been approved by the Board on November 11,
2010, and is expected to become effective in January 2011.
Areas of Shared Responsibility
9. Macroeconomic development. The two institutions discuss and consult with each other
in the preparation of the macroeconomic framework and debt sustainability analysis, as well
as in the preparation of analytical pieces on macro-growth issues.
10. Public expenditure management. In FY 09, the Bank completed the first Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment for Belarus. The Fund, jointly
with the Bank, has been working on rationalizing expenditures, primarily through subsidy
cuts and reducing the cost of pensions. The Bank will focus on improving the efficiency of
public spending.

9
11. Debt management. Debt management is an area of priority reform for Belarus. The
Bank plans to conduct Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) in Belarus in
FY11. The application of the DeMPA tool would facilitate the assessment of the strengths
and weaknesses in debt management to help design of plans for strengthening debt
management capacity and monitoring progress over time. The DeMPA work will build on
the findings of the WB and IMF TA earlier missions in debt management and in access to
capital markets.
12. Financial sector. The 2008 FSAP Update, prepared jointly by the Bank and the Fund,
provided valuable insights on the key vulnerabilities in the financial sector and reforms
needed and formed the basis of the follow-up dialogue. In FY10, the Bank conducted
financial sector monitoring jointly with the IMF and will continue doing so in FY11. The
World Bank will maintain an active dialog with the authorities on bank privatization and
restructuring, as well as on reforms in the securities and insurance sectors.
Areas in Which the IMF Leads
13. The IMF is actively engaged with the authorities in discussing the macroeconomic
program, providing technical assistance and related support, including support on economic
and financial statistics, tax policy, monetary operations, and fiscal transparency. The IMF is
leading the dialogue on setting the objectives for monetary and exchange rate policies,
overall budget envelope, and tax policy.
14. The IMF analysis in these areas serves as an input to the Bank policy advice. The Bank
and the IMF teams have regular consultations, and the Bank staff takes part in the IMF
Article IV Consultations. This helps to ensure consistency of policy recommendations by the
two institutions.
15. Questions may be referred to Connie Luff (Country Program Coordinator, ECCU2,
202-458-4068), Gallina A.Vincelette (Senior Economist, ECSPE, 202-473-0288), and
Marina Bakanova (Senior Country Economist, ECSPE, 375-17-2265284).

10
Belarus: Bank and Fund planned activities in macro-critical structural reform areas in 2011
Title

Products

1.Bank Work
Program
(AAA)

Belarus Country Economic
Memorandum

2.Fund Work
Program

Provisional Timing of
Missions
Ongoing

Expected Delivery Date
June 2011

Programmatic Public
Expenditure Review (PER) ‐
phase 1

Ongoing

March 2011

Programmatic Public
Expenditure Review (PER) ‐
phase 2

Ongoing

December 2011

Debt Management
Performance Assessment

May 2011

August 2011

TA on social policies

Ongoing

TA through 2010‐11

Financial Sector Monitoring
TA

Ongoing

TA through 2010‐11

Privatization TA

Ongoing

TA through 2010‐11

TA in environmental policies
and institutions (grants)

Ongoing

TA through 2010‐11

TA on program budgeting
and medium‐term framework

March‐April 2011

TA report to government in
May 2011

11
ANNEX III. BELARUS— STATISTICAL ISSUES
As of February 10, 2011
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General:
Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance. The most
affected area is external debt data.
National Accounts: The National Statistics Committee (NSC) compiles and disseminates
quarterly and annual GDP estimates at current and constant prices following the 1993 System
of National Accounts. The quality of the estimates is good, and the timeliness and periodicity
exceed the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) requirements. In addition to the
quarterly and annual estimates, a monthly GDP is compiled 15 days after the end of the
reference month. The NSC compiles annually a full set of accounts (up to the financial
accounts), institutional sector accounts, and input-output tables. It has started the compilation
of experimental estimates of regional GDP at current and constant prices – monthly,
quarterly and annual. The accuracy of the source data is good, and the statistical techniques
used are sound. The national accounts estimates are internally consistent, and they are also
consistent with other macroeconomic statistics. All other real sector data are disseminated in
accordance with the SDDS requirements.
Price Statistics:
The CPI covers 31 towns in the country and the PPI covers 1,467 industrial organizations,
and they are published monthly. In addition to the general CPI index, the NSC also publishes
indices for foodstuffs, non-food goods, and services. The CPI is based on weights from 2008.
Detailed PPI weight data are not published.
Government finance statistics:
Government finance statistics are compiled in broad compliance with the recommendations
of the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). Areas that need
improvement include classification of some expenses (e.g. subsidies to corporations, social
benefits to households, capital transfers to corporations); inconsistency between GFS and
monetary data; valuation of assets and liabilities (at nominal or market value); and
compilation for public corporations.
Monetary statistics: Monetary and Financial Statistics are compiled by the National Bank of
the Republic of Belarus (NBRB), broadly following methodology of the IMF’s Monetary and
Financial Statistics Manual (MFSM). However, there are some problems related to the
treatment of the IMF accounts, compilation of the monetary base, and classification of some
institutional units.

12
External sector statistics:
The NBRB publishes quarterly balance of payments and international investment position
statements in the BPM5 format and is transitioning to BPM6. Overall the timeliness and
serviceability of external sector data is satisfactory, although there are gaps in external debt
data.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Belarus subscribed to the Special Data
A data ROSC report was published on
Dissemination System (SDDS) on
February 1, 2005.
December 22, 2004.

13
BELARUS: TABLE OF COMMON INDICATORS REQUIRED FOR SURVEILLANCE
(As of February 10, 2011)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
7
data

Frequency
of
7
reporting

Frequency
of
7
publication

Exchange Rates

Feb. 2011

02/8/11

D/W/M

D

D

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
1
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

Dec 2010

01/15/11

D/W/M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

Dec. 2010

01/15/11

D/W/M

M

M

Broad Money

Dec. 2010

01/15/11

W/M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

Dec. 2010

01/15/11

D/W/M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

Dec. 2010

01/15/11

W/M

M

M

Feb. 2011

02/8/11

D/W/M

D/W/M

D/W/M

M

M

M

Q

Q

Q

Interest Rates

2

Consumer Price Index

Dec. 2010

01/11/11

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – General
4
Government

Q4 2010

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
3
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

Dec. 2010

01/28/11

M

M

Q

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

Dec. 2010

01/28/11

M

M

Q

External Current Account Balance

Nov. 2010

01/18/11

M

M

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

Dec. 2010

02/08/11

M

M

Q

GDP/GNP

Dec. 2010

01/11/11

M

M

M/Q

Q3 2010

12/15/10

Q

Q

Q

Q3 2010

12/15/10

Q

Q

Q

Gross External Debt
International Investment Position
1

6

01/28/11

Memo Items:
Data Quality –
Methodological
9
soundness

8

Data Quality
Accuracy
10
and reliability

O, O, LO, LO

O, O, O, O, O

O, LO, O, LO

O, O, LO, LO,
O

LO, LNO, O, O

O, O, O, O,
NO

O, O, LO, LO

LO, O, O, O,
O

O, O, LO, O

LO, LNO, LO,
O, LO

Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign
currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a
foreign currency but settled by other means.
2
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Including external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7
Daily (D); Weekly (W); Monthly (M); Quarterly (Q); Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
8
These columns should only be included for countries for which Data ROSC (or a Substantive Update) has been published.
9
Reflects the assessment provided in the data ROSC published February 1, 2005 and based on the findings of the mission that took place during March 23 to
April 7, 2004 for the dataset corresponding to the variable in each row. The assessment indicates whether international standards concerning (respectively)
concepts and definitions, scope, classification/sectorization, and basis for recording are fully observed (O), largely observed (LO), largely not observed (LNO), or
not observed (NO).
10
Same as footnote 7, except referring to international standards concerning (respectively) source data, statistical techniques, assessment and validation of source
data, assessment and valid.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/34
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
March 09, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation with
Belarus
On March 4, 2011 the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with Belarus.1
Background
For nearly a decade before the crisis, Belarus’s economy grew rapidly but remained vulnerable
to external shocks. The crisis exposed the external weaknesses and prompted the authorities to
embark on a Fund-supported adjustment program. The program aimed at addressing the
vulnerabilities and establishing conditions for sustainable growth: the exchange rate was
realigned and supported by a new exchange rate regime, monetary and the fiscal policies were
tightened, and several important structural reforms initiated. Belarus avoided output loss during
the crisis and completed program in March 2010. However, the current account deficit failed to
adjust due to the strength of the external shock but also owing to high credit growth spurred by
lending under government programs.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
After the end of the program policies have been loosened to the extent of becoming
unsustainable: 12-month credit growth rate increased to 38 percent in the end of 2010, 1st grade
wage in the budget sector was increased by about 50 percent, and the Republican budget
deficit limit was increased to 3 percent of GDP. Moreover, the National Bank of the Republic of
Belarus (NBRB) did not make use of the exchange rate flexibility provided by the existing
exchange rate system. Loose macroeconomic policies succeeded in increasing the growth rate
of GDP to about 7½ percent, but at the cost of estimated further increase in the current account
deficit to about 16 percent of GDP and strong pressures on the international reserves. Gross
reserves were supported by a sharp increase in foreign currency borrowing by the NBRB from
Belarusian commercial banks at the end of 2010: during all of 2010, the stock of such borrowing
amounted to some US$3.8 billion, with US$2.3 billion having been accumulated in the final
quarter of the year.
Belarus’s prospects are expected to improve due to the recent agreement on the Common
Economic Area with Russia and Kazakhstan, but it would not be sufficient to restore current
account sustainability without significant adjustment measures. The new agreement with Russia
on the regime for oil imports reached in December 2010 will entail the net gain of about 2
percent of GDP in the oil balance, but it does not fundamentally change the outlook. Without
prompt adjustment measures, the current account deficit will remain too high. The authorities
need to make quickly difficult decisions to restore external sustainability.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for the progress made under the Fundsupported program that expired in March 2010. Under this program, Belarus avoided loss of
output during the global recession, contained inflation, and increased gross reserves. Against
this background, Directors regretted the recent relaxation of macroeconomic policies which has
boosted domestic demand and has contributed to an unsustainable current account deficit. To
restore external sustainability, they stressed the urgent need for policy adjustments and farreaching structural reforms.
Directors underscored that reducing the current account deficit is critical. They emphasized the
need for fiscal and monetary tightening and cuts in lending under government programs. Noting
the impact of high credit and wage growth on the external accounts, Directors reiterated the
importance of prudent monetary policy and a lower wage bill in the public sector. In general,
they considered that exchange rate flexibility would also facilitate the adjustment.
Directors expressed concern about the authorities’ decision to borrow foreign exchange from
domestic banks to meet mounting pressures on international reserves. They encouraged the
authorities to refrain from such borrowing and reorient macroeconomic policies to support the
balance of payments.

3

Directors welcomed the plans for structural reforms contained in the Program for Social and
Economic Development for 2011-15 and the recently adopted President’s Directive aimed at
liberalizing the economy. These reforms, if accompanied by macroeconomic adjustment, would
help address structural balance of payments problems and improve competitiveness. Directors
urged the authorities to pursue an ambitious structural reform agenda centered on economic
liberalization, a shift in investment from the housing sector to the tradable sector, a smaller role
of the state, and the development of the financial sector. They agreed that establishing a
Development Bank to administer lending under government programs would free the central
bank and commercial banks from a quasi-fiscal activity.
Directors welcomed the opportunity to review Belarus’ experience with the 2009 exceptional
access Stand-By Arrangement. They agreed with the main message from the ex post
evaluation that the Fund-supported program was generally successful. Directors stressed the
need to ensure ownership, including at the highest levels, of program design and conditionality.
They saw merit in continued close engagement with the Fund but stressed that any future
financial arrangement should be accompanied by a credible commitment to strong stabilityoriented policies and an ambitious structural reform agenda. Directors supported the proposal to
initiate post-program monitoring, which would enhance the policy dialogue between the Belarus
authorities and the Fund.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2011 Article IV Consultation with Belarus is also available.

4
Belarus: Selected Economic Indicators, 2007–11
2007
2008

2009
Prel.

2010
Est.

2011
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified)
National accounts
Real GDP
Total domestic demand
Consumption
Nongovernment
Government
Investment
Of which: fixed
Net exports 1/
Consumer prices
End of period
Average
Monetary accounts
Rubel broad money
Growth of credit to the economy at constant exchange rates

8.6
11.9
9.7
13.4
-0.5
16.4
16.4
-1.5

10.2
17.8
12.5
16.3
0.3
28.2
23.8
-9.4

0.2
-1.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-2.9
5.0
1.5

7.6
10.3
7.0
8.6
1.3
16.1
16.6
-4.3

6.9
4.7
5.7
6.9
1.0
2.9
3.0
1.4

12.1
8.4

13.3
14.8

10.1
13.0

9.9
7.7

10.5
11.0

35.0
48.5

22.5
50.0

1.0
27.7

27.5
38.2

13.2
24.8

(Percent of GDP)
External debt and balance of payments
Current account
Trade balance
Exports of goods
Imports of goods
Gross external debt
Public 2/
Private (mostly state-owned-enterprises)
Savings and investment
Gross domestic investment
National saving
Public sector finance
Republican and local government balance
General government balance 3/
Revenue
Expenditure 4/
Of which:
Wages
Subsidies and transfers
Investment
Gross public debt

-6.7
-8.9
53.8
-62.7
27.7
6.5
21.2

-8.6
-10.3
54.0
-64.3
25.0
6.8
18.1

-13.0
-14.1
43.4
-57.5
44.9
18.1
26.7

-16.0
-16.9
46.3
-63.2
52.4
21.2
31.2

-14.1
-11.7
51.3
-62.9
57.3
24.3
33.0

34.1
27.4

37.6
29.0

37.3
24.3

42.8
26.8

39.5
25.4

-0.6
0.4
49.5
49.0

0.0
-3.5
50.6
54.1

-1.8
-0.7
45.7
46.4

-2.6
-4.3
41.9
46.3

-3.0
-2.2
40.9
43.1

8.0
10.5
8.5
8.9

6.6
11.5
10.0
10.7

6.7
11.7
8.1
20.0

7.1
8.4
8.4
22.4

8.0
7.8
6.0
25.5

(Annual percentage change, unless indicated otherwise)
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (billions of U.S. dollars)
45.3
60.8
49.2
54.7
…
Nominal GDP (trillions of rubels)
97.2
129.8
137.4
163.0
197.4
Terms of trade
-1.5
8.6
-8.0
-1.0
3.8
Real effective exchange rate
-3.9
1.6
-4.5
-4.9
1.2
Official reserves (billions of U.S. dollars)
4.2
3.1
5.7
5.0
6.2
Months of imports of goods and services
1.2
1.2
1.8
1.4
1.5
Percent of short-term debt
56.8
40.4
63.2
42.5
46.2
Financing gap (billions of U.S. dollars)
…
…
…
4.6
Sources: Belarusian authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Gross consolidated debt of the public sector (central bank and general government debt including publicly guaranteed debt).
3/ Refers to the augmented balance of the general government.
4/ Refers to the augmented expenditure of the general government.

