© 2010 International Monetary Fund

December 2010
IMF Country Report No. 10/370

June 24, 2010
July 7, 2010
January 29, 2001
April 29, 2010
July xx, 2010
Sierra Leone: 2010 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Modification of Performance
Criterion, and Financing Assurances Review—Staff Report; Public Information Notice and
Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for
Sierra Leone.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2010 Article IV
Consultation with Sierra Leone and first review under the three-year arrangement under the extended
credit facility, request for modification of performance criterion, and financing assurances review, the
following documents have been released and are included in this package:


The staff report for the combined 2010 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the
Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Modification of
Performance Criterion, and Financing Assurances Review, prepared by a staff team of the
IMF, following discussions that ended on October 8, 2010, with the officials of Sierra Leone
on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on November 18, 2010. The views expressed in
the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Board of the IMF.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its December 6, 2010 discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.



A statement by the Executive Director for Sierra Leone.

The documents listed below have been separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Sierra Leone
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of Sierra Leone
Technical Memorandum of Understanding
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SIERRA LEONE
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the ThreeYear Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Modification of
Performance Criterion, and Financing Assurances Review
Prepared by the African Department
(In consultation with other departments)
Approved by Doris C. Ross and Dominique Desruelle
November 18, 2010
Fund relations. The Executive Board approved on June 4, 2010 a three-year ECF
arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 31.11 million (30 percent of quota). One
disbursement in the amount of SDR 4.44 million was made at the time of the approval.
Past Surveillance. During the 2008 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors
observed that enhancing domestic revenue mobilization and strengthening public
expenditure management should be a high priority in order to improve the fiscal position
and create space for poverty-reducing and infrastructure spending. Directors also called
for steps to strengthen bank supervision and implement structural reforms to promote
private sector activity. While progress has been made—notably a goods and services tax
was introduced, tax administration reforms continued, and bank supervision has
improved—further progress is needed in broadening the tax base, rebuilding
infrastructure, and developing the private sector.
Staff team. The mission comprised Mr. Mikkelsen (head), Ms. Saxena, Mr. Million and
Mr. Stepanyan (all AFR) and Mr. Palmason (SPR). It was assisted by Messrs. Tjirongo
and Sandy (Resident Representative Office). Mr. Itam (OED) participated in several
meetings.
Discussions. Discussions were held in Freetown, September 8–22, 2010 and in
Washington DC, October 4–8, 2010. The mission met with President Koroma, Finance
Minister Kamara, Central Bank Governor Sesay, parliamentarians, other government
officials, and representatives of civil society and donors.

2
Contents

Page

Abbreviations and Acronyms ....................................................................................................4
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................5
I. Background .............................................................................................................................6
II. Policy Challenges Ahead ......................................................................................................7
A. Development Priorities and Fiscal Sustainability ........................................................7
B. Revenue Potential from Mining ...................................................................................9
C. Competitiveness of the Economy...............................................................................11
D. Debt Sustainability .....................................................................................................13
III. Recent Economic Developments and Program Performance ............................................13
IV. Program Issues ...................................................................................................................16
A. Policies for the Remainder of 2010 ...........................................................................16
B. Policies for 2011 ........................................................................................................18
V. Program Risks .....................................................................................................................20
VI. Ex Post Assessment ...........................................................................................................20
VII. Staff Appraisal ..................................................................................................................21
Boxes
1. Infrastructure Needs: 2010–13 .............................................................................................8
2. Mining Exports and Revenue Potential .............................................................................10
3. Exchange Rate Assessment................................................................................................12
Figure
1. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2006–10 ..................................................................15
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators ............................................................................................23
2. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government (In billions of Leone) ................................24
3. Fiscal Operations of the Central Government (In percent of GDP) ..................................25
4. Monetary Accounts ............................................................................................................26
5. Balance of Payments ..........................................................................................................27
6. Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund..........................................................................28
7. Schedule of Disbursements Under the ECF Arrangement, 2010–12 ................................29
8. Millennium Development Goals ........................................................................................30
9. Financial Soundness Indicators of the Banking System, 2005–10 ....................................31

3
Appendix
Letter of Intent .........................................................................................................................32
Attachment I. Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies .............................34
Attachment II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding .........................................45

4
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACC
BOP
BSL
DfID
DSA
DTD
EC
ECF
EU
FHCI
FMR
FSDP
GBAA
GDP
GST
HIPC
IMF
JICA
LTO
MDAs
MDG
MDRI
MEFP
MOFED
MTEF
NEER
NRA
PC
PFM
PRS
PRSP
PV
REER
SDR
TA
TMU

Anti-Corruption Commission
Balance of Payments
Bank of Sierra Leone
U.K. Department for International Development
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Domestic Taxpayer Department
European Commission
Extended Credit Facility
European Union
Free Health Care Initiative
Financial Management Regulation
Financial Sector Development Plan
Government Budgeting and Accountability Act
Gross Domestic Product
Goods and Services Tax
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Monetary Fund
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Large Taxpayer Office
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
National Revenue Authority
Performance Criterion
Public Financial Management
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Present Value
Real Effective Exchange Rate
Special Drawing Right
Technical Assistance
Technical Memorandum of Understanding

5
Executive Summary


After the economic slowdown in 2009, the outlook this year for Sierra Leone is more
favorable. Growth is expected to pick up due to buoyant output in the service and
agriculture sectors. However, inflation will remain in double digits this year owing to the
one time jump in prices from the introduction of the goods and services tax, but is
expected to decline to single digits in 2011.



Program performance was satisfactory in the first half of 2010. All quantitative
performance criteria for end-June 2010 were met. The two structural benchmarks for
end-June on implementation of an automatic fuel pricing mechanism and adoption by the
Bank of Sierra Leone of new off-site surveillance guidelines were implemented with
delays.



Article IV consultation discussions focused on the authorities’ development priorities
and their financing while maintaining a competitive economy and a sustainable debt
outlook. The authorities intend to increase public spending on rebuilding basic
infrastructure and improving health care services and fund this by improving tax
administration and exploiting the revenue potential from the mining sector. The exchange
rate is broadly aligned with its fundamentals, and the risk of debt distress remains
moderate.



Fiscal spending in the second half of 2010 is projected to overshoot the program
because of higher health and infrastructure outlays, higher interest payments, and the
clearing of arrears to oil marketing companies. While part of this increase will be funded
by higher tax revenues, the authorities are requesting an increase in the program target for
net domestic bank financing for end-2010. To support this request, the authorities have
committed to a budget framework for 2011 that envisages higher domestic revenue and
moderate domestic borrowing. Moreover, they have raised royalties on diamonds and
eliminated existing fuel subsidies.



Structural reforms will focus on improving tax administration, strengthening public
financial management, and deepening the financial sector. The first two reform areas will
help create fiscal space for capital and social spending while the latter complements these
efforts by encouraging private sector development.



The risks to the program reflect fiscal uncertainties, but they appear to be
manageable. In particular, the development of the public sector wage bill is a concern,
following the more than doubling of salaries to health care professionals earlier this year.

6
I. BACKGROUND

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

1.
Although macroeconomic stability has been achieved, Sierra Leone remains a
post-conflict country whose growth prospects hinge on rebuilding infrastructure and
developing an accessible financial sector. The rebuilding efforts that followed the end of
the civil conflict in 2001 are far from complete—
Real GDP per capita, index (1990=100)
1990-2009
the country still suffers from lack of basic
110
infrastructure and weak institutions. Despite
100
relatively high economic growth in recent years, per 90
80
capita income remains low, poverty is pervasive
70
(estimates show that about 60 percent of the
60
population remains below the poverty line), and
50
Sierra Leone ranks at the bottom of the UN’s
Human Development Index.
Development Indicators: Sierra Leone (SLE) and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)
1990
SLE

SSA

2000
SLE

SSA

2007
SLE

SSA

712
…
40
…

2488
0.45
53
51

403
…
42
…

2877
0.50
53
61

679
0.36
47
38

3718
0.53
55
64

GDP per capita (US$)
Human Development Index 1/
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Adult literacy rate 2/

Sources: Human Development Report, UNDP and IMF staff calculation.
1/ In 2007, Sierra Leone ranked 180 out of 182 countries for which this index was calculated.
2/ Percentage of population aged 15 years and over.

2.
The Government of Sierra Leone launched in 2009 the Agenda for Change to
identify the key policy priorities for its poverty reduction strategy through 2012. The
Agenda for Change identifies lack of infrastructure as the key impediment to economic
growth and presents a strategy to accelerate public investments in infrastructure and promote
private sector development. The strategy also identifies a need to support agricultural
development and gradually strengthen health and education services. Although external
donors have provided substantive concessional resources to finance an increase in public
spending on infrastructure and social development, the financing gaps to implement the
strategy are still significant. The focus of the current ECF-supported program is to create
fiscal space for those spending priorities by strengthening tax performance and improving the
public financial management system, as well as deepening the financial sector.
3.
The medium term outlook for the Sierra Leonean economy is favorable.
Following a period of slow growth, real GDP growth is expected to recover to 4.5 percent in
2010 and increase gradually to 6 percent by 2012, benefiting from the recent completion of
the Bumbuna I power station, investment in basic infrastructure, and initiatives to improve
the business climate and increase agricultural productivity. The global economic recovery
would increase export demand for minerals and cash crops, which should contribute to

7
exchange rate stability. Combined with expanding domestic food production, this should ease
inflationary pressures. Monetary and exchange rate policies will aim at returning to singledigit inflation next year. However, import coverage of gross foreign exchange reserves is
expected to decline from the current relatively high level as imports rebound with economic
recovery and expansion in investment.
II. POLICY CHALLENGES AHEAD
4.
Against the backdrop of a difficult international economic environment with
continued weak external demand and a likely decline in external budget support to
Sierra Leone, the discussions focused on (i) development priorities and fiscal
sustainability; (ii) domestic revenue potential including from mining; (iii) competitiveness of
the economy; and (iv) the outlook for debt sustainability.
A. Development Priorities and Fiscal Sustainability
5.
The authorities are determined to implement the Agenda for
Change—Sierra Leone’s poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP). They are embarking
on an acceleration of public investments in basic infrastructure to remove one of the key
constraints to create an enabling environment for businesses and to reach a sustainable
growth path. At the same time, to ensure broad-based economic growth, where the quality of
life for all Sierra Leoneans improves, more investment is needed in health and education. The
authorities therefore intend to expand public spending on two fronts, in particular, in the
coming years:
(i)

Development of basic infrastructure. The authorities have identified priority
projects for roads, energy, water, and sanitation systems across the country (Box 1).
The plan will require a more than 10-fold increase in public infrastructure investment
in the period 2011–13 compared to 2008–10. Only about one-fourth of the increase in
investment is financed from current donor commitments and the projected mediumterm budget. However, a significant increase in commitments of concessional project
financing is expected from several donors, including the African Development Bank,
the European Union (EU), Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the
Islamic Development Bank, and India. Nevertheless, a substantial residual financing
gap for the three years will need to be closed by either raising domestic resources or
identifying additional sources of external financing.

(ii)

Improvements in health care. To reduce infant and maternal mortality and achieve
the MDGs, the government launched a new free health care initiative (FHCI) in April
2010. The initiative involves provision of cost-free medical care and drugs to these
vulnerable groups, hiring of health professionals and a significant improvement in the
compensation to professional health workers to ensure elimination of user fees in all
government hospitals and health centers. This initiative nearly doubled the
domestically financed expenditure on health care in 2010. The annual total cost for
2010–12 is estimated at 2.8 percent of GDP. About 40 percent of this reflects the

8
costs of medicines and other expenses, which are currently funded outside of the
budget by donors. Staff emphasized the importance of transparently showing the full
medium-term cost of this initiative in the budget to ensure the sustainability of the
initiative as donor support tapers off.
Box 1. Sierra Leone: Infrastructure Needs, 2010–13
The absence of basic infrastructure is a major obstacle to economic growth in Sierra Leone. The civil war
destroyed most of the key transport system, power generation and distribution installations, and water pipelines.
The government considers the achievements made since the end of the war as insufficient and it intends to
accelerate investments in infrastructure in the coming years. To this end, the government has identified a
number of priority projects to develop infrastructure for (i) roads, (ii) energy; and (iii) water and sanitation
systems. So far, external donor contributions to infrastructure development have been relatively small. During
2008–10, donors provided US$301 million in project support, of which only US$36 million was intended for
infrastructure development. For the same period, out of US$113 million domestically financed capital
expenditures, the government spent US$68 million on infrastructure.
The government expects that closer cooperation with external donors, including nontraditional donors like the
Islamic Development Bank, India, and China, will generate a stronger interest in supporting investments in
infrastructure. For 2011-13, the government estimates an infrastructure need of US$1.4 billion, of which, based
on current commitments, donors are projected to finance about US$176 million and the government
US$161 million. This leaves a financing gap of about US$1.1 billion, or 15 percent of 2011–13 GDP (Table 1).
The government expects that donors could provide an additional US$335 million. Furthermore, the plan is to
attract private investors to construct and own the Bumbuna II hydropower station at an estimated cost of
US$624 million. The remaining financing gap is US$96 million, which accounts for 1.4 percent of 2011–13
GDP. To finance this remaining gap, the government is considering two options: (i) increasing domestic
revenues; and (ii) issuing long-term government bonds. However, the authorities are cognizant of the need to
further develop the bond market in Sierra Leone before any significant amounts of long term-bonds could be
issued at a reasonable financing cost. Therefore, the focus will need to be on domestic revenue mobilization.
The identified key infrastructure projects include:
Road projects: (i) reconstructing key roads connecting different regions of the country such as MakeniMatotaka, Kenema-Koindu, Freetown- Conakry and the Port Loko-Lungi roads; and (ii) building rural roads
and roads connecting rural areas with main inter-region roads.
Energy projects: (i) Bumbuna II hydropower station; (ii) creating capacity for generation of renewable energy
through mini-hydro dams and solar energy at the rural level; (iii) extending capacity of thermal power
generation at Bo and Western Area; and (iv) expanding and rehabilitating of transmission and distribution
networks across the country.
Water and sanitation projects: (i) rehabilitating water supply in key provincial and district headquarter towns
such as Mile 91, Pujehun, Kabbala and Makeni; (ii) improving access to drinking water in Freetown especially
through installation of sub-mains; (iii) constructing of boreholes in rural areas; and (iv) providing safe drinking
water in government hospitals across the country.
Table 1. Sierra Leone: Financing for Infrastructure Developments, 2008–13
2008–2010

2011–2013
Total
Foreign
GoSL
Financing
financing
financing financing
gap
need
(In percent of GDP)
6.2
1.7
1.1
3.4

Total
financed

Foreign
financed

GoSL
financed

Roads

0.71

0.03

0.68

Energy

0.08

0.05

0.04

12.3

0.8

1.3

10.2

…

…

…

9.0

0.0

0.0

Water

1.03

0.55

0.48

1.5

0.0

Total

1.82

0.62

1.20

20.0

2.5

Of which: Bumbuna II

Source: GoSL and IMF staff estimates

Possible ways to close the gap
Donor
financing

FDI

Remaining
gap

2.6

0.0

0.8

0.8

9.0

0.4

9.0

0.0

9.0

0.0

0.0

1.5

1.4

0.0

0.1

2.3

15.1

4.8

9.0

1.4

9

3.5

Sierra Leone: Total Expenditure on Health, 2008-12

Percent of GDP

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2008

2009
Domestic financed

2010 Proj.

2011 Proj.

2012 Proj.

Foreign financed

Source: MoFED, UNICEF and Staff estimates.

6.
The authorities are conscious of the challenge to finance the envisaged increase
in priority spending. With an anticipated gradual reduction in external budget support, the
authorities are considering issuing longer-term government bonds to fund an increase in
infrastructure spending. Staff pointed out the need to carefully analyze the financing costs of
issuing longer-term bonds because of the lack of depth of financial markets in Sierra Leone.
Moreover, to maintain debt sustainability, there is no scope for increasing non-concessional
borrowing beyond the domestic financing already envisaged in the medium-term fiscal
framework. Given tight budget constraints and weak project implementation capacity, staff
advised the authorities to select projects with the highest priority, contain nonpriority
spending, and strengthen domestic revenue collections. While the authorities acknowledged
the need to focus more on containing nonpriority spending, they were confident that tax
revenue would rise in the future from newly signed iron ore mining projects.
B. Revenue Potential from Mining
7.
Efficiency gains from goods and services tax (GST) and other taxes
notwithstanding, there is a need to find new avenues to raise revenue to generate
sufficient fiscal space to implement the government’s investment plans for
infrastructure and social services. While the implementation of the 6.5 percent royalty on
diamonds and elimination of GST exemptions would help, a more significant revenue
potential lies in the country’s vast mining resources. The estimated mining potential,
including recently signed agreements for iron ore mining, could raise total exports 10-fold
while revenue from royalties alone could increase by about 6 percent of GDP (Box 2).

10

Box 2. Sierra Leone: Mining Exports and Revenue Potential
Although mining has been an important economic activity in Sierra Leone since the 1930s, a significant
potential for extraction and export of minerals remains untapped. Key minerals are rutile, bauxite, diamonds
(alluvial and hard-rock deposits), gold, and iron ore. Other minerals include lignite, clays, base metals (copper,
nickel, molybdenum, lead, and zinc), chromite, and platinum. Before the conflict, the mining sector played a
major role in economic activity: GDP (20%), exports (90%), and fiscal revenues (4%). The Mines and Minerals
Act of 2009 is expected to contribute to restoring the sector as the main engine of economic growth.
The general geology suggests that endowments are abundant and that new exploration and development would
open new mines under the right conditions. The basic information available on the mineral potential of
Sierra Leone is very poor, and the geological data is incomplete and outdated. The World Bank (Tapping the
Mineral Wealth for Human Progress—A Break With the Past, 2005) has estimated that successful realization of
the large-scale mineral potential of the country in diamonds, gold, rutile, and bauxite, could result in the
establishment of four new mines, in addition to reactivation of three existing mines. As a result, total annual
mineral export revenues could top US$370 million.
While the mining of iron ore dates back to the 1930s, it was abandoned in the 1980s. But with renewed market
interest in minerals, an existing mine is being restored by a foreign investor (Marampa, London Mining). In
addition, new exploration has discovered 10.5 billion tons of iron ore deposits (Tonkolili, African Minerals).
Annual production is conservatively estimated at 35 million tons annually in the medium term. Potentially, it
could be as much as 45–75 million tons annually, if fully implemented over the next decade. Chinese investors
have reportedly expressed interest in the project.
Preliminary geological investigations in the 1960s identified favorable conditions for hard-rock gold minerals.
Potentially, the volume of gold production could increase from 6,000 to 300,000 oz under the right conditions.
But more systematic exploration is needed to determine the extent of gold deposits.
Exports of major mineral deposits could range from US$370 million to US$3.3 billion annually in the next
decade. This compares to mineral exports of US$203 million (total exports of US$341 million) in 2010
(Table 1). Revenue from royalties alone could range from US$16 million to US$114 million annually
(assuming royalty rates of 6.5% on diamonds, 5% on gold, and 3% on other minerals) compared to
US$3 million for the same commodities in 2010. Even at the lower end of this potential range, it would be a
major contribution to exports and fiscal revenue, raising the low fiscal revenue-to-GDP ratio and lowering the
high debt-to-exports ratio. New policy measures taken in 2010 increased the royalty rate on diamonds to
6.5 percent.

Table 1: Mining Potential in Sierra Leone
Volume (000)
current potential % change
Rutile (tons)
Bauxite (tons)
Diamonds (cts)
Gold (oz)
Iron ore (tons)
Total
In percent of GDP (2010)
In percent of fiscal revenue
In percent of exports

71
646
481
6
0

330
2,500
692
300
35,000

367
287
44
5,072
…

Value (US$ million)
potential
current lower higher % share
33
31
132
7
0
203

139
154
65
120
77
190
90
362
… 2,499
370 3,325

10.7

19.4 174.5

59.5 108.5 975.1

5
4
6
11
75
100

Royalties (US$ m.)
potential
current lower higher
0
1
2
0
…
3

4
2
5
5
…
16

5
4
12
18
75
114

0.1
1.2

0.8
6.3

6.0
45.9

11
8.
Two mining lease agreements on iron ore, signed by the government earlier this
year, could increase tax revenues significantly. While staff previously had raised strong
concerns about the extensive tax exemptions provided in the first agreement (ratified by
parliament in early 2010), the fiscal regime in a second mining lease agreement ratified in
August is more attractive for the government, despite containing some tax concessions. Staff
reiterated its position that the fiscal framework defined in the current tax legislation and the
new Mines and Minerals Act is appropriate and should be applied to all future mining
investments. While the authorities argued that limited tax concessions were necessary to
attract investors for the second project, they are committed to applying the existing fiscal
regime in the future. The related revenue potential from royalties, income tax, and licenses
could be substantial in the medium term. Estimates prepared by staff indicate that annual tax
revenues from iron ore could reach 10–12 percent of GDP in 2014–15, if the projects are
implemented as planned. Staff stressed that at this early stage, when uncertainties about
timing and production amounts remain significant, it is important to manage expectations and
contain spending until the revenue starts to be collected.
C. Competitiveness of the Economy
9.
Staff sees the value of the leone as broadly in line with fundamentals. The mission
discussed with the authorities the results of its analysis of external stability and structural
competitiveness.
10.
The exchange rate assessment: Sierra Leone’s exchange rate regime is classified as
floating, with the value of the leone determined by the market. The Bank of Sierra Leone
(BSL) maintains a weekly foreign exchange auction, which is used mainly to sterilize
domestic government spending financed by foreign grants and loans. The competitiveness of
the leone was assessed using the three CGER approaches and an alternative approach based
on monthly observations (Box 3). Despite sensitivity to methodological differences, none of
the approaches used show significant exchange rate deviations from estimated equilibrium
values at end-2009. The authorities welcomed the staff’s assessment and agreed to maintain
exchange rate flexibility to allow full adjustment to exogenous shocks.
11.
Structural competitiveness: The World Bank’s Doing Business Report 2010 ranks
Sierra Leone 148th out of 183 countries in the world, and 22nd among 46 Sub-Saharan
African countries. Sierra Leone’s world ranking improved from 160 in 2008 to 148 in 2010
as the economy underwent structural reforms. For example, business start-up has become
easier with the establishment of a one-stop shop for business registration. In addition, tax
administration has been simplified with better training and equipment at the tax authority, a
consolidated income tax act, and a new value added tax that replaced seven existing indirect
taxes. However, the authorities understand the need to further improve the business climate,
especially by rationalizing tax administration, reducing bureaucracy, enforcing contracts and
developing property rights.

12
Box 3. Sierra Leone: Exchange Rate Assessment
After depreciating in the first half of the
Sierra Leone: Recent Development of REER and NEER
2000s, the real effective exchange rate
January 2000-June 2010
130
(REER) has started to recover, though with
120
significant fluctuations. More recently, the
110
REER appreciated strongly at the onset of
100
90
the global crisis in late 2008, mainly
80
reflecting price compression among major
70
REER
European trading partners and a strong
60
NEER
depreciation of the British pound.
50
HP_FILTER
40
However, this trend reversed with the
marked depreciation of the leone in 2009,
resulting in a depreciation of the REER of
Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
about 30 percent from its peak in early
2009 to early 2010. This depreciation was
caused mainly by a decline in export proceeds and transfers due to the second round effects of the global
economic crisis.
Assessing the exchange rate with tools developed by the Consultative Group on Exchange Rates (CGER)
indicates that the real effective exchange
Methodology used
Assessment in 2009
REER over/under valuation
rate in 2009 was very close to its estimated
equilibrium level and thus broadly aligned
Macroeconomic Balance
No misalignment
+0.3 %
with macroeconomic fundamentals.
External Sustainability
Broadly in line
+3.3 %
Specifically, the exchange rate was within
Equ. real exchange rate
No misalignment
+1.1 %
a range of less than 5 percent of the
estimated equilibrium rate in 2009.
In addition to the standard CGER approaches, the relationship between the nominal effective exchange rate
(NEER), the relative price between Sierra Leone and trading partners, and international oil prices has been
analyzed using monthly data. By defining equilibrium according to this modified Purchasing Power Parity
model, the exchange rate was found to be practically fully aligned with price fundamentals. While the variation
around equilibrium has been quite volatile in recent years, the NEER was only 0.2 percent away from its
equilibrium in June 2010.
Sierra Leone: Monthly NEER Disequilibrium in PPP Model (Percent)
January 2002-June 2010
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates.

It should be emphasized that data
limitations, model selection, and structural
changes in the economy severely limit the
scope for precise point estimates of the
equilibrium exchange rate in the context of
a post-conflict country like Sierra Leone.
This applies particularly to the two
indirect CGER approaches that depend
critically on estimating current account
norms that are not well defined in postconflict circumstances

13
Ease of Doing Business

Starting a business

Enforcing
contracts

Sierra Leone

Paying Taxes

SSA

Sierra Leone

SSA

40

# of procedures

39

Time spent on filing 3 major taxes (days
per year)

15
13

12

Number of days

46

# of procedures

Payments reflect number of taxes,
method of payment, frequency of filing
(# per year)

6
9
Source: Doing Business, World Bank

29
38
Source: Doing Business, World Bank

12.
The multiple-price Dutch auction system applied by BSL gives rise to a multiple
currency practice (MCP) subject to Fund jurisdiction. The current auction system has
been in operation before the start of the current ECF arrangement. Staff continues to work
towards a resolution of this issue in the context of a more comprehensive review involving
MCPs of this nature in a number of countries.
D. Debt Sustainability
13.
Sierra Leone’s risk of debt distress remains moderate.1 Although the present value
of external debt-to-export ratio remains close to the 100 percent threshold, external debt
indicators are expected to remain below the DSA thresholds through 2030. Staff reiterated
the need for continued prudent macroeconomic policies and reliance on grants and highly
concessional resources to finance government operations. The authorities concurred and
explained that the government is reaching out to a broader group of donors to seek
concessional financing for development programs. Staff welcomed the authorities’ resolve to
strengthen debt management; they are in the process of adopting a new debt management law
and are seeking technical assistance from the Bank and the Fund to develop a medium-term
debt management strategy (MTDS). The dialogue with commercial creditors over debt relief
is ongoing and the IDA Debt Reduction Facility is scheduled for implementation in 2011.
The authorities are also pursuing negotiations with a few remaining official bilateral creditors
in line with the enhanced HIPC Initiative.2
III. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROGRAM PERFORMANCE
14.
While economic activity has shown signs of a pickup in 2010, inflation has
remained high (Figure 1 and Table 1).


Real GDP growth decelerated to 3.2 percent in 2009 owing to weak output in mining
and manufacturing. However, economic activity appears to have picked up in 2010,

1

Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) 2010, www.imf.org.

2

Agreements on the delivery of the HIPC relief are still pending with China, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.

14
reflected by marked growth in the services sector, buoyant agricultural production,
and a rebound in exports. While lower fuel and domestic food prices eased
inflationary pressures during most of 2009, inflation jumped by about 7 percent in the
first two months of 2010 due to the introduction of the GST and higher domestic fuel
prices. However, seasonally adjusted monthly inflation rates have stabilized since
then, and inflation was 18.5 percent in the 12 months through September, but it is
expected to decline to 16 percent by year-end.


The external current account deficit declined to 8.4 percent of GDP in 2009 from
11.5 percent of GDP in 2008.
Sierra Leone: External Trade, 2006-10
While exports were basically flat
300
in 2009, imports declined,
Imports (fob)
250
reflecting weaker economic
200
150
Exports (fob)
growth and lower oil prices.
100
However, exports picked up in
50
2010 because of higher diamond
0
-50
export volumes and prices.
-100
Despite BSL interventions to
-150
support the leone in 2009, gross
international reserves increased to
Sources: Sierra Leonan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
6.1 months of imports at end2009, reflecting the SDR
allocation in 2009. Gross reserves declined to 5.2 months of imports at end-June 2010
because of a recovery of imports and temporary delays in external budget support.



The exchange rate stabilized in the first half of 2010 after a depreciation of about
28 percent in 2009. The BSL continued to supply foreign currency to the market
through foreign exchange auctions, although the offered amount decreased from
US$2 million per week in January to less than US$1 million per week in September,
reflecting reduced pressures in the market.

15.
Fiscal policy performance during the first half of 2010 was broadly satisfactory
(Tables 2 and 3). The overall deficit, excluding grants, was 6.1 percent of GDP, compared to
6.3 percent of GDP in the program. Revenue collections were above the target and current
spending was close to the program, but the wage bill was higher owing to hiring in the health
sector. Capital expenditures were below program because of shortfalls in external project
support, while domestically financed capital spending was higher than envisaged.
16.
In the first two months of the third quarter of the year, however, budgetary
spending accelerated. Despite continued improvement in revenue collections, this caused an
unexpected deterioration in the fiscal position. The increase in spending was spread across
many items, including wages for hiring another 3,000 health care staff to implement the
FHCI, increased compensation to military families, higher than anticipated debt service
payments, keeping the emergency power project beyond June, and payments to complete
important road projects. In addition, arrears to oil marketing companies (0.3 percent of GDP)
were cleared. The increased financing need in July and August was covered mostly by
drawing on overdrafts in the BSL amounting to 1.2 percent of GDP.

15
Figure 1. Sierra Leone: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2006-10
(Percent changes, unless indicated otherwise)
12-Month Inflation
(Percent)

Contribution to Real GDP Growth
8

8

30

Primary

7

7

Secondary
Tertiary

6

Indirect taxes
Real GDP (right scale)

5

25

6
5

Food

20

4
4

15

3
3

2

10

All Items

2

1

1

0
-1

5

0

0

0

7

-2

6

25

-4

5

20

-6

4

15

-8

3

10

-10

2

5

-12

1

-14

0

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010
Proj.

Fiscal Balance
(Percent of GDP)
35
Domestic revenue
Total expenditure
Overall balance, excl. grants (right scale)

30

0
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Gross Official Reserves
(Months of Imports)

2006

2007

Proj.

3900

3500
3300
3100

160
150

NEER 1/
REER 1/

130
120
110
100
90

2900
2700
2500

2010

Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates
(2005=100)

140
3700

2009

Proj.

Exchange Rate (Le/US$)
4100

2008

80
70
60

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and IMF estimates and projections.
1/ Alternative calculation with weights based on economic importance of the three main currencies (USD, EUR, and GBP).

16
17.
Monetary policy remained tight through the third quarter of 2010. As envisaged in
the program, the BSL managed to halt the monetary expansion that took place toward the end
of 2009. As a result, reserve and broad money grew only about 3 and 5½ percent, respectively,
in the first half of 2010 (Table 4). Despite the slowdown in money growth, credit to the private
sector expanded by about 40 percent in the 12 months through June. Following a significant
improvement in the quality of banks’ loan portfolios in the last few years, the ratio of
nonperforming loans to gross loans increased to 13.6 percent in June 2010 from 10.6 in
December 2009 (Table 9). Notwithstanding the significant direct credits from the BSL to the
Government in the third quarter of the year, reserve money was contained in line with the
program. The BSL sold a substantial amount of its holdings of treasury securities to the
commercial banks to absorb the liquidity created by the fiscal expansion. As a result, interest
rates on treasury bills increased by 400 basis points in the third quarter to about 18 percent.
18.
Program performance was satisfactory in the first half of 2010. All quantitative
performance criteria for end-June 2010 were met (MEFP Table 1). The two structural
benchmarks for end-June (implementing an automatic fuel pricing mechanism and adopting
new off-site surveillance guidelines) were implemented but with a delay (MEFP Table 2).
Similarly, two of the three structural benchmarks for September were implemented with a
slight delay: the commissioner and the deputy commissioner were hired for the Domestic Tax
Department (DTD); and amendments to the Government Budget and Accountability Act and
the Financial Management Regulation were submitted to the parliament to ensure that only
viable capital projects enter into the budget.
IV. PROGRAM ISSUES
19.
Consistent with the Agenda for Change, the key program objective is to raise
growth by increasing investments in infrastructure and developing the private sector. In
order to achieve this objective, the focus will remain on (i) creating fiscal space for improving
basic infrastructure and social services while maintaining macroeconomic stability;
(ii) strengthening tax performance and improving public financial management (PFM)
systems; and (iii) developing the financial sector by making it more accessible and
strengthening BSL independence and supervisory role.
A. Policies for the Remainder of 2010
20.
Budget expenditures for 2010 are projected to be 1.2 percent of GDP higher than
programmed, partly financed by higher revenue collections. Spending is projected to
increase in the second half of the year due to additional needs to implement the national
development priorities: hiring an additional 3,000 health care workers under the FHCI,
maintaining an emergency power project, and investing in additional infrastructure,
particularly roads. Moreover, foreign interest payments are projected to increase owing to
exchange rate changes. On the financing side, payments for clearing arrears to oil marketing
companies are projected to exceed the program by 0.3 percent of GDP stemming from unpaid

17
subsidies accumulated because of delays in implementing a new automatic domestic fuel
pricing framework. On the revenue side, the GST is continuing to exceed expectations;
therefore, for the year as a whole, domestic revenue has been revised up by 0.6 percent of
GDP. As a result, the overall fiscal deficit, excluding grants, is projected to increase to
11.5 percent of GDP, compared to 10.8 percent of GDP in the program. On this basis, there is a
need to revise the program target for net domestic bank financing from 2.4 percent of GDP to
3.3 percent of GDP in 2010. In the event that domestic revenue exceeds the revised projection
for 2010, the authorities have agreed to reduce net domestic bank financing correspondingly
(MEFP ¶10).
21.
While recognizing the tremendous needs of the country, staff stressed the
importance of maintaining budget discipline and limiting the use of overdrafts in the
BSL. Staff raised concerns about the significant use of overdrafts in the BSL to finance the
fiscal expansion in the third quarter of 2010.3 The use of direct financing from the BSL, except
for smoothing purposes, to finance government spending hinders liquidity management and the
overall objectives of monetary policy. Looking forward, the authorities committed to
strengthening budget discipline, increasing revenue collection, containing
nonpriority expenditures, and reducing overdrafts with the BSL. To this end, the authorities
(i) made the increase in diamond royalties to 6.5 percent effective in November 2010;
(ii) implemented, by end-October 2010, a new automatic domestic fuel price framework that
will eliminate existing subsidies within a few months; and (iii) reduced government overdrafts
with the BSL by about Le 30 billion (0.4 percent of GDP) in early November 2010, and
committed to amending the BSL Act to limit direct BSL credit to the government, including
overdrafts, to 5 percent of the previous year’s domestic revenues (MEFP ¶29).
22.
Monetary policy will seek to contain inflationary pressures from the introduction
of the GST and the fiscal expansion. The monetary program has been maintained as
envisaged in the program. Reserve money growth is targeted at 7.5 percent in 2010 to keep
inflation below 16 percent by end-2010. The BSL will stand ready to tighten monetary policy
further, should inflationary pressures increase. With a stable leone against the US dollar, the
amount offered in the foreign exchange auction will remain at a reduced level for the rest of
2010. The program end-December targets for net domestic assets and gross international
reserves have been maintained.
23.
On the structural program, the two benchmarks for end-December 2010—establishing
a credit reference bureau and integrating the GST administration within the Large Taxpayer
Office—are on schedule to be met (MEFP Table 3).
3

BSL overdrafts or “ways and means” increased to about 2.5 percent of GDP in the third quarter. Note that “ways
and means” are only used as within-budget-year financing and any outstanding amounts need to be settled within
90 days after the end of the fiscal year. In the past, outstanding amounts, generally below 1 percent of GDP, have
been repaid by issuing treasury bills to the BSL.

18
B. Policies for 2011
24.
The macroeconomic outlook is positive for 2011. The economy is expected to grow
by 5.2 percent, while inflation should return to single-digits. This will be supported by an
increase in public investment and a monetary policy aimed at achieving single digit inflation
and maintaining a flexible exchange rate.
Fiscal policy
25.
Fiscal policy in 2011 is to boost infrastructure investment to support sustained
economic growth. The authorities are preparing the 2011 budget that envisages higher
domestic revenue and a significant increase in capital spending, mainly financed by external
grants or concessional loans (MEFP ¶16–19). Fiscal policy will be anchored by keeping
domestic financing from banks and nonbank financial institutions close to 2 percent of GDP.
26.
The authorities are focused on raising revenues. Domestic revenue is projected to
increase to 13.3 percent of GDP from 13 percent of GDP in 2010, reflecting an increase in
diamond royalties to 6.5 percent, continued efficiency gains from GST, and benefits from tax
administration reforms. Although royalties could begin to be collected from the new iron ore
mining projects, the authorities have prudently incorporated only the annual license fees into
the budget projection for 2011. Grants remain at 6.8 percent of GDP as the anticipated decrease
in budget support by 0.9 percent is offset by an increase in project grants. Privatization
proceeds are projected to yield an additional 0.6 percent of GDP.
27.
On the expenditure side, the authorities foresee a shift from current to capital
spending. To build basic infrastructure, capital spending is projected to increase by
1.8 percentage points of GDP to 10.2 percent of GDP in 2011, mostly financed by external
project grants and concessional project loans. Current expenditures are envisaged to decline,
reflecting containment of non-priority spending on goods and services, and savings arising
from the termination of the emergency power project.4 However, spending for preparations of
the 2012 elections will partially offset these savings. The wage bill assumes a 15 percent
increase in basic salaries and includes the full year effect of the new hiring in the health sector.
28.
Domestic bank financing will decline in 2011, while external project financing and
privatization proceeds will increase. The overall fiscal deficit, excluding grants, is projected
to increase to 12.5 percent of GDP from 11.5 percent of GDP in 2010. Net domestic financing
from banks and nonbank financial institutions is projected to decline to 2.3 percent of GDP in
2011 from 3.5 percent of GDP in 2010. The decline in domestic bank financing and the switch

4

Budgeted spending on goods and services is 0.3 percentage points of GDP below the budget for 2010 (excluding
the emergency power project). This saving reflects lower allocations for travel, vehicles, office equipment, and
other nonpriority goods and services.

19
from current to capital spending will support private sector development and help achieve
lower inflation in 2011.
Monetary and exchange rate policies
29.
Monetary policy will aim to achieve single digit inflation by the end of 2011.
Continued tight monetary policy, combined with the reduction in annual inflation because of a
base effect stemming from the 7 percent price jump in January-February 2010, is projected to
achieve a significant reduction in inflation in 2011. Reserve money is envisaged to grow by
14 percent and broad money by 20 percent; this should accommodate a 31 percent growth in
private credit. With constrained government access to direct credit from the BSL and active use
of the repo and reserve repo instruments, liquidity management is expected to improve.
30.
The authorities are committed to maintaining a flexible exchange rate to facilitate
adjustment to external shocks. The BSL will limit its foreign currency sales to absorbing
foreign-financed budget spending and smoothing short-term market volatility (MEFP ¶21).
With a rebound in exports and prudent macro policy, the volume of BSL’s foreign exchange
auctions is expected to remain low in 2011.
Financing assurances
31.
The government is making good faith efforts to resolve external arrears to
commercial creditors; those are estimated at US$240 million at end-2009. The authorities
continue to engage creditors and have made goodwill payments to avoid litigation. They
secured a grant to fund the preparatory work for an IDA debt-buy-back program. Once
implemented, possibly as early as end-2011, external commercial debt could be reduced by
over 90 percent. Government policy is that no creditor will be exempted from participating in
the program. Ongoing efforts to resolve these arrears provide sufficient financing assurances
for the Fund-supported program.
Structural reforms
32.
The authorities are committed to stepping up structural reforms to complement
the scaling up of public investment and providing for other development priorities.
Reforms will focus on


Improving tax administration: To reduce inefficiencies arising from separate tax
departments and to enhance tax compliance, the National Revenue Authority (NRA)
will integrate GST operations with the Large Taxpayer Office (LTO) and Medium
Taxpayer Office (MTO). In addition, the NRA will step up efforts to improve tax
compliance by implementing a small taxpayer regime and applying penalties for
noncompliance (MEFP ¶23–24).

20


Strengthening PFM: The authorities aim to strengthen the Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) by enhancing the planning, monitoring and evaluation process for
capital projects. They also plan to improve the quality of the workforce in the public
sector by implementing a multiyear pay reform. Budget execution will continue to be
strengthened by the rolling out of IFMIS to ministries, departments and agencies
(MEFP ¶25–27).



Strengthening the financial sector: The BSL will enhance the conduct of its monetary
policy by establishing a benchmark interest rate. The independence of the BSL will be
strengthened, as will its supervisory role in reducing vulnerabilities (with the adoption
of new off-site surveillance guidelines for banks). The BSL will also limit its direct
credit to the government, which will foster the development of bond markets. Access to
credit will be enhanced by establishing a credit reference bureau and strengthening the
payments and settlements system. In addition, the Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Act
2005 has been revised to include provisions for combating the financing of terrorism
(CFT); these are to be submitted to the parliament by the end of the year
(MEFP ¶28–33).
V. PROGRAM RISKS

33.
There are risks to budget implementation in the short and medium term. The
pressure to increase wages outside of the health care sector continues and the budget cost of the
FHCI could be higher than envisaged if donor support does not come through as projected. The
budget will be strained further if revenue collections from higher royalties on diamonds do not
materialize, while the authorities have committed to large infrastructure projects. To reduce
these fiscal risks, a timely implementation of the public service pay reform will be important.
In addition, efforts are required to improve tax performance through reforming tax
administration and eliminating discretionary tax incentives. In the medium term, tax revenue
from mining may be lower than anticipated if the new mining projects do not fully materialize.
34.
Sierra Leone has adequate capacity to meet its financial obligations to the Fund.
The country has established a record of timely servicing its obligations to the Fund, and the
DSA places Sierra Leone at a moderate risk of debt distress (Table 6). Debt service to the Fund
would remain modest in absolute terms, and below 1.5 percent of exports of goods and services
throughout the program period.
VI. EX POST ASSESSMENT
35.
As Sierra Leone is a member with a longer-term program engagement with the
Fund, an Ex Post Assessment (EPA) update has been circulated to the Executive Board
(www.imf.org). The EPA focused on program objectives and design, as well as key lessons
from the experience. The update found that the authorities and donors agree that the Fund has
been an essential advisor on macroeconomic policy. Key EPA recommendations include

21
continued focus on strengthening capacity through technical assistance, setting ambitious but
realistic revenue targets, formulating structural benchmarks that are of macro-critical
importance, and fostering better coordination among the authorities, donors and the Fund to
conduct a more forward-looking discussion of the macroeconomic framework for the following
fiscal year, thus reinforcing the budget preparation process.
VII. STAFF APPRAISAL
36.
After a period of economic slowdown, the outlook for Sierra Leone appears more
favorable. Growth is expected to pick up due to strong growth in the services sector and
buoyant agricultural production. However, inflation is projected to remain in double digits this
year owing to the introduction of the GST, but it is expected to decline to single digits in 2011.
37.
A key constraint to economic growth in the medium term is the lack of basic
infrastructure. While sustained strong growth is a necessary condition to achieve a significant
reduction in poverty, a challenge for the authorities in the coming years will be to strike the
right balance between spending on basic infrastructure and on social services. Staff welcomes
the authorities’ current effort to accelerate infrastructure investments and encourages donors to
expand their support.
38.
A sustainable fiscal policy is critical for macroeconomic stability. Mobilizing more
domestic revenues and containing nonpriority spending will continue to create fiscal space for
investments in infrastructure and human resources. Staff is thus encouraged by the authorities’
resolve to raise royalties on diamond production, strengthen tax administration, and eliminate
all subsidies on domestic fuel prices. On the spending side, it is important to contain the wage
bill by raising compensation to public servants to more competitive levels only in the context
of a multiyear pay reform.
39.
Staff welcomes the authorities’ commitment to fully apply the fiscal regime for
mining in accordance with the Mines and Minerals Act and current tax legislation. While
the fiscal regime in a recent mining lease agreement for iron ore represents an improvement
compared to agreements signed in the past, in staff’s view no tax incentives were needed to
make the project economically attractive. Notwithstanding these tax concessions, the
medium-term revenue potential from this mining agreement could be significant. However, in
view of the uncertainty about the exact amounts and timing, staff recommends that new
spending decisions should not be made before the increase in revenue materializes.
40.
The fiscal expansion in the second half of 2010 has created a challenge for
monetary policy. Staff welcomes BSL’s steadfastness to neutralize the liquidity effect of this
expansion by significantly stepping up its open market operations. Staff also supports the
BSL’s commitment to reduce inflation to single digits in 2011 and to establish a benchmark
monetary policy interest rate. The BSL should continue to enhance banking supervision and
closely monitor developments of nonperforming loans.

22
41.
There are no concerns about competitiveness and external stability at present.
Staff calculations show that the leone is broadly aligned with its fundamentals. The authorities
are encouraged to maintain exchange rate flexibility to allow adjustment to exogenous shocks.
42.
The DSA for Sierra Leone shows limited room for additional borrowing. Staff
recommends that the authorities rely on grants and highly concessional loans for financing
their development program. The authorities’ resolve to strengthen debt management is
welcomed.
43.
Staff supports the authorities’ commitment to accelerate structural reforms. The
focus on improving tax administration, strengthening public financial management, and
deepening the financial sector is appropriate. The first two reform areas will help create fiscal
space for capital and social spending while the latter complements these efforts by encouraging
private sector investment and activity.
44.
Staff supports the authorities’ request to modify the target on net domestic bank
credit to the government, given the measures taken by the authorities to improve revenue
collection, constrain nonpriority spending, and reduce the government’s access to overdrafts
with the BSL, as well as the authorities’ commitment to a 2011 budget consistent with
macroeconomic and fiscal sustainability. Staff recommends completion of the first ECF review
and the financing assurances review.
45.
Staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation take place in accordance with
the 2010 Decision on consultation cycles.

Table 1. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic Indicators
2008

2009

2010
Prog.

Proj

2011
Proj

2012
Proj

2013
Proj

2014
Proj

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
National account and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
GDP at market prices
(in billions of local currency)
Consumer prices (end-of-period)
Consumer prices (average)
External sector
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Exports of goods (US$)
Imports of goods (US$)
Average exchange rate
(local currency per U.S. dollar)
Nominal exchange rate change (depreciation -)
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -)
Gross international reserves, months of imports

3.2
5.3
6,330

4.8
13.3
7,605

4.5
15.0
7,605

5.2
8.5
8,678

6.0
7.3
9,874

6.0
6.3
11,125

6.0
6.0
12,496

12.2
14.8

10.8
9.2

12.5
15.5

16.0
17.6

9.5
9.1

8.0
8.7

7.5
7.7

7.0
7.2

-2.3
-3.0
24.8
2,985

-10.5
-1.0
-2.6
3,410

5.7
25.9
14.7
…

3.6
25.7
18.0
…

3.2
15.4
8.6
…

2.0
13.2
11.1
…

0.6
11.7
-9.1
…

0.9
10.2
-8.6
…

-2.2
-11.6
4.4

-26.7
-3.2
6.1

…
…
5.7

…
…
5.6

…
…
4.9

…
…
4.6

…
…
4.3

…
…
4.1

56.8
9.6
30.4
9.1

45.4
19.3
28.1
14.0

32.2
8.0
15.2
...

26.1
8.0
11.8
18.1

31.4
14.4
20.5
...

18.3
15.8
17.7
...

16.5
14.7
18.6
...

17.0
14.5
15.7
...

(Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Gross capital formation
Government
Private
National savings
External sector
Current account balance
(including official grants)
(excluding official grants)
External public debt (including IMF)
Central government budget
Overall balance
(excluding grants)
Revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending

14.8
6.2
8.6
3.3

14.9
7.1
7.8
6.6

16.1
8.1
7.9
7.1

16.3
8.4
7.9
6.8

18.9
10.2
8.7
9.4

19.4
10.2
9.2
9.9

19.0
9.3
9.7
9.7

19.3
9.3
10.0
10.1

-11.5
-15.4
31.2

-8.4
-12.8
36.1

-9.0
-12.7
33.8

-9.5
-12.9
39.8

-9.5
-11.6
28.1

-9.5
-11.3
29.2

-9.3
-10.9
30.1

-9.2
-10.6
30.5

-4.7
-9.2
11.5
4.5
20.7

-3.2
-11.1
11.8
7.9
22.9

-3.9
-10.8
12.4
7.0
23.3

-4.7
-11.5
13.0
6.8
24.5

-5.7
-12.5
13.3
6.8
25.8

-5.0
-10.6
14.3
5.6
24.9

-4.4
-9.5
14.4
5.0
23.9

-4.4
-9.4
14.5
5.0
23.9

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ For 2010 data is for September.

23

Money and credit
Domestic credit to the private sector
Base money
M2
91-day treasury bill rate (in percent) 1/

5.5
11.1
5,826

24
Table 2. Sierra Leone: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government
(In billions of leone)

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax
Personal Income Tax
Corporate Income Tax
Goods and Services Tax
Imports sales tax 1/
Domestic sales tax 1/
Excises
Import duties
Mining royalties and license
Others
Of which: Five indirect taxes 1/
Non-tax
Grants
Budget support
Debt relief
Project grants
Expenditures and net lending
Current expenditures
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Of which : Emergency Power Project
Subsidies and transfer
Of which : Foreign-financed transfers for elections
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Capital expenditure
Foreign financed
Domestic financed
Net lending
Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants
Financing
External financing (net)
Borrowing
Project
Budget
Amortization
Domestic financing (net)
Bank
Central bank
Commercial banks
Nonbank
Non bank financial institutions
Privatization proceeds
Change in arrears
Floats (checks payable & outstanding commitments)
Errors and omissions/financing gap

Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

1,475
946
839
148
76
197
…
…
137
216
41
25
…
107
529
283
14
232

1,505
988
878
148
76
250
…
…
137
204
31
32
…
110
517
265
20
232

1,748
1,157
1,033
175
88
299
…
…
147
229
65
30
…
124
591
179
20
392

1,963
1,412
1,271
203
103
404
…
…
162
285
79
35
…
141
550
179
21
351

900
573
245
179
275
96
…
53
46
7
327
164
162
0

1,770
1,151
506
339
11
170
…
136
117
19
619
418
202
0

1,861
1,219
515
366
31
186
…
152
135
16
642
418
224
0

2,240
1,356
566
359
0
258
44
172
151
22
884
652
232
0

2,456
1,448
645
406
0
216
…
182
160
22
1,007
701
306
0

-252
-481

-266
-462

-295
-824

-356
-873

-492
-1,083

-493
-1,043

202
155
198
160
39
-43
47
109
163
-54
-62
-25
10
-59
12
1

252
63
87
87
0
-24
186
192
149
43
-5
54
0
-26
-33
3

266
54
84
57
27
-29
198
221
178
42
-23
16
0
-55
16
14

295
162
213
185
28
-51
133
180
157
23
-47
18
8
-74
0
0

356
175
237
185
52
-62
181
250
227
23
-69
18
8
-95
0
-1

492
271
345
304
41
-74
221
152
113
39
69
43
49
-24
0
0

493
333
380
351
29
-46
157
144
127
17
13
43
0
-30
0
3

362
-254
1,244

252
-234
…

417
-270
…

417
-304
1,425

476
-259
1,646

541
-161
1,803

June, 2010
Prog.

2008

2009

Act.

934
670
589
110
62
…
123
14
70
161
19
31
24
80
265
115
28
121

1,250
749
660
122
61
…
129
11
107
170
20
40
29
89
500
290
25
186

662
433
477
66
38
92
71
21
66
100
9
13
…
48
229
118
2
109

634
438
493
65
37
108
82
26
63
84
8
20
…
54
196
60
29
108

1,207
848
334
285
83
109
…
120
109
12
359
284
75
0

1,452
1,000
402
350
59
145
…
103
89
14
452
345
107
0

914
570
237
198
282
84
…
51
44
7
344
196
148
0

-273
-538

-202
-703

273
143
163
163
0
-20
158
218
120
98
-60
-34
4
-46
16
-28

330
-133
1,280

2010 Full year
Prog.

Memorandum item:
Total poverty expenditures
Domestic primary balance, including grants
Public domestic debt

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Replaced by GST on January 1, 2010.

294
-244
……

25
Table 3. Sierra Leone: Fiscal Operations of the Central Government
(In percent of GDP)
June, 2010
Prog.

2010 Full year
Prog.
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

19.8
13.0
11.5
1.9
1.0
3.3
…
…
1.8
2.7
0.4
0.4
…
1.4
6.8
3.5
0.3
3.1

20.1
13.3
11.9
2.0
1.0
3.4
…
…
1.7
2.6
0.7
0.3
…
1.4
6.8
2.1
0.2
4.5

19.9
14.3
12.9
2.1
1.0
4.1
…
…
1.6
2.9
0.8
0.4
…
1.4
5.6
1.8
0.2
3.5

23.3
15.1
6.6
4.5
0.1
2.2
…
1.8
1.5
0.3
8.1
5.5
2.7
0.0

24.5
16.0
6.8
4.8
0.4
2.4
…
2.0
1.8
0.2
8.4
5.5
2.9
0.0

25.8
15.6
6.5
4.1
0.0
3.0
0.5
2.0
1.7
0.2
10.2
7.5
2.7
0.0

24.9
14.7
6.5
4.1
0.0
2.2
…
1.8
1.6
0.2
10.2
7.1
3.1
0.0

-3.5
-6.1

-3.9
-10.8

-4.7
-11.5

-5.7
-12.5

-5.0
-10.6

3.5
0.7
1.1
0.7
0.4
-0.4
2.6
2.9
2.3
0.6
-0.3
0.2
0.0
-0.7
0.2
0.0

3.9
2.1
2.8
2.4
0.4
-0.7
1.7
2.4
2.1
0.3
-0.6
0.2
0.1
-1.0
0.0
0.0

4.7
2.3
3.1
2.4
0.7
-0.8
2.4
3.3
3.0
0.3
-0.9
0.2
0.1
-1.3
0.0
0.0

5.7
3.1
4.0
3.5
0.5
-0.9
2.5
1.8
1.3
0.4
0.8
0.5
0.6
-0.3
0.0
0.0

5.0
3.4
3.8
3.5
0.3
-0.5
1.6
1.5
1.3
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.0
-0.3
0.0
0.0

5.5
-3.6
…
7,605

5.5
-4.0
18.7
7,605

5.5
-3.0
19.0
8,678

5.5
-1.6
18.3
9,874

2008

2009

Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Tax
Personal Income Tax
Corporate Income Tax
Goods and Services Tax
Imports sales tax 1/
Domestic sales tax 1/
Excises
Import duties
Mining royalties and license
Others
Of which: Five indirect taxes 1/
Non-tax
Grants
Budget support
Debt relief
Project grants

16.0
11.5
10.1
1.9
1.1
…
2.1
0.2
1.2
2.8
0.3
0.5
0.4
1.4
4.5
2.0
0.5
2.1

19.7
11.8
10.4
1.9
1.0
…
2.0
0.2
1.7
2.7
0.3
0.6
0.5
1.4
7.9
4.6
0.4
2.9

8.7
5.7
6.3
0.9
0.5
1.2
0.9
0.3
0.9
1.3
0.1
0.2
…
0.6
3.0
1.6
0.0
1.4

8.3
5.8
6.5
0.9
0.5
1.4
1.1
0.3
0.8
1.1
0.1
0.3
…
0.7
2.6
0.8
0.4
1.4

19.4
12.4
11.0
1.9
1.0
2.6
…
…
1.8
2.8
0.5
0.3
…
1.4
7.0
3.7
0.2
3.1

Expenditures and net lending
Current expenditures
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Of which : Emergency Power Project
Subsidies and transfer
Of which : Foreign-financed transfers for elections
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Capital expenditure
Foreign financed
Domestic financed
Net lending

20.7
14.6
5.7
4.9
1.4
1.9
…
2.1
1.9
0.2
6.2
4.9
1.3
0.0

22.9
15.8
6.3
5.5
0.9
2.3
…
1.6
1.4
0.2
7.1
5.5
1.7
0.0

12.0
7.5
3.1
2.6
3.7
1.1
…
0.7
0.6
0.1
4.5
2.6
1.9
0.0

11.8
7.5
3.2
2.4
3.6
1.3
…
0.7
0.6
0.1
4.3
2.2
2.1
0.0

Overall balance
Including grants
Excluding grants

-4.7
-9.2

-3.2
-11.1

-3.3
-6.3

Financing
External financing (net)
Borrowing
Project
Budget
Amortization
Domestic financing (net)
Bank
Central bank
Commercial banks
Nonbank
Non bank financial institutions
Privatization proceeds
Change in arrears
Floats (checks payable & outstanding commitments
Discrepancy/financing gap

4.7
2.5
2.8
2.8
0.0
-0.3
2.7
3.7
2.1
1.7
-1.0
-0.6
0.1
-0.8
0.3
-0.5

3.2
2.4
3.1
2.5
0.6
-0.7
0.7
1.7
2.6
-0.9
-1.0
-0.4
0.2
-0.9
0.2
0.0

3.3
0.8
1.1
1.1
0.0
-0.3
2.4
2.5
2.0
0.6
-0.1
0.7
0.0
-0.3
-0.4
0.0

5.7
-2.3
22.0
5,826

5.7
-4.0
19.7
6,330

3.3
-3.1
…
7,605

Act.

Memorandum items:
Total poverty expenditures
Domestic primary balance, including grants
Public domestic debt
Nominal GDP (in billions of local currency)

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Replaced by GST on January 1, 2010.

3.9
-3.2
……
7,605

Table 4. Sierra Leone: Monetary Accounts 1/
(In billions of leone; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

2009

2010
Mar.
Act.

June
Prog.

Act.

2011
Sept.
Prog.

Dec.
Prog.

Proj.

Proj.

I. Monetary Survey
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Domestic Credit
Claims on central government (net)
Claims on other public sector 2/
Claims on private sector
Other items (net) 3/
Money and quasi-money (M3)
Broad money (M2)
Foreign exchange deposits

832

1,542

1,447

1,388

1,345

1,359

1,370

1,371

1,398

599
967
536
17
413
-397

335
1,280
647
31
601
-980

424
1,357
680
35
643
-968

673
1,536
847
36
653
-907

665
1,587
854
41
693
-964

790
1,634
894
36
704
-888

866
1,727
828
36
794
-927

775
1,752
898
53
758
-977

1,174
2,099
1,050
53
996
-968

1,431
1,124
307

1,877
1,439
437

1,870
1,409
461

2,061
1,597
464

2,009
1,520
490

2,149
1,665
484

2,237
1,733
504

2,146
1,608
537

2,572
1,938
634

II. Bank of Sierra Leone
Net foreign assets

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Commercial bank deposits

1,005

905

832

834

804

815

815

743

-7
4
144
0
7
-167

-442
6
287
0
7
-747

-341
14
334
0
12
-705

-244
6
444
0
9
-721

-250
-10
446
0
9
-699

-207
6
476
0
9
-715

-207
6
470
0
9
-710

-207
1
498
0
8
-719

-48
18
611
0
8
-685

472
383
89

563
486
77

565
469
96

589
434
155

584
468
116

597
436
161

608
465
143

608
498
109

695
556
139

27.5
28.8
26.6
3.5
3.6
9.3
325

8.0
15.2
32.2
3.4
3.7
10.4
336

8.0
14.3
26.1
3.5
3.5
10.0
336

14.4
19.9
31.4
3.4
3.7
11.5
326

Memorandum items:
Reserve money
M3 (Money and quasi-money )
Credit to the private sector
Velocity (GDP/M3)
Money multiplier (M3/Reserve money)
Credit to the private sector (in percent of GDP)
Gross Reserves (in US$ millions)

(Annual percentage change)
9.6
26.1
56.8
4.1
3.0
7.1
209

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ End of period
2/ Include public enterprises and the local government.
3/ Including valuation.

19.3
31.1
45.4
3.4
3.3
9.5
336

23.2
26.4
33.6
4.1
3.3
8.4
326

28.6
35.4
31.4
3.7
3.5
8.6
328

27.5
32.1
39.4
3.8
3.4
9.1
313

26

Net domestic assets
Claims on other depository corporations
Claims on central government (net)
Claims on other public sector 2/
Claims on private sector
Other items (net) 3/

479

27
Table 5. Sierra Leone: Balance of Payments
(In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated)
2008

Current account

2009

2010
Prog.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

2013

2014

Proj.

-223.7

-155.1

-171.1

-181.6

-201.0

-220.9

-234.1

-250.4

-196.0
274.1
147.7
-470.0
-151.5

-186.6
271.3
105.5
-457.9
-92.7

-174.9
350.2
139.1
-525.1
-126.9

-199.3
341.0
132.1
-540.4
-131.8

-192.9
393.7
155.0
-586.6
-150.9

-206.2
445.8
178.1
-652.0
-174.1

-213.6
498.0
199.4
-711.6
-194.4

-224.3
548.6
216.6
-772.9
-213.4

Services (net)

-64.0

-63.2

-53.5

-64.9

-71.9

-79.4

-86.1

-93.1

Income (net)
Of which: interest on public debt

-74.8
-3.9

-35.0
-4.2

-43.6
-4.5

-29.9
-3.5

-32.5
-3.9

-36.0
-4.9

-39.3
-6.0

-42.1
-6.5

Transfers
Official transfers
Other transfers

111.1
77.7
33.4

129.8
83.3
46.5

100.9
70.8
30.0

112.5
64.8
47.7

96.4
43.6
52.9

100.7
42.3
58.4

104.8
41.5
63.3

109.2
40.7
68.5

199.7

263.2

130.2

141.0

182.5

224.4

239.3

267.8

48.6
40.5

71.0
56.8

60.8
53.4

60.8
58.2

98.3
95.4

86.0
82.8

89.4
64.9

99.5
70.2

151.1
59.2
91.9
48.0
54.7
-6.7
0.0
0.3
43.6

192.2
79.4
112.8
45.9
56.8
-10.9
128.1
-23.1
-38.1

69.4
51.1
18.2
45.5
53.4
-8.0
0.0
0.4
-27.7

80.1
45.9
34.2
49.1
59.4
-10.3
0.0
2.0
-16.9

84.2
48.7
35.5
72.9
84.0
-11.1
0.0
-19.9
-17.5

138.5
59.9
78.6
87.5
93.5
-6.0
0.0
-20.9
12.1

150.0
64.9
85.1
86.8
96.6
-9.8
0.0
-20.1
18.4

168.2
70.2
98.0
94.7
106.4
-11.6
0.0
-22.5
25.8

-24.0

108.1

-40.9

-40.6

-18.5

3.5

5.2

17.4

24.0
6.0
18.0
18.0
0.0
0.0

-108.1
-126.9
18.8
18.8
0.0
0.0

40.9
0.0
40.9
43.0
-2.1
0.0

40.6
0.0
40.6
42.8
-2.1
0.0

18.5
9.9
8.5
13.5
-5.0
0.0

-3.5
-10.0
6.5
13.5
-7.0
0.0

-5.2
-5.0
-0.2
6.8
-7.0
0.0

-17.4
-5.0
-12.4
0.0
-12.4
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Of which: diamonds
Imports, f.o.b
Of which: oil

Capital and financial account
Capital account
Of which: project support grants
Financial account
Foreign direct and portfolio investment
Other investment
Public sector (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Monetary authorities
Change in net foreign assests of commercial banks
Other, including errors and omissions
Overall balance
Financing
Central bank net reserves (- increase)
Gross reserve change
Use of Fund loans
Purchases
Repurchases
Exceptional financing
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Current account
Trade Balance
Capital and Financial Account
Overall Balance
Official aid (grants and loans)

(Percent of GDP)
-11.5
-10.0
8.0
-1.2
8.9

-8.4
-10.1
16.2
5.8
10.5

-9.0
-9.2
8.3
-2.1
9.6

-9.5
-10.5
8.3
-2.1
9.6

-9.5
-9.1
9.5
-0.9
10.6

-9.5
-8.8
9.1
0.2
9.4

-9.3
-8.5
8.7
0.2
8.9

-9.2
-8.2
8.8
0.6
8.9

Budget support in US$ (grants and loans)

77.7

82.9

77.8

77.8

53.6

53.0

52.2

51.4

Gross International Reserves
(US$ millions)
Months of imports
excluding SDR allocation of 2009

209
4.4
4.4

336
6.1
3.8

336
5.7
3.5

336
5.6
3.5

326
4.9
3.0

336
4.6
2.9

341
4.3
2.7

346
4.1
2.6

2,984.6

3,410.2

…

…

…

…

…

…

National currency per US dollar (average)

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Table 6. Sierra Leone: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund
Projection
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Fund obligations based on existing credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest 1/

0.0
0.1

1.4
0.0

3.3
0.0

4.6
0.2

4.6
0.2

8.1
0.1

9.9
0.1

10.8
0.1

9.4
0.1

9.4
0.0

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest 1/

0.0
0.1

1.4
0.0

3.3
0.0

4.6
0.2

4.6
0.2

8.1
0.2

9.9
0.2

12.1
0.2

12.6
0.1

14.3
0.1

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of quota

0.1
0.2
0.1
1.2
0.0
0.1
0.1

1.4
2.1
0.5
13.3
0.1
0.6
1.4

3.3
5.0
1.1
25.0
0.2
1.5
3.2

4.8
7.3
1.4
40.9
0.3
2.2
4.6

4.8
7.4
1.3
32.2
0.3
2.2
4.7

8.3
12.7
2.0
41.5
0.5
3.7
8.0

10.0
15.3
2.2
44.7
0.5
4.4
9.7

12.3
18.7
2.5
47.1
0.6
5.3
11.8

12.7
19.3
2.3
44.6
0.6
5.4
12.2

14.4
22.0
2.5
44.9
0.6
6.0
13.9

Outstanding Fund credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service
In percent of GDP
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of quota

46.7
72.0
22.2
477.5
3.9
21.4
45.0

73.4
111.2
28.1
697.1
5.8
33.1
70.7

79.0
120.0
26.5
602.7
5.7
36.8
76.2

83.2
126.6
24.7
705.6
5.4
37.6
80.3

83.1
126.6
22.2
554.3
5.0
37.1
80.1

75.0
114.3
18.3
374.0
4.2
33.0
72.3

65.1
99.4
14.6
289.8
3.4
28.3
62.8

53.0
80.9
10.9
203.1
2.6
22.7
51.1

40.4
61.7
7.3
142.3
1.8
17.1
39.0

26.1
39.8
4.5
81.3
1.1
10.9
25.2

Net use of Fund credit (in millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments

12.2
12.2
0.0

26.8
28.2
1.4

5.6
8.9
3.3

4.3
8.9
4.6

-0.2
4.5
4.6

-8.1
0.0
8.1

-9.9
0.0
9.9

-12.1
0.0
12.1

-12.6
0.0
12.6

-14.3
0.0
14.3

324
15
1,856
336
104

395
16
1,914
336
104

454
20
2,112
326
104

512
18
2,333
336
104

570
23
2,527
341
104

626
31
2,735
346
104

681
34
2,928
351
104

742
40
3,135
356
104

841
43
3,356
361
104

891
49
3,591
366
104

Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and services (in millions of US$)
Debt service (in millions of US$)
Nominal GDP (in millions of US$)
Gross International Reserves (in millions of US$)
Quota (millions of SDRs)
Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ There are no interest payments to the Fund in 2010-11.
2/ Total debt service includes IMF repayments.

28

2009

Table 7. Sierra Leone: Schedule of Disbursements Under the ECF Arrangement, 2010-2012
Availability

Disbursements
In millions
of SDRs

Conditions for Disbursement
In percent
of quota

4.44

4.28

Effectiveness of the three-year ECF arrangement

November 15, 2010

4.44

4.28

Board completion of the first review based on observance
of performance criteria for June 30, 2010

May 15, 2011

4.44

4.28

Board complettion of the second review based on observance
of performance criteria for December 31, 2010

November 15, 2011

4.44

4.28

Board completion of the third review based on observance
of performance criteria for June 30, 2011

May 15, 2012

4.44

4.28

Board completion of the fourth review based on observance
of performance criteria for December 31, 2011

November 15, 2012

4.44

4.28

Board completion of the fifth review based on observance
of performance criteria for June 30, 2012

May 15, 2013

4.47

4.32

Board completion of the sixth review based on observance
of performance criteria for December 31, 2012

31.11

30.00

Total disbursements

29

May 15, 2010

30
Table 8. Sierra Leone: Millennium Development Goals
1990

Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)
Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)
GDP per person employed (annual % growth)
Income share held by lowest 20%
Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)
Poverty gap at $1.25 a day (PPP) (%)
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP) (% of population)
Prevalence of undernourishment (% of population)
Vulnerable employment, total (% of total employment)

1995

2000

2005

2008

64
39
-20
1.1
..
45
63
45
..

65
41
-9
..
..
..
..
43
..

65
44
1
..
24.7
..
..
..
..

64
41
4
6.1
28.3
20
53
47
..

64
42
4
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..
..

37
60
..
81
..

44
64
..
81
..

..
..
69
57
..

6
..
..
..
..

9
40
71
71
..

15
..
90
69
23.2

13
..
90
69
..

..
169
290

..
166
283

37
161
274

67
157
265

67
155
262

..
..
..
..
..
..

146
..
..
..
..
..

139
42
4
..
68
..

130
43
5
2,100
81
..

126
..
..
..
..
..

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under age 5 with fever)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, female (% of females ages 15-24)
Condom use, population ages 15-24, male (% of males ages 15-24)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, male (% ages 15-24)
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

..
..
..
207
..
..
0.2
..

..
..
..
279
..
..
1.0
29

61
..
..
377
..
..
1.2
33

52
..
..
509
1.3
0
1.6
36

..
..
..
574
1.3
0
1.7
37

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Forest area (% of land area)
Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)
Improved water source (% of population with access)
Marine protected areas, (% of surface area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)

0.2
0.1
43
..
..
..
..

0.3
0.1
41
12
57
..
..

0.4
0.1
40
12
57
..
..

0.3
0.2
38
11
53
..
4.1

..
..
..
11
53
..
4.1

Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Aid per capita (current US$)
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports, excluding workers' remittances)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)
Telephone lines (per 100 people)

15
10
0.0
0
0

51
62
0.0
0
0

43
46
0.1
0
0

69
9
0.2
14
..

99
4
0.3
18
..

5.5
190
0.8
10.0
40
..
4.1

5.5
200
0.8
5.6
39
..
4.0

5.4
150
0.6
6.9
43
..
4.2

5.3
230
1.2
17.4
46
35
5.1

5.2
320
1.8
19.7
48
38
5.6

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Literacy rate, youth female (% of females ages 15-24)
Literacy rate, youth male (% of males ages 15-24)
Persistence to last grade of primary, total (% of cohort)
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)
Total enrollment, primary (% net)
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%)
Ratio of female to male enrollments in tertiary education
Ratio of female to male primary enrollment
Ratio of female to male secondary enrollment
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of total nonagricultural employment)
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)
Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)
Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)
Unmet need for contraception (% of married women ages 15-49)

Other
Fertility rate, total (births per woman)
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)
Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (millions)
Source: World Development Indicators database, 2009.

31
Table 9. Sierra Leone: Financial Soundness Indicators of the Banking System, 2005–10

2005

2006

2007

2009

2008

2010
June

(Percent, end of period, unless otherwise indicated)
Capital adequacy
Regulatory capital ratio 1/
Regulatory tier 1 capital ratio 2/

35.7
10.3

33.3
17.0

35.0
16.7

43.5
18.7

34.0
18.8

29.5
16.6

…
…

…
…

25.6
28.5

17.9
4.6

10.6
9.5

13.6
9.3

Earnings and profitability
Return on assets
Return on equity

8.1
28.0

5.8
17.0

3.1
10.3

2.2
7.2

1.6
4.0

1.2
3.8

Liquidity
Ratio of net loans to total deposits
Liquidity ratio 3/
Statutory minimum liquidity ratio 3/ 4/
Share of foreign exchange deposits in total deposits

27.5
53.0
34.0
30.7

26.5
58.9
28.5
32.4

27.7
53.3
25.7
36.5

33.9
62.0
25.0
32.2

41.5
53.4
29.0
34.5

43.6
34.7
33.2
35.4

Asset quality
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans
Nonperforming loans (net of provisions) to regulatory capital

(Number of banks not complying)
Prudential ratios at year-end
Capital adequacy
Minimum liquidity ratio
Minimum capital
Limit of single large exposure 5/

0
0
0
0

0
0
1
2

0
0
1
1

0
0
1
2

1
1
2
4

1
1
0
5

Memorandum Item:
Number of banks

7

8

10

13

14

13

Source: Bank of Sierra Leone.
1/ Capital requirement over risk-weighted assets (solvency ratio).
2/ Core capital (Tier I) over total assets.
3/ Calculated taking into account both domestic currency and foreign currency deposits. Liquid assets include domestic currency cash in vault,
claims on the BSL, claims on discount houses, and government securities.
4/ Effective November 2007, minimum liquidity includes 40 percent of demand deposits and 20 percent of quasi-money to be held in either
cash or treasury bills.
5/ A single large exposure of an institution is any exposure that is 2 percent or more of its capital base.

32
APPENDIX: SIERRA LEONE—LETTER OF INTENT

November 17, 2010
Mr. Dominique Strauss-Kahn
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
U.S.A.
Dear Mr. Strauss-Kahn:
The attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) supplements the one
attached to my letter to you dated May 18, 2010. It describes recent economic developments
and progress in the implementation of the ECF-supported program during the first half of
2010 and presents our policies planned for the remainder of 2010 and 2011.
All June 2010 quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets were met. The two
structural benchmarks for June were met, but with a slight delay: the automatic domestic
fuel-pricing formula was adopted in October to bring the domestic pump prices in line with
international oil prices and the BSL adopted the new off-site surveillance guidelines for
banks in November.
Although fiscal policy remained on target in the first half of 2010, spending accelerated in
the second half of the year due to unanticipated expenditures on emergency power project,
hiring of health care workers, higher interest payments, outlays for road construction, and
payments of arrears to oil marketing companies because of delays in implementing full
pass-through of international fuel prices. While tax collections are anticipated to exceed
program projections, mostly explained by very good performance of the GST introduced in
January, additional domestic financing of 0.9 percent of GDP will be required in 2010.
Hence, the Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) requests that the target for end-December
2010 on net domestic bank credit to the central government be modified. To further boost
domestic revenue in 2011, we have raised royalties on diamonds to 6.5 percent, in line with
the Mines and Minerals Act 2009. The GoSL is committed to present to Parliament a 2011
budget that constrains non-priority spending and target net domestic bank financing of about
2 percent of GDP.
On this basis, the GoSL requests that the second disbursement be made available upon
completion of the first review under the ECF arrangement.

33
The GoSL believes that the policies set forth in the attached MEFP and Technical
Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) are adequate to achieve the objectives of the new
program, but stands ready to take any further measures that become necessary for this
purpose, in consultation with the Fund. The GoSL will consult with the Fund in advance of
revisions to the policies contained in the MEFP and continue to provide the staff of the IMF
the information required to accurately assess Sierra Leone’s progress in executing the
policies in the MEFP. The second, third, and fourth reviews under the current program shall
take place in June 2011, December 2011 and June 2012, respectively. Furthermore, the GoSL
will continue to consult with the IMF on its economic and financial policies, in accordance
with the IMF’s policies on such consultations.
The GoSL agrees, in line with its commitment to transparency and accountability, to the
publication of this letter, its attachments, and the related staff report in accordance with the
procedures for publication.
Very truly yours,

________/s/__________
Samura M. W. Kamara
Minister of Finance and
Economic Development

Attachments

____________/s/_____________
Sheku S. Sesay
Governor of Bank of Sierra Leone

34
ATTACHMENT I. SIERRA LEONE: MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This memorandum reviews recent economic developments and outlines the
macroeconomic policies and structural reforms that the Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL)
will pursue under the current Extended Credit Facility (ECF).
II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
2.
Economic activity appears to have picked up in 2010. Exports of diamonds have
rebounded and indicators point to buoyant agricultural output. Real GDP growth is projected
at 4.5 percent in 2010, compared to 3.2 percent in 2009. While lower fuel and domestic food
prices eased inflationary pressures during most of 2009, inflation rose in the first half of 2010
due to the depreciation of the leone in late 2009, the introduction of the goods and services
tax (GST) in January, and higher domestic fuel prices. The CPI increased by 18 percent in
the 12 months through August 2010. However, so far this year, the leone has been stable
against the US dollar.
3.
Fiscal policy was broadly implemented as programmed through June. Revenue
collections were above the target and current spending was close to the program, but the
wage bill was higher due to higher than anticipated hiring in the health care sector. Capital
expenditures were lower than programmed due to shortfalls in external project support.
However, domestically financed capital spending was higher than envisaged.
4.
Monetary policy remained tight in the first half of 2010. Growth in reserve money
and broad money decelerated significantly in the first half of 2010, as programmed. Private
sector credit continued to expand in the first half of 2010, albeit at a slower pace. With a
stable value of the leone, the amount offered on the BSL’s weekly foreign exchange auctions
fell as envisaged in the program to less than US$1 million by June.
5.
Program performance was satisfactory in the first half of 2010. All June 2010
quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets were met (Table 1) and the two
structural benchmarks for June have been implemented, though with some delay (Table 2).
Moreover, two of the structural benchmarks for September have been implemented, though
with a slight delay, and the remaining benchmark is expected to be implemented in
November 2010.
III. MEDIUM-TERM FRAMEWORK
6.
The medium term outlook for the Sierra Leonean economy is favorable. Real
GDP growth is expected to recover to 4.5 percent in 2010 and increase to 6 percent by 2012,
benefiting from the recent completion of the Bumbuna power station, investment in basic
infrastructure, and initiatives to improve the business climate and raise agricultural
productivity. The global economic recovery will increase export demand for minerals and

35
cash crops, which should contribute to exchange rate stability. Combined with expanding
domestic food production, this should ease inflationary pressures. Monetary and exchange
rate policies will also aim at returning to single-digit inflation, with inflation projected to
decline from 16 percent in 2010 to 8 percent in 2012. However, import coverage of gross
foreign exchange reserves is expected to decline from 6.1 months in 2009 to 4.6 months in
2012, as imports recover with economic recovery and expansion in investment.
7.
The economic impact of newly signed mining lease agreements for iron ore could
be significant. Assuming full implementation of the planned investments, exports and tax
revenue would increase substantially in the medium- and long-term. However, since these
projects are still in their infancy and there are uncertainties about the timing and production
volumes, they have not been incorporated in the medium-term macroeconomic projections.
Moving forward, the government wishes to level the playing field for new mining
investments and it will therefore apply the fiscal regime defined in the Mines and Minerals
Act (MMA) 2009 and existing tax and custom acts to future mining lease agreements. Also,
the government will consider, as stipulated for in the MMA, demanding an equity stake in
future larger mining projects to participate in windfalls and to gain insight into the mining
business.
8.
Consistent with the priorities laid out in the Agenda for Change 2008–12 (PRSP
II), the emphasis will be to create fiscal space to improve basic infrastructure while
maintaining macroeconomic stability. Since grants and concessional budget financing from
donors are likely to decline to pre-crisis levels in the next few years, the government
recognizes the urgent need to increase domestic revenue and strengthen the efficiency of
public spending. Reflecting efficiency gains from the introduction of GST and improvement
in tax administration, the aim is to raise domestic revenue above 13.5 percent of GDP by
2012. To achieve this target, the GoSL will fully apply the fiscal regime stipulated in existing
tax and customs acts and will resist issuing discretionary tax exemptions. Fiscal space will
further be created by containing non-priority spending, and raising public sector efficiency,
especially on project selection and implementation. The GoSL is committed to keeping
domestic financing below 2 percent of GDP to maintain debt sustainability and prevent
crowding out of the private sector.
9.
Debt sustainability will remain a priority. The GoSL is committed to a
conservative strategy of external borrowing on concessional terms. A comprehensive
national debt law and procedures manual will be adopted in 2010. In collaboration with the
Public Debt Unit of Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MOFED), government
agencies are working on improving the quality of debt data and reporting in order to better
monitor commitments, disbursements, and debt service obligations. The Commonwealth
Secretariat Debt Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS) will be electronically
linked with IFMIS. In order to further improve on debt management, the Government is
requesting assistance from the World Bank and the Fund with respect to developing a
comprehensive Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS).

36
IV. POLICIES FOR THE REMAINDER OF 2010
10.
The fiscal deficit is projected to be higher than programmed in 2010. Fiscal
spending has accelerated in the second half of 2010 due to the hiring of an additional 3,000
health care staff, unanticipated outlays for the emergency power project that was supposed to
expire in June, payments of arrears on fuel subsidies, and additional infrastructure projects
particularly on roads. For the year, total expenditures, including payments of arrears, are
projected to be 1.5 percentage points of GDP higher than programmed. On the revenue side,
the GST continues to perform better than anticipated and revenues are therefore projected to
exceed the program target by 0.6 percentage points of GDP. With unchanged program
budget support grants and loans, domestic bank financing is projected to increase to 3 percent
of GDP from 2.1 percent as envisaged in the program. The overall fiscal deficit, excluding
grants, is projected to increase to 11.5 percent of GDP from 10.8 percent of GDP in the
program. In case domestic revenues, including any prepayment of taxes, exceed
Le 988 billion, the additional revenue will be used to reduce domestic bank financing in
2010.
11.
The GoSL has consolidated several existing tax incentives from a number of
sector-specific acts into the tax and customs acts. The aim is to maintain the current
incentives without introducing new ones, while working towards eliminating all discretionary
tax incentives and exemptions. To this end, the GoSL has submitted the Revenue
Management Act 2010 to Parliament for enactment. The purpose of the act is to regulate the
granting of tax incentives and discretionary duty waivers. Furthermore, to evaluate the costs
and benefits of this policy, the GoSL will prepare a policy review by March every year
covering the previous calendar year. This review will contain a list of all projects that have
benefited from the catalogue of incentives, specify the purpose of the projects, and report
foregone revenue. The review will be made publicly available and submitted to the
Parliament.
12.
A new Mines and Minerals Act came into effect on January 1, 2010. In line with
the act, a 6.5 percent royalty for diamond mining became effective in November 2010. The
annual revenue effect is estimated at 0.2 percent of GDP.
13.
Monetary policy will remain tight to prevent the second round effects of the
increase in inflation from the introduction of the GST earlier this year and from higher
domestic fuel prices. Reserve money is targeted to grow by 7.5 percent in 2010, consistent
with 14 percent growth in broad money. Despite higher domestic financing of the budget,
private sector credit is still anticipated to expand by a healthy 26 percent in 2010. The BSL
will stand ready to tighten monetary policy further, should inflationary pressures increase.
With a stable leone against the US dollar, the amount offered in the foreign exchange auction
will remain at a reduced level.
14.
Direct credit from the BSL to the government increased significantly in the
second half of the year to finance accelerated budgetary spending. In September,

37
government overdrafts in BSL amounted to about 2.7 percent of GDP. However, almost
immediately, the BSL was able to withdraw liquidity by selling significant amounts of its
holding of treasury bills to keep monetary policy on course. The GoSL recognizes
shortcomings of relying on central bank financing. Hence overdrafts in BSL was reduced to
about Le 175 billion in early November 2010 and will be further reduced to Le 150 billion
(2 percent of GDP) by end-November 2010. In line with the BSL Act, all direct credits
provided in 2010 will be repaid no later than 93 days after end-2010. Also, the GoSL is
committed to revise the BSL Act to limit the use of direct credit to government in the future
(see section VI).
V. POLICIES FOR 2011
15.
Macroeconomic policies for 2011 will aim at improving basic infrastructure and
social services while maintaining macroeconomic stability. This should help facilitate
higher economic growth and lower inflation.
Fiscal policy
16.
The 2011 budget envisages higher domestic revenue, a significant increase in capital
spending, mainly financed by external grants or concessional loans, and a moderate domestic
financing need.
17.
On the revenue side, domestic revenue is projected to increase to 13.3 percent of
GDP from 13 percent of GDP in 2010, reflecting an increase in diamond royalties to
6.5 percent and continued efficiency gains from GST. This projection does not incorporate
any revenue from ongoing iron ore investment projects, except for the annual license fee.
Grants remain at 6.8 percent of GDP as the decrease in budget support by 0.9 percentage
points is compensated by an increase in project grants. Privatization proceeds are projected at
0.6 percent of GDP, reflecting sales of shares in Rokel Bank and Sierra Leone Commercial
Bank, as well as proceeds from the concession of the port in Freetown.
18.
On the expenditure side, a shift from current to capital spending is envisaged. In line
with the priorities laid out in the Agenda for Change to build basic infrastructure, capital
spending will increase from 8.4 percent of GDP in 2010 to 10.2 percent in 2011, financed by
external grants and concessional project loans (7.5 percent of GDP) and domestic sources
(2.7 percent of GDP). Wages and salaries are envisaged to decrease from 6.8 percent of GDP
in 2010 to 6.5 percent in 2011, reflecting a 15 percent increase in basic salaries and savings
accruing from the pay reform that would start implementation in the second half of the year.
In order to conduct fair, peaceful and democratic elections in 2012, current expenditures will
include Le 20 billion (0.3 percent of GDP) on elections, with additional donor support of
Le 44 billion.
19.
The overall fiscal deficit, excluding grants, is envisaged to increase to
12.5 percent of GDP from 11.5 percent of GDP in 2010. However, domestic bank

38
financing is projected to decline to 1.8 percent of GDP from 3.3 percent of GDP in 2010,
reflecting an increase in external project financing and privatization proceeds.
Monetary and exchange rate policies
20.
Monetary policy will aim to achieve single digit inflation by the end of 2011.
Reserve money is envisaged to grow at 14 percent that will imply a 20 percent growth in
broad money and will accommodate a 31 percent growth in private credit. With a constrained
access to direct credit from the central bank by the GoSL, liquidity management will be
eased.
21.
The authorities are committed to maintaining a flexible exchange rate to
facilitate adjustment to external shocks. The BSL will limit its foreign currency sales to
absorb foreign-financed budget spending and smooth short-term market volatility.
VI. STRUCTURAL REFORMS
22.
The structural reform program will complement macroeconomic policies to
promote an efficient public sector and higher sustainable private sector-led economic
growth. Structural policies will continue to focus on improving tax administration,
strengthening public financial management, and developing the financial sector (Tables 2 and
4). Policies for the two latter areas will be based on the Integrated Public Financial
Management Reform Program (IPFMRP) and the Financial Sector Development Plan
(FSDP), respectively.
Improving tax administration
23.
The GoSL will further step up efforts to improve tax administration and
broaden the tax base. The current tax administration suffers from inefficiencies arising from
separate tax departments for GST and income and it is not conducive to enhance tax
compliance. To this end, the National Revenue Authority (NRA) will integrate GST
operations (taxpayer services, filing and returns processing, and coordinated audit operations)
with the Large Taxpayer Office (Structural Benchmark for December 2010). Moreover,
NRA will transfer all eligible taxpayers to the Medium Taxpayer Office (MTO) and integrate
the GST administration with MTO to improve the efficiency of tax collections (Structural
Benchmark for September 2011).
24.
The NRA will step up efforts to improve tax collection and compliance. Measures
include applying penalties for non-filing of returns and underestimation of quarterly
installment payments; and levying and collecting interest on late payment of tax. In a similar
vein, a new small taxpayer regime will be implemented to improve voluntary compliance
(Structural Benchmark for December 2011).

39
Strengthening public financial management
25.
The GoSL will strengthen the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)
by enhancing the planning, monitoring and evaluation process for capital projects. The
government will fully integrate a three-year public investment plan with the budget process
for 2012 budget in line with the amendments to the Government Budget and Accountability
Act (Structural Benchmark for December 2011).
26.
The GoSL is committed to building a high quality workforce in the public sector.
To improve working conditions for the public service and to attract staff of high caliber, the
government will develop and start implementing a multiyear pay reform (Structural
Benchmark for June 2011). The reform will (i) realign current discrepancies in qualifications
and grade placements; (ii) decompress the wage structure; (iii) retrench redundant staff; and
(iv) gradually raise compensation to competitive levels financed partly from the restructuring
and, if necessary, a moderate increase in the total public sector wage bill.
27.
The roll out of IFMIS to MDAs will continue to strengthen budget execution.
So far, IFMIS has been rolled out to 11 key MDAs with 2 additional MDAs in the process,
accounting for about 65 percent of expenditures. The MOFED will continue to provide
training and support to IFMIS users across MDAs to ensure that activities are properly and
adequately captured within the system.
Financial sector measures
28.
The independence of the BSL will be strengthened by amending the BSL and
Banking Acts (Structural Benchmark for June 2011). The amendments will enhance the
independence of the BSL and align the acts with the Basel Core Principles for Effective
Supervision, as recommended by recent IMF TA missions.
29.
There is a need to limit the use of BSL direct credits to the government. This will
encourage the government to improve its cash flow management and support the
development of securities market. Also, the amendments to the BSL Act will (i) set a limit of
the annual flow of direct credits to the government (loans and advances) to 5 percent of the
actual domestic revenue in the previous budget year; (ii) require that such direct credits are
repaid within 93 days from the end of the financial year (repayments may be made with
marketable treasury bills that mature before the 93 day deadline); and (iii) stipulate that the
BSL may purchase government securities strictly for monetary policy purposes and provided
that such purchases are only made in the secondary market. While these amendments are not
likely to be approved before mid-2011, the government and the BSL are committed to adhere
to the above principles for BSL direct credits to the government from the beginning of 2011.
30.
The BSL will strengthen its supervisory role to reduce the vulnerabilities arising
in the financial sector from NPLs. This will be achieved by developing a new IT platform
and filling open staff positions in the Banking Supervision Department of the BSL. Also, the
BSL will gradually move to a risk-based supervision system. In addition, the BSL has aimed
to increase the minimum capital requirement from Le 15 billion to Le 30 billion over a
five-year period, starting in 2010.

40
31.
To develop a long-term capital market, the MOFED and the BSL will engage
market participants, including the commercial banks, NASSIT and other non-bank financial
institutions, to develop a long-term bond market consistent with the government’s financing
need. The GoSL will also strengthen the capital market regulatory structure and governance
by enacting the Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) Act and implement associated
regulations, and deepen the long-term capital market with the privatization and divestiture of
slated public enterprises.
32.
Private sector development is constrained by limited access to financial services.
Lack of financial development is evident in low credit to the private sector. Access to credit
will be enhanced by strengthening information structure through establishing a credit
reference bureau (Structural Benchmark for December 2010). To improve efficiency of
transactions in the economy, the BSL is working towards strengthening the payments and
settlement systems. In this context the AfDB is financing the automation of the payment
system, which includes: (i) Real Time Gross Settlement; (ii) Automated Cheque Processing
and Automated Clearing House; (iii) Scriptless Securities Settlement System; (iv) Core
Banking Application; and (v) Infrastructure Upgrade. Contracts have been awarded to
solution providers for all components and studies to gauge the scope have been conducted for
most of them.
33.
To prevent opportunities for money laundering, by the end of this year the
government will submit to the parliament a new law on Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism.
Other reforms
34.
The GoSL has committed to the principles of Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI). The first EITI Report (covering mining for 2006–07) was
published in March, and the final validation report was submitted on August 9, 2010. The
validation report recommends a number of improvements to the governance and management
of the process which are being considered. Furthermore, there are on-going efforts to
disseminate the first Sierra Leone EITI report.
35.
There is a need to strengthen Sierra Leone’s capacity to collect and disseminate
economic statistics. The GoSL is seeking technical assistance from the IMF to improve the
reporting of national account and price statistics. There is a particular need to improve
collection of data on agriculture output and to compute one single reliable consumer price
index.
VII. PROGRAM MONITORING
36.
The program will be monitored based on quantitative performance criteria for
end–December 2010, end-June 2011 and end-December 2011 (Tables 1 and 3), and structural
benchmarks for 2010 and 2011 (Tables 2 and 4).

Table 1. Sierra Leone: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets for 2010 1/
(Cumulative change from beginning of calendar year to end of month indicated; Le billions, unless otherwise indicated)
2009
Actual Stock

2010
Prog.

June
Adj. Prog.

Act.

Status

Sept. 2/

Dec.

Performance criteria
Net domestic bank credit to the central government (ceiling)
Unadjusted target (ceiling)
Adjustment for the shortfall (excess) in external budget support
Adjustment for the issuance of government securities to the nonbank private sector

191.5

240.4
191.5
31.5
17.3

206.5

Met

202.7

250.3

-442.3

198.6

247.7
198.6
31.5
17.6

192.4

Met

235.5

235.1

336.4

-8.7

-24.3
-8.7
-7.9
-7.2
-0.4

-23.2

Met

-11.8

0.0

…

0.0

0.0

Met

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Met

0.0

0.0

…

0.0

…

0.0

0.0

Total domestic government revenue (floor)

…

432.8

438.1

Met

676.8

987.9

Poverty-related expenditures (floor)

…

252.2

294.5

Met

337.9

417.0

…
…

29.6
44.0
11.4
3,990

21.7
26.7
7.0
3,906

52.1
45.4
11.4
3,990

77.8
18.4
15.9
3,990

Net domestic assets of the central bank (ceiling)
Unadjusted target (ceiling)
Adjustment for the shortfall (excess) in external budget support
Adjustment for exchange rate depreciation (appreciation)
Gross foreign exchange reserves of the central bank, US$ millions (floor)
Unadjusted target (floor)
Adjustment for the shortfall (excess) in external budget support 3/
Adjustment for the shortfall in the US$ value of IMF disbursement
Adjustment for the increase (decrease) in BSL short-term foreign currency liabilities
Contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt
by the public sector with maturities of one year or more (ceiling) 3/
Outstanding stock of external debt owed or guaranteed by the public sector
with maturities of less than one year (ceiling) 3/
External payment arrears of the public sector (ceiling) 3/
Indicative target

Memorandum items:
External budgetary assistance (US$ million) 4/
Net credit to government by nonbank sector 5/
ECF disbursements (SDR millions)
Exchange rate (Leones/US$)
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/

…

The performance criteria and indicative targets are defined in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU).
Indicative targets.
These apply on a continuous basis.
Including grants and loans.
Comprises treasury bills purchased by the National Social Security and Insurance Trust (NASSIT) and the nonfinancial private sector.

41

647.3

42
Table 2. Sierra Leone: Structural Benchmarks for 2010
Measures

Timing

Macro Rationale

Status

 Adopt a domestic fuel pricing formula that
reflects full pass-through of international
oil prices.

End– June

To enhance
transparency and
eliminate risks for the
budget in case of
external shocks.

Met with delay.
Implemented in October 2010.

 Adoption by the BSL of new off-site
surveillance guidelines for banks.

End– June

To enhance the
supervisory role of the
BSL for financial sector
development.

Met with delay.
Implemented in November 2010.

 Establish a Domestic Tax Department
(DTD) as the vehicle for achieving
integration of domestic tax collection and
make it functional, including recruiting
Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner.

EndSeptember

To improve efficiency of
revenue collection
efforts.

Not met.
Following interviews held in
October 2010, the NRA Board
has appointed a Commissioner
and a Deputy Commissioner for
the Domestic Tax Department.

 Submit to parliament amendments of the
Government Budgeting and Accountability
Act (2005) and Financial Management
Regulation to ensure that only viable
capital projects enter into the budget.

End–
September

To improve efficiency of
public investments and
achieve the program
growth targets.

Met with delay.
Implemented in October 2010.

 Establish reverse repo rate as the
benchmark interest rate and announce the
rate after every Monetary Policy
Committee meeting.

Continuous
from endSeptember

To increase the
effectiveness of
monetary policy and
help develop a yield
curve.

Not met.
Expected to be met in
November 2010.

 Establish a credit reference bureau.

EndDecember

To improve informational
infrastructural and
promote credit access
for credit-worthy
customers.

The Credit Reference Bill was
gazette on September 9, 2010.
This bill has been sent to
parliament and a pre-legislative
hearing is scheduled for the third
week in November.

 Integrate the Goods and Services Tax
(GST) administration within the Large
Taxpayer Office (LTO).

EndDecember

To ensure full and
efficient implementation
of the GST to achieve
domestic revenue target.

An action plan has been
developed and sent to the
Board. NRA Management
intends to execute the
establishment of the LTD and to
integrate the GST administration
within the same framework but
at different dates of end
September and end December,
respectively. The next step is to
seek approval by the NRA
Board.

Table 3. Sierra Leone: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets for 2011 1/
(Cumulative change from beginning of calendar year to end of month indicated; Le billions, unless otherwise indicated)

Dec. 2010
Stock

2011
Mar. 2/

Jun.

Sept. 2/

Dec.

897.6

64.6

106.6

137.6

152.1

-207.5

63.7

112.8

146.6

159.5

336.4

-22.7

-14.8

-24.7

-9.9

Contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt
by the public sector with maturities of one year or more (ceiling) 3/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Outstanding stock of external debt owed or guaranteed by the public sector
with maturities of less than one year (ceiling) 3/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

External payment arrears of the public sector (ceiling) 3/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total domestic government revenue (floor)

…

260.0

549.7

831.8

1,156.6

Poverty-related expenditures (floor)

…

134.6

271.0

382.5

514.2

…
…

16.7
12.4

3,990

3,990

31.3
18.2
4.4
3,990

42.5
25.9
4.4
3,990

53.5
43.2
8.9
3,990

Performance criteria
Net domestic bank credit to the central government (ceiling)
Net domestic assets of the central bank (ceiling)
Gross foreign exchange reserves of the central bank, US$ millions (floor)

43

Indicative target

Memorandum items:
External budgetary assistance (US$ million) 4/
Net credit to government by nonbank sector 5/
ECF disbursements (SDR millions)
Program exchange rate (Leones/US$)

1/ The performance criteria and indicative targets are defined in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU).
2/ Indicative targets.
3/ These apply on a continuous basis.
4/ Including grants and loans.
5/ Comprises treasury bills purchased by the National Social Security and Insurance Trust (NASSIT) and the non financial private sector.

44

Table 4. Sierra Leone: Proposed Structural Benchmarks for 2011
Measures

Timing

Macro Rationale



Submit amendments to the BSL and Banking
Acts.

End–June

To increase operational
independence of the BSL and
improve regulation and
supervision of the financial
sector.



Develop and start implementing a pay reform
for public servants.

End-June

To improve the quality of civil
services by providing
competitive wages.



Transfer all eligible taxpayers to the Medium
Taxpayer Office (MTO) and integrate GST
administration with MTO.

End-September

To improve efficiency of
revenue collection efforts.



Implement new small taxpayer regime.

End–December

To improve voluntary
compliance and raise tax
revenue.



Strengthen the medium-term expenditure
framework by completing a three-year public
investment plan, fully integrated with the budget
process, to be submitted with 2012 budget.

End-December

To improve efficiency of public
investments and achieve
medium-term growth targets

45
ATTACHMENT II. SIERRA LEONE: TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
November 17, 2010
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
This memorandum sets out the understandings between the Sierra Leonean authorities
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) regarding the definitions of the quantitative
performance criteria (PCs) and structural benchmarks (SBs) for the program supported by the
Extended Credit facility (ECF) arrangement, as well as the related reporting requirements.
Unless otherwise specified, all quantitative PCs and indicative targets will be evaluated in
terms of cumulative flows from the beginning of the period, as specified in Table 3 of the
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP).
2.
Program exchange rates. For the purpose of the program, foreign currency
denominated values in 2010 and 2011 will be converted from their U.S. dollar denominated
value into Sierra Leonean currency (leones) using a program exchange rate of Le 3,990/US$.
II. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
A. Gross Foreign Exchange Reserves of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL)
3.
Definition. Unless otherwise noted, gross foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of
Sierra Leone (BSL) are defined as reserve assets of the BSL. Reserve assets are defined in
the IMF’s Balance of Payments Manual (5th ed.) and elaborated in the reserve template of the
Fund’s International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity: Guidelines for a Data
Template. They exclude foreign assets not readily available to, or controlled by, the monetary
authorities.
Adjustment clauses
4.
The floor on the change in gross foreign exchange reserves will be adjusted
(a) downward (upward) by the amount in U.S. dollars of the shortfall (excess) in
programmed external budgetary assistance1—the downward adjustment will be capped at the
equivalent of US$20 million; (b) downward (upward) for any shortfall (excess) in the
U.S. dollar value of disbursements from the IMF under the ECF arrangement; and (c) upward
(downward) for any increase (decrease) in BSL short-term (one year or less in original
maturity) foreign currency-denominated liabilities (to residents and nonresidents).

1

External budgetary assistance is defined as program grants and program loans, excluding HIPC assistance.

46
B. Net Domestic Assets of the BSL
5.
Definition. Net domestic assets (NDA) of the BSL are defined as the end-period
stock of the reserve money less the end-period stock of net foreign assets calculated at the
program exchange rates. Reserve money includes currency issued (equal to currency outside
banks plus cash in vaults), deposits of commercial banks with the BSL and the BSL liabilities
to other private sector. Net foreign assets of the BSL are defined as gross foreign exchange
reserves (defined above) minus foreign liabilities. Foreign liabilities are defined as foreign
currency-denominated liabilities of the BSL to nonresidents and the outstanding use of Fund
credit. For program purposes, foreign liabilities exclude SDR allocation.
6.
Adjustment clauses. The ceiling on changes in NDA of the BSL will be adjusted
upward (downward) by the leone value of the shortfall (excess) in the external budgetary
assistance at the test dates—the upward adjustment will be capped at the equivalent of
US$20 million.
C. Net Domestic Bank Credit to the Central Government (NCG)
7.
Definition. NCG refers to the net banking system’s claims on the central government
as calculated by the BSL. It is defined as follows:


the net position of the government with commercial banks, including: (a) treasury
bills; (b) treasury bearer bonds; and (c) loan and advances of commercial banks to the
government; less government deposits in commercial banks;



the net position of the government with the BSL, including: (a) treasury bills;
(b) treasury bearer bonds, excluding holdings of special bonds provided by
government to cover the BSL losses; (c) the stock of non-interest bearing
non-marketable securities (NIBNMS); (d) the difference between converted NIBNMS
into treasury bills and proceeds from their sales; and (e) ways and means; less
(a) central government deposits; and (b) HIPC and MDRI relief deposits.

8.
Adjustment clauses. The ceiling on changes in NCG will be adjusted (a) upward
(downward) by up to the leone value of the shortfall (excess) in external budgetary
assistance—the upward adjustment will be capped at the equivalent of US$20 million;
(b) downward (upward) by the excess (shortfall) in the leone value of net issues of
government securities to the nonbank private sector vis-à-vis the program assumption (as
specified in the memorandum items in Table 3 of the MEFP).
9.
Data source. The data source for the above will be the series “Claims on government
(net)”, submitted to the IMF staff and reconciled with the monthly monetary survey prepared
by the BSL.

47
10.
Definition of Central government. Central government is defined for the purposes
of this memorandum to comprise the central government and those special accounts that are
classified as central government in the BSL statement of accounts. The National Social
Security and Insurance Trust and public enterprises are excluded from this definition of
central government.
D. External Payment Arrears of the Public Sector
11.
Definition. External payment arrears of the public sector are defined as the stock of
new external overdue debt-service payments by the public sector. For the purposes of this
PC, the public sector comprises the central government, regional government, all public
enterprises and the BSL. The nonaccumulation of external arrears is a performance criterion
during the program period. Excluded from this PC are those debts subject to rescheduling.
This PC will apply on a continuous basis.
E. New Nonconcessional External Debt Contracted or Guaranteed by the Public
Sector with an Original Maturity of One Year or More
12.
Definition. Those are defined as all forms of new debt with original maturity of one
year or more contracted or guaranteed by the public sector (see paragraph 11 for definition of
public sector) based on the residency criterion. This PC applies not only to debt as defined in
the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt (Decision
No. 12274 (00/85), August 24, 2000, Point 9, as revised on August 31, 2009, (Decision
No. 14416-(09/91)) but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has
not been received. Excluded from this PC are disbursements from the IMF and those debts
subject to rescheduling. For the purposes of this PC, the “public sector” is as defined in ¶11
above. This PC will apply on a continuous basis.
13.
Any external debt of which the net present value, calculated with the reference
interest rates mentioned hereafter, is greater than 65 percent of the nominal value (grant
element of less than 35 percent) is considered nonconcessional, with the exception of IMF
lending. For debt with a maturity of more than 15 years, the average of the ten-year
commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs) published by the OECD is used to calculate the
grant element. The average of the six-month CIRRs is used for debt with shorter maturities.
For loans in foreign currencies for which the OECD does not calculate a CIRR, calculation of
the grant element should be based on the CIRR in SDRs. The Government will report any
new external borrowing and its terms to Fund staff as soon as external debt is contracted or
guaranteed by the government.
F. External Short-Term Debt Contracted or Guaranteed by the Public Sector
14.
Definition. External short-term debt is defined as external debt stock with a maturity
of less than one year contracted or guaranteed by the public sector (see paragraph 11 for
definition of public sector). Debt is defined in Annex I of this TMU. For this purpose,

48
short-term debt will exclude normal trade credit for imports. For the purposes of this PC, the
public sector is as defined in ¶11 above. This PC will apply on a continuous basis.
III. QUANTITATIVE INDICATIVE TARGET
A. Domestic Revenue of Central Government
15.
Definition. The floor on total domestic central government revenue is defined as total
central government revenue, as presented in the central government financial operations
table, excluding external grants.
B. Poverty-Related Expenditures
16.
Definition. Poverty-related expenditures refer to those expenditures in the areas
identified in Table 2 of the Sierra Leone HIPC Decision Point Document.
IV. PROGRAM MoNITORING
17.
The Sierra Leonean authorities shall maintain a program-monitoring committee
composed of senior officials from the MoFED, the BSL, and other relevant agencies. The
committee shall be responsible for monitoring performance under the program,
recommending policy responses, informing the IMF regularly about the progress of the
program, and transmitting the supporting materials necessary for the evaluation of PCs and
benchmarks. The committee will provide monthly reports to the IMF on progress in
implementing the program’s quantitative targets and structural benchmarks.

49
ANNEX 1: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REVISED GUIDELINES ON PERFORMANCE
CRITERIA WITH RESPECT TO FOREIGN DEBT
The term “debt” has the meaning set forth in point No. 9 of the Guidelines on Performance
Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted on August 24, 2000, which reads as follows:
“(a) For the purpose of this guideline, the term “debt” will be understood to mean a current,
i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a contractual arrangement through the provision
of value in the form of assets (including currency) or services, and which requires the obligor
to make one or more payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some
future point(s) in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities
incurred under the contract. Debts can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as
follows: (i) loans, i.e., advances of money to obligor by the lender made on the basis of an
undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the future (including deposits, bonds,
debentures, commercial loans, and buyers’ credits) and temporary exchanges of assets that
are equivalent to fully collateralized loans under which the obligor is required to repay the
funds, and usually pay interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future
(such as repurchase agreements and official swap arrangements); (ii) suppliers’ credits,
i.e., contracts where the supplier permits the obligor to defer payments until sometime after
the date on which the goods are delivered or services are provided; and (iii) leases,
i.e., arrangements under which property is provided which the lessee has the right to use for
one or more specified period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total expected service
life of the property, while the lessor retains the title to the property. For the purpose of the
guideline, the debt is the present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments
expected to be made during the period of the agreement excluding those payments that cover
the operation, repair, or maintenance of the property. (b) Under the definition of debt set out
above, arrears, penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from the failure to make
payment under a contractual obligation that constitutes debt are debt. Failure to make
payment on an obligation that is not considered debt under this definition (e.g., payment on
delivery) will not give rise to debt”. (c) Excluded from this performance criterion are normal
import-related credits, disbursements from the IMF, and those debts subject to rescheduling
arrangements.”

50
Sierra Leone: Summary of Data to be Reported to IMF Staff
Type of Data
Real sector

Public finance

Monetary and financial
data

Tables

Frequency

Reporting Deadline

National accounts

Annual

End of year + 9 months

Revisions of national accounts

Variable

End of revision + 2 months

Disaggregated consumer price index

Monthly

End of month + 2 weeks

Net government position and details of
nonbank financing, including the stock of
the float, treasury bills, and bonds, as well
as privatization receipts

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Government flow-of-funds table
(Government Financial Operations Table)
with supporting documentation (final) and
presented on commitment and cash bases

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Petroleum product prices and tax receipts
by categories of petroleum products

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Stock of outstanding payment commitments
with a breakdown between current and
capital expenditures

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Import duty exemptions by end-users and
tariff regimes and estimates of
corresponding revenue losses

Quarterly

End of quarter + 6 weeks

Monetary survey

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Balance sheet of the BSL

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Consolidated balance sheets of commercial
banks

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

BSL monitoring sheet of net financing of the
financial sector to the government

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

BSL monitoring sheet of treasury bills and
bonds holdings

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Borrowing and lending interest rates

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Results of foreign exchange and Treasury
Bills auctions

Weekly

End of week + 3 days

Stocks of government securities

Monthly

End of month + 6 weeks

Banking supervision ratios

Quarterly

End of quarter + 8 weeks

51
Sierra Leone: Summary of Data to be Reported to IMF Staff (concluded)
Type of Data

Tables

Frequency

Reporting Deadline

Monetary and financial
data

External debt

HIPC initiative and MDRI
monitoring

Gross official foreign reserves

Weekly

End of week + 1 week

Foreign exchange cashflow table

Monthly

End of quarter + 4 weeks

Revised balance of payments data

Monthly

When revisions occur

Exports and imports of goods (including the
volume of key minerals and fuels)

Monthly

End of month + 3 months

Outstanding external arrears and
repayments (if applicable)

Monthly

End of month + 4 weeks

Details of all new external borrowing and
guarantees provided by government on
new borrowing, including the associated
concessionality calculation (percentage) for
each new loan.

Monthly

End of month + 4 weeks

External debt service payments (separately
on principal and interest payment) to each
creditor, including and excluding new
disbursements in the debt recording
system. Also, including and excluding HIPC
relief.

Monthly

End of month + 4 weeks

Statement of special account at the BSL,
that receives resources generated by the
HIPC Initiative and tracks their use

Monthly

End of month + 4 weeks

Statement of special MDRI account at the
BSL and the corresponding povertyreducing spending financed

Monthly

End of month + 4 weeks

Minutes of the meeting of the Monetary
Policy Committee

Monthly

Date of meeting + 2 weeks

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
SIERRA LEONE
Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis 2010
Prepared by the staffs of the International Monetary Fund and
the International Development Association
Approved by Doris C. Ross and Dominique Desruelle (IMF)
and Sudarshan Gooptu and Jan Walliser (World Bank)
November 18, 2010
Based on the low-income country (LIC) debt sustainability analysis (DSA), staff’s assessment
is that Sierra Leone’s risk of debt distress remains moderate. Under baseline projections, all
external debt indicators are below their indicative thresholds throughout the projection
period (2010-30). Under the most extreme shock scenarios, however, the PV of debt to
exports breaches its threshold significantly, the PV of debt to revenue breaches its threshold
marginally, and the PV of debt to GDP ratio touches its threshold temporarily. Public sector
debt dynamics remain on a stable path under the baseline scenario, but stress tests suggest
that threats to debt sustainability remain. The analysis highlights the continued need for
improved domestic revenue mobilization, the containment of low priority current
expenditures, as well as growth and export-enhancing policies. Sierra Leone should continue
to contract new external financing only in the form of grants and highly concessional loans
and promote the development of a domestic debt market. The authorities agree with staff’s
assessment, highlighting the need for continued borrowing on highly concessional terms to
meet the countries’ large infrastructure investment needs, while stressing the importance of
not unduly increasing the risk of debt distress.
I. BACKGROUND
1.
This debt sustainability analysis (DSA) updates the DSA presented in December
2009 (IMF Country Report, No. 10/15). It was jointly conducted by the Fund and World
Bank staffs in collaboration with the authorities.
2.
Sierra Leone reached the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative
and qualified for debt relief under the MDRI on December 15, 2006. In January 2007,
Paris Club creditors agreed to cancel outstanding claims.1 Debt relief from the international
1

Sierra Leone has received debt relief under HIPC and MDRI Initiatives from the IMF, IDA, AfDB, EIB,
IFAD, BADEA, IDB, and OPEC Fund. Bilateral agreements have been signed with all Paris Club creditors.
Agreements on the delivery of the HIPC relief are still pending with China, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia.

2
community helped decrease Sierra Leone’s public sector nominal external debt from about
142 percent of GDP at end-2005 to about 32 percent of GDP at end-2007.
3.
At end-2009, Sierra Leone’s nominal public and publicly guaranteed external
debt, including arrears, was estimated at US$692.6 million.2 About 57 percent of this debt
is multilateral, 8 percent bilateral, and 35 percent commercial. The largest multilateral
creditors are the World Bank Group (US$124 million), the African Development Bank
(US$60 million) the Islamic Development Bank (US$47 million), and the IMF
(US$72 million). Debt to commercial creditors consists of arrears accumulated before and
during the civil war, which ended in 2002. The Sierra Leone government is making goodwill
payments to some commercial creditors to avoid litigation. With World Bank assistance, the
authorities are preparing for a debt-buy-back operation of eligible commercial debt by
end-2011.
4.
Domestic debt amounted to 20 percent of GDP at end-2009. Around 80 percent of
outstanding domestic debt is in the form of treasury instruments. Commercial banks and
other financial institutions accounted for about one half and the Bank of Sierra Leone one
quarter of the holdings.
Comparison with the 2009 DSA
(averages in percent of current GDP unless indicated)
2010-14
2015-19
2020-24
2025-29
2009
Actual DSA09 DSA10 DSA09 DSA10 DSA09 DSA10 DSA09 DSA10
Stock of external debt (eop. US$ million)
Stock of external debt (eop.)
Debt service on external debt
Exports of goods and nonfactor services
Current account deficit
Domestic government revenue
Domestic debt
Real GDP growth (percent)

692.6
40.8
1.4
17.5
8.4
11.7
19.7
3.2

778.4
29.0
2.1
19.1
7.4
12.0
12.1
5.6

835.0
31.1
2.3
21.9
9.4
13.8
18.0
5.5

1042.5
27.5
3.6
20.9
5.5
12.4
9.0
5.1

1114.2
29.4
4.1
24.1
8.6
16.4
16.0
5.5

1405.1
26.5
4.3
24.1
4.7
12.2
7.4
5.0

1495.2
28.2
4.7
26.3
7.5
19.4
16.1
5.5

1854.1
25.0
6.5
26.9
4.5
11.5
5.9
5.0

2020.5
27.2
6.4
29.0
6.9
21.3
16.1
5.5

II. UNDERLYING DSA ASSUMPTIONS
5.
While Sierra Leone was negatively affected by the global economic downturn,
the medium-term outlook remains relatively favorable. Economic activity continued to
decline in the first half of 2009 due to falling global demand and declining foreign inflows.
Despite a pickup in exports of diamonds and agricultural products in the second half of 2009
and an increase in domestic food production, real GDP growth for the year as a whole slowed
to 3.2 percent in 2009 compared with 5.5 percent in 2008. The external current account
deficit is estimated to have declined to 8.4 percent of GDP in 2009 from 11.5 percent of GDP
2

Public sector refers to central government and the nonfinancial public sector. This includes USD$240 million
of unreconciled commercial debt for which a debt-buy-back operation is pending.

3
Box 1. Baseline Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying the DSA


Economic activity is projected to recover gradually with real GDP reaching 6 percent by 2012 and
declining thereafter towards a steady state of 5.5 percent by 2018. Medium- to long-term growth is
predicated on the government’s ongoing policies to consolidate macroeconomic stabilization, expand
basic public infrastructure, and improve the business environment for private sector development.



Monetary and exchange rate policies will aim to bring 12-month (end of period CPI) inflation down to
8 percent at end-2012, from a projected inflation of 16 percent at end-2010, and to a steady state of
5.4 percent by 2016. The projection reflects the WEO assumptions on the prices of the main
commodities, as well as the authorities’ commitment to refrain from central bank financing and to
strengthen central bank capacity in conducting monetary policy.



Exports are expected to benefit from a projected increase in commodity prices, expansion in mining
capacity, and increased investment in agriculture. Exports of goods and services are projected to
gradually increase from about 18 percent of GDP in 2009 to 31 percent by 2030. Imports of goods and
services are projected to gradually increase from about 31 percent of GDP in 2009 to 40 percent in
2030.



The new GST together with ongoing strengthening and modernization of customs and tax
administration is expected to gradually broaden the tax base, raising domestic revenue from
11.8 percent of GDP in 2009 to 14.5 percent by 2012 and gradually to 22.5 percent by 2030. Current
expenditures are projected to gradually increase from 15 percent to 19.5 percent of GDP by 2030,
while public capital expenditures are expected to gradually increase from 7 percent of GDP in 2009 to
12 percent by 2030 in order to address the substantial infrastructure needs of the country. The overall
fiscal deficit, including grants, is projected to slightly increase from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to
3.5 percent by 2030.



Total donor assistance, including grants and concessional loans, is expected to decline from the
current level of 10 percent of GDP to 8 percent of GDP in the medium term. Budget support is
projected to decline gradually from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to 0.6 percent by 2030.



It is assumed that about US$240 million of unreconciled commercial debt would be eligible for the
World Bank assisted debt buy-back operation in 2011.



Domestic debt is expected to decline gradually from 19 percent of GDP in 2009 to 16 percent in 2030,
as the government refrains from central bank borrowing and limits issuance of new securities. In the
outer years, domestic debt in percent of GDP is projected to be significantly higher than envisaged
under the 2009 DSA because of higher annual fiscal deficits reflecting investment in infrastructure
and social services. Domestic debt includes treasury bills, treasury bearer bonds, non-interest bearing
bonds, recapitalization bond, ways and means advances, and domestic arrears.

in 2008, reflecting an increase in official transfers and weak imports. After a long period of
stability, the leone depreciated against the US dollar by about 25 percent in 2009, mostly
reflecting weaker inflows from exports. The medium-term outlook is, however, favorable for
Sierra Leone. Economic growth will benefit from the recent completion of the Bumbuna
power station, investment in basic infrastructure, initiatives to improve the business climate
and raise agricultural productivity, and continued macroeconomic stability. This should
support a recovery of real GDP growth to 4.5 percent in 2011 and to 6 percent in 2012. An
expected recovery in export demand for minerals and cash crops should contribute to

4
exchange rate stability. Monetary and exchange rate policies will aim to bring 12-month CPI
inflation down to 8 percent at end-2012 from a projected inflation of 16 percent at end-2010.
The baseline macroeconomic assumptions underlying this DSA are summarized in Box 1.3
III. EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
A. Baseline
6.
Under the baseline scenario, the debt indicators are projected to remain below
the corresponding thresholds throughout the projection period. The PV of debt-to-GDP
ratio would remain in the range of 19-22 percent throughout.4 The PV of external debt to
exports is projected to decline from 108 percent in 2009 to 95 percent in 2015, 79 percent by
2020, and 63 percent in 2030. The PV of debt-to-revenue ratio declines from a peak of 159 in
2009 to 87 by 2030, below its 200 percent threshold. The ratios of debt-service-to exports
and debt-service-to-revenue remains well below their thresholds throughout the projection
period (Table 1).5
B. Alternative Scenarios and Stress Tests
7.
The alternative scenarios highlight the need for maintaining prudent external
debt management and refraining from non-concessional borrowing. Under an alternative
scenario that assumes less favorable borrowing terms, the PV of debt-to-exports ratio
breached the indicative thresholds (A2, Table 2a). It would therefore be important to pursue a
prudent external debt management policy, relying mostly on grants and highly concessional
loans. The government has expressed interest in technical assistance from the Bank and the
Fund on developing a Medium Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS).
8.
Under the standard stress tests, public debt ratios are sensitive to an export
shock and a one-time real depreciation of 30 percent in 2011. These highlight the
vulnerability of the economy to adverse external developments. Notably the analysis shows
3

The impact of two new iron ore projects is not reflected in the baseline because of limited information.

4

Sierra Leone remains rated as a weak performer with regard to its policies and institutions with an average
2007–09 Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating of 3.14. As a poor performer, the debt and
debt service thresholds under the joint IMF-WB DSA framework for LICs applied to Sierra Leone are:
(i) 100 percent for Present Value (PV) of debt-to-exports; (ii) 30 percent for PV of debt-to-GDP; and
(iii) 200 percent for PV of debt-to-revenue. The relevant debt service thresholds are (i) 15 percent of exports;
and (ii) 25 percent of revenues.
5

While the nominal value of public debt includes USD$240 million of unreconciled commercial debt for which
a debt-buy-back operation is pending in 2011, the present value calculation includes 10 percent of this nominal
debt stock, reflecting the expected payments in the debt-buy-back. It should be noted, however, that all the
external debt thresholds would be breached temporarily in 2010 in the case of treating the full amount at face
value in the present value calculation prior to the debt buy-back in 2011.

5
that the debt-to-exports ratio is particularly sensitive to export shocks. Under the most
extreme bound test of a one standard deviation export shock (B2), the PV of debt-to-exportsratio would reach 159 percent of exports in 2012, gradually declining to 89 percent in 2030.6
A combination shock (B5), which reduces growth in exports, real GDP, net FDI inflows, and
the GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms by half a standard deviation, would also breach the
threshold, but to a lesser degree. The most extreme stress test for the debt-to-GDP and debtto-revenue indicators represents a one-time 30 percent real exchange rate depreciation
relative to the baseline in 2011. This results in a temporary breach of the indicative threshold
of the debt to revenue indicator, while the threshold is touched but not breached in the case of
the debt-to-GDP ratio. Finally, none of the stress tests for the liquidity indicators breach their
corresponding thresholds. Overall, however, the tests underscore the importance of
strengthening the environment for economic growth and export oriented policies, including
continuing infrastructure investment and financial deepening.
IV. FISCAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY
A. Baseline
9.
Under the baseline, Sierra Leone’s total public debt burden (including domestic
debt) is expected to stabilize over the projection period.7 The baseline macroeconomic
scenario assumes a marginal and gradual reduction in domestic financing relative to GDP.
With moderate domestic financing, domestic debt is expected to decline from 19 percent of
GDP in 2009 to 16 percent by 2030. This trend helps offset the increase in external debt, so
that the public debt-to-GDP ratio would decline from 60 percent of GDP in 2009 to
44 percent by 2030. While a lower relative accumulation of domestic debt is a positive
development, there is a need to develop a more competitive domestic debt market that could
result in lower nominal and real interest rates and longer maturities (Table 3).
B. Alternative Scenarios and Stress Tests
10.
In order to avoid unfavorable developments in public debt dynamics, the
primary fiscal deficit needs to be contained going forward. Under an alternative scenario
assuming an unchanged primary balance from 2010, the PV of debt-to-GDP ratio would
moderately increase after 2020, compared to the baseline during the projection period. This
underscores the importance of improving domestic revenue mobilization and containing nonpriority current expenditures (Table 4). Under bound tests, a one standard deviation growth
shock in 2011-12, and a one-time 30 percent depreciation, would moderately increase the
corresponding PV of debt ratios.
6

Due to large fluctuations in the economic data following the end of the civil war in 2002, stress tests and
alternative scenarios have been calibrated to use a 5-year historical period.
7

Public debt reflects current and committed government obligations.

6
V. DEBT DISTRESS CLASSIFICATION AND CONCLUSIONS
11.
Based on the LIC-DSA framework, Sierra Leone remains at moderate risk of
external debt distress. Under the baseline scenario, debt indicators are below the indicative,
country-specific policy dependent thresholds. Stress tests reveal that Sierra Leone’s external
debt trajectory is still vulnerable to shocks affecting its external sector. The evolution of
external debt critically hinges on policies aimed at boosting growth and diversifying the
export base, while continuing to access grants and highly concessional loans.
12.
Although domestic debt is projected to decline significantly over time relative to
GDP, it does not affect the overall assessment. A slowdown in domestic debt accumulation
does, however, lessen liquidity and rollover risks associated with its short maturities. Stress
tests underline the importance of improving domestic revenue mobilization and containing
non-priority expenditures. Policies should aim at developing the domestic debt market.

7
Figure 1. Sierra Leone: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External
Debt under Alternatives Scenarios, 2010-2030 1/

a. Debt Accumulation

10

50

9

45

8

40

7

35

6

30

5

25

4

20

3

15

2

10

1

5

0

0
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Rate of Debt Accumulation

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)
Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

180

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

250

160
200

140
120

150

100
80

100

60
40

50

20
0
2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

16

0
2010

2015

2025

2030

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

30

14

2020

25

12
20
10
8

15

6

10

4

5

2
0

0
2010

2015
Baseline

2020

2025

2030

Historical scenario

2010

2015

2020

2025

Most extreme shock 1/

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ T he most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2020. In figure b. it corresponds to
a One-time depreciation shock; in c. to a Exports shock; in d. to a One-time depreciation shock; in e. to a
Exports shock and in figure f. to a One-time depreciation shock

2030

Threshold

8

Figure 2.Sierra Leone: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2010-2030 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Non-debt flows

Historical scenario

60

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
50

40

30

20

10

0
2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024

2026

2028

2030

2024

2026

2028

2030

2024

2026

2028

2030

300

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
250

200

150

100

50

0
2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

18

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2020.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

9

Table 1.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007-2030 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Historical
Average

Actual

Standard
Deviation

Projections

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

31.7
31.7
-78.6
-16.2
5.1
9.0
19.7
28.7
-5.7
-3.5
1.8
-5.8
-15.6
0.4
-6.1
-9.9
-62.4
0.0

31.8
31.8
0.0
4.0
11.3
13.3
17.2
30.5
-5.7
-4.0
3.6
-3.0
-4.3
0.4
-1.5
-3.2
-3.9
0.0

40.8
40.8
9.0
6.1
8.2
13.5
17.5
30.9
-7.0
-4.5
1.7
-4.0
1.9
0.3
-1.1
2.7
2.9
0.0

40.4
40.4
-0.4
5.5
9.3
13.9
20.7
34.6
-5.9
-3.4
1.4
-2.4
-1.5
0.3
-1.8
…
-5.8
0.0

29.6
29.6
-10.8
5.4
9.3
12.5
21.5
34.0
-4.6
-2.1
1.4
-2.3
-1.6
0.3
-1.9
…
-16.2
0.0

30.9
30.9
1.3
5.3
9.3
12.2
22.0
34.2
-4.3
-1.8
1.3
-2.6
-1.4
0.2
-1.6
…
-4.0
0.0

31.8
31.8
0.9
5.0
9.0
11.9
22.5
34.4
-4.1
-1.6
1.3
-2.6
-1.5
0.2
-1.7
…
-4.1
0.0

32.3
32.3
0.5
4.8
8.9
11.6
22.9
34.5
-4.0
-1.5
1.3
-2.6
-1.5
0.2
-1.8
…
-4.4
0.0

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

...
...
...
...
...
8.3
8.3
15.0
0.3
83.7

...
18.7
... 107.4
... 18.7
... 107.4
... 158.4
3.2
4.3
3.2
4.3
4.7
6.4
0.4
0.3
11.2
-0.8

19.7
94.8
19.7
94.8
151.3
4.0
4.0
6.4
0.4
9.7

20.0
93.1
20.0
93.1
150.1
5.9
5.9
9.5
0.4
20.2

20.9
95.0
20.9
95.0
145.9
3.5
3.5
5.4
0.2
7.9

21.4
95.0
21.4
95.0
149.1
4.0
4.0
6.3
0.2
8.1

6.4
9.8
0.4
3.4
5.0
...
10.9
0.1
0.1
0.0
...
...

5.5
11.2
1.3
2.3
24.5
...
11.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
...
...

3.2
-7.8
0.9
-3.4
-3.6
...
11.8
0.2
0.1
0.1
...
...

4.5
-1.7
0.8
22.0
14.9
36.7
13.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
8.8
72.1

5.2
5.3
0.7
14.8
9.0
39.6
13.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
8.6
75.6

6.0
4.2
0.8
12.9
11.0
40.4
14.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
7.4
73.4

1.7
16.9

2.0
17.3

1.9
-4.9
0.3

0.0
...
...
...

0.0
...
...
...

0.0
18.4
98.0
4.0

1.9
2.7
0.4
3.3
0.0
19.3
87.7
3.7

2.1
10.8
0.4
2.5
0.0
19.7
86.4
5.5

2.3
10.5
0.5
2.9
0.0
20.5
88.3
3.3

4.9

3.6

-10.4

4.7

-4.0

2.3

2010-15
Average

2020

2030

33.0
33.0
0.7
4.9
8.8
11.4
23.3
34.7
-3.8
-1.3
1.3
-2.6
-1.4
0.2
-1.7
…
-4.1
0.0

30.3
30.3
-0.5
3.8
7.7
9.9
25.3
35.3
-3.5
-1.0
1.2
-2.6
-1.4
0.2
-1.6
…
-4.3
0.0

28.0
28.0
-0.3
2.5
6.3
9.0
30.8
39.7
-3.0
-0.5
0.3
-2.6
-1.2
0.2
-1.5
…
-2.8
0.0

21.6
94.3
21.6
94.3
148.8
4.9
4.9
7.7
0.2
8.5

22.0
94.6
22.0
94.6
148.6
4.6
4.6
7.2
0.2
8.1

20.1
79.2
20.1
79.2
109.8
4.7
4.7
6.5
0.3
8.2

19.2
62.6
19.2
62.6
87.3
3.3
3.3
4.6
0.4
6.6

6.0
2.2
0.8
11.3
9.0
42.0
14.4
0.2
0.1
0.1
6.7
74.5

6.0
2.1
0.8
9.9
8.5
42.9
14.5
0.2
0.1
0.1
6.6
75.5

5.5
1.5
0.8
8.8
7.5
41.8
14.8
0.3
0.1
0.1
6.4
74.7

5.5
1.4
0.8
8.9
7.4
41.4
18.3
0.4
0.3
0.1
7.2
83.0

5.5
1.4
0.8
9.2
8.5
39.5
22.0
0.7
0.6
0.2
7.8
84.4

2.5
8.3
0.5
2.3
0.0
21.1
88.4
3.7

2.7
8.2
0.6
1.9
0.0
21.2
87.9
4.6

2.9
7.1
0.6
2.0
0.0
21.7
88.3
4.3

4.1
7.0
0.8
1.1
0.1
19.7
74.3
4.4

8.1
7.0
1.5
1.2
0.1
18.9
59.4
3.1

2016-30
Average

7.3

-3.3

-2.6

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross remittances (Billions of US dollars)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittances)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

6.6
3.7
1.2
10.9
8.7
...

1.9
7.4
0.7
14.5
13.9
...

0
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes project grants (3 and 4 percent of GDP annually), exceptional financing (changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments.
For projections also includes contribution from price and exch. rate changes. The large residual in 2007 includes HIPC relief and in 2011 the pending debt buyback.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are derived over the past 5 years due to large fluctuations in the post-conflict economic data.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

5.5
2.3
0.8
13.3
10.0
40.6

7.9
2.5

5.5
1.4
0.8
9.0
8.0
41.0
19.5

7.2
83.2

7.0
1.2

10

Table 2a.Sierra Leone: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2010-2030
(In percent)
Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2020

2030

20

20

21

21

22

22

20

19

20
20

16
21

14
23

12
24

9
25

7
27

-2
27

-3
29

20
20
20
20
20
20

20
22
21
19
20
27

21
26
23
19
22
29

22
26
24
19
23
29

22
26
24
20
23
30

22
26
25
20
24
30

20
23
23
19
21
28

19
20
22
19
20
26

95

93

95

95

94

95

79

63

95
95

76
97

65
103

52
107

41
110

31
114

-10
107

-10
95

95
95
95
95
95
95

91
118
91
87
101
91

93
159
93
85
120
93

93
157
93
86
119
93

92
154
92
86
119
92

93
154
93
87
119
93

78
124
78
74
99
78

62
89
62
60
78
62

151

150

146

149

149

149

110

87

151
151

122
156

99
158

82
168

65
174

49
179

-13
149

-15
133

151
151
151
151
151
151

149
162
159
141
149
206

146
179
163
131
157
200

150
181
167
135
160
204

150
179
167
135
160
204

150
177
167
136
160
204

111
127
124
102
118
151

88
91
98
84
92
120

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2010-2030 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

11
Table 2b.Sierra Leone: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2010-2030 (continued)
(In percent)
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2020

2030

Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline

4

6

4

4

5

5

5

3

4
4

6
6

4
4

5
4

6
5

6
5

6
4

6
0

4
4
4
4
4
4

6
7
6
6
7
6

4
5
4
3
4
4

4
6
4
4
5
4

5
7
5
5
6
5

5
7
5
5
6
5

5
8
5
4
6
5

3
5
3
3
4
3

6

9

5

6

8

7

7

5

6
6

9
10

6
6

7
7

9
8

9
8

8
5

8
0

6
6
6
6
6
6

10
9
10
9
10
13

6
6
6
5
6
8

6
7
7
6
7
9

8
8
9
8
8
11

7
8
8
7
8
10

7
8
7
6
7
9

5
5
5
4
5
6

40

40

40

40

40

40

40

40

A. Alternative Scenarios
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Alternative Scenario :[Costumize, enter title]
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2010-2030 2
A3. Alternative Scenario :[Costumize, enter title]
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2011-2012 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2011 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock
(implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

12
Table 3.Sierra Leone: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2007-2030
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

Estimate
Average

2007

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

2008

2009

Standard
Deviation

2010

Projections

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2010-15
Average

2020

2030

55.2
31.7

53.7
32.9

60.4
41.6

59.2
40.9

48.5
29.9

49.2
31.0

49.4
31.8

48.9
32.3

48.7
33.0

46.2
30.3

44.1
28.0

-81.5
-19.6
-0.4
15.7
4.8
15.3
-18.2
-11.3
-3.0
-8.3
-6.9
-1.0
-0.1
0.0
-0.9
0.0
-61.9

-1.5
-3.3
2.6
16.0
4.5
18.7
-5.3
-3.5
-0.6
-2.9
-1.8
-0.6
-0.1
0.0
-0.5
0.0
1.8

6.7
6.6
1.6
19.7
7.9
21.4
5.5
-1.3
0.4
-1.7
6.8
-0.5
-0.2
0.0
-0.4
0.0
0.1

-1.3
-4.0
2.7
19.8
6.8
22.5
-6.3
-3.2
-0.6
-2.6
-3.1
-0.4
-0.1
0.0
-0.3
0.0
2.7

-10.6
-1.3
3.8
20.1
6.8
23.9
-4.2
-2.7
0.2
-2.9
-1.5
-0.8
-0.6
0.0
-0.2
0.0
-9.3

0.6
-0.2
3.2
19.9
5.6
23.0
-3.1
-2.5
0.3
-2.7
-0.6
-0.2
0.0
0.0
-0.2
0.0
0.8

0.2
0.0
2.7
19.4
5.0
22.1
-2.7
-2.5
0.3
-2.8
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-0.5
0.0
2.7
19.5
5.0
22.2
-2.7
-2.5
0.3
-2.8
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

-0.2
0.8
3.0
19.6
4.8
22.6
-2.2
-2.2
0.3
-2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0

-0.4
-0.6
1.0
24.4
6.1
25.5
-1.7
-1.8
0.6
-2.4
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

-0.2
-0.4
1.1
28.9
6.8
30.0
-1.5
-1.6
0.7
-2.3
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

23.5
0.0
...
...
17.5
149.2
215.0
…
22.8
32.8
81.1

22.0
1.2
...
...
17.1
137.0
191.1
…
15.0
21.0
4.1

38.4
19.6
18.7
...
17.0
194.5
324.4
158.4
10.9
18.3
-5.1

38.4
20.2
19.7
...
16.8
194.0
295.6
151.3
13.2
20.1
4.0

39.0
20.3
20.0
...
17.1
193.5
292.4
150.1
14.9
22.5
14.4

39.1
20.9
20.9
...
5.6
196.8
273.5
145.9
12.0
16.7
2.5

39.0
21.4
21.4
...
5.1
200.7
271.2
149.1
12.3
16.7
2.5

38.2
21.6
21.6
...
5.3
195.7
262.9
148.8
13.2
17.7
3.3

37.7
22.0
22.0
...
5.5
191.9
254.6
148.6
12.7
16.8
3.1

6.4
0.4
-1.8
-6.8
10.6
-0.1
...

5.5
1.3
-1.6
-6.1
11.1
0.3
...

3.2
0.8
1.9
21.5
5.3
0.2
...

4.5
0.7
-3.1
-7.9
15.0
0.1
36.7

5.2
0.7
2.2
...
8.5
0.1
39.6

6.0
0.8
2.4
...
7.3
0.0
40.4

6.0
0.8
2.8
...
6.3
0.0
42.0

6.0
0.8
3.2
...
6.0
0.1
42.9

5.5
0.8
4.2
...
5.1
0.1
41.8

0.1

2.2

3.0

2016-30
Average

1.1

Other S ustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio
Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percen
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

6.6
1.2
-2.1
0.7
10.9
0.1
…

1.9
0.7
2.3
11.1
3.5
0.1
…

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Public sector refers to central government and nonfinancial public sector.
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are derived over the past 5 years due to large fluctuations in the post-conflict economic data.

35.9 35.3
20.1 19.2
20.1 19.2
...
...
3.8
3.7
147.1 122.4
196.6 160.4
109.8 87.3
11.4
9.1
15.2 11.9
1.5
1.4

5.5
0.8
1.9

5.5
0.8
6.3

5.5
0.8
6.3

5.5
0.8
6.3

...

...

...

...

8.0
0.1
40.6

4.5
0.1
41.4

4.5
0.1
39.5

4.5
0.1
...

13
Table 4.Sierra Leone: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2010-2030

Projections
2013 2014

2010

2011

2012

2015

2020

2030

38

39

39

39

38

38

36

35

38
38
38
39

35
38
39
38

32
37
39
39

29
37
39
39

26
36
39
39

22
36
39
39

16
41
39
44

9
54
50
53

38
38
38
38
38

39
37
36
51
49

40
36
34
49
48

40
36
35
48
48

40
35
34
46
46

40
35
34
45
46

40
33
33
41
43

43
33
35
40
40

194

194

197

201

196

192

147

122

194
194
194
197

173
188
194
192

160
188
197
184

149
192
202
180

132
187
198
179

114
182
196
177

65
168
160
216

31
185
170
272

194
194
194
194
194

195
185
179
254
242

202
183
173
249
243

207
186
177
247
246

203
181
174
236
238

201
178
171
227
233

161
136
135
168
174

148
114
120
138
139

13

15

12

12

13

13

11

9

13
13
13
13

15
15
15
15

11
11
12
12

10
12
12
12

11
13
13
13

10
12
13
13

8
12
12
17

2
12
11
21

13
13
13
13
13

15
15
15
16
15

12
11
11
13
13

12
11
11
14
14

13
12
12
16
15

13
12
12
15
14

12
11
11
14
12

10
8
8
12
11

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative Scenario :[Costumize, enter title]
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative Scenario :[Costumize, enter title]
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2010
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
A4. Alternative Scenario :[Costumize, enter title]
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2011-2012
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2011

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SIERRA LEONE
Staff Report for the 2010 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the ThreeYear Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, Request for Modification of
Performance Criterion, and Financing Assurances Review—Informational Annex
Prepared by the African Department
(In collaboration with other departments)
November 18, 2010

Contents

Page

I. Relations with the Fund .......................................................................................................2
II. Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11 ................................................................7
III. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................................8

2
Appendix I. Relations with the Fund
(As of September 30, 2010)
I.

Membership Status: Joined 9/10/62; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position

SDR Million
103.70
103.69
0.02

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
99.51
120.97

% Allocation
100.00
121.57

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
ECF Arrangements

SDR Million
70.32

% Quota
67.81

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:

Type
ECF
ECF
ECF
VI.

Date of
Arrangement
Jul 01, 2010
May 10, 2006
Sep 26, 2001

Expiration
Date
Jun 30, 2013
Jun 22, 2010
Jun 25, 2005

Amount
Drawn
(SDR Million)
4.44
51.88
130.84

Projected Payments to Fund1
(SDR million; based on current use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Principal
Charges/interest
Total
VII.

Amount
Approved
(SDR Million)
31.11
51.88
130.84

% Quota
100.00
99.99
0.02

2010
1.40
1.40

Forthcoming
2012
2013
4.62
4.62
0.16
0.15
4.78
4.77

2011
3.27
0.00
3.27

2014
8.12
0.14
8.26

Implementation of HIPC Initiative
Enhanced
Framework
Commitment of HIPC Initiative assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed (NPV terms)

1

March 2002

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the amount will be
shown in this section.

3
By all creditors (US$ million)2
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date

675.20
125.21
100.00
December 2006

Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR million)
Amount disbursed
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income 3
Total disbursements

100.00
66.03
33.97
6.58
106.58

VIII. Implementation of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI):
I. MDRI-eligible debt (SDR Million) 4
Financed by: MDRI Trust
Remaining HIPC resources

117.34
76.75
40.59

3

II. Debt Relief by facility (SDR Million)
Eligible Debt
Delivery Date
December 2006
IX.

GRA

PRGT

Total

N/A

117.34

117.34

Safeguards Assessment

Pursuant to IMF policy, the Bank of Sierra Leone was subject to a safeguards assessment
with respect to the ECF arrangement approved on May 10, 2006. The assessment, which was
completed on June 12, 2006, proposed recommendations to address new and continuing
vulnerabilities in financial reporting, internal audits, and internal controls. Updates of the
2006 safeguards assessment report were completed in October 09 and November 2010. The
most recent update finds that the BSL maintains important elements of the safeguards
framework; financial statements are prepared and audited in accordance with international
standards and are published in a timely manner. However, financial safeguards need to be
2

Assistance committed under the original framework is expressed in net present value (NPV) terms at the
completion point, and and assistance committed under the enhanced framework is expressed in NPV terms at
the decision point. Hence these two amounts cannot be added.
3

Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point but not disbursed during the interim.
4

The MDRI provides 100 percent debt relief to eligible member countries that qualified for the assistance.
Grant assistance from the MDRI Trust and HIPC resources provide debt relief to cover the full stock of debt
owed to the Fund as of 2004 that remains outstanding at the time the member qualifies for debt relief.

4
improved in other areas. External auditors need to be selected and appointed in a timely
manner, based on well-established criteria, and should be appointed for a multi-year term
instead of the current practice of annual appointments. The audit committee should monitor
timely implementation of recommendations arising from external and internal audits and
safeguards assessments.
X.
Exchange Rate Arrangement
For customs valuation purposes and for official transactions, the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL)
calculates an official exchange rate every Friday morning as the weighted average of the
auction rate, the commercial bank mid-rate, and the bureau mid-rate in the previous week.
Commercial banks may buy foreign exchange from and sell it to individual customers and
may trade among themselves or with the BSL on a freely negotiable basis. As of
October 14, 2010, the BSL mid-rate was Le 4,109.30=US$1.
Sierra Leone’s de jure exchange rate regime is classified as floating, with the value of the
leone determined by the market. Furthermore, effective November 1, 2008, the de facto
exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified to ‘floating’ from a ‘stabilized arrangement’.
Effective February 2, 2009, the de facto exchange rate arrangement was reclassified from a
conventional pegged arrangement to a “stabilized arrangement” retroactively to
April 30, 2008, due to a revision of the classification methodology. In March 2008, the
exchange rate regime was reclassified as “a conventional peg” to reflect the nominal stability
of exchange rate developments under de facto management through the auction by the BSL
as the only seller of foreign exchange.
With effect December 14, 1995, Sierra Leone has accepted the obligations of Article VIII,
Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions. Sierra Leone maintains one
multiple currency practice subject to Fund jurisdiction arising from the applied multiple-price
Dutch auction system, as there is no formal mechanism in place to prevent spreads of
effective rates between winning bids from exceeding 2%.
XI.

Article IV Consultation

The Executive Board concluded the 2008 Article IV consultation on December 22, 2008. The
next Article IV consultation will be held in accordance with the 2010 decision on
consultation cycles.
XII.

Technical Assistance

Department
FAD

Purpose
Reform Progress update

Date
September 2010

Review of petroleum pricing mechanism

February 2010

Tax administration

January 2010

Evaluation of progress in PFM reforms

March 2009

Assistance in designing a simplified
regime for small taxpayers

January 2009

5
Department

MCM

STA

XII.

Purpose
Evaluation of progress on tax
administration reform and VAT
preparation
Evaluation of progress on PFM reforms

Date
September 2008

Implementation of public financial
management reforms

March 2008

Tax administration reforms for successful
VAT implementation
Banking Supervision and Banking
Regulation
Needs assessment and monetary
operations and foreign exchange auction
system
Follow-up assessment on TA needs

February 2008

Follow-up assessment of banking
supervision processes at BSL
Follow-up assessment on progress in
strengthening central bank internal
auditing
BSL: Internal audit and management of
the central bank
Monetary policy, banking supervision,
and recapitalization of the BSL
Recapitalization of the BSL

March 2009

Standardized Report Form Data
Development for Other Financial
Corporations
Producer Price Index Mission
Assist the authorities in implementing the
international standards recommended in
the Monetary and Financial Statistics
Manual
National accounts statistics mission
National accounts statistics mission
National accounts statistics mission

October 2010

July 2008

April 2010
March 2010
June 2009

March 2009
October 2008
April/May 2008
February 2008

October 2010
April 2009

March 2009
September/October 2008
January 2008

Resident Representative

Mr. Francis Kumah will assume responsibility for the Fund office in Freetown in November
2010 as a new resident representative.

6
Appendix II. Sierra Leone Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11
Title

Activities

Provisional Timing
of Mission

Expected Delivery
Date

A. Mutual Information on Relevant Work Programs
World Bank
work program

Public Expenditure Review

February 2009

November 2010

Supplement to Third Governance Reform
and Growth Credit (GRGC 3)

May 2010

June 2010

Fourth Governance Reform and Growth
Credit (GRGC 4)

Multiple 2010

December 2010

Decentralized Service Delivery Spn.

Multiple 2010

N/A

Financial Sector TA Credit

Sep., Dec. 2010

March 2011

Mining Sector TA Credit

Nov-Dec. 2010

May 2011

IRCBP Supervision

June & Dec. 2010,
May 2011

N/A

IPFMRP (PFM Project) Supervision

Feb-Mar., June,
Nov. 2010, May
2011
August 2010

N/A

Technical Assistance
FPDFI:
 AML/CFT

May 2010

N/A

AFRPS:
 Pay Reform

June 2010

N/A

2010 Article IV consultation and first ECF
review

September 2010

December 2010

Second ECF review

March 2011

June 2011

N/A

N/A

Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability Assessment (joint with
other donors)

IMF work
program

January 2011

Technical Assistance
FAD:
 Tax administration reform

7

Appendix II. Sierra Leone Joint World Bank-IMF Work Program, 2010–11 (continued)
Title

Activities

Provisional
Timing of
Mission

Expected Delivery
Date

MCM
 Needs Assessment and Multi-Topic

May 2010

June 2010

 Banking Legislation

June 2010

July 2010

 Open Market Operations/FOREX
Management

October 2010

August 2010

 Open Market Operations and
Foreign Exchange Market

Dec 2010

March 2011

 Open Market Operations and
Foreign Exchange Market

Feb 2011

May 2011

 Monetary and Banking Statistics

October 2010

January 2011

 Price Statistics

October 2010
March 2011

January 2011
June 2011

STA

 National Accounts

B. Agreement on Joint Products and Missions
Joint products
in 2010

DSA
Assisting the authorities with the
implementation of their financial
sector reform strategy

September 2010

December 2010
Continuous

8
Appendix III. Statistical Issues
A. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision has serious shortcomings that significantly hamper surveillance.
The prolonged civil war resulted in a virtual collapse of statistical systems in the late 1990s.
Serious deficiencies still affect balance of payments statistics, national accounts, government
finance statistics, and social indicators. A major and sustained improvement in the coverage
and timeliness of economic data will require greater interagency coordination and
restructuring the institutional framework.
Real sector statistics: Improvements have been made in the compilation of construction,
estimation of informal sector activity, measurement of government services, agricultural
production, household final consumption, and constant price gross domestic product (GDP).
Remaining issues concern rebasing the accounts, developing better data sources for
agricultural production, and generally continuing the improvement of informal sector
measurement. In addition, for constant price GDP, there is a need to supplement the
consumer price index (CPI) with alternative price measures, such as the producer price index
or industry-specific measures such as a construction cost index. Work in this area will
continue under a new DFID-funded project.
Efforts to reconstruct the national accounts estimates commenced during 2003/04, with the
main effort being to prepare new estimates for the period starting in 2001. Because resource
constraints significantly hindered the production of final estimates, only preliminary data for
2001–04 were made available. Efforts are underway to prepare revised national accounts
based on a 2005 benchmark and using 2005 prices to compile constant price estimates.
However, shortages of resources and staff continue to pose major constraints to the statistical
development undertaken by Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL).
The SSL compiles the CPI monthly and publishes it with a lag of about three weeks. It has
been rebased to 2007 using the 2007 Sierra Leone integrated household survey and continues
to cover the capital city and three main districts. While a national CPI is being compiled, the
authorities continue to publish the old CPI (1992=100). To avoid confusion, the authorities
have requested TA to validate the work done in order to adopt a common series.
A technical assistance mission visited Freetown in October 2010 to review the CPI and to
advice on the development of a producer price index (PPI). The authorities are working to
improve the index calculation methods for the CPI and procedures to aggregate regional CPIs
to obtain the national index.
Preliminary PPI weighting structures have been developed in some areas to support
compilation of indices by industry and product, and the sample of establishments to be
surveyed has been selected. Work will continue on obtaining further weighting data, and on
selecting products and transactions for sampling. It is expected that the first PPI, with indices
calculated for May to August 2011, will be published in November 2011.

9
Government finance statistics: The budget reporting system was established with
assistance from the Fund/UNDP technical assistance project. Monthly cash flow data on
budgetary central government revenue, current expenditure, and financing are provided. The
transaction coverage of the budgetary central government cash flow is incomplete. There is
an urgent need for more timely and accurate data on foreign-financed development projects.
Reports on implementation of the development budget and its financing are currently not
produced in a format that is suitable for budget analysis because the necessary data are not
available. There is also need for quality control of the final data.
The authorities are currently considering introduction of a flash reporting system for
government expenditure in general and for foreign aid-financed projects. As part of the
GDDS regional project for Anglophone African countries, work has been undertaken to
reconcile fiscal and monetary data and to improve the coverage and classification of the two
data sets. With the current drive towards decentralization and the growing role of local
government, there is an urgent need to compile and monitor the operations (and financial
balance sheet data) for the whole of consolidated general government.
Monetary and financial statistics: The main components of the central bank balance sheet
are available daily and weekly; this system provides an early warning system on key
financial targets. The full monetary survey is compiled by the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL)
with a lag of about six weeks; it has comprehensive coverage of commercial banks.
There has been some progress in the compilation of data in line with the 2000 Monetary and
Financial Statistics Manual. The BSL, with assistance from STA, has completed the
preparation of a standardized report form (SRF) for the central bank. There is a need to
expand coverage of other deposit corporations, improve data collection for other financial
corporations and develop the financial corporations survey.
Reconciliation of fiscal and monetary statistics remains a challenge. In the past, compilation
of fiscal data solely on a cash basis and differences in the coverage of the central government
explained most of the discrepancies between the datasets. In 2007, a TA mission found
limited progress on previous recommendations on the fiscal reporting system for extra
budgetary agencies and projects. The coverage of reporting agencies had improved, but there
were many obvious errors and omissions in the data and in the BSL database. However, in
June 2008 the authorities notified the IMF that the fiscal data have been reconciled with the
expanded BSL monetary data.
Balance of payments: The BSL is responsible for compiling balance of payments (BOP)
statistics. It obtains source data from the SSL, government ministries, the Customs and
Excise Department (Customs), and the “Financial Survey of Major Limited Companies,” for
data on foreign direct investment. Imports and exports of goods estimates are based on data
compiled by Customs and are adjusted for coverage, valuation, and timing to accord with
BOP definitions. The BSL does not adjust BOP data using supplementary information to
take account of unreported data.

10
External transactions are characterized by a large volume of activity in the informal sector,
principally diamond smuggling. A considerable portion of imports is financed by these
unrecorded exports. As a result, official BOP statistics tend to substantially understate
transactions. Staff has been addressing this problem through the use of third-country
(principally EU member) import data. STA has been providing technical assistance on BOP
issues to help the authorities implement the Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition
(BPM5).
Data problems also exist for trade in services, income statistics, current transfers, and the
capital and financial accounts. Regarding the last, there are substantial difficulties in
tracking financial transactions of the public and private sectors that are routed through
commercial banks. While the authorities are producing data on the international investment
position, improvements are required in coverage and in valuation adjustments. These
difficulties are manifested in reconciling flow data in the BOP and stocks in the international
investment position. Estimates of smuggled imports and exports, in particular diamonds, are
also not available.
Information on official grant and loan receipts is relatively good and is prepared by AFR on
the basis of contact with the authorities and donor agencies, but data on private capital flows
are very poor. Some information on private banking flows can be derived from the monetary
survey. Other private flows, especially those linked to the informal diamond trade, are
implicitly included in “errors and omissions.”
B. Data Standards and Quality
Sierra Leone commenced its participation in the General Data Dissemination System
(GDDS) in 2003. Metadata need to be updated.
C. Reporting to STA
Fiscal data are reported to AFR, but it is not disseminated in the International Financial
Statistics. Plans are underway to resume reporting annual data for publication in the GFS
Yearbook (the most recent data refer to 2004).
The BSL started reporting monetary data in the SRF-format to the IMF in April 2010.

11
Sierra Leone: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
October 2010
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data 1/

10/14/10

10/22/10

W

Frequency
of
Reporting
1/
W

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities 2/

08/10

10/07/10

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

08/10

10/07/10

M

M

M

Broad Money

08/10

10/07/10

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

08/10

10/07/10

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

08/10

10/07/10

M

M

M

Interest Rates 3/

09/10

10/22/10

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

08/10

09/17/10

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing – Central
Government

06/10

08/13/10

M

M

N/A

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/09

09/08/10

Q

Q

N/A

External Current Account Balance

12/09

09/08/10

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

06/10

09/08/10

A

A

A

GDP/GNP

12/09

09/15/10

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

06/10

09/08/10

A

A

A

International Investment Position 4/

06/09

08/31/09

A

A

A

Exchange Rates

Frequency
of
publication
1/
W

1/ Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2/ Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should
comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of
financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by
other means.
3/ Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills,
notes and bonds.
4/ Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 10/156
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 10, 2010

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2010 Article IV Consultation with
Sierra Leone
On December 6, 2010, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone.1
Background
Sierra Leone continued to make progress in its post-conflict transition towards creating
an enabling environment for sustained economic growth. Although living conditions have
started to improve, per capita income remains low and poverty is widespread. Sierra
Leone’s growth prospects hinge on rebuilding basic infrastructure and developing broad
access to financial services.
Real GDP growth decelerated to 3.2 percent in 2009 owing to weak external demand
associated with the global economic recession. However, economic activity is projected
to increase to 4.5 percent in 2010, reflecting marked growth in the services sector,
buoyant agricultural production, and a rebound in exports. While lower fuel and
domestic food prices eased inflationary pressures during most of 2009, inflation is
projected to increase to 16 percent in 2010, mainly because of a jump in the price level
in the first two months of the year due to the introduction of the goods and services tax.

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm

2
Exports have picked up in 2010 because of higher diamond export volumes and prices
and gross international reserves are expected to remain at comfortable levels.
In June 2010, the Executive Board approved a new 3-year Extended Credit Facility
(ECF) arrangement in support of Sierra Leone’s economic program, which aims to raise
economic growth in the medium-term by accelerating investments in infrastructure and
social development. The program is designed to create fiscal space for these spending
priorities by further strengthening tax performance and improving the public financial
management system. Private sector growth is envisaged to be supported by a
deepening of the financial sector.
Fiscal policy aims at improving infrastructure and social services in 2011. Capital
spending is envisaged to further expand to 10.2 percent of GDP, most of which will be
externally financed. Nonpriority expenditures are expected to remain constrained.
Domestic revenues are projected to continue to increase to 13.3 percent of GDP in
2011, reflecting efficiency gains from tax reforms and the implementation of higher
royalties on diamonds.
Monetary policy aims at bringing inflation down to single digits in 2011. With the
establishment of a benchmark policy rate, the transmission mechanism is likely to
improve. A flexible exchange rate will be maintained to facilitate adjustment to external
shocks.
Structural reforms focus on: (i) improving the tax administration and broadening the tax
base; (ii) strengthening public financial management by enhancing the planning,
monitoring and evaluation process for capital projects and building a high-caliber
workforce by implementing a multi-year pay reform; and (iii) deepening the financial
sector by adopting the new surveillance guidelines for banks and establishing a credit
reference bureau.
Executive Board Assessment
Against the backdrop of a challenging domestic and global environment, Directors
underscored the need to maintain macroeconomic stability, address infrastructure
bottlenecks, and reduce poverty. Given the large development needs and the
importance of maintaining debt sustainability, Directors welcomed the authorities’
determination to safeguard capital and social spending while minimizing the use of
domestic financing.
Directors stressed the importance of fiscal prudence in balancing the need to mobilize
resources for the ambitious infrastructure and social spending plans while maintaining
debt sustainability. They expressed concern about the recent acceleration in fiscal
spending and the continued use of central bank financing for budget expenditures.
Directors noted the authorities’ commitment to improve revenue collection from the

3
goods and services tax, higher diamond royalties, and other critical tax administration
reforms, and welcomed the implementation of an automatic fuel pricing formula.
Directors also stressed the importance of implementing a comprehensive public sector
pay reform, eliminating discretionary tax exemptions, and carefully prioritizing
infrastructure projects. Directors strongly urged the authorities to apply the fiscal regime
in the Mines and Minerals Act to all future mining agreements.
Directors noted the staff assessment that the leone remains broadly aligned with its
fundamentals. They encouraged the authorities to press ahead with structural reforms to
improve the business climate and boost competitiveness over the medium term.
Directors commended the Bank of Sierra Leone’s commitment to maintain a tight
monetary policy to reduce inflationary pressures, particularly in the face of the significant
increase in direct credit to the government. They considered that establishing a
benchmark policy interest rate will help improve the transmission mechanism. Directors
highlighted the need to enhance central bank independence and strengthen bank
regulation and supervision.
Directors concurred that strong progress in implementing structural reforms is key to
achieving high and sustainable growth. They agreed that reforms should focus on
improving tax administration, strengthening public financial management, and
developing the financial sector to boost private sector investment and activity.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency
of the IMF's views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent
of the country (or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions
of Article IV consultations with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the
regional level, of post-program monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member
countries with longer-term program engagements. PINs are also issued after Executive
Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise decided by the Executive
Board in a particular case.

4
Sierra Leone: Selected Economic Indicators
2008

2009

2010
Proj.

2011
Proj.

2012
Proj.

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise
indicated)
National account and prices
GDP at constant prices
GDP deflator
GDP at market prices
(in billions of local currency)
Consumer prices (end-of-period)
Consumer prices (average)
External sector
Terms of trade (deterioration -)
Exports of goods (US$)
Imports of goods (US$)
Average exchange rate
(local currency per U.S. dollar)
Nominal exchange rate change (depreciation -)
Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -)
Gross international reserves, months of imports
Money and credit
Domestic credit to the private sector
Base money
M2
91-day treasury bill rate (in percent) 1

5.5
11.1
5,826

3.2
5.3
6,330

4.5
15.0
7,605

5.2
8.5
8,678

6.0
7.3
9,874

12.2
14.8

10.8
9.2

16.0
17.6

9.5
9.1

8.0
8.7

-2.3
-3.0
24.8
2,985

-10.5
-1.0
-2.6
3,410

3.6
25.7
18.0
…

3.2
15.4
8.6
…

2.0
13.2
11.1
…

-2.2
-11.6
4.4

-26.7
-3.2
6.1

…
…
5.6

…
…
4.9

…
…
4.6

56.8
9.6
30.4
9.1

45.4
19.3
28.1
14.0

26.1
8.0
11.8
18.1

31.4
14.4
20.5
...

18.3
15.8
17.7
...

(Percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
National accounts
Gross capital formation
Government
Private
National savings
External sector
Current account balance
(including official grants)
(excluding official grants)
External public debt (including IMF)
Central government budget
Overall balance
(excluding grants)
Revenue
Grants
Total expenditure and net lending

14.8
6.2
8.6
3.3

14.9
7.1
7.8
6.6

16.3
8.4
7.9
6.8

18.9
10.2
8.7
9.4

19.4
10.2
9.2
9.9

-11.5
-15.4
31.2

-8.4
-12.8
36.1

-9.5
-12.9
39.8

-9.5
-11.6
28.1

-9.5
-11.3
29.2

-4.7
-9.2
11.5
4.5
20.7

-3.2
-11.1
11.8
7.9
22.9

-4.7
-11.5
13.0
6.8
24.5

-5.7
-12.5
13.3
6.8
25.8

-5.0
-10.6
14.3
5.6
24.9

Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and the IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ For 2010 data is for September.

Press Release No. 10/474
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 6, 2010

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Completes First Review Under ECF Arrangement with
Sierra Leone and Approves US$6.83 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the first
review of Sierra Leone’s economic performance under a program supported by an Extended
Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement. The completion of the review enables the immediate
disbursement of an amount equivalent to SDR 4.44 million (about US$6.83 million), bringing
total disbursements under the arrangement to SDR 8.88 million (about
US$13.67 million).
In completing the review, the Executive Board also approved the modification of a
performance criterion related to the target on net domestic bank credit to the government. The
three year ECF arrangement for Sierra Leone was approved with effect from July 1, 2010 for
an amount of SDR 31.11 million (about US$47.88 million; see Press Release No. 10/228). The
Executive Board also completed the financing assurances review.
Following the Executive Board’s discussion of Sierra Leone, Mr. Naoyuki Shinohara, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, made the following statement:
“After the economic slowdown in 2009, the outlook this year for Sierra Leone is more
favorable. Growth has picked up due to buoyant output in the service and agriculture sectors
and a rebound in exports. However, inflation will remain in double digits this year owing to the
one time jump in prices from the introduction of the goods and services tax and higher
domestic fuel prices. Gross international reserves remain at comfortable levels.
“The government’s Agenda for Change envisages raising growth by removing infrastructure
bottlenecks, while developing access to financial services. In the medium term, fiscal space for
higher capital and social spending will be created by broadening the tax base, containing
nonpriority spending, and raising public sector efficiency, especially in project selection and
implementation.

2

“Fiscal spending, including on infrastructure, is projected to be higher than envisaged in 2010,
resulting in higher domestic budget financing. Going forward, there is a need to strengthen
budget discipline, increase revenue collection, contain nonpriority expenditures, and limit the
use of direct credit to the government from the central bank. While the introduction of the
goods and services tax has improved revenue collections, there is a need to adhere to the Mines
and Minerals Act and continue to strengthen tax administration. The recent establishment of an
automatic pricing framework for domestic fuel prices will eliminate fuel subsidies.
“Fiscal policy for 2011 appropriately focuses on scaling up investment in infrastructure and
improving basic healthcare, while limiting domestic financing. To ensure fiscal sustainability,
continued efforts to improve domestic revenue collection and to implement public sector pay
reform will be important.
“Monetary policy will seek to bring inflation to single digits by next year. Exchange rate
flexibility will be maintained to facilitate adjustment to external shocks,” Mr. Shinohara added.

Statement by Moeketsi Majoro, Executive Director for Sierra Leone
December 6, 2010
Introduction
My Sierra Leonean authorities value highly the support from staff, Management, and
Executive Directors in their efforts to foster socio-economic development, while maintaining
macroeconomic stability. They appreciate the constructive dialogue with staff in addressing
the policy challenges to sustaining economic growth and reducing poverty. My authorities
have embarked on the structural transformation of the economy through increased investment
in infrastructure and the social sectors. Accordingly, efforts at enhancing domestic revenue
mobilization have been enhanced in the face of accelerated development spending.
Implementation of their development agenda is however severely challenged by dwindling
external financing, which remains crucial in creating the required fiscal space. My authorities
broadly share the thrust of the staff report as it presents a balanced assessment of recent
macroeconomic developments, policy opportunities and challenges going forward.
Program performance
In spite of the daunting challenges, my authorities continue to demonstrate a steadfast
commitment to pursuing prudent macroeconomic and structural policies within the context of
the Fund program. This is reflected in the strong performance in respect of the end-June 2010
program targets, as all quantitative performance criteria were met. However, while domestic
revenue collection has risen, the enhanced development spending has warranted a resort to
additional domestic bank financing. As staff pointed out, part of the additional spending has
been required to finance the free health care program, higher interest payments, and
outstanding arrears to oil marketing companies. On the structural front, the Bank of Sierra
Leone (BSL) strengthened its oversight of the banking system by adopting new guidelines
for off-site surveillance. In addition, the authorities took the bold and socially-sensitive step
to implement an automatic fuel pricing mechanism, with a commitment to effect monthly
increases until domestic fuel prices are fully reflective of international petroleum market
developments. Further efforts continue to be directed at strengthening revenue administration
and enhancing public financial management. My authorities’ commitment to judiciously
implement the program, going forward, remains unwavering. It is against this backdrop that
they request completion of the first review under the ECF arrangement and modification to
the program target on net domestic bank financing.
Recent economic developments
The economy continues to exhibit signs of an incipient recovery, manifested by the strong
growth in mineral exports, rebound in domestic manufacturing and services sectors, and
buoyancy in agricultural productivity. Against the backdrop of these developments, real GDP
growth is well on course to revert to its upward trajectory, accelerating to 4.5 percent in 2010
from 3.2 percent in 2009. In spite of the increased importation of machinery, transport
equipment and petroleum products to support the recovery process, the more than
proportionate expansion in exports culminated in the narrowing of the trade deficit. The

2

exchange rate has been relatively stable in 2010 following a marked depreciation the
previous year, prompting the BSL to gradually reduce the size of the foreign exchange
auctions. Gross foreign reserves are expected to remain at comfortable levels, well above
5 months of imports coverage, by end-December 2010. Furthermore, my authorities seize
this opportunity to re-emphasize that the corrective measures to eliminate the separate
windows in the foreign exchange auction that gave rise to multiple currency practices (MCP)
have long been instituted. They continue to await the provision of technical assistance by the
Fund in putting in place appropriate safeguards in the auction system to prevent
re-introduction of MCPs.
Fiscal performance in 2010 has been challenging, given the authorities’ determination to
pursue their infrastructural and social development programs outlined under the ‘Agenda for
Change’. With improving but inadequate domestic revenue mobilization and delays in the
disbursement of programmed external budgetary support, my authorities resorted to direct
central bank financing as a stop-gap measure to keep implementation of critical development
projects on course. Notwithstanding, they remain committed to maintaining fiscal discipline
and minimizing utilization of ways and means advances at the Central Bank, and have thus
instituted appropriate policy measures to improve the fiscal outlook. In addition to the
upward revision of the domestic revenue target, the increase in diamond royalties to
6.5 percent initially scheduled to take effect in 2011 has been frontloaded to November 2010,
while a new automatic petroleum pricing mechanism has commenced operation with a view
to eliminating subsidies. Furthermore, the accumulated overdrafts from the Central Bank are
gradually being rolled back and the authorities are in the process of effecting legislative
amendment to the BSL Act to limit direct Central Bank credit to the government.
Monetary policy has responded appropriately to the fiscal developments and price pressures
from the introduction of the goods and services tax (GST) in January this year. Supported by
the relatively stable exchange rate, proactive monetary policy by the BSL has succeeded in
containing inflationary pressures and in keeping monetary aggregates within program
parameters. Inflation, which peaked at 17.8 percent in April 2010, is expected to drop to
below 16 percent by end-December 2010. Credit to the private sector has expanded
significantly to support a strong recovery of the economy. My authorities, however, remain
committed to improving the efficiency of monetary operations to be better positioned to
contain any resurging inflationary pressures.
Though in broad agreement with staff’s assessment of recent macroeconomic and social
developments, my authorities, however, wish to stress that the report fails to appropriately
capture the tremendous progress that has been accomplished in recent years in addressing
pervasive poverty and improving social development. While Sierra Leone had ranked at the
bottom of the United Nation’s Human Development Index (HDI) emerging from a
decade-long civil conflict, the 2010 United Nation’s HDI moves the country up an
impressive 11 places from the preceding year to 158 position, reflecting recent progress in
socio-economic developments.

3

Medium-term outlook and policies
With recovery from the global financial and economic crisis firming up, my authorities’
policy focus has shifted to returning the economy to a high and sustainable growth trajectory,
albeit within a stable macroeconomic environment. Continued scaling up of investment in
infrastructure and enhanced delivery of basic social services, in line with the authorities’
‘Agenda for Change’ which forms the basis of the second generation Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper (PRSP II), will be pursued over the medium term. Against this backdrop, my
authorities are in agreement with staff on the growth path of GDP to 6 percent and the
improving outlook for inflation to single digits by 2012. With the reduced exchange rate
pressures, the gross foreign exchange reserves position is expected to cover over 5 months of
imports over the medium term.
Fiscal policy
My authorities remain committed to pursuing prudent fiscal management with a view to
maintaining medium- to long-term fiscal sustainability. Mindful of the challenges in
scaling-up resources to effectively implement the ‘Agenda for Change’, the authorities are
determined to institute far-reaching policy measures to ensure mobilization of substantial
domestic revenues to complement external budgetary and project support. To this end, the
fiscal regimes stipulated in the Mines and Minerals Act (MMA) 2009 and the existing tax
and customs legislations will be judiciously applied. The Revenue Management Bill, which
is to be submitted soon for legislative approval, will minimize the issuance of discretionary
tax exemptions.
On the expenditure front, my authorities will seek to switch expenditures towards their
strategic priority of scaling up investments in infrastructure and other key areas such as
education, health, and agriculture, consistent with attainment of the MDGs. Accordingly,
non-statutory recurrent expenditures will be appropriately contained to create the needed
fiscal space. Furthermore, public financial management will continue to be strengthened in
order to improve budget credibility and enhance the efficiency of public spending. To this
end, the integrated financial management information system (IFMIS) will continue to be
rolled out to the remaining government ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs), while
at the local council level a financial management information system will be implemented to
promote transparency and accountability in the use of their resources. Additionally, a
three-year public investment plan will be fully integrated into the budget process over the
medium term.
While we agree with staff on the exclusion of the anticipated proceeds from large mining
operations from the medium-term macroeconomic framework, my authorities are confident
that the medium- to long-term fiscal outlook will be drastically improved as proceeds from
these mining ventures are realized and prospects for commercial oil drilling off the coast of
Sierra Leone materialize. On the latter, action is being taken to strengthen the regulatory and
institutional framework for the upstream petroleum sector, including the formulation of a
new petroleum sector policy that sets out the fiscal principles for a modern petroleum fiscal
regime.

4

Monetary and exchange rate policies
My authorities are committed to returning inflation to single digits over the medium term,
following the hike at the start of the year on account of the introduction of the GST and the
pass-through effects of the exchange rate. To this end, the monetary policy framework will
be strengthened, including through the introduction of a benchmark policy rate to help signal
the stance of monetary policy to the market. Monetary operations will be further deepened by
enhancing the effectiveness of the monetary instruments in sterilizing excess liquidity.
The current flexible exchange rate regime will be maintained to help facilitate smooth
adjustments to external shocks. The foreign exchange auction will continue to complement
monetary operations in absorbing excess liquidity. Also, the BSL will seek to enhance its
foreign exchange management strategy by promoting inter-bank foreign exchange market
transactions and migrating to a wholesale foreign exchange auction system.
Debt sustainability and management
My authorities concur with the staffs’ assessment that the country remains at a moderate risk
of debt distress, with all external debt indicators below their indicative thresholds under the
baseline scenario. They are, nonetheless, cognizant of the threats to debt sustainability in the
event of an external shock. As a result, they are committed to refraining from nonconcessional external borrowing, while strengthening their public debt management capacity.
In this regard, a comprehensive national debt law and procedures manual, consistent with
international best practices, will soon be submitted for parliamentary approval. Plans are also
underway to electronically link the Commonwealth Secretariat Debt Recording and
Management System (CS-DRMS) with IFMIS, and technical assistance is being sought from
the Fund and the World Bank to develop a comprehensive medium-term debt management
strategy (MTDS). Finally, as staff pointed out, progress is being made in finalizing
arrangements for the implementation of the commercial debt buyback operation, under the
auspices of the World Bank that will significantly reduce the country’s stock of outstanding
external debt.
Other structural reforms
In addition to strengthening the debt management capacity, my authorities’ structural reform
agenda will include instituting policy measures aimed at developing the financial sector and
improving the business climate.
My authorities will continue to pursue reform of the financial sector aimed at promoting
financial intermediation, while maintaining financial stability. To this end, a credit reference
bureau is to be fully operational to help address the information asymmetry in the banking
sector, thereby mitigating the risk of loan default. Further strengthening of the supervisory
framework of the banking system will be undertaken through the adoption of risk-based
supervision including consolidated supervision of banks and other financial institutions,
while the automation of the payments system will be completed over the medium term.

5

Finally, the process of revising key banking legislations, in line with international regulatory
standards, will be swiftly concluded.
Finally, the business environment will be further improved, including through the
implementation of the Private Sector Development Strategy. Progress is already being made
in strengthening the business regulatory framework and minimizing the barriers to
investment, as manifested in the recent legislative approval of the Public-Private Partnership
law that encourages private participation in the delivery of public services. The continued
progress accomplished in creating a conducive business environment is reflected in the
country’s steady upward movement in the rankings of the World Bank’s ‘Ease of Doing
Business’ index.
Conclusion
My authorities continue to demonstrate a firm commitment to implementing the ECF
program as reflected in the strong program performance. Their commitment to judiciously
implement the program, going forward, remains unwavering.
My authorities consider the Fund’s and other development partners’ policy advice and
financial assistance critical to successfully implementing their development agenda and
attaining the MDGs. It is against this backdrop that they solicit the Executive Board’s
support in completing the first review under the ECF arrangement.

