© 2011 International Monetary Fund

July 1, 2011
January 29, 2001

July 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/186
January 29, 2001 January 29, 2001
January 29, 2001

Euro Area Policies: 2011 Article IV Consultation—Lessons from the European
Financial Stability Framework Exercise; and Selected Issues Paper
The attached paper on Lessons from the European Financial Stability Framework Exercise and the
Selected Issues paper were prepared by staff teams of the International Monetary Fund as background
documentation for the periodic consultation with officials at EU institutions. The papers are based on
the information available at the time the Selected Issues paper was completed on July 1, 2011; and at
the time the paper on Lessons from the European Financial Stability Framework Exercise was
completed on July 11, 2011. The views expressed in this document are those of the staff team and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the governments of the euro area or the Executive Board of the
IMF.
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents by the IMF allows for the deletion of
market-sensitive information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Lessons from the European Financial Stability Framework Exercise
Prepared by staff of the Monetary and Capital Markets (MCM), European (EUR),
and Legal (LEG) Departments
Approved by
José Viñals, Antonio Borges, and Sean Hagan
July 11, 2011

Key Issues

This European Financial Stability Framework Exercise (EFFE), conducted by IMF
staff, is expected to be a precursor to a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
for the EU area. It focuses on the internal consistency of the design of the new framework
and on identifying outstanding issues. Assessing the functioning of the new institutions is
premature given their recent setup, while issues related to the current macro-economic
scenario are being dealt with in the report on the euro area consultation.
The European Union’s (EU) financial stability framework is being markedly
strengthened, with more responsibility for financial stability moving to the EU level.
Several new institutions have been operating since 1 January 2011, and progress is being
made on harmonizing regulation, supervision, deposit insurance, crisis management and
resolution, besides other areas.
The EFFE sees a need to: (i) strengthen the effectiveness of the current institutions,
including with regard to decision making and the transition to the new regime; (ii)
adopt a consistent design across all elements of the financial stability framework, while
allowing adaptation to local or temporary circumstances; and (iii) fill in an important
gap in the present framework by ensuring effective crisis management and resolution.
Developments regarding the financial stability framework in Europe are of interest
worldwide; also, experiences from outside Europe may assist in the continuing
evolution of the European financial stability architecture. There would thus seem to be a
role for periodic IMF surveillance. The proposed 2012 EU FSAP could be a useful
opportunity to take this work forward.

2

Contents

Page

Glossary .....................................................................................................................................3
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................5
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................9
II. The EU Financial Stability Infrastructure ...........................................................................10
A. The European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS) ........................................10
B. The European Supervisory Authorities ...................................................................11
C. European Systemic Risk Board ...............................................................................14
D. Supervisory Colleges ..............................................................................................16
E. The Financial Stability Work of the European Commission...................................19
F. Cross-Institution Coordination ................................................................................19
III. EU Financial Policy Issues ................................................................................................20
A. Crisis Management and Bank Resolution ...............................................................20
B. Financial Stability, State Aid, and Competition......................................................23
C. Macroprudential Instruments ..................................................................................26
D. Data Adequacy ........................................................................................................28
E. Direct Regional Supervision: The Rating Agencies ................................................30
Boxes
1. Some Lessons from Recent European FSAP Updates .........................................................10
2. Current Issues in the Supervision of Insurance and Occupational Pensions .......................13
Appendixes
I. Details of Current Institutional Arrangements .....................................................................32
II. Supervising the Insurance and Pensions Industries.............................................................38
Annex
I. Institutional and Legal Issues from FSAPs in EU Member States ......................................41

3
GLOSSARY
AMF
ASC
ATC
BCP
CCP
CEREP
COREP
CRA
CRD
DGCOMP
DGECFIN
DGMARKT
DGS
DNB
DTI
EBA
EC
ECB
EEA
EFC
EFFE
ELA
ESA
ESCB
ESFS
EIOPA
EMIR
ESMA
ESRB
EU
EUR
EWS
FSA
FSAP
FSB
IMF
IORP
LEG
LOLR
LTV
MCM
MiFID
MoF

Authority for Financial Markets (Netherlands)
Advisory Scientific Committee of the ESRB
Advisory Technical Committee of the ESRB
Basel Core Principles
Central Counterparty
Central Repository
Common Reporting
Credit Rating Agency
Capital Requirements Directive
EC Directorate General for Competition
EC Directorate General for Economics and Finance
EC Directorate General for Internal Market and Services
Deposit Guarantee Scheme
Netherlands Central Bank
Debt to Income Ratio
European Banking Authority
European Commission
European Central Bank
European Economic Area
Economic and Finance Committee of the European Union
European Financial Stability Framework Exercise
Emergency Liquidity Assistance
European Supervisory Authority
European System of Central Banks
European System of Financial Supervisors
European Insurance and Occupational Pension Authority
European Market Infrastructure Regulation
European Securities Market Authority
European Systemic Risk Board
European Union
European Department of the IMF
Early Warning Exercise
Financial Soundness Authority
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Financial Stability Board
International Monetary Fund
Institutional and Occupational Retirement Pensions
Legal Department of the IMF
Lender of last resort
Loan-to-Value Ratio
Monetary and Capital Markets Department of the IMF
Market in Financial Instruments Directive
Ministry of Finance

4
MoU
NCBs
P&A
PRA
SIFI
TR
TREM

Memorandum of Understanding
National Central Banks
Purchase and Assumption
Prudential Regulatory Authority (United Kingdom)
Systemically Important Financial Institution
Trade Repository
Transaction Reporting Exchange Mechanism

5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The European Union’s (EU) financial stability framework is being markedly
strengthened, with more responsibility for financial stability moving to the EU level.
Several new institutions have been operating since 1 January 2011, and progress is being
made in harmonizing regulation, supervision, deposit insurance, crisis management and
resolution, in particular.
This strengthening is taking place on the heels of a severe financial crisis which is still
lingering in weaknesses in the banking system interrelated with sovereign difficulties in
the euro area periphery. Constructing a new financial stability framework in the present
macro-economic circumstances in the EU complicates the process and poses challenges.
This European Financial Stability Framework Exercise (EFFE), conducted by IMF
staff, is expected to be a precursor to a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
exercise for the EU area. It focuses on the internal consistency of the design of the new
framework and on identifying outstanding issues. Assessing the functioning of the new
institutions is premature given their recent setup, while issues related to the present macroeconomic scenario are being dealt with in the report on the euro area consultation
discussions.
Raising the effectiveness of the current setup
Important progress has been made in designing an institutional framework to secure
proper micro and macro-prudential supervision at the EU level, but this new set up
faces a number of challenges:


Establishing the credibility of each of the institutions, and of the system as a whole:
the European Banking Authority (EBA) has to ensure stress tests in 2011 that are seen
to be operationally useful for assisting financial stability; the European Securities
Market Authority (ESMA) needs to demonstrate its capability to supervise rating
agencies; the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA)
must play a key role in adopting Solvency II; and the European Systemic Risk Board
(ESRB) needs to provide meaningful warnings and recommendations.



Information sharing: the importance of data sharing is well recognized and the
legislation establishing the new EU agencies, as well as recent EU legislation, provide
for robust information sharing duties on the part of national authorities enabling such
agencies to have access to the data relevant for the exercise of their tasks. Residual
obstacles that may still prevent in practice full data sharing among the national
supervisors and the relevant ESAs or the ESRB need to be fully removed, if
necessary through legislative changes including at the national level. Still more work

6
is needed to ensure the timely compilation of comparable data on the main risk
factors, which can evolve quickly.


Effective supervision: good supervision rests on a blend of offsite and onsite
components. The ongoing offsite reforms should therefore be complemented by
renewed attention to onsite supervision, involving the core colleges.



Developing a “Single Rule book” and harmonizing supervisory practices at the
highest possible level, as a key element in establishing a single market in financial
services and avoiding regulatory arbitrage.



Ensuring that the resource pool of the ESAs is commensurate with their mandate and
responsibilities, while leveraging on the resources of the national authorities: the
availability of sufficient skilled staff is critical to ensure that risky compromises do
not need to be made. New tasks and powers will have to be accompanied by
additional resources.



Effective decision making: the current arrangements rest on substantial involvement
of the institutions’ stakeholders, geared to generating mutual trust and buy-in.
Additional measures could be taken to ensure that the process does not become
unwieldy and that decisions can be made quickly, particularly in a crisis.



Clear and comprehensive macro-prudential oversight needs to be established. An
enhanced role could be given to the ESRB, especially with respect to cross-border
application of macro-prudential tools in a uniform manner.



Effective dispute resolution: the new ESAs have been given roles in cross-country
disputes and emergency situations, which are expected to be further, strengthened
under the forthcoming Commission proposals, to settle disagreements between
supervisors or, in exceptional circumstances, to take temporary action aimed at
safeguarding financial stability. In general, the aim should be to promote EU-focused
rather than domestic solutions.

Ensuring consistency across all elements of the financial stability framework
Many EU-wide initiatives are proceeding in the areas of regulation and supervision.
Moving on parallel tracks is commendable, but raises the need to ensure consistency. Several
issues can be highlighted:


New capital adequacy rules need to be strong and adaptable to changing economic
circumstances, but also supportive of the single financial market. Hence it will be
important to set capital requirements at an ambitiously high level, possibly above
Basel III. In addition there should be sufficient scope for supervisors to address
prudential concerns within their areas of operation, in particular by allowing

7
sufficient scope for the introduction and national operation of a range of
macroprudential instruments and topped-up capital demands on systemically
important financial institutions (with reciprocity coordinated through the ESRB);


The state aid regime for the banking system needs to take account of the development
of resolution frameworks together with systemic and stability considerations that are
special to the financial sector;



Conduct-of-business and consumer protection policies are important for financial
stability and the completion of the internal market. Therefore appropriate
coordinating arrangements at the EU level need to be identified (e.g., through the
Joint Forum);



Deposit guarantee schemes and resolution funds need to be designed in a consistent
manner;



Clear rules need to be laid down for imposing losses on the private sector; and



Clear rules need to be laid down for sharing the burden across Member States in a
way that facilitates the effective resolution of future financial crises.

Completing the framework
Putting in place an effective framework for crisis management and resolution remains a
priority.1
The resolution tool kit will remain incomplete as long as it does not include an EU-wide
mechanism to address weaknesses in the financial system, including the central
provision of financing during restructuring and a fiscal backstop to share any residual
costs (ideally prefunded by the industry to mitigate moral hazard). National authorities
should pursue private sector solutions to restructure fragile banks, via mergers and
acquisitions, also across borders, with the EBA playing a leading role in orchestrating the
restructurings. Innovative techniques to minimize the burden on taxpayers, including bail-in
arrangements and contingent capital buffers, may be useful elements in the toolkit. For
systemic questions spilling across borders, an explicit, rather than ad hoc, decision making
mechanism needs to be put in place. The EBA can play a role in monitoring this. The review
envisaged for 2014 recognizes the need to move ahead in a number of these areas, but earlier
progress is highly desirable.

1

Given that the banking passport applies also to EEA countries, it is preferable to include also these countries in
such regime.

8
Coordination beyond the EU
For financial stability in Europe, European agencies have to look outside as well as
inside the Union. Most European systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs)
operate also outside the EU. EU financial stability therefore requires close cooperation with
bodies outside the EU, including in the areas of supervision and cross-border resolution. It
will be important to work to harmonize insofar as possible with outside jurisdictions, and in
particular to assess in full the implications of the Dodd Frank legislation.
Developments regarding the financial stability framework in Europe are of interest
worldwide; also, experiences from outside Europe may assist in the continuing
evolution of the European financial stability architecture. The proposed 2012 EU
“FSAP” could be a useful opportunity to take this work forward.

9
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
Since the 2008–9 global economic crises, the EU has intensified its efforts to
strengthen its financial stability infrastructure, recognizing that financial stability is a
common public good and that national decisions easily transcend borders. The aim is to
promote the single market in financial services and to manage the financial system in a way
that minimizes the likelihood and potential severity of future financial sector difficulties.
Impressive progress has been achieved, as a range of new institutions have been established
and started operations
2.
The success of EU-wide efforts to secure financial stability is of keen interest to
the IMF, reflecting its global mandate. The IMF has long been involved in the debate over
the EU’s financial policy framework, notably through its euro area surveillance. Bilateral
financial sector surveillance too is being pursued: Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP) Updates have recently been completed for five EU members, and more are planned.2
In several areas, similar vulnerabilities or institutional issues in different countries have been
investigated in detail (Box 1). Thus, a review at the regional level enables an assessment of
the common threads, which in many cases derive from decisions and developments at the EU
level, and similarly to identify possible regional policy measures.
3.
In light of these considerations, the EU Economic and Finance Committee (EFC)
invited the IMF to conduct a limited European Financial Stability Framework Exercise
(EFFE) in 2011 as a precursor to a broader FSAP-type exercise in 2012.3 The 2011
exercise is intended to give the opportunity for an early view of the emerging European
financial stability infrastructure, and to provide a timely oversight over the outstanding issues
from the ongoing national FSAPs.4
4.
This report is an outcome of the IMF mission that visited Brussels, Frankfurt,
London and Paris between April 26 and May 6, 2011.5 The mission would like to thank all
2

FSAP Updates have been completed for Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Sweden and the United
Kingdom, and a more limited exercise has been held for Poland. FSAP Updates for France and the Czech
Republic are forthcoming. A discussion of the institutional and legal issues arising from the five completed EU
member FSAPs is provided as an annex to this paper.
3

An FSAP has a number of formal requirements, some of which may not be relevant at a regional level. It
therefore needs to be determined whether the exercise in 2012 would technically constitute an FSAP or a
parallel exercise with similar characteristics.
4

The mandate of the EFFE includes the institutional architecture of the EU financial stability framework. Other
conjunctural issues, such as the role of the ECB in the current crisis, and alternative mechanisms to deal
urgently with ailing financial institutions, form part of the Euro Area Article IV consultation.
5

The mission comprised Messrs. Enoch (head) and Hardy, Ms. Jassaud, and Messrs. Severo and Wehrhahn (all
MCM), Messrs. Everaert and Tressel (both EUR), and Messrs. Gullo and Jansen (both LEG).

10
its counterparts for their frank and full discussions, and for the excellent coordination of the
arrangements for the mission.
Box 1. Some Lessons from Recent European FSAP Updates
The recent FSAP Updates for five EU countries have re-emphasized a number of cross-cutting themes.
Especially relevant here are the following:


The recent global financial crisis was in large measure the product of credit booms and asset price
bubbles in the U.S. and various European countries, with its intensity and virulence exacerbated by
cross-border linkages and disruption in euro and U.S. dollar funding markets. Financial market strains
have been perpetuated by the lack of a common approach to the crisis;



National institutional and legal frameworks for financial stability are still incomplete. The autonomy of
some of the agencies, and institutional arrangements, are open to enhancement. In several cases
supervisors are still struggling to adapt their operations to require more and higher quality capital, and
to be more pre-emptive, for example in requiring early action; bank resolution frameworks remain a
major gap. Crisis management, and especially the management of cross-border crises, needs to be
improved in terms of the legal framework, operational arrangements, and ensuring that adequate
resources are available on a timely basis;



Some impediments to fully effective cross-border supervision remain, and the resolution of crossborder banks has been unsatisfactory; and



Supervisory authorities need to have available more comprehensive and consistent data related to
current risk factors, including cross-border developments.

Dealing with these issues may well require EU-level action in terms of both regulation and operational
mechanisms.
A more complete discussion of institutional and legal issues deriving from the recent FSAP updates is provided
in Annex I.

II. THE EU FINANCIAL STABILITY INFRASTRUCTURE6
A. The European System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS)
5.
The establishment of the ESFS represents a large step forward for the single
financial market project, but at the same time forms a complicated network of
regulatory and supervisory institutions (see Figure 1). It was set up to facilitate
cooperation among EU and national supervisors, secure the exchange of relevant
information, and ensure effective decision-making with respect to cross-border financial
institutions. The ESFS is designed to be an integrated network of national and EU-wide
supervisory authorities leaving the day-to-day supervision to the national level. An advantage
6

A detailed description is contained in Appendix 1.

11
of this network is that it engages the existing national supervisory authorities. However, it
remains to be seen how this network will operate in practice, and whether all relevant
information will be shared among participating authorities.
B. The European Supervisory Authorities
Structure and responsibilities
6.
On 1 January 2011, the three ESAs were created: the European Banking
Authority (EBA), the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), and the
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). Their creation
represents a major enhancement of the mechanisms to coordinate cross-border supervision,
facilitate cooperation between supervisors, promote convergence of supervisory practices,
and implement the planned “Single Rule Book.”
7.
The ESAs are regulatory agencies of the Commission accountable to the
European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. They have legal
personality as well as administrative and financial autonomy. Each ESA is governed by: (i) a
Board of Supervisors, which is made up of representatives of the relevant national
supervisors and, on a non-voting basis, the main relevant European institutions, (ii) a
Management Board, made up of a more limited group of Board of Supervisors members, and
(iii) a Chairperson and an Executive Director, vested with the powers to, respectively,
represent and manage the ESA.
8.
The ESAs have no direct general regulatory powers. Basic acts such as the main
sectoral directives and regulations (e.g., CRD, MiFID, and Solvency II) can only be adopted
by the EU legislators (i.e., European Parliament and the Council) on the basis of a proposal
by the European Commission. While the ESAs are empowered to draft the technical
standards, the Commission retains the formal regulatory power: ultimately it is the
Commission that endorses and gives them binding legal effect.7
9.
Within the limited circumstances specified in EU legislation, the ESAs will be
able to temporarily prohibit or restrict certain financial activities that threaten the
orderly functioning and integrity of financial markets or the stability of the financial
system. In most areas, however, the day-to-day supervision of financial institutions will
remain at the national level, and the ESAs have only indirect supervisory powers (settlement
of disagreements between competent authorities in cross-border situations and across sectors,
participating in colleges of supervisors). At the same time, ESAs may adopt decisions
addressed to a financial institution in case of a breach of a directly applicable EU legislation,
7

It should be noted that the European Parliament and the Council have the power to object these standards and,
where necessary, block their adoption.

12
provided that such decision is in conformity with a formal opinion issued by the
Commission.8 ESMA, however, will be the first example of an agency with a pan-European
supervisory responsibility, for Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) starting in June 2011.9 The
overall supervisory package is to be reviewed in 2014.
Establishing credibility
10.
The new ESAs will need to move quickly to establish their credibility with
financial institutions and political weight vis-à-vis national authorities. Otherwise, they
risk becoming just an additional layer of supervision and workload with little effect on
coordination and targeted harmonization.
11.
Credibility can best be established by early and decisive action. The main areas of
focus are :


The 2011 EU-wide banking stress test will be a first and critical challenge for the
EBA. The methodology and the procedures are already determined, and have been
commendably disseminated. While the approach to certain aspects of the current
exercise may be viewed as too circumspect, the decision to focus on Core Tier I
capital sends a strong signal. The EBA will need to be in the lead with a careful
communication strategy as the results come out, and to ensure any follow-on
requirements, for instance that certain banks replenish their capital, will be
understood and prepared. More generally, there will be a need to ensure that stress
tests in the future are properly understood and that they are conducted independently
and clear in identifying areas of concern.



Solvency II implementation is in full swing (see Box 2). For this purpose, EIOPA will
have to provide a large volume of detailed guidance and implementing standards,
before full implementation at end 2012.10 Moreover, conducting the upcoming
European insurance sector stress tests with rigor and efficiency will contribute to
consolidating EIOPA’s standing. There is a full agenda of issues affecting the
insurance and occupational pensions sector.

8

Individual decisions addressed to financial institutions may also be issued in case of an emergency situation,
triggered by the Council, and if a financial institution is required to comply with its obligations under EU law
where competent authorities have not resolved disagreements in cross-border situations.
9

It is understood that the responsibility will be delegated to national authorities as the ESMA builds up its
implementation capacity.
10

Appendix II provides more details on outstanding supervisory issues in the insurance and occupational
pension sectors.

13


Recent legislative initiatives in the securities markets reinforce the role of the ESMA
on several fronts, including on CRAs, hedge funds (Alternative Investment Fund
Managers), Trade Repositories (TR), Central Counterparties (CCPs)11 and the temporary
prohibiting or restriction of financial activities that threaten financial stability or the
orderly functioning of financial markets.

12.
It is important that sufficient resources with commensurate skills be allocated to
these functions. In this regard, the initial administrative burden related to the creation of the
new operational and administrative framework together with the need to deliver on the
responsibilities will present a challenge. Capacity to deliver on existing tasks is already
stretched, and the prospective expansion of the tasks of the ESAs will require commensurate
enhancements in expertise.

Box 2. Current Issues in the Supervision of Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Solvency II is in the process of replacing the current regulatory framework (Solvency I) for insurance
companies licensed in the EU; the new regime should be in place January 2013. Solvency II is based on three
pillars: quantitative requirements; qualitative requirements such as risk management; and supervisory reporting.
EIOPA will take over from CEIOPS in providing technical advice on Solvency II Level 2 implementing
measures, and related training. The implementation efforts are following a maximal harmonization approach.
But, internal model approval, a key component of Solvency II, will probably require strong engagement from
EIOPA, as will the effort to reconcile Solvency II rules on liability valuation with the International Financial
Reporting Standards.
With regard to pension funds, the Institutional and Occupational Retirement Prevision (IORP) Directive is in
the process of review, thus adding to the workload of EIOPA. Issues of valuation of technical provisions, the
security of the benefits and the risk supervision are the main topics of discussion of possible harmonization.
EIOPA’s contribution to the assessment of systemic risks is likely to be prominent. The current low interest rate
environment could strain the insurance industry even while it benefits other parts of the system.

13.
An important function that has been given to the ESAs is to foster a cooperative
relationship among national supervisors. The ESAs’ role is to coordinate and monitor the
actions of the national authorities; in this connection, they are also represented at supervisory
colleges, and play a mediating role in solving disputes. To enable them to fulfill their
responsibilities in this area and to ensure that EU-wide concerns are taken into account, the
ESAs need to be represented in any “core colleges” that are established. The ESAs should

11

In the upcoming European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) regulation, the ESMA is likely to be
given a central role in the colleges of competent authorities facilitating the reach of joint opinions necessary for
the authorization.

14
also make active use of their rights (set out in the regulation establishing the ESAs) to
participate in onsite supervision.
14.
Another significant role for the ESAs is to disseminate best practices in
supervisory activities. This needs to be embedded in procedures and in a credible
verification process, supported by training. Peer reviews will play an important role in this
area. They will need to be intrusive, and be disclosed. The ESAs will also need to put in
place procedures for developing, and subsequently verifying consistency of application of the
planned “Single Rule Book,” and promoting the exchange of information on the treatment of
individual institutions, in order to prevent regulatory arbitrage and financial institutions
searching for supervisory gaps (“shopping for a regulator”).
Governance
15.
The ESAs should act decisively in order to establish their credibility. Their
governance framework assigns one vote per member, and provides for a decision making
process requiring majority—either simple or qualified, depending on the circumstances—
rather than unanimity; these factors should facilitate rapid and forthright decision-making. A
shift of “culture” toward a more EU-wide focus of decision-making will be important.
16.
The required endorsement by the EC of any binding regulation drafted by an
ESA is intended to ensure recognition of the interests of the Union, but limits formal
independence. This reliance may however be justified on legal and practical grounds. The
procedure for the adoption of technical standards allows the Commission to refuse
endorsement only on the basis of certain grounds that have to be based on EU-wide interests.
Such procedure may––if applied in a sound manner––lead to a fruitful and transparent
dialogue in the adoption of standards, while leaving a predominant role to the ESAs given
their technical expertise.12 As greater experience is gained with the process, the concept of
“technical standards,” which does not include policy choices, will need to be clarified to
avoid possible challenges.
C. European Systemic Risk Board
17.
The ESRB, established at the start of 2011, has a broad mandate and is
responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system in the EU. It is to
issue risk warnings when risks are deemed significant and, when necessary, provide policy
recommendations to mitigate the risks identified.

12

However, the Parliament or the Council may reject a regulatory technical standard before its adoption.

15
18.
The ESRB is not a separate legal entity. Formally, it is an independent EU body
responsible for the macroprudential oversight of the financial system within the EU13 The
ECB provides analytical, statistical, logistical and administrative support to the ESRB.14
19.
The institutional set-up of the ESRB is relatively complex, and could prove
unwieldy. Decisions within the General Board of the ESRB (comprising 37 voting members
and 27 non-voting members) will be taken by simple majority, but a majority of two thirds
will be needed to adopt recommendations or to make a warning public. The functioning of
the ESRB is based on participation involving all key players—national authorities and other
EU institutions. This is a pragmatic approach for a new organization. However, there is a risk
that such an approach could lead to overly cautious warnings. Moreover, the size of the
decision-making group in the ESRB is large, so the timing and the procedures of the
decision-making process risk becoming cumbersome. This may be especially costly in time
of emerging risks. Moving forward, the General Board should adopt an approach under
which puts in place rules that provide broad direction for ESRB activities and ensure
accountability but leave ESRB management operational flexibility.
20.
The decision-making processes will need to be flexible enough to facilitate the
timely identification of emerging risks. Currently, the Steering Committee (a sub-group of
the General Board) effectively sets the specific work program. In order to promote the
“bottom up” identification of risks, it is suggested that the ESRB staff propose the work
program to the Steering Committee and thus the General Board, after consultation with
national supervisors, the ESAs, and the Advisory Scientific Committee. The ESRB could
also consider how to use the Steering Committee beyond setting the work program in order
to be the most effective for decision-making.
21.
The ESRB’s enforcement of its recommendations will depend on the effective
operation of the “comply or explain” principle. But making warnings and
recommendations public may not be a credible threat because doing so could trigger an
adverse market reaction. The European Parliament has an explicit role in monitoring actions
taken in response to a warning, but such a role can be performed only when
recommendations are made public. This limits the potential usefulness of oversight by the
Parliament. A possible solution to this concern could be to mandate publication, after a lapse
of time, of risk warnings, and recommendations that were not made public, as well as the
responses by the addressees, much as central banks do with their market-sensitive decisions.
If “comply or explain” does not work well, serious consideration should be given for more
direct involvement of the ESRB in ensuring that its recommendations have effect.
13

In contrast to the ESAs, the ESRB is not overseeing the enforcement of EU laws, and it does not have the
status of a regulatory agency.

14

Other central banks also provide assistance.

16
22.
The credibility of the ESRB will depend crucially on its ability to speak “truth to
power,” and to weigh in on policy decisions. To this end, it needs early on to publish clear
and well-argued analyses of the main current macro-prudential risks. The key test for the
ESRB is whether it will be able to identify major risks, issue risk warnings on these risks,
and recommend policy actions that are followed-up.
23.
Successful interaction between the ESRB and the ESAs, in particular to ensure a
proper coordination of macroprudential and microprudential instruments, will be
important. The ESAs are providing microprudential risk assessments, and are working with
the ESRB through the Working Groups on systemic risks and data exchanges. In one
direction, decisions on temporary bans of financial products (by an ESA) and various bank
capitalization ratios, for example, have macroprudential dimensions which necessitate a close
coordination with the ESRB. In the other, the ESRB Board envisages that the ESAs will
more broadly contribute to systemic risk monitoring through joint submissions of crosssectoral risk assessments; the ESAs’ contribution would be built into the governance
structure through their participation on the ESRB General Board. Eventually and depending
on the implementation process, a clarification of the respective mandates may be needed. The
ESAs and the ESRB need to establish processes for sharing information and analyses that can
feed from, and inform, risk assessments at both the EU and individual college level, for both
on and off site examinations.
24.
The ESRB is dependent on the ESAs for the provision of microprudential data,
which will be crucial for its oversight of the financial system. Under the current regulation
the ESRB may only submit a “reasoned” request to the ESAs to receive non-aggregated
information on an ad hoc basis. The need for ad hoc and motivated requests may give rise to
problems in practice, for example, if it is necessary to compare bank-specific data over time
on a systematic basis. The ESAs and the ESRB are working on protocols for information
sharing and should be encouraged to develop guidelines and processes for handling such
requests.
25.
The ESRB is developing the institutional framework, concepts and tools to
ensure macro-prudential stability at the EU level. In close cooperation with the ESAs, it
will elaborate a color-code system (dashboard) corresponding to situations of different risk
levels.
D. Supervisory Colleges
26.
One step to achieve effective supervision in the EU of financial groups operating
across border has been the establishment of colleges of supervisors. In this setting
supervisors competent in the jurisdictions where a financial institution belonging to a certain
financial group is established (and now also the respective ESA) meet periodically in order to
exchange information about the condition of the group. These colleges will enable
supervisors to strengthen their working relationships with their counterparts, and to have a

17
much better understanding of the overall state of the institutions that they are supervising.
However, since many of the largest institutions operate in a substantial number of countries,
such colleges might be unwieldy: hence “core colleges” have been established, in which
participation is limited to those jurisdictions where the institution has its most significant
presence. Both full colleges and core colleges are operational for a number of cross border
groups.
27.
Although a major step forward, these colleges are not a complete answer to the
cross border supervision issue:


There are challenges involved in ensuring that the representation of host supervisors
in the colleges is sufficiently broad: in particular, it may be difficult to include in the
core college the authority of a host country where a financial institution’s activity
may not be very significant from the group's viewpoint even though such activity may
be significant from the host country’s perspective. To mitigate this concern, it should
be ensured that all decisions and information from the core college are circulated
among other college members;



College meetings are time consuming, and the burden may fall on a limited number
of officials. There is already anecdotal evidence of supervisory agencies declining to
send representatives to meetings of colleges;



The colleges provide a forum for discussion, but may not lead to prompt action,
although, in the case of the EBA, banking colleges are required to reach joint
decisions in relation to the solvency of a banking group;



It is not always clear that the incentives are such as to maximize information sharing.
While such sharing is in principle mandatory, there may be scope for information not
to be brought to the attention of college colleagues, or not brought on a timely basis.
For instance, as long as supervisors maintain a national focus, the authorities may be
reluctant to share information about a troubled financial institution if there is concern
that this could lead the authority receiving the information to ring-fence the assets of
the institution. If, perhaps, a bank is preparing to downsize, it will likely focus its
efforts in those places where it has problems, and supervisors may wish to protect
their own jurisdictions by not volunteering information about any problems there; and



Moreover, there are in some cases legal prohibitions on the sharing of information, so
that supervisors from one member state cannot provide more than generalities about
the activities of the bank/insurer they are supervising.

28.
To some extent these problems can be seen as teething troubles that will likely
fade over time as the process becomes established, but a number of specific measures to
enhance cross-border supervision can be suggested:

18


Collaboration on risk assessment, and adopting a common template, methodology,
and scoring scales has already been developed for EBA colleges and similar
approaches should be encouraged elsewhere. The risk assessment would best be
carried out at the group level, within the colleges, and be interactive, structured, and
detailed. One of the key challenges for the EBA will be to further harmonize the
convergence on Pillar 2 (common methodologies for risk assessment);



Collaboration in conducting onsite supervision is essential for supervisory
effectiveness. It is already the case that many onsite inspections are joint between
home and hosts. There could be a presumption that home supervisors would invite
subsidiary and branch hosts to participate, and subsidiary hosts would invite parent
home supervisors. Moreover, where the cross-border presence is significant,
particularly where the supervisory agency is a member of the core college, the
supervisory plan would be discussed at the college level. Participation of all relevant
supervisors would also be expected. Such an approach would also serve to mitigate
the concerns that have been voiced about the limitations on the powers of national
supervisors in the face of branching under the European “single passport” policy.
Clearly, this is a significant resource issue, but supervising financial institutions with
substantial cross border activity has to be seen as resource intensive;



Legal restrictions on the sharing of information should be identified and, to the
maximum possible extent, removed;



Agreement on ex ante “burden sharing” principles should be designed in such a
manner that supervisors have an interest in the outcome of the institution as a whole,
so that the incentives for sharing information are maximized; and



Where there is uncertainty as to the powers of national authorities, for instance to
decline giving “no objections” approval on safety and soundness grounds to a crossborder takeover, such uncertainty could be resolved through the actions of the ESAs.

29.
Cross-border activity is of course relevant not just within the EU; nearly all
major EU financial institutions have substantial activity worldwide. Insofar as
institutions have less understanding of non-EU markets than of those in the EU, this
increases the vulnerability of the activity. Many of the problems affecting EU institutions in
the crisis originated from outside the EU. Many of the suggestions above therefore apply as
much to cross border activity outside the EU as they do to activity within the EU. Joint
inspections for instance are similarly useful. And convergence of regulatory regimes will
help mutual understanding as to what is happening in the respective jurisdictions. MoUs with
U.S. authorities, for instance, should include provisions for joint inspections on a regular
basis.

19
30.
The establishment of “crisis management colleges” for larger cross-border
banking groups is one important, but in itself limited, element of the framework.
Already some groups have been established to bring together the various institutions—
supervisors, central banks, and finance ministries—that would be involved in dealing with a
crisis in such a bank. Such a pre-existing network should facilitate the logistics of
intervention and the negotiation of a coherent approach. However, crisis management
colleges will tend to be large and therefore unwieldy. More importantly, the existence of a
college will not solve the competing interests over burden sharing in cross-border banking
resolution, nor does it create strong incentives for individuals to reveal vulnerabilities and
failings on a timely basis.
E. The Financial Stability Work of the European Commission
31.
The EC plays a central role in proposing prudential and non-prudential
regulations for the financial sector, and in overseeing macroeconomic policies that
affect the financial sector. The current legislative agenda is unusually full, with forthcoming
amendments to the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD), the directive on Deposit
Guarantee Schemes (DGS), the banking crisis management framework, a review of the
Market in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID), as well as measures for the
implementation of Solvency II. This agenda largely represents an effort to implement lessons
from the global crisis and associated internationally-agreed regulatory changes (e.g., G-20
commitments), for example, to raise the level and quality of bank capital.
32.
There has been a shift toward greater reliance on EU regulations, which have
the force of directly applicable law, and to allow less room for national discretion in the
transposition of directives; the aspiration is to achieve a “Single Rule book.” The shift is
motivated by the need to equip the EU financial sector with a consistent set of core
supervisory rules, so as to further strengthen EU financial stability. Differences that stem
from exceptions, derogations, additions made at national level, or ambiguities contained in
directives that have a material impact on the market, that are not as stringent as the minimum
core standards, or that may induce competition distortions or regulatory arbitrage, will be
identified and removed. However, the rules need to be designed to allow flexibility for the
sake of proportionality and to deal with differences in economic conditions across the EU:
especially where monetary and fiscal policies are constrained, there may be good reasons to
differentiate other policies, for example, for macro-prudential purposes, though as noted
above, coordination of such policies will remain essential and could be handled by the ESRB
(see below).
F. Cross-Institution Coordination
33.
Interagency coordination is effected through a Joint Committee. This is
composed of the Chairpersons of the ESAs and staff from the ESAs who are responsible for
coordinating the work of the three ESAs on cross-sectoral issues and on the supervision of

20
financial conglomerates. As the three ESAs could, in theory, take different positions on the
same issues, which could allow room for regulatory arbitrage, the work of the Joint
Committee will be important to bridge the gap with the ESRB, and address underlaps and
overlaps.
34.
In this context, consumer protection concerns will need to be given due attention.
All three ESAs have the same consumer protection mandate, which might on the one hand
create overlaps and inconsistencies among them and on the other may lead to inaction and
weaken the sense of ownership on the part of each ESA. Moreover, the financial crisis has reemphasized the connection between consumer protection and systemic stability. To ensure
that these issues are effectively addressed, the European system needs to accommodate
differences across countries in responsibility for consumer protection: some unify prudential
and consumer protection responsibilities, others have a “twin peak” model and will require
that the ESAs will have to coordinate across agencies.
III. EU FINANCIAL POLICY ISSUES
A. Crisis Management and Bank Resolution
35.
Establishing a comprehensive EU framework for resolution and crisis
management is necessary to fill a remaining gap in the current financial stability
framework. To underpin the single financial market, resolve the mismatch between the
banking passport and national fiscal responsibilities, and align national interests toward
financial stability in the EU, setting up a unified framework would be the preferred approach.
Such a framework should involve the establishment of a European Resolution Authority with
associated financing and fiscal backstops, encompassing ex ante rules to fund resolution of
financial institutions, through contributions from the industry and pooled fiscal resources in
the event that temporary public financial support is necessary; this would also avoid
distortions of competition policy at the national level, as compliance with state aid rules
would have been cleared at the ESA level.
36.
There does not appear to be sufficient political support to make the quantum
leap to an EU wide unified setup. Working within this constraint, the Commission outlined
in a consultation document of October 2010 a more gradual approach toward building a
comprehensive EU framework for resolution and crisis management that will apply to all
credit institutions and some investment firms. The first phase consists of a legislative
proposal aimed at giving national authorities a common minimum set of resolution tools,

21
which is expected to be adopted by the Commission in fall 2011, while adoption by the
European Parliament and Council is expected by the end of 2012.15
37.
The enhancement of the resolution toolbox envisaged by the Commission
broadly goes in the right direction. The aim is to reduce the frequency and severity of
banking crises by ensuring that early remedial action is taken, shareholders and other relevant
stakeholders have a greater role in burden sharing—thereby reducing the risk of loss for
others including governments—and introducing features that facilitate resolution when it is
unavoidable. The Commission’s plans would require Member States to ensure that national
authorities have an effective range of options for early intervention, attempting to strike a
balance between financial stability concerns at the one hand and the need to minimize
interference in property rights at the other, and mitigating legal risks deriving from the
interference with such rights. Due consideration is also given to the need to coordinate
certain elements at the global level, such as on the application of statutory bank debt
restructuring or “bail-in.”
38.
In a few areas, clarification is still warranted. For instance, the Commission
consultation argues that the general rule should be that failing banks should be liquidated
under the bankruptcy code through ordinary (or slightly modified) liquidation rules, and that
they should be resolved using special resolution tools (such as transfers of assets on a
wholesale basis) only as a going concern and only if the public interest of financial stability
is at stake; however, there seems a strong case that special resolution tools should be
available more broadly, also in the bankruptcy process to allow an orderly liquidation, and
for both systemic and non systemic institutions.
39.
While the Commission intends to review the EU crisis management framework
with a view to possibly establishing an integrated regime in 2014, the authorities must
be able to take appropriate measures in the interim if problems arise in cross border
institutions. The Commission consultation envisages that group-level resolution plans will
be developed by resolution colleges under the leadership of the home country authority and
with a strong coordination role for the EBA; such plans would include measures for a
coordinated resolution of cross-border group entities, with losses being absorbed by private
stakeholders. For EU cross-border banks having a significant presence outside the EU (or for
EU sub-groups that are part of global financial conglomerates) such plans should be
developed with relevant third countries authorities, to ensure coordination in the resolution
process and, ultimately, mutual recognition of resolution measures. It would be useful for the
above mentioned resolution plans to be developed soon, well before the 2014 review.

15

Further steps will include a study and, if appropriate, a legislative proposal for full harmonization of bank
resolution and insolvency regimes and, in 2014, an integrated framework, possibly centered on a European
Resolution Authority.

22
40.
A framework for intra-group financial support also deserves consideration,
provided that the complex underlying legal and economic challenges are addressed. The
Commission envisages in its recent consultation that group financial support agreements be
concluded among the various group entities in case of troubles affecting the financial
stability of the group as a whole. Such a framework may provide a useful tool to facilitate
private funding of troubled groups and may give an early intervention mechanism that
stabilizes the financial soundness of the groups. Again, the EBA could play a role in
facilitating joint decision.
41.
Agreement ex ante on principles for specific burden sharing is necessary for a
fully satisfactory resolution regime, given that, due to market failures, temporary funding
of a resolution by Member States might be necessary.16 In particular, the resolution plans
discussed above should provide for ex ante burden sharing principles, with appropriate
participation by national fiscal authorities. Any agreement on burden sharing should cover
both the financing of restructuring and the allocation of any net costs. Reaching agreement
may be difficult, but if the resolution framework is to reduce the expected cost to government
from bank failures, the effort will be well worthwhile.17
42.
Two elements of the new regime have an important bearing on the effectiveness
of the financial stability framework: bank creditor bail-ins and sovereign risk. While the
framework for bank creditor bail-ins is being discussed in a global context (FSB), uncertainty
about its parameters and timing is complicating current crisis management. In addition, the
explicit recognition of the need for market discipline on sovereign borrowing has important
ramifications for the approach to risk weighting of government debt on the books of financial
institutions. Clarifying how both will be handled is urgent and seems essential to help resolve
current conjunctural strains.
Deposit guarantee scheme
43.
There is merit in having an integrated framework for crisis management that
would be interlinked with a pan-European deposit insurance scheme. A gradual
approach is now being pursued, in which it remains the primary responsibility of the member
States to ensure that depositors are duly compensated through the national DGSs. The
amendments to the DGS directive, which are currently under negotiation in the Council and
the European Parliament, need to be supportive of the overall crisis management framework.
To this end, certain features that would strengthen the existing framework (discussed below)

16

See IMF, “Resolution of Cross-Border Banks—A Proposed Framework for Enhanced Coordination,” 2010.
There is a need also to improve the framework for managing crises in global banks. Within the EU, however,
there is more scope for making progress because the Member States are committed to cooperate with each other
indefinitely and on a wide range of issues.

17

23
are especially important; it is welcome that many of these elements are being covered in the
proposed amendments:


The DGS should be adequately pre-funded, and have ready recourse to additional
funding if needed, so as to be credible and to avoid a pro-cyclical increase in
contributions during a time of stress;



The DGS should be structured to work seamlessly with resolution funds. DGS
resources should be available to finance the resolution of banks, for example, through
a purchase and assumption (P&A) operation, on condition that insured depositors and
the DGS itself are not thereby made worse off;



In case of bank failure, depositors should be paid out very quickly.18 Depositors
should be aware of this and other key features of the scheme;



Private ownership of DGS raises conflict of interest issues that may give rise to
constraints on the flow of confidential information in a way that ultimately may
hinder resolution efforts;



Depositor preference could be considered, so as to reduce potential costs to the
taxpayer;



DGS coverage should be sufficiently high but limited so as to cover most depositors
and not weaken market discipline unnecessarily. Also, the level of coverage should be
uniform in order to avoid competitive distortions within the single market; and



The DGS and the resolution funds are complementary, and so establishing a single
decision making structure will be helpful in achieving a least cost resolution.
B. Financial Stability, State Aid, and Competition

44.
The EU has had to adapt its rules on state aid to take into account the
exceptional conditions generated by the global financial crisis. The Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union contains strict limitations on state aid being used to
distort competition and the internal market, but also allows some derogation when a
country’s economy is subject to a serious disturbance. With this justification in mind, the
European Commission has issued a series of Communications19 defining how it will assess
18

With perhaps an exception for deposits that are in dispute. The Commission earlier proposed payout within
seven days of a failure.

19

http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/09/499&format=HTML&aged=0&language
=EN&guiLanguage=en

24
state aid to the financial sector in the context of the current financial crisis. These
communications emphasize the temporary nature of the crisis; the objective of ensuring that
institutions receiving aid are viable and are quickly restored to a condition where they can
safely operate without aid; the need to take into account systemic stability and the
maintenance of credit flows; and the desirability of containing moral hazard by ensuring that
shareholders assume a large share of the costs associated with the restructuring of the
troubled institution and do not unduly benefit from the aid received. Against this background,
the Commission has issued rulings on numerous cases of state aid to individual financial
institutions and sectoral support schemes.
45.
The European authorities are working to formulate a more permanent special
framework for state aid in the financial sector, in recognition of certain special features of
the financial services industry: the financial sector plays a unique systemic role in the
economy, but it is also subject to systemic vulnerabilities and very sudden crises.20 The
financial sector is heavily regulated for prudential purposes, and is protected by certain safety
nets, such as a DGS, the availability of Emergency Liquidity Assistance, and, in some
countries, a Financial Stability Fund or a resolution fund.
46.
More specifically, a dedicated regime for state aid to the financial sector should
acknowledge systemic stability concerns, which recognize that:


Risk is reduced by diversification of sectoral and country exposures. A business line
or subsidiary that is “non-core” can contribute to stability if its returns are not
strongly correlated with those of other business lines;



The effect on a bank’s margin of support received by an institution is ambiguous. A
stigma may attach to receiving state aid, such that the recipient’s marginal funding
and capital costs are high; on the other hand, a bank may benefit from the public’s
perception of state support;



Support for one institution could sometimes have positive spill-over effects on others,
for example, by underpinning investor confidence; and



Moral hazard factors are already pervasive in the financial sector, even in the absence
of an institution requiring state aid; prudential regulations and mechanisms already go
some way to limit this effect. For example, a systemically important financial
institution (SIFI) may be subject to a capital surcharge or a higher levy in part
because it may well be rescued if it gets into difficulty. Such a measure serves to

20

The Commission is preparing a policy paper (due by end-2011) on the permanent framework for state aid in
the financial sector, which would apply from 2014 after a transitional period.

25
achieve a similar objective to that of the state aid regime, and indeed a degree of
burden sharing with shareholders is achieved in advance.
47.
The speed with which financial crises can develop suggests that the operational
procedures for assessing state aid need to be implementable under very tight deadlines.
In some cases it may be necessary to provide assistance in a matter of days, and a delay to
review acceptability under state aid rules could be very costly.21 So far, the European
Commission has always managed to decide on assistance within the market constraints on
timelines since existing procedures are already made sufficiently flexible in this respect.
However, also during normal times, and not just during a crisis, it will be useful to validate in
advance the pricing of assistance that is available from various standing facilities, such as a
bank resolution fund. In the absence of such standing facilities, emergency state aid to a
financial institution could be presumed to be acceptable, but subject to ex post review and
possible correction in line with the predetermined principles.
48.
The new bank resolution regime, by facilitating earlier and more market-based
restructuring of problem banks, should reduce but not eliminate the need for a regime
for state aid to the financial sector. The two regimes should be consistent with each other,
so that, for example, principles applied to divest activities under early intervention should not
contradict the principles of bank restructuring under the state aid regime. State aid has been
interpreted widely, to encompass also temporary government financing or guarantees to
facilitate restructuring. Moreover, such assistance may turn into losses for government if the
restructuring does not succeed and/or an appropriate remuneration for the State funds has not
been paid. Lastly, the circumstances under which the financing from a compulsory DGS or a
bank resolution fund would count as state aid should be clarified. The Commission will need
to ensure that the effectiveness of its crisis management framework is not undermined by
other EU rules and directives that were largely developed before the recent financial crisis
and may not fully recognize the implications of the crisis for effective resolution. This could
include the Financial Collateral Directive, in respect of termination rights.
49.
A dialogue with prudential regulators and supervisors is advisable. Competition
and prudential authorities may have parallel responsibilities in areas such as the vetting of
major acquisitions and changes in ownership. They may also have complementary
information, for example, on competition between banks and nonbanks and the scope for
cross-border entry. Competition authorities need to take prudential regulations into account
in assessing what is a “normal” balance sheet structure and what action is needed for a weak
bank to become securely viable, because meeting prudential norms is one element of
viability.

21

There is a parallel with rules for bank intervention: normally, intervention is not subject to a stay of
execution, and ex post judicial recourse may lead to compensation rather than reversal of the action.

26
C. Macroprudential Instruments
50.
The institutional structure for the implementation of macroprudential
instruments remains decentralized at the Member State level. Macroprudential policies
should be calibrated mostly based on country-level macro-financial conditions. In some
countries work is advanced in developing a macroprudential framework, although in others
this is still at an early stage of development. Nonetheless, there is a strong case within the EU
for coordination through an EU institution (e.g., the ESRB) to deal with single passport and
home-host concerns.
51.
One area in which the ESRB’s powers could be usefully expanded is that of the
coordination of macroprudential tools and ensuring their consistent application across
borders, so as to limit the scope for regulatory arbitrage as well as for leakage, and ensure
that similar products are treated similarly for all institutions. The ESRB could take a more
proactive role in issuing recommendations to the Commission, as part of the harmonization
of national regulatory frameworks, regarding the set of available instruments to be used for
macroprudential purposes by the national authorities; similar considerations apply to the
imposition of loss absorbency requirements for globally systemic financial institutions.
ESRB guidelines would then help operationalize these macroprudential instruments. The
tool-box of macroprudential instruments available to the authorities should be easy to
implement and to enforce, be effective in mitigating macroprudential risks, have limited
distortionary effects, and not result in regulatory arbitrage. Given that systemic crises can
originate from various segments of the financial sector (banks, non-banks such as hedge
funds, insurance companies), a range of macroprudential instruments should be available for
each of these segments. Since possible challenges to financial stability are diverse, one can
imagine that instruments might need to be applied to specific institutions, to sectors of the
financial system, to regions within a country, regions cross-border, nationally or more
widely. A broad range of macroprudential instruments (such as was earlier prepared by the
ESRB) should be available to the authorities. If a Member State wishes to apply a
macroprudential tool and wants to secure reciprocity from an institution operating in its
territory but not subject to its national supervisory oversight, it could submit a proposal to
this end for approval to the ESRB.
52.
Recommendations on the design of the macroprudential instruments and their
calibration should ideally be binding on the Member State. The role of the ESRB could
be substantially enhanced, potentially as part of 2014 review that the Commission intends to
conduct in 2014 on the new EU financial stability framework, to define the set of instruments
and the range over which they may normally be applied, or to review macroprudential
measures introduced at a national level with a view to ensuring reciprocity (similar treatment
for all institutions performing a particular activity). Nonetheless, careful consideration will
need to be given whether it will be possible under the existing EU legal framework to confer
upon the ESRB such binding powers toward Member States. A “comply or explain” regime

27
in this regard, analogous to that in place concerning its warnings, would be a weaker
alternative.
53.
For banks, the set of instruments to be included in a macroprudential legal
framework should encompass a broad range of tool. addressing both the demand and
supply of credit. Work is ongoing to identify and put in place a comprehensive set of
instruments. Amongst the instruments that might be included are:22


A countercyclical capital buffer, where the overall buffer for internationally active
banks should be a weighted average of capital add-ons set by national jurisdictions,
with weights based on the geographic composition of a bank’s portfolio of exposures,
as under the Basel III approach. The EU Capital Requirements Directive (CRD4)
implementing Basel III should set an ambitiously high common bar that enhances the
safety of the European financial system. At the same time, it should allow sufficient
scope for the calibration of macroprudential instruments such as countercyclical
capital buffers to cope with asynchronous credit cycles, and recognize that there may
be still a need for the ESRB to issue recommendations and endorse the introduction
of other macroprudential tools. The countercyclical capital buffer has some
limitations: (a) there will be long lags in implementation (banks are likely to have one
year to adjust their countercyclical buffers); (b) it is a fairly complex instrument; (c)
its effectiveness remains untested.



Limits on loan-to-value ratios could form part of the policy toolkits of national
macro-prudential authorities to allow a swift reaction to emerging risks in real estate
markets. Existing experience with limits on LTVs suggests that this measure can be
effective in dampening mortgage credit growth and in slowing house price
appreciation. As with the limit-to-debt ratio below, to prevent regulatory arbitrage,
such limits should be applied not only to banks but to non-banks as well. To avoid
circumvention through cross-border lending, such limits could be reviewed by the
ESRB, which could have the power to ensure reciprocity.



Limits on debt-to-income ratios could be considered as a macro-prudential
instrument. They would help ensure that borrowers have the ability to repay their
mortgages. The experience of some countries that have relied upon such limits on
DTI for a long time (e.g., France) should prove useful in designing and calibrating
this instrument.



Measures to address the cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk could also be
included, such as capital or liquidity surcharges, risk-weighted instruments, or levies
on SIFIs.

22

Some of these measures could apply to non-bank lenders.

28
54.
For non-banks such as hedge funds, possible additional macroprudential
measures include:


Margins or valuation haircuts on securities used as collateral in the securitized
lending markets (such as repo markets). This instrument would be used to regulate the
supply of secured funding. It could also mitigate the pro-cyclicality of the shadow
banking system by affecting their funding conditions given that most source their
funding in the wholesale markets.



Leverage limits. A leverage ratio in the hedge funds sector could help dampen lending
exuberance. The EU directive on Alternative Investment Fund Management already
gives an advisory role in this regard to the ESRB. However, the draft regulation on a
ban of short selling and naked CDS currently does not include any role for the ESRB,
which instead is given to ESMA.

55.
For insurance companies and pension funds, there may be a need to identify
more specialized measures, for instance in relation to the low long term interest rates and
longevity risk, and risks associated with derivative products.
D. Data Adequacy
56.
An important aspect of the new European supervisory architecture regards its
ability to eliminate data gaps and foster an efficient flow of information between its
various components. Compiling and disseminating appropriate information on risk
exposures and interconnections among institutions is a precondition for the establishment of
an effective framework targeted to achieve stability in the financial system. The framework
should ensure vertical (across the three layers) as well as horizontal (within members in each
layer) distribution of data and information in general. While an effective framework that
protects the confidentiality of information needs to be put in place, maximum data sharing
should be the goal: lack of data or lack of data sharing should be eliminated as a potential
cause of the next crisis.
European Supervisory Authorities
57.
The regulation establishing the ESAs entitles them to obtain access, via
European and national counterparties, to all the information necessary to conduct their
activities. While it is clear that information having a micro-supervisory purpose may be
obtained by ESAs, there is more uncertainty over the possibility of the ESAs gaining access
to supervisory data that could be used for risk assessment purposes.23 For example, whereas
23

The legal ambiguity derives from the fact that existing provisions require that supervisory data cannot be used
for purposes other than strict supervision. ESAs, however, are mandated to perform risk assessment exercises
beyond pure supervision.

29
the EBA has indicated it will have access to all confidential data available to national
supervisors on a regular basis, EIOPA is facing opposition in its efforts to obtain all detailed
data necessary for the implementation of Solvency II. Reportedly, national securities market
regulators are, citing a range of obstacles, reluctant to share data on individual financial
transactions with ESMA.24 In addition, it is still unclear whether ESMA will be able to use its
supervisory data on CRAs internally for the purposes of risk assessment. This may in turn
have implications for the information that can be shared with the ESRB.
58.
Achieving comparability of financial data across all Member States is important
for micro and, a fortiori, macro-prudential supervision. ESAs will play a central role in
this process, since they will be responsible for creating and updating common reporting
templates for their respective sectors. As an example, the EBA is to prepare harmonized data
reporting systems for implementation by end of 2012 which will be applied by national
supervisors to banking companies.25 Similarly, EIOPA is developing a fully harmonized
reporting framework to meet requirements under Solvency II which would enhance the
availability of supervisory information on insurance firms. Finally, ESMA is developing a
centralized system to collect data on CRAs.26
59.

In order for common reporting to be effectively applied:



The ESAs should implement such systems through binding technical standards (in the
form of regulations), enforcing their consistent application across all national
supervisors;
The ESAs will likely need to conduct periodic revisions of the reporting templates to
ensure they are kept updated and sufficiently flexible to rapidly incorporate
information on evolving financial products and risk factors; and
The ESAs should ensure a high degree of coordination in the design and
implementation of reporting systems, so as to reduce the reporting burden and avoid
duplication of efforts. 27





24

These data are currently available in the Transaction Reporting Exchange Mechanism (TREM), which was
created in 2007 by CESR–ESMA’s predecessor.

25

In order to achieve full consistency in the application of current Common Reporting (COREP), the EBA is
working on the definition of uniform reporting formats according to Art. 74 of Directive 2010/78/EU of
November 24, 2010. This common reporting system will become effective on December 31, 2012. In order to
ensure uniform conditions of application of this Directive, the EBA is required to develop implementing
technical standards to introduce, within the Union, uniform formats, frequencies and dates of reporting before
January 1, 2012.

26

This central repository (CEREP) requests CRAs to make available public information on their historical
performance including the ratings transition frequency and information about credit ratings issue in the past.

27

Even small differences in the reporting format and timing can add significantly to regulatory burden.

30
European Systemic Risk Board
60.
The ESRB will not have direct access to all the data necessary to conduct its
activities. It will depend heavily on the collaboration of the ECB, which has the resources
and capabilities to provide analytical as well as statistical support. Notwithstanding, there are
legal constraints preventing full sharing of confidential information between the two
institutions, particularly on information that is not in summary or in aggregate form. The
ESRB is also expected to rely on the ESAs and Member States for data derived from
supervisory sources and also for “soft” information for its macroprudential analyses. This
type of information will normally be aggregated.28
61.
There is concern that the relevant authorities may not be willing to share
institution-specific data with the ESRB. As noted above, the ESRB regulation stipulates
that requests from the ESAs for confidential data on individual institutions may only be made
on an ad hoc basis and must be justified on the basis on prevailing market conditions; this
may limit access to sensitive microprudential data. Besides these legal constraints, the broad
range of parties involved in the ESRB’s governance structure increases the risk of leakages
of confidential information.
62.
The ESRB will need to build its reputation and develop solid relationships with
other institutions to gain trust and thus increase its access to information. By giving
stakeholders a higher degree of participation in its activities, it can be expected to build up
the initial reputational capital necessary to facilitate its future engagement with the national
bodies. For example, the ESRB will attempt—through its Advisory Technical Committee—
to capture through a so-called “bottom-up” approach, evidence on risks and vulnerabilities,
also to complement the analytical input from the ECB, which is based on a “top-down”
approach.
E. Direct Regional Supervision: The Rating Agencies
63.
On 1 July 2011, CRAs will be the first cross-border financial institutions in the
EU licensed and supervised by a supranational agency—ESMA—and to this end, ESMA
has been endowed with a comprehensive mix of supervisory tools. If ESMA manages to
instill a supervisory culture and implement supervisory tools tailored to cross border entities,
it could pave the way to possible future centralized supervision of financial markets and/or
institutions in the future.
64.
ESMA will have the right to request a broad set of reports and returns, and also
conduct on-site inspections. Hence, it is developing reporting templates and systems on
CRAs that will facilitate the processing, monitoring and analysis of the prudential
28

For example, the EBA must provide information on Key Risk Indicators to the ESRB on a regular basis.

31
information received. A central repository (CEREP) will gather all the information for
prudential purposes. Part of the information will be made public, on an aggregated and biannual basis (as from summer 2011); published information will include CRAs’ performance
indicators, including rating actions (downgrades/upgrades), defaults, and transition matrices.
ESMA can also access staff and management, and can conduct on-site inspections, which
may help enhance its credibility as well as its effectiveness.
65.
ESMA can impose stringent fines, according to a comprehensive list of breaches
attached to the regulation. It can also require corrective measures, including suspending the
use of credit ratings for regulatory purposes, issuing a public notice, temporarily prohibiting
the credit rating agency from issuing credit ratings and, as a last resort, withdrawing the
registration when the credit rating agency has seriously or repeatedly infringed the
regulation. With regard to accountability, ESMA will present its annual report on fines and
corrective measures to the EU Commission, Parliament and Council.
66.
ESMA will possess its own budget for the supervision of CRAs. While the
calibration of the fee is still under discussion (secondary legislation on fees is to be adopted
by the EU Commission), the Commission should only set a minimum and a
maximum percentage, to give some leeway to the Authority and at the same time establish
criteria that ensure a degree of predictability.
67.
The accumulated delays in hiring staff and preparing tools and methods for
supervision at ESMA’ may hinder its efforts to establish credibility for its supervisory
function quickly. By the end of 2011 ESMA is expected to have 15 staff working on CRAs.
While supervision legally starts in July 2011, it will initially apply to a narrow set of entities;
only four rating agencies—including none of the three largest ones—had been registered as
of May 2011. The delay was due mainly to the complexity of the license applications, and the
continued functioning of a collegial procedure (where ESMA was an observer and not the
licensing authority) on a transitional basis. The largest CRAs are now expected to be
registered by the summer. Meanwhile, ESMA is undertaking an intensive recruitment
process.29 A balance between supervisors and former private sector practitioners should be an
objective in order to ensure the build-up of a supervisory culture and independence from the
industry.

29

Staffing and preparation are currently speeding up. While 3 experts were working on CRAs in 2009, the team
reached 5 experts in May 2011. The unit should reach 15 staff members by the end of 2011, and 35 by
end-2012.

32
APPENDIX I: DETAILS OF CURRENT INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
The European System of Financial Supervisors
68.
The main objective of the ESFS is to ensure that the rules applicable to the
financial sector are adequately implemented to preserve financial stability and to
ensure confidence in the financial system as a whole and protection for the customers of
the financial services. The ESFS comprises the ESRB, the three new supervisory authorities
(EBA, EIOPA, and ESMA), the Joint Committee of these supervisory authorities, and the
national supervisory authorities.
European Supervisory Authorities
69.

The ESAs are entrusted with the following main tasks:



To contribute to the establishment of high-quality common regulatory and
supervisory standards and practices, in particular by providing opinions to the Union
institutions and by developing guidelines, recommendations, and draft regulatory and
implementing technical standards;



To contribute to the consistent application of legally binding Union acts, in particular
by contributing to a common supervisory culture, ensuring consistent, efficient and
effective application of the Union acts, preventing regulatory arbitrage, mediating and
settling disagreements between competent authorities, ensuring effective and
consistent supervision of financial institutions;



To promote a coordinated European Union supervisory response and contribute to the
stability of the financial system of the European Union in close cooperation with all
other ESAs and the ESRB;



To organize and conduct peer review analyses of competent authorities, including
issuing guidelines and recommendations and identifying best practices, in order to
strengthen consistency in supervisory outcomes;



To ensure the coherent functioning of colleges of supervisors and taking actions, inter
alia, in emergency situations; and



To contribute to providing a high level of protection to consumers and beneficiaries
of financial services and products in its area of competence.

70.
Basic acts such as the main sectoral directives and regulations (e.g., CRD,
MiFID, Solvency II) can only be adopted by the EU legislators (i.e., the European
Parliament and the Council) on the basis of a proposal by the European Commission. In areas
specified in these acts, the ESAs and the Commission are delegated the power to adopt rules

33
that either further develop (regulatory technical standards) or implement (implementing
technical standards) the basis acts. As regulatory agencies, the ESAs’ powers are limited to
drafting these standards; while European case law requires that the Commission retains the
formal regulatory power, and that it ultimately endorses them to give them binding legal
effect.
71.
Each ESA is governed by its Board of Supervisors, which integrates the relevant
national authorities in the field of its competence in each Member State. The
Management Board, a subgroup of the Board of Supervisors, ensures that the ESA carries out
its mission and performs the tasks assigned to it. The ESA is represented by a Chairperson,
elected for a five years term that can be extended once by the Board of Supervisors following
a pre-selection by the European Commission and confirmation by the European Parliament in
public hearing. The Chairperson is responsible for preparing the work of the Board of
Supervisors and chairs its meetings as well as the meetings of the Management Board.
The Executive Director appointed by the Board of Supervisors for a similar term as the
Chairperson is in charge of the management of the ESA and is responsible for the
implementation of the annual work program under the guidance of the Board of Supervisors
and the control of the Management Board. At the moment, national authorities predominate
amongst the Board of Supervisors members, and have all the votes, which may under-weight
EU-wide interests and considerations that are not favored by member-states authorities.
72.
When carrying out the tasks conferred upon it by the Regulation, the
Chairperson and the voting members of the Board of Supervisors are to act
independently and objectively in the sole interest of the Union as a whole and shall
neither seek nor take instructions from Union institutions or bodies, from any government of
a Member State or from any other public or private body
73.
Peer Reviews are mandated to help monitoring the implementation of
supervisory provisions set out in Community Legislation and in the ESAs' measures, as
well as to monitor convergence in supervisory practices. The Review Panel aims at
encouraging a timely and consistent day to day application of all the above and at enhancing
supervisory convergence within the European Economic Area (EEA).
74.
Stakeholder groups are established to facilitate the ESAs’ consultation with
stakeholders in Europe. The stakeholder groups, each comprising of 30 people, include
representatives of the industry, consumers and beneficiaries as well as academics. 30

30

The ESAs will need to consult with a narrower circle of respective industry representatives on technical
issues.

34
75.
The ESAs have an autonomous budget, with revenues coming from national
supervisory authorities and the General Budget of the Union. The Union budgetary procedure
is applicable and the auditing of accounts is undertaken by the Union’s Court of Auditors.
76.
The fact that ESAs have legal personality, autonomy and binding powers makes
it essential that they are accountable to the European Parliament and the Council.
Decisions taken by the ESAs may be appealed by the addressee or any natural or legal person
directly and individually concerned by that decision, by filing an appeal to the competent
ESA. The Board of Appeal, which is a joint body of ESAs, independent from their
administrative and regulatory structures, shall decide within two months, which decision can
be contested before the Court of Justice of the EU.
77.
To prepare their statements and documents and to carry out their technical
work, the ESAs have set up a number of Working Groups consisting of experts from the
national supervisory authorities, and to which other stakeholders contribute from their
expertise and insight. These Working Groups relate closely to the respective ESAs’ work
programs.
78.
The ESAs are successor institutions of the “Level 3 Lamfalussy Committees” of
supervisors. The formation of the ESAs was thus a continuation and enhancement of the
pre-existing committees. The ESAs’ regulations provide for continuity of the Committees’
work including the transfer of their existing staff. For both EBA and EIOPA the total
assigned number of staff will be around 60 experts in 2011 increasing to around 100 in 2013;
and around 70 in 2011 rising to 130 for ESMA.
The European Systemic Risk Board
79.
On January 1, 2011, the ESRB was established as the new EU independent
macro-prudential entity.31 The structure of the ESRB comprises a General Board, a
Steering Committee, a Secretariat, an Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC) and an Advisory
Technical Committee (ATC). Members of the Board with voting rights (with one vote each)
include the President (Chair), the Vice-President of the ECB, the Governors of the national
central banks, a member of the Commission, the Chairs of the European Supervisory
Authorities (ESAs), the Chair and two Vice Chairs of the ASC, and the Chair of the ATC
(37 voting members and 27 non-voting members32).

31

Regulation No. 1092/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of November 24 of 2010 and
Council Regulation No.1096/2010 of November 17 of 2010.

32

The voting members of the General Board are the President and the Vice-President of the ECB, the
Governors of the national central banks, a member of the EU Commission, the Chairs of the ESAs, the Chair
and two Vice Chairs of the ASC, and the Chair of the ATC. The non-voting members are the high level
representatives of the national supervisory authorities, and the president of the EFC.

35
80.
The ESRB’s oversight includes all financial institutions, shadow banks, markets,
products and infrastructures. It is tasked with the mitigation of system-wide risks of
financial instability. The ESRB shall monitor the financial system, and identify and assess
risks of instability that may affect the financial system as a whole. The ESRB is to issue risk
warnings when risks are deemed significant, and when necessary, provide policy
recommendations to mitigate or address the risks identified. Warnings and Recommendations
can be of a general or of a specific nature, and be addressed to the European Commission, to
specific Member States, to the ESAs, or to one or several national supervisory authorities.
The ESRB is also responsible for the implementation in the EU of the recommendations of
the IMF, the BIS and the FSB to the G20, and of the coordination of its actions with
International Financial Institutions and with relevant institutions in non-EU countries on
macro-prudential oversight matters.
81.
The ESRB reports at least annually to the European Parliament and the
Council, marking the publication of its annual report, and more frequently in the event
of widespread financial distress. Where appropriate, the European Parliament and the
Council invite the ESRB to examine specific issues to financial stability. The European
Parliament may request the Chair of the ESRB to attend a hearing of the competent
Committees of the European Parliament and the Chair of the ESRB shall hold confidential
oral discussions at least twice a year behind closed doors with the Chair and the Vice-Chairs
of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament.
82.
The ESRB does not have a legal personality. It has no binding powers, and
enforcement of recommendations will depend on the good functioning of a “comply or
explain” concept. To enhance its influence and legitimacy, warnings and recommendations
addressed to national authorities will be transmitted, subject to confidentiality, to the
Council, the Commission, and the ESAs. Moreover, the ESRB may make warnings and
recommendations public where appropriate. Policy recommendations will specify a timeline
for the relevant policy response by the body to which the warning is addressed, and it will be
the responsibility of the authority to which the ESRB sends a warning to act on it, or to
provide a justification in case of inaction. If a recommendation has not been followed or the
addressees fail to appropriately explain their inaction, the ESRB shall inform the Council and
when relevant, the ESAs. The regulation foresees an explicit role for the European
Parliament in the follow-up of ESRB recommendations when they are made public.
83.
The headcount of the ESRB Secretariat as of May 2011 is approximately 25 staff
members, about half ECB staff and half from national central banks. The ECB has
recruited 35 staff from NCBs to deal with ESRB-related issues. The EBA has provided
resources to working groups. More broadly, the ECB provides analytical, statistical,
administrative and logistical support to the ESRB. As a center of knowledge in the euro area,
the ECB analytical power is crucial for the ESRB. The ESRB can also count on its
stakeholders’ contributions through its related sub-structures, such as working groups with

36
the ESAs, and Committees such as the ATC and the ASC providing for crucial analytical
tasks and independent reviews of strategies by distinguished academics.
The financial stability work of the European Commission
84.
The EC plays a central role in setting prudential and non-prudential regulations
for the financial sector, and in overseeing macroeconomic policies that deeply affect the
financial sector. The Commission has the ‘right of initiative’, i.e., the Commission alone is
responsible for drawing up proposals for new European legislation, which it presents to
Parliament and the Council. Thus, the Directorate General (DG) for the Internal Market and
Services manages the process of formulating and issuing new financial sector directives and
regulations, in consultation with the ESAs, national authorities and market participants. 33
85.
The current agenda is unusually full, with forthcoming amendments to the Capital
Requirements Directive (CRD), the directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGS),
the banking crisis management framework, a review of the Market in Financial Instruments
Directive (MiFID), and implementation of Solvency II. This agenda largely represents an
effort to implement lessons from the global crisis and associated internationally-agreed
regulatory changes, for example, to raise the level and quality of bank capital. Moreover, to
strengthen the reforms of the European supervisory architecture, initiatives have been
launched to work toward a “common rulebook.” This should provide a common legal basis
for supervisory action in the EU - ensuring strengthened stability, equal treatment, lower
compliance costs for companies as well as removing opportunities for regulatory arbitrage.
Such efforts do not require full harmonization of all aspects of EU legislation, but rather
focus on one harmonized core set of key standards. Indeed, some flexibility needs to be
maintained for the sake of proportionality and to deal with differences in economic
conditions across the EU: especially where monetary and fiscal policies are constrained,
there may be good reasons to differentiate other policies, for example, for macro-prudential
purposes.
86.
The EC’s responsibility to safeguard the internal market implies that it oversees
state aid to the financial sector, and also mergers. The DG for Competition has had to pay
increasing attention to the financial sector as governments reacted to the global crisis by
introducing facilities to support the financial sector.
87.
The DG for Economic and Financial Affairs oversees macroeconomic conditions
and policies—such as the maintenance of the Stability and Growth Pact—but is also
involved in financial stability work, such as the recent stress testing exercises. An area of
increasing attention has been that of macro-financial linkages: on the one hand, fiscal and
33

One implication is that the ESAs do not themselves have full power to set regulations in their respective areas
of competence.

37
current account balances, and the balance sheet positions of the government and nonfinancial
private sector translate into important risk factors in the financial sector; on the other,
the functioning of the financial sector influences, for example, savings and investment rates,
and contingent claims on government.

38
APPENDIX II: SUPERVISING THE INSURANCE AND PENSIONS INDUSTRIES
88.
Solvency II is in the process of replacing the current regulatory framework
Solvency I in the EU and the new regime should be in place January 2013. The process
started already in 2009 with the adoption of the Solvency II Framework Directive by the
European Parliament. Solvency II is based on a three pillar approach, which is similar to the
banking sector (Basel II) but adapted for insurance. The first pillar contains the quantitative
requirements. The second pillar contains qualitative requirements on undertakings such as
risk management, as well as supervisory activities, and the third pillar covers supervisory
reporting and disclosure. Solvency II will also streamline the way that insurance groups are
supervised, and recognizes the economic reality of how groups operate.
89.
CEIOPS, the forerunner of EIOPA, was requested by the European Commission
since the beginning of the process to provide technical advice on the vast majority of
Solvency II Level 2 implementing measures. This role has put EIOPA in the position of
being a natural source for reference, standard setting and consultant authority, as is intended
in the new regulatory architecture. The implementation efforts are following an approach that
requires detailed regulatory and implementing standards to ensure the consistent application
of the regime throughout the EU to avoid regulatory arbitrage and an uneven playing field.
Training provided by CEIOPS on Solvency II will continue, enhancing the supervisory
quality and harmonization. The need for cooperation among member authorities to gain
understanding of the complexity of Solvency II will enhance the work of EIOPA in the
coordination area.
90.
Expectations regarding EIOPA are extremely high. Solvency II is in the final
stages of becoming the official solvency regime, creating an immediate need for guidance
and implementing standards. Further, the internal model approval, a challenging and crucial
step for ensuring solvency will probably require strong engagement from EIOPA to ensure
best practice and proper understanding by all supervisory authorities. In addition, the
mandate to participation by EIOPA in the Supervisory Colleges will add expectations
regarding guidance in this new field of group supervision.
91.
Proper staffing will be a critical component for the success of EIOPA and
ultimately for the EU insurance and occupational pensions supervision. The urgent need
to gain credibility calls for effective and influential participation in the Colleges of
Supervision and will require an adequate level of seniority in staffing, thus constraining
EIOPA’s ability to hire young promising talent at this stage. In addition, the high demand for
actuarial and internal model resources created by Solvency II has significantly raised
compensation to levels that could hit EIOPA’s budgeted salary structure boundaries.
92.
EIOPA’s role promoting a coordinated European Union supervisory response
and contributing to the stability of the financial system of the European Union, working
in close cooperation with the other ESAs and the ESRB, will be not free from

39
challenges. The low interest rate environment, together with costs associated with the
introduction of Solvency II, could trigger a change in the demand for the products of the
insurance industry. Also, the low interest rate environment, while beneficial for other
institutions in the financial sector, could accentuate a search for yield to the detriment of
credit quality in the pension and long term life products.
93.
EIOPA’s contribution to the evaluation of the type of systemic risk posed by the
insurance industry, as well as monitoring, providing early warnings and if necessary
coordinating responses in emergency situations, will be critical. With around 30 of the
largest global insurance groups domiciled in the EU, the engagement and timely evaluation
of the prudential situation of these groups by EIOPA will be essential for fulfilling its
mandate. Access to detailed, timely data on these groups will be required as well as strong
coordination with the national authorities. Information sharing will require strong protection
of confidentiality and data security, but also a cultural change in the national authorities and
the willingness to share granular data on a timely basis.
94.
The Institutional and Occupational Retirement Prevision (IORP) Directive is in
the process of review thus adding an important and resource- intensive task to the
workload of EIOPA. The EC has approached EIOPA with a Call for Advice on the new
IORP Directive due by December 2011. The purpose of the Directive is to remove
impediments to the cross border establishment of occupational pension funds. Currently
around 78 of 150,000 occupational pension funds operate cross border. Valuation of
technical provisions, the security of benefits, risk-based supervision, and modernizing the
prudential regulation of defined contribution (DC) schemes are the main topics of discussion
and possible harmonization. The fact that the design of occupational pensions remains a
national decision is likely to dampen harmonization at EU level.
95.
There is a risk that the consumer protection mandate assigned to EIOPA may be
relegated in the priorities. While the mandate requires EIOPA to take a leading role in
promoting transparency, simplicity and fairness in the market for consumer financial
products or services across the internal market, the assigned powers appear disproportionate,
for instance giving EIOPA only the option to adopt guidelines and recommendations with a
view to promoting the safety and soundness of markets and convergence of regulatory
practice but not regulatory standards. EIOPA may also issue warnings in the event that a
financial activity poses a serious threat to the stability and effectiveness of the system;
however, it is not clear what implications and actions will follow. EIOPA is also to engage in
achieving a coordinated approach to the regulatory and supervisory treatment of new or
innovative financial activities. This will require a close engagement with the market and
access to detailed information at the individual institutions’ level.


Proper valuation of assets and liabilities will be necessary for the successful
introduction of Solvency II, but current IFRS work in insurance is delayed and there
are important differences, particularly as regards the valuation of the liabilities.

40
Solvency II valuation standards have two major areas of divergence with respect to
the currently discussed IFRS. The ultimate adopted valuation will impact the
application of Solvency II and could compromise the soundness of the system if too
much freedom is granted.
96.
Training plans are important for the enhancement of supervision. EIOPA has a
wide range of training activities. Topics include Solvency II, accounting, consumer
protection, and risk supervision. The training on Solvency II traditionally offered to
supervisors in the policy departments has now moved to address operational staff needs. The
development of online courses and their availability in the various EU languages is
recommended.

41
ANNEX I: INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL ISSUES FROM FSAPS IN EU MEMBER STATES
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


The global financial crisis has led to reform efforts in many countries to improve
institutional and legal aspects of financial stability frameworks. Within the
European Union (EU), these efforts are taking place both at the regional level and in
many member countries. This annex focuses on the evolving financial stability
frameworks in five EU countries that have recently engaged in FSAPs and are on the
list of the 25 most interconnected economies. This annex is intended to
complement the European Financial Stability Framework Exercise (EFFE) that
focuses on the emerging financial stability framework at the EU level.



The five FSAPs indicate a trend for Ministries of Finance (MoFs) to take on a
more prominent role in financial crisis prevention and management, inter alia
through increased oversight of autonomous agencies. Such oversight can be
appropriate, but should not curtail the operational autonomy of supervisory agencies.
While there is no simple solution here, the operational autonomy of supervisory
agencies is essential and should remain in the forefront of any institutional reform.
The FSAPs call for appropriate coordination mechanisms among supervisory
agencies, as well as between the agencies and the Government.



There is a tendency in the assessed countries to strengthen the institutional
framework for macro-prudential oversight, including clear delineations of
responsibilities for macro-prudential surveillance. In this regard, there is a strong
case for strengthening the financial stability mandate of central banks, by specifying a
clearly defined and well integrated set of objectives, as well as the functions and
macro-prudential tools to achieve these objectives.



With regard to micro-prudential supervision, the FSAPs have revealed
weaknesses in the gathering of supervisory information obtained via formal
regulatory reporting. Moreover, further progress can be made in enhancing home-host
cooperation.



The FSAPs revealed that bank resolution frameworks vary considerably among
the five countries. Major weaknesses exist in several countries, especially as their
frameworks lack robust resolution tools. Furthermore, coordination mechanisms
between supervisory agencies and MoFs, as well as between the courts, resolution
authorities and supervisory agencies, need to be strengthened. Some countries have
recently introduced legal reforms to improve their bank resolution framework.
Problems related to cross-border resolution would likely need to be handled largely at
the EU level, but the lack of ex ante burden sharing arrangements within the EU
remains a major impediment. Particularly given the present absence of a regional

42
framework, steps should be taken at the national levels to reinforce coordination
between national authorities regarding cross-border bank resolution.


Finally, the FSAPs have shown a clear need to improve various aspects of
national Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGS). Weaknesses include inability to
finance bank resolution, a lack of ex ante funding, and absence of depositor
preference, which, taken all together, may make it cumbersome and time consuming
for national DGSs to play an active role in bank resolution and ensure that tax payer
expenses are minimized.

I. INTRODUCTION
97.
The global financial crisis has led to widespread reform efforts aimed at
improving the institutional and legal aspects of financial stability frameworks; within
the European Union (EU) these efforts are evident both at the regional level and in
many member countries. The interrelationship between the national and regional structures,
and the ongoing moves towards fostering a single market within the EU, has generated
additional dimensions to this work. The European Financial Stability Framework Exercise
(EFFE) has analyzed the developments in the institutional and legal structure at the regional
level. This annex complements the EFFE paper with lessons from recent bilateral exercises.34
98.
Over the past year, Fund staff has conducted FSAP updates for various
European Union (EU) member countries.35 Five of these covered countries are on the list
of members with systemically important financial systems for whom mandatory FSAP
stability assessments, conducted every five years, have become an integral part of Article IV
surveillance36. With the increasing convergence of the institutional structures and rules in
Europe, a number of issues arising in these national FSAPs are similar across countries; some
of these derive directly from decisions made at an EU level, while others relate to national
responsibilities in an increasingly common external environment.
99.
This paper covers three broad areas. The next section looks at the institutional and
legal frameworks for financial stability. Section III covers issues arising in the area of micro34

This Annex was prepared by a team led by Messrs. Enoch (MCM) and Jansen (LEG) and comprising also
Ms. Jassaud, Mr. Verkoren and Ms. Zhou (all MCM), and Messrs. Bossu and Gullo (both LEG).

35

Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. All the FSAP teams also included
staff from the Fund’s European and Legal Departments.

36

Integrating Stability Assessments Under the Financial Sector Assessment Program into Article IV
Surveillance, August 27, 2010, http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/082710.pdf

43
prudential supervision. Section IV contains a discussion of crisis management and bank
resolution issues at the national level. Finally, Section V offers some conclusions.
II. NATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORKS FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY
100. The FSAPs with the EU members have demonstrated that countries are
reconsidering institutional arrangements and legal frameworks aimed at promoting
financial stability in light of the crisis. Before the crisis, the institutional debate in the field
of financial stability focused mainly on providing appropriate levels of autonomy and
adequate toolkits for central banks and micro-prudential supervisors. The financial crisis has
signaled a need s for a more comprehensive review of the mandates of central banks and
supervisory agencies as well as of the coordination mechanisms between them. In the EU,
this requires analysis and action at both EU and member state level. While efforts have been
made to address the issue of cross-border coordination in the field of financial stability at the
EU level (e.g., supervisory colleges, Winding Up Directive), individual member states
continue to retain considerable responsibility for national financial stability. Accordingly,
they will need to develop more robust national institutional and legal frameworks to fulfill
those responsibilities.
A. Autonomy of Supervisory Agencies
101. The “standards and codes” assessments with the EU members highlighted
tensions associated with the autonomous status of supervisory agencies, and
particularly their objectives, independence, and powers. From an institutional
perspective, a key lesson from the crisis is that financial stability is ultimately the
responsibility of the government and that, for this reason, the government will inevitably
have a leading role to play in addressing financial stability issues. The government’s central
role has a bearing on the design of institutional frameworks for crisis prevention—i.e.,
macro- and micro-prudential supervision—and crisis management, that may curtail the
autonomy of supervisory agencies. At the same time, however, a balance needs to be
maintained to ensure a sufficient level of autonomy for regulatory agencies at the operational
level. In the recent FSAPs with EU members, a number of jurisdictions were rated “largely
compliant,” rather than compliant, on Core Principle 1 (“Objectives, independence, powers,
transparency, and cooperation”) and its sub principles (also see Figure 1). These FSAPs
identified constraints on the autonomy of regulatory agencies in the areas of the rule-making
process, the reporting lines vis-à-vis the political authorities, the procedure for appointment
and removal of the governing bodies, the lack of clear mandates and/or insufficient
independence in priority setting and insufficient resources. The recommendations from the
FSAPs highlight a number of important lessons.

44
Figure 1. Observance of Core Principle 1 across five EU countries



The mandates and supporting objectives of supervisory agencies should be
sufficiently clear and coherent, and individual objectives should be sufficiently
balanced vis-à-vis each other (for instance, prudential objectives vs. consumer
protection objectives) (Sweden, United Kingdom).



Where rules are set exclusively by the MoF the supervisory agency has autonomy
only as regards implementing those rules. Under such circumstances, the rule-making
powers of the MoF should focus on the broad components of the prudential
framework, allowing the prudential supervisor to determine quantitative thresholds,
minimum ratios et cetera (Netherlands).



There is a need to safeguard the operational autonomy of supervisory agencies,
ensuring that they can effectively withstand any undue industry and/or government
interference (Luxembourg, Sweden).



Rules for the appointment and removal of the members of the governing bodies must
be set in a way that avoids undue influence in daily management (Luxembourg).
Moreover, supervisory agencies should have sufficient autonomy in setting
supervisory priorities and allocating resources accordingly (Sweden). There should be
mandatory disclosure of the reasons for the dismissal of a supervisory agency’s board
member (Germany, Luxembourg).



The internal governance framework of the agencies must allow for an efficient
decision-making process to ensure that remedial actions can be taken in a timely
manner. Weaknesses identified in members’ frameworks do not typically relate to the
range of available instruments (although the assessments highlighted some notable

45
exceptions (Netherlands, United Kingdom)) but to their application in practice; in
some cases supervisory authorities fail to apply a “ladder” of actions, ensuring that
timely and appropriate supervisory actions are taken, commensurate with the nature
and seriousness of the identified issues (Germany, Luxembourg, Sweden).


The framework for establishing the budget and setting priorities for the agency should
be transparent. Priorities should be set on the basis of sound risk assessments
performed by the supervisory authority, encompassing both micro- and macro risks.
Frequent changes to the budget or to the priorities of the agency should be avoided
(Sweden).



The framework should provide robust legal protection for supervisors. In several
countries, existing protections need to be strengthened (Germany, Netherlands, and
Sweden).

102. The strengthened role of MoFs in crisis prevention and management is likely to
have an impact on the autonomy of micro-prudential supervisors. In several of the
FSAPs, officials from the relevant MoF expressed the view that regulators did not perform
particularly well in the period leading up the crisis, and that there is a need for increased
oversight over the autonomous supervisory agencies. (This was particularly the case in those
of the assessed countries where the MoF is politically responsible before Parliament for the
actions of the central bank and financial regulators.) Accordingly, MoFs will likely continue
to assert a more prominent role in crisis prevention and management even into the post-crisis
period in ways that may potentially undermine the autonomy of regulators.
103. There is no simple solution to resolve the tension between the needs for
government involvement and supervisory autonomy; rather it will require a delicately
balanced approach. On the one hand, institutional arrangements will have to recognize that,
as is the case in the assessed countries, the minister of finance is politically responsible to
Parliament for the action of supervisory agencies and for the expenditure of taxpayer money
as part of interventions aimed at buttressing financial stability. On the other hand, operational
autonomy for supervisory agencies is essential for the performance of their tasks, and
political interference with daily management and supervisory decisions must be avoided.
Moreover, supervisory agencies, as any public agency, benefit from the powers that have
been conferred upon them in legislation: their authority must therefore be framed in a manner
that ensures their democratic legitimacy, with related accountability and transparency
requirements. Going forward, this balance may most effectively be struck through a
framework consisting of the following four pillars:


Each supervisory agency operates with functional autonomy and a well calibrated,
realistic and, the extent possible, verifiable mandate;

46


Those mandates are complemented by clear transparency and accountability
mechanisms vis-à-vis the political authorities and the public at large,37 as well as
sufficient budgets to adequately perform its tasks and responsibilities;



The supervisory agencies are subject to strong inter-agency coordination mechanisms
(see below); and



The MoF ensures policy coordination while respecting the autonomy of each agency
in its respective field of competencies.
B. Institutional Framework for Macro-prudential Oversight

104. In the assessed countries, the design of institutional arrangements for macroprudential oversight is still a work in progress. Conceptually, such arrangements should
include a clear delineation of responsibilities for macro-prudential surveillance, decision
making, and enforcement.38 The FSAPs suggest that, in the assessed countries, the central
bank is best placed to perform the surveillance function.39 Similarly, most countries of the
countries under review seem to converge towards an approach where the micro-prudential
supervisor is charged with most of the enforcement of macro-prudential rules, although the
financial consumer protection agency might also play a role. However, the allocation of
macro-prudential decision-making powers varies from country to country. In some countries,
the political authorities seem hesitant to entrust autonomous agencies with decision-making
powers that go beyond their original mandate. This is particularly so in the context of loanto-value (LTV) ratios for home mortgages, where micro-prudential and consumer protection
concerns intersect with housing policies and taxation. (See Box 1).
105. Given the involvement of multiple stakeholders, effective macro-prudential
oversight requires close and continuous cooperation. An important precondition of such
cooperation relates to the possibility of timely information-sharing between micro- and
macro-prudential authorities, which is in some cases hampered by confidentiality obligations.
Interestingly, most of the assessed countries seem to be little attracted by the idea of
addressing the need to close and continuous cooperation between all stakeholders involved
37

Parliamentary committees can play a role in overseeing the effective exercise of powers delegated to the
agencies. However, all of the assessed countries have parliamentary systems wherein the Minister of Finance is
politically responsible for the agencies before parliament, and the accountability arrangement should reflect this
central role of the minister.

38
39

Work is in train on MCM and LEG papers on this topic.

In the United States the Dodd-Frank Act (see Section 153 et.seq.) established the Office of Financial
Research in the Treasury Department and charged this Office with supporting the Financial Stability Oversight
Council including through the collection of data and the design of tools for risk monitoring.

47
via the establishment of a (U.S.-inspired) “Council”-type of structure, wherein the MoF and
the various agencies coordinate policies under the political leadership of the minister of
finance; in most cases, countries seem to prefer a Memorandum of Understanding- (MoU)
based approach.

Box 1. Who Should Set LTV Ratios?
Prudential regulation, with its focus on individual firms, may not be sufficient to prevent system risks caused by
the failures of individual financial institutions. Progress is being made to enhance macro-prudential framework
by expanding the macro-prudential tool box, although more work needs to be done in clarifying the key
concepts and developing the institutional framework for macro prudential supervision.
One related question that emerged from the FSAP discussions in Netherlands and Sweden is who should set
(LTV ratios. The housing sector played a critical role in recent financial crises and empirical studies tentatively
support the effectiveness of using LTV ratios in taming housing booms. The agency in charge of setting LTV
ratios varies from the supervisor responsible for consumer protection (Sweden) to the MoF ( Netherlands).
Another possibility would be the central bank.


In the Netherlands, the high LTV ratio of household mortgage loans (well above 100 percent and still
rising until recently) is seen as a key vulnerability, which led the MoF, w to propose capping them.
They are now at a maximum of 110 percent. The staff recommended assigning additional powers to
the supervisors (DNB and the Authority for Financial Markets (AFM)) to facilitate timely actions,
specifically by allowing them to modify LTV ratios within a range that could be set by the MoF.



In Sweden, the Finansinspektionen, which is in charge of both prudential and conduct-of-business
supervision, imposed an 85 percent maximum LTV cap in October 2010—combined with a 125 basis
points hike of the policy rate by the Swedish central bank—in response to rapidly rising house prices,
which has apparently helped slow down mortgage lending in recent months.

106. This discussion raises the question whether, and how, the financial stability
mandate of central banks should be strengthened. Before the crisis, policy makers broadly
agreed that price stability should be the main objective of central banks, and the overall
mandate of central banks was geared toward pursuing that objective. After the crisis, policy
makers have been debating whether central banks should receive a more explicit and stronger
financial stability mandate and, if so, how such mandate should be crafted. The FSAPs found
that designing adequate financial stability mandates is not a clear-cut exercise. For instance,
in the Netherlands, the central bank already had a financial stability mandate before the
crisis, but that mandate was arguably too limited, because it included a financial stability
objective that was tied exclusively to the micro-prudential function of the central bank and
not to its activities more broadly. Going forward, if policy makers aim at strengthening the
financial stability mandate of central banks, care should be given to define and elaborate a
cohesive set of objectives, functions and instruments, that would be closely tied with the
central bank’s other statutory tasks (e.g., monetary stability, micro-prudential supervision).

48
C. Institutional Models for Micro-Prudential Supervision
107. The FSAPs suggest that there is no perfect institutional model for microprudential supervision: each model can work, or fail. The assessments detected, however,
a trend to move micro-prudential supervision from a “stand alone” regulatory agency to
either vest these responsibilities in the central bank (Netherlands and United Kingdom) or
strengthen the interactions between the macro prudential (typically the central bank) and the
micro prudential supervisor (Germany). As discussed in Box 2, the arguments for charging
the central bank with micro-prudential supervision are compelling, but there is no guarantee
that reliance upon such a model will be successful. A strong supervisory culture (with
minimal regulatory capture) and the avoidance of intra-central bank “silo” mentalities are
instrumental in making the model work.
108. The challenges for micro-prudential supervision do not lie only in the
institutional model, but also relate to other elements. In many assessed countries, in
addition to a more forceful supervision (as discussed in Section III), the mandates of microprudential supervisors leave room for improvement. In addition to the supervisory autonomy,
which will be separately discussed below, the most pressing issues calling for discussion are
the following:


Mandates—Prior to the crisis, prudential supervision tended too often to promote the
competiveness of national financial systems (including by supporting “national
champions”) either formally or simply in practice. The financial crisis has
emphasized the need to shift toward protecting the safety and soundness of the
financial systems, rather than the competiveness of individual institutions. (Also, the
impact of regulation should be analyzed in light of the former rather than the latter.)
Particularly in the EU context, such an approach is also inconsistent with the
objectives of the single market.



Regulatory Powers—Another important lesson from the FSAPs (see. e.g.,
Netherlands) is that the regulatory instruments of supervisors may be limited and in
need of strengthening.. In this regard, the distinction between enforcement powers
and rule-making authority comes into play. The FSAPs have revealed that often
political authorities (such as the Minister), rather than the supervisors, may be vested
with rule-making powers. This is explained by democratic legitimacy and the
ministerial accountability toward the Parliament (e.g., Netherlands). The challenge is
to combine such approach to rule-making with the operational autonomy of the
agencies. One avenue could be to involve supervisory agencies in the exercise of
Ministerial regulatory powers by way of a transparent and open consultation
procedure with a view to balance political, policy and technical arguments.

49
Box 2. The “Twin Peaks” Model of Supervision
The “twin peaks” model refers to a supervisory framework that separate the prudential and conduct-ofbusiness supervision under different agencies. This model of supervision was adopted in the Netherlands
in 2002, under which the Dutch Central Bank (DNB) became a single prudential supervisor for all financial
institutions (banks, insurance companies, investment firms, pension funds, and securities firms), and the
Authority for Financial Markets (AFM) was created as supervisor responsible for conduct-of-business
supervision including supervision of security market activities, with a strong focus on market behavior and
consumer/investor protection. The “twin peaks” model has been or is being adapted by several Euro area
countries, including the United Kingdom (Table 1). Specifically, in the aftermath of recent financial crisis, the
U.K. government has announced that the existing unified supervisory regime (“one peak “ model) will be
replaced by a “twin peak” model, under which a new prudential regulator, the Prudential Regulation Authority
(PRA), will be created, as a subsidiary of the Bank of England, to carry out prudential supervision of financial
firms; and a new Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) will be set up for the conduct-of-business supervision.
The preference for a unified prudential supervisor has been driven by changes in the financial industry
structure. More specifically, financial systems had become dominated by a few very large financial
conglomerates operating across bank/insurance/pension lines, and offering increasingly complex financial
products that blurred the conventional credit/insurance/securities boundaries.
The preference for objective-based supervision has led to the separation of prudential and conduct-ofbusiness supervision under different agencies, or “twin peaks.” The preference seems to be based on the
view that the objective of prudential supervision is to safeguard financial stability, while the objective of
conduct-of-business supervision is to protect consumers. Despite synergies between them, they require different
skill sets and different tools to achieve their individual objective. That said, problems in conduct-of-business are
often precursors of prudential difficulties, so focus on appropriate conduct-of-business practices should assist
financial stability.
The decision to locate the unified prudential supervisor within the central bank has been based on several
factors. These include (i) the close link between macroeconomic stability and financial stability; (ii) the
expectation that prudential supervisors could benefit from the central bank’s macroeconomic analysis, as well
as from the central bank’s long standing credibility; and (iii) for the Netherlands, the intention to enhance
DNB’s role with new responsibilities at the time when monetary policies became the responsibility of the
European Central bank (ECB), which would also limit the potential conflict of interest between monetary policy
and financial stability objectives.
The crisis demonstrated that the effectiveness of supervision goes beyond which institutional model it is
based on. Both the United Kingdom’s “one peak” and the Dutch “twin peaks” model were seriously tested
during the recent financial crisis. A strong supervisory culture and close coordination between the agencies will
be needed to make any model work. .

50
Table 1. Selected Supervisory Models40
Before Recent Crisis

After Recent Crisis

Integrated prudential and
conduct-of-business supervision
(One Peak)

Belgium, Italy, France, Germany,
Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, Hungary, Poland,
Portugal, Japan, Korea, Singapore,
Colombia, Nicaragua

Germany, Switzerland,
Sweden, Hungary, Poland,
Japan, Korea, Singapore,
Colombia, Nicaragua

Separated prudential and
conduct-of-business supervision
(Twin-Peaks)

Australia,
Netherlands

Belgium, France, Italy
(planned), Portugal (planned),
Spain (planned), United
Kingdom, Australia,
Netherlands

Unified prudential supervision
integrated with central bank

Netherlands, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Switzerland

Belgium, France, Italy
(planned), Spain (planned),
United Kingdom, Netherlands,
Hong Kong, Singapore,
Switzerland

Unified prudential supervision
outside central bank

Australia, Belgium, United
Kingdom, Japan, Hungary,
Germany, Sweden

Australia, Japan, Hungary,
Germany, Sweden

109. Above all, there is a need to improve the effectiveness of supervisory agencies. A
theme common to all the FSAPs in the study is the significant reliance in the past on moral
suasion and the increasing focus now being put on intrusive supervision. While the
supervisory culture in Europe is typically less “enforcement driven” than in, for example, the
United States, supervisory agencies should acknowledge that while moral suasion and
informal pressure may, under normal circumstances, be sufficient to influence supervisory
institutions’ senior management, they also need to stand ready to demand progressively
stronger remedial action. This will typically require a decisive “will to act,” supported by
effective decision-making procedures that do not suffer from stakeholder interference and a
legal framework that is not susceptible to arbitrary suspension of supervisory sanctions and
decisions.

40

Based on (1) ECB, 2010, “Recent Developments in Supervisory Structures in the EU Member States (200710); (2) Donato Mascinadaro and Marc Quintyn, 2010 “Regulating the Regulators: The Changing Face of
Financial Supervision Architectures Before and After the Crisis,” and (3) a review by MCM experts.

51
III. ISSUES RELATED TO MICRO-PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION
A. Data Reporting Requirements
110. In all instances, the granularity of the information obtained via formal
regulatory reporting was assessed as insufficient. The reporting requirements often respect
the minimum harmonization dictated under the Capital Requirements Directive. The
financial crisis has emphasized the need for rich data being readily available for supervisory
agencies, for instance on nonperforming assets or sectoral and geographical concentrations.41
111. Because of the paucity of data collected through normal central reporting to the
agencies, the relevant authorities tend to rely on ad hoc arrangements that are based on
financial institutions’ own internal systems. In Sweden, Germany and the United
Kingdom, there has been a strong reliance on individual bank management information for
the systemic banks. For the purposes of off-site supervision, DNB also makes substantial use
of banks’ internal management reports.
112.
Given the differences that exist between the banks’ internal management
reporting systems, inconsistencies exist in the manner in which the data is collected and
reported. This has implications for the building of supervisory tools such as Early Warning
Systems (EWS) and stress tests, as it makes it difficult to conduct comparative or aggregate
analysis. The FSAPs clearly demonstrated a need to enhance existing regulatory reporting
frameworks and implement more standardized, comprehensive approaches that ensure timely
reporting or all material risks and developments on a sufficiently granular basis. However,
they also highlighted that domestic authorities are already undertaking initiatives aimed at
overhauling existing frameworks (e.g., Germany).
B. Cross Border Supervision
113. The guiding principle of the EU’s existing framework for cross-border
supervision of the banking system is that of home country control. The responsibility for
prudential supervision of a banking group as a whole lies with the “consolidated supervisor,”
in the country where the group has its head office (“home country”). The consolidated
supervisor is required to coordinate and disseminate all relevant or essential information in
going concern and emergency situations.
114. Home country control is also the prudential basis for the “single passport”
system, which grants EU-wide freedom of establishment and operation to any bank

41

This paper does not discuss Pillar 3 issues as it looks only at issues covered in the FSAP discussions.

52
licensed in any Member State.42 When a bank that has received a license operates a branch
in another Member State, prudential responsibility, authority, and accountability for the
branch are all vested in the home country authorities, for all elements of the prudential
framework with the sole exception of liquidity.
115.

The single passport system raises several concerns:



As a consequence of the “single passport,” host supervisors cannot prevent the
establishment of a branch of an EU institution in their country, as the Capital
Requirements Directive (CRD) does not provide them with the authority to make an
independent assessment of the incoming institution’s plans. Instead, host supervisors
are wholly reliant on the assessment by the home supervisor of the “adequacy of the
administrative structure or the financial situation of the credit institution, taking into
account the activities envisaged.” The CRD does not, in other words, provide host
supervisors with formal powers to review and/or challenge the substantive assessment
to be conducted by the home supervisors.43



Moreover, host supervisors have limited supervisory powers vis-à-vis branches,
hampering their ability to take appropriate measures under deteriorating
circumstances.44 Under the CRD, the host supervisor is solely responsible for
liquidity supervision and for the implementation of monetary policies in the context
of the Euro system (as well as the prevention of financial crime and consumer
protection). In contrast, responsibility for supervising the financial soundness and
solvency of a credit institution as a whole (including all of its foreign activities)
resides with the home supervisor.45 This limited role for host supervisors has

42

The EU provisions on the single passport relate to EU Member States, plus the countries that are a member of
the EEA, i.e., Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein. For simplicity’s sake, the analysis focuses on the EU
Member States, but would in principle also apply to afore-mentioned EEA countries.

43

Although the Guidelines for Passport Notifications, issued by CEBS on 27 August 2009
(http://www.eba.europa.eu/getdoc/364b9c1a-c8c4-4e84-8b20-1195707c08f9/CEBS-PassportingGuidelines.aspx) stress that there should be co-operation between the relevant Authorities, leading to “genuine
dialogue” and that Authorities should “provide each other with the fullest mutual assistance” in any matters
falling within the scope of this Guideline, it does not obligate home state supervisors to provide host state
supervisors with any substantive argumentation evidencing their approval of the envisaged branch
establishment. However, the CRD provides for a general cooperation requirement among supervisor with
respect to branches, including on information sharing.
44

As also highlighted in the developments with regard to Icesave, as discussed in Box 3.

45

The CRD explicitly states that host state supervisors (Article 16) “may not require authorization or
endowment capital for branches of credit institutions authorities in other Member States” and (Article 23)”
“shall provide that the activities listed in Annex 1 [of the CRD] may be carried out within their territories (…)
either by the establishment of a branch of by way of the provision of services, by any credit institution

(continued)

53
important implications for countries whose banking systems have a large foreign
presence—for example, Luxembourg—as their supervisors are heavily dependent on
supervision conducted by the home countries.46 The developments with regard to
Icesave during the course of 2008 provide ample illustration of the need for changes
in this area (Netherlands).


In several instances, host supervisors have not strictly enforced the limited
supervisory powers they have. Host supervisors47 have granted “concessions”48 to
cross border banking groups located within the EU, lifting solo liquidity
requirements. Moreover, host supervisors have placed undue reliance upon home
supervisors in ways that have compromised their ability to take effective and timely
(if necessary, preemptive) action vis-à-vis branches.

116. The importance of branches in some EU countries has emphasized the need for
closer cooperation between the host and the home country supervisor. Moreover,
operational differences between subsidiaries and branches are waning ( Luxembourg), as
increasingly important functions of banks such as liquidity and risk management as well as
technical systems are centralized at the group level, which makes it hard to disentangle assets
and liabilities of the various entities, also characterized by a high level of intra-group
exposure.
117. While EU directives49 impose mandatory rules for cooperation, coordination,
and information exchange for supervisory purposes, the FSAPs have highlighted
problems in this regard. In some instances, information sharing was inadequate (United
Kingdom), and in others the supervisor appears to have relied to a large extent on the
supervision exercised by the host supervisor (Netherlands).

authorized and supervised by the competent authorities of another Member State, provides that such activities
are covered by the authorization.”
46

For instance, in the event of breaches of domestic legislation, host authorities can only intervene by asking
the home supervisor to take measures aimed at correcting the irregular situation.

47

Three supervisory authorities (Germany, Netherlands and United Kingdom) have granted liquidity
concessions to third country branches.

48

Liquidity concessions were used to hand off responsibilities to the home supervisors (Germany, United
Kingdom, the Netherlands as well as two other EU countries). They imply waiving quantitative requirements
with respect to liquidity, in return home supervisors assume certain reporting obligations to the host supervisor.
This “cooperation” involved the home supervisory authority carrying out liquidity supervision on a centralized
basis for the whole group, including branches in other EU Member States.

49

CRD, Articles 129 and 132.

54
118. Recent enhancements to the EU legislative framework on the home-host
cooperation are a positive step forward in helping to address issues identified in the
FSAPs. The European Union has enhanced supervisory co-operation through mandatory
Colleges of Supervisors. Since the CRD II amendment,50 branches can be designated as
‘significant’, mandating the establishment of a College of Supervisors—if such a forum does
not already exist—in which the relevant host state supervisor of such a branch will
participate.Through such a College, the supervisory authorities will, inter alia, exchange
information, determine supervisory programs on the basis of a risk assessment and trying to
come to joint decisions on Pillar 2 additional capital. The establishment of Colleges of
Supervisors has enhanced the effectiveness of cross-border supervision in several ways. The
Colleges meet (at least) twice per year and provide a useful forum to coordinate supervisory
activities and exchange information; moreover, the Colleges are beginning to serve as a
forum for joint decision-making.51
119. At the same time, the operational framework for the Colleges could be
strengthened. While the legal framework for information sharing within the supervisory
perimeter within the EU is well established, the exchange of information can be sluggish in
practice. The CRD explicitly permits and, in some cases, requires information sharing for
specified purposes between the supervisory authorities of Member States, even if memoranda
of understanding are not in place.52 In practice, however, College participants do not share
information proactively and have been slow to reach agreements on the sharing of
information for particular purposes. Moreover, the CRD, as amended, allows the
participation of third countries’ supervisory authorities in Colleges of supervisors, but only if
they are subject to confidentiality requirements that are equivalent to the relevant CRD
requirements. In practice, some key third countries are still missing at EU Colleges.
120. The effectiveness of the colleges of supervisors would be substantially enhanced
through the implementation of several key measures. These include greater emphasis on
peer reviews, and on onsite as well as offsite supervision. According to the Peer Review on
the Functioning of Supervisory Colleges, conducted by CEBS in 2010,53 important next steps

50

Directive 2009/111/EC, published on 16 September 2009. http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:302:0097:0119:EN:PDF.
51

This is the case even though full implementation of EBA's Guidelines for the joint assessment and joint
decision regarding the capital adequacy of cross-border groups51 is only expected as of the end of March 2011.

52

Certain concerns are persisting as to possible impediments which may prevent a national authority to provide
firm-specific information that is not relevant for direct supervisory purposes, but for other goals such as
systemic risk assessment.

53

http://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/Review-Panel/Peer-Review-Report-on-the-functioning-ofcolleges.aspx, issued on October 18, 2010. For details, see Table 2.

55
Table 2. Main Observations of EBA’s Supervisory Colleges Peer Review 2010
Information exchange
Practical modalities of information
exchange
Scope of information exchange

Means of information exchange
Risk assessment
Risk assessment process

Risk expert groups

Planning and coordination
Common supervisory planning
Joint inspections

Findings of inspections and follow-up

Information exchange should be a continuous process,
supplementing current bilateral contacts
Colleges have often not reached agreement on the type of
information that is deemed to be essential (and thus must be
shared pro-actively) and is relevant (i.e., is available upon
request)
Information exchange would benefit from secure web
platforms and quarterly reports
Not every College has instituted a “structured, two-way risk
assessment process;” moreover, risk assessments would benefit
from discussions with the group’s top management and the
development of common ‘scoring scales’
Risk expert groups consisting of experts from all College
members can provide useful input to the risk assessment
process
Much progress needs to be achieved to better synchronize
supervisory plans
Joint inspections are deemed to be advantageous but have not
yet been taken up by every College
Findings of inspections and decisions on appropriate follow-up
should be clearly communicated to other College members

to strengthen the role of the Colleges will be (i) to extend and deepen cross-border
cooperation, inter alia through more joint activities, (ii) to extend the perimeter of the
Colleges by expanding the membership toward (additional) non-EU countries; and (iii) to
establish efficient and secure channels for information sharing, ensuring a swift information
delivery on a ‘real time’ basis.
IV. ISSUES RELATED TO CRISIS MANAGEMENT AND BANK RESOLUTION
A. Recognizing the Role of the Ministry of Finance
121. The FSAPs point to the need to explicitly recognize and support the central role
of the MoF in crisis management frameworks. In particular, three areas could be
improved.


Flow of Information from Agencies to the MoF—While MoFs should not ordinarily
have access to confidential supervisory information concerning individual financial

56
Box 3. Icesave
From the perspective of home-host cooperation within Europe, the Icesave case is interesting for two reasons.
First of all, it highlights the importance of effective cooperation and information-sharing. Secondly, the case
highlights the importance of full and timely information-sharing between relevant authorities, as this would
typically be a prerequisite for effective intervention at an early stage, thus preventing the occurrence of bigger
and more costly problems at a later stage. Icesave was an online savings account brand owned and operated by
Landsbanki from 2006–2008. It operated in two countries - the United Kingdom (since October 2006) and the
Netherlands (since May 2008).
Landsbanki was placed into receivership by the Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) on
October 7, 2008, following numerous comments in the international media on weaknesses in the Icelandic
banking system and a subsequent deposit run in its U.K. operations. At the time, a press release from the FME
stated that all of Landsbanki's Icelandic branches, call centers, ATMs and internet operations would be open for
business as usual, and that all “domestic deposits” were fully guaranteed; the press release did not refer to
deposits abroad. Shortly after issuance of the press release, on October 9, 2008, the Icelandic assets and
liabilities of Landsbanki were transferred to a new government-owned bank, Nýi Landsbanki. As Landsbanki
had been acquiring assets in Iceland with foreign loans and deposits, the assets of Nýi Landsbanki exceeded its
liabilities significantly, even after it had made provisions for over half its loans to customers. .
It was immediately after Landsbanki has been placed into receivership by FME that both the U.K. and the
Dutch authorities attempted to ring-fence assets and using their deposit insurance schemes to compensate
depositors up to the insured maximum. In this context, both countries took it upon themselves to compensate
their depositors and subsequently tried to recoup the paid-out amounts from Iceland. Iceland has disputed that it
has a sovereign obligation to repay the United Kingdom and Dutch governments. Since then the three
governments have spent over two years trying to reach an agreement on the Icesave deposit payouts. To date,
the governments involved have not reached agreement on the way forward, with the population of Iceland
voting against two consecutive repayment schemes via two referenda. The Netherlands and the United
Kingdom instituted legal proceedings against Iceland at the Court of Justice of the European Free Trade
Association States. The Court has not taken any decision against Iceland, although the ESA issued a reasoned
opinion in June, finding that Iceland has breached the EU directive on deposit insurance.

institutions in normal times, the MoF does need access to such information when
there is a crisis (e.g., to inform adequate decision making including with regard to
solvency support), albeit under appropriate safeguards. At present, legal frameworks
within the EU (including EU directives) do not sufficiently make provision for such
information sharing. The FSAPs, therefore, recommended that confidentiality rules be
modified accordingly.54

54

Once the legislation has been modified to allow better information flows from the specialized agencies to the
MoF, a MoU between them could further specify the type and timing of information sharing.

57


Budgetary Frameworks for Official Support—MoFs should have the legal authority
to enter swiftly into support transactions with financial institutions (recapitalization,
acquisition of shares, extension of guarantees) and execute those through the transfer
of financial resources. The FSAPs have demonstrated that sufficient provision is
made for the former but not the latter. More specifically, authorities have been forced
to enter into support transactions without necessarily having budgetary authorization
to fund those transactions. Staff has therefore recommended that MoFs benefit from a
standing budgetary authorization to provide official support, albeit with safeguards
(such as adequate resolution frameworks) to mitigate moral hazard.



Role of MoF in Bank Resolution—Given that the effective resolution of ailing banks
is likely to require temporary official financing,55 the decision-making process of
resolution agencies should provide for adequate coordination with the MoF. In
particular with regard to the resolution of large or systemically important financial
institutions, the MoF is likely to be involved in the design of resolution and crisis
containment strategies. Legal frameworks should recognize this reality explicitly, and
establish a clear and effective division of labor between the MoF, the central bank,
and the resolution authorities, subject to appropriate confidentially arrangements.
(Netherlands, Sweden and United Kingdom).
B. Emergency Liquidity Assistance

122. The principles underlying the provision of emergency liquidity assistance (ELA)
to banks are well-established. 56 Such assistance should only be provided to banks that are
illiquid but not insolvent. Moreover, such lending should be provided against high-quality
collateral although, in a crisis, this requirement can be relaxed, and a central bank can accept
any asset of the bank in question, in principle with a haircut to ensure that it is not at financial
risk. In addition, such lending is not traditionally reported to the public at the time, on the
assumption that such reporting would undermine the standing of the bank.
123. In the recent financial crisis, European central banks made extensive use of
emergency liquidity assistance. On 2 October 2008, the European Union announced that
guarantees from the German government, consistent with EC principles on state aid, enabled
Hypo Real Estate Holding AG to “tap additional emergency liquidity lines” from the
Bundesbank. As another example, RBS and HBOS received more than GBP 60 billion in

55

On the role of temporary public financing in orderly resolution see IMF: Resolution of Cross Border bank—
A Proposed Framework for Enhanced Coordination, June 2010, pp 23–25.

56

See Bagehot (1872). ELA is sometimes also referred to Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) funding.

58
emergency loans in the autumn of 2008, repaying the last of these loans in January 2009.57
More recently, reports from the Central Bank of Ireland indicate substantial emergency
liquidity is being provided to Irish banks.
124. In the Euro-Area, under current arrangements, ELA is provided by, and at the
risk of, the National Central Banks (NCBs), and not by the ECB. In the Euro Area, the
NCBs provide monetary policy credits to their local banks pursuant to a policy and legal
framework established by the (Governing Council of the) ECB. Even though the NCBs are
legally the counterparty of the borrowing banks, the risks and revenues from those credits are
pooled within the Eurosystem. The framework for ELA is fundamentally different: such
assistance is provided by individual NCBs and the risks are not pooled within the
Eurosystem. (Losses thus accrue to the NCB and ultimately the Member State’s Treasury.)
NCBs are required to inform the ECB of such operations. In cases involving large amounts of
support above an agreed threshold, the NCB involved has to seek the approval of the ECB, in
order to avoid interfering with the single monetary policy.
125. While the FSAPs found the relevant countries’ frameworks for ELA to be
adequate, they also revealed that the crucial distinction between ECB monetary policy
credit and NCB emergency liquidity assistance is not always well understood by market
participants. This became evident when NCBs (as part of the ESCB) occasionally closed out
local banks from access to monetary policy operations and shifted them toward ELA. In such
cases, market participants did not understand that, given the greater risks associated with
ELA, the haircuts imposed on collateral in this context are generally much higher than they
are for monetary policy credits.
C. Bank Resolution
126. It is generally recognized that a sound bank resolution regime is a key
component of a country’s crisis management framework. Without such a regime in place,
policy-makers will be faced with the difficult choice between letting a financial institution
fail with a potential risk to financial stability or bailing out the institution with taxpayer
money and serious moral hazard consequences. Many countries have therefore enacted
special insolvency frameworks that apply to banks and that differ in several important
respects from the general corporate insolvency regime. These frameworks typically give the
banking authorities the central role in the conduct of insolvency proceedings and often
minimize the involvement of the courts. In addition, sound bank resolution frameworks

57

See the Bank of England’s submission to the Treasury Committee, dated 24 November 2009.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/other/treasurycommittee/financialstability/ela091124.pdf

59
typically include mechanisms to resolve banks under official control as a going concern
(“official administration”) as well as liquidation mechanisms that strike a balance between
financial stability, the protection of depositors, and creditor rights.58 Special resolution tools
(such as “purchase and assumption” transactions and, increasingly, mandatory debt
restructuring) that can be triggered both before and after actual insolvency constitute key
components of the regime.
Official administration
127. The assessed countries’ regimes for going concern resolution under official
control (“official administration”) vary considerably. Some countries (such as the United
Kingdom) have no such framework in place, and rely on mechanisms to resolve an ailing
bank while it is under private control. Other countries (such as the Netherlands and
Luxembourg) have a form of official administration, albeit with some design features that
may impede effective bank resolution. Typical weaknesses include (i) a lack of robust bank
resolution tools such as a mechanism for the authorities to transfers of assets and liabilities of
the failing institution without the consent of the counterparties, and (ii) a requirement that a
full moratorium over bank liabilities be automatically imposed upon the initiation of official
administration even where it may hinder the resolution of the bank as a going concern.
Resolution tools
128. In response to the crisis, progress has been made at the national level to
introduce more effective resolution tools. The recent global financial crisis has exposed
inadequacies in national bank insolvency frameworks, specifically with regard to the
resolution of systemic financial institutions. More specifically, under highly volatile and
uncertain market conditions, lengthy and uncertain court proceedings to wind-down a
distressed bank—mainly owing to the complexity and cross-border nature of a distressed
institution—could undermine market confidence and risk destabilizing the financial system.
The assessed countries have addressed such inadequacies in particular by introducing the
following elements in their frameworks:59


Early Triggers- Several countries have introduced new triggers for the
commencement of insolvency proceedings that allow their authorities to intervene at
an earlier stage of the bank’s difficulties. While the Dutch framework already

58

On the concept of “official administration” see IMF/World Bank, “An Overview of the Legal, Institutional,
and Regulatory Framework for Bank Insolvency,” 2009, pp 26–35, and IMF, “Resolution of Cross Border
Banks—A Proposed Framework for Enhanced Coordination,” June 2010, para 35.

59

As discussed in the EFFE companion paper, the EC is also preparing an EU-wide Directive with the aim to
harmonize resolution tools.

60
included early triggers before the crisis, Germany and the United Kingdom have
recently introduced legislation allowing the resolution authorities to intervene in
banks before actual insolvency. In Luxembourg and Sweden, bank insolvency
frameworks do not establish triggers for early intervention and this issue remains to
be addressed.


Purchase and Assumption Transactions—Germany and the United Kingdom have
recently introduced legislation for purchase and assumption (P&A) transactions.
Under these mechanisms, the authorities are empowered to restructure ailing banks by
transferring assets and liabilities to another institution without the consent of the
relevant counterparties, thus preserving their going-concern value. The Netherlands
already had a framework for P&As while Luxembourg and Sweden still have no such
framework.



Bridge Banks—Post crisis, Germany and the United Kingdom have enacted rules
underpinning the use of “bridge banks” under which the viable parts of a troubled
bank’s business is spun off to a publicly-held bridge institution on a temporary basis,
pending transfer to a private sector purchaser. The Netherlands is considering
legislation in the same direction. Luxembourg and Sweden have no framework for
bridge banks.



Mandatory Debt Restructuring—Germany is the only of the assessed countries
which has already enacted a bank-specific framework for mandatory debt
restructuring of banks – that is, under which the authorities may unilaterally
restructure the balance sheet of a troubled bank without the consent of the
counterparties.

Administrative versus judicial resolution procedures
129. The FSAPs present compelling arguments for strengthening the balance between
judicial review and the effectiveness of resolution procedures. In many assessed countries
(Germany, Netherlands, and Sweden), the judiciary plays a prominent role in bank
resolution. While this is understandable in light of the legal traditions of those countries,
there is a tension between the protection of stakeholder interests through judicial involvement
and the need for speed of those resolution proceedings. To achieve a better balance between
the various public policy objectives, the FSAPs have recommended strengthening the
administrative nature of bank resolution proceedings by shifting decision-making power to
bank resolution agencies wherever possible, while enhancing the ex post review powers of
the judiciary so as to ensure that stakeholder rights are protected and that the resolution
authorities act consistently with the legal framework.

61
D. Institutional Set-Up of Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGSs)
130. Another lesson from the FSAPs is that their governance structures may
undermine the ability of DGSs to contribute to resolution. The EU’s harmonization of
national DGSs (see below) does not address their governance, and as a consequence, the
governance frameworks of DGSs in EU Member States continue to differ significantly.


In the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, the DGS does not have separate legal
personality and is directly managed and operated by respectively the central bank and
micro-prudential supervisor. Such a structure favors the sharing of confidential
information regarding weak banks and strong coordination between resolution and
deposit insurance.



In Germany and Luxembourg, the DGS is managed by the contributing banks and
accountable to its members but not to the public authorities. Private ownership of the
DGS raises conflict of interest issues and can hinder the sharing of confidential
information and coordination in resolution.

131. The DGSs in many of the assessed countries are not well-equipped to support
effective bank resolution. While deposit insurance is organized at member state level, the
European Union has issued a directive to harmonize to some extent the rules underpinning
the national DGSs.. However, this directive follows the strict “pay-box” approach that has
been implemented by a number of Member States and that suffers from a number of
weaknesses:


No Authorization to Finance Bank Resolution- As “pay box” systems, several of the
assessed DGSs do not have the power to provide financing in support of a resolution
of a troubled bank. They are either inadequately pre-funded or unavailable to finance
the resolution of banks, for example, through “purchase and assumption”
transactions.60 Those DGSs typically also lack regulatory obligations regarding the
availability of information on insured depositors, operational manuals, contractual
frameworks and due diligence tools to prepare and perfect the necessary transfers
within a rapid timeframe, and are prohibited from establishing “bridge banks”
structures.



Lack of Depositor Preference—Several DGSs do not have a system of deposit
preference in place. Consequently, the DGS ranks as an unsecured creditor of the

60

To avoid moral hazard, such power should be well circumscribed: the DGS should only provide financial
support up to the amount of insured deposits, and under the condition that the transferor bank is subsequently
put into liquidation (thus avoiding open bank assistance inappropriately benefitting to the pre-insolvency
stakeholders).

62
insolvent estate. Depositor preference would strengthen the ability of the DGS to
recover its claim by preference over the ordinary unsecured creditors, thus reducing
potential costs to the taxpayer.
E. Inter-Agency Coordination for Crisis Management and Bank Resolution
132. Another finding of the FSAPs is that, while inter-agency MoUs may be useful in
the context of crisis management, their effectiveness in facilitating a quick crisis
response varied among countries. All of the assessed countries have domestic interagency
MoUs, which in several instances contributed to an appropriate policy response. For instance,
in the Netherlands, the actions of the authorities have been buttressed by a well-designed
MoU between the MoF and the central bank that provides guidance on how the central bank
will provide emergency liquidity assistance. In some countries, the FSAPs have identified a
need to expand the coverage of MoUs, in particular where the supervisory and resolution
authorities are separate agencies (such as Germany); an additional concern arises as to the
coordination between those two agencies in resolving banks. This being said, the U.K.
experience has illustrated the inherent limitations of MoUs: while the Tripartite MoU was
relatively well designed in function of the respective responsibilities of the relevant agencies
(including MoF), the crisis response was hampered by inter-agency coordination problems.
133. The limitations of MoUs should ideally be addressed by legislative reforms. In
addition to fine-tuning the individual mandates of the respective agencies, there is room for
enshrining explicit legal coordination duties and mechanisms in legislation (as is, for
instance, the case in Luxembourg). One type of crisis management coordination mechanism
could consist of a multiparty inter-agency committee in which MoF and various agencies are
represented. The design of such a committee should be well aligned with the institutional
arrangements for macro-prudential oversight. While there are some similarities between the
two, there are also significant differences. For instance, the deposit insurance fund might not
necessarily be involved in macro-prudential oversight, but should be a key member of crisis
management committees.
F. Cross-Border Resolution
134. In addition to progressing with international and EU reforms, the FSAPs
suggested that steps should be taken at the national levels to reinforce coordination
between national authorities and foreign authorities regarding cross-border bank
resolution. Resolution within the EU is dealt with by EU directives, which are broadly
appropriate, albeit with some room for improvement (mainly regarding intra-group
coordination). In contrast, with regard to coordination with non-EU Member States, the
assessed countries would benefit from taking more forceful action authorizing their
resolution authorities to coordinate action with foreign authorities. Such reforms likely will
have to be combined with parallel strengthening of cross-border supervisory arrangements,

63
and are likely to require some minimum harmonization and burden sharing to be fully
effective.61
V. CONCLUSIONS
135. The FSAPs indicate a trend that MoFs are likely to have a more prominent role
in financial crisis prevention and management that is likely to have an impact on the
autonomy of central banks and prudential supervisors. While increased oversight of
autonomous agencies of the State is appropriate, the operational autonomy of these agencies
should nevertheless be safeguarded. While there is no simple solution here, the operational
autonomy of supervisory agencies is essential and should remain in the forefront of any
institutional reform. Moreover, there is a need for strong coordination mechanisms among
those agencies as well as between the agencies and the Government.
136. There is a clear tendency in the assessed countries to strengthen the financial
stability mandates of central banks, but those mandates should be carefully designed. In
this context, greater precision should be given to the design of a well integrated set of central
bank objectives, functions and instruments. Especially, those central banks that are also
micro-prudential supervisors will have to calibrate a delicate balance between their monetary
stability and their financial stability mandates.
137. The FSAPs demonstrated a need to enhance existing regulatory reporting
frameworks by implementing more standardized and comprehensive approaches. The
FSAPs reveal weaknesses in the gathering of supervisory information obtained via formal
regulatory reporting and too much dependency on the internal reporting systems of financial
institutions. Remaining legal impediments that hinder an efficient exchange of information
between the supervisory agencies to fulfill their tasks should be abolished.
138. The FSAPs indicate that, as a consequence of the EU home country control
principle, the limited supervisory powers of host supervisors vis-à-vis branches of
foreign banks can cause problems. Enhancement of home-host cooperation is under way in
most jurisdictions, for instance through the colleges of supervisors, but such cooperation can
be intensified..
139. The bank resolution frameworks vary considerably among the assessed
countries. Major weaknesses exist in several countries, especially as their frameworks lack
robust resolution tools. Adequate coordination mechanisms with MoFs should be provided in
case temporary official financing is required. Also, coordination mechanisms between courts,
resolution authorities and supervisory agencies can be strengthened by increasing reliance on
61

See IMF, “Resolution of Cross Border Banks—A Proposed Framework for Enhanced Coordination,” June
2010.

64
administrative procedures wherever possible while enhancing the ex-post review powers of
the courts. Some other countries have recently introduced law reform measures to overcome
the identified weaknesses. With regard to cross-border banks the lack of ex ante burden
sharing arrangements within the European Union continues to be an impediment.
140. Many national DGSs still require improvement in a number of important areas.
These include the absence of authorization to finance bank resolution, the lack of ex ante
funding, and the lack of depositor preference, which, taken all together, may make it
cumbersome and time consuming for national DGSs to play an active role in bank resolution
and ensure that tax payer expenses are kept as low as possible.
141. Especially with regard to cross-border financial institutions, some of the
weaknesses are beyond control of the assessed countries. Thus impediments to fully
effective cross-border supervision remain, and the resolution of cross-border banks to date
has been unsatisfactory. Comprehensive solutions are likely to be reached at the EU-level or
beyond.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
EURO AREA POLICIES
Selected Issues
Prepared by Thomas Harjes, Nico Valckx, Thierry Tressel, Esther Perez Ruiz,
Nandaka Molagoda (all EUR), and Erlend Nier (MCM)
Approved by the European Department
July 1, 2011
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The selected issues paper accompanying the staff report discusses corporate funding costs (¶7 of the staff report), the effects
ECB policy measures on individual euro area banks ((¶18 of the staff report), the interplay between national and
supranational macroprudential policy frameworks (¶32 of the staff report), governance issues (Section IV.B and Box 4 of the
staff report), and growth drivers (Section IV.C of the staff report).
Sovereign credit costs are closely correlated with private funding costs (Chapter I). Of a 100 basis point increase in sovereign
spreads about 50–60 basis points are passed on to private firms on average. To avoid setbacks in economic and financial
integration of the euro area, strict fiscal consolidation is needed in countries with high public debt and funding costs.
Moreover, the links between sovereigns and firms located in their jurisdiction will need to be loosened. While there is no
silver bullet to achieve this in practice, EU support schemes for bank restructuring or resolution, harmonization of regulation
and taxation, and a stronger European competition and supervisory authorities should all help.
ECB policy measures significantly affect individual euro area banks’ stock prices and profitability as well as systemic risk
indicators (Chapter II). The performance of weak banks seems negatively affected by rising interest rates, while both strong
and weak banks would benefit from withdrawal of nonstandard measures, with some exceptions. Overall, the results suggest
care should be taken not to adversely affect weak banks and banks in the periphery, and strengthening of capital and funding
should remain high on the agenda.
Strong financial integration and a high degree of cross-border banking activities in Europe imply that the European Systemic
Risk Board (ESRB) needs to play a leading role in the macroprudential oversight for the EU as a whole (Chapter III).
Effective macroprudential oversight also requires strong mandates and appropriate tools at the level of national
macroprudential authorities. The ESRB should ensure that a common macroprudential toolkit is established EU-wide and
play a key role in ensuring reciprocity of macroprudential policies among Member States.
Skeptics stress the fragility of EMU because of the lack of fiscal union, inadequate market flexibility, and low level of labor
mobility (Chapter IV). While a fully-fledged federal system would have helped to limit the damage of the crisis and speed up
its resolution, this is no proof that the euro area is not viable without a federalist fiscal architecture. Nonetheless, a major
overhaul of EMU’s governance is needed to find effective solutions to the deficiencies of its institutional setup.
Total factor productivity (TFP) is the main driver underlying the superior GDP growth in the U.S. compared to Europe since
the mid-1990s, with the U.S. advantage being concentrated in ICT and market services sectors (Chapter V). TFP performance
in these European sectors is hampered by low participation in external trade, strict product market regulation, inadequate
human capital and high corporate taxes, all inhibiting knowledge creation and assimilation. Europe therefore needs to seek
growth by opening up markets to domestic and foreign competition, enhancing human capital and easing corporate taxation.

2
Contents

Page

I.

Financial Integration and Corporate Funding Costs in Europe after the Financial and
Sovereign Debt Crisis ...........................................................................................................4
A. Introduction .....................................................................................................................4
B. Data and Estimation ........................................................................................................6
C. Conclusion.......................................................................................................................9
References ..........................................................................................................................12

II.

ECB Policy Measures and Euro Area Banks ..................................................................14
A. Introduction ...................................................................................................................14
B. Methodology and Data ..................................................................................................16
C. Results ...........................................................................................................................19
D. Conclusions and Policy Implications ............................................................................24
References ..........................................................................................................................31

III.

The European Systemic Risk Board: Effectiveness of Macroprudential Oversight in
Europe ................................................................................................................................33
A. Introduction .................................................................................................................33
B. Institutional Constraints ...............................................................................................34
C. The Need for Effective National Macroprudential Policy Frameworks ......................35
D. The Macroprudential Policy Toolkit ...........................................................................40
E. The Role of the ESRB in a Financially Integrated EU ................................................45
F. Conclusion....................................................................................................................48
References .........................................................................................................................49

IV.

Strengthening Governance in the Euro Area .....................................................................50
A. Introduction ...................................................................................................................50
B. Economic Systems in the EU and the U.S.: A Brief Comparison ................................51
C. Bolstering Economic Integration in the Euro Area .......................................................52
D. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................57
References ..........................................................................................................................61

V.

Raising Potential Growth in Europe: Mind the Residual ..................................................62
A. Introduction ...................................................................................................................62
B. TFP Growth in Europe and the United States ...............................................................62
C. Empirical Specification and Data Description ..............................................................63
D. Results ...........................................................................................................................66
E. Can Policies Help? ........................................................................................................68
F. Conclusion .....................................................................................................................69
References ..........................................................................................................................79

3
Tables
Table I.1. Panel Estimates of the Effects of Sovereign CDS and Stock Price Developments on
Country Effects ........................................................................................................................8
Table II.1. Contribution of ECB Policy Measures in Systemic Risk VAR ...................................26
Table II.2. Panel Regression Estimates of Banks’ ROA and Marginal Effects of ECB Policy
Measures ................................................................................................................................27
Table II.1A: Set of ECB Policy Measures .....................................................................................28
Table II.2A. Banks in the Sample for the Event Study and Panel Regression ..............................29
Table III.2A. Macroprudential Instruments Selected by European Countries (Part I) ..................43
Table III.2B. Macroprudential Instruments Selected by European Countries (Part II) .................43
Table IV.1. Main Changes to the Stability and Growth Pact following the 2011 .........................58
Table IV.2. Main Changes to the Stability and Growth Pact following the 2011 Reform—
Corrective Arm ......................................................................................................................59
Table V.1. Contribution to Growth of Real Output in the Market Economy, EU Economies and
the U.S., 1995–07...................................................................................................................70
Table V.2. Major Sector Contribution to TFP Growth in the Market Economy, 1995–07 ...........71
Table V.3. Industry Coverage ........................................................................................................72
Table V.4. TFP Growth Determiants: EU13 and the U.S. (1980–07), ICT Industries and Market
Services ..................................................................................................................................72
Table V.5. Change in TFP Growth from a 1 Standard Deviation Increase in Model Variables ...73
Figures
Figure I.1. Monthly 5-year Sovereign CDS Premia of Selected Euro Area Countries .................10
Figure I.2. Monthly 5-year CDS Premia of Large Banks in Selected Euro Area Countries .........10
Figure I.3. Monthly 5-year CDS Premia of Telecom Firms in Selected Euro Area Countries .....11
Figure I.4. Estimated Country Effects for Selected Euro Area Countries .....................................11
Figure II.1. Euro Area Listed Banks: Abnormal and Cumulative Abnormal Returns ..................30
Figure IV.1. EU and the U.S.: Fiscal Centralization and Redistribution.......................................60
Figure V.1. EU13 TFP Growth Differential with the U.S. ............................................................74
Figure V.2. Technological Leaders in 2007: Selected Services Sectors .......................................75
Figure V.3. EU13 and the U.S.: TFP Growth Fundamentals ........................................................76
Figure V.4. EU12 and the U.S.: Impact of Regulations Network Industries, Distribution and
Business Services ..........................................................................................................77
Figure V.5. Reform Impact on Annual Aggregate TFP Growth ...................................................78
Figure V.6. Reform Impact on Sectoral TFP Growth ....................................................................78
Boxes
Box 1: Institutional Models ...........................................................................................................39
Appendixes
Appendix I. Data ............................................................................................................................13

4
I.

FINANCIAL INTEGRATION AND CORPORATE FUNDING COSTS IN EUROPE AFTER THE
FINANCIAL AND SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISIS1
A.

Introduction

1.
The global financial crisis and the ensuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe have had
a marked impact on financial integration and debt funding costs in Europe. The blow-out in
credit spreads for the sovereign debt of several euro area member states came unexpected and
sharply reversed a long period of convergence. Before the financial crisis, the euro area bond
market was one of the most integrated financial market segments (ECB, 2009). Following the
introduction of the euro, debt funding costs fell sharply for many member states to the much
lower German level and differences in government bond yields never exceeded 50 basis points
until August 2007. Not only the public sector benefited from the common currency but banks
and other firms also saw a marked decline in debt costs. Once corrected for corporate- and
sector-specific risk, the geographic location of a firm explained only a very small portion of the
variance of corporate bond yields, typically no more than 2 percent (ECB, 2004).
2.
Markets changed course after the onset of the financial crisis and a jump in global
risk aversion. Some sovereigns benefited from a flight to safety, while others and risky
corporate debt saw their spreads rise sharply. Initially, the common currency shielded euro area
member states from liquidity shortages and sudden stops in debt flows. With augmented access
to the ECB and swap lines agreed between the ECB and the U.S. Federal Reserve, banks could
receive unlimited euro and dollar liquidity against a broad range of collateral, including of
course, euro area government paper. However, when public debt dynamics deteriorated sharply
and sustainability concerns arose, membership of a currency union turned into a double-edged
sword for some. Lacking control over the currency in which their debt is issued, members with a
surge in public debt suddenly appeared fiscally fragile (De Grauwe, 2011). Mody (2009)
identifies the rescue of Bear Stearns in March 2008 as the turning point after which euro area
countries became increasingly differentiated. Thereafter, sovereign spreads tended to rise when
the prospects of the domestic financial sector worsened which was especially evident in Ireland.
Following the failure of Lehman Brothers in October 2008, spreads also rose faster for countries
with high ratios of public debt-to-GDP (Sgherri and Zoli, 2009), and blew out after the dismal
Greek fiscal position was fully revealed.
3.
The surge in credit spreads was not limited to sovereign debt markets. Pronounced
global risk aversion also pushed the spread for riskier corporate debt to record levels. However,
this spike was short lived and the pricing of average corporate risk has eased significantly over
the past years. In contrast, sovereign spreads for several euro area member states continued to
rise in 2010 and are close to their highest levels since introduction of the euro (Figure I.1). These
1

Prepared by Thomas Harjes

5
developments were mirrored by private funding costs in those member states as sovereign
spreads are often perceived as the benchmark for the pricing of other debt instruments (ECB,
2011).
4.
This note sets out to explore the recent relationship between sovereign and private
funding costs in the euro area which have displayed a strong correlation over the past year
in several member states. The link between sovereign spreads and private funding costs is
complex and causality can run in both directions. Moreover, both may at times reflect changes in
overall economic conditions or a country’s outlook causing a spurious relationship between
public and private funding costs. Generally, differences in individual euro area sovereign debt
spreads reflect default and liquidity risk given the absence of currency risk. The liquidity
premium for smaller member states has likely increased somewhat but the sharp differences in
the price of public debt for Austria and Finland, on the one hand, and Greece, Ireland and
Portugal, on the other hand suggest that perceived default risk accounts for the bulk of these
countries’ debt spreads. There are several channels through which their high sovereign funding
costs may affect private borrowing costs, and vice versa:


A country with significantly higher sovereign funding costs may have to reduce its deficit
sharply and would be expected to take fiscal consolidation measures, possibly including
higher corporate taxes (Papademos, 2010). This would lower firms’ net profits, worsen
their credit risk assessment and drive up their credit risk premia.



Strict fiscal austerity may have a negative short-term impact on economic growth and
weigh on firms’ profits as well, driving up credit risk premia.



In the extreme event of a disorderly sovereign default, a country’s foreign debt financing
often dries up completely at least for some time and, especially for exporters, effective
tax rates can rise sharply as the government seeks to raise revenue in foreign exchange.



Large systemically important firms including banks are likely to receive some state
support if a crisis hits, establishing a direct link from sovereign to private funding costs.



At the same time, the financial health of private firms may have implications for public
funding costs if these firms are considered systemically important for the country’s
economy, or the European financial system. The Irish case is a prominent example where
private banks’ default risk spread to its sovereign after debt liabilities were first
guaranteed and later transferred to the government.

6
B.

Data and Estimation

5.
The estimation first separates country effects in corporate CDS premia from sectorspecific and individual credit risk. A second step relates these estimated country effects to
changes in sovereign CDS premia and a country’s economic outlook, measured by the national
stock index. Using monthly data comprising CDS for about 200 euro area firms, their credit
ratings and industry classification, sovereign CDS and national stock market indexes, the
following section presents evidence that there is a positive and significant link between
sovereign and private funding costs.
Data description
6.
The sample includes monthly data of CDS for about 200 euro area firms, their
credit ratings and industry classification, sovereign CDS and national stock market indexes
of 11 euro area countries starting in 2008.2 Differences in funding costs are measured by
5-year CDS for senior debt denominated in euro. While CDS premia and funding spreads should
theoretically move in parallel, Fontana (2010) and Fontana and Scheicher (2010) show that CDS
premia for sovereign and corporate debt have deviated at times from debt spreads, defined as
debt yield minus a benchmark rate, since the onset of the financial crisis. But the difference
rarely exceeded 100 basis points. Most euro area firms issue debt infrequently and at different
maturities. The use of 5-year CDS simplifies the analysis and does not require correcting for
differences in term structure across corporate debt. The credit rating is the lower of either
Moody’s or S&P’s rating if available and adjusted over time. Industry classification includes the
following sectoral classification: banking, non-bank financials, manufacturing, energy, transport
and telecommunications. Figures I.2 and I.3 present CDS premia for a selection of euro area
banks and telecoms. Greek, Irish, and Portuguese firms clearly stand out with Spain marking the
border between low and high premia. CDS premia for telecoms are markedly lower than the ones
for sovereign and bank CDS premia proving that the sovereign does not necessarily set a lower
bound for private credit costs.
Estimation of country effects
7.
To explore the link between private and public borrowing costs, the estimation
proceeds in two steps. First is the decomposition of the variation in corporate CDS premia into
sector-, credit-, and country-specific effects. Second is the estimation of a relationship between
these country-specific factors and sovereign CDS premia. Following broadly the methodology of
Baele and others (2004), based on the Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) approach for equity
returns, corporate default spreads are modeled to consist of five components: a common factor
2

Data source is Datastream, detailed information is provided in the Data Appendix. The countries include Austria,
Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain.

7
(α), a credit risk factor (β), an industry, or sector-specific factor (γ), a country factor (δ), and a
firm-specific disturbance (ε).
CDS it   t   it   it   it   it

(1)

A time series for common, credit, industry and country factors is estimated by running the
following cross-sectional regression each month:
CDS i     Jj 1 j I ijCredit   kK1 k I ikIndustry   lL1 i I lCountry   i

(2)

where (I) is a dummy variable that is one if the firm with CDSi has credit rating (j), belongs to
industry (k), or country (l). Since each firm belongs to at least one country, credit rating and
industry, the estimation can only reveal cross-sectional differences between countries, industries
and credit ratings and the following parameter restrictions are imposed:



J
j 1

 j  0;  kK1 k  0;  iI0 i  0

(3)

8.
Credit rating and country effects may not be fully independent. Sovereign credit
worries often lead to across-the-board downgrading of the credit ratings of that country’s firms
and especially banks. They may even spill over from one member state to others that are
perceived to display similar characteristics (see, Arezki and others 2011). Therefore, it is
possible that the above equation may feature a bias and likely underestimate country effects to
some extent. Figure I.4 presents the evolution of country effects since early 2008.3 The variation
in country effects has risen markedly since early 2008, especially for countries in the periphery:
Greece, Ireland and Portugal stand out with Spain being the borderline case. Also, the statistical
significance of country effects rises over time. Other than for banks, sector-specific effects are
not significant and, as a result, sectoral differentiation is reduced to banks and non-banks with
the former, as expected, featuring higher CDS premia. The credit rating factors (3 for investment
grade credit and 1 for speculative/non-investment credit) are mostly significant and the factor for
speculative credit nicely tracks the credit spread between average 5-year BBB euro corporate
yields (IBOXX) and German Bunds.

3

Country effects are displayed for the final month in each quarter and as differences to the lowest country effect
estimated each month rather than as deviations from average.

8
Estimation of the relationship between sovereign and corporate CDS
9.
Country effects may reflect sovereign worries. They could also signal changes in a
country’s economic outlook measured by changes in national stock market indexes, as discussed
above, although most firms in the sample (with actively traded CDS) are relatively large and
their operations internationally diversified. In a panel regression, the time series of country
factors (δ) is regressed on sovereign CDS premia (x) and national stock market indexes (y) with
various specifications of fixed/random cross-section and time effects.

 lt   xlt  ylt   l  wt   lt

(4)

10.
For various specifications (with/without fixed and random cross-section/time
effects), estimation of (4) reveals a significant and positive relationship between sovereign
CDS premia and the country effects that were estimated in the previous section. Of a
100-basis point increase in sovereign spreads about 50–60 basis points are passed on to private
firms (Table 1), noting that causality may not always work in only one direction. At the same
time, the relationship between changes in national stock market indexes and country effects is
small and not significant for most specifications. Sovereign CDS premia and national stock
market indexes may not be fully independent but regressed on each other do not exhibit any
significant relationship over the sample. To learn more about possible causality, correlations and
Granger causality is explored at the country level for sovereign CDS premia and country effects.
Contemporaneous correlation (no lags) dominates and Granger causality tests are largely
inconclusive.
Table I.1. Panel Estimates of the Effects of Sovereign CDS and Stock Price
Developments on Country Effects
(1)
(2)
Fixed effects Fixed effects
Cross-country
Time

(3)
Fixed effects
Cross-country+Time

(4)
(5)
Random effects Random effects
Cross-country
Time

(6)
Random effects
Cross-country+Time

Variables
Sovereign CDS

0.512***
(0.034)

0.523***
(0.047)

0.581***
(0.054)

0.529***
(0.035)

0.537***
(0.037)

0.537***
(0.037)

Stock Index (level)

0.000
(0.002)

1.306**
(0.601)

-0.567
(0.916)

-0.244
(0.325)

0.265
(0.353)

-0.266
(0.362)

27.630**
(19.134)

125.600**
(48.717)

-19.630
(72.252)

10.691
(29556)

47.180
(29.311)

8.347
(32.38)

0.82
0.00

0.72
0.00

0.84
0.00

0.66
0.00

0.69
0.00

0.66
0.00

Constant

R-squared
Prob(F-Statistic)

Source: Staff estimates. Sample (total pool) contains 142 monthly observations from 2008Q1-2011Q1 for the following countries:
Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain.
Stock index remains insignificant if included as first differences instead of levels; ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.

9
C.

Conclusion

11.
The reemergence of perceived credit default risk for euro area sovereigns is a key
legacy of the global financial crisis. This note has provided some evidence that the associated
premia embedded in sovereign credit costs are closely correlated with private funding costs and
likely in large part passed on to the firms located in these countries. This is the case not only for
banks but also for other non-financial firms, including telecoms, utilities, and others.
12.
First and foremost, strict fiscal consolidation is needed in countries with high public
debt and funding costs. If sustained, however, significant differences in the cost of private
capital across countries reflecting sovereign concerns should complicate monetary policy and
may trigger a relocation of capital intensive activities to low risk/cost destinations. Large banks
and other firms that rely on external debt financing may await a similar process of consolidation
across Europe that national airlines experienced over the past decade, although for different
reasons. However, member states may resist such developments which could trigger
protectionism and fragmentation of markets with highly adverse economic consequences.
13.
To avoid such setbacks in economic and financial integration of Europe’s economy
the links between sovereigns and firms located in their jurisdiction will need to be loosened.
How this could be achieved in practice is open to debate but further European integration along
the following lines should help in breaking the financial links between firms and their national
sovereigns and eliminate possible channels through which costs associated with sovereign
default risk could affect private funding costs and vice versa:


European instead of national support schemes for bank restructuring or resolution support
should decouple banks from their national sovereign and significantly reduce differences
in banks’ debt costs across Europe. Moreover, they could internalize the negative
external effects of ailing banks on the entire euro area financial sector and facilitate
resolution of cross-border institutions and cross-border M&As.



Harmonizing regulation and taxation and working towards the introduction of a common
corporate tax for large firms would help. This would eliminate the threat of large
effective corporate tax increases in a country where the sovereign is under financial
pressures, or even may default on its debt obligations.



A strong role for European competition and supervisory authorities should accompany
restructuring and any cross-border consolidation of banks and other firms that may occur
to safeguard competition and financial stability.

10
Figure I.1. Monthly 5-year Sovereign CDS Premia of Selected Euro Area Countries
1200

1200

Austria
Belgium
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain

1000

800

600

1000

800

600

400

400

200

200

0

0
Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

Dec-08

Mar-09

Jun-09

Sep-09

Dec-09

Mar-10

Jun-10

Sep-10

Dec-10

Mar-11

Source: DataStream

Figure I.2. Monthly 5-year CDS Premia of Large Banks in Selected Euro Area Countries
1600

1600
RAIF ZNTRLBK
KBC BANK
BNP PARIBAS
DEUTSCHE BANK
ALPHA BANK
ALLIED IRISH BKS
UNICREDITO ITALIANO
ING GROEP
BANCO ESPIRITO SANTO
BBV ARGENTARIA

1400

1200

1000

1400

1200

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0
Mar-08

Jun-08

Source: DataStream

Sep-08

Dec-08

Mar-09

Jun-09

Sep-09

Dec-09

Mar-10

Jun-10

Sep-10

Dec-10

Mar-11

11
Figure I.3. Monthly 5-year CDS Premia of Telecom Firms in Selected Euro Area Countries
450

450
TELEKOM AUSTRIA

400

400

FRANCE TELECOM
350

350

DEUTSCHE TELEKOM
HELLENIC TELECOM

300

300

PT TELECOM
TELEFONICA

250

250

200

200

150

150

100

100

50

50

0

0
Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

Dec-08

Mar-09

Jun-09

Sep-09

Dec-09

Mar-10

Jun-10

Sep-10

Dec-10

Mar-11

Source: DataStream

Figure I.4. Estimated Country Effects for Selected Euro Area Countries
700

700

600

500

Austria

Belgium

Spain

Finland

France

Germany

Greece

Ireland

Italy

Netherlands

Portugal

600

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0
Mar-08

Jun-08

Sep-08

Source: Staff estimates.

Dec-08

Mar-09

Jun-09

Sep-09

Dec-09

Mar-10

Jun-10

Sep-10

Dec-10

Mar-11

12
References
Arezki, R., Candelon, B. and A. Sy, 2011, “Sovereign Rating News and Financial Markets
Spillovers: Evidence from the European Debt Crisis,” IMF Working Paper No. 11/68
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Baele, L., Ferrando, and others, 2004, “Measuring Financial Integration in the Euro Area,” ECB
Occasional Paper No. 14 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank).
European Central Bank (Various Issues), Financial Integration in Europe (Frankfurt: European
Central Bank).
De Grauwe, P., 2011, “The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone Manuscript,” (Leuven: University
of Leuven and CEPS).
Heston and Rouwenhorst, 1994, “Does Industrial Structure Explain the Benefits of International
Diversification?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 36, pp. 3–27.
Mody, A., 2009, “From Bear Stearns to Anglo Irish: How Eurozone Sovereign Spreads Related
to Financial Sector Vulnerability,” IMF Working Paper No. 09/108 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
Papdemos, L., 2010, “Financial Integration, Development and Stability: Lessons from the
Crisis,” Speech delivered at the conference “Financial Integration and Stability: the
Legacy of the Crisis,” Frankfurt.
Sgherri, S. and E. Zoli, 2009, “Euro Area Sovereign Risk During the Crisis,” IMF Working
Paper No. 09/222 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

13
APPENDIX I. DATA
The sample includes 5-year CDS data of all firms located Austria, Belgium, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain available from Datastream or
Bloomberg. For the smaller countries the sample size is relatively small and for all countries
individual CDS are excluded if they trade above 1500 basis points. Moreover, CDS that do not
show any trading activity within a month (featuring constant CDS premia) are excluded as well.
The credit rating factors are defined as follows:
Credit _Factor1
Credit _Factor2
Credit _Factor3
Credit _Factor4
Credit _Factor5

= 1 for Aaa-Aa3 (Moody’s) and AAA-A+( S&P)
= 1 for A-A3 (Moody’s) and A-BBB+( S&P)
= 1 for Baa-Baa3 (Moody’s) and BBB-BB+( S&P)
= 1 for all lower ratings
= 1 no rating available

14
II.

ECB POLICY MEASURES AND EURO AREA BANKS4
A.

Introduction

14.
Since the start of the current financial crisis in mid-2007, governments and central
banks across advanced countries have implemented multiple standard and nonstandard
measures to safeguard their financial systems. In the initial phase of the crisis, risks were
confined to U.S. subprime asset, banks’ exposures, and funding profiles. In order to offset
increased liquidity, counterparty, and credit risks, central banks started lowering interest rates
(i.e., standard policy measures), but also introduced a number of nonstandard policy measures,
such as broader access to liquidity (credit easing) and temporary FX swap lines. Following the
failure of Lehman in September 2008, governments in advanced countries injected capital in
banks, guaranteed liabilities and purchased/guaranteed impaired assets, in order to avoid
widespread bank defaults. At the same time, central banks beefed up lender of last resort
operations and started quantitative easing (IMF 2009a). In the euro area, the ECB reacted with a
series of interest rate reductions, the expansion of liquidity provision to banks at longer
maturities and under fixed rate full allotment (FRFA), expanded the collateral framework and set
up a covered bond purchase program (CBPP) for 60 billion euros.
15.
The intensification of the financial crisis in the euro area in 2010 forced European
authorities to take additional measures. In late 2009, concerns started to emerge about a
number of euro area governments’ ability to continue to support their banking sector as well as
about the size and sustainability of their debt and deficits. Government bond spreads reached
historic levels in a number of periphery countries and in May 2010, Greece received financial
assistance from other euro area countries and from the IMF. The European Financial Stability
Facility (EFSF) was created to cover the future needs of member states with solvency problems
and was accessed by Ireland in November 2010 and by Portugal in May 2011.
16.
The ECB contributed to the stabilization of the euro area by introducing
additional nonstandard measures. In May–June 2010, it established the securities market
program (SMP) to purchase government bonds in secondary markets, provided additional FRFA
long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) and reactivated USD swap lines with the Federal
Reserve. The ECB’s balance sheet expanded from 1 to 1.8 trillion euros and long-term
refinancing increased from around 20 percent in 2005 to over 90 percent by early 2010. As to the
standard measures, the ECB interest rate was maintained at a 1 percent lower bound between
May 2009 and April 2011. The ECB considered its nonstandard measures necessary for
sustaining financial intermediation in the euro area and maintaining the link between the official
ECB policy rate, money markets and the market for longer-term securities (ECB, 2010).

4

Prepared by Nico Valckx.

15
17.
While previous research examined the effectiveness of crisis-related policy
measures, none examined directly their impact on banks. A number of papers have
previously examined the effects of standalone government rescue measures on bank equity
prices, CDS spreads and other market indicators (see, e.g., IMF (2009b), BIS (2009), King
(2008)). Others analyzed the impact of central bank measures on selected money and capital
markets (see, e.g., Gagnon and others (2010) for the U.S., Joyce and others (2010) for the U.K.,
Beirne and others (2011) for the ECB’s CBPP) and on credit and GDP (Borio and Disyatat
(2009), Gambacorta and Marqués-Ibañez (2011), Peersman (2010), Fahr and others (2010)).
Also related is a whole strand of research on the effects of monetary policy announcements on
bank stock prices and interest rates (see, e.g., Blinder and others (2008)). However, until now, no
studies seem to have specifically analyzed the impact of central bank policies on individual
banks.
18.
This paper aims at examining the effects of ECB policy measures on individual
euro area banks and on systemic risk. A key question is whether ECB policy measures have
affected banks uniformly, or whether their effectiveness depends on banks’ initial condition (for
instance, more strongly affecting weak banks). It is also interesting to know whether the impact
is different for standard (interest rate) versus nonstandard policy measures, and whether the
central bank’s measures helped reduce systemic risk. These findings have relevance for the
discussion of the ECB’s exit strategy, including issues of speed, sequencing, and whether a
special facility for weak banks would be desirable.
19.
The main findings are as follows. The ECB policy measures affect a large number of
banks, as measured by the reaction of bank stock prices to policy announcements on a high
frequency basis. This is also confirmed by analysis of systemic risk indicators, which shows a
significant impact of various nonstandard policy measures, especially for the ECB’s move to
fixed-rate full allotment (FRFA). For the other measures, however, the effects vary with the state
of financial markets, location and the risk indicators at hand. At a quarterly frequency, the
analysis shows a significant impact of standard and nonstandard policy measures on bank
profitability. Here, the impact is shown to differ across banks depending on their strength in
terms of capital, liquidity, funding and loan-deposit mix. Weak banks—defined as those scoring
low on these dimensions—are negatively affected by rising interest rates, while most banks
would benefit from withdrawal of nonstandard measures (except in the periphery, in case of
reduction in liquidity provision), although the latter probably reflects the contemporaneous
nature of the relation between nonstandard measures and banking health. The remainder of the
paper discusses the methodology and data, presents and analyzes the results and ends with some
policy conclusions.

16
B.

Methodology and Data

Methodology
20.
The paper examines the effects of ECB policy measures on banks according to
three complementary approaches. The paper analyzes the effects of ECB measures, defined
below, on: a) individual bank equity prices; b) indicators of systemic bank risk; and c) euro area
banks’ quarterly return on assets (ROA). Choosing for three different approaches helps
overcome model-dependence and allows for assessing the impact of ECB measures both in the
short and longer run, as well as at an individual bank and systemic level.
21.
First, an event study is undertaken on euro area banks’ equity prices. Bank equity
prices are used to determine the short-term impact of various ECB policy measures around
specific event days.5 In line with the traditional event study approach for equities, the capital
asset pricing model (CAPM) is used to obtain estimates of expected returns and to construct
abnormal returns (MacKinlay 1997):

Rit = αi + βi Rt +εit

(1)

where Rit denotes bank i’s daily equity return, εit a bank-specific news factor, Rt the market
return, and α and β are parameters estimated over a pre-specified estimation window. From
equation (1), abnormal returns (AR) are computed as ARit = Rit – (ai + bi Rt) and cumulative
abnormal returns (CAR) around the event as CARi,τ = Στ ARiτ. These (cumulative) abnormal
returns are further aggregated across events to obtain average bank-specific reactions to a set of
policy measures. In addition to this parametric approach, a sign test was used, exploiting the sign
of (cumulative) abnormal returns. Here the assumption is that the expected proportion of positive
abnormal returns under the null hypothesis is 0.5 and CARs have equal probability of being
positive or negative. Results for the latter test are not reported but were qualitatively very similar
to those based on ARs and CARs.
22.
Second, the paper estimates the impact of ECB policy measures on bank systemic
risk indicators. Two types of systemic risk indicators are calculated: the first one is the
normalized score from a principal component decomposition of bank CDS spreads
distinguishing between core and periphery banks (first chart).6 The second one is based on
cumulated bank equity returns (second chart). A vector autoregression (VAR) is run with these
systemic risk indices, using daily data from late 2005 onwards, allowing for possible spillovers
5

Bank stock prices express market-based expectations of future discounted profits, and any news which impacts
market expectations should be reflected instantaneously in prices, according to the efficient market hypothesis
(Fama, 1970).

6

The first principal component of single-name CDSs are among the best indicators of systemic risk, according to
Rodriguez-Moreno and Peña (2011).

17
between core and periphery banking sectors, and between the different proxies for systemic risk.
The EONIA rate is taken as proxy for the ECB standard policy measure. ECB nonstandard
policy measures are introduced as zero-one dummy variables and in the case of the CBPP, FRFA
and for the period with 1-year refinancing, as step variables equaling one during their existence
and zero elsewhere. The VIX, sovereign bond spreads and money market spreads are used as
exogenous variables in the VAR to control for broad changes in risk perception. Alternatively, a
variant with refinancing volumes, SMP purchases and CBPP purchases as quantity variables is
estimated.
Euro Area Banking Risk Indices: 2007-2011
CDS and Equity Market-Based Risk Measures
4

4

Euro Area Banking Sector CDS-based

-300

-200
Cumulative weekly bank equity return (percent) 2

-250
3

3

-150
-200

2

2

1

1

0

0

-150

-100

-100
-50

-50
0

-1

Core euro area banks (inc. Spain)
GIP country banks

-2
2007

-1

-2
2008

2009

2010

2011

0
50
100
2007

Core euro area banks (inc. Spain)
GIP country banks
50
2008

2009

2010

2011

Source: Bloomberg, Datastream and staff calculations.
1 Normalized score from a principal component analysis on 5-year senior bank credit default swap spreads, estimated using
daily data (1 Jan. 2005-3 June 2011).The core risk index comprises CDS spreads of 35 banks and the GIP risk index 11 banks
(from GRC, IRL and PRT). The first principal component captures 85.4% of the common variation across core country banks
and 83.1% across GIP country banks. 2/ Based on country indices of weekly banking sector equity returns, cumulated since
January 2007 (equally weighted returns; inverted scale). Periphery consists of GRC, IRL and PRT (GIP). Core euro area
consists of other euro area countries except SVK and EST (which do not have a banking equity index).

23.
Third, the impact of ECB policy measures on bank performance is estimated
using panel regressions for quarterly bank return on assets (ROA). For a panel of banks
from the event study which report on a quarterly basis, baseline and extended models for ROA
are estimated. The baseline model includes bank- and country-specific variables. As for bankspecific factors, lagged ROA, loan loss provisions, the tangible common equity ratio (TCE), the
liquid asset ratio and the share of wholesale in total funding are included. The panel also controls
for country-level GDP growth, GDP growth volatility and cross-section fixed effects. In a next
step, this specification was augmented by standard and nonstandard ECB policy measures.
Changes in the Euribor are used as standard policy measure and the share of LTROs in total ECB
refinancing and the ratio of ECB bank lending to GDP are included as alternative proxies for
nonstandard measures (see also in Data section below). These policy measures are interacted
with various bank-specific factors which allow for a differentiation across strong and weak
banks. Ceteris paribus, we expect that banks in a weaker state (less liquid, more reliant on

18
wholesale funding, with higher loan-deposit ratio and with lower TCE capital) should benefit
more from the various ECB policy measures, although it can probably not be excluded that also
strong banks benefit from some measures (e.g. from taking up liquidity from the ECB for a long
period at a very low rate).
Data
24.
The ECB’s policy instruments comprise both standard and nonstandard policy
measures:


Standard policy measures relate to changes in the key ECB policy interest rate. When
examining quarterly bank profitability, we use the 3-month Euribor rate, which is closely
related to the ECB policy rate and has a greater impact on bank performance.



Nonstandard policy measures associated with the financial crisis include changes in the
collateral framework, changes in the procedure and profile of refinancing operations
(fixed rate full allotment and additional longer-term operations), and purchases under the
covered bond and securities market purchase programs, as well as the introduction and
usage of USD swaps (see Table II.1A). The effects are differentiated for each measure
according to whether they imply a loosening or a tightening (normalization), or whether
purchases are high or low in case of the SMP. For the CBPP, only news related to its
announcement and reactions to the monthly progress reports is examined. For the SMP,
some discretion was necessary to determine whether interventions were ‘high’ or ‘low’.
Here, as well as in the case of standard measures, we analyze both event-day and broader
event windows. When examining quarterly bank profitability, several proxies for
nonstandard measures (NSM) are used: the share of long-term refinancing operations
(LTROs) in total ECB operations, the size of the ECB balance sheet and the amount of
ECB lending to banks as a percent of GDP or bank assets, as well as a news count based
on the cumulative (net) number of
Non-standard ECB policy measures (NSM)
measures announced during the quarter
100
(see text figure). Interestingly, based on
90
the share of LTROs and ECB lending to
80
banks, some withdrawal of nonstandard
70
policies is already underway. The same is
60
true when considering the net versus
50
gross count of nonstandard measures.

25.
The event study and quarterly ROA
panel relies on a set of listed euro area banks.
For the event study, bank stock prices and
company data are readily available from
Bloomberg L.P. for a set of 86 euro area banks
going back at least to early 2005 (the starting

10
9
8
7
6
5

40

4

30

3

20

2

10

1

0
2005

2006
2007
2008
Total NSM count
Share of LTROs
ECB assets/GDP (rhs)

0
2009
2010
2011
Net NSM count
ECB refi/GDP (rhs)

19
point for our study; see Table II.2A for coverage).7 For the analysis of quarterly bank ROA, a
subset of 60 banks with available income and balance sheet information is examined.
C.

Results

Event study results
26.
As expected, the ECB’s conventional interest rate policy affects a significant
number of banks. On the event day, abnormal returns are significantly different from zero for
38 out of 86 banks (16 positive, 22 negative) in case of easing (excluding the October 15, 2008
rate decrease, which corresponded with other measures) and for 18 banks (13 positive,
5 negative) during the tightening cycle of 2005 (Figure II.1). Similarly, for CARs, results are
similar in both easing (31 significant CARs: 14 positive, 17 negative) and tightening
(13 significant CARs: 3 positive, 10 negative) cycles. The correlation between ARs and CARs is
positive and significant: those banks that exhibit stronger one-day abnormal returns also tend to
have more persistent multi-day abnormal returns (simple correlation 0.593, Kendall’s tau 0.366).
The stronger and more significant reaction of banks during the easing cycle probably reflects the
fact that this took place during the financial crisis when bank stock prices reacted more strongly
to policy decisions than before. Moreover, official interest rate reductions typically are more
quickly translated into banks’ lending rates and involve a compression in banks’ net interest
margins, which tends to negatively affect profitability and stock prices. This effect appears
especially important in countries with predominantly floating rate loans, such as Ireland and
Portugal.
27.
Different nonstandard measures also affect a large number of banks. The
expansion of refinancing operations and the change to FRFA, purchases under the CBPP and
SMP, and the broadening of the collateral base were all associated with significant ARs for
one third of the banks (see also Figure II.1). News on USD swaps affected nearly half of the
bank ARs significantly. The majority of significant reactions are attributable to negative ARs,
except for the news on the CBPP and USD swaps, where mainly positive ARs are found. The
subsequent and still ongoing normalization—including the expiration of one-year LTROs, the
(temporary) move back to variable-rate tenders, the tightening of the collateral framework and
low SMP activity—affect between 10 and 30 percent of all banks, with mostly negative ARs for
refinancing operations, suspension of USD swaps and SMP purchases. Similar results hold for
longer event windows, judging from the similar size and patterns in the CARs. This suggests that
announcements of unconventional measures are mostly perceived as reflective of the high
7

Alternatively, event studies can also be set up with bank credit default swap (CDS) spreads, but these are available
for a much smaller subset of banks and the series remain at quasi-constant levels until late 2007. For the analysis of
interest rate policy effects, this is too short. However, as indicated above, bank CDS spreads are used for an impact
analysis of the ECB’s policy measures under the first approach (as a systemic risk indicator).

20
uncertainty in the market and the relative scarcity of fundamental information in the midst of the
crisis. Furthermore, it appears that bank stock returns react broadly similar to positive and
negative news about the ECB’s unconventional policies, i.e., banks that underperformed on the
day of credit easing measures tend to respond in the same direction to tightening or withdrawal
of the same measures (correlations between 0.118 and 0.242).
28.
These results lead to two questions which are answered by subsequent analysis:
1) did ECB policy measures significantly reduce risks at a broader systemic level, and 2) do
ECB policy measures have distributional effects, i.e., do they affect weak and strong banks, or
core versus periphery, differently?
Impact on systemic risk
29.
Various nonstandard ECB policy measures appear to have a significant impact on
systemic bank risk indices, but standard interest rate measures did not. In the 4-variable
VAR with daily data, announcements of standard policy measures (dummies for interest rate
changes) did not impact the systemic risk indicators. Also actual interest rates (or changes
thereof) did not affect bank systemic risk indicators and hence were not included in the final
specification (Table II.1). This probably reflects the fact that these measures are generally well
anticipated by market participants and hence have no impact on market prices or risk.8 Various
nonstandard measures, on the other hand, seem to significantly influence bank systemic risk
across both core and periphery countries. Their effect is both direct and indirect, through the
interaction with some market risk variable, which means that their effect on systemic risk tends
to be state-dependent. More specifically, the results can be summarized as follows:


Bank credit default versus equity risk indicators. Nonstandard measures appear to have
overall a more significant impact on bank credit default than on equity risk indices, with
12 versus 8 (out of 18) significant impact effects.



Core versus periphery. For periphery banks, nonstandard measures have a strong impact
on credit default risk indices but almost none on equity risk indices. For core banks, the
impact is divided roughly equal across both types of risk indicators.



Median impact. The policy of fixed-rate full allotment seems to result in lower credit risk
and higher equity returns, both in periphery and core euro area countries and hence
appears to bring down bank systemic risk. This is in line with market intelligence which
suggests that the ECB’s FRFA policy is important for banks. Apart from that, there is no
consistent pattern as regards the impact of the other nonstandard measures on the bank
risk indices, evaluated at the median of the market risk variables: sometimes they are

8

One could even add that interest rate measures also generally are not intended to impact systemic risk.

21
positive and sometimes negative. For instance, easing of liquidity provision and CBPP
tend to reduce bank credit default risk, while during the 1-year LTRO window, there was
an increase in bank credit default risk. News on high SMP purchases tends to reduce
credit default risk for core banks, while raising it for periphery banks. Hence, when
evaluated at the median market condition, the systemic risk impact of nonstandard
measures is very instrument-specific, without a clear overall picture emerging.


State-dependency. The impact of nonstandard measures varies across financial market
conditions, judging from differences in signs of the marginal effects at the two ends of
the distribution. For instance, measures that ease liquidity provision reduce default risk
and increase equity returns when euribor-eonia spreads are low (at the 10th percentile),
but vice versa when they are high (at the 90th percentile of the spread distribution). With
news on SMP purchases, equity returns are boosted when the VIX index is low but fall
when VIX is high.

Impact on banks’ quarterly performance
30.
Both standard and nonstandard measures affect bank performance. When
estimating a quarterly bank ROA panel with LTRO as proxy for nonstandard policies and TCE
as state variable, both standard and nonstandard policy measures significantly affect bank
performance (Table II.2, top panel). However, with wholesale funding or the loan-deposit ratio
as state variable, only standard policy (interest rate changes) appears to affect banks’ ROA,
while with liquidity, only nonstandard measures do. Hence, the significance of ECB policy
measures on bank performance depends somewhat on the state variable used, although it is not
entirely unreasonable that liquidity overtakes the significance of interest rate effects, while more
structural bank-specific factors such as wholesale and loan-deposit ratios subsume the effect of
the more structural, nonstandard measures. When estimating the panel with ECB lending as a
percent of GDP as proxy for nonstandard policies, the significance of nonstandard measures
changes: they lose significance in the models with TCE and liquidity as state variable, but gain
significance in the model with wholesale funding. The fact the wholesale funding plays an
important role in the model with ECB lending as proxy for nonstandard policies is not entirely
implausible, given the substitution of market funding (wholesale and interbank) and ECB
lending during the crisis.
31.
Differentiating across banks, higher interest rates appear to benefit stronger banks,
while during periods with heightened nonstandard policies, all banks seem to suffer. In
order to capture the full effect of policy measures on ROA, one needs to account for both their
direct and indirect impact, evaluated at various levels of the interaction term (Table II.2, bottom
panel). This shows that stronger banks (i.e., banks with TCE and liquidity at the upper 10th or
wholesale funding and loan-deposit ratios at the lowest 10th percentile) achieve higher ROA
throughout this period in response to standard policy measures (tightening of interest rates). This
is in line with expectations, since weak banks—defined as those in the bottom 10 percent of the
distribution of the aforementioned bank-specific state variables—may be more vulnerable to

22
increases in the cost of capital and funding, because they are perceived as more risky by market
participants or have a smaller deposit base (knowing that bank revenues improve as deposits
adjust less fully to interest rate increases; see, e.g., Gropp and others (2007)). Hence, according
to these results, weak banks should raise capital in order to reduce the negative impact from
withdrawal of standard measures. However, in response to an increase in nonstandard measures
(a raise in either the LTRO share or ECB bank lending to GDP), virtually all banks—both weak
and strong—appear to perform worse. This may reflect the contemporaneous nature of the
relation between nonstandard measures and banking health: when banking performance
deteriorated across the board as a result of the financial crisis, nonstandard measures were
enacted to offset the risks to financial stability. Conversely, one may expect that these measures
are withdrawn only when banks have sufficiently recovered from the crisis and would thereby
not have negative repercussions on bank performance.9
32.
Simulations confirm that higher interest rates would adversely affect weak banks,
but not necessarily banks in the periphery, and improvements in ROA from exiting
nonstandard measures are broad-based. A simulation exercise is undertaken, based on the
above estimations and ROA from 2010:Q4, and assumes a 50 basis points increase in interest
rates. Separately, a withdrawal of nonstandard measures is assumed—either reducing the LTRO
share by 25 percentage points (in the specification with TCE as state variable) or reducing ECB
lending to financial institutions in the euro area by 1 percent of GDP (in the specification with
wholesale funding as state variable). In both cases, this would bring these nonstandard measures
back to pre-crisis levels. Furthermore, another set of simulations is reported, distinguishing
banks by location, based on similar panel estimations as in Table II.2, but interacting ECB policy
measures with a location dummy instead of bank-specific state variables. The results are as
follows:


9

Interest rate increase. Taking 2010:Q4 as a starting point, a 50 bps increase in interest
rates would have relatively small overall effects on banking sector ROA, although there
appear to be distributional effects: weak banks would see their profits substantially
reduced, while strong banks would gain (text figure).10 Also location appears to matter:
periphery banks, although starting from overall losses in 2010:Q4, would experience a
substantial improvement in ROA, while other banks would see little change on average.
One plausible explanation may be the difference in sensitivity of assets and liabilities to
interest rate changes: new loan volumes at GIP banks are extended at very short-term
maturities, which allows for a faster repricing in case of interest rate increases. GIP banks

To verify whether this contemporaneous relation is sample-specific, the panel models were estimated over a shorter
time span, ending before the onset of the crisis (although this becomes then a very small sample, 2005:Q1-2007:Q3).
Results remained qualitatively similar.
10
The overall impact is evaluated at the average TCE ratio in 2010:Q3, while the impact on weak (strong) banks is
evaluated at the 10th (90th) percentile of the TCE ratio, taking into account both the direct effect on ROA of interest
rates and the interaction with the TCE ratio level.

23
also have TCE ratios slightly above the average of the distribution. Furthermore, strong
banks (with TCE capital buffers at the top of the distribution) generally have higher
deposit funding and higher loan-deposit ratios, which makes them less sensitive to
repricing of liabilities and more to asset repricing, relative to weak banks (i.e., with TCE
ratios in the bottom of the distribution). A similar pattern emerges from a model with
wholesale funding as the state variable (second figure): overall, there is very little impact
on ROA from an interest rate increase, but banks with high reliance on wholesale funding
seem to suffer, although they start from a very high ROA, while those with low
wholesale funding benefit, because they are less sensitive to a repricing of liabilities and
have less leverage. Also here, GIP banks (with wholesale funding ratios around the
average of the distribution) stand to cut back their losses significantly.


Withdrawal of nonstandard measures. A reduction in the share of LTROs would lead to
gains across the board, and across different types of banks. This possibly reflects the fact
that nonstandard measures were expanded as the financial crisis evolved, and a
withdrawal would likely coincide with a recovery of the financial sector. In other words,
markets may expect nonstandard measures to be in place for as long as needed and they
may be withdrawn when banks are able to record sound operating results. Results using
wholesale funding as state variable and ECB lending as a percent of GDP as nonstandard
measure are broadly similar. An exception appears to be GIP banks, which see their ROA
decline following a reduction in ECB lending (as opposed to the shift in long versus short
refinancing using the LTRO variable as nonstandard policy measure in the first text
figure). This may reflect the sensitivity of their banking sector to outside financing and
their difficulty to access market financing.

24
Simulation of Euro Area Banks’ ROA
for Increase in Euribor Rate and Withdrawal of Nonstandard Measures
Model with TCE as state variable and
share of LTROs as non-standard policy measure
0.40

0.40
ROA (in percent)

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

-0.10

0.60
0.50

Model with wholesale funding as state variable and
ECB lending (% of GDP) as non-standard measure
ROA (in percent)

-0.10

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10
0.00

0.00

ROA 2010Q4
euribor +0.50bps
LTRO -25%

0.60

-0.10

ROA 2010Q4
euribor +0.50bps
ECB Lending/GDP -1%

-0.10

-0.20

-0.20 -0.20
-0.20
Strong
GIP
Other
Overall
High
Low
GIP
Other
Wholesale
Location
TCE
Location
Source: Bloomberg, staff computations.
Note: Shown are bank return on assets (ROA) in 2010Q4, after a 50 basis points increase in the euribor interest rate, a decrease in the
share of LTROs by 25 percent (left figure) and in ECB lending by 1 percent of GDP (right figure), for all banks and differentiated by levels
of capital strength (left), wholesale funding (right) and location. Overall, weak/strong TCE and high/low wholesale compute ROA impact
using the average, 10th and 90th percentile from the respective Q3 2010 ratios. GIP is for banks located in GRC, IRL and PRT.
Overall

Weak

D.
33.

Conclusions and Policy Implications

Four broad messages can be taken away from the above findings:



Both standard and nonstandard ECB policies matter for a large number of banks, judging
from the cross-section of abnormal stock returns. Reactions to interest rate changes
appear to have been asymmetric: more banks responded significantly and negatively to
declines than to rate increases, which may be due to greater sensitivity of assets than
liabilities to repricing risk. Hence, from this perspective, future gradual interest rate
increases may not affect euro area bank equity prices too negatively, especially if the
ECB policy is well communicated to markets. Furthermore, nonstandard measures appear
to have generated positive and significant abnormal returns for a large number of banks.



At a systemic level, the change in operating procedures to fixed-rate full allotment and—
to some extent, the CBPP and measures to expand liquidity provision—helped to reduce
systemic risks. However, for the rest, the evidence on the effects of nonstandard policy
measures on system risk indicators is mixed and appears to be dependent on the state of
financial markets. In terms of exit from nonstandard measures, withdrawal from liquidity
measures and low purchases under the SMP seem to have been market-neutral, as they
did not impact systemic risk indicators. Going forward, it may be necessary to keep
nonstandard measures in place as long as systemic risk indicators remain elevated.



At a quarterly frequency, there is evidence of significant effects of both standard and
nonstandard ECB policy measures on euro area banks. Their impact also seems to vary
according to various dimensions: weak banks (with low capital, high wholesale reliance,

25
high loan-deposit and low liquidity) appear to suffer from a policy of higher interest
rates, while strong banks and banks in the periphery benefit. In response to nonstandard
measures, most banks would benefit from an eventual withdrawal, except banks in the
periphery dependent on access to ECB lending, although this may more reflect
comovement rather than causality between nonstandard measures and bank health. These
findings are confirmed by simulations on 2010:Q4 profits.


In sum, the results suggest care should be taken not to adversely affect weak banks and
banks in the periphery. Raising interest rates and withdrawal of nonstandard measures
should be properly timed, done in a proper sequence, and communicated consistently and
well in advance to markets, as appears to be the case. This way, banks have sufficient
time to adjust and look for alternative funding and capital to support or improve their
performance. The findings also somehow support the ECB’s separation principle,
allowing decisions on interest rates to be independent from those on nonstandard
measures, as the impact on bank performance appears to be different across these policy
measures.

26
Table II.1. Contribution of ECB Policy Measures in Systemic Risk VAR
VAR estimation results
CDS bank default risk
Cumulative equity return
GIP
Core
GIP
Core
Risk factors:
VIX
∆VIX
∆GIP sovereign spread
Euribor-EONIA spread
Policy dummies and interaction terms:
Liquidity [easing]
Liquidity [easing]*Euribor-EONIA spread
SMP [high]
SMP [high]*VIX
Step variables and interaction terms:
FRFA
CBPP
CBPP*∆GIP sovereign spread
1-year LTRO
1-year LTRO*∆GIP sovereign spread
R2adj (N = 1440)

0.0001
0.002a
0.001a
-0.00001

0.0003c
0.006a
0.003a
-0.00004

-0.024a
-0.35a
-0.10a
0.001

-0.017a
-0.299a
-0.047a
-0.002

-0.087a
0.0015a
-0.035
0.003a

-0.033
0.0004
-0.178a
0.008a

0.60
-0.02
4.86a
-0.18b

1.59c
-0.03b
2.12b
-0.08b

-0.005c
-0.004
-0.001a
0.007b
0.0016a

-0.010a
-0.004
0.0006c
0.005
-0.0007c

0.26
0.20
0.02
-0.24
0.014

0.26b
0.14
-0.003
-0.14
0.024b

0.365

0.382
0.245
Marginal policy effects

0.315

Liquidity [easing]
Euribor-EONIA spread at
10th
-0.022
0.14
percentile
-0.052
0.80
Median
-0.012
-0.31
-0.017
0.02
90th percentile
0.006
-1.13
0.047
-1.38
SMP [high]
VIX at 10th percentile
0.019
-0.040
1.96
0.77
Median
0.034
-0.003
1.18
0.40
90th percentile
0.063
0.071
-0.39
-0.34
CBPP
∆GIP spread at 10th percentile
0.03
0.16
0.003
-0.009
Median
0.20
0.13
-0.004
-0.004
90th percentile
0.50
0.09
-0.018
0.003
1-year LTRO
∆GIP spread at 10th percentile
-0.38
-0.008
0.012
-0.37
Median
-0.24
0.008
0.005
-0.13
90th percentile
-0.05
0.029
-0.004
0.18
Source: Bloomberg L.P., Datastream and staff computations.
Top panel reports VAR coefficients for core and GIP (GRC, IRL, PRT) bank credit default and bank equity
risk indices, estimated with daily data from November 2005-May 2011. Bottom panel reports marginal
impact of ECB policy measures on systemic risk indicators, at various levels of the interaction terms. The
VAR controls also for the level and change in the VIX, changes in the average GIP 10-year bond spread
vis-à-vis Germany (∆GIP sovereign spread) and the Euribor-EONIA spread. ECB policy measures are
captured by dummy and step variables (equal to one for the period when active and zero otherwise).
Insignificant policy measures were deleted from the VAR. The VAR was estimated in first differences to
ensure stationarity and with 3 lags. To save space, estimates of the endogenous variables are not
reported.
Statistically significant at a: 1, b:5 and c: 10 percent. In bold are significant marginal effects based on the
significance of the parameters (at 10 percent level).

Table II.2. Panel Regression Estimates of Banks’ ROA and Marginal Effects of ECB Policy Measures
Base
Model

TCE

STATE variable
LIQ
WHOLE

LDEP

TCE

STATE variable
LIQ
WHOLE

27

LDEP
Lagged ROA
0.619a
0.604a
0.608a
0.604a
0.601a
0.607a
0.618a
0.614a
0.611a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
LLP
-0.707
-0.718
-0.692
-0.701
-0.709
-0.730
-0.696
-0.705
-0.713a
a
b
c
b
b
a
a
a
GDP growth
0.024
0.017
0.013
0.015
0.016
0.022
0.021
0.021
0.022a
a
b
b
c
b
a
a
a
GDP volatility
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.004
0.003
0.003a
TCE
0.114a
0.099a
0.112a
0.115a
0.113a
0.105a
0.113b
0.115a
0.113a
b
a
b
c
b
Wholesale funding
-0.004
-0.006
-0.005
-0.003
-0.004
-0.005
-0.004
0.003
-0.004b
b
c
b
b
b
Liquid assets
0.007
0.005
0.001
0.006
0.003
0.006
0.003
0.007
0.004
Loan/deposit
0.0002
0.001
ECB policy measures
NSM=LTRO share in ECB operations
NSM= ECB operations/GDP
∆Euribor
-0.140a
-0.006
0.210a
0.092b
-0.132b
-0.014
0.255a
0.097b
∆Euribor*STATE
0.030a
0.001
-0.005a
0.000a
0.027a
0.0004
-0.006a
-0.001a
a
a
NSM
-0.003
-0.005
-0.001
-0.001
-0.014
-0.028
0.036
0.009
NSM *STATE
0.0003c
0.0001c
-2x10-5
-4x10-6
0.001
0.0006
-0.001b
-0.0001
R2 adj. (N=1066)
0.839
0.841
0.840
0.841
0.838
0.840
0.838
0.841
0.838
∆Euribor:
Marginal policy effects
STATE at 10th percentile
-0.078
0.127
0.054
-0.076
0.151
0.054
0.003
-0.008
Median
0.005
0.004
0.022
-0.001
-0.002
0.019
0.010
-0.002
90th percentile
0.118
-0.097
-0.019
0.100
-0.129
-0.026
0.029
0.013
NSM:
STATE at 10th percentile
-0.025
-0.035
0.018
-0.013
-0.014
-0.012
-0.019
0.002
Median
-0.017
-0.023
-0.009
-0.019
-0.016
-0.009
-0.010
-0.004
90th percentile
-0.008
0.007
-0.031
-0.024
-0.019
-0.004
0.010
-0.011
Source: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, ECB, IMF staff computations
Notes: Upper part of the table shows panel estimates for a cross-section of 60 euro area stock-listed banks from the wider sample of 86 banks used in the
event study for which quarterly financial statement data are available. Estimation period is 2005:Q1-2011:Q1. Cross-section fixed effects are included but not
reported here. Bank-specific variables are lagged one quarter in order to avoid strong endogeneity. LLP: loan loss provisions (percent of assets), TCE: tangible
common equity ratio, LIQ: liquid asset ratio, WHOLE: share of wholesale in total funding, LDEP: loan-deposit ratio. Besides a baseline model, several variants
are presented, interacting standard and non-standard ECB policy measures with bank-specific state variables (STATE). The standard policy measure is the
change in the 3-month Euribor rate (∆Euribor), while the non-standard measure (NSM) is either the percentage of long-term refinancing (LTRO) in total bank
refinancing or total ECB bank lending as a percent of GDP.
Lower part of the table computes marginal effects on bank ROA of a one percentage point change in interest rates, ECB operations/GDP and of a 10
percentage point change in the share of LTROs.
Statistically significant at a: 1, b: 5 and c: 10 percent level. In bold are significant marginal effects based on the 10 percent significance level of the parameter
estimates.

28

Table II.1A: Set of ECB Policy Measures
Standard Interest Rate Policy Measures
December 1, 2005 Increase (beginning of cycle)
March 2, 2006 Increase
June 8, 2006 Increase
August 3, 2006 Increase
November 2, 2006 Increase
December 7, 2006 Increase
March 8, 2007 Increase
June 6, 2007 Increase
July 3, 2008 Increase
April 7, 2011 Increase (beginning of new cycle)
Nonstandard Policy Measures (NSMs)
SMP
May-June 2010
start SMP/EFSF, high activity
Oct-Dec 2010
high activity
Covered Bonds Purchase program
May 7, 2009 CBPP announced
June 4, 2009 CBPP detail
July 6, 2009 CBPP start
June 30, 2010 CBPP end
Liquidity Measures
August 9, 2007 FINE TUNING
August 22, 2007 supp LTRO 3m
September 6, 2007 ECB meeting-supp LTROs
March 28, 2008 supp 6m LTRO, continue 3m LTRO
May 2, 2008 expansion 25>50bn, 1m biweekly
July 31, 2008 renewal 3m LTRO-50bn (Aug, Sep)
September 4, 2008 renewal 3m, 6m LTRO (50bn/25bn)
September 29, 2008 special refi 35d FA, variable r
October 8, 2008 FRFA MROs, corridor 100bps
May 6, 2009 1y LTRO FRFA announced
June 23, 2009 1y LTRO
September 29, 2009 1y LTRO
May 10, 2010 reinstate FRFA 3m, USD, SMP, 6m LTRO
September 2, 2010 3M LTRO indexed FRFA, renewed
December 2, 2010 3M LTRO indexed FRFA, renewed
Collateral Framework
May 25, 2007 Residence criteria EEA
April 8, 2010 graduated haircuts lower rated assets
July 28, 2010 Increase haircuts
April 29, 2011 loan-level ABS requirements

USD swaps
December 12, 2007
March 11, 2008
July 30, 2008
September 26, 2008
October 13, 2008
April 6, 2009
June 25, 2009
September 24, 2009
December 21, 2010

measures to address pressures ST funding
measures to address liquidity pressures
measures to address liquidity pressures
measures to address liquidity pressures
measures to address liquidity pressures
expanded swaps
extend USD swaps
continue USD swaps
prolongation USD swaps till Aug 2011

October 8, 2008
October 15, 2008
November 6, 2008
December 4, 2008
January 15, 2009
March 5, 2009
April 2, 2009
May 7, 2009

July-Sep 2010
Jan-April 2011

Decrease corridor
Decrease policy rate, turmoil EUR
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease

low activity
low activity (ex Jan 18)

December 3, 2009
December 15, 2009
March 4, 2010
July 1, 2010
September 30, 2010
December 23, 2010

Begin phasing out, indexation LTRO
1y LTRO-indexed FRFA
3M VARIABLE, MRO as FRFA
expiry 1y LTRO, FTO
expiry 1y LTRO, FTO
expiry 1y LTRO. FTO

October 30, 2007
November 12, 2008
November 20, 2009
May 3, 2010
October 8, 2010
December 16, 2010
March 31, 2011

Amendments
Expansion collateral, 5% haircut
Ratings ABS 2nd best rule
Greek debt eligibility criteria suspended
changes ABS clawbacks/close links
adds FTDs, addl ex close links
suspension rating threshold for IRL debt

January 18, 2010
January 27, 2010

discontinue CHF
discontinue swaps with Fed

29
Table II.2A. Banks in the Sample for the Event Study and Panel Regression
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Country
AUT
AUT
AUT
AUT
BEL
BEL
CYP
CYP
DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU

Bank name
Raiffeisen Bank International AG
Erste Group Bank AG
Oberbank AG
Wiener Privatbank SE
KBC Groep NV
Dexia SA
Marfin Popular Bank PCL
Bank of Cyprus Plc
Deutsche Bank AG
Commerzbank AG
Landesbank Berlin Holding AG
DAB Bank AG
Baader Bank AG
Aareal Bank AG
UmweltBank AG

DEU
DEU
DEU

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU
DEU
ESP
ESP
ESP
ESP
ESP
ESP
ESP
FIN
FIN
FIN
FIN
FIN
FRA
FRA
FRA
FRA
FRA
FRA

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.

Country
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
GRC
IRL
IRL
IRL
IRL
ITA
ITA

Gontard & Metallbank AG
Bankverein Werther AG
Berlin-Hannoversche
Hypothekenbank AG
Wuestenrot &
Wuerttembergische
IKB Deutsche Industriebank AG
Oldenburgische Landesbank AG
HSBC Trinkaus & Burkhardt AG

57.
58.

ITA
ITA

59.

ITA

60.
61.
62.
63.

ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA

Merkur Bank KGaA
Banco Santander SA
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria
SA
Banco Popular Espanol SA
Banco de Sabadell SA
Bankinter SA
Banco Pastor SA
Banco Espanol de Credito SA
Pohjola Bank PLC
Bank of Aland PLC
Norvestia OYJ
Sampo OYJ
Amanda Capital OYJ
BNP Paribas
Credit Agricole SA
Societe Generale
Union Financiere de France BQE
Natixis
Credit Industriel et Commercial

64.
65.

ITA
ITA

Mediobanca SpA
Credito Bergamasco SpA
Banca Popolare di Milano Scarl
Piccolo Credito Valtellinese Scarl
Banca Popolare dell'Emilia Romagna
Scrl
Banca Intermobiliare SpA

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.

ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
ITA
MLT
NLD
NLD
NLD
NLD
NLD
PRT
PRT
PRT
PRT

Banca Finnat Euramerica SpA
Banco di Sardegna SpA
Banca Popolare di Spoleto SpA
Banco di Desio e della Brianza SpA
Credito Artigiano SpA
Banca Profilo SpA
Unipol Gruppo Finanziario SpA
Mittel SpA
Credito Emiliano SpA
Banca IFIS SpA
Banca Carige SpA
Bank of Valletta PLC
ING Groep NV
Van Lanschot NV
Aegon NV
BinckBank NV
KAS Bank NV
Banco Comercial Portugues SA
Banco Espirito Santo SA
Banco BPI SA
BANIF SGPS SA

83.
84.
85.
86.

Bank name
National Bank of Greece SA
EFG Eurobank Ergasias SA
Alpha Bank AE
Piraeus Bank SA
Agricultural Bank of Greece
Geniki Bank
Emporiki Bank SA
Marfin Investment Group SA
Attica Bank
Bank of Ireland
Allied Irish Banks PLC
Irish Life & Permanent Group
Anglo Irish Bank Corp Ltd
UniCredit SpA
Intesa Sanpaolo SpA
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena
SpA
Unione di Banche Italiane SCPA
Banca Popolare dell'Etruria e del
Lazio

30
Figure II.1. Euro Area Listed Banks: Abnormal and Cumulative Abnormal Returns
(January 2005–May 2011)
AR interest rate changes

10

CAR interest rate changes

10

10

5

5

5

5

0

0

0

0

-5

-5

-5

Decrease

Increase

-10
1

11

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

21

31
41
51
61
AR liquidity measures

Enhancement
1

11

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

21

1

11

10

71

71

21
31
41
51
61
71
AR covered bond purchase program

11

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

81

21

31
41
51
61
CAR liquidity measures

Enhancement
1

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

11

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

81

Narrowing

-10
1

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Increase

-10

81

Withdrawal

31
41
51
61
AR collateral framework

Broadening

-5
Decrease

-10

10

21

11

81
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Withdrawal

31
41
51
61
CAR collateral framework

Broadening
1

71

71

81
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Narrowing

21
31
41
51
61
71
CAR covered bond purchase program

81

10

10

5

5

5

5

0

0

0

0

-5

-5

-5
On creation

-10
1

11

4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
1

11

21
31
41
51
61
AR USD purchases/swaps

11

21

31

71

41

51

61

71

1
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

81

Withdrawal
81

-5
On creation

-10

81

Low

USD swaps
1

-10

21
31
41
51
61
71
AR securities market program

High

8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

Monthly

10

11

11

11

21
31
41
51
61
CAR USD purchases/swaps

21

81
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

Low

USD swaps
1

-10

21
31
41
51
61
71
CAR securities market program

High
1

Monthly

31

71

81
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

Withdrawal
41

51

Source: Bloomberg L.P.
Figures show standardized abnormal returns (AR: lef t side) and cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR: right side) f or events listed in Table A.1. Values in excess of +/-1.96 are
statistically signif icant at the 5 percent level.

61

71

81

31
References
Beirne, John, and others, 2011, “The Impact of the Eurosystem’s Covered Bond Purchase
Program on the Primary and Secondary Markets,” ECB Occasional Paper 122,
January (Frankfurt: European Central Bank).
Bank for International Settlements, 2009, “An Assessment of Financial Sector Rescue
Programmes,” BIS Papers 48, July (Basel: Bank for International Settlements).
Blinder, Alan S., and others, 2008, “Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A
Survey of Theory and Evidence,” ECB Working Paper 898, May (Frankfurt:
European Central Bank).
Borio, Claudio and P Disyatat, 2009, “Unconventional Monetary Policies: An Appraisal,”
BIS Working Paper 292 (Basel: Bank for International Settlements).
European Central Bank, 2010, “The ECB’s Response to the Financial Crisis,” Monthly
Bulletin (October).
Fahr, Stephan, and others, 2011, “A Monetary Policy Strategy in Good and Bad Times:
Lessons from the Recent Past,” ECB Working Paper 1336, May (Frankfurt: European
Central Bank).
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
Work,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 25, pp. 383–417.
Gagnon, Joseph, and others, 2010, “Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve:
Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 441, March
(New York: Federal Reserve Bank).
Gambacorta, Leonardo and David Marques-Ibanez, 2011, “The Bank Lending Channel:
Lessons from the Crisis,” ECB Working Paper 1335, May (Frankfurt: European
Central Bank).
Gropp, Reint, Christoffer Kok Sørensen, and Jung-Duk Lichtenberger, 2007, “The Dynamics
of Bank Spreads and Financial Structure,” ECB Working Paper 714, January
(Frankfurt: European Central Bank).
International Monetary Fund, 2009a, Initial Lessons of the Crisis, February (Washington).

32
International Monetary Fund, 2009b, Market Interventions during the Financial Crisis: How
Effective and How to Disengage? Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 3,
October, 117-152 (Washington).
Joyce, Michael, and others, 2010, “The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,”
Bank of England Working Paper 393, August (London: Bank of England).
King, Michael R, 2009, “Time to buy or just buying time? The Market Reaction to Bank
Rescue Packages,” BIS Working Papers 288, (Basel: Bank for International
Settlements).
MacKinlay, Graig A., 1997, “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of
Economic Literature, March, pp. 13-39.
Peersman, Gert, 2010, “Macroeconomic Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy in the
Euro Area,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8348, April (Washington: Center for
Economic and Policy Research).
Rodriguez-Moreno, Maria and J. Ignacio Peña, 2011, “Systemic Risk Measures: The Simpler
the Better?” Universidad Carlos III de Madrid Working Paper, February (Getafe:
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid).

33
III.

THE EUROPEAN SYSTEMIC RISK BOARD: EFFECTIVENESS OF MACROPRUDENTIAL
OVERSIGHT IN EUROPE11
A.

Introduction

34.
The role of macroprudential policy is to identify risks to systemic stability and to
develop and implement a policy agenda so as to mitigate risks and build buffers to
cushion the impact when crises occur. To be effective, macroprudential policy rules need
to be complemented by an element of discretion that takes into account all information and
enables policy to respond flexibly to developments in the financial system. Because of this
inherent need for judgment, the institutional framework that underpins decision-making and
establishes powers to use macroprudential instruments plays a central role.
35.
In the EU context, the complexity of macroprudential oversight of the financial
system is exacerbated by strong financial integration, including cross-border banking
activities and integrated financial markets. A supranational overlay is thus required to
ensure that policy action can take account of the scope for cross-country externalities and
interconnectedness. Coordination of policies at the EU level is needed also to reduce the
possibility of regulatory arbitrage of national actions that is likely otherwise when capital and
financial services can flow freely across national borders.
36.
The establishment of the ESRB in January 2011 is a crucial step in providing
greater traction for macroprudential oversight at the EU level, as envisaged in the 2009
De Larosière report. However, the ESRB’s legal foundations imply that it has to establish
its credibility under a set of institutional constraints—a complex decision making process
(with 27 Member States and EU/euro area institutions being involved), no direct access to
supervisory data, and no binding powers.12 These constraints put a premium on close
collaboration with other EU bodies, such as the ECB, the new European Supervisory
Authorities (ESAs) and the European Commission.
37.
Perhaps less anticipated by the De Larosière report, the effectiveness of the
ESRB also requires a sufficient level of preparedness of national macroprudential
authorities and collaboration between the national and the EU level. Effective
macroprudential oversight across the EU is likely to require a “bottom-up” element to
complete analysis and decision-making on the part of the ESRB, but will also require that
“top-down” recommendations of the ESRB are implemented. This national element,
conditioned by national information and mandates, will be important for identification of
11

Prepared by Erlend Nier and Thierry Tressel
Regulation (EU) No. 1092/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on
European Union macro-prudential oversight of the financial system and establishing a European Systemic Risk
Board.

12

34
risks and the development of national initiatives to mitigate risk. Strong national frameworks
are needed also to ensure effective follow-up to risk warnings and recommendations of the
ESRB. However, since macroprudential policy is likely subject to biases for inaction, as we
shall discuss, ESRB risk warnings and recommendations are needed to strengthen the
national resolve to take action. In this regard it is desirable for national mandates to contain
an EU dimension, including a requirement to comply with ESRB recommendations.
38.
In addition to strong mandates and decision making powers, effective follow-up
on ESRB risk warnings and recommendations will also require that an adequate and
common macroprudential policy toolkit is in place in all Member States. The
macroprudential toolkit of EU countries should go beyond the small set of instruments on
which there is already an international consensus, and should be flexible enough to address a
range of sources and channels of transmission of systemic risks.
39.
The ESRB should move forcefully in developing the EU macroprudential policy
toolkit and recommend legislative action on the part of the EU Commission to ensure
that a common set of macroprudential instruments is put in place across EU Member
States. Once macroprudential policy is operational across the EU, a key role for the ESRB
will be to provide an EU-wide perspective on risks arising from interconnectedness and
financial imbalances across the EU. The ESRB will also have a key role to play in
sanctioning and coordinating the use of macroprudential tools across the EU, so as to ensure
appropriate reciprocity of macroprudential policy and to minimize cross-border arbitrage of
national macroprudential action. The ESRB could finally provide a seal of approval when
countries decide to use or to modify macroprudential instruments that interrelate with
standards established across the EU.
40.
The paper is organized as follows. Section B sums up the constraints under which
the ESRB operates. Section C explains why national macroprudential frameworks will play
an important role in completing risk analysis and ensuring follow-up on ESRB
recommendations, and assesses recent changes in institutional models at the national level.
Section D explores which tools should be established at national level so as to enable an
effective and coordinated response to the build-up of systemic risks across the EU. In Section
E, the paper argues for a strong role for the ESRB in establishing the EU macroprudential
toolkit and in harmonizing use of macroprudential policies in a manner that ensures
reciprocity across the EU. Section F concludes.
B.

Institutional Constraints

41.
The ESRB was established under a set of constraints that may hamper its
effectiveness, as argued by Fund staff in the report of the European Financial Stability

35
Framework Exercise (EFFE).13 The current set-up may be the outcome of a political
economy process combined with a desire to maintain a balance of power among EU
institutions.
42.
A first constraint is that the regulation does not envisage direct or automatic
access to supervisory data for the ESRB.14 Difficulties to obtain such data may hamper
assessment of systemic risk. This is a strong constraint in particular when there is a need to
assess correlated exposures to particular sectors, the web of interconnections between
individual financial institutions and their evolution over time.
43.
The ESRB will be subject to complex decision-making processes. This second
constraint is a consequence of the supranational dimension of the ESRB. Its General Board
has a large membership covering all EU countries in addition to the ECB and of other EU
institutions (the EU Commission, the ESAs). The sheer size of the board may slow decisionmaking and will require strong leadership on the part of its Steering Committee in setting the
agenda. Another factor that may mitigate the strength of this constraint is that the General
Board can make decisions by majority vote.15
44.
The ESRB has no binding powers. It has no direct powers, e.g., in the calibration or
setting of macroprudential instruments, nor the power to issue binding recommendations to
any other EU or national body. Indeed, the fact that the ESRB has no legal personality under
the treaty may rule out a material strengthening of its powers beyond those envisaged in the
establishing regulation. Its influence will instead need to rely on its communication strategy,
through formal risk warnings and non-binding recommendations as well as informal suasion,
and on the quality of its analysis.
45.
The ESRB has limited resources. This limited resource is complemented by the
support provided by the ECB, and that provided by national authorities through their
contributions to the work of the ESRB in its various working groups.
C.

The Need for Effective National Macroprudential Policy Frameworks

46.
Because of the high degree of financial interconnectedness across the EU, the
ESRB needs to play a leading role in macroprudential oversight for the region as a
whole. However, effective macroprudential policy across the EU also requires effective
policy frameworks at the national level. First, local supervisory information and analytical
13

European Financial Stability Framework Exercise, Preliminary Findings and Recommendations, May 26,
2011, prepared by staff of the Monetary and Capital Markets, European and Legal Departments of the IMF.
14
The regulation stipulates that requests from the ESRB for detailed data addressed to the ESAs will have to be
ad hoc and motivated, and it does not provide a dispute settlement mechanism.
15
Decisions within the General Board of the ESRB are generally taken by simple majority, but a majority of two
thirds will be needed to adopt recommendations or to make a warning public.

36
expertise are required to analyze risks and policy options in a manner that takes account of
local conditions. Second, the national framework for decision-making will determine the
effectiveness of the interplay between the national and the EU level. Macroprudential policy
at the national level will need to be able to respond to ESRB risk warnings and
recommendations, requiring that adequate mandates and powers are established at the
national level. Moreover, effectiveness of macroprudential policy across the EU will require
that national authorities have the resolve and the incentive to take action, including in
response to risk warnings of the ESRB. Finally, strong national mandates and institutions
will enhance cooperation with EU institutions in risk analysis and assessment, enabling the
ESRB to tap analytical expertise that already exists at the national level. In sum, while strong
national frameworks are not sufficient to ensure effective macroprudential policy across the
EU, they are a necessary complement to the existing arrangements at the EU level.
47.
Strong mandates are needed at the national level that open up and at the same
time constrain discretionary use of powers. The mandate needs to establish safeguarding
systemic stability as the primary objective, but should also include secondary objectives to
ensure the policymakers consider trade-offs when macroprudential action has costs as well as
benefits. For example, a secondary objective could be to ensure that macroprudential action
does not unduly impair the capacity of the system to contribute to balanced growth. The
strength of powers needs to be commensurate with the public policy interest in mitigating
systemic risk.16 These powers should include (i) information collection powers; (ii)
rulemaking and calibration powers; and (iii) powers to determine the appropriate perimeter
of macroprudential action. Mandates and powers should be flanked by strong accountability
mechanism that ensure the policymaker is required to explain its action or inaction and can
be challenged by the public and elected bodies. 17
48.
A key challenge in establishing effective macroprudential policy frameworks
both at the national and at the EU level is to ensure ability and willingness to act. The
benefits of taking corrective action—reduction in the probability and impact of a financial
crisis—are uncertain and long-term, while the costs of taking action, including their impact
on the financial industry and the provision of financial services to the economy, are often felt
immediately and are highly visible.18 The gains of macroprudential policies are uncertain and
difficult to assess because, in contrast to other policies—such as stabilization policies that
aim at affecting a macroeconomic aggregate—macroprudential policies aim at reducing the
probability of a tail event—an objective by definition difficult to measure. The costs of
macroprudential policies, such as a tightening of prudential requirements, are in contrast
more easily quantifiable, because they will affect the financial industry and other sectors
16

The public policy interest arises because the financial sector provides key services to the real economy.
IMF (2011b) and Nier (2011) offer further discussion of these points. See also Tucker (2011) for an overview
of the new arrangements in the U.K.
18
See IMF (2011b) and Nier (2011).
17

37
immediately and more visibly. This, in general, may create a bias in favor of inaction or
insufficiently timely and forceful action.19 20
49.
National authorities may have a stronger bias towards inaction than
supranational authorities. Because of the high level of financial integration and
interconnectedness in the EU, financial crises originating in individual countries will
inevitably affect other EU countries directly or indirectly. National authorities will not
internalize such externalities unless their mandate contains an EU dimension. Another reason
why national authorities could be prone to inaction is because of lobbying and other political
economy pressures at the national level. Such political economy pressures can be particularly
strong where supervision is prone to be influenced by an explicit or implicit objective to
protect the competitiveness of “national champions”. To minimize biases for inaction,
national frameworks and mandates should therefore be such that they contain an EU
dimension and reinforce the effectiveness of the EU institutions, for example by including a
requirement to comply with ESRB recommendations.
50.
In sum, national and supranational mandates need to complement each other.
Because the ESRB has no binding power, nor the capacity to analyze policy-trade-offs that
takes full account of national conditions, effective macroprudential policy requires effective
arrangements at the national level that increase ability and willingness to act on the part of
the macroprudential policymaker. However, since political economy pressures and crosscountry externalities may engender greater resistance to act at the national level, the EU
dimension is essential. National mandates need to be complemented by guidance provided by
the ESRB and should include a requirement to act on ESRB recommendations.
Institutional models in the EU: changes and status quo
51.
Since the crisis, there has been substantial institutional change in a number of
countries across the EU (Box 1). In addition, in a number of other member states change is
ongoing or planned. A range of institutional models are being established and differ along
four dimensions: (i) the degree of institutional integration between agencies, (ii) the
existence of a separate committee or council, (iii) the role of the central bank or the treasury
as the leading agency (chair) of the committee, and (iv) whether the committee has strong
decision-making powers, including the power to direct the actions of constituent agencies.

19

Another difficulty with macroprudential policy is that the decision by the policy-maker to signal growing
systemic risk may trigger market speculation and self-fulfilling expectations of a crisis.
20
Countries’ crisis experience may also condition their approach to macroprudential policies. For example,
countries that experienced a deep financial crisis—such as the U.K.—are more actively developing their
macroprudential toolkit than other countries that did not.

38
52.
There is a strong and welcome trend towards greater institutional integration
between central banks and regulatory agencies. The move to more strongly integrated
models is likely to enhance effectiveness by increasing ability and willingness to act,
fostering the flow of information and enabling the establishment of strong powers on the part
of decision-making committees.21 Belgium, Ireland, and the U.K. are key examples to date of
countries that have reversed the strong separation between central banks and regulatory
agencies that was introduced from the late 1990s in favor of integration between central bank
and prudential agency (in the U.K.) or between central bank and the integrated financial
regulator (in Belgium and Ireland). The U.K. and Romania are examples of countries were a
new macroprudential committee has been or is being set up that is chaired by the central
bank and has strong decision-making powers.
53.
In a number of other cases, however, the new macroprudential council is instead
chaired by the treasury, rather than the central bank. Examples include France, Greece,
Italy, and Portugal. A risk of a strong role of the Treasury is that this may reduce
independence from the political process and willingness to act. A strong role of the treasury
tends to be a feature also and perhaps in particular for countries that are characterized by
separation between central bank and prudential agency, as prevailing in Denmark, Hungary,
Poland and Austria. In these countries, moreover, the role of the council tends to be
coordination, often relying on consensus between agencies, as opposed to a decision-making
committee that would have strong independent powers or powers to direct its members.
54.
Finally, for a large number of countries a high degree of separation between
central bank and regulatory agencies persists. This could become an obstacle to effective
macroprudential policy especially if a council charged with macroprudential policy
coordination remains absent from the regulatory framework. Examples here include Estonia,
Finland, Germany and Luxembourg in the euro area, Latvia, and Sweden in the larger EU, as
well as Iceland and Norway outside of the EU, but inside the European Economic Area.
55.
Overall, recent changes in institutional frameworks are likely to increase
effectiveness of macroprudential frameworks, complementing the introduction of the
ESRB at EU level. However, institutional changes appear far from complete in a number of
countries and have also tended to reduce independence from the political process in some
cases. A strong role of central banks is a key strength of the institutional set-up at the level of
the ESRB and should be a guiding principle also for the review of national frameworks going
forward.22
21

22

See Nier (2009) and Nier (2011)

See IMF (2011b) and Nier (2011) for further discussion of the appropriate roles of the treasury and the central
bank in financial regulation.

39
Box 1. Institutional Models
Model 1—Full integration. This model is characterized by a full institutional integration between the central
bank, the prudential regulator and the securities markets regulator. Full institutional integration allows for
decision-making along the full range of potential macroprudential tools to be made by a committee that is
internal to the organization, such as the central bank’s executive board and for such decisions to be fully
binding on the respective department. As set out in IMF (2011b), it may be useful for decisions on monetary
policy to be made by a separate committee. In Europe, the Czech Republic has long been the only example of
the fully integrated model. More recently Ireland moved to a fully integrated model and abandoned the strong
separation between central bank and integrated financial regulator that characterized its former model.
Belgium is planning to move to full integration between central bank and integrated regulator in 2011, in the
process dismantling its macroprudential coordinating council.
Model 2—Partial integration. This model is characterized by strong institutional integration between the
central bank and the prudential regulator, with the latter a department or subsidiary of the central bank, and a
securities markets authority that is separate from the central bank. This model is widespread in Europe, but
there are differences in the way macroprudential decisions are taken. Under one variant of the model (2a), the
Governor of the central bank chairs a committee that brings together central bank officials, including the head
of prudential regulation and supervision, and the head of the separate securities markets authority. Under a
second variant (2b), macroprudential policy is conducted by a committee that again brings together the
central bank and the separate securities market regulator, but the committee is chaired by the Treasury. Under
a third variant (2c) coordination between the central bank and its prudential department and the separate
securities market authority is more informal and there is no dedicated macroprudential committee that spans
all three agencies. The U.K. is moving to a model where the macroprudential committee is chaired by the
central bank (2a) as is already the case in Romania. Change in the U.K. will also reintroduce close
institutional integration between central bank and prudential agency, by the setting up of a new prudential
agency as a subsidiary of the central bank. In a number of other countries, including France, Greece Italy, and
Portugal the starting point has been integration between central bank and the prudential agency, and this is
now being complemented by new macroprudential councils that bind in the securities regulators, but are
chaired by the Treasury (2b). A number of other countries, such as the Netherlands have not (yet) introduced
a dedicated macroprudential committee or council (2c), and rely instead on strong institutional integration
between central bank and prudential regulator as a coordinating device.
Model 3—Separation. In this model there is separation between the central bank and both the prudential
regulator and the securities market regulator, with the latter two sometimes integrated to form one integrated
regulator. Macroprudential policy coordination that involves the central bank then has to rely on inter-agency
coordination that can be facilitated by a council. However, under separation it tends to be difficult to square
strong powers to direct with the operational autonomy of each participating institution. Separation therefore
favors decision-making by consensus and while a council may issue recommendations, such
recommendations will under separation tend to be non-binding on constituent agencies. In practice, in
addition, separation may favor a strong role of the treasury, so as to mediate between differences of view
between constituent agencies. Consistent with this, In Europe there is no example to date of the separated
model in which the macroprudential council is chaired by the central bank (3a). Hungary and Poland have
recently set up a council that is chaired by the treasury (3b), as is the case also in Denmark and Austria.
Finally, in a number of countries, there is no formal macroprudential council and coordination between
central bank and regulatory agencies is more informal (3c). Examples here include Estonia, Finland,
Germany, and Luxembourg in the euro area, Latvia, and Sweden in the larger EU, as well as Iceland and
Norway outside of the EU, but inside the European Economic Area.

40
Lack of powers at national level
56.
Lack of powers to use macroprudential instruments at national level could
become a further important obstacle to effective macroprudential policy in the EU. The
need to constrain a dynamically evolving financial system requires powers to act, including
the power to choose the appropriate tool in any given conjuncture and to calibrate those tools
to the prevailing level of systemic risk. National authorities need also to have the ability to
respond swiftly to ESRB recommendations, by employing appropriate macroprudential
instruments to reduce the build-up of vulnerabilities.
57.
There is considerable heterogeneity across the EU as regards the independent
ability of regulatory agencies to introduce new regulations or to recalibrate existing
regulations without a change in law. In a number of countries, such as Sweden and
Romania the regulatory agency has strong independent powers to set financial regulations,
without such regulatory acts requiring the consent of the treasury or parliament. In a number
of other countries the rulemaking power of the regulatory agency is more constrained, often
requiring consultation with or approval of the treasury, as in Finland, Germany, and the
Netherlands, or in some cases even a parliamentary act.
58.
This underscores the need for regulatory authorities across the EU to be
empowered to use and calibrate macroprudential tools in a manner that is independent
of the political process. Such powers on the part of the regulatory authorities need to be
guided by a mandate that opens up as well as constrains the discretionary use of
macroprudential tools and should be flanked by appropriate accountability mechanisms.23
D.

The Macroprudential Policy Toolkit

59.
In this section of the paper, we examine which macroprudential tools should be
established at the national level. In the context of the EU this issue has two important
dimensions. First, tools that are established at national level should be effective and
comprehensive, enabling the authorities to respond effectively to the build-up of systemic
risk. Second, it is desirable that there are common sets of tools, shared by all member states,
so that mitigation of systemic risk can be coordinated through the ESRB and regulatory
arbitrage avoided.
60.
We first briefly outline principles that should guide the choice of the EU
macroprudential policy toolkit. Second, we summarize the findings of the IMF survey of
macroprudential policies performed by the Monetary and Capital Market department of the
IMF. We argue that the macroprudential toolkits considered by national authorities according

23

See IMF (2011b) and Nier (2011) for further discussion.

41
to this survey are unlikely to be sufficient to address a range of possible systemic risks. We
next suggest additional instruments that should be included in the macroprudential toolkit.
Choice and use of macroprudential instruments: normative considerations
61.
Most instruments that have been used so far are prudential instruments
recalibrated for macroprudential purposes. Most experiences with macroprudential
instruments in the EU were in Central and Eastern European countries, where instruments
included enhanced capital requirements and increases in reserve requirements. Examples of
use of macroprudential instruments in more mature economies are the introduction of
dynamic provisions in Spain in the early 2000, and limits on LTV more recently introduced
in Sweden.
62.
Macroprudential instruments are needed to address two distinct dimensions of
systemic risk. They need to mitigate systemic risks arising from the tendency of the system
to become overexposed to aggregate or correlated risks over time (such as aggregate or
sectoral credit imbalances, asset price bubbles and balance sheet mismatches) and those
arising from the systemic impact of the failure of individual institutions (such as
amplification and contagion effects arising because of interconnectedness, fire sales or
confidence effects).24
63.
Experience has shown that financial crisis have various sources and channels of
transmission or amplification. The current crisis in the euro area is the consequence of real
estate bubbles and sovereign risks; the 2008 financial crisis in the United States was
exacerbated by weak underwriting standards at origination in the U.S. real estate market and
of failures in the securitization process; the Asian crisis of the 1990s was mainly caused by
balance sheet maturity mismatches in the corporate sectors, with high reliance on short-term
debt supplied by merchant banks to finance long-term investments; emerging markets
(Korea) also experienced episodes of financial stress resulting from the rapid expansion of
consumer credit through banks and non-bank financial intermediaries.
64.
Macroprudential toolkits should include a carefully selected set of instruments
sufficient to address most foreseeable sources of systemic risks. The often cited principle
according to which instruments should be linked to objectives does not imply that
macroprudential policy should rely on only one instrument. Because systemic risk has
multiple dimensions and can arise through various institutions, markets, and sectors, the
macroprudential policy toolkit must contain sufficient instruments to mitigate risks through
each likely channels of systemic risk build-up. By contrast, a too restrictive set of
instruments may not allow the policymaker to target new channels of build-up of systemic
risks.
24

See for example Borio (2009), Nier (2009), and Nier (2011).

42
65.
Another argument in favor of the establishment of a range of instruments is that
there is, so far, very limited knowledge about which instruments are effective, and
which ones are not. Moreover, experience has shown that to be effective a range of
complementary instruments may need to be brought to use when the build-up of systemic
risk is fuelled by strong underlying forces that cause each individual instrument to be subject
to arbitrage (see for instance Crowe and others, 2011). This also requires that instruments
should be broad in scope, rather than applied only to particular institutions, which could
result in arbitrage or miss addressing the proper channels of systemic risks.
66.
Individual macroprudential instruments belonging to the toolkit should be
chosen based on several key characteristics. First and foremost, it is essential that
instruments are effective in limiting the build-up of systemic risk and help increase resilience
while minimizing dead-weight costs on the industry or to the provision of credit to the
economy. Another key dimension in the EU is that macroprudential instruments should be
designed and applied to limit opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. To protect the fabric of
the single market, reciprocity of macroprudential policies will need to play a crucial role.
Finally, clarity and simplicity in the use and calibration of instrument may be needed to
ensure that clear signals are sent to market participants.
Developing the EU macroprudential toolkit
67.
The survey conducted at the end of 2010 by the Monetary and Capital Market
Department of the IMF asked each Member State their views on the set of instruments
that should belong to their macroprudential policy toolkits. A list of 30 instruments was
suggested in the questionnaire, but the questionnaire also allowed countries to add other
instruments.
68.
The instruments that were mentioned in the questionnaire can be classified in
the following categories: (i) instruments targeting the asset side of banks; (ii) instruments
targeting asset-liability mismatches; (iii) capital measures; (iv) measures targeting SIFIs; (v)
measures focused on the funding of banks; (vi) measures affecting the functioning of
markets; and (vii) other measures (such as tax policy).
69.
Respondents favor a small set of measures on which there is already an
emerging international consensus. There is a clear consensus on capital measures, such as
the countercyclical capital buffer agreed upon in Basel III, dynamic provisioning, and capital
conservation measures also included in Basel III (such as restrictions on the distribution of
profits). A large majority of countries favor imposing limits on loan-to-value ratios and loanto-income ratios. A capital surcharge for SIFIs and limits on maturity mismatches also
emerges as measures that would be considered by a majority of countries.

43
Table III. 1. Macroprudential Instruments Selected by European Countries (Part I)
Assets measures

Country
euro area
Other EU
EEA
All

Asset/liability measures

Limits on
Caps on exposures Caps on
Caps on loan- debt/loanor
foreign
to-value
to-income concentra currency
ratios
ratios
tion
lending
8
6
5
1
5
2
2
2
1
1
14
9
7
3

Ceiling on
credit or
credit
growth,
incl by
sector
2
1
3

Capital measures

Limits on
net open
Counterc
currency
yclical
positions/ Limits on
capital
Restrictions
currency maturity
Reserve requireme Dynamic
on profit
mismatch mismatch requirement
nt
provisioning distribution
2
7
2
7
7
7
4
2
3
3
3
1
1
1
1
6
8
4
11
11
11

Note: 15 countries included: Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Norway, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Romania

70.
There is, surprisingly, more limited support for macroprudential measures
addressing other dimensions of macroprudential risks. Few respondents mentioned
measures targeting the funding structure of financial intermediaries, in particular the reliance
on wholesale funding—such as a levy on wholesale funding, a (time varying) liquidity
coverage ratio, or liquidity surcharges for systemically important institutions.25 Measures
targeted at the functioning of securities market, such as limits on haircuts or on collateral
margins, were also only selected by a few countries. Other types of measures (addressing
non-real estate sectors, or the functioning of the interbank market, or fiscal measures) appear
to have less or almost no support among the group of respondents.
Table III.2. Macroprudential Instruments Selected by European Countries (Part II)
SIFIs

Country
euro area
Other EU
EEA
All

Size
dependent
leverage
Capital
limit
surcharge
1
7
1
1
1
2
9

Funding

Marke ts

time
varying
core
levy on
liquidity haircut or
funding wholesale coverage margin on CCP for
ratio
funding
ratio
collateral derivatives
4
2
4
1
2
1
1
2
1
6
1
4
6
1

Fiscal

Sector
specific
taxes
2
2
1
5

71.
While the choices of respondents fully reflect the growing international
consensus, completing this small set with additional instruments would be justified, for
two main reasons. First, as discussed earlier, there remains a lot of uncertainty over each
instrument’s effectiveness. Hence, enlarging the set of instruments admitted to the
25

Both levies on wholesale funding and quantitative liquidity ratios act as “automatic stabilizers” mitigating the
cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk and potentially reducing the need to readjust these measures in a
countercyclical fashion.

44
macroprudential toolkit would limit the likelihood that macroprudential instruments might
turn out to be ineffective when needed. Second, some instrument may be suited only for
specific sources or for specific channels of transmission of systemic risk, and are unlikely to
be useful in mitigating other sources of systemic risks, as highlighted in the previous section.
72.

The most popular instruments so far are not without their limitations.



While broad in scope, the countercyclical capital buffer may suffer from some a
number of limitations. First, in the Basel III framework, there will be long lags (up to
one year) between the announcement of capital add-ons by national supervisors and
its implementation. Second, the deviation of the credit-to-GDP ratio from its trend—
used as an indicator to calibrate the buffer—is an imperfect indicator of the
macrofinancial cycle. Third, during downturns, the decision to release the buffer by
the macroprudential supervisor may be inconsistent with the microprudential
principle under which banks should not deplete capital when non-performing assets
are building up. Finally, the capital buffer is a blunt tool: when the build-up of
imbalances is concentrated in particular sectors this could lead to a crisis well before
the buffer is triggered by aggregate developments.26



The second most popular measure, a contingent upper bound on loan-to-value ratios,
potentially completed by an upper limit on the debt-to-income ratio to ensure ability
to repay, seems to be emerging as an effective instrument; but the experience so far
suggests that implementation could be challenging, as there are risks of regulatory
arbitrage, through both non-bank and cross-border lending. Moreover, to be effective,
coverage must be comprehensive including by covering second-lien mortgages
(Crowe and others, 2011). Its benefits in terms of buffers and mitigation of strategic
defaults may also differ across countries, according to characteristics of the mortgage
market (including, for example, whether mortgages are full recourse or not). Finally,
relaxing the LTV limit in a downturn may also create conflicts between the
macroprudential and the microprudential perspectives. From a macro perspective, it
may be optimal to raise limits on loan-to-value ratios to support the real estate market
during a crisis. But such a policy may increase the credit risk of individual financial
institutions, and may not be optimal from a micro-prudential perspective.

73.
The set of instruments emerging from the international consensus appears too
focused on taming broad-based credit booms and real estate bubbles, and not
sufficiently aware of other specific channels and sources of risks. The macroprudential
26

The impact on credit supply will depend on the speed at which the buffer is built-up. A fast build-up will
presumably be more effective in constraining credit supply, in particular if banks have to resort to costly
issuance of equity.

45
toolkit of EU countries should therefore go beyond this set and consider including additional
instruments targeting:
a. Time varying exposures to specific sectors. Time and sectoral contingent risk weights
would usefully complement the countercyclical capital buffer for two reasons.27 First,
they would allow to target more specifically the sectors where systemic risk is
developing, thus allowing a cross-sectional differentiation of risks. Second, in
contrast to broad-based measures, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, sectoral
measures would more easily identify the build-up of sectoral vulnerabilities that may
not be well captured by the private credit to GDP ratio. Examples of such measures
would include contingent risk weights on interbank lending, lending to sovereigns,
corporates, or households.28
b. Funding of financial intermediaries. Balance sheet expansions during the boom were
financed by relying on wholesale funding, often of a short-term nature. A possible
instrument, in addition to the two quantitative liquidity constraints included in Basel
III, would be a contingent levy on non-core funding (as currently introduced in
Korea) which would help address both the time dimension and the cross-sectional
dimension of systemic risk.
c. Collateralized lending markets. A possible instrument would be contingent margins
or valuation haircuts on existing securities used as collateral in the securitized
lending markets (such as for repos). This instrument would be used to regulate the
supply of secured funding which would help reduce the risks of fire sales. It would
also affect the contribution of the shadow banking system to pro-cyclicality by
affecting their funding conditions in wholesale markets. Ideally, strong margining
should be extended to OTC markets to incentivize the move to central clearing of
derivatives.
E.

The Role of the ESRB in a Financially Integrated EU

The role of the ESRB in the design and use of macroprudential tools across the EU
74.
Because of the integration of financial systems among EU countries, effective
national mandates and tools are necessary but not sufficient to ensure effective
macroprudential oversight across the EU. They are necessary because without these
27

Some of these measures would generalize microprudential exposures limits that are not time varying.
Optimal risk weights may differ from a microprudential perspective than from a macroprudential one. For
example, collateralized short-term assets (such as reverse repo transactions) may appear safe from a
microprudential perspective, and therefore attract low capital requirements. But they could be systemically
important as decisions not to roll-over the transaction may trigger fire sales of assets by the counterparty of the
transaction, which may amplify financial crisis (Morris and Shin, 2008).

28

46
national elements there can be no effective macroprudential action for the EU as a whole.
But a pure national approach is not sufficient in a highly financially integrated region where
capital should continue to flow freely across borders. First, decisions to act need to have a
EU dimension to overcome cross-country externalities and the risks of regulatory capture at
the national level. Second, strong coordination of policy actions at the EU level is needed to
avoid regulatory arbitrage by financial institutions that are located outside of the country
setting macroprudential policies. The ESRB therefore has a strong role to play in ensuring
effective macroprudential oversight for the region as a whole.
75.
The ESRB should warn that a minimum set of macroprudential instruments
common to all Member States needs to be established EU-wide. This approach would
ensure that each Member States is able to act in response to rising systemic risks, and that all
Member States can adopt common responses to similar risks. The ESRB advice on the
harmonization and use of macroprudential policy toolkits should result in recommendations
addressed to the Commission for specific EU Directives, to ensure that macroprudential
policy is operational in all Member States.
76.
The ESRB should also make recommendations on the calibration of individual
macroprudential instruments across all EU countries. This will ensure that the calibration
is adequate to the risk identified. In particular, the instrument should be calibrated in a way
that mitigates risks effectively—without imposing undue costs on the financial sector—and
that all national macroprudential authorities adopt similar quantitative responses to systemic
risks. The ESRB could also warn that some practices (such as LTVs at or above 100 percent)
are excessively risky and should therefore be prohibited. In some cases the ESRB should
give advice as to whether a particular instrument can be implemented by way of a policy rule
or whether a discretionary overlay is needed. The ESRB can also issue recommendations on
what additional elements need to be considered in the discretionary use of tools. If needed,
the ESRB could also issue guidance on the combination of instruments that could more
effectively help reduce systemic risks.
77.
The ESRB should play a key role in facilitating the effectiveness of
macroprudential policy across the EU by ensuring reciprocity across EU countries, so as
to reduce the scope for regulatory arbitrage.29 To avoid regulatory arbitrage and ensure
effectiveness of macroprudential action across the EU, a mechanism is needed whereby
home country authorities reciprocate the macroprudential measures put in place by host
countries, based on the exposures of the consolidated national financial institutions to the

29

The experience of Central and Eastern European countries proved that measures taken by host countries can
be evaded through cross-border lending, lending through branches or non-bank financial intermediaries that are
not within the regulatory perimeter of the host country.

47
asset class of the host country considered.30 The ESRB should, if it is satisfied that the
macroprudential action taken by the host authority is justified, issue a recommendation to
other macroprudential authorities to reciprocate the measures taken by the host authority.
78.
The ESRB could finally sanction the decisions of Member States to set or modify
macroprudential instruments in particular when these decisions interrelate with EU
standards.31 For example, under the forthcoming capital requirements directive (CRD IV),
member states will require flexibility in the variation of risk-weights for macroprudential
purposes. A potential solution may be for such use of risk-weights to be validated by the
ESRB, with the exception then formally granted by the Commission. To minimize the burden
on the ESRB, such validation process could be designed to be as rule-based as possible.
The need for the ESRB to work with other EU bodies
79.
The ESRB will need to work closely with the European Supervisory Authorities.
Successful interaction between the ESRB and the ESAs will be important to ensure a proper
meshing of macroprudential and microprudential instruments and risk assessments. Strong
cooperation is needed also in the exchange of data and information. As noted in the EFFE
report, the current regulations stipulate that requests for detailed data from the ESAs will
have to be ad hoc and motivated, and it does not provide a dispute settlement mechanism,
which could become problematic in practice
80.
The ESRB also depends on the ECB for analytical, statistical, logistical and
administrative support. Close collaboration between the two institutions will remain
essential in the future. However, since the ESRB is an EU institution covering non-euro area
countries, there may be a need to also strengthen its analytical resources in the medium-term,
independently of the analytical contribution of the ECB.
81.
Finally, the ESRB will also need to work closely with the EU Commission. The
ESRB needs to warn when legislative action on the part of the Commission unduly
constrains macroprudential policy action. And it should recommend that the Commission
takes positive legislative action to ensure that common macroprudential toolkits will be
available to policymakers across the EU. The ESRB will also have a role to play in the
assessment of macroeconomic imbalances that will be performed by the EU Commission
under the External Imbalance Procedure. It should use its recommendations to sharpen
financial sector advice given in that process.

30

For example, an asset class would be defined as sovereign bonds of country A, or mortgages on properties of
country B.
31
More generally, countries may occasionally have an interest in obtaining a validation of their national
macroprudential policies by the ESRB, for example to overcome opposition on the part of the financial industry.

48
F.

Conclusion

82.
Under the current framework, the effectiveness of the ESRB will strongly
depend on successful interaction with other EU institutions and with national
authorities. Collaborations with other EU institutions have already been initiated; for
example, the ESRB and ESAs are already setting up protocols for information sharing and
guidelines and processes for handling data requests should be initiated. The ESRB together
with the EBA also actively participates in rulemaking to transpose Basel III countercyclical
capital buffer into the EU law. It has expressed clear views on the need for some flexibility in
the CRDIV to accommodate macroprudential policy across the EU.
83.
National macroprudential oversight arrangements will be important elements of
the overall EU framework. They will affect the ability and willingness to make use of
national information and analytical capacity as inputs in the ESRB’s analysis. They will also
shape the follow-up on ESRB risk warnings and recommendations. But the role of the ESRB
will remain crucial, because of the high degree of financial integration within the EU and the
resulting scope for cross-country externalities and spillovers. Because the ESRB has no
binding powers under the current framework, national mandates should explicitly include a
requirement to act on ESRB recommendations.
84.
To ensure effective follow-up on ESRB recommendations, EU countries will also
have to have common macroprudential instrument toolkits in place. Hence, agreement
has to be reached at the EU level on a selective harmonized toolset to be established EUwide. The toolset should be broad enough to provide the capacity to address various potential
sources as well as channels of transmission and amplification of systemic risk. The ESRB
should use its mandate to take the lead in harmonizing macroprudential toolkits across EU
countries. The ESRB should make recommendations to the EU Commission to use its law
making power to introduce a common set of macroprudential instruments, and to ensure that
an appropriate degree of flexibility for use of macroprudential tools will be embedded in the
CRDIV. To safeguard the single rule book, it should also ensure adequacy and consistency of
application, including reciprocal use of instruments across the EU.

49
References
Borio, Claudio, 2009, “Implementing the Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation
and Supervision,” Banque de France, Financial Stability Review 13, The Future of
Financial Regulation, September (Paris: Banque de France).
Crowe, Christopher W., and others, 2011, “Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: Options to
Deal with Real Estate Booms,” Staff Discussion Note No. 11/02 (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2011a, European Financial Stability Framework—Preliminary
Findings and Recommendations, report prepared by staff of the Monetary and Capital
Markets, European and Legal Departments (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).
International Monetary Fund, 2011b, Macroprudential Policy: an Organizing Framework,
IMF Policy Paper, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
HM Treasury, 2010, “A New Approach to Financial Regulation: Judgment, Focus and
Stability” (London: HM Treasury).
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, 2008, “Financial Regulation in a System Context,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall (Washington: The Brookings
Institution).
Nier, Erlend W., 2009, “Financial Stability Frameworks and the Role of Central Banks—
Lessons from the Crisis,” IMF Working Paper No. 09/70 (Washington: International
Monetary Fund).
Nier, Erlend W., 2011, “Macroprudential Policy—Taxonomy and Challenges,” National
Institute Economic Review, April.
Tucker, Paul, 2011, “Macroprudential Policy: Building Financial Stability Institutions,”
Speech given at the 20th Annual Hyman Minsky Conference, New York, April, 14,
2011.
Wong, Eric, and others, 2011, “Loan-to-Value Ratio as a Macroprudential Tool—Hong
Kong’s Experience and Cross-Country Evidence,” Hong Kong Monetary Authority
Working Paper 01/2011. (Hong Kong: Hong Kong Monetary Authority).

50
IV.

STRENGTHENING GOVERNANCE IN THE EURO AREA32
A.

Introduction

85.
The crisis has questioned the viability of the euro area in its current shape.
Skeptics stressing its fragility because of the lack of fiscal union, inadequate market
flexibility, and low level of labor mobility, now feel vindicated. There is no doubt that a
fully-fledged federal system as in the U.S. would have helped to prevent some distinctive
features of the crisis in the euro area (e.g. disproportionate state-level debts), allow smoother
resolution of financial-system problems, and more generally, offer less scope for
policymakers to confuse markets with conflicting commentaries. Yet, is this a definitive
proof that the euro is not viable without a federalist fiscal architecture?
86.
To address this question, this paper frames the various aspects of crisis
prevention and management in the light of fiscal federalism. Strictly speaking fiscal
federalism refers to the conduct of fiscal operations at federal and regional levels with a
three-fold function: redistribution (permanent transfers from richer to poorer regions),
stabilization (counter-cyclical federal fiscal policy when all regions are hit by a common
shock), and risk-sharing (temporary transfers when selected regions are hit by a regionspecific shock). The U.S. is the quintessential example of a fiscal union, while the EU, where
certain functions such as agricultural and cohesion policy, can only be regarded as a soft
form of fiscal federalism, which in any case does not coincide with the currency union.
Differences between the two regions are even larger if the notion of fiscal federalism is
extended to reflect the degree of cross-border economic activity and resolution mechanisms.
87.
European economic governance is currently under debate but the large number
of proposals on the table simply seek strengthened coordination. Is this a problem? We
argue that this need not be a problem provided that solutions put forward work in practice.
But a major overhaul is clearly needed.
88.
The paper is structured as follows. Section B compares the euro area and the U.S.
economic systems, with a focus on fiscal aspects. Section C assesses current crisis prevention
and management proposed reforms. Section D concludes.

32

Prepared by Esther Perez Ruiz.

51
B.

Economic Systems in the EU and the U.S.: A Brief Comparison33

89.
This section compares the EU and U.S. fiscal and economic salient features, with
a focus on fiscal federalism. One way to compare fiscal capacity in the two regions is to
quantify the centralization of revenues and the distribution of expenditures by the U.S.
federal government and the EU budget (Figure IV.1). Note that this is not an entirely fair
comparison as the EU is distinct from the euro area, so the fiscal transfer space does not
coincide with the monetary union and there are no specific transfer provisions for members
of the euro area. Nonetheless, it is instructive to look at the differences between the EU and
the U.S. In the U.S., federal taxes collected from the states range from 12 to 20 percent of
state GDP, and federal transfers received by states range from 9 to 31 percent of state GDP.
In contrast, most EU countries contribute to the common budget by about 0.8 to 0.9 percent
of their GDP, and receive EU funds amounting to 0.5 to 3.5 percent of their GDP. As a
result, fiscal redistribution is much more sizable in the U.S. and the relationship between
redistribution and the level of development (as measured by GDP per capita) is also much
stronger in the U.S.
90.
While important, differences in fiscal centralization alone cannot explain why
only the continuity of the euro area has been challenged so far. Institutional features,
such as fiscal rules, the scope for local debt, the conduct of fiscal stabilization, the strength of
the banking system and the extent of market flexibility also matter. We compare the two
regions in those areas that can help prevent and manage crises in regions/states participating
in a supranational entity:


Fiscal rules in the U.S. tend to be more stringent than in the euro area leaving less
potential for irresponsible behavior. Most U.S. states have Balanced Budget
Requirements (BBRs) in their constitutions, which can be interpreted as a response of the
states to a credibly established no bailout by the federal government of defaulting states
(Laubach, 2005). Snell (2004) concluded that 36 states have rigorous BBRs (effectively
disciplining local fiscal policies), 4 have weak requirements, and the other 10 fall in
between those categories.



The scope for local debt is less in the U.S.: given the higher share of centralization of
revenues and expenditures and the fact that state fiscal rules are generally strict, state
spending does not have the potential to lead to massive debt/GDP ratios. To illustrate, the
combined debt of US states and local governments amounted to about 22 percent of U.S.
GDP in 2010, with limited cross-state divergence (ranging from 9.3 percent in Wyoming
to 33 percent in Rhode Island). In contrast, the euro area debt-to-GDP ratio amounted to

33

This section heavily relies on Darvas (2010).

52
85 percent of GDP in 2010 (ranging from 18 percent in Luxembourg to 142 percent in
Greece).


The superiority of fiscal stabilization in the U.S. cannot be established: During the
crisis the US federal government allowed automatic stabilizers to run and adopted a
major discretionary stimulus including direct help to state budgets. In the EU, countercyclical policies were left to each member state with some attempt of coordination from
the center. However, both in the euro area and the U.S. there are states that had to deal
with pro-cyclical fiscal policy at some point during the crisis and states that could benefit
from counter-cyclical fiscal policy (Darvas, 2010). Focusing on the pre-EMU period,
Fatas (1998) also concluded that the benefits in terms of fiscal stabilization were not
sizable enough to compensate the costs of creating a fully-fledged European fiscal
federation.



Strength of the banking system: measures implemented to date to reinforce the
banking system seem to have been more effective in the U.S. Alongside with fiscal
functions, banking regulation and supervision are also centralized in the U.S., and fixing
the financial system is easier because cross-(state-)border banking is not inhibited. The
fragmentation and fragility of the euro-area banking industry is a major reason why the
crises in current program countries threaten the EMU project.



Labor and product market flexibility: the empirical literature proving the U.S. much
closer to an Optimum Currency Area (OCA) than the EU is voluminous. Cross-border
mobility of companies and labor is clearly superior in the U.S.



Significant similarities exist between the two areas as to the formal crisis resolution
mechanisms: Prior to the crisis, there were no bail-out or short-term financial
mechanisms in the euro area or the U.S. Neither an orderly default mechanism was
previewed.

Overall, although the two regions have some similarities in terms of the damage potential of
the state-level problems, the comparison with the U.S. suggests that a more federalist fiscal
and economic union would most likely have reduced the vulnerability of the euro area to
crises, accelerated the strengthening of the banking system, increased the political coherence
of the euro area and boosted confidence.
C.

Bolstering Economic Integration in the Euro Area

91.
Solutions to euro area problems can be tailored to its needs. Since the euro area
has a different political setup than the U.S., the level of government debt is very diverse
across countries, and the establishment of fiscal transfers as sizable as in the U.S. would

53
surely generate further tensions and antagonism between creditor and debtor countries,
European solutions need not follow the U.S. model. How can the euro area governance be
put on a solid footing? To what extent do the current governance proposals give the euro area
some attributes of a political union? How do they contribute to enhance stabilization,
redistribution and risk sharing?
Macroeconomic stabilization and discipline: enhancing the scrutiny of imbalances
92.
With the monetary instrument lost, fiscal policy becomes the main
countercyclical instrument in the euro area. However, fiscal polices have been mostly
pro-cyclical before and during the EMU years (Fatas and Mihov, 2009). More responsible
fiscal policies would have reduced the scope for crises by limiting pre-crisis debt levels. But
this does not necessarily require a fiscal federation: a larger role for fiscal stabilization in the
euro area can be achieved through counter-cyclical country-level fiscal rules. Most U.S.
states have constitutional fiscal rules—and the same approach has also been adopted recently
by Germany. Other euro-area members may also choose this approach, possibly augmented
by the introduction of independent fiscal councils (Calmfors and others, 2010).
93.
By capping the expenditure-to-GDP ratio, the revamped SGP (Tables IV.1 and
IV.2) aims to contain pro-cyclical fiscal policies. Fiscal discipline will also be improved by
strengthening enforcement (including quicker and semi-automatic sanctions) and making the
debt criterion operational (placing under Excessive Deficit Procedure, or EDP, countries with
debt levels above the 60 percent limit and reducing indebtedness at a yearly pace lower than
1/20th of the distance from that benchmark). Taking into account implicit liabilities will
require a country with an oversized banking sector to factor in potential rescue costs. All this
is encouraging. However, the effectiveness of fiscal surveillance could be substantially
improved by introducing legal provisions requiring the correction of past upward drifts in
public expenditure; calibrating more ambitious and country differentiated medium term
objectives (MTOs) to realistically face sustainability challenges posed by the crisis and aging
populations; initiating EDPs by reverse qualified majority whereby Commission’s
recommendation prevails unless the Council decides otherwise by QM; restricting sanction
waivers; and tightening legal deadlines for corrective action.
94.
But macroeconomic stabilization is not only about fiscal policy and not all crises
are rooted in a lack of budgetary discipline. As fiscal excesses may be neither the only nor
the most important source of macroeconomic imbalances, the new Excessive Imbalances
Procedure (EIP) is a necessary complement to the revised SGP. Imbalances can be of two
kinds, internal (if prompted by irresponsible fiscal behavior, credit excesses in the private
sector and asset bubbles) and external (if rooted in competitiveness deficiencies), both
affecting the current account balance and international investment positions. The EIP
comprises a preventive arm, identifying imbalances and triggering, as needed, in-depth
analyses about their underlying causes. For countries suffering from excessive imbalances
and put under the EIP, the corrective arm will require the adoption of adequate fiscal,

54
structural and macro-prudential remedies. Current proposals helpfully identify general
objectives, but to be effective, EIP regulations will have to define limit thresholds for key
indicators, introduce more binding deadlines, and use reverse qualified majority voting in all
relevant steps. The list of minimum amendments to make the new procedure work includes:






Establishing well-defined benchmarks in the EIP regulation. The absence of
indicators and reference thresholds in the regulation introduces legal uncertainty
especially at the initiation of the EIP. Such legal vacuum is at odds with SGP
regulations, which specify benchmarks the deviation from which makes a strong case
for activating EDPs. At the very minimum, EIP rules should clearly spell out
thresholds for current account balances and international investment positions, given
their comprehensive character. The remaining indicators (e.g. competitiveness, credit
indicators) could play a complementary role and be the object of a separate Code of
Conduct.
Facilitating decision making. Relevant EIP decisions (other than the imposition of
sanctions) should be taken by reverse qualified majority, most importantly the
initiation of EIPs.
Tightening deadlines. As the EIP involves many steps, the process is likely to be
lengthy and uncertain unless binding deadlines are foreseen. Maximum spells within
consecutive steps should be specified along the procedure and an overall time length
of one year (starting from the initiation of the EIP until the final closure/imposition of
sanctions) could be set.

Higher public and private risk-sharing
95.
One important advantage of federal systems is that they create risk-sharing
opportunities by pooling the debt of participating states. A euro area bond would play a
similar role in the euro area. There would be common issuance to which countries have
conditional access (either up to a level, or under some other strict, measurable conditions).
Safeguards should produce the right incentives to prevent countries from massively issuing
bonds and promote fiscal discipline more powerfully than the SGP or any other fiscal
coordination proposal.
96.
Euro area bonds would reduce the cost of debt of most member states (and
eventually of all of them) through a much larger market size, depth, liquidity and
diversification. This would place them on a par with the U.S. Treasury bonds, reinforcing
the euro as a major reserve currency. Lower cost of debt and the attractiveness of this market
for large investors would also help achieve more sustainable debt levels and higher economic
growth potential.
97.
Another important gap to fill between the euro area and a federal system as the
U.S. is financial supervision and crisis resolution. By neglecting the problem of systemic
risk, micro-prudential regulation has failed to maintain financial stability. As a result, many

55
European countries have had to provide bailouts. Government interventions have in turn
reduced cross-border lending, limiting the scope for risk diversification and financial
stability. Both a macro-prudential approach to regulation and a euro area wide burdensharing mechanism are needed to foster private risk-sharing, as is the removal of financial
protectionism. And all these institutional changes should be feasible without creating a U.S.style federal fiscal system.
Making the most of current redistribution efforts
98.
Although modest compared with the U.S., Europe’s redistribution policy,
embodied in the Common Agricultural Policy and the Cohesion Policy, features the
highest degree of fiscal federalism at the EU level. Rather than discussing the optimal
level of redistribution, a very contentious issue, it is important to note that the low level of
intra-EU redistribution has not caused the current crisis: it is ironic that precisely Greece
was the highest net beneficiary prior to the crisis, receiving much more than what the
relationship between net balance with the EU and GDP per capita would suggest.
99.
The EU earmarks a total of about 348 billion euros under the heading Structural
and Cohesion Funds (SCF) over 2007–13. This is equal to 2.8 of the EU GDP or
0.4 percent of per year on average. It is usually claimed that EU funds are not as powerful an
instrument for resource allocation as in the U.S. Yet, EU support for cohesion represents a
significant amount when compared, for example, with the size of the rescue packages to
Greece (110 billion euros) and to Ireland (85 billion euros). And Marshall Plan aid from
1948-51 was only about 2 percent of the GDP of all recipient countries, but made a
substantial contribution to western European growth.
100. Moreover, some EU countries have large amounts of usable SCF. As a matter of
fact, funds are only partially slowly absorbed and countries lose the funds that are still
unused two years after they have been allocated. For instance, in Portugal and Greece unused
funds respectively amount to 9.3 and 7 percent of GDP (Marzinotto, 2010). Accelerating the
absorption rate of EU funds and further exploiting synergies between EU grants and EIB
loans are two commendable objectives of adjustment programs in crisis-hit countries.
Enhancing market adjustment
101. Measures to move the whole euro area, including its labor market, towards an
OCA, are of the utmost importance. It is now 20 years since the Single Market Program
was launched with the goal of eliminating barriers to the movement of goods, services,
capital and workers. Despite substantial progress over this period, especially in financial
markets, the integration of product markets appears to have stalled, and labor remains largely
fragmented.

56
102. Labor mobility in the EU remains relatively low, despite the legal right to work
anywhere in the EU. One longstanding reason inhibiting mobility is the large differences in
tax, social insurance and pension systems across the EU. There is ample evidence that
differences in implicit tax rates on income substantially distort mobility (Fenge and Von
Weizsacker, 2008, Wasmer and Janiak, 2008). Further reducing mobility distortions—not
only for pensions but also for other parts of European welfare states—would be desirable.
103. Completing the agenda of the Single Market initiated in the mid-1980s, the
Services Directive called for the removal of unjustified obstacles to market entry in the
provision of services. However, given the abstract nature of its principles and its broad
coverage, countries have practically kept a broad scope of freedom for its implementation
and its impact has been generally disappointing. Moreover, the need to analyze regulations
on an individual basis in order to verify their compatibility with the directive (“screening of
legislation”) has made the transposition a very lengthy process and delayed its economic
benefits.
Higher intrusion in domestic policies: who oversees non-compliance?
104. One common feature of the manifold processes described so far is that they keep
intact national sovereignty. As such, the proposed governance package continues to belong
to the category of inter-governmental projects subject to inter-governmental coordination. In
essence, the de jure institutional structure of the region will be left broadly unchanged after
these reforms and the control of fiscal, macro-prudential and structural policies will remain
in the hands of national governments. The only hope for the reforms to make a difference
with the status quo is that, this time, coordination and peer pressure will work. But will they
really?
105. An attempt to complement coordination procedures with a certain dose of
political commitment is represented by the Euro Plus Pact. Meant to bolster economic
integration over and above Treaty commitments, the Pact (agreed upon by euro area leaders
in March) was initially perceived as a valuable political addition to the governance package.
However, in reality, the Pact contains a list of desirable cross-cutting goals for tighter
coordination on the competitiveness, employment, fiscal and financial fronts, but no tangible
means to implement them beyond current procedures. To help the euro area grow out of the
crisis, the Pact should take a decisive turn towards commitments which are time-bound,
ambitious in terms of objectives and concrete regarding their design.
106. The alternative to more governmental coordination is to transfer some national
sovereignty to a supranational entity. This would mean that although national authorities
would retain in principle the control over fiscal, macro-prudential and structural policies,
some delegation of political power to the center is also allowed if a country fails to comply
with euro area rules. A first step towards increasing the degree of supra-nationality would be

57
to vest euro area authorities with powers to override national policies if those conflict with
the common interest (Trichet, 2011). This would imply shared competence over economic
matters, but only for sovereigns failing to abide by the region’s rules. In any case, in a highly
interconnected region as the euro area national sovereignty is de facto more of an illusion
than a reality.
D.

Conclusion

107. Euro area governance needs to go through an ambitious reform. While the origin
of the euro-area fiscal crisis is not the lack of a federal institutional setup with higher
redistribution, stabilization and risk-sharing roles, a more federal approach would likely have
dampened the contagion of state-level problems within the region, accelerated its resolution
and enhanced political coherence overall.
108. While improvements compared to the status quo, current government proposals
fall short of what is needed to support the integrity of the euro area. The new policy
framework looks somewhat unclear, with no less than three different, partially overlapping,
European procedures—for budgets, macroeconomic imbalances and macro-financial
stability. This not only calls for a substantial coordination effort across policy areas, but more
fundamentally, between the national and supranational authorities. If past is prologue, it is far
from certain that inter-governmental agreements will succeed in this huge coordination task,
and the Euro Plus Pact seems to be no exception in this respect.
109. For this reason it is expected that the governance model will be in need of
reform soon. And euro area members will again be confronted with the uncomfortable,
though unavoidable, decision on how much national sovereignty to delegate. No doubt
curtailing the powers of governments breaking the rules requires a fundamental political
move, possibly expanding the notion of national sovereignty with economic considerations,
and requiring legal changes both to the Treaty and the Constitutional laws. Enabling the
prevalence of European authority over national institutions (where circumstances so advice)
needs, above all, a change in mentality, though some progress has to be acknowledged in the
area of regulation and supervision. National authorities need to delegate some power to the
center for the sake of the common interest. This is quite different from creating coordination
institutions at the EU level that overlap, duplicate but that can hardly supersede national
authorities.

58
Table IV.1. Main Changes to the Stability and Growth Pact following the 2011
Reform--Preventive Arm
Current rules

Legislative Proposal

Preventive arm--Principles of fiscal prudency--Limiting risks to public finance sustainability
* A MTO is set for each country to (i) provide a safety
margin w.r.t. the 3% of GDP deficit limit; (ii) to accelerate
progress towards sustainability.
* The MTOs are defined in CAB terms, net of one-off and
other temporary measures.
* The MTOs for euro area countries are set within the
range between -1% of GDP and balance or surplus.
* The MTOs are differentiated , in relation to (i) by output
volatility and budgetary sensitivity to output; and in
relation to (ii) by public debt levels and age-related
liabilities.
* Countries are expected to improve the structural
balance by at least 0.5 p.p. each year until the MTO is
achieved, with some leeway in bad times and an
expectation that faster progress would be made in "good
times".
* "Good times" are periods with positive output gaps.
* MTOs are revised every 4 years.

* Rules as regards MTOs are kept.
* But past adjustment efforts towards MTOs proved inadequate.
Seemingly fast/sound convergence of CABs towards MTOs
masked strong reliance on windfall revenues to finance unusually
high expenditure levels (i.e. the MTO instrument was not useful to
fulfill criterion (i)).
* New principle of fiscal prudency to complement MTOs-Ceiling for Expenditure-to-GDP ratio
* Expenditure growth proportional to potential GDP growth prevents
deficits from deteriorating sharply in bad times and allows for
using unexpected extra revenues for debt reduction.
* Countries having achieved MTOs: annual exp. growth not to
exceed a "prudent" 10y-horizon GDP growth projection.
* Countries that have not achieved the MTO: annual exp.growth not
to exceed a rate below a "prudent" 10y-horizon GDP growth
projection. Such rate set to ensure an "appropriate" adjustment
towards the MTO.
* Deviations are allowed if (i) the excess of exp. growth is explicitly
covered by offsetting discretionary revenue measures; (ii) the
country has significantly "overachieved" the MTO, or (iii) in
periods of severe economic downturn of a general nature.

Preventive arm-Warnings and Sanctions in case of deviation from fiscal prudency

* Early warning by the EC if significant deviation from
the MTO.
* Council recommends to take corrective action if
persistent and/or serious deviation.

* Rules as regards early warnings and Council recommendations
stay.
* The meaning of "significant deviation" is clarified: A deviation
reducing the government balance at least 0.5% of GDP in one
single year or of at least 0.25% of GDP on average in two
consecutive years.
* Council recommendations backed by interest-bearing deposit
(0.2% of GDP) for EA countries only, if no "appropriate action"
is taken within a max. of 5 months (3 months in serious cases).
* Decision making rule is Reverse Qualified Majority (RQM) within
10 days following EC proposal.
* Deposit could be reduced/cancelled upon reasoned request
from the country.
* Deposit is returned, with accrued interest, once situation is
deemed reversed or converted into fine in case of noncompliance.

Source: Staff summary of current legislative proposals.

Table IV.2. Main Changes to the Stability and Growth Pact following the 2011 Reform—Corrective Arm
Current rules

Legislative Proposal
Corrective arm--Declaration of EDP--Correcting unsustainable budgetary policies

* While both the deficit and debt criterion are on an equal footing in the Treaty, in practice only the deficit
threshold activated the EDP. This was partly due to the ambiguity of the notion "sufficiently diminishing
pace".
* Adoption of a
numerical benchmark to gauge a "sufficiently diminishing" debt ratio: the distance from the 60%
* The debt criterion can lead to EDP unless the ratio is "sufficiently diminishing" and approaching
target was reduced at an average rate of 1/20th per year over previous 3 years.
the reference value at a "satisfactory pace".
* Grace period of 3 years from the entry into force of the regulation before the rule is applied ("account shall
be taken of the backward looking nature of this indicator in its application").
* The debt criterion is far from being automatic: Non-compliance will not necessarily result in EDP. A risk
analysis will examine factors contributing to debt dynamics including nominal growth, abd risk factors
Corrective arm--Activation, Deadlines, Reporting requirements and Sanctions
* EDP is activated if a country does not fulfill at least one of the two Treaty thresholds and no
"appropriate action" is taken to address Council recommendations , the Council may decide to place
the country under EDP by QM, based on a EC report.

* Conditions to activate the EDP stay the same.

* A 6-month deadline is set for taking corrective action for countries under EDP.
* The correction of the excessive deficit should be accomplished within one year.
* Deadlines provisions remain the same.
* Extension of deadline is allowed for if "unexpected economic events with major unfavourable
consequences for government finances occur". The deadline will be extended by one year "as a rule".
* Within six months at most the country will present a report on action taken in response to the
Council recommendations. The report will be made public.

* Reporting requirements remain the same.

* The Council may decide whether "effective action" has been taken. If no effective action has been
taken within the deadline, the Council may give notice to the MS concerned to take measures to
reduce the deficit.
* No deadline is specified for the Council to give notice to the country concerned.
* Deadlines provisions remain the same.
* Extension of deadline is allowed for "unexpected adverse economic events with major
unfavourable consequences for government finances". The extension will be granted by one year "as a
rule".
* If no effective action is taken within four months after the Council notice, the previous non-interestbearing deposit will be converted into a fine.
* Fine could be reduced or cancelled:
• by the EC based on exceptional economic circumstances or following a reasoned request from the
country concerned
• by the Council by Qualified Majority.
* If the MS fails to comply with the Council recommendations systematically, the Council may apply a
fine including (i) a fixed component equal to 0.2 % of GDP, (ii) and a variable component, equal to
one-tenth of the difference between the deficit as a percent of GDP and the 3% reference value.
* Provisions regarding the final fine remain the same.
* If the EDP concerns the debt criterion, the variable component will be calculated with reference to
the balance that should have been achieved in that year according to the notice issued by the
Council.
Source: Staff summary of current legislative proposals.

59

* Upon a decision to place a country in EDP, a non-interest-bearing deposit amounting to 0.2% of GDP
will apply for EA countries:
• For countries previously subject to sanctions under the preventive arm, the interest-bearing deposit is
transformed into a non-interest-bearing deposit.
• Otherwise, the Council will adopt a recommendation setting a deadline for corrective action. In case of
serious slippages, sanctions could be applied immediately.
* Deposit could be reduced or cancelled:
• by the EC on grounds of exceptional economic circumstances or following a reasoned request from the
country concerned.
• by the Council by QM.

60
Figure IV.1. EU and the U.S.: Fiscal Centralization and Redistribution
60

60

U.S. Federal Budget: Taxes From, Spending in, and Balance with States, 1999
(Percent of state GDP)

50

50
40

40
Spending

30

Taxes

Balance

30
20

10

10

0

0

-10

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
NEW MEXICO
MONTANA
WEST VIRGINIA
MISSISSIPPI
NORTH DAKOTA
VIRGINIA
ALABAMA
SOUTH DAKOTA
OKLAHOMA
ALASKA
ARKANSAS
HAWAII
LOUISIANA
KENTUCKY
MARYLAND
MAINE
SOUTH CAROLINA
MISSOURI
IDAHO
TENNESSEE
ARIZONA
IOWA
RHODE ISLAND
KANSAS
VERMONT
WYOMING
NEBRASKA
PENNSYLVANIA
UTAH
NORTH CAROLINA
FLORIDA
GEORGIA
TEXAS
OHIO
INDIANA
WASHINGTON
OREGON
COLORADO
CALIFORNIA
DELAWARE
MASSACHUSETTS
NEW YORK
WISCONSIN
MICHIGAN
MINNESOTA
NEVADA
ILLINOIS
NEW HAMPSHIRE
NEW JERSEY
CONNECTICUT

20

4.0

4.0

EU Budget: Contribution from, Spending in, and Balance with Member States, 2008
(Percent of member state GDP)
Total EU Spending (excl.administration)
Total national contribution
EU administrative spending
Balance with EU (excl. administration)

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0

-10

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

-0.5

-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
GR LT BG LV PT EE PL RO SK HU CZ MT IE SI ES LU UK CY AT FI FR BE DK IT DE SE NL
20

15
MT
WV
MS

10

NM
ND

VA
OK AL SD
AK
ARLA
KY HI
ME
MO MD
SCIA
ID
TN
KS AZ WY
NE
VT RI NC
WA
UTPA TXGA
NY
FL IN OH
CA MA
OR WI
MI MN
CO
NV
IL NJ
NH

5

0

-5

15

10

5

DE

0

-5
CT

-10

-10
40

90
140
GDP per capita at PPP (US=100)

3.0
Balance with EU less administration (percent of GDP)

Balance with the Federal Government (percent of
GDP)

20

3.0
GR

LT

2.5
2.0

2.5
2.0

BG

LV

1.5

EE
RO

1.0

PL

PT

1.5

HU SK

1.0

CZ
MT

0.5

SI

0.5

IE

ES

UK AT
CY
FI DK
FR
ITBE
SE NL
DE

0.0
-0.5

0.0
-0.5

-1.0

-1.0
40

60

80

100

120

140

160

GDP per capita at PPS (EU=100)

Sources: OECD; Haver Analytics; Harvard Kennedy School, Taubman Center for State and Local
Government; and European Commission, DG Budget.

61
References
Calmfors, L., G. Kopits and C. Teulings, 2010, “A New Breed of Fiscal Watchdogs,”
Eurointelligence. Available via the Internet
http://www.eurointelligence.com/index.php?id=581&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=2791&
tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=901&cHash=0cb479c189
Darvas, Z., 2010, “Fiscal Federalism in Crisis: Lessons for Europe from the US,” Working
Papers 1002, Department of Mathematical Economics and Economic Analysis,
(Corvinus: University of Budapest).
Fatás, E., 1998, “Does Europe Need a Fiscal Federation?” Economic Policy Vol. 13, No. 26.
Fatás, E. and I. Mihov, 2009, “The Euro and Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Papers 14722,
(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Fenge, R. and J. von Weizsäcker, 2008, “Public Pensions and Intra-EU Mobility: An Unfinished
Agenda,” Bruegel Working Papers 46 (Brussels: Bruegel).
Laubach, T., 2005, “Fiscal Relations Across Levels of Government in the United States”, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers No. 462, (Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
Marzinotto, B., 2010, “A European Fund for Economic Revival in Crisis Countries,” Bruegel
Policy Brief 2011/01 (Brussels: Bruegel).
Snell, R. K., 2004, “State Balanced Budget Requirements: Provisions and Practice,” National
Conference of State Legislatures. Available via Internet
http://www.ncsl.org/?TabId=12651
Trichet, J.C., 2011, “The Euro Area and Its Role in the Global Economy”, Remarks by JeanClaude Trichet upon reception of the 2011 Global Economy Prize, Kiel, 19 June 2011.
Wasmer, E. and A. Janiak, 2008, “Mobility in Europe: Why It Is Low, the Bottlenecks, and the
Policy Solutions,” European Economy, Economic Papers No. 340, (Brussels: European
Commission).

62
V.

RAISING POTENTIAL GROWTH IN EUROPE: MIND THE RESIDUAL34
A.

Introduction

110. Higher potential growth is needed in Europe to underpin debt sustainability, keep
up living standards and shoulder the costs of ageing. The challenge ahead is substantial, as
even before the crisis potential growth in mature European economies hobbled around 2 percent,
at a considerable distance from e.g. the U.S.
111. The bulk of the EU-U.S. growth gap is explained by Total Factor Productivity
(TFP). It has become commonplace for growth accounting exercises to identify TFP as the main
driver underlying the superior GDP growth in the U.S. since the mid-1990s (see, for instance,
Jorgenson and others, 2008; van Ark and others, 2008), in stark contrast with previous decades,
when TFP growth performance in Europe was well above that of the U.S.
112. As a residual measure TFP has multiple interpretations, but it reflects in some way
the overall efficiency of the production process. This study is an attempt to link the growth
residual to policy-relevant determinants such as levels of human and ICT capital, the regulatory
environment, taxation and the degree of openness. Our focus is on ICT and market services
industries, where U.S. TFP growth advantage was mostly concentrated.
113. The paper is organized as follows. Section B presents TFP patterns in 13 European
countries and the U.S. This is followed by the description of the empirical setup and the data
used in the analysis in Section C. Section D presents the main results and discusses the specific
channels through which fundamentals may affect productivity. Section E uses the estimated
model for policy simulation and Section F concludes.
B.

TFP Growth in Europe and the United States

114. This section examines growth accounting stylized facts for the U.S. and 13 European
countries. The sample includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden, Ireland, the U.K. (henceforth referred to as EU13 or
Europe for short), and the U.S. The analysis of other standard EU country groupings is prevented
due to lack of data availability.
115. During the pre-crisis period 1995–07, EU13’s growth performance lagged by
1.2 percentage points relative to the U.S. As documented in previous studies a substantial part
of this growth differential (0.9 percentage points) was explained by weaker TFP growth, with
only 0.3 percentage points being attributable to the differential growth in factor quality and
quantity (Table V.1). The shortfall in TFP growth vis-à-vis the U.S. represents a reversal

34

Prepared by Nandaka Molagoda and Esther Perez with statistical assistance from Xiaobo Shao.

63
compared with the period 1980–95, where productivity growth in Europe (at 0.9 percent)
situated well above the U.S. (at 0.5 percent).
116. TFP experiences within Europe are very diverse. While productivity growth in
Finland, Austria, Ireland, Slovenia and Sweden outperformed the U.S. during 1995–07, TFP
decreased sharply in Spain and, less markedly, in Italy and Denmark. Core economies in the
region, such as Belgium and Germany, while registering positive growth rates, generally fared
poorly compared with the U.S.
117. TFP growth strongly differs across industries too. The productivity growth gap
between Europe and the U.S. is largely accounted for by market services and, to a lesser extent,
ICT-producing sectors (Table V.2). In contrast, goods production seems to be more efficient in
Europe. For instance, in Austria, Germany, Finland, Slovenia and France, manufacturing
industries are still important sources of productivity growth. In Spain and Italy, lackluster
performance overall is not only due to slow growth in market services, but also in
manufacturing, where traditional labor-intensive sectors face increasing low-cost competition
from China and Eastern Europe (see, e.g. Chen and others, 2011). It is also important to note that
Europe’s lagging productivity is due more to a lack of dynamism within industries than to a bias
towards low-productive industries. While positive, the TFP growth differential attributable to the
allocation of resources towards lower-than-average productivity sectors is only about 20 percent
of the total TFP growth gap (Table V.2, column 5). In what follows, we restrict our empirical
analysis to productivity performance at the industry level.
118. Cross-Atlantic TFP growth differences are concentrated in a handful of sectors.
Differences are found to be especially large in computers, electrical and optical equipment, and,
for market services, in retail distribution, finance and business services, and real estate activities
(Figure V.1). By contrast, Europe exhibits stronger TFP growth in network utilities, such as
electricity, gas and water supply, and especially post and telecommunications.
C.

Empirical Specification and Data Description

Empirical setup
119. Our empirical approach is policy oriented. Conceptually there are as many
specifications for TFP as theories of endogenous growth. As our main focus is polices, we will
adopt an eclectic approach focusing on two empirical regularities, namely technological catch-up
with the leading industries and knowledge spillovers from the frontier economies to laggards
(see Scarpetta and Tressel, 2002; Aghion and Howitt, 2005; and Griffith and others, 2006). The
estimated equation is:

64

TFPi , j ,t 1 
  X i , j ,t
  2  ln
(1) TFˆ Pi , j ,t     1 TFˆPi ,Leader
j ,t
 TFP

Leader
i
j
t

,
,
,
1



TFPi , j ,t 1 
 X i , j ,t   1 Di   2 D j   3 Dt  
  1 TFˆPi ,Leader
X i , j ,t   2  ln
j ,t
 TFP

Leader ,i , j ,t 1 










where the indices i, j, t denote countries, industries and years; Leader denotes the country
exhibiting the highest TFP level in sector j in year t; the sign ^ indicates growth rates; X i , j ,t is a
set of additional control factors that may affect TFP growth rates independently or interacted
with explanatory factors in the baseline specification; and Di , D j and Dt are country, industry and
year fixed effects.
120. The specification allows for catching-up phenomena and knowledge spillovers. TFP
growth in a given country and sector depends on its ability to keep pace with TFP growth in the
country with the highest productivity level (the frontier economy), as captured by the
coefficient  2 . A negative coefficient indicates that the farther a sector is from the technology
frontier the greater the scope for productivity improvements arising from technological catch-up.
In addition TFP growth in the leader can have a direct impact on the followers’ productivity
growth (  1 )—whenever followers are involved in analogous breakthrough innovations or in the
presence of knowledge spillovers, including through trade.
121. The economic environment is assumed to influence the capacity to catch up with
state-of-the-art technologies and to benefit from knowledge spillovers. The variables we use
to represent such framework conditions include human capital, the adoption of ICT technology,
product market regulations, openness and corporate taxes. These variables enter both separately
and interacted with the leader’s TFP growth and the laggard’s TFP distance from the frontier.
Data description
122. Our panel data have cross-country, cross-sector and time series dimensions. Our
panel sample covers the 1980–07 period and includes 33 industries (Table V.3) located in the
U.S. plus the EU13, namely all market services, the ICT-producing manufacturing sector and all
industries in the economy that use ICT goods intensively. TFP growth rates are taken from the
EU KLEMS (KLEMS henceforth) database, which contains a growth accounting exercise based
on high-quality measures of factor inputs. KLEMS’ growth accounting framework distinguishes
between labor with different skill levels, ICT and non-ICT capital stock. In this framework,
innovations that are factor specific are embodied in the definition of capital or labor inputs. For
instance, the direct effect of the ICT revolution appears as a change in the composition of capital
services (from non-ICT to ICT capital services). Similarly, changes in human capital are
embodied in the stock of labor services. This methodology thus allows assessing TFP
developments excluding the impact of changes in the quality of both capital and labor inputs.

65
123. The technology gap term is constructed using the Groningen Growth and
Development Center (GGDC) Productivity Level database. This databank (Inklaar and
Timmer, 2009) contains PPP-adjusted TFP levels consistent with the KLEMS growth accounts.
Anchoring TFP KLEMS growth rates to the 1997 levels, technological leaders and followers can
be identified across all sample countries, industries and time periods. As a way of illustration, in
2007, Sweden and Netherlands were situated at the technological frontier in network utilities,
while the U.S. dominated in ICT-producing industries and business services (Figure V.2). The
TFP growth at the frontier (the other key factor in the baseline model) is represented by the TFP
growth of the country with the highest TFP level in industry j, in year t.
124. Human capital is proxied by the ratio of high skilled labor to overall labor. Skilled
labor is measured by the share of the labor force having completed tertiary education. The ratio
of ICT capital to non-ICT capital is added to the regression to control for the role of ICT
technologies in facilitating TFP growth. According to this measure, human capital is found to be
most developed in U.S., Finland, Spain, Sweden, and Ireland, both in services and ICT sectors,
while the proportion of ICT in non-ICT capital services is highest in Anglo-Saxon and Nordic
countries (Figure V.3).
125. The regulatory stance in product markets is measured by the OECD Regulatory
Impact indicator (RI). The RI indicators (developed by Conway and Nicoletti, 2006), measure
the “knock on” effect on each industry arising from anti-competitive regulations in up-stream
network industries (energy, transport and telecommunications), retail distribution and
professional services. Besides reflecting the extent of anti-competitive regulation in nonmanufacturing sectors, the RI indicators also capture their economic importance as supplier of
intermediate inputs to other sectors—hence the importance of increasing competition in these
sectors. Barring post and telecommunications, “knock on” effects in key ICT and services
sectors in EU13 countries are generally well above the U.S. (Figure V.4).
126. Gauging the impact of corporate taxes on sectoral TFP is not straightforward, as
those tax indicators are not differentiated by industries. An indirect way to test for these
effects is to see whether the impact of corporate taxes on TFP growth is shaped by industryspecific characteristics, in particular, profitability rates (Vartia, 2008). To implement this, the
OECD statutory corporate tax levied on corporate profits at a flat rate (and applying to the
majority of the corporations) is linked to profitability, as determined by the ratio of operating
profits over value added (both obtained from the OECD STAN database)35. Firms’ profits are
taxed at the highest rates in core Europe and the U.S. while Ireland, Austria, Denmark, and the
Netherlands stand out as the countries with the lowest tax burden on profits (Figure V.3).

35

There are many ways to combine profitability and tax rates but in the empirical specification discussed in section
IV the product of both variables proved to be particularly relevant.

66
127. We enter the degree of openness in the regression separately and interacted with
both the technological gap and TFP growth of the leader country. This approach is
consistent with previous findings in the economic growth literature pointing to a strong link
between openness, innovation spillovers and the technological catch up (see, for instance,
Rivera-Batiz and Romer, 2006). In order to obtain industry-specific measures of openness, we
express for each sector the sum of imports and exports (as compiled in the OECD STAN
database) as a share of sectoral value added. The small European economies of Belgium, Ireland
and the Netherlands are predominantly open, while the U.S., U.K., France, Italy, and Spain are
comparatively closed (Figure V.3).
D.

Results

128. Confirming past studies, our results suggest that, across the whole sample of
industries, TFP growth benefits from the innovations carried out in the leading economy.
In addition, the coefficient of the productivity gap is negative36 and significant, indicating the
importance of international diffusion of new-vintage technologies. Broadly, a 1 percent increase
in TFP growth in the frontier economy results in a 0.1 percentage point increase in TFP growth,
while a 1 percent larger TFP gap one period earlier results in almost 0.4 percentage point
increase in TFP growth. However, given the size of the average TFP gap and the average TFP
growth rate of the frontier economy, the contribution of the leader’s productivity improvements
is, on average, about six times larger.
129. Both human and ICT capital appear to have a significant explanatory power. Our
estimates suggest that human capital has a positive coefficient on its own (even though our
measure of TFP controls for the composition effects of labor input) and when interacted with
TFP growth at the frontier, pointing to the importance of a highly educated workforce for
innovation and knowledge spillovers. In line with past studies investigating the role of human
capital in determining the pace of convergence with frontier innovation (see, for instance,
Vandenbusche and others, 2006), the positive coefficient of the interaction with the catch up
effect implies a stronger TFP impact of human capital the closer a sector is from the frontier. As
with human capital, a higher proportion of ICT capital appears to be a facilitator of technology
spillover effects.
130. In keeping with previous studies, we find a direct negative impact of RI on TFP
growth. The literature pointing to a negative relationship between product market regulation,
entrepreneurship and productivity is voluminous (see for example Scarpetta and Tressel, 2002;
Brandt, 2004; Conway and others, 2006; Crafts, 2006; and their extensive reference lists).
36

The technological gap measures the distance of each sector from the leader country, thus it always takes negative
values (see equation (1)). A negative coefficient for the technological gap thus implies a positive impact on TFP
growth.

67
Product market rigidities can impair productivity by reducing incentives to invest, adopt frontier
technologies, or innovate, not least because overregulated markets prevent the entry of highproductivity firms and the exit of inefficient competitors (Fonseca and others, 2001, Barseghyan,
2008, and Nicoleti and Scarpetta, 2003). We find that product market regulations reduce TFP
growth more markedly the closer are industries from the frontier (as indicated by the negative
interaction with the technological gap variable), where productivity growth is more strongly
based on innovation rather than the adoption of existing technologies. As revealed by the
negative significant interaction with TFP growth in the frontier economy, our results support the
view that innovation incentives are increased by competitive pressures (Aghion and others,
2006).
131. Corporate taxes appear to hamper TFP growth. Our estimation approach assumes that
corporate taxes affect TFP through industry-specific profitability rates. In line with Vartia
(2008), the estimated coefficient of the product of corporate tax and profitability rates is
negative. This can be interpreted as an adverse effect of corporate tax rates on TFP, with this
effect being larger in industries that are inherently characterized by a high return. By investing in
R&D activities relatively more than the average firm in the economy, high-profitable industries
may be also more vulnerable to tax increases insofar as they shrink the remuneration of factors
associated with high-risk projects. Besides reducing incentives to innovate, corporate taxes may
distort relative factor prices leading to inefficient factor input combinations which may lower
TFP growth (Auerback and Hines, 2002). Corporate taxes may also reduce FDI and hinder
knowledge spillovers to domestic firms, arguably more so in those industries characterized by
the highest returns.
132. Openness is key to knowledge creation and assimilation. To gauge the potential of
trade flows in improving TFP growth, we enter openness separately and interacted with the
catch-up factor. To our knowledge, the influence of openness was not considered in previous
analysis. We find a positive impact of openness on economic efficiency, both directly and by
improving the absorption capacity of existing technologies.
133. We ascertain the relative importance of each explanatory factor taking into account
both direct and indirect effects. Using the estimated coefficients provided in Table V.4, we
compute the response of TFP growth (averaged across both industries and countries) to a onestandard-deviation increase in each variable, independently or interacted with knowledge
spillovers and/or the catch-up term. The results (Table V.5) point to regulatory impact and
corporate taxes as the variables having the highest influence on productivity growth, followed by
openness and human capital. However, this policy ranking is more apparent than real, as the
changes associated with one-standard-deviation increases in the first two variables are huge.
Thus we turn in the following section to the analysis of more meaningful policy experiments.

68
E.

Can Policies Help?

134. This section presents some illustrative simulation experiments. To this aim, we
quantify the differential (on average over the period 1995–07) between each country’s TFP
growth, as estimated by the model, and the TFP growth that would prevail if all sectors in each
country were to see i) regulation reduced to the lowest sample levels; ii) ICT/non-ICT capital
ratio increased to the highest sample levels; iii) human capital augmented to mimic best sample
practices; iv) openness increased by 20 percentage points; v) corporate taxes cut down to
22 percent37; and vi) the suggested changes undertaken altogether. Rather than as a literal
description of what every country ought to do, the simulation presented here is meant to illustrate
the scope for TFP gains and to generate a benchmark against which to make cross-country
comparisons. Clearly, countries need not to adopt such reform package in full, but may target
specific policy areas and decide on the speed of reform that best suits their needs.
135. Simulated scenarios imply that best to improve TFP growth in most countries is to
open markets to domestic and foreign competition. Belgium, Italy, Austria, France, Germany,
and Spain have to gain the most from lightening their regulatory environment. Though less
powerful than a shock to the regulatory impact, higher exposure to international competition also
unlocks considerable TFP growth returns, most markedly in the relatively closed economies of
the U.S., Spain, Italy, and France. Bolstering human capital is found to deliver sizable
productivity increases too, especially in Ireland, Sweden, Denmark, Sweden, Netherlands, and
Belgium. Corporate tax cuts would trigger substantial TFP improvements in Germany and Italy.
Intriguingly enough, there is no visible TFP effect to incorporating higher levels of ICT capital
as a share of overall capital. For all countries identified above, each of the simulated scenarios
would add at least 0.4 percentage points to TFP growth.
136. The results are indicative of a substantial scope for reform. The combined impact of
those changes would yield large TFP growth returns in all countries, with Germany, Belgium,
Italy, France, Austria, and Denmark benefiting the most from the implementation of such an
ambitious policy package (Figure V.5). Of course, actual growth impact will vary with the
ambition of the reform agenda, the speed of its implementation, and the time needed for these
reforms to take hold.
137. The sectoral approach allows us to identify the industries contributing the most to
unleash TFP growth potential. Some regularities are revealed by the data upon the adoption of
the policy package described under point vi) above (and represented in Figure V.6 for aggregate
TFP in each country). Electrical and optical equipment stands out as the sector with the highest
TFP growth potential in 10 countries, followed by renting of machinery, equipment and business
activities, and other community, social and personal services (7 countries each). Printing and
37

This is the average value of statutory tax rates in Ireland over the period 1995-07.

69
publishing, machinery, nec38, and wholesale and retail trade seem to lock substantial productivity
gains in 6 countries. In contrast, the TFP improvements arising from network industries (post
and telecommunication, transport and storage and utilities) are comparatively more modest. This
may point to the effectiveness of the Single Market Program in liberalizing traditionally
monopolistic sectors, compared with its capability to open up professional services in general.
Quite clearly, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to fostering TFP growth but there is room for
focusing policy initiatives on those industries where TFP gains are concentrated in most
countries.
F.

Conclusion

138. Europe needs to seek growth by opening up markets to domestic and foreign
competition, enhancing human capital and, to a lesser extent, easing corporate taxation.
Continued efforts in this direction should improve Europe’s capacity to sell goods and services
abroad and become an attractive destination for investors. And to the extent that our findings are
relevant, more openness—a powerful innovation generator and transmitter of existing
technologies—should bring about more growth for Europe.
139. More competition in services would spur innovation and accelerate convergence
with frontier technologies. The Single Market Program has been more effective in liberalizing
monopolistic sectors such as energy and telecommunications than in removing obstacles to
competition in professional services. Many services could benefit from a truly single market
across Europe. An ambitious implementation of the Services Directive (i.e. reducing to the
minimum the list of justified restrictions for proportionality reasons by alignment to best
practices under the Mutual Evaluation Process) should unleash the potential to increase
productivity growth across Europe.
140. Improving education is a must for keeping up with rapid technological change and
for continuing innovation. Beyond increases in spending on education and training, the quality
of this spending is crucial. Experience shows that evaluation and targeting of training are
important to maximize its impact.
141. Our results provide some support to the view that corporate taxes are harmful for
growth insofar as they discourage innovation in the most dynamic and profitable firms.
Previous studies have also pointed to the relationship between lower corporate taxes, FDI, and
productivity gains for domestic firms. Although reducing the tax burden on corporates’ profits
might, in the short run, may conflict with the need to ensure fiscal sustainability, this does not
imply that government should not start consider avenues for fiscally neutral shifts.

38

Not classified elsewhere

70
Table V.1. Contribution to Growth of Real Output in the Market Economy, EU
Economies and the U.S., 1995–07
(annual average growth rates, in percent)
Output contribution from
Growth rate Hours
of output
worked
1 = 2+3
2

Labor
productivity
3=4+5+6+7

Labor productivity contributions from
Non-ICT
labor
ICT capital capital per
hour
TFP
composition per hour
4
5
6
7

Austria
Belgium 1/
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Slovenia 2/
Spain
Sweden
UK

2.7
2.5
2.4
4.5
2.5
1.3
7.6
1.7
3.1
4.4
3.5
4.1
3.2

0.4
0.5
1.0
1.0
0.3
-0.3
2.1
0.7
0.8
0.1
2.0
0.6
0.4

2.4
2.0
1.4
3.5
2.1
1.7
5.5
1.0
2.3
4.3
1.5
3.5
2.8

0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.5

0.5
0.9
1.0
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.7
0.8

0.2
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.5
0.5
3.3
0.7
0.3
1.7
1.4
1.2
0.5

1.5
0.2
-0.2
2.5
0.9
0.7
1.6
-0.2
1.1
1.6
-0.7
1.4
1.0

EU13 3/
USA

2.2
3.5

0.5
0.6

1.6
2.9

0.2
0.3

0.6
1.0

0.7
0.5

0.2
1.1

Source: KLEMS database. The market economy ICT production (manufacturing of electrical and optical
equipment, post and telecommunication services), goods production (agriculture, mining, manufacturing excluding
electrical machinery, construction and utilities), and market services (distribution services, financial and business
1/ From 1995-06.
2/ From 1996-06.
3/ Data for European Union refer to 13 countries in the table.

71
Table V.2. Major Sector Contribution to TFP Growth in the Market Economy, 1995–07
(annual average growth rates, in percent)
Goods
TFP
ICT production production
1 = 2+3+4+5
2
3

Market
services
4

Reallocation
5

Austria
Belgium 1/
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Slovenia 2/
Spain
Sweden
UK

1.5
0.2
-0.2
2.5
0.9
0.7
1.6
-0.2
1.1
1.6
-0.7
1.4
1.0

0.2
0.0
0.2
1.2
0.3
0.4
1.0
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.0
0.8
0.3

1.7
0.6
-0.1
1.0
0.6
0.7
0.5
-0.1
0.3
1.6
-0.2
0.5
0.2

-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
0.5
0.1
-0.2
0.4
-0.2
0.5
0.1
-0.4
0.2
0.5

-0.3
-0.2
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.4
0.0
0.0
-0.3
-0.1
-0.1
0.0

EU13 3/
USA

0.2
1.1

0.3
0.6

0.3
-0.1

-0.3
0.5

-0.1
0.1

Source: KLEMS database. ICT production includes manufacturing of electrical and optical
equipment, post and telecommunication services. Goods production includes agriculture, mining,
manufacturing (excluding electrical machinery), construction and utilities. Market services include
distribution services, financial and business services, and personal services.
1/ From 1995-06.
2/ From 1996-06.
3/ Data for EU13 refer to the 13 countries in the table.

72
Table V.3. Industry Coverage
SIC Code

Industry Name

21t22
29
30t33
36t37
40t41
45
50t52
55
60t63
64
65t67
70
71t74
90t93

Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and publishing
Machinery, nec 1/
Electrical and optical equipment
Manufacturing nec 1/; recycling
Electricity, gas, and water supply
Construction
Wholesale and retail trade
Hotels and restaurants
Transport and storage
Post and telecommunications
Financial intermediation
Real estate activities
Renting of machinery and equipment and other business activities
Other community, social and personal services

Source: IMF Staff.
1/ The acronym nec stands for "not elsewhere classified."

Table V.4. TFP Growth Determiants: EU13 and the U.S. (1980–07), ICT Industries and
Market Services
Dependent variable: TFP growth rate
TFP growth in the frontier
TFP relative to the frontier (t-1)
ICT capital/non-ICT capital
Openness
Human capital
Regulatory Impact
Profitability * corporate tax rate (t-1)

Coefficient
0.10**
-0.44**
0.00***
7.21***
0.02
-9.65*
-0.20***

Interactions:
Regulatory impact * TFP growth in the frontier
Regulatory impact * TFP relative to the frontier
ICT capital/non-ICT capital * TFP growth in the frontier
Human capital * TFP growth in the frontier
Human capital * TFP relative to the frontier
Openness * TFP relative to the frontier

-0.38**
-3.39
0.00*
0.01**
0.03*
9.02***

t value
2.26
-2.18
5.83
2.75
0.36
-1.87
-4.45

Number of obs = 1439
Note: Panel regression with country, industry and fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
reported in the parentheses. *, ** and *** denotes significant at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.

-2.36
-0.72
1.64
2.3
1.67
3.84

73
Table V.5. Change in TFP Growth from a 1 Standard Deviation Increase in
Model Variables
Direct

Indirect 1/
TFP frontier

Regulatory impact

-1.53

-0.08

ICT capital/non-ICT capital

0.00

0.00

Human capital

0.26

0.17

Openness

2.59

Profitability&corporate tax rate
1/ Evaluated at sample mean.

-1.10

TFP relative
0.38

Overall
effect
-1.22
0.00

-0.27

0.15

-2.29

0.29
-1.10

Source: EU KLEMS database.
Post and telecommunications

Electricity, gas, and water supply

Pulp, paper, paper products, printing and
publishing

Financial intermediation

Machinery, nec

Transport and storage

Real estate activities

-2

Renting of machinery and equipment and other
business activities

Hotels and restaurants

Manufacturing nec; recycling

Wholesale trade and commission trade, except
of motor vehicles and motorcycles

Repair of household goods

Sale, maintenance and repair of motor vehicles
and motorcycles, retail sale of fuel

Other community, social and personal services

Electrical and optical equipment

74

Figure V.1. EU13 TFP Growth Differential with the U.S.

12

(% Difference, Average, 1995-07)
12

10
10

8
8

6
6

4
4

2
2

0
0

US minus EU12
-2

-4
-4

75
Figure V.2. Technological Leaders in 2007: Selected Services Sectors
(Productivity Levels relative to the U.S. US=1 in 1997)1/
1.2

1.2

Transport and storage

NLD

DNK

IRL

ESP

ITA

AUT

BEL

FRA

Renting of machinery and equipment
and other business activities

1

2

UK

ESP

ITA

UK

2.5

FIN

0

USA

0

BEL

0.2

AUT

1

IRL

0.4

USA

2

FIN

0.6

NLD

3

DNK

0.8

GER

4

FRA

1

SWE

5

Electrical and optical equipment

GER

Post and telecommunications

SWE

6

0.8
1.5
0.6
1
0.4
0.5

1.2

1.8

Electricity, gas, and water supply

AUT

SVN

FRA

ESP

FIN

NLD

GER

DNK

ITA

SWE

Wholesale and retail trade

1.6

1

UK

BEL

IRL

USA

IRL

BEL

ITA

SWE

AUT

ESP

GER

DNK

0

UK

FIN

USA

NLD

0

FRA

0.2

1.4
0.8

1.2
1

0.6

0.8
0.4

0.6
0.4

0.2

Sources: EU KLEMS database; GGDC Productivity Level database; and Staf f Calculations.
1/ For each country, the technology gap term is computed as the ratio between the productivity level
in that country and the productivity level in the US. US productivity levels, set at 1 f or all sectors in
1997, are backcast and f orecast using EU KLEMS TFP growth rates.

ITA

ESP

UK

AUT

SWE

IRL

USA

FRA

GER

NLD

DNK

0

FIN

IRL

SVN

NLD

DNK

GER

ITA

BEL

UK

AUT

ESP

FIN

USA

SWE

FRA

0.2
0

76
Figure V.3. EU13 and the U.S.: TFP Growth Fundamentals
Levels, 2007
0.7

IRL

AUT

ITA

GER

SVN
NLD

BEL

ESP
UK

FRA

NLD

FIN

IRL

SVN

DNK

0

ESP

0

AUT

0.1

GER

0.1

SWE

0.2

ITA

0.2

FIN

0.3

DNK

0.3

BEL

0.4

UK

0.4

NLD

0.5

USA

0.5

FRA

ICT to non-ICT capital stock ratio
(Services)

0.6

SWE

0.6

USA

ICT to non-ICT capital stock ratio
(Electrical and optical equipment)

UK

0.7

60

70
Human capital
(Electrical and optical equipment )

60

Human capital
(Services)

50

50

40

40
30
30

ITA

AUT

GER

DNK

BEL

FRA

GER

USA

FRA

BEL

SWE

ESP

IRL

0.45

Source: EU KLEMS database; OECD Tax database; and WEO.

ITA

ESP

UK

SWE

0.00

AUT

0.0

DNK

0.05

USA

0.2

FRA

0.10

UK

0.15

0.4

ITA

0.6

ESP

0.20

FIN

0.8

GER

0.25

SWE

1.0

DNK

0.30

AUT

1.2

NLD

0.35

IRL

1.4

BEL

Corporate tax rates

0.40

IRL

1.6

FIN

Openness, overall economy

NLD

1.8

SVN

USA

ITA

DNK

NLD

AUT

FRA

BEL

UK

GER

IRL

SVN

SWE

0

ESP

0

FIN

10

USA

10

FIN

20

20

77
Figure V.4. EU12 and the U.S.: Impact of Regulations Network Industries, Distribution
and Business Services1/
(OECD Regulatory Indicators, 2008)

Business Services/

Electrical and Optical Equipment
United
Kingdom

Austria
0.2

United
Kingdom

Belgium

0.1
Sweden

Denmark

0.2

Netherland
s

France

Ireland

United
Kingdom

0.4
0.3

Sweden

0.2

Spain

Italy

Denmark

Finland

France
Italy

Denmark

United
Kingdom
Sweden

Spain

0.2

France
Italy

Belgium
Denmark

Finland

France
Italy

Germany
Ireland

Belgium
Denmark

0.1

0.0

Netherlan
ds

United States
EU12

0.2
Sweden

0.1
Spain

Germany
Ireland

Post and Telecommunications
Austria
0.3
United
Kingdom

0.3

Finland

0.0

Netherla
nds

United States
EU12

Transport and Storage
Austria
0.4

Belgium

0.2
Sweden

Germany
Ireland

United States
EU12

0.1

0.0

Netherland
s

Germany
Ireland

Electricity, Gas, and Water Supply
Austria
0.3
United
Kingdom

Belgium

Finland

France

0.1
Spain

Denmark

0.0

Netherlands

Germany
United States
EU12

Wholesale and Retail Trade
Austria
0.5

Belgium

0.1
Finland

0.0

Italy

0.4
0.3

Sweden

0.1
Spain

Austria
0.5

United States
EU12

Spain

0.0

Netherla
nds

Finland

France
Italy
Ireland

Germany
United States
EU12

Source: OECD.
1/ The OECD Regulatory Impact Indicators measure the "knock on" ef f ect of each industry arising
f rom anti-competitive regulations in network industries (energy, transport and commnications),
retail distribution and prof essional services.

78
Figure V.5. Reform Impact on Annual Aggregate TFP Growth1/
(percentage points deviation from baseline, average 1995–07)
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0

SVN

NLD

USA

UK

ESP

IRL

SWE

FIN

AUT

DNK

FRA

ITA

GER

0.0

BEL

1.0

Source: KLEMS data and Staf f Estimates.
1/ In the simulated scenario RI is reduced to the lowest sample levels; ICT to non-ICT capital ratio is
increased to the highest sample levels; human capital is augmented to mimic best practices; openne
is aligned with the most exposed country f or each sector; and corporate taxes are cut down to 22
percentage points across the board.

Figure V.6. Reform Impact on Sectoral TFP Growth
(Percentage points deviation from baseline, average 1995–07)
Sector Name

AUT

Printing and publishing
Machinery nec 1/
Electrical and optical equipment
Manufacturing nec 1/; recycling
Post and telecommunications
Electricity, gas and water supply
Construction
Wholesale and retail trade
Hotels and restaurants
Transport and storage
Other community, social and personal services
Financial intermediation
Renting of mach&equip; business activities

5.85 4.44

BEL

DNK ESP
0

FIN

FRA

GER

IRL

0.32 6.79 3.35 4.26 3.57

ITA

NLD

0

1.81

0

1.92 7.33 4.79

0

0

3.22 8.36 5.42

0.99 2.97 2.95 2.23 4.65 9.06 7.32 0.51 5.67
7.38 7.55 2.43 3.47

SVN SWE

UK

USA

7.9

5.92

6.3

5.4

9.6

3.52

0

8.6

0

0.86 4.31

0

2.15

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

7.77

0

0

0.52

0

0

0

0

0

0

7.93

2.3

0

0

1.57

0

0

1.7

0

0

6.87 1.01 6.75

0

6.01

0

2.06 2.34

0.88 0.46 0.27
2

0

4.57 2.44 1.29 2.36 7.06 0.69 0.67
3.67 5.01 7.83

3

6.04 2.42 3.81 6.86
0

0

0

0

7.19 8.39 8.35 0.75 0.93 2.03
0

6.9

5.4

0

0

0

0

0.7

3.27 2.51 5.66 4.81 3.31 7.73 8.37 0.71
3.47 3.96 6.03

2.9

0

0
0

0

6.5

2.11

0.54 2.79

2.15 1.79 4.76

2.52 2.37 3.74
0

5.83 9.68

0

0
0

0.23 9.89
0

0

2.19 10.2 3.87 2.49 8.65

3.13 2.42 1.33 1.37 1.89 1.12 1.41 1.42

0

1.82 4.01 4.15 5.84 2.32 1.56 8.35 0.72 6.63 0.47 0.23 2.83 4.01 10.4
TFP growth differential between 0 and 1.5 percentage points
TFP growth differential between 1.5 and 3 percentage points
TFP growth differential above 3 percentage points

Sources: KLEMS; and IMF staff estimates.
1/ The acronym nec stands for "not elsewhere classified."

79
References
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt, 2006, “Appropriate Growth Policies: a Unifying Framework,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 4, pp. 269–314.
Brandt, N., 2004, “Business Dynamics, Regulation and Performance,” OECD, Directorate for
Science Technology and Industry Working Paper 2004/3, (Paris: Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development).
Chen, R., G.M Milesi-Ferreti, and T. Tressel, forthcoming, “Euro Area Debtor Countries:
External Imbalances in the Euro Area,” IMF Working Paper (Washington: International
Monetary Fund).
Barseghyan, L., 2008, “Entry Costs and Cross-Country Differences in Productivity and Output,”
Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 13, pp. 145–167.
Conway, P., and G. Nicoletti, 2006, “Product Market Regulation in the Non-Manufacturing
Sectors of OECD Countries: Measurement and Highlights,” OECD Economics
Department Working Paper No. 530 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development).
Conway, P., and others, 2006, "Regulation, Competition and Productivity Convergence," OECD
Economics Department Working Papers No. 509, (Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
Crafts, N., 2006, “Regulation and Productivity Performance,” Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, Vol. 22, No. 2.
Fonseca, R., P. Lopez-Garcia, and C. Pissarides, 2001. “Entrepreneurship, Start-Up Costs and
Employment,” European Economic Review Vol. 5, pp. 692–705.
Griffith, R., S. Redding, and H. Simpson, 2006, ‘Technological Catch-Up and the Role of
Multinationals,” revised version of CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3765 (Washington:
Center for Economic and Policy Research).
Inklaar, R. and M. P. Timmer, 2009, “Productivity Convergence Across Industries and
Countries: The Importance of Theory-Based Measurement,” Macroeconomic Dynamics,
13 (Sup 2), pp. 218–240.
Jorgenson, D.W., M. Ho, and K.J. Stiroh, 2005, “Productivity: Information Technology and the
American Growth Resurgence” (Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of Technology).

80
Luis A. Rivera-Batiz and Paul M. Romer, 1992, “International Trade with Endogenous
Technological Change,” NBER Working Papers 3594 (Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research).
Nicoletti, Giuseppe and Stefano Scarpetta, 2003. “Regulation, Productivity, and Growth: OECD
Evidence,” Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 2944 (Washington: World Bank).
Scarpetta, S. and T. Tressel, 2002, “Productivity and Convergence in a Panel of OECD
Industries: Do Regulations and Institutions Matter?” OECD Economics Department
Working Papers No. 342 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development).
Van Ark, B., M. O’Mahony, and M.P. Timmer, 2008, “The Productivity Gap Between Europe
and the U.S.: Trends and Causes,” Journal of Economics Perspectives, Vol. 22(1),
pp. 25–44.
Vandenbussche, J., P. Aghion, and, C. Meghir, 2006, “Growth, Distance to Frontier and
Composition of Human Capital,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 11 (2), pp. 97–127.
Vartia, L., 2008, “How Do Taxes Affect Investment and Productivity?—Industry Level Analysis
of OECD Countries,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 656, (Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development).

