September 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/270

© 2011 International Monetary Fund

xxx, 2011
2011

January 29, 2001
August, 2011

St. Kitts and Nevis: 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By
Arrangement—Staff Report; Staff Supplements; Public Information Notice and Press
Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director
for St. Kitts and Nevis.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2011 Article IV
consultation with St. Kitts and Nevis and Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and
Request for Stand-By Arrangement, the following documents have been released and are included in
this package:


The staff report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By Arrangement,
prepared by a staff team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on June 3, 2011 with
the officials of St. Kitts and Nevis on economic developments and policies. Based on
information available at the time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on
July 20, 2011. The views expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board of the IMF.



A supplement on the debt sustainability analysis.



A supplement on the Assessment of the Risks to the Fund and the Fund’s Liquidity Position.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its July 27, 2011 discussion of the staff report on issues
related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.



A statement by the Executive Director for St. Kitts and Nevis.

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ST. KITTS AND NEVIS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By Arrangement
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
(In Consultation with Other Departments)
Approved by David Vegara and Jan Kees Martijn
July 20, 2011
Executive Summary
Context and Key Issues. Following a contraction both in 2009 and 2010, St. Kitts and Nevis’ tourism-dependent and
highly indebted economy has begun a slow recovery in 2011. With a public debt-to-GDP ratio of about 200 percent at
end-December 2010, the country faces difficult economic challenges, including a large exposure of banks to the
government and accumulation of external arrears. Given that the government is faced both with financing and debt
sustainability difficulties, decisive actions are needed to put public debt on a firmly downward trajectory, thereby
creating a virtuous cycle of lower debt and higher economic growth.
Policy Framework. The authorities’ reform agenda encompasses a three-pronged approach. The first priority is fiscal
consolidation—allowing revenues to rise upfront and containing spending increases, while at the same time, making
efforts to protect the most vulnerable groups. The second priority is a comprehensive debt restructuring to address the
debt overhang. The third priority is to further strengthen the financial sector, including through the establishment of a
Banking Sector Reserve Fund as a backstopping mechanism for liquidity support, if needed. The authorities have also
outlined a structural reform agenda to help strengthening fiscal management, improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of the public sector, and removing obstacles to growth.
Request for a SBA. In the attached letter, the authorities are requesting a 36-month SDR 52.5 million (590 percent of
quota) Stand-By Arrangement involving exceptional access. An initial purchase of SDR 22.2 million becomes
available upon Board Approval of the arrangement, and the remainder phased thereafter, subject to quarterly reviews.
The program entails risks given the prolonged period of relatively high primary fiscal surplus targets and weaknesses
in implementation capacity. However, these are mitigated by signs of strong policy ownership, the fact that the bulk of
the fiscal measures have already been implemented, and that technical assistance, including from CARTAC, will
accompany the authorities’ policy implementation.
Fund Relations. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on July 7, 2010. St. Kitts and Nevis has accepted the
obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions. Data provision is adequate for surveillance and for
program monitoring, although significant areas for improvement remain. As part of the authorities’ communications
strategy, Fund staff (WHD and EXR) have reached out to various stakeholders to explain aspects of the economic
program. Additional outreach—with EXR support—is planned once the program has been approved.
Discussions. A staff team comprising Messrs A. Schipke (head), K. Nassar and Ms. S. Ogawa (all WHD);
Ms. A. Holland (MCM) and Ms. S. Jahan (SPR) visited St. Kitts and Nevis during May 16–June 3, 2011.The mission
met with the Prime Minister/Finance Minister, the Cabinet, the ECCB Governor and staff, as well as other senior
government officials and representatives of the private sector. Mr. W. Samuel (Regional Resident Representative) and
Mr. M. Sajkunovic (OED) participated in the discussions.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................1
I.
II.

III.
IV.

Background and Recent Developments .........................................................................4
Policy Discussions and Program for 2011/14 ................................................................7
A.
Fiscal Policy .......................................................................................................8
B.
Debt Restructuring .............................................................................................9
C.
Structural and Social Policies ..........................................................................10
D.
Financial Sector Policies ..................................................................................11
E.
Exchange Rate Assessment..............................................................................12
Program Issues .............................................................................................................12
Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................16

Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.

Key Ratios Under the Rebased GDP ...........................................................................19
Magnitude of the Balance of Payment Needs ..............................................................20
Exceptional Access Criteria .........................................................................................21
Status of the Debt Restructuring ..................................................................................22

Figures
1.
Selected Economic Indicators ......................................................................................23
2.
Policy Response ...........................................................................................................24
3.
Banking System Developments, 2004–10 ...................................................................25
Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Basic Data ....................................................................................................................26
Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2007–16 ........................................................27
Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2007–16 ........................................................28
Structure of the Public Debt, 2005–10 .........................................................................29
Balance of Payments, 2007–16 ....................................................................................30
Monetary Survey, 2007–12 ..........................................................................................31
Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability, 2005–10 ......................................32
External Financing Requirement and Sources, 2009–2016 .........................................33
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2011–2021................................................34

Annexes
I.
Exchange Rate Assessment..........................................................................................35
II.
Summary of Appendices ..............................................................................................37
III.
Letter of Intent .............................................................................................................38

3
Attachment 1. Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies, 2011–14 ....40
Attachment 2. Technical Memorandum of Understanding.................................46
IV.

Memorandum of Understanding between the Eastern Caribbean
Central Bank and the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis for the Operation
of the Banking Sector Reserve Fund ..................................................................53

V.

Public Information Notice............................................................................................59

4
I. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
1.
St. Kitts and Nevis’ tourism-dependent and highly indebted economy is
recovering slowly from a two year-long recession, mainly due to a rebound in tourism.
St. Kitts and Nevis is one of 8 members of the ECCU, which has a quasi-currency board.
Activity is estimated to have declined both in 2009 and 2010, due to a fall in tourism receipts
and FDI-related construction activities. A mild recovery is underway in 2011, driven
primarily by the outlook for the United States1 (St. Kitts and Nevis’ major export market) and
the reopening of the Four Seasons Hotel in Nevis.2 Inflationary pressures, which remained
subdued in 2009 due to the output gap, have begun to intensify towards the end of 2010, as a
result of oil and food price increases.
2.
Faced with increasing fiscal imbalances in 2010, the authorities started to
implement a strong fiscal adjustment program at the end of the year. As a result of the
recession, the overall fiscal deficit widened from 3.8 percent of GDP in 2009 to 9.4 percent
of GDP in 2010 and arrears accumulated on oil imports from Venezuela. In response to these
developments the authorities implemented their home-grown reform program, which was in
line with the 2010 Article IV recommendations. The yields from these revenue reforms and
expenditure cuts have started to materialize in 2011. It was important for the authorities to
demonstrate that they could
St. Kitts and Nevis: Fiscal Measures Already Implemented, 2010-11
Implementation
implement the recommendations of
date
the 2010 Article IV consultations
Implementation of VAT and excise tax
Nov-10
Imiplementation of unincorporated business tax
Nov-10
prior to the start on any program
Streamline import duty exemptions
Nov-10
Increased auditing and monitoring of duty free shops
2010
discussion to show ownership.
Introduce environmental levy on new vehicles
2010
Change the structure of the housing and social development levy
Jan-11
Demonstrating ownership was
Increase electricity tariff
Jan-11
Source: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities.
important to overcome the still very
strong stigma in the society concerning Fund adjustment programs. On the revenue front, a
VAT and excise tax reforms were implemented in November 2010. Other measures
implemented include streamlining import duty exemptions, strengthening auditing and
monitoring of duty free shops and introduction of an environmental levy on new vehicles.
They also changed the structure of the Housing and Social Development Levy and

1

According to the April 2011 World Economic Outlook, growth is expected to remain sluggish in the
United States faced with household, fiscal, and financial sector balance sheet problems and still-high
unemployment.

2

The national accounts of the ECCU member states have been rebased with a base year of 2006. For St. Kitts
and Nevis, this will result in a 28 percent increase in the 2009 nominal GDP, mainly reflecting a broader
coverage of financial, communication, and offshore education services. Box 1 shows how the rebased GDP
series will impact a number of key ratios. The rebasing exercise was accompanied by CARTAC technical
assistance.

5

increased electricity tariffs by about 80 percent in January 2011. On the expenditure side, the
authorities froze public wages, but increased capital expenditure to acquire two new
electricity generators in order to stem island-wide black outs.
3.
Already high public debt levels increased further, elevating the vulnerability of
the country and the broader ECCU. St. Kitts and Nevis is one of 8 members of the ECCU
and debt sustainability issues in any one country can spill over to other members of the
union. Several factors contributed to the rapid accumulation of public debt, including fiscal
deficits, assumption of both liabilities but also assets (mostly land) of the former state-owned
sugar company, and exogenous shocks (mainly natural disasters). The authorities
increasingly sought recourse to domestic financing, which has further increased the exposure
of the banking sector to the government. Of the total public debt estimated at US$1.05 billion
(about 200 percent of GDP), the banking sector held about 46 percent at end-December 2010.
In addition to some cross-border holdings of bank assets and liabilities in the ECCU, there is
a risk of spillovers since a fiscal crisis in one country could result in a general loss of
confidence in the banking system and disruption in the interbank market. The Nevis Island
Administration has been able to successfully rollover its 365-day T-bills in June on the
Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM), following the authorities’ announcement
of their intention to restructure the public debt.
St. Kitts and Nevis: Public Sector Debt, Dec 2010
(In percent of GDP)
Total public sector debt

domestic debt,
139%

Social
Security
Board
(loans), 17%

Domestic debt
Overdraf ts,
11%

Medium-long
term
securities,
10%
T-bills, 30%

external debt,
60%

Commercial
banks
(loans), 67%

Other
domestic, 2%

External debt
Multilateral debt
Commercial
and other,
31%
CDB, 20%

Bilateral, 6%

Multilateral,
24%

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates

Other IFI,
4%

6
4.
Reflecting the recession, the external current account deficit improved in 2010.
Available data suggest that, while exports of goods and nonfactor services remained broadly
stable, imports of goods and nonfactor services declined by about 6 percentage points of
GDP. As a result, the external current account imbalance is estimated to have narrowed by
about 6½ percentage points of GDP. The deficit was financed by official inflows, FDI,
commercial banks, and a further accumulation of arrears on fuel imports from PetroCaribe
(Venezuela).
5.
Available financial sector indicators at end-December 2010 point to a
well-capitalized banking system, but some banks are highly exposed to the government.
The banking sector in St. Kitts and Nevis, with 352 percent of GDP in assets, is the third
largest in the ECCU accounting for 20 percent of the total assets of the ECCU banking
system. The banking system in St. Kitts and Nevis consists of seven commercial banks, two
are indigenous banks (St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla National Bank (SKNA) and Bank of Nevis
(BON), and the rest are branches of foreign banks and locally incorporated
subsidiaries/branches of regional banks.3 The banking sector’s capital adequacy ratio, at
46 percent, remained well above
St. Kitts and Nevis: Banking Sector, End-December 2010
ECCB’s regulatory requirement of
(In percent of GDP)
Number Assets Loans Deposits
8 percent. However, the high CAR
might overstate the strength of the
Banks
7
352
173
221
banks since some banks are highly
Source: ECCB
exposed to the government and
government debt is zero risk weighted. NPLs increased marginally to 5.5 percent, while
provisioning for NPLs declined to 42 percent. At the same time, return on average assets
(profitability) declined from 2.1 percent in 2009 to 1.1 percent in 2010, in part, reflecting
both the recession and loss of a part of international banking business. The net liquid assets
ratio of the overall banking sector declined slightly from 44 percent of total deposits at endDecember 2009 to 42 percent at end-December 2010, but was still significantly above
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank’s (ECCB’s) prudential guidelines of 20–25 percent.
6.
Regulation of the non-bank financial sector has been strengthened, but
continued efforts are needed to ensure effective supervision. In addition to banking,
St. Kitts and Nevis has a large non-bank financial sector comprising of one offshore bank,
four credit unions (assets of EC$186 million or 10.2 percent of GDP), 16 insurance
companies (assets of EC$815 million or 44.4 percent of GDP), nine money services
companies, one development bank as well as a finance and mortgage company. The
authorities have moved forward in strengthening the single regulatory unit for non-banks
and, except for credit unions and cooperatives, implemented the harmonized ECCU
legislation.

3

They are branches of foreign incorporated Bank of Nova Scotia, Royal Bank of Canada, and CIDB First Caribbean
International Bank; and locally incorporated foreign owned RBTT Bank (SKN) and RBTT Bank Caribbean (SKN).

7
7.
St. Kitts and Nevis has been very receptive to Fund’s policy advice in recent
years. The authorities have actively sought Fund advice, particularly in the areas of fiscal
policy, debt management, and the financial sector regulatory framework. Also, the authorities
implemented all key fiscal revenue measures of their home-grown program, in line with the
2010 Article IV recommendations, including introduction of a VAT, implementation of an
excise tax and electricity tariff reform. They have also actively sought CARTAC technical
assistance in the areas of tax policy and administration, public expenditure management, and
statistics. In addition, MCM fielded TA missions which have contributed to a strengthening
of St. Kitts and Nevis’ debt management unit.
II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS AND PROGRAM FOR 2011/14
8.
Discussions focused on the overriding objective of achieving fiscal and debt
sustainability and further strengthening the financial sector. There was agreement that
fiscal and debt sustainability needs to be restored through a combination of: (i) an ambitious
medium-term fiscal consolidation, which the authorities have already begun to implement;
(ii) a comprehensive debt restructuring to address the debt overhang; and (iii) further
strengthening the financial sector. At the same time, the authorities intend to implement
structural reform measures to underpin the fiscal efforts and boost confidence for private
sector investment. The discussions, therefore, focused on policies that would contribute to
achieving the authorities’ macroeconomic objectives. In support of their policy framework,
the authorities are requesting Fund financial assistance in the context of a 36-month SBA
(Section III and Attachment 1).
9.
The authorities’ policy framework aims at restoring macroeconomic stability
and building a solid foundation for a sustained pick-up in growth and a stable financial
system (MEFP, paragraph 6).


Real GDP growth. It is expected that St. Kitts and Nevis’ economy will remain
tourism dependent, while investment will enhance the quality of services and
diversify the product to boost competitiveness and potential output. The framework is
predicated on the expectation of a slow growth recovery, reaching 1½ percent of GDP
in 2011 and picking up gradually to about 3½ percent in the medium term, broadly in
line with the historical average. During 2011–12, the projections assume subdued
tourism activities, given continued high unemployment rates in advanced economies
(particularly in the U.S.), higher oil and food prices, and limited FDI inflows. The
medium term growth outlook is predicated on a gradual recovery in the demand for
tourism as well as an increase in private investment, as the public debt is brought
under control.



Inflation. Consumer price inflation is likely to reach 3.9 percent in 2011, reflecting
WEO projections of international prices of oil and food. In the medium term, it is
expected to gradually revert to its historical average of 2½ percent, anchored by the
quasi-currency board arrangement.

8


Balance of payments. The external current account deficit is projected to widen in
2011, with higher energy and food prices expected to more than offset the impact of
fiscal consolidation. In the medium term, better global economic conditions and an
improved investment climate are projected to result in a recovery in private inflows.
By 2016, exports of goods and tourism receipts are projected to reach about
11.9 percent of GDP and 19.5 percent of GDP, respectively. As a result, the current
account deficit is expected to narrow, reaching 21.4 percent of GDP in 2016. The
overall balance of payments projections suggest that external financing gaps could
reach an average of US$71.4 million (or about 12.2 percent of GDP) per year during
2011–13, reflecting the maturity profile of the public debt. The external financing
gaps are expected to be covered by a comprehensive debt restructuring and support
from International/Regional Financial Institutions, including Fund resources
(discussed below).
St. Kitts and Nevis: Key Economic Indicators, 2009-16

Projections
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
GDP real growth, at factor cost, in percent
-9.6
-1.5
1.5
1.8
2.5
3.0
CPI inflation, end of period, in percent
1.0
3.9
3.9
2.9
2.5
2.5
Primary fiscal balance, in percent of GDP
4.9
-0.5
5.0
5.4
6.4
4.5
Overall fiscal balance, in percent of GDP
-3.8
-9.4
-4.0
-3.2
-2.4
-4.5
Public debt, in percent of GDP
189.3
199.2
190.4
183.7
177.1
171.6
Current account balance, in percent of GDP
-34.0
-27.5
-29.5
-27.4
-25.2
-23.5
Gross international reserves, in US$ million
122.9
155.7
154.0
152.2
150.4
148.4
Sources: St. Kitt sand Nevis authorities; Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

2015
3.5
2.5
4.4
-5.0
166.1
-22.1
146.3

2016
3.5
2.5
4.3
-5.6
161.5
-21.4
144.1

A. Fiscal Policy
10.
A key element of the authorities’ program is a strong fiscal adjustment effort to
restore debt sustainability. Consequently, the program supports the authorities’ intention to
achieve an annual average primary fiscal surplus of about 5.6 percent of GDP during
2011-13. Given the uncertainties on economic prospects and the availability of financing, the
authorities have identified contingency measures amounting to 1.0 percentage point of GDP
in case of a shortfall (MEFP, paragraph 8).
11.
The authorities agreed to a primary fiscal surplus target of 5 percent of GDP for
2011 (MEFP paragraph 8), from a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP in 2010. On the revenue
front, net yields from the VAT and the electricity tariff adjustment are expected to contribute
to the improvement in revenue of 4.6 percentage points of GDP. On the expenditure front,
reductions in the wage bill (0.7 percent of GDP) and capital expenditure and net lending
(2.5 percent of GDP) are expected to more than offset increases in goods and services
(1.0 percent of GDP) and transfers (1.2 percent of GDP), implying savings of 1.0 percent of
GDP in relation to the 2010 outturn. The primary surplus target of 5 percent of GDP in 2011
includes grants (primarily from the European Union) similar to 2010. Despite these
measures, there is a financing gap of 11.3 percent of GDP that is expected to be closed with

9
resources from St. Kitts and Nevis’ development partners (including the IMF), as well as a
comprehensive debt restructuring.
12.
The authorities intend to take expenditure measures in the context of the 2012
and 2013 budgets to reach primary fiscal surplus targets of 5.4 percent and 6.4 percent
of GDP, respectively. In order to realize additional savings in the medium term, the
authorities are committed to freezing the wage bill and containing expenditure on goods and
services for the next three years (MEFP, paragraph 8). Reduction in the wage bill is projected
to contribute to savings of about 0.7 percentage points of GDP per annum in 2012 and 2013.
They have also reaffirmed their commitment to implementing broad-based public
expenditure reforms to rationalize the public sector wage structure and employment (MEFP,
paragraph 13).
B. Debt Restructuring
13.
The mission and the authorities agreed that fiscal adjustment alone will not
ensure debt sustainability (MEFP, paragraph 10). It was recognized that attempts to achieve
higher primary fiscal targets over the medium term would not be sustainable unless
accompanied by a meaningful reduction in the public debt service burden, which will require
burden sharing by all stakeholders. In this context, the authorities have retained debt and
legal advisors, publicly announced to seek a comprehensive and substantive restructuring of
the public debt, initiated discussions with creditors, and obtained financing assurances from
the Paris Club. The authorities’ strategy (Box 4), developed with the assistance of their debt
advisors, emphasizes dialogue with all creditors and information transparency (including
publishing relevant information on the debt restructuring on their website).
14.
A key element of the overall restructuring strategy is to resolve the collateralized
debt of St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corporation (SSMC) that was assumed by the
federal government in 2005, through a debt-land swap. The authorities have established a
working group to consider associated legal, accounting, and regulatory issues. They are also
taking steps to update the mapping and valuation of land and preparing a plan to establish a
government-owned company to sell land.
15.
The goal of the restructuring exercise is to place public debt on a firmly
downward trajectory in line with the ECCU’s target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020.4 The
restructuring is expected to alleviate the debt burden and close financing gaps beyond the
program period. Steps have already been taken to resolve outstanding arrears to creditors and
negotiations with other creditors have begun, with commercial creditors actively engaged in
the dialogue.

4

The debt-to-GDP target would remain the same under the rebased GDP.

10
C. Structural and Social Policies
16.
Other elements of the program include structural reforms aimed at
strengthening public financial management, improving the effectiveness and efficiency
of the public sector, and removing impediments to growth. These measures include
(i) improving public financial management; (ii) pension reform; (iii) civil service reform; and
(iv) social safety net reforms.


Strengthening public financial management. This is a key priority under the
authorities’ program as it supports and facilitates fiscal consolidation. To advance this
agenda during the program period, structural benchmarks include: (i) strengthening
financial management, reporting and auditing of line ministries; (ii) strengthening the
procurement office; (iii) prioritizing investment projects; and (iv) preparing a
medium-term macro framework to help frame annual budgets (MEFP, paragraph 12
and Table 3). Staff also welcomed the authorities’ commitment to maintaining strict
discipline among non-financial public enterprises (MEFP, paragraph 7).



Social Security Reform. Actuarial reviews of the Social Security Scheme5 indicate
that the system could begin to run deficits in 2029 and deplete its reserves by 2041.
The benefit-to-payments ratio increased in 2010, with contributions down 3 percent
relative to 2009, reflecting the impact of the economic downturn. In line with
recommendations of the ECCU-wide Pension Commission, the mission welcomed the
authorities’ commitment to strengthening the Social Security Scheme (MEFP,
paragraph 14). This should include parametric reforms, with a view to strengthening
and preserving the sustainability of the scheme.



Civil service reform. St. Kitts and Nevis’ public sector is large even by standards of
small states. In order to underpin improvements in the fiscal position during the
program period, the authorities will freeze the wage bill for the next three years.
Given the signaling role of the public sector, this should also facilitate wage restraint
in the private sector and lead to an improvement in competitiveness. The mission also
welcomed the authorities’ commitment to pressing ahead with plans to rationalize
employment and the wage structure in the public sector, for which the authorities are
seeking technical assistance from the World Bank.



Strengthening social safety nets. There are indications that poverty has increased in
recent years. A series of social programs has evolved over time in a piecemeal
manner, which is both expensive and inefficient in targeting the needs of the most

5

See Tareq S., et. al. (2010), “St. Kitts and Nevis: Options for Expenditure Rationalization,” FAD Technical
Assistance Report.

11
vulnerable.6 The mission welcomed the authorities’ plans to streamline social safety
nets (MEFP, paragraph 16) and to develop a social safety net reform strategy, seeking
technical assistance from UNICEF and the World Bank. Staff underscored the need to
sharpen the focus and coherence of poverty reduction initiatives to ensure that they
are linked to the social development programs in the budget, consistent with overall
macroeconomic and fiscal objectives.
D. Financial Sector Policies
17.
Maintaining the health of the financial sector will be critical. The authorities
agreed that maintaining banking sector stability during the debt-restructuring exercise will be
paramount. Given the large exposure of domestic institutions to the government and the
uncertainty surrounding the debt restructuring, the program envisages the establishment of a
Banking Sector Reserve Fund (MEFP, paragraph 11) to provide temporary liquidity, if
needed, to solvent indigenous banks that face liquidity constraints. The resources for the
proposed Reserve Fund will be secured with IMF financing upon approval of the SBA, given
St. Kitts and Nevis’ balance of payments needs and the fact that it will implement an
IMF-supported program to address these needs (first bullet, paragraph 20). The operation of
this facility will be governed by a Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
and the ECCB, which will administer the Reserve Fund on behalf of the Government
(Annex IV). Preliminary stress tests were conducted, which will be updated by the time of
the first review.
18.
Strengthening the oversight of non-bank financial institutions is a priority.
St. Kitts’ Single Regulatory Unit (SRU) began operations in 2010. In the period ahead, the
priorities are to strengthen regulatory oversight of the insurance business, private sector
pension plans and credit unions. The SRU is currently implementing a new reporting
structure based on CARTAC technical assistance, and has stepped up on-site inspections and
tightened licensing provisions, especially for insurance related businesses. A new credit
union and cooperative bill is expected to be approved by parliament in the second half of
2011. While the resolution process for BAICO appears to have stalled, a judicial manager has
been appointed for CLICO in April 2011 and a report is expected by end-July 2011. The
authorities were confident that there are sufficient assets in CLICO St. Kitts to cover its
liabilities.

6

See Tareq S., et. al., (2010).

12
E. Exchange Rate Assessment
19.
The different CGER methodologies indicate that the real exchange rate is
somewhat overvalued (Annex I). Staff analysis shows that the macro-economic balance
(MB), external sustainability (ES), and equilibrium real effective exchange rate (REER)
approaches indicate overvaluation. A simple average of the three approaches gives an
overvaluation of 14.4 percent. Given the need to promote growth and strengthen the
economy against vulnerabilities, labor market policies are critical. In this context, the
authorities indicated that the freezing of public wage measures envisaged under the
Fund-supported program will contribute to a reduction in real wage pressures, given the
signaling effect of public sector wages for the private sector. This in turn should help relative
price changes necessary to raise St. Kitts and Nevis’ competitiveness.
III. PROGRAM ISSUES
20.
In support of their program, the authorities have requested a 36-month SBA
from the Fund. In view of the difficult economic situation, mounting actual and potential
balance of payments needs, and precarious budget and debt position, a three-year SBA in an
amount equivalent to 590 percent of quota or SDR52.5 million (about US$84.0 million,
equivalent to 15 percent of GDP) would help cushion the adjustment effort and restore
confidence by signaling sustainable macroeconomic policies. A Fund program would also be
key to a Paris Club rescheduling/restructuring and for catalyzing additional financial
resources.


Access and Financing: Balance of payments projections based on fiscal adjustment
suggest that financing gaps could reach US$73.0 million (or 13.1 percent of GDP)
and US$90.0 million (or 15.3 percent of GDP) in 2011 and 2012, respectively. In
addition, the Banking Sector Reserve Fund will require US$17.1 million. The
financing gap is expected to be closed in large part through the debt restructuring. A
Fund program of SDR 52.5 million would help fill the remaining part of the financing
gap, along with resources from other multilateral/regional financial institutions.
Given that St. Kitts and Nevis is a middle income country and not a member of the
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), additional sources of financing are limited.
Both the World Bank and Caribbean Development Bank are currently exploring
options to provide additional resources, which could serve as contingencies.
Justification for Exceptional Access. Staff estimates that the dual impact of the global
downturn and increase in food and fuel prices will lead to a cumulative balance of payments
gap of US$220 million or 1,546 percent of quota over 2011–14. Also, there is a significant

risk that uncertainty relating to the debt restructuring could lead to pressures on the
capital account. In the case of large deposit outflows that would merit emergency
liquidity support, exceptional balance of payments pressures in the capital account
would arise. In the absence of new external financing, these outflows could produce a

13
severe liquidity crunch, hence a disorderly fiscal adjustment. To preempt this
eventuality, the Banking Sector Reserve Fund would act as a buffer for the banking
system during the debt restructuring—generating a large up-front financing need, and
thus providing a key justification for the authorities’ request for exceptional access
(Boxes 2 and 3). If the outflows were too large or persistent, however, the authorities
would have to adopt corrective measures, in consultation with Fund staff.


Phasing and Use of Resources: The phasing of the disbursement is substantially
front-loaded, with about half of the total program funds proposed to be disbursed on
approval of the SBA by the Board. The resources would address St. Kitts and Nevis’
balance of payments problem and to help maintain the stability of the domestic
financial system by providing the financing for the Banking Sector Reserve Fund.



Conditionality and Reviews: Quarterly quantitative performance criteria focus on
fiscal targets, in particular the overall fiscal balance of the central government. In
addition, they include the standard continuous PC on contraction of short-term
external debt and on the non-accumulation of domestic and external arrears. The
authorities have implemented all prior actions including on initiating the debt
restructuring process, and on a framework for monitoring expenditure arrears.
Structural benchmarks include strengthening fiscal management, improving the
effectiveness and efficiency of the public sector, and removing obstacles to growth.
Quarterly reviews will help the authorities to establish a solid track record of fiscal
performance, while seeking to contain risks to the Fund. All disbursements and
outstanding balances from the use of the Banking Sector Reserve Fund will be
reported to the Fund on a weekly basis.

21.
The proposed program is consistent with the Fund’s arrears policy. In staff’s
view, the authorities are in compliance with the Fund’s policy on lending into arrears, based
on their good faith efforts to engage with their private creditors. The authorities have initiated
collaborative discussions with private creditors and are working on a debt restructuring
strategy. The strategy focuses on information transparency, inter-creditor equity, and
dialogue with all creditors and would therefore be consistent with Fund’s lending into arrears
policy. Staff judges that the authorities engage in good faith efforts to reach a collaborative
agreement with these creditors. There has been an accumulation of arrears to non-Paris Club
bilateral creditors and discussions have started with concerned creditors and the arrears are
being addressed. Currently, there are no arrears to Paris Club creditors and Paris Club
creditors have provided financing assurances.
22.
Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the ECCB is subject to a full
safeguard assessment under a four year cycle. The most recent assessment was completed
in July 2007, and concluded that the ECCB continues to have appropriate control
mechanisms in place, which have strengthened since the first safeguards assessment was

14
completed in 2003. ECCB management places emphasis on good governance and sound
controls, and has enhanced the bank’s transparency and accountability since the last
assessment, including through the publication of financial statements that comply with
International Financial Reporting Standards. The next assessment will take place in the
second half of 2011 and the ECCB has agreed to provide the necessary information.
23.
Additional financial and technical assistance would be required. Given the
limited capacity, the authorities have hired a macro advisor (financed by DFID) and formally
requested financial and TA support from the WB (in the areas of budget support, civil service
reform, social safety nets and natural disaster insurance), the IFC and EU (in the area of land
management), and CARTAC (in the area of public financial management).
24.
Although a SBA with St. Kitts and Nevis carries significant risks, staff believes
that there is a compelling case for a Fund program.


Capacity to repay the Fund. With strong program implementation including debt
restructuring, St. Kitts and Nevis’ capacity to repay the Fund is expected to be
adequate (Table 9). Combined with the use of Fund resources from a previous
Emergency Natural Disaster Assistance (ENDA), debt service to the Fund will peak
in 2015 and 2016 at 4.7 percent of GDP7 and 11.7 percent of exports of goods and
services, but will significantly fall in the following years. Also, St. Kitts and Nevis
has demonstrated to be able to make large debt service payments—14.7 percent of
GDP on average over the past 5 years. The program is heavily frontloaded, but the
debt restructuring will help put debt firmly on a downward trajectory. The staff
judges that the authorities’ commitment to the Fund program will deepen St. Kitts and
Nevis’ ability to access markets and strengthen public finances allowing the
government to discharge its obligations in a timely manner. Also, the modalities of
the Banking Sector Reserve Fund are set-up to ensure that a large part of the
resources could be used only as liquidity support to solvent banks with a high
probability of being repaid, therefore improving the capacity to repay.



Debt sustainability. Fiscal adjustment measures by themselves would not be
sufficient to achieve public debt sustainability. At almost 200 percent of GDP,
St. Kitts and Nevis’ public debt level is unsustainably high by international
standards.8 The government has relied heavily on short-term financing, with T-bills

7
8

Under the rebased GDP, the ratio will peak at 3.7 percent.

St. Kitts and Nevis continued to have the highest public debt-to-GDP ratio in 2010 among the ECCU member
countries even under the rebased GDP (once published: 156 percent of GDP). For the rest of the ECCU member
countries, public debt-to-GDP ratios under the rebased GDP in 2010 stood at 97 percent in Grenada, 90 percent
in Antigua and Barbuda, 75 percent in St. Lucia, 67 percent in Dominica, and 66 percent in St. Vincent and
Grenadines.

15
(mainly 91-day) and overdrafts constituting about 30 percent of total domestic debt,
which exposes the government to significant rollover risks. A Fund program prior to
the rollover of T-bills in mid-August 2011 would help instill confidence and
minimize rollover risks. Debt sustainability analysis shows that fiscal adjustment
under the program will put the debt on a downward trajectory (reaching 162 percent
of GDP or 126 percent of rebased GDP by 2016), but remain unsustainable and the
debt dynamics are extremely susceptible to growth shocks. Therefore, to achieve debt
sustainability, a comprehensive and substantive debt restructuring is paramount.
Preliminary DSA calculations show that, combined with the fiscal adjustment, a
comprehensive debt restructuring (including debt-land swaps) would bring the
debt-to-GDP ratio down, in line with the ECCU’s target level of 60 percent by 2020.
Public Sector Debt in Highly-Indebted Emerging Market Countries 1/
(End 2010, in percent of GDP)
250
200
150
100

Malaysia

Uruguay

Tunisia

Poland

Jordan

Guyana

Brazil

Egypt

St. Lucia

Belize

Seychelles

St. Vincent and Grens.

Dominica

Antigua and Barbuda

Grenada

Barbados

Lebanon

Jamaica

0

St. Kitts and Nevis

50

1/ Debt ratio for ECCU countries are based on old GDP before rebasing.



9

Downside risks. The largest risks are related to program implementation and
additional adverse shocks, including natural disasters. Given the comprehensiveness
of the program, capacity constraints could lead to implementation delays. To address
this issue, the authorities have hired a macroeconomic advisor, financed by DFID,
and are requesting TA to assist in land management from the IFC. Regarding
exogenous shocks, the fiscal saving under the comprehensive debt restructuring will
provide a buffer for some fiscal deviation without undermining the debt trajectory.9 In
addition, the authorities are seeking World Bank support to enhance insurance against

In the last hurricane that hit the country in 2008, the primary surplus decline by 0.7 percentage points
compared to the recent average. There is the risk that the fiscal deviation will exceed the buffer.

16
natural disasters.10 While the authorities have been able to run large primary
surpluses, there are risks of slippages. For these, the program contemplates
contingency measures of about 1 percent of GDP per annum. Given the uncertainties
during the debt restructuring, the Banking Sector Reserve Fund would address
liquidity pressures in the banking sector and corresponding balance of payments
financing needs. Since St. Kitts and Nevis is part of the ECCU, adverse developments
in any of the other member states could lead to spillovers.


Upside risks. First, consumers and businesses could view the fiscal consolidation
measures as signaling a permanent reduction in their future tax burden and an
increase in their permanent income, which could trigger higher private spending and
growth. Second, fiscal consolidation and debt sustainability, if achieved, could reduce
interest rates and stimulate economic growth above those projected under the
program. In both cases, a virtuous cycle of growth and improved fiscal outcomes
would accelerate the decline in the public debt-to-GDP ratio and reduce the
economy’s vulnerability to exogenous shocks.
IV. STAFF APPRAISAL

25.
Following a two-year long recession, a gradual recovery of St. Kitts and Nevis’
highly indebted economy is underway. The economy is faced both with financing and
liquidity difficulties. Given the structure of the public debt, heightened uncertainty in St.
Kitts and Nevis, if not addressed, could spill over to economic activity in the rest of the
ECCU through adverse feedback loops between sovereign risk and the banking system. The
authorities’ multipronged reform agenda, for which they are seeking support under the SBA,
appropriately lays out a strategy to dramatically reduce the country’s debt burden. The
strategy is focused on (i) achieving ambitious primary fiscal surpluses; (ii) lowering the debt
service burden; and (iii) further strengthening the financial sector. In addition, the structural
reform agenda include initiatives aimed at strengthening the medium-term orientation of the
public expenditure framework, which would underpin the fiscal efforts as well as address the
overvaluation of the exchange rate and boost confidence for private sector investment. Based
on the soundness of the policy framework, staff is confident of the prospects for a return to
stable growth and a further strengthened financial system.
26.
The authorities have shown remarkable resolve in pursuing fiscal consolidation.
In the staff’s view, both revenue and expenditure measures implemented under the
authorities’ home-grown program so far are in line with the 2010 Article IV consultation
recommendations. On the revenue front, measures seek to broaden the tax base—to take
advantage of the cyclical recovery—and decrease distortions by reducing exemptions. On the
expenditure front, the extension of the wage-bill freeze for the next three years is important
10

St. Kitts and Nevis is already a member of the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Fund (CCRIF).

17
to secure fiscal savings. It would, however, be crucial to design and implement the civil
service reform strategy as soon a possible in order to achieve the desired reduction in the
wage-to-GDP ratio. Furthermore, the authorities’ plans to enhance social safety nets to
protect the most vulnerable will strengthen the program’s credibility and sustainability.
27.
Notwithstanding the fiscal adjustment, a comprehensive and timely public debt
restructuring is critical for the program to be fully financed and to achieve debt
sustainability. The authorities have taken a series of important steps that mark the first phase
of implementing a comprehensive public debt restructuring strategy and approached
creditors. The updated macroeconomic assessment reflected in this staff report will inform
the next round of consultations—in particular, the specific restructuring options. Debt
restructuring, including the debt-land swap, will complement the ongoing fiscal effort,
ensuring burden sharing by all. Nevertheless, given the structure of the debt, ensuring the
strength of the domestic financial system is a critical element in the design of the debt
operation. Staff therefore supports the authorities’ efforts to engage in open and transparent
negotiations with creditors on a restructuring aimed at restoring public debt sustainability,
consistent with St. Kitts and Nevis’ long-term repayment capacity, while ensuring the
viability of the domestic financial system. Staff is confident that the authorities will achieve a
substantial debt restructuring sufficient to fill the remaining financing gaps, which will place
the debt on a firmly downward trajectory toward the ECCU’s debt-to-GDP target of
60 percent by 2020.
28.
Supervision of nonbank financial institutions needs to be stepped up. The
collapse of two important regional insurance companies (BAICO and CLICO) illustrates the
weaknesses in the supervisory framework. While recent amendments to the Insurance Act
and other legislation are welcome, technical assistance would be needed to strengthen the
newly established Single Regulatory Unit through adequate training of regulators and
supervisors. In the staff’s view, better and timelier information on nonbank financial
institutions would improve transparency and provide more effective market discipline to the
sector.
29.
Staff considers the structural conditionalities under the program appropriate.
The comprehensive reforms to rationalize and enhance the efficiency and accountability of
the public sector and improved controls over public sector employment and compensation are
key to sustaining the fiscal adjustment beyond the program period. It is also imperative that
the authorities maintain strict discipline among non-financial entities.
30.
The exceptional annual access under the proposed arrangement addresses
St. Kitts and Nevis’ balance of payments vulnerabilities, while keeping Fund exposure
manageable. First, there is a risk that due to uncertainty relating to the debt restructuring,
there could be pressures on the capital account. Second, in the absence of Fund engagement,
financing difficulties could lead to a depletion of external reserves, especially in the context
of higher oil and food prices. The proposed level of access would, therefore, help leave

18
external reserves stable. Third, through prior actions, the authorities have shown their ability
to deliver on their commitments.
31.
In view of St. Kitts and Nevis’ balance of payments financing needs and the
strong policies proposed by the authorities, the staff supports the authorities’ request
for an arrangement under the SBA in the amount of SDR 52.5 million.
32.
The staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation with St. Kitts and Nevis
be held on the cycle for countries with a Fund arrangement, in accordance with the Decision
on Article IV Consultation Cycles.

19

Box 1. Key Ratios Under the Rebased GDP
In line with other ECCU members, St. Kitts and Nevis’ national accounts series is being
rebased to base year 2006 from 1990. The rebased GDP will improve the current and
constant price GDP series by using a wider range of data sources (including economic surveys
and administrative data), changes in methodology, and improved estimation procedures. The
rebased GDP series also reflect the inclusion of financial intermediation services indirectly
measured, activities of offshore universities, and the output of owner-occupied housing.
St. Kitts and Nevis rebased GDP series will lead to an increase in nominal GDP by 21 percent
on average for 2000-09.1
Under the rebased GDP, the primary balance will amount to 3.9 percent of GDP
(5.0 percent under the old GDP) in 2011 from -0.4 percent in the previous year (see table).
The primary balance will average 4.6 percent of GDP in 2012–14. The fiscal adjustment will
result in a debt-to-GDP ratio of about 113 percent by 2020, which is far short of the ECCU’s
debt target of 60 percent of GDP.
St. Kitts and Nevis: Key Indicators
avg.
2005-09

2010

2011

2012

2013

Projection
2014

2015

2016

2020

(In percent of rebased GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure
Overall balance
Primary balance
Public sector debt

32.3
36.0
-3.7
3.4
…

30.9
38.3
-7.4
-0.4
155.8

34.5
37.6
-3.1
3.9
148.9

External current account

-21.1

-21.5

-23.1

33.3
35.8
-2.5
4.2
143.7

33.6
35.5
-1.9
5.0
138.5

31.5
35.1
-3.5
3.5
134.2

31.5
35.4
-3.9
3.4
129.9

31.4
35.7
-4.3
3.4
126.3

…
…
…
…
112.7

-21.4

-19.7

-18.4

-17.3

-16.8

…

(In percent of old GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure
Overall balance
Primary balance
Public sector debt

39.6
44.2
-4.5
4.1
…

39.5
49.0
-9.4
-0.5
199.2

44.1
48.1
-4.0
5.0
190.4

42.5
45.8
-3.2
5.4
183.7

43.0
45.4
-2.4
6.4
177.1

40.3
44.8
-4.5
4.5
171.6

40.2
45.2
-5.0
4.4
166.1

40.2
45.7
-5.6
4.3
161.5

…
…
…
…
144.1

External current account

-26.0

-27.5

-29.5

-27.4

-25.2

-23.5

-22.1

-21.4

…

Source: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

________________________
1
The increase for the ECCU overall averaged 17 percent.

20

Box 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Magnitude of the Balance of Payment Needs
Proposed total access under the SBA equals SDR 52.5 million (590 percent of quota, or
approximately US$84 million). The annual access under the program is expected to exceed the
normal access limit of 200 percent of quota. This proposed access level would meet the large
actual and potential balance of payments needs and to assist the authorities in the establishment
of a banking sector reserve fund.


Balance of Payments Needs. The global slowdown has severely affected the economy
through its impact on tourist arrivals, FDI inflows, and remittances. The current surge
in food and fuel prices has added to the balance of payments pressures. Staff estimates
that the dual impact of the global downturn and increase in food and fuel prices will
lead to a cumulative balance of payments gap of US$220 million or 1,546 percent of
quota over 2011–14. While the debt restructuring is expected to close a substantive part of
the gap, the remaining gap would be financed through Fund resources.



Banking Sector Reserve Fund. The program envisions establishing an upfront
Banking Sector Reserve Fund (US$17.1 million) to act as a buffer for the banking
system during the debt restructuring process. The size of the reserve fund is equivalent
to 15 percent of private deposits minus the net liquid assets of the indigenous banks in
St. Kitts and Nevis1 and the 2009 SDR allocation.

The program is expected to be heavily frontloaded. The balance of payments needs in the first
year of the program will be 378 percent of quota—and to assist the authorities in the
establishment of a banking sector reserve fund—exceeding the normal annual access limit of
200 percent of quota. In the remaining program years, the additional balance of payments
needs amount to 212 percent of quota.
______________________
1/
There are two indigenous banks in St. Kitts and Nevis.

21

Box 3. St. Kitts and Nevis: Exceptional Access Criteria
Staff’s assessment is that St. Kitts and Nevis meets all four criteria for exceptional access.
While total access under the proposed SBA (590 percent of quota) is within the cumulative access
limit, the annual access will exceed the normal access limit of 200 percent of quota in the first year.
Evaluation of the case for exceptional access is given as follows:



Criterion 1—The member is experiencing or has the potential to experience exceptional
balance of payments pressures on the current account or the capital account, resulting in
a need for Fund financing that cannot be met within the normal limits Staff estimates that
the dual impact of the global downturn and increase in food and fuel prices will lead to a
cumulative balance of payments gap of US$220.1 million or 1,546 percent of quota over
201114. A significant portion of this gap will be filled through a comprehensive debt
restructuring. The remaining gap will be filled through Fund financing (US$67 million or
470 percent of quota). In addition, the program envisions establishing upfront a Banking Sector
Reserve Fund (US$17.1 million or 120 percent of quota) to act as a buffer for the banking
system. Once the debt restructuring is complete and St. Kitts and Nevis regains access to
private capital markets, the financing gap is expected to be filled in part through the Regional
Government Securities Market (RGSM).



Criterion 2—A rigorous and systematic analysis indicates that there is a high probability
that the member’s public debt is sustainable in the medium term. Debt sustainability for
these purposes will be evaluated on a forward-looking basis and may take into account, inter
alia, the intended restructuring of debt to restore sustainability. Staff’s preliminary calculations
indicate that there is a high probability that the debt is sustainable in the medium term. The
fiscal saving under the comprehensive debt restructuring and the fiscal contingencies will
provide a buffer for some fiscal deviation, including potential contingent liabilities without
undermining the debt trajectory. The initial public and publicly-guaranteed debt amounted to
200 percent of GDP at end December 2010. This debt would be put firmly on a downward
trajectory in line with the multipronged approach of the authorities consisting of (i) strong
fiscal adjustment and (ii) comprehensive debt restructuring, including a debt-land swap.
Preliminary debt sustainability calculations suggest that the implementation of these measures
will help reduce the public debt to sustainable levels in the medium term



Criterion 3—The member has prospects of gaining or regaining access to private capital
markets within the timeframe when Fund resources are outstanding. St Kitts and Nevis
has accessed private capital markets, including the Regional Government Securities Market
(RGSM), in the past. The program will boost confidence in St Kitts and Nevis’ ongoing debt
sustainability and, once the debt restructuring is complete, facilitate a resumption of access to
private bond markets, including through the RGSM, which would contribute to the broader
goal of reducing government’s dependence on the domestic financial sector.



Criterion 4—The policy program of the member provides a reasonably strong prospect of
success, including not only the member’s adjustment plans but also its institutional and
political capacity to deliver that adjustment. The program entails risks given the magnitude
of the targeted fiscal consolidation strategy and weaknesses in implementation capacity.
However, these are mitigated by strong policy ownership, frontloading of key fiscal measures,
on-going engagement with debt advisors, and the fact that St. Kitts and Nevis managed to run
persistent fiscal primary surpluses in the past. On the structural front, institutional capacity to
deliver the core elements of the program will be strengthened by on-going technical support
from the Fund, CARTAC and other IFIs. Given the strong political support, staff believes that
the program has a sufficient chance for success.

22

Box 4. Status of the Debt Restructuring
The authorities are working with their debt advisers to develop and implement a comprehensive debt
restructuring with the overall objective of filling the identified financing gaps and placing the public
debt on a firmly downward trajectory towards achieving the ECCU’s target of 60 percent of GDP by
2020. Staff understands that all public debt is eligible for restructuring with the exception of
multilateral debt and Treasury bills.
The debt restructuring is expected to take several months and involve a series of phases across both
commercial and official sector creditors, including:






Initial engagement of commercial creditors.
Verification of creditor claims.
Commencement of negotiations, including tabling of specific options.
Agreement of terms of restructuring offer.
Formal offering and completion of the debt exchange.

In parallel, the authorities are taking steps to resolve arrears with official sector creditors and engaging,
along similar lines, with bilateral creditors.
The first phase of the process (initial engagement of commercial creditors), is in train. Initial
indications suggest that key domestic creditors support the overall aims of the debt restructuring and
will engage constructively. Dialogue with other creditors is also proceeding in line with expectations.
Given the weak fiscal position, servicing of external commercial debt has been suspended pending the
resolution of the debt restructuring. The consequent arrears will be treated in line with the Fund’s
lending into arrears policy.
Debt Restructuring: Steps Taken
-- Hiring of Debt and Legal Advisors
June 2011
-- Press release announcing the intention to seek debt restructuring
-- Creation of the website to provide information to creditors
-- Posting of the first presentation material updating the economic and financial situation
-- Initiation of bilateral discussions with key creditors
July 2011
-- Establishing a working group for debt-land swap issues
-- Received financing assurances including from Paris Club

A key element of the overall restructuring exercise is to resolve collateralized debt, in particular the
debt of the state-owned St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corporation (SSMC) that was assumed by the
federal government on closure of the sugar industry in 2005. The authorities intend to include a debtland swap as part of the debt restructuring.
The Banking Sector Reserve Fund, operational once the SBA has been approved, will ensure that
short-term liquidity constraints are mitigated.

23
Figure 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: Selected Economic Indicators
...reflecting declines in tourism receipts and
FDI inflows (in percent of GDP).

Economic activity contracted during both
2009 and 2010...
8

40
Real GDP Growth

6

30

4

20

2

10

0

0

-2

-10

-4

Communication

-6

Tourism

-30

-8

Construction

-40

-20

Government services

CA deficit
Tourism receipt

-50

-10
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
prel.

2010
prel.

Inflationary pressures are mounting due to
fuel and food price increases.

Real credit growth has also declined.
2,500

30

12

25

10

20

8

15

6

6

10

4

4

5

2

2

0

0

Real credit growth (percent, right scale)
Broad money (EC$m, left scale)

2,000

Private credit (EC$m, left scale)

1,500
1,000
500
0
Jan-04Jan-05Jan-06Jan-07Jan-08Jan-09Jan-10

115

FDI flows

(Index 2005=100) 1/

10
ECCU

8

0
USA

-2

-10

-4
Jan-04 Jan-05 Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10

-2
-4

...as has the customer- based measure.
140
130

105

St. Kitts and Nevis

-5

Following the sharp appreciation in late 2008,
the CPI-based REER depreciated, reflecting
the recent depreciation of the U.S. dollar ...
Trade weighted nominal
effective exchange rate

12

Inflation (in percent, year on year)

Customer-based real effective exchange rate
(index 2005=100) 1/

120
110

95

100
CPI-based real effective
exchange rate

85
1993

1996

1999

2002

Competitor-based real effective
exchange rate (index 2005=100) 1/ 2/

90
2005

2008

80
1993

1997

2002

Sources: ECCB; Caribbean Tourism Organizations; St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and
Fund staf f estimates and calculations.
1/ An increase (decrease) indicates and appreciation (depreciation).
2/ The spike in the competitor-based real exchange rate in 2002-03 was largely caused
by the real ef f ective depreciation and subsequent appreciation of the Dominican
Republic's peso.

2006

24
Figure 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Policy Response
The authorities implemented fiscal stimulus in
2010...
12
8

Cyclically Adjusted Fiscal Balance
Output gap 1/

50
St L

i

A t

l
45

...reflecting an increase in expenditure
while revenue declined...
(In percent of GDP)
d C li ll Adj t d D fi it (%

t

Expenditure

4
40

0
-4

35

Revenue

30

Structural balance 2/

Economic recovery in 2011 is expected to
remain moderate.
10

( In percent, year on year)

0

Real GDP growth

0
Fiscal impulse

2
0

-4

-10
St Kitts and Nevis
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

Wages and salaries continued to decline,
but remained high.
(In percent of GDP)

16

Public debt increased and remained well
above the ECCU average.
18
16

Wages and salaries

12

8
Capital expenditure

4

190

St Kitts and Nevis

190
170

150

150

130

130

10

110

110

8

90

90

6
4

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

210

210

170

14
12

Interest payment

-6
-8

-15
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

6

4

-2

-30

10

6
Other Caribbean

-5

-20

14

8

5

20

18

10
Other ECCU

Stay-over arrivals
growth

10

25
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

...and has played negligible role in
suporting economic activity.

-10

30

25

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

30

35

Actual balance % GDP 3/

-16

40

45
40

-8
-12

50

ti l GDP)

70

ECCU

70
50

50
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
proj.

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; ECCB; and Fund staf f estimates and projections.
1/ Actual output is mesures as gross domestic product (GDP) at f actor cost. The output gap is
actual output less potential output, as a percent of potential output.
2/ The structural balance, expressed as a percent of potential output, is the budgetary position
(overall balance) that would be observed if the level of actual output coincided with potential
output.
3/ Actual balance is the overall balance (revenue and grants less expenditure), and is expressed
as a percentage of actual output.

25

The unsatisfactory asset ratios increased
moderately in 2010, but remained below the
ECCU average 1/

Gross public sector exposure is high in
the banking sector.

40
30
20
10
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
St. Kitts and Nevis

Unsatisfactory asst to total assets

Gross public exposure to total assets

Figure 3. St. Kitts and Nevis: Banking System Developments, 2004–2010
(In percent)

20
15
10
5
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

St. Kitts and Nevis

ECCU average

ECCU average

...while liquidity remained broadly stable.

7

60

6

50

Liquid assets ratio

Return on avg. assets

Profitability deteriorated further in 2010 from the
peak in 2008...

5
4
3
2
1

40
30
20
10
0

0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
St. Kitts and Nevis

St. Kitts and Nevis

ECCU average

Provisionings increased in 2009 and
remained above the ECCU average in 2010.

Officially reported capital adequacy ratios
remain well above prudential norms.

Capital to risk-weighted assets

120
Provisions to NPLs

100
80
60
40
20
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
St Kitts and Nevis

ECCU average

ECCU average

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
St. Kitts and Nevis

Source: ECCB
1/ Unsatisfactory assets include nonperforming loans, credits, and overdrafts.

ECCU average

26
Table 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: Basic Data
I. Social and Demographic Indicators

Area (sq. km)

269.4

Adult literacy rate (percent, 2009)

Population
Total (thousands, 2001)
Rate of growth (percent per year, 2001)
Density (per sq. km., 2001)
Net migration rate (per thousand, 2002)

46.1
0.02
171.2
-9.8

Health and nutrition
Calorie intake (per capita a day, 1996)
Population per physician (thousand, 2000)
Access to safe water (percent, 2008)
AIDS incidence rate (per 100,000, 1998)

97.8
2,639
0.9
99
14

Population characteristics (2008)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per thousand live births)
Under 5 mortality rate (per thousand)

73
14
15

Gross domestic product (2010)
(millions of U.S. dollars)
(millions of E.C. dollars)
(US$ per capita)

528
1,427
9,401

II. Economic and Financial Indicators, 2005–12
2005

2006

2007

2008

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise specified)
National income and prices
Real GDP (factor cost)
5.2
2.6
4.2
4.6
Consumer prices, end-of-period
6.0
7.9
2.1
7.6
Real effective exchange rate (end-of-period) 1/
2.7
2.2
-5.6
12.5
Banking system
Net foreign assets 1/
Net domestic assets 1/
Of which
Credit to private sector 1/ 2/
Broad money 2/
Of which
Money
Quasi-money

2009

Prel.
2010

Proj.
2011

Proj.
2012

-9.6
1.0
-3.9

-1.5
3.9
0.8

1.5
3.9
...

1.8
2.9
...

7.8
-1.2

6.4
7.3

6.9
5.0

11.6
-10.0

-8.4
14.3

1.1
3.9

4.1
1.5

2.2
3.2

5.8
6.6

8.4
13.6

8.6
11.9

4.3
1.6

4.1
5.9

3.5
4.9

5.1
5.5

3.6
5.4

2.3
7.3

14.5
13.5

12.2
11.9

11.4
0.0

-3.1
7.5

14.9
3.3

5.5
5.5

5.4
5.4

(In percent of GDP)
Public sector 3/
Primary balance
Overall balance
Current revenue
Grants
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Foreign financing
Domestic financing
Sale of assets
Change in External arrears
Statistical discrepancy
Financing gap 4/
Total public debt (end-of-period)
Of which
Central government 5/
Public enterprises 5/
Public debt service (percent of total revenue and grants
External sector
External current account balance
Trade balance
Services, net
Of which
Tourism receipts
Transfers, net
Net capital inflow 6/
FDI (net)
External financing gap 4/
External public debt (end-of-period)

4.0
-4.1
36.7
2.7
36.8
6.7
-4.1
17.7
0.3
…
-9.9
…
195.5

4.7
-5.0
36.8
2.7
36.6
8.0
-0.4
6.0
0.5
…
-1.1
…
187.7

3.6
-4.8
37.3
2.1
35.9
8.2
-1.7
2.0
2.6
…
1.8
…
178.2

3.3
-5.0
35.4
1.8
35.4
6.8
4.6
-5.8
4.0
0.9
1.2
…
165.0

4.9
-3.8
38.0
4.7
39.8
6.7
0.2
4.6
2.2
1.5
-4.6
…
189.3

-0.5
-9.4
36.0
3.6
39.9
9.1
0.5
3.1
0.9
2.7
2.2
…
199.2

5.0
-4.0
40.6
3.5
41.5
6.6
-3.8
-3.8
0.3
0.0
11.3
190.4

5.4
-3.2
40.1
2.5
39.5
6.3
-7.3
0.5
0.3
-4.7
14.4
183.7

123.5
72.0
32.5

140.6
47.2
34.3

134.5
43.7
30.1

125.4
39.6
28.4

145.4
43.9
25.2

154.7
44.5
28.7

150.3
40.1
30.1

145.6
38.1
49.0

-18.3
-27.7
15.6

-20.4
-33.1
15.7

-24.3
-35.4
13.9

-33.2
-38.0
7.2

-34.0
-37.5
6.1

-27.5
-31.0
5.7

-29.5
-35.0
6.5

-27.4
-34.2
7.3

27.6
5.4
16.7
21.2
…
76.4

27.0
6.6
23.9
22.7
…
67.6

24.3
5.7
25.7
26.2
…
58.7

19.3
5.8
34.8
31.2
…
56.6

15.9
5.5
34.9
24.8
…
60.2

15.6
5.7
31.0
21.6
…
60.4

16.3
6.1
16.1
21.7
13.1
52.4

17.1
6.0
16.6
21.8
15.3
38.9

(In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)
External public debt service
External public debt (end-of-period)
Memorandum items
Gross international reserves, end-of-period
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
(in percent of broad money)
Holding of SDRs, millions of U.S. dollars
Nominal GDP at market prices (in millions of EC dollars

22.0
147.8

22.7
139.7

21.0
130.6

18.8
140.3

21.8
170.7

21.4
169.3

28.6
142.6

29.5
103.4

71.5
15.1
…

88.6
16.5
…

95.6
15.9
…

110.2
18.0
…

122.9
19.0
13.3

155.7
22.9
12.8

154.0
21.5
12.8

152.2
20.2
12.8

1,184.5

1,315.3

1,385.7

1,539.4

1,420.8

1,426.7

1,505.6

1,586.3

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; ECCB; UNDP; World Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ In relation to broad money at the beginning of the period.
2/ Data from 2009 includes non-bank financial institutions and subsidiaries and affiliates as parts of private sector to reflect the changes in definition
in Jan 2009.
3/ Central government unless otherwise noted.
4/ The financing gap to be closed through debt restructuring and IMF financing.
5/ St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corporation (SSMC) debt included in central government debt since 2006.
6/ Includes errors and omissions.

27
Table 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2007–16 1/
(In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars)

2007

2008

2009

Prel.
2010

2011

2012

Proj.
2013

2014

2015

2016

517.3

544.4

539.4

513.5

611.6

636.0

667.8

704.3

746.3

790.9

517.3
400.4
116.0
7.4
84.1
192.9
116.8
0.0

544.4
422.0
135.7
6.6
83.9
195.9
122.5
0.0

539.4
396.1
148.7
8.8
69.6
169.0
143.3
0.0

513.5
342.4
92.6
9.4
84.2
156.3
171.0
0.0

611.6
412.1
87.6
9.9
197.2
117.4
199.5
0.0

636.0
443.6
92.3
11.2
207.5
132.6
192.4
0.0

667.8
466.7
97.0
12.5
218.0
139.3
201.1
0.0

704.3
493.1
102.4
13.2
230.3
147.2
211.2
0.0

746.3
523.5
108.8
14.0
244.5
156.2
222.8
0.0

790.9
555.8
115.5
14.8
259.6
165.9
235.1
0.0

611.6

650.4

661.1

698.5

723.6

726.2

756.5

789.6

845.3

907.1

Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Transfers

497.8
185.8
141.5
116.3
77.3
39.0
54.1

545.3
204.5
151.8
128.7
86.8
41.9
60.3

565.6
233.4
150.1
123.2
81.6
41.6
58.9

568.7
224.0
161.5
127.0
86.7
40.3
56.2

624.2
226.0
185.9
135.6
100.9
34.7
76.8

626.0
226.0
182.9
137.0
110.3
26.7
80.1

634.7
226.0
187.4
147.8
128.6
19.2
73.4

660.9
232.4
192.7
158.3
142.8
15.5
77.6

708.8
246.7
204.6
175.1
158.9
16.2
82.3

762.2
261.9
217.2
195.6
178.2
17.4
87.4

Net lending
Capital expenditure

13.1
100.7

15.4
89.7

7.6
87.9

5.8
124.0

1.0
98.4

1.0
99.1

1.0
120.8

1.0
127.6

1.0
135.5

1.0
143.9

19.5
-94.3

-0.9
-106.0

-26.2
-121.7

-55.3
-185.0

-12.6
-112.0

9.9
-90.2

33.1
-88.7

43.4
-85.3

37.6
-99.0

28.6
-116.2

Total revenue
Current revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income
Taxes on property
Taxes on domestic goods and consumption 2/
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Nontax revenue
Capital revenue
Total expenditure and net lending

Current balance
Overall balance (before grants)
Grants

28.4

28.3

67.5

50.7

52.1

38.9

48.1

6.0

6.0

6.0

Overall balance (after grants)
Primary balance

-65.9
50.5

-77.7
51.0

-54.2
69.0

-134.3
-7.3

-59.9
75.7

-51.3
85.7

-40.6
107.2

-79.3
79.0

-93.0
82.1

-110.2
85.4

Financing
Net foreign financing
Disbursements
Amortization
Net domestic financing
Banking system
Nonbanks and other
Principal repayments of SSMC debt
Sale/purchase of assets
External arrears

41.2
-23.0
24.9
47.9
27.8
1.6
26.2
0.0
36.4

58.7
70.3
104.3
33.9
-88.5
-133.9
45.4
0.0
62.3
14.6

120.0
2.9
32.2
29.2
64.7
24.6
40.1
0.0
31.4
21.0

102.4
6.8
41.9
35.2
44.2
3.7
40.6
0.0
12.8
38.6

-110.5
-57.4
6.9
64.3
-56.9
0.0
0.0
-56.9
3.9
0.0

-177.6
-115.7
4.0
119.7
8.4
0.0
8.4
0.0
4.0
-74.2

-90.6
-103.6
2.5
106.1
8.8
0.0
8.8
0.0
4.2
0.0

-12.4
-30.5
1.4
32.0
9.3
0.0
9.3
0.0
8.8
0.0

-9.6
-28.8
0.3
29.2
9.9
0.0
9.9
0.0
9.3
0.0

-68.1
-31.6
0.0
31.6
-46.4
0.0
10.5
-56.9
9.9
0.0

24.7
0.0

19.0
0.0

-65.8
0.0

31.9
0.0

0.0
170.4

0.0
228.8

0.0
131.2

0.0
91.7

0.0
102.6

0.0
178.4

1,386
2,469

1,539
15
2,540

1,421
36
2,689

1,427
74
2,842

1,506
74
2,867

1,586
0
2,915

1,666
0
2,951

1,761
0
3,021

1,869
0
3,105

1,984
0
3,205

1,864
1,292
572

1,931
1,293
638

2,066
1,422
643

2,207
1,543
664

2,263
1,625
638

2,310
1,825
486

2,347
1,940
407

2,417
2,020
397

2,501
2,110
391

2,601
2,212
389

Statistical discrepancy
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
GDP (market prices)
Stock of external arrears
Public sector debt (end of period) 5/
Of which
Central government 6/
Domestic
External 5/

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Combined accounts of the Federal Government of St. Kitts and Nevis and the Nevis Island Administration.
2/ The sharp drop in international taxes and concurrent rise in taxes on domestic goods and services reflect the introduction of VAT in November 2010.

28
Table 3. St. Kitts and Nevis: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2007–16 1/
(In percent of GDP)

Total revenue
Current revenue
Tax revenue
Taxes on income
Taxes on property
Taxes on domestic goods and consumption 2/
Taxes on international trade and transactions
Nontax revenue
Capital revenue
Total expenditure and net lending

2007

2008

2009

Prel.
2010

2011

2012

Proj.
2013

2014

2015

2016

37.3

35.4

38.0

36.0

40.6

40.1

40.1

40.0

39.9

39.9

37.3
28.9
8.4
0.5
6.1
13.9
8.4
0.0

35.4
27.4
8.8
0.4
5.4
12.7
8.0
0.0

38.0
27.9
10.5
0.6
4.9
11.9
10.1
0.0

36.0
24.0
6.5
0.7
5.9
11.0
12.0
0.0

40.6
27.4
5.8
0.7
13.1
7.8
13.3
0.0

40.1
28.0
5.8
0.7
13.1
8.4
12.1
0.0

40.1
28.0
5.8
0.7
13.1
8.4
12.1
0.0

40.0
28.0
5.8
0.7
13.1
8.4
12.0
0.0

39.9
28.0
5.8
0.7
13.1
8.4
11.9
0.0

39.9
28.0
5.8
0.7
13.1
8.4
11.8
0.0

44.1

42.2

46.5

49.0

48.1

45.8

45.4

44.8

45.2

45.7

35.9
13.4
10.2
8.4
5.6
2.8
3.9

35.4
13.3
9.9
8.4
5.6
2.7
3.9

39.8
16.4
10.6
8.7
5.7
2.9
4.1

39.9
15.7
11.3
8.9
6.1
2.8
3.9

41.5
15.0
12.3
9.0
6.7
2.3
5.1

39.5
14.2
11.5
8.6
7.0
1.7
5.1

38.1
13.6
11.2
8.9
7.7
1.2
4.4

37.5
13.2
10.9
9.0
8.1
0.9
4.4

37.9
13.2
10.9
9.4
8.5
0.9
4.4

38.4
13.2
10.9
9.9
9.0
0.9
4.4

0.9
7.3

1.0
5.8

0.5
6.2

0.4
8.7

0.1
6.5

0.1
6.3

0.1
7.3

0.1
7.3

0.1
7.3

0.1
7.3

1.4
-6.8

-0.1
-6.9

-1.8
-8.6

-3.9
-13.0

-0.8
-7.4

0.6
-5.7

2.0
-5.3

2.5
-4.8

2.0
-5.3

1.4
-5.9

2.1

1.8

4.7

3.6

3.5

2.5

2.9

0.3

0.3

0.3

Overall balance (after grants)
Primary balance

-4.8
3.6

-5.0
3.3

-3.8
4.9

-9.4
-0.5

-4.0
5.0

-3.2
5.4

-2.4
6.4

-4.5
4.5

-5.0
4.4

-5.6
4.3

Financing
Net foreign financing
Drawings
Amortization
Net domestic financing
Banking system
Nonbanks and other
Principal repayments of SSMC debt
Sale/purchase of assets
External arrears

3.0
-1.7
1.8
3.5
2.0
0.1
1.9
0.0
2.6
…

3.8
4.6
6.8
2.2
-5.8
-8.7
2.9
0.0
4.0
0.9

8.4
0.2
2.3
2.1
4.6
1.7
2.8
0.0
2.2
1.5

7.2
0.5
2.9
2.5
3.1
0.3
2.8
0.0
0.9
2.7

-7.3
-3.8
0.5
4.3
-3.8
0.0
0.0
-3.8
0.3
0.0

-11.2
-7.3
0.3
7.5
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.3
-4.7

-5.4
-6.2
0.1
6.4
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.3
0.0

-0.7
-1.7
0.1
1.8
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.5
0.0
1.6
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.0

-3.4
-1.6
0.0
1.6
-2.3
0.0
0.5
-2.9
0.5
0.0

1.8
…

1.2
…

-4.6
…

2.2
…

0.0
11.3

0.0
14.4

0.0
7.9

0.0
5.2

0.0
5.5

0.0
9.0

…
178.2

0.9
165.0

2.5
189.3

5.2
199.2

4.9
190.4

0.0
183.7

0.0
177.1

0.0
171.6

0.0
166.1

0.0
161.5

134.5
93.2
41.3

125.4
84.0
41.4

145.4
100.1
45.3

154.7
108.2
46.5

150.3
108.0
42.4

145.6
115.0
30.6

140.8
116.4
24.4

137.3
114.7
22.6

133.8
112.9
20.9

131.1
111.5
19.6

Current expenditure
Wages and salaries
Goods and services
Interest
Domestic
Foreign
Transfers
Net lending
Capital expenditure
Current balance
Overall balance (before grants)
Grants

Statistical discrepancy
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Stock of unpaid fuel expenses
Public sector debt (end of period) 5/
Of which
Central government 6/
Domestic
External 5/

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Combined accounts of the Federal Government of St. Kitts and Nevis and the Nevis Island Administration.
2/ The sharp drop in international taxes and concurrent rise in taxes on domestic goods and services reflect the introduction of VAT in November 2010.

29
Table 4. St. Kitts and Nevis: Structure of the Public Debt, 2005–10 1/
(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise stated)
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Total stock of debt
(In percent of GDP)

857.8
195.5

914.6
187.7

914.4
178.2

940.9
165.0

996.0
189.3

1052.8
199.2

Total external debt (by debtor)
St. Kitts Government
Nevis Island Administration
Public enterprises 2/

335.1
177.2
47.0
110.9

329.3
181.8
44.1
103.4

301.3
171.0
40.8
89.5

322.9
199.8
36.4
86.7

316.9
202.0
36.3
78.7

319.2
215.8
30.0
73.4

Total external debt (by creditor)
Bilateral
Taiwan, Province of China
Kuwait
Other
Multilateral
CDB
World Bank
Other
Commercial and other

335.1
39.9
15.3
9.9
14.7
98.9
79.8
13.0
6.1
196.4

329.3
44.6
24.0
8.4
12.3
105.6
84.3
14.6
6.7
179.0

301.3
42.5
24.9
7.7
9.9
106.6
86.1
14.8
5.8
223.4

322.9
38.0
23.0
6.2
8.8
115.0
95.2
14.6
5.2
234.8

316.9
33.8
21.1
4.9
7.8
119.8
97.4
13.5
9.0
221.6

319.2
30.1
18.9
4.5
6.6
124.3
105.3
11.1
7.9
164.8

Total domestic debt (by debtor)
St. Kitts Government
Nevis Island Administration
Public enterprises 2/

522.7
281.1
36.6
204.9

585.3
418.8
40.2
126.3

613.0
419.2
59.2
134.6

618.0
406.8
72.3
138.9

679.1
439.7
87.0
152.3

733.6
467.4
104.2
162.0

Total domestic debt (by instruments)
Loans and advances
Treasury bills
Debentures
Regional government securities market
Other

522.7
333.7
152.4
8.8
15.7
12.1

585.3
404.7
144.0
10.3
15.7
10.6

613.0
448.4
126.9
10.3
15.7
11.8

618.0
410.6
137.4
42.4
15.4
12.1

679.1
458.8
151.4
42.3
15.4
11.2

733.6
505.6
161.1
39.9
15.4
11.6

Total domestic debt (by creditor)
ECCB
Commercial banks
of which: overdrafts
Social security
Other

522.7
6.2
362.5
473.0
79.6
74.4

585.3
6.4
424.0
855.3
83.5
71.5

613.0
6.9
439.4
847.5
84.5
82.3

618.0
4.7
427.0
875.1
94.5
91.9

679.1
11.0
454.6
0.0
110.1
103.4

733.6
10.4
487.6
0.0
114.1
121.4

Memorandum items (in percent of GDP):
Debt of former St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corporation
Public sector debt excluding debt to social security system
Net assets of Social Security Board

24.2
171.3
64.0

26.6
161.2
63.3

25.2
152.9
65.7

22.6
142.4
64.4

24.5
164.7
75.2

24.4
174.8
80.2

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; ECCB; and financial statements of public enterprises.
1/ Public debt comprises debts of the St. Kitts government, Nevis Island Administration, and public enterprises, including
government guaranteed debt and debt to the social security system but excluding all other intra-public sector debt.
2/ Including SSMC in 2005.

30

Table 5. St Kitts and Nevis: Balance of Payments, 2007–16
2007

2008

Prel.
2010

2009

2011

Proj.
2013

2012

2014

2015

2016

-413.3
-568.4
206.3
-774.7

-413.8
-589.1
220.6
-809.7

-425.2
-623.6
236.1
-859.7

(In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars)
Current account
Trade balance
Exports, f.o.b.
Imports f.o.b.
Of which
Mineral fuel

-336.8
-490.9
155.8
-646.7

-510.8
-585.6
186.2
-771.8

-482.7
-532.2
145.2
-677.4

-391.9
-442.0
157.0
-598.9

-444.8
-526.3
170.2
-696.5

-434.1
-542.1
180.6
-722.7

-419.9
-552.0
192.8
-744.8

-39.5

-62.2

-27.2

-34.7

-47.1

-47.5

-46.4

-45.9

-46.1

-46.1

154.1
192.6
467.1

74.7
110.7
435.0

49.5
86.8
356.1

50.1
81.5
352.0

81.6
97.4
382.8

108.0
115.6
416.3

132.1
130.7
446.6

155.1
148.9
482.6

175.3
169.5
523.8

198.4
193.4
569.5

336.9
-274.4
-117.3

297.2
-324.3
-125.4

225.4
-269.3
-115.4

222.2
-270.4
-113.2

245.2
-285.4
-107.0

270.5
-300.7
-102.5

292.7
-315.9
-97.6

319.9
-333.7
-97.0

351.2
-354.3
-101.6

386.4
-376.1
-106.7

-52.5
78.8
12.4
66.4

-55.6
89.4
12.4
77.0

-53.3
78.2
-2.1
80.3

-50.8
81.7
-2.1
83.8

-41.2
91.2
-2.1
93.3

-33.1
94.9
-2.1
97.0

-24.8
99.0
-2.1
101.1

-20.1
103.2
-2.1
105.3

-19.9
107.4
-2.1
109.5

-19.9
111.7
-2.1
113.8

Capital and financial account

271.6

479.2

552.5

441.6

242.7

262.7

281.8

369.9

374.7

365.3

Official
Capital transfers (net)
Long-term borrowing (net)
Disbursements
Amortization

-13.2
27.8
-41.0
37.4
78.4

33.5
49.1
-15.5
45.7
61.3

-11.9
11.9
-23.8
32.3
56.0

42.5
50.7
-8.2
49.7
57.9

9.8
52.1
-42.3
74.6
116.9

-57.8
38.9
-96.7
46.4
143.1

-49.6
48.1
-97.7
27.1
124.8

-21.2
6.0
-27.2
22.6
49.8

-14.8
6.0
-20.8
23.2
44.0

-8.0
6.0
-14.0
35.6
49.7

Private capital
Capital transfers (net)
Foreign direct investment (net)
Portfolio investment (net)
Commercial banks
Other private (net)

284.8
10.5
363.1
-35.0
-80.5
26.7

445.6
11.1
480.3
28.3
-149.6
75.5

564.4
11.9
353.0
-28.4
148.7
79.3

399.1
12.3
307.8
-28.4
69.7
37.7

232.9
12.2
326.0
-28.4
-79.2
2.3

320.5
12.1
346.0
-28.4
-46.5
37.3

331.4
12.0
362.6
-28.4
-39.5
24.7

391.1
11.9
386.4
-28.4
-39.3
60.6

389.6
11.7
410.8
-28.4
-47.3
42.8

373.3
11.5
441.2
-28.4
-81.3
30.3

84.4
19.1

56.5
24.8

-56.6
13.3

0.0
49.7

0.0
-202.1

0.0
-171.3

0.0
-138.1

0.0
-43.4

0.0
-39.1

0.0
-59.9

Overall financing
Net international reserves
Gross reserve (increase = -)
IMF reserve liabilities (purchase = +
Change in arrears
Financing gap
IMF financing 1/
Residual financing gap
Banking Sector Reserve Fund

-19.1
-19.1
-19.1
0.0
…

-24.8
-39.4
-39.4
0.0
14.6
…

-13.3
-34.3
-43.2
9.0
21.0
…

-49.7
-88.4
-88.4
0.0
38.6
…

202.1
4.5
4.5
0.0
0.0
197.5
99.1
98.4
46.1

171.3
2.5
4.8
-2.3
-74.2
243.1
54.6
188.5
0.0

138.1
0.5
5.0
-4.5
0.0
137.6
19.1
118.5
0.0

43.4
3.0
5.3
-2.3
0.0
40.4
1.6
38.8
-5.8

39.1
5.6
5.6
0.0
0.0
33.5
-59.8
93.2
-23.1

59.9
6.0
6.0
0.0
0.0
54.0
-74.2
128.2
-17.3

Current account
Exports of goods and nonfactor service
Merchandise exports
Of which
Sugar
Nonfactor services
Of which
Tourism receipts
Imports of goods and nonfactor service
Merchandise imports
Nonfactor services
Foreign direct investment (net)
Stock of external arrears
External financing gap
External public debt

-24.3
44.9
11.2

-33.2
40.4
12.1

-34.0
35.3
10.2

-27.5
35.7
11.0

-25.2
38.4
11.6

-23.5
39.1
11.7

-22.1
39.8
11.8

-21.4
40.6
11.9

Services and transfers (net)
Services (net)
Services (receipts)
Of which
Tourism receipts
Services (payments)
Factor income (net)
Of which
Public sector interest
Transfers (net)
Official (net)
Private (net)

Errors and omissions
Overall balance

(In percent of GDP)

-

-

-

-29.5
36.7
11.3
-

-27.4
37.6
11.4
-

-

-

-

-

33.7

28.3

25.1

24.7

25.4

26.2

26.8

27.4

28.0

28.7

24.3
-66.5
-46.7
-19.8
26.2
…
58.7

19.3
-71.2
-50.1
-21.1
31.2
0.9
…
56.6

15.9
-66.6
-47.7
-19.0
24.8
2.5
…
60.2

15.6
-60.9
-42.0
-19.0
21.6
4.2
…
60.4

16.3
-65.2
-46.3
-19.0
21.7
3.7
13.1
52.4

17.1
-64.5
-45.6
-19.0
21.8
0.0
15.3
38.9

17.6
-63.6
-44.7
-19.0
21.8
0.0
8.3
31.2

18.2
-63.0
-44.0
-19.0
21.9
0.0
2.3
28.0

18.8
-62.3
-43.3
-19.0
22.0
0.0
1.8
25.2

19.5
-62.3
-43.3
-19.0
22.2
0.0
2.7
23.1

Merchandise exports
Tourism receipts
Merchandise imports
Terms of trade

-1.0
-5.2
9.1
-1.6

19.5
-11.8
19.3
-3.1

-22.0
-24.1
-12.2
4.6

8.1
-1.4
-11.6
-4.5

6.7
8.2
3.1
1.6

7.0
9.3
4.0
1.5

6.9
9.8
4.5
0.9

7.0
10.0
6.2
0.9

External public debt
External debt service
Of which
Interest

130.6
21.0

140.3
18.8

170.7
21.8

169.3
21.4

142.6
28.6

103.4
29.5

81.3
23.4

71.5
10.1

63.4
8.6

56.8
8.6

7.9

8.6

10.1

9.5

7.1

5.3

3.7

2.8

2.6

2.4

(Annual percentage change)
8.4
10.3
16.3
-5.5

6.1
10.3
3.8
0.9

(In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services)

Sources: ECCB; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Negative indicates repayment to the IMF.

31

Table 6. St. Kitts and Nevis: Monetary Survey, 2006–12
2006

2007

Prel.

Proj.

Proj.

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

(In millions of EC$)
Net foreign assets
ECCB imputed reserves
Crown agents
Commercial banks

562.1
239.1
10.6
312.3

661.7
258.3
10.6
392.8

850.7
297.6
10.6
542.4

711.5
331.9
10.6
369.0

730.1
420.3
10.6
299.2

804.8
415.8
10.6
378.4

846.5
411.0
10.6
424.9

Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Net credit to central government
Net credit to St. Kitts
Net credit to Nevis
Net credit to non-financial public sector
Credit to the private sector 1/
Net other assets 2/

889.7
392.1
422.5
397.5
25.0
-30.3
1048.9
-551.3

963.0
393.4
464.8
412.5
52.2
-71.4
1173.4
-603.8

799.8
366.3
337.2
263.0
74.2
29.1
1242.7
-809.2

1036.4
390.9
427.4
298.9
128.5
-36.5
1311.1
-665.6

1103.7
407.5
433.4
259.2
174.3
-26.0
1371.7
-675.5

1130.4
341.0
376.5
202.3
174.3
-35.6
1464.9
-675.5

1192.5
333.1
376.5
202.3
174.3
-43.5
1534.8
-675.5

Broad money (M2)
Money
Currency in circulation
Demand deposits 1/
Quasi-money 1/
Savings deposits
Time deposits
Foreign currency deposits

1451.8
201.5
55.1
146.3
1250.3
521.8
309.5
419.0

1624.7
226.0
56.2
169.8
1398.6
565.6
377.6
455.4

1650.5
251.7
70.1
181.6
1398.8
602.6
398.1
398.1

1747.9
243.9
78.3
165.5
1504.0
638.5
491.0
374.5

1833.8
280.2
101.1
179.1
1553.7
638.4
552.4
362.8

1935.2
295.6
106.6
189.0
1639.6
673.7
582.9
382.9

2039.0
311.5
112.4
199.1
1727.5
709.8
614.2
403.4

-8.4
14.3
1.5
5.5
-4.0
4.1
8.7

1.1
3.9
0.9
0.3
0.6
3.5
-0.6

4.1
1.5
-3.6
-3.1
-0.5
5.1
0.0

2.2
3.2
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
3.6
0.0

(Percentage change relative to broad money at beginning of period)
Net foreign assets
Net domestic assets
Net credit to the public sector
Net credit to central government
Net credit to non-financial public sector
Credit to the private sector 1/
Net other assets 2/

6.4
7.3
5.8
5.5
0.3
8.4
-7.0

6.9
5.0
0.1
2.9
-2.8
8.6
-3.6

11.6
-10.0
-1.7
-7.9
6.2
4.3
-12.6

(Annual percentage change)
Broad money (M2)
Money
Currency in circulation
Demand deposits 1/
Quasi-money 1/
Savings deposits
Time deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Credit to the private sector (in nominal terms)
Credit to the private sector (in real terms)

13.6
14.5
10.5
16.1
13.5
10.8
7.6
22.2
11.5
3.3

11.9
12.2
2.0
16.1
11.9
8.4
22.0
8.7
11.9
9.6

1.6
11.4
24.8
6.9
0.0
6.5
5.4
-12.6
5.9
1.4

5.9
-3.1
11.7
-8.8
7.5
6.0
23.3
-5.9
5.5
4.5

4.9
14.9
29.0
8.2
3.3
0.0
12.5
-3.1
4.6
0.7

5.5
5.5
5.5
5.5
5.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.8
2.8

5.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.8
1.8

Memorandum items:
Income velocity of money
Income velocity of broad money
Private sector credit/GDP (in percent)
Foreign currency deposits/GDP (in percent)

6.5
0.9
79.7
31.9

6.1
0.9
84.7
32.9

6.1
0.9
80.7
25.9

5.8
0.8
92.3
26.4

5.1
0.8
96.1
25.4

5.1
0.8
97.3
25.4

5.1
0.8
96.8
25.4

Sources: ECCB; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data up to 2008 is revised to reflect the changes in the definition of private sector in January 2009.
2/ Includes capital accounts.

32
Table 7. St. Kitts and Nevis: Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability, 2005–10
(12-month percentage change, unless otherwise stated)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Prel.
2010

8.0
15.2
-3.5
18.0
-18.3
12.0

-8.2
18.6
-4.4
8.7
-20.4
17.8

-1.0
9.1
-1.6
-5.2
-24.3
19.6

19.5
19.3
-3.1
-11.8
-33.2
31.1

-22.0
-12.2
4.6
-24.1
-34.0
38.9

8.1
-11.6
-4.5
-1.4
-27.5
31.0

21.2

22.7

26.2

31.2

24.8

21.6

600.8
17.9

696.0
18.6

764.5
18.6

759.0
17.0

800.8
17.5

927.3
19.9

102.6
76.4
22.0

115.7
67.6
22.7

145.5
58.7
21.0

200.9
56.6
18.8

136.7
60.2
21.8

110.8
60.4
21.4

9.5

8.8

7.9

8.6

10.1

9.5

Nominal exchange rate (E.C. dollars per U.S. dollar, end period)
Real effective exchange rate depreciation (-), end period 2/

2.7
2.8

2.7
2.2

2.7
-5.5

2.7
12.8

2.7
-3.8

2.7
-5.6

Financial indicators
Broad money
Credit to the private sector
Share of nonperforming assets to total assets of banks (percent)
Provisions for loan losses/nonperforming assets (percent)
Provisions for loan losses/total loans (percent)
Gross government exposure/total assets (percent)
Total loans/total deposits (percent)
Net liquid assets/total deposits (percent)
Foreign currency deposits/total deposits (percent)
Liquid assets/total deposits (percent)
Liquid assets/current liabilities (percent)
Total capital/total assets (percent) 3/
Total Capital/Risk Weighted Assets (percent) 3/
Tier 1 Capital/Risk Weighted Assets (percent) 3/
Ratio of bank’s before-tax profits to average assets (percent)

6.6
7.9
8.1
19.3
1.2
30.1
80.4
38.4
21.1
39.7
53.1
7.6
45.1
41.1
3.1

13.6
11.5
6.7
24.3
1.2
31.0
85.1
38.3
25.0
40.0
45.4
8.0
38.9
36.0
3.4

11.9
11.9
5.7
23.9
1.0
29.1
86.9
38.0
23.4
38.1
47.6
9.5
41.8
37.7
4.0

1.6
5.9
5.5
20.0
0.9
28.2
88.7
42.3
22.9
39.6
48.5
12.3
47.0
40.1
4.7

5.9
5.5
4.1
48.9
2.1
26.1
77.4
42.9
30.2
43.8
51.1
12.3
51.0
42.0
2.1

4.9
4.6
5.3
42.2
2.3
26.3
78.1
41.0
27.5
41.7
51.3
11.6
45.6
36.8
1.1

External indicators
Merchandise exports
Merchandise imports
Terms of trade deterioration (-)
Tourism earnings
Current account balance (percent of GDP)
Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP) 1/
Of which
Foreign direct investment
Gross international reserves of the ECCB
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of broad money
Commercial banks’ net foreign assets (millions of U. S. dollars)
External public debt (percent of GDP)
External debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services
Of which
Interest

Sources: ECCB; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Includes errors and omissions.
2/ Estimated on the basis of weights given by the average trade share during 1999–2003.
3/ For locally incorporated banks only.

33
Table 8. St. Kitts and Nevis: External Financing Requirement and Sources, 2009-2016
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

2009

Prel.
2010

2011

2012

Projection
2013
2014

2015

2016

127.8

159.5

234.9

216.3

207.0

162.5

169.2

192.6

Current account deficit

178.8

145.1

164.7

160.8

155.5

153.1

153.3

157.5

Amortization
Official (public sector and central g
of which: to official creditors
Private sector (net)
Commercial banks
Other private

-63.7
20.8

-18.4
21.4

71.8
43.3

56.4
53.0

51.7
46.2

10.6
18.4

18.0
16.3

37.3
18.4

-84.4
-55.1
-29.4

-39.8
-25.8
-14.0

28.5
29.3
-0.8

3.4
17.2
-13.8

5.5
14.6
-9.2

-7.9
14.6
-22.4

1.7
17.5
-15.8

18.9
30.1
-11.2

Reserve accumulation (+: increase)

12.7

32.7

-1.7

-0.9

-0.2

-1.1

-2.1

-2.2

141.0

145.2

161.7

153.7

156.1

147.6

156.8

172.6

8.8

23.3

23.8

18.9

22.3

6.6

6.6

6.5

Foreign Direct Investment (net)

130.8

114.0

120.7

128.2

134.3

143.1

152.2

163.4

Net inflow of equity and other capital

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

-10.5

11.9
11.9

18.4
18.4

27.6
27.6

17.2
17.2

10.0
10.0

8.4
8.4

8.6
8.6

13.2
13.2

Financing gap

-13.2

14.3

73.2

62.5

50.9

15.0

12.4

20.0

Errors and omissions
Accumulation of arrears

-20.9
7.8

0.0
14.3

0.0
0.0

0.0
-27.5

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Exceptional external financing
IMF net disbursement
Potential Fund disbursement 1/
Repurchases
Interest due
Other new financing

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

36.3
36.3
36.7
0.0
-0.4
0.0

19.2
19.2
20.2
0.0
-1.0
0.0

5.9
5.9
7.1
0.0
-1.2
0.0

-0.7
-0.7
2.9
-2.3
-1.3
0.0

-23.2
-23.2
0.0
-22.1
-1.1
0.0

-28.1
-28.1
0.0
-27.5
-0.6
0.0

Residual financing gap

0.0

0.0

36.9

70.8

45.1

15.7

35.6

48.1

Gross financing requirement

Sources of financing
Capital grants and transfers

New borrowing
of which: public sector

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

34
Table 9: St.Kitts and Nevis: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2011-2021 1/
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Fund obligations based on existing credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

0.03
0.00
0.03

0.64
0.56
0.08

1.18
1.11
0.07

0.61
0.56
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit (in
millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest

0.30
0.00
0.30

1.43
0.56
0.87

2.33
1.11
1.22

4.68
3.33
1.35

20.38
19.18
1.20

21.65
21.19
0.46

6.90
6.73
0.17

2.37
2.29
0.08

0.39
0.34
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

0.05
0.00
0.05

Fund credit outstanding based on existing and prospective
credit (in millions of SDRs)

35.9

47.9

51.2

49.7

30.6

9.4

2.6

0.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total Obligations based on existing and prospective credit
in millions of U.S. dollars2/
in percent of exports of goods and services
in percent of external debt service3/
in percent of GDP
in percent of rebased GDP
in percent of quota
in percent of net imputed reserves
in percent of revenue and grants

0.5
0.2
0.8
0.1
0.1
3.4
0.3
0.2

2.3
1.0
3.4
0.4
0.3
16.1
1.5
0.9

3.7
1.6
6.3
0.6
0.5
26.2
2.5
1.4

7.5
2.9
22.4
1.1
0.9
52.6
5.0
2.8

32.6
11.8
57.9
4.7
3.7
229.0
22.3
11.7

34.6
11.6
57.3
4.7
3.7
243.3
24.0
11.7

11.0
3.5
30.0
1.4
1.1
77.5
7.7
3.5

3.8
1.1
12.4
0.5
0.4
26.6
2.6
1.1

0.6
0.2
2.2
0.1
0.1
4.4
0.4
0.2

0.1
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.1
0.0

57.4
28.0
98.0
1.9
10.3
402.8
37.3

76.7
34.7
117.5
2.4
13.1
538.5
50.4

82.0
34.6
148.1
2.5
13.3
575.7
54.5

79.6
31.2
307.7
2.3
12.2
558.9
53.6

48.9
17.7
206.4
1.4
7.1
343.4
33.4

15.0
5.0
58.2
0.4
2.0
105.3
10.4

4.2
1.3
16.4
0.1
0.5
29.7
2.9

0.5
0.2
2.0
0.0
0.1
3.8
0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

33.6
33.6
0.0

12.1
12.6
0.6

3.3
4.4
1.1

-1.5
1.8
3.3

-19.2
0.0
19.2

-21.2
0.0
21.2

-6.7
0.0
6.7

-2.3
0.0
2.3

-0.3
0.0
0.3

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

557.6
204.8
58.6
363.7
154.0

587.5
221.1
65.3
379.0
152.2

617.2
236.8
55.4
392.8
150.4

652.1
255.1
25.9
410.5
148.4

692.3
275.7
23.7
431.1
146.3

735.0
298.4
25.8
457.7
144.1

780.3
314.1
25.8
471.4
144.1

828.4
330.8
26.9
485.8
144.1

879.4
348.4
28.2
507.5
144.1

933.7
367.0
27.5
530.4
144.1

991.3
386.7
25.8
554.4
144.1

Outstanding Fund Credit
in millions of U.S. dollars2/
in percent of exports of goods and services
in percent of external debt service3/
in number of months of imports of goods and services
in percent of GDP
in percent of quota
in percent of net imputed reserves
Net use of Fund Credit (in millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayment and Repurchases
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of US dollars)
Exports of goods and services (in millions of US dollars)
External debt service (in millions of US dollars)
Imports of goods and services (in millions of US dollars)
Net imputed reserves (in millions of US dollars)

1/ Assumes a 3-year SBA with access in the amount of SDR 52.5 million (590 percent of quota)
2/ US$1 = 0.624825 SDR (as of June 30, 2011)
3/ Including prospective repurchases/repayments

35

Annex I. St. Kitts and Nevis: Exchange Rate Assessment
The different CGER methodologies indicate that the exchange rate is somewhat
overvalued. The three methodologies indicate an overvaluation in the range of 13 to
17 percent.




The Equilibrium Real Effective Exchange
Rate (ERER) method—which looks at
fundamentals believed to affect the
equilibrium REER1—suggests an
overvaluation of 17.2 percent over its long
run equilibrium. The actual real exchange
rate has been appreciating due to the strength
of the U.S. dollar since 2008, peaking in
2009. But this trend abated in 2010 with the
slide of the U.S. dollar against other major
currencies.

Actual and Equilibrium REER, 1979–2010 1/
(Index 2005=100)
150

St. Kitts and Nevis

140
130
120
110
100
90
80

Actual

Equilibrium

70
1979

1985

1991

1997

2003

2009

Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and Pineda, Cashin and Sun (2009),
"Assessing Exchange Rate Competitiveness in the ECCU", IMF Working Paper
09/78 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
1/ The dotted lines around the equilibrium exchange rate represents 90 percent
confidence intervals of the prediction.

The Macro-economic balance (MB) approach points to an overvaluation of about
13.2 percent. The standard CGER methodology with a world sample (consisting of
111 countries including the ECCU member countries) suggests that the CA norm is
-18.3 percent of GDP against the underlying CA of -21.4 percent of GDP.2 A
depreciation of about 13 percent is needed to close the gap between the norm and the
current account in the medium term.
CGER Macro Balance (WORLD SAMPLE)
(In percent)
CAB/GDP
REER
CAB/GDP
Underlying
CAB/GDP
(OverNorm
(2016)
Elasticity
valuation)
-18.3

-21.4

-0.24

13.2

REER Deviation from Equilibrium
(in percent)
MB Approach

13.2

ERER Approach

17.2

ES Approach

12.8

Average

14.4

1

This estimation of the exchange rate takes into account productivity differential in the tourism sector (using
per capita tourist arrivals instead of per capita GDP), terms of trade for tourism, government consumption and
net foreign assets. For a detailed explanation of the methodology see Pineda, Cashin and Sun (2009),
“Assessing Exchange Rate Competitiveness in the ECCU,” IMF Working Paper 09/78 (Washington,
International Monetary Fund).

2

This compares to the average overvaluation in the range of 2.8 percent when comparing the CARICOM
countries using the methodology by Pineda, Cashin and Sun (2009) for tourism-dependent economies reported
in last year’s assessment. Pineda, Cashin and Sun (2009)’s methodology includes FDI as a determinant of the
equilibrium current account balance as countries can run higher CA deficits financed by FDI inflows. In the
medium term, however, FDI inflows are expected to remain subdued and unlikely to return to pre-crisis levels.

36



The External Sustainability (ES) approach indicates an overvaluation. In ES3, the
current account norm is estimated to be -18.4 percent of GDP, requiring a REER
adjustment of about 12.8 percent depreciation to stabilize net foreign assets.

With the exchange rate assessment showing a slight overvaluation, external
competitiveness remains a challenge. With the exchange rate adjustment constrained by the
quasi currency board, enhancing labor
ECCU: Wage Bill of Central Government, 2006–10 1/
(In percent of GDP, period average)
market flexibility is essential.
Controlling increases in public sector
compensation would therefore be an
important step in ensuring
competitiveness. Over the medium
term, the strong fiscal measures
recommended in the active scenario
7
8
9
10
11
12
would help to reduce wage pressures
and likely lower the equilibrium REER.
Antigua and Barbuda
Grenada

Dominica
St. Lucia

St. Vincent and the Grenadines
St. Kitts and Nevis

1/ Based on rebased GDP. St. Kitts and Nevis' high wage bill reflects in part the costs of two
autonomous administrations.
Sources: ECCU country authorities; and Fund staff estimates.

The gains St. Kitts and Nevis made in increasing its share of the ECCU and Caribbean
tourist market have reverted after 2005. To improve competitiveness, St. Kitts and Nevis
would need to upgrade the productive capacity of the tourism sector including hotel capacity
St Kitts and Nevis' Share of Stayover Arrivals
and infrastructure. Given its reliance on
14.0
0.9
FDI as a financing source, it is imperative
0.8
to continue to attract FDI inflows and
12.0
0.7
stimulate private sector led growth over the
10.0
0.6
medium term by improving the existing
0.5
business climate, including by lowering the
8.0
0.4
costs of registering property and getting
6.0
0.3
credit and enforcing contracts, where the
4
islands rank lower.
4.0
0.2
Share of ECCU arrivals
(in percent, left scale)

Share of Caribbean arrivals
(in percent, right scale)

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Source: ECCB, CTO

3

Unlike the CGER methodology, we do not exclude capita account transfers as capital account transfers
including grants are an important financing source for the ECCU countries.

4

Based on the Doing Business 2011 database.

37
Annex II. St. Kitts and Nevis: Summary of Appendices
Fund Relations
St. Kitts and Nevis has outstanding obligations to the Fund. St. Kitts and Nevis is a member
of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), which manages monetary policy and the
exchange system for its eight members. The common currency, the Eastern Caribbean dollar,
has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of EC$2.70 since July 1976. St. Kitts and Nevis
accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in December 1984. The
exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions. The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive
Board on July 7, 2010 (SM/10/153). CARTAC has provided extensive technical assistance in
recent years. In addition, FAD fielded an expenditure review mission in September 2010.
Relations with the World Bank Group
In June 2010, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Regional Partnership
Strategy (RPS) for FY 2009–14 was presented to the Board of the World Bank. The strategy
supports the sub-region’s development agenda through two main pillars: (i) building
resilience; and (ii) enhancing competitiveness and stimulating growth over the medium term.
There is currently one active World Bank project in St. Kitts and Nevis aimed at improving
the access, quality, and use of telecommunications and ICT services to achieve
socio-economic development in the OECS. Looking ahead, the World Bank Group is
expected to assist the government in the areas of civil service reform, strengthening social
safety nets, land management, and natural disaster management.
Relations with the Caribbean Development Bank
The CDB supports the economic and social development of St. Kitts and Nevis through
policy dialogue and the financing of priority capital projects and technical assistance. As of
end-May 2011, CDB has approved loans totaling US$166.9 million in the areas of basic
education, road infrastructure, electricity generation, student loans, child development,
natural disaster management and policy-based guarantees.
Statistical Issues
St. Kitts and Nevis participates in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).
Data provided is broadly adequate for surveillance, although significant shortcomings in data
provision and data quality remain, particularly in the real sector (including the consumer
price index), fiscal and balance of payments data. An April 2007 data ROSC mission to
assess monetary and financial statistics noted some recent improvements and identified some
shortcomings in the ECCB’s monetary statistics, which a technical assistance mission in
December 2009 aimed to address.

38
Annex III. Letter of Intent
July 13, 2011
Ms. Christine Lagarde
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431
Dear Ms. Lagarde:
As set out in the 2011 Budget, the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis is taking decisive
actions to create the conditions for strong economic growth to improve the living conditions
of all citizens by tackling the country’s high public debt levels. The global downturn that
started in late 2008, coupled with the damage caused by Hurricane Omar and the temporary
closure of a key hotel on Nevis, drastically reduced tourism receipts and FDI inflows. As a
result, St. Kitts and Nevis’ economy contracted in 2009 and 2010. The decline in
employment and economic activity led to a sharp deterioration in the fiscal position and a
significant increase in public debt. In 2011, the current account deficit will widen due to the
dual impact of economic recovery and increase in food and fuel prices. Moreover, financing
needs are increasing as a result of large imminent rollover needs.
The main objective of the government’s program is to foster macroeconomic stability and
create a virtuous cycle of sustainable public debt and strong economic growth, which in turn
would further strengthen the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. The program, which is
described in the attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP),
includes expenditure cuts and revenue-enhancing measures (including those already taken)
amounting to 5.5 percent of GDP in 2011 relative to 2010. It also incorporates important
structural reforms that will further enhance the fiscal position over the duration of the
program, while reducing vulnerabilities in the financial sector.
In addition, a comprehensive debt restructuring is envisaged. The government believes that
sustained implementation of the program, complemented by debt restructuring, will put the
public debt on a clear downward path. In this context, we have initiated discussions with our
creditors with the goal of reaching agreement on a restructuring of our debt that enables us to
sharply reduce the debt servicing burden.

39
The government of St. Kitts and Nevis is committed to the objectives and measures
underlying the program and intends to pursue them with IMF assistance. Support from the
IMF and other multilateral financial institutions will help to further boost confidence,
including the provision of a liquidity buffer to further strengthen our financial system. Given
the broad-based nature of the reform agenda, the government believes that sustained
multilateral engagement over the medium term is essential, including through the provision
of technical assistance in priority areas. Based on our balance of payments needs—including
those arising from the repayment of external obligations of the government—and our policies
described in the attached MEFP, we request approval of a 36-month Stand-By Arrangement
(SBA) in an amount equivalent to SDR 52.5 million (about US$84 million or 590 percent of
quota) for the period July 27, 2011 through July 26, 2014.
We believe that the economic and financial policies set forth in the MEFP are adequate to
achieve the objectives of its program. However, we stand ready to take further measures to
meet our objectives, and would consult with the IMF on the adoption of such measures, and
in advance of revisions to the policies contained in the MEFP, in accordance with the Fund’s
policies on such consultations. We will provide the Fund with the information it requires for
monitoring progress during program implementation. The program will be monitored
through quarterly reviews, with the first review to be completed after November 15, 2011
and the second review to be completed after February 15, 2012.
We authorize the IMF to publish this Letter of Intent and its attachments (including the
Technical Memorandum of Understanding), and the related staff report.
Sincerely yours,

/s/
Dr. the Hon. Denzil Douglas
Prime Minister and Minister of Finance
St. Kitts and Nevis

40
Attachment 1
St. Kitts and Nevis: Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies, 2011–14
July 13, 2011
I. BACKGROUND AND PROGRAM OBJECTIVES
1.
The global economic and financial crisis that started in late 2008 has severely
impacted St. Kitts and Nevis’ economy. The economy contracted in 2009 and 2010,
reflecting sharp declines in stay-over tourist arrivals and construction-related FDI inflows.
The global downturn also precipitated the collapse of two large regional insurance companies
with significant presence in St. Kitts and Nevis. Inflationary pressures have begun to rise in
2011, reflecting the pass through of higher international prices of energy and food. Together,
these developments pose a serious threat to St. Kitts and Nevis’ macroeconomic stability.
2.
The crisis has taken a major toll on our public finances, notably in the form of an
approximately 13½ percent drop in tax revenue in 2010, compared with 2009. To help stem
the deterioration in the fiscal position, we have taken strong measures, including the
introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) in November 2010, while cutting capital
expenditure relative to the budget. Notwithstanding these measures, the overall fiscal deficit
deteriorated by about 5½ percentage points of GDP.1 As a result, the total stock of public
debt reached about 200 percent of GDP at end-December 2010.
3.
On the external front, tourism receipts, which account for approximately one half of
exports of goods and services, declined by about 24 percent in 2009 and remained broadly
flat in 2010. However, the external current account deficit—though still very high—
narrowed to 27½ percent of GDP in 2010, reflecting a slowdown in economic activity and
FDI-related imports.
4.
The main objectives of the government’s program are to substantially strengthen
public finances, significantly reduce public debt levels (including through a comprehensive
debt restructuring), and help establish the conditions for sustained economic growth. The
strong fiscal adjustment, coupled with a comprehensive debt restructuring, will significantly
reduce the debt service burden and help set the public debt-to-GDP ratio firmly on a
downward path toward the ECCU debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020. We expect that
steadfast implementation of this program will help mobilize external financing, including
1

The national accounts of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union member states have been rebased with a base
year of 2006. For St. Kitts and Nevis, this will result in a 28 percent increase in the 2009 nominal GDP, mainly
reflecting a broader coverage of financial, communication, and offshore education services. The rebasing
exercise was accompanied by CARTAC technical assistance. The ratios in this memorandum are expressed in
GDP prior to the rebasing.

41
from the IMF, to support its objectives. With the improved fiscal and economic performance,
we also expect to meet the conditions to facilitate the release of EU sugar grants.
5.
To achieve a large and sustainable reduction in the public debt, the program targets
average primary fiscal surpluses of about 5.6 percent of GDP during 2011–13 (compared
with -0.5 percent of GDP in 2010). The projected improvements in the fiscal position will be
driven by higher tax revenue resulting from the implementation of the VAT and other
reforms, such as the increase in the electricity tariff by about 80 percent and strict control of
expenditure. The program also envisages structural reforms which are critical to its success,
especially in the public sector.
II. MACROECONOMIC POLICIES FOR 2011–12
6.
Our program envisages a gradual economic recovery, with real GDP growth projected
to reach about 1½ percent and 1.8 percent, in 2011 and 2012, respectively. Reflecting the
pass through of higher international prices of food and energy, inflation is expected to reach
3.9 percent in 2011, before declining to 2.9 percent in 2012. In the medium term, inflation is
expected to revert to its historical average of 2.5 percent, anchored by the currency board
arrangement. The external current account deficit is projected to temporarily widen in 2011,
due to higher energy and food prices. In line with the economic recovery, a moderate
improvement in FDI flows and other private financial inflows is expected to partially finance
the current account deficit in 2011–12. External financing needs are expected to amount to
about 28 percent of GDP during 2011–12, which are anticipated to be addressed by the
reduction in the external repayment obligations as a consequence of the debt restructuring.
7.
In 2011, we intend to deepen our fiscal adjustment process and initiate a
comprehensive debt restructuring, thereby setting the stage for restoring debt and external
sustainability. Efforts are ongoing to strengthen budgetary performance, which will intensify
in the period ahead. These efforts will be accompanied by supporting structural reforms in
the public sector. In addition, we will create no new nonfinancial public enterprises, nor
change the role of the existing enterprises in a way that would assume central government
spending mandates.
A. Fiscal Adjustment
8.
We believe that the fiscal measures implemented so far provide the critical
adjustments needed to begin to restore debt sustainability. Building on the measures taken in
2010, we have increased electricity tariffs and the housing and social development levy in
2011. On the expenditure side, we have adopted a policy to freeze the wage bill until 2013
and prioritized capital expenditure. Together, these measures are expected to achieve a
primary fiscal surplus of 5 percent of GDP in 2011. In the event of a shortfall, we have
identified contingency measures equivalent to 1 percentage point of GDP that would be taken
to ensure that we achieve the primary fiscal surplus target. These include measures to
increase revenue from the Housing and Social Development Levy (0.3 percent of GDP),

42
customs service charge (0.1 percent of GDP); and a reduction in capital expenditure
(0.6 percent of GDP), if needed.
9.
We estimate that the overall fiscal deficit will reach US$22.2 million (about
4.0 percent of GDP) in 2011. It is anticipated that net domestic financing (including proceeds
from the sale of assets) will amount to a net repayment of US$19.6 million (3.5 percent of
GDP) and our external obligations, net of expected disbursements for projects and already
disbursed loans, will amount to a net repayment of US$21.3 million (3.8 percent of GDP). As
a result, a financing gap of about US$63.1 million (11.3 percent of GDP) is expected in 2011.
B. Debt Restructuring
10.
While the measures outlined above would bring about a sharp improvement in the
fiscal accounts, they would not by themselves close the financing gaps and put the public
debt on a sustainable path. Accordingly, we are in the process of negotiating a
comprehensive and substantive public debt restructuring, which would ensure burden sharing
by all. With the assistance of our debt advisors, we have developed a strategy that
emphasizes information transparency and dialogue with all creditor groups. Overall, we
expect that such a restructuring will yield substantial interest savings to put public debt on a
firmly downward trajectory in the medium term. We have already taken substantive steps to
resolve our outstanding arrears to creditors and significant balance of payments support from
our international partners will be necessary.
C. Strengthening the Financial Sector
11.
To further strengthen the financial system, we intend to establish a GOSKN Banking
Sector Reserve Fund. This Fund will provide temporary liquidity to solvent local banks that
face liquidity constraints and its operation will be governed by a Memorandum of
Understanding between the Government and the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB),
who will administer the Fund on behalf of the Government.
D. Structural and Social Policies
12.
We will take steps to enhance public financial management. To advance this
important agenda, we will take the following steps in 2011–12: (i) update the mapping of
publicly owned land; (ii) undertake a land valuation; (iii) rationalize public land sales and
development agencies; (iv) make good faith efforts and demonstrate progress in the
discussion with the creditors on debt restructuring; (v) submit to Cabinet a proposal to
rationalize the subsidies on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG); (vi) submit the bill for the
corporatization of the Electricity Department to Parliament; (vii) submit the draft of the new
Procurement Act to Parliament; and (viii) establish a medium-term expenditure framework.
13.
Civil service reform is a key pillar of our medium-term public sector transformation
program. We plan to undertake a comprehensive civil service reform to improve the

43
efficiency of the public sector and are seeking technical assistance from our development
partners (including the World Bank).
14.
In line with the ongoing ECCU-wide new initiative, we are committed to further
strengthening the social security scheme by drafting a proposal for a comprehensive pension
reform and continue to carry out regular actuarial reviews.
15.
Regarding debt management, we are committed to developing an explicit
medium-term strategy that takes account of the cost-risk tradeoff of alternative financing
options, within the context of the overall macroeconomic environment.
16.
Protecting the most vulnerable social groups will continue to be a priority under the
program. To promote efficiency, we intend to introduce a cash transfer program, with a view
to better target the most vulnerable in society. In this context, we will present to Cabinet a
social safety net reform strategy by March 2012. As a first step, we intend to compile an
inventory of all social assistance programs, which would allow for the establishment of a
central beneficiary system of all programs and have begun to solicit technical assistance from
our development partners (including UNICEF and the World Bank). The plan entails the
introduction of an objective and transparent targeting mechanism to effectively direct social
assistance to the poor. In the medium term, we will rationalize social assistance programs on
the basis of a coherent social protection strategy as well as link social assistance programs to
actions that promote human capital.
E. Prior Actions
17.
Prior actions under the program include: (i) public announcement of the
Government’s commitment to undertake a debt restructuring; (ii) appointment of legal
advisors for the due diligence on the existing debt contracts; and (iii) taking stock of and
putting in place a framework to monitor expenditure payment arrears on a regular basis with
assistance from CARTAC; and (iv) agreement between the Government and the ECCB on
the operating modalities of the GOSKN Banking Sector Reserve Fund. As of June 30, 2011,
all of the measures have been implemented.
III. PROGRAM MONITORING AND SAFEGUARDS ASSESSMENT
18.
Progress in the implementation of policies under the program will be monitored
quarterly through quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets, as well as
structural benchmarks. The first and second program reviews should be completed after
November 15, 2011 and February 15, 2012, respectively. At this stage, quantitative
performance criteria are set for end-September and end-December 2011 and indicative
targets for 2012. The phasing of access under the arrangement and the quarterly review
schedule are set out in Table 1. The quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets
are set out in Table 2. The understanding between the St. Kitts and Nevis Government and
IMF staff regarding the quantitative performance criteria, as well as definitions of all relevant

44
variables and reporting requirements are contained in the attached Technical Memorandum
of Understanding (TMU). The program also incorporates a continuous performance criterion
on the non-accumulation of domestic and external arrears. The Government has plans for the
clearance of external arrears through the debt restructuring process, and will provide
quarterly reports on the outstanding stock of external arrears within 8 weeks of the end of
each quarter. Prior actions and structural benchmarks are presented in Table 3.
19.
In line with Fund policies, the government recognizes the importance of completing a
safeguards assessment of the ECCB by end-2011. The ECCB has agreed to cooperate with
Fund staff and provide the information required to complete such an assessment.
Table 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: Schedule of Review and Purchases
Amount of Purchase
Millions of SDR
Percent of Quota

Availability date
July 27, 2011
November 15, 2011
February 15, 2012
May 15, 2012
August 15, 2012
November 15, 2012
February 15, 2013
May 15, 2013
August 15, 2013
November 15, 2013
February 15, 2014
May 15, 2014

22.150
11.470
3.161
3.161
3.161
3.161
1.105
1.105
1.105
1.105
0.913
0.913

248.9
128.9
35.5
35.5
35.5
35.5
12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4
10.3
10.3

Total
Source: Fund staff estimates

52.510

590.0

Conditions
Approval of arrangement
First review and end-September 2011 performance criteria
Second review and end-December 2011 performance criteria
Third review and end-March 2012 performance criteria
Fourth review and end-June 2012 performance criteria
Fifth review and end-September 2012 performance criteria
Sixth review and end-December 2012 performance criteria
Seventh review and end-March 2013 performance criteria
Eight review and end-June 2013 performance criteria
Nineth review and end-September 2013 performance criteria
Tenth review and end-December 2013 performance criteria
Eleventh review and end-March 2014 performance criteria

Table 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, 2011-12 1/
Performance Criteria
End Sep. End-Dec.
2011
2011

End-Mar.
2012

Indicative Targets
End-Jun. End-Sep.
2012
2012

End-Dec.
2012

Performance Criteria:
Central government overall balance including grants (floor) 1/ 2/

-60

-60

-9

-10

-39

-51

Central government budget expenditure arrears accumulation (ceiling)

0

0

0

0

0

0

Stock of external short term debt (ceiling)

0

0

0

0

0

0

Central government or guaranteed external arrears accumulation (ceiling) 3/

0

0

0

0

0

0

42

76

24

65

67

86

Indicative Target:
Central government primary balance (floor) 1/ 2/
Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Cumulative within each calendar year.
2/ See the TMU for a description of adjustors.
3/ To be monitored on a continuous basis.

45
Table 3. St. Kitts and Nevis: Prior Actions and Structural Benchmarks
Action

Target Date

Objectives

I. Prior Actions
Authorities commit publicly to undertake a debt restructuring
Appointment of legal advisors for the due diligence on the existing debt contracts
Take stock of and put in place a framework to monitor expenditure payment arrears on
a regular basis with assistance from CARTAC
Agreement between the authorities and the ECCB on the modalities of the GOSKN
Banking Sector Reserve Fund

End-June 2011
End-June 2011
End-June 2011
End-June 2011

II. Fiscal and Public Sector Reforms
Public financial management
Update the registry of at least 600 acres of land

End-September 2011

Undertake a valuation of at least 600 acres of land

End-September 2011

Make substantial progress on the consultative phase of restructuring with creditors

End-September 2011

Submit the bill for the corporatization of the Electricity Department to Parliament

End-September 2011

Submit to Cabinet proposal to rationalize the subsidy on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
Submit draft of new Procurement Act to Parliament

End-March 2012
End-June 2012

Draft proposal for the establishment of an asset management company

End-June 2012

Establish a medium-term expenditure framework with agreed fiscal targets

End-June 2012

Civil service reform
Cabinet to approve a plan for civil service reform covering human resource policy,
reviewing the organization and structure of the civil service and addressing wage policy
and payroll management

Strenghten public financial
management
Strenghten public financial
management
Strenghten public financial
management
Strenghten institutional
framework
Streamline social safety
Strenghten institutional
framework
Strenghten public financial
management
Improve medium-term
orientation of the budget

End-June 2012

Strenghten public financial
management

End-September 2012

Strenghten public financial
management

End-December 2011

Strenghten public financial
management

Actuarial review of Social Security
Regular review of the Social Security Scheme.
Public enterprise reform
Review borrowing capacity of public enterprises
Rationalize public land sales and development agencies
Strengthen social safety net
Submit social safety net reform strategy to Cabinet

End-September 2012
End-March 2012

Streamline social safety
nets

End-September 2011

Financial sector stability

to accompany the 2013 Budget

Improve medium-term
orientation of the budget

End-June 2013

Strenghten public financial
management

III. Financial Sector Reforms
Update the existing stress tests of financial institutions
IV. Medium-term benchmark
Develop and explicit medium-term debt management strategy that takes account of the
cost-risk tradeoff of alternative financing options, within the context of the overall
macroeconomic environment
Draft proposal for a comprehensive pension reform
Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff.

46
Attachment 2
St. Kitts and Nevis: Technical Memorandum of Understanding
1.
St. Kitts and Nevis’ performance under the Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) will be
assessed on the basis of the quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets, as well as
the structural benchmarks. This Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) defines
the variables set out in Table 2 of the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
(MEFP). It also lays down the reporting requirements to adequately monitor the program.
2.
For the purposes of the program, the exchange rate of the East Caribbean dollar
(EC$) to the U.S. dollar is set at EC$2.70 = US$1. Foreign currency accounts denominated in
currencies other than the U.S. dollar, excluding SDRs, will be first valued in the U.S. dollar
at actual end-of-period exchange rates used by the ECCB to calculate the official exchange
rates. SDR-denominated accounts will be valued at the program exchange rate of U.S. dollar
1.6 per SDR.
I. COVERAGE
3.
For the purpose of the program, central government will cover all items included in
the government budgets of the Federation (both St. Kitts and Nevis).
4.
The nonfinancial public sector is defined as the total central government and
nonfinancial public enterprises. Public enterprises consist of the Development Bank of
St. Kitts and Nevis, Financial Services Regulatory Commission, Frigate Bay Development
Corporation, La Vallee Greens Ltd, National Housing Corporation, Nevis Air and Sea Port
Authority, Nevis Cultural Development Foundation, Nevis Electricity Corporation, Nevis
Housing and Land Development Corporation, Nevis Solid Waste Management Authority,
Nevis Tourism Authority, St. Christopher and Nevis Solid Waste Management Corporation,
St. Christopher Tourism Authority, St. Kitts Urban Development Corporation,
St. Christopher Air and Sea Ports Authority, WhiteGate Development Corporation, and ZIZ
Broadcasting Corporation.
5.
External debt is defined as all debt owed to creditors residing outside of St. Kitts and
Nevis, while domestic debt covers all debt owed to residents of St. Kitts and Nevis. The
latter covers all T-bills, including those held by creditors residing outside of St. Kitts and
Nevis.
II. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
A. Central Government’s Overall Deficit (PC)
6.
The central government overall balance will cover all of its revenue, grants,
expenditure, and transfers. Revenues will exclude any proceeds from the sale of public assets

47
such as land, which will be considered as financing below the line. Expenditures will exclude
clearance of arrears, which will be considered as financing below the line.
7.
The central government’s overall balance will be measured from the financing side as
the sum of the net domestic financing, net external financing, plus proceeds from the sale of
public assets, minus clearance of arrears.
8.

9.

Net domestic financing of the central government is defined as the sum of:


net domestic bank financing as measured by the change in the domestic
banking system credit to the central government net of deposits, as reported
by the consolidated balance sheet of the monetary authorities and commercial
banks, including special tranches from the ECCB;



net nonbank financing as measured by the net changes in holdings of
government securities by nonbanks, and net borrowing from nonbank
institutions;



the changes in the stock of domestic arrears of the central government defined
as net changes in unpaid checks issued, unprocessed claims, pending invoices,
plus accrued interest payments, and other forms of expenditures recorded
above the line but not paid;



gross receipts from divestment defined as proceeds received from any
privatization, divestment, and sale of asset (land); and



any exceptional financing, including rescheduled principal and interest.

Net external financing of the central government is defined as the sum of:


disbursements of project and non-project loans, including securitization;



proceeds from bonds issued abroad (with an original maturity of one year or
greater);



net changes in short-term external debt (with an original maturity of less than
one year), excluding exceptional financing;



net changes in cash deposits held outside the domestic banking system;



any changes in arrears on external interest payments and other forms of
external expenditures recorded above the line but not paid;



any exceptional financing, including rescheduled principal and interest;

48
less:


payments of principal on current maturities for bonds and loans on a due
basis, including any prepayment of external debt.

10.
The floor on the overall balance of the central government will be adjusted as
follows:


downward (i.e., a larger overall deficit target would apply) to the extent that
budgetary grants fall short of the programmed amounts by less than
EC$3 million.



upward to the extent that budgetary grants exceed the annual amounts
specified in the program.



downward by the cumulative amount of up to EC$15 million spent on bank
recapitalization and support to the British American Insurance Companies or
CLICO as part of a regional solution—any amounts spent in excess of this
programmed contingency will need to be funded within the program limit on
the overall deficit.



upward to the extent that clearance of arrears fall short of the amounts
specified.



upward to the extent of exceptional financing achieved through debt
restructuring.
Table 1. Programmed Disbursements of Budgetary Grants in 2011
(in EC$ millions)
Quarters
I
II
III
IV
Grants

0.1

4.6

4.6

36.2

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
Note: Values presented are cumulative and Euro 1 = US$1.3341.

B. Stock of Central Government Short-Term External Debt (PC)
11.
The limit on short-term external debt applies to debt owed or guaranteed by the
central government of St. Kitts and Nevis, with an original maturity of up to and including
one year. Excluded from the limit are any rescheduling operations (including the deferral of
interest on commercial debt) and normal import-related credits. Normal import credit is
understood to be a self-liquidating operation where the proceeds from sales of imports are

49
used to retire the debt. Debt falling within the limit shall be valued in U.S. dollars at the time
of the contract or guarantee becomes effective.
C. External Arrears of the Public Sector (PC)
12.
The non-accumulation of arrears to external creditors will be a continuous
performance criterion under the program. This performance criterion applies to arrears
accumulated related to debt contracted or guaranteed by central government. External
payment arrears consist of external debt service obligations (principal and interest) falling
due after December 31, 2010 that have not been paid at the time due, taking into account the
grace periods specified in contractual agreements. Arrears resulting from nonpayment of debt
service for which a clearance framework has been agreed or a rescheduling agreement is
being sought are excluded from this definition.
D. Budget Expenditure Arrears (PC)
13.
A ceiling is set on central government budget expenditure arrears, equal to the stock
of such arrears as at December 31, 2010 (Table 2). The ceiling applies to the increase in the
sum of: (1) any invoice that has been received by a spending agency from a supplier of
goods, services, and capital goods delivered and verified, and for which payment has not
been made within the contractually agreed period, or in the absence of a grace period, within
60 days; and (2) unpaid wages, pensions, or transfers, pending for longer than 60 days to
domestic or foreign residents, irrespective of the currency denomination of the debt.
Table 2. Stock of Budget Expenditure Arrears at end-December, 2010
(in EC$ millions)
Stock of arrears
Unpaid checks issued
Unprocessed invoices
Pending invoices
Interest and amortization arrears on domestic debt

183
…
…
…
0

Total

183

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Nevis Island Administration.

III. INDICATIVE TARGET ON THE PRIMARY BALANCE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
14.
The central government’s primary balance is defined as revenue and grants minus
non-interest expenditures. As in the definition of the overall balance, revenue will exclude
any proceeds from the sale of public assets. Net lending is a non-interest expenditure item
(negative net lending is a revenue item). Interest expenditures include interest payments on
outstanding arrears, as defined above in sections IIC and IID (at their contractual rates)
converted to a cash basis.

50
15.
The floor on the primary balance of the central government will be monitored
from the financing side as the sum of the net domestic financing, net external financing,
proceeds from the sale of public assets, plus domestic and external interest payments on a
due basis.
16.
The floor on the primary balance of the central government will be adjusted as
follows:


downward (i.e., a smaller primary surplus target would apply) to the extent
that budgetary grants fall short of the programmed amounts by less than
EC$3 million.



upward to the extent that budgetary grants exceed the annual amounts
specified in the program.



downward by the cumulative amount of up to EC$15 million spent on bank
recapitalization and support to the British American Insurance Companies or
CLICO as part of a regional solution.



upward to the extent of exceptional financing achieved through debt
restructuring.
IV. DATA AND INFORMATION

17.
To enable monitoring of performance relative to the above quantitative performance
criteria and indicative targets, the St. Kitts and Nevis authorities will provide Fund staff with
the following specific data and information within 8 weeks after the end of each month.
Fiscal sector


Central government budgetary accounts.



Capital expenditure.



Total monthly disbursements and grants receipts, disaggregated into: (a) budgetary
support (by type—either loans, external “bonds” and/or other securities); (b) project
loans; (c) budgetary grants; and (d) project grants.



Central government domestic debt data (St. Kitts and Nevis).



Stock of domestic arrears, including unpaid checks issued, stock of unprocessed
claims due and invoices pending; interest and amortization on domestic debt.



Stock of external arrears by creditor.

51


Detailed monthly external debt report from the Debt Unit in the Ministry of Finance,
showing fiscal year-to-date disbursements, amortization, interest payments and
outstanding stocks, for the central government and public enterprises.



Copies of loan agreements for any new loans contracted, including financing
involving the issue of government paper, and of any renegotiated agreements on
existing loans.

Financial sector


Monetary survey for St. Kitts and Nevis as prepared by the Eastern Caribbean Central
Bank.

Real sector


Consumer price index.

18.

Reporting on a quarterly basis will include the following:

Fiscal


A detailed overview of capital expenditures on a project by project basis and the
composition of financing.



Financial position of the public enterprises (as listed in paragraph 4).

Real sector


Economic indicators under the real sector.

External sector


Economic indicators under the external sector.

19.

Reporting on an annual basis will include the following:

External and real sectors


GDP and its components.



Balance of payments accounts.

20.

Other reporting will include:



Reports of legislative changes pertaining to economic matters.

52


Notification of any establishment of new public enterprises.



All disbursements and outstanding balances from the use of the Banking Sector
Reserve Fund on a weekly basis.

53
Annex IV
Memorandum of Understanding between the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank and the
Government of St Kitts and Nevis for the Operation of the Banking Sector Reserve
Fund
THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU) is made this 27 day of
July 2011 BY AND BETWEEN THE EASTERN CARIBBEAN CENTRAL BANK a
body established under Article 3 of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank Agreement, 1983
and having its principal office at Bird Rock in the island of Saint Christopher, (hereinafter
called “the ECCB” which expression shall where the context so requires or admits include
its successors in title and assigns) AND the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis hereinafter
referred to as the Government.
WHEREAS, as part of the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Stand-by Arrangement with
the Government, a Banking Sector Reserve Fund (“the Fund”) will be established at the
ECCB to provide liquidity support to solvent locally incorporated domestic banks;
AND WHEREAS, the Government has requested that the ECCB manages the Fund on its
behalf;
NOW THEREFORE, the Government and the ECCB have reached the following
understandings:
1.0 GOVERNMENT UNDERTAKINGS
1.1

The Government undertakes to:
1.1.1 Establish and maintain a dedicated account at the ECCB, for the duration of
the Government’s programme with the IMF, for the sole purpose of providing
liquidity to solvent locally incorporated banks;
1.1.2

Transfer EC$ 46.1 million to the account after the initial disbursement
under the IMF’s Stand-by Arrangement (SBA);

1.1.3

Provide liquidity support to solvent locally incorporated banks in
accordance with the Operational Guidelines set out in Schedule I and as
may be amended from time to time.

1.2 The Government hereby authorizes and requests the ECCB to:
1.2.2

accept and hold on its behalf securities assigned by the banks to the
Government as collateral for advances from the Fund;

1.2.3

release the securities upon repayment of the advance; in accordance with the

54
Operational Guidelines and without reference to or further authority from the
Government.
2.0.

ECCB UNDERTAKINGS

The ECCB undertakes to:
2.1 Administer the day-to-day operations of the Fund on behalf of the Government
including
2.1.1

maintaining the books and records of the account;

2.1.2 receiving and processing applications from the banks to access the Fund in
accordance with the Operational Guidelines;
2.1.3 approving requests for advances provided banks meet the conditions set out in
the Operational Guidelines.
2.2 Report to the Government on Monday of every week that the Fund is in operation via
SWIFT message on the usage of the Fund provided only that if the reporting day falls
on a weekend, public holiday or other non-business day, the ECCB shall report on the
next business day..
2.3

Remit any interest earned on the Fund to the Government quarterly on October
31st, January 31st, April 30th and July 31st of each year that the Fund is in operation.

2.4

The ECCB agrees to:
2.2.1 receive and hold on behalf of the Government securities assigned by the banks
to the Government as collateral for advances from the Fund;
2.2.2 release the securities upon repayment of the advance; in accordance with the
Operational Guidelines and without reference to or further authority from the
Government.

GENERAL
The parties to this MOU may take practical measures as may be necessary to facilitate the
implementation of this MOU. Accordingly, the parties may in writing and by consensus,
waive, amend or alter any of the provisions of this MOU including the Operational
Guidelines.

55
SIGNED on the 27 day of July 2011
by:
/s/
K Dwight Venner, Governor
For and on behalf of Eastern Caribbean Central Bank

SIGNED on the 27 day of July 2011
by:

/s/
Denzil L Douglas, Prime Minister
For and on behalf of the Government

56
Schedule I
Government of St Kitts and Nevis Banking Sector Reserve Fund Operational
Guidelines
Introduction
This facility is made available by the Government to solvent locally incorporated domestic
banks that face temporary liquidity constraints. The facility will remain available for the
duration of the Government’s SBA with the IMF (36 months).
All requests for a temporary advance must be signed by the Chairman of the Board of
Directors and addressed to the Governor of the ECCB; and copied to the Minister responsible
for Finance. Requests for an advance received at the beginning of the business day will
generally be processed the same day; otherwise, requests will be processed within 24 hours.
All requests for an advance must be accompanied by the following:
1.

The reasons for the request and sources of repayment;

2.

The amount and tenor of the advance requested;

3.

Evidence that the bank has been unsuccessful in its attempt to raise the required
liquidity in the interbank market (IBM) or the repo market;

4.

A balance sheet, a detailed listing of liquid assets with an indication of amounts
hypothecated and details of undrawn commitments as at the date of the request;

5.

Details of the assets being pledged to secure the advance.

In addition, where a bank is applying for an advance to be rolled over, the bank should
provide a plan outlining how they expect to remedy their liquidity difficulties and reduce
their dependence on this facility.
The Governor will approve the advance if (i) the liquidity need has arisen as a consequence
of unanticipated client demands and (ii) subject to a determination by the ECCB that the
bank is solvent.
Terms and Conditions
Advances are subject to the terms and conditions outlined below:

57
Security
All advances must be fully secured with securities assigned to the Government. Security may
be in the form of: (i) fixed deposits; or (ii) Treasury bills.
For expediency, prior to any specific request being made for advances, locally incorporated
banks requesting an advance are required to lodge collateral with the ECCB in accordance
with the following provisions:
i.

Physical Securities

A bank wishing to use ECCB’s depository service must deposit securities with
the ECCB’s Head Office or Agency Office. The securities must be delivered with the
memorandum of deposit. The following information must be included in the memorandum:
(a) the description of the securities;
(b) the nominal value of the securities;
(c) Authorized Signatory;
(d) Date.
A bank wishing to borrow from the Fund using securities deposited with the
ECCB will be required to instruct the ECCB to assign these securities for a set period for the
benefit of the Government of St Kitts and Nevis. .
ii.

Dematerialized Securities

For Securities listed on the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM), the borrowing
bank must complete the Pledging form (available at www.ecseonline.com) by providing its
contact details, terms of loan and description of the instruments being pledged.
Limits
Subject to the availability of resources, banks will be eligible to draw up to 90 percent of the
amount of fixed deposits or the nominal value of Treasury bills.
Interest
The ECCB shall set the interest on advances not lower than the ECCB’s discount rate.
Without prejudice to the foregoing, the ECCB may change the interest at any time, effective,
at the earliest, from the following business day. Any change in the interest rate will be
communicated to the borrowing bank by the ECCB.

58
Interest will, in the first instance, be credited back to the Fund. Once per quarter, any interest
received will be transferred to the government’s consolidated fund to defray the costs of
providing the liquidity advance.
Maturity of advance
Advances under this facility will be granted for a period up to fourteen (14) days. Unless
otherwise agreed, advances are to be repaid in full on maturity. However, advances may be
rolled over on request subject to the availability of sufficient collateral and the ECCB’s
affirmation of the ongoing solvency of the bank. All advances must be repaid on or before
July 26, 2014.
On maturity date of the advance, the borrowing bank will be required to send a Swift
message (MT202) to the ECCB requesting the transfer of funds to the Government of St
Kitts Banking Sector Reserve Fund Account.
In instances where the advance is extended for an additional period of time, the borrowing
bank and the ECCB will confirm the terms and conditions of the new arrangement.
Additionally, the borrowing bank will be required to instruct the ECCB to continue to hold
the securities on behalf of the Government of St Kitts and Nevis for a specified time.
Other
No dividends should be paid by the borrowing bank until all advances under this facility are
fully repaid.
The ECCB will reconfirm to GOSKN its assessment that the bank remains solvent at each
point an advance is rolled over.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ST. KITTS AND NEVIS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By Arrangement
External and Public Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund
July 20, 2011
This debt sustainability analysis (DSA) indicates that St. Kitts and Nevis’ public and publicly
guaranteed (PPG) debt would be unsustainable even with the adoption of strong fiscal
adjustment measures. The comprehensive debt restructuring currently pursued by the
government (not included in the formal analysis), however, would restore public debt
sustainability.
A. Introduction
1.
St. Kitts and Nevis has the highest public debt-to-GDP ratio among the ECCU
member states.1 As of end-2010, the stock of public and publically guaranteed (PPG) debt2 is
estimated to be around 199 percent of GDP. About 69 percent of St. Kitts and Nevis’ PPG debt is
held domestically (139 percent of GDP), mostly by commercial banks (about 90 percent of GDP)
and statutory bodies (20 percent of GDP). The remaining 31 percent of PPG debt is external debt
(60 percent of GDP) and mainly comprised of
obligations to commercial creditors including
bond holders (31 percent of GDP). External
debt is owed to multilateral creditors
(24 percent of GDP), in particular to the
Caribbean Development Bank (20 percent of
GDP); non-Paris Club bilateral creditors
(6 percent of GDP); and Paris Club members
(1 percent of GDP). In 2010, the total
outstanding borrowing from the Eastern
Caribbean Central Bank was about 1.7 percent
of GDP.
St. Kitts and Nevis: Public Sector Debt, Dec 2010
(In percent of GDP)

Total public sector debt

domestic debt,
139%

Social
Security
Board
(loans), 17%

Domestic debt

Overdraf ts,
11%

Medium-long
term
securities,
10%

T-bills, 30%

external debt,
60%

Commercial
banks
(loans), 67%

Other
domestic, 2%

External debt

Multilateral debt

Commercial
and other,
31%

CDB, 20%

Bilateral, 6%

Multilateral,
24%

Other IFI,
4%

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; and Fund staff estimates

1

St. Kitts and Nevis continued to have the highest public debt-to-GDP ratio in 2010 among the ECCU member
countries even under the rebased GDP (once published: 156 percent of GDP). For the rest of the ECCU member
countries, public debt-to-GDP ratios under the rebased GDP in 2010 stood at 97 percent in Grenada, 90 percent in
Antigua and Barbuda, 75 percent in St. Lucia, 67 percent in Dominica, and 66 percent in St. Vincent and Grenadines

2

Public and publically guaranteed debt includes all St. Kitts government, Nevis Island Administration, and statutory
bodies, including debt to the social security system.

2

2.
The government has relied heavily on short-term financing from the captive
domestic market. As of December 2010, T-bills (mainly 91-day, with the next roll-over
scheduled in mid-August 2011) and overdrafts constituted about 30 percent of total government
domestic debt. This high share of short-term debt has, in turn, exposed the government to
significant rollover risks. Approval of the SBA prior to the rollover, however, would instill
confidence and significantly reduce the rollover risks. In addition, there is a concentration of
principal repayment scheduled in 2011–13.
3.
Despite a tradition of timely servicing its debt, St. Kitts and Nevis is beginning to
accumulate arrears. St. Kitts has built up external arrears of about 5.2 percent of GDP
(EC$ 74.3 million) during 2008–10, for which the authorities have engaged in discussions with a
view to reaching a resolution. Nevis has accumulated external arrears of about 0.1 percent of
GDP in 2010 (EC$ 2 million), which will be cleared in the process of the debt restructuring.
Beginning June 2011, St. Kitts and Nevis has also started to miss payments to external private
creditors but it does not have arrears to multilaterals or the Paris Club.
4.
The exchange rate risk stemming from the foreign-denominated debt in St. Kitts
and Nevis is relatively low. Reflecting the structure of its treasury operations, all domestic debt
is denominated in local currency (Eastern Caribbean dollars). Moreover, about 71.7 percent of its
external debt is denominated in U.S. dollars, to which the local currency has been pegged since
1976, and another 11.5 percent in EC dollars. The remaining portion of external debt is
denominated mostly in SDRs (2.8 percent), Euros (2.2 percent), and Kuwaiti dinars
(1.6 percent).
B. Macroeconomic Assumptions
5.
In line with the macroeconomic framework presented in the staff report, the debt
sustainability analysis is based on the following assumptions:


Real GDP Growth: Real GDP growth is projected to reach 1½ percent and 1.8 percent,
in 2011 and 2012 respectively, somewhat subdued due to continued high unemployment
rates in advanced economies, particularly the U.S. (the main source market for St. Kitts
and Nevis’ tourism). Growth is expected to reach 3.5 percent in the medium term,
mirroring improvements in both domestic and external economies.



Inflation: Inflation is projected to peak at about 3.9 percent in 2011, reflecting the passthrough of higher international prices of oil and food, gradually reverting to its historical
average of 2½ percent in the medium term, anchored by the currency board arrangement.



External Sector: The external sector is expected to mark in 2011 the inception of a
gradual recovery, albeit below the pre-crisis levels. In the medium term, exports of goods
as a percentage of GDP are expected to reach about 11.9 percent. Tourist receipts are
expected to gradually recover, reaching 19.5 percent of GDP in the medium term, in line

3

with economic developments in the main source markets for tourism (the USA and the
UK), but still below the pre-crisis levels. FDI inflows are also assumed to partially
recover to the pre-crisis levels, averaging about 22 percent of GDP during 2011–16. The
external current account deficit is expected to widen in 2011 due to the impact of higher
energy and food prices. It will converge to about 21.4 percent of GDP in the medium
term.


Fiscal Balance: The primary surplus of the central government is expected to reach
5 percent of GDP in 2011, reflecting three key projections: (i) revenue from the
implementation of a VAT and the increase in the electricity tariff; (ii) constraining of
capital expenditure; and (iii) two tranches of EU sugar grant will be disbursed in the
second-half of the year. Furthermore, the primary surplus is expected to increase to
5.4 percent of GDP in 2012 through freezing the public wage bill and containing
expenditure on goods and services. Financing gaps will be filled almost exclusively by
recourse to the domestic banking system (we assume 90 percent domestic financing by
commercial banks at a market interest rate with the remaining 10 percent externally
financed).



Fund program: We consider public debt developments in the context of a three-year
SBA with access of SDR 52.5 million (590 percent of quota). The disbursements are
programmed to become available on a quarterly basis following the Board’s approval
after each review. Exceptional access will be required as disbursements in 2011 will be
about 378 percent of quota, exceeding the normal access limit of 200 percent of quota on
an annual basis.

C. Evaluation of External and Public Debt Sustainability under the Non-Restructuring
Scenario
6.
Although external public debt is projected to decline over the medium term and can
sustain most shocks, the adoption of strong fiscal adjustment measures will not be enough
to place St. Kitts and Nevis’s total PPG on a sustainable path. External debt is projected to
fall from the current level of about 60 percent of GDP to about 23 percent of GDP in the medium
term (Figure 1 and Table 1). Shocks to the economy will not deter its downward trajectory
although it will converge to a higher debt level in the medium term. Total public debt is set to
decrease from 199 percent of GDP in 2010 to 162 percent of GDP by 2016 (Figure 2 and
Tables 2). The bound tests show that a growth shock will reverse the downward trajectory of
public debt causing it to be on an explosive path despite adoption of strong reforms. The range of
shocks would cause the PPG debt-to-GDP ratio to range between 160 to 201 percent of GDP in
the medium term.
7.
A comprehensive and substantive debt restructuring is needed to put St. Kitts and
Nevis’ total PPG debt on a sustainable path. Even with the substantial fiscal measures
contemplated, PPG debt would not decline significantly as a share of GDP in the absence of a

4

comprehensive debt restructuring. In this context, the authorities have retained debt and legal
advisors, publicly announced to seek a comprehensive and substantive debt restructuring,
initiated discussions with creditors, and obtained financing assurances from the Paris Club. The
authorities’ strategy, developed with the assistance of their debt advisors, would bring public
debt levels closer to the ECCU target of 60 percent of GDP by 2020.3
D. Conclusion
8.
This DSA illustrates that St. Kitts and Nevis’ PPG debt is unsustainable even in the
presence of strong fiscal adjustment measures, thus making a comprehensive debt
restructuring critical. The adoption of strong fiscal adjustment measures will put debt on a
downward trajectory but it will still be at an uncomfortably high level, achieving a public debtto-GDP ratio of about 162 percent by 2016. Furthermore, growth shocks can cause the PPG debt
to switch to an explosive path. A comprehensive and substantive debt restructuring, therefore, is
critical to ensure fiscal sustainability. The authorities’ debt restructuring scenario currently under
discussion is expected to bring the debt-to-GDP ratio down towards the ECCU’s target level of
60 percent by 2020.

3

The debt-to-GDP target would remain the same under the rebased GDP.

5
Figure 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: External Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/
(External debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
50

90

45

80

Historical 13 40
Baseline 35
23

70

50

30

50

40

25

40

30

20

30

20

15

20

90

Gross financing need
under baseline
(right scale)

80
70
60

10
2006

2008

2010

2012

10
2016

2014

10
2006

90
2.9

Baseline:

80

60

60

50

50

40

23

20
10
2006

Growth
shock
2008

2010

2012

2012

2014

2014

2016

Non-interest current account shock
(in percent of GDP)
Baseline:

-22.6

Scenario:

-26.3
-24.0

Historical:

41

CA shock

Baseline

20

18
2016

10
2006

Combined shock 2/

2008

2010

2012

23

2014

2016

Real depreciation shock 3/
90

80

80

70

70

60

60
Combined
shock

40

2010

30

90

50

2008

23

40

Baseline

30

6.7

Baseline

70

1.3

Historical:

Historical:

i-rate
shock 24

80

0.5

Scenario:

70

4.1
4.4

60

Growth shock (in percent per year)
90

Baseline:
Scenario:

30 %
depreciation

50
30

34

40
30

30
Baseline

20
10
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Baseline

20

23
2016

10
2006

2008

2010

2012

23

2014

2016

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks.
Figures in the boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario
being presented. Ten-year historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and current account
balance.
3/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent occurs in 2010.

6
Figure 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Public Debt Sustainability: Bound Tests 1/ 2/
(Public debt in percent of GDP)
Interest rate shock (in percent)

Baseline and historical scenarios
220

Gross financing need under

Historical

200

214

83

Baseline
162

180

93 220

73

43

160

Baseline 162

33 140

140

23

120

13

100
2006

2008

2010

2012

3
2016

2014

Baseline:

4.3

Scenario:

5.4

Historical:
100
2006

2008

2010

2012

3.2
2014

201

200

PB shock
182

180

180
160

Baseline

140
120
100
2006

2008

2010

2016

220

Growth
shock

200

120

Primary balance shock (in percent of GDP) and
no policy change scenario (constant primary balance)

Growth shock
(in percent per year)

220

171

63 180
53

160

i-rate
shock

200

Baseline:

2.9

Scenario:

0.5

Historical:

1.3

2012

2014

162

Baseline
162

160

No policy change

160

140
120

2016

Combined shock 3/

100
2006

2008

2010

Baseline:

7.3

Scenario:

3.3

Historical:

-1.9

2012

2014

2016

Real depreciation and contingent liabilities shocks 4/
220

220
Combined
shock 188

200

30 %
depreciation

200
180

180
Baseline

160

162

140

140

120

120

100
2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

100
2006

172

contingent
liabilities
shock

160

162

Baseline

2008

2010

2012

189

2014

2016

Sources: International Monetary Fund, country desk data, and staff estimates.
1/ Shaded areas represent actual data. Individual shocks are permanent one-half standard deviation shocks. Figures in the
boxes represent average projections for the respective variables in the baseline and scenario being presented. Ten-year
historical average for the variable is also shown.
2/ For historical scenarios, the historical averages are calculated over the ten-year period, and the information is used to
project debt dynamics five years ahead.
3/ Permanent 1/4 standard deviation shocks applied to real interest rate, growth rate, and primary balance.
4/ One-time real depreciation of 30 percent and 10 percent of GDP shock to contingent liabilities occur in 2010, with real
depreciation defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic
inflation (based on GDP deflator).

Table 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: External Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006-2016
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2006

Baseline: External debt

2007

Actual
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

2016

67.6

58.7

56.6

60.2

60.4

52.4

38.9

31.2

28.0

25.2

23.1

Change in external debt
Identified external debt-creating flows (4+8+9)
Current account deficit, excluding interest payments
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net non-debt creating capital inflows (negative)
Automatic debt dynamics 1/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes 2/
Residual, incl. change in gross foreign assets (2-3) 3/

-8.8
-3.4
15.9
17.4
48.4
65.8
-18.4
-1.0
4.6
-1.8
-3.8
-5.3

-8.9
-4.2
20.5
21.5
44.9
66.5
-23.7
-1.1
3.7
-2.6
-2.1
-4.7

-2.1
-5.7
29.6
30.8
40.4
71.2
-33.0
-2.2
3.6
-2.4
-3.4
3.6

3.6
14.7
30.2
31.4
35.3
66.6
-22.8
7.4
3.7
5.8
-2.1
-11.1

0.2
7.6
23.9
25.3
35.7
60.9
-19.6
3.3
3.6
0.9
-1.2
-7.5

-8.0
8.9
26.8
28.5
36.7
65.2
-19.8
1.9
2.7
-0.9
...
-17.0

-13.4
6.4
25.3
26.9
37.6
64.5
-20.0
1.2
2.1
-0.9
...
-19.9

-7.7
4.2
23.7
25.3
38.4
63.6
-20.1
0.6
1.5
-0.9
...
-12.0

-3.2
2.3
22.3
23.8
39.1
63.0
-20.3
0.3
1.1
-0.9
...
-5.5

-2.7
0.8
21.1
22.4
39.8
62.3
-20.5
0.1
1.1
-0.9
...
-3.5

-2.2
-0.2
20.4
21.7
40.6
62.3
-20.8
0.2
1.0
-0.8
...
-2.0

External debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)

139.7

130.6

140.3

170.7

169.3

142.6

103.4

81.3

71.5

63.4

56.8

0.2
33.8

0.2
36.4

0.2
42.4

0.2
44.1

0.2
37.5

0.2
43.0

0.3
46.0

0.2
36.4

0.2
29.3

0.2
27.1

0.2
26.3

52.4

34.3

23.1

17.9

14.6

12.7

1.5
4.0
4.8
8.7
12.9
-26.8
19.8

1.8
3.5
4.2
7.9
4.2
-25.3
20.0

2.5
2.5
4.0
7.1
3.6
-23.7
20.1

3.0
2.6
3.9
7.7
4.5
-22.3
20.3

3.5
2.6
4.0
8.1
5.0
-21.1
20.5

3.5
2.6
4.3
8.2
6.2
-20.4
20.8

Gross external financing need (in billions of US dollars) 4/
in percent of GDP

10-Year

10-Year

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 5/
Historical
Average

Key Macroeconomic Assumptions Underlying Baseline
2.6
5.2
6.5
4.0
14.5
-15.9
18.4

4.2
3.3
5.9
-2.1
6.4
-20.5
23.7

4.6
6.2
6.8
-0.3
19.0
-29.6
33.0

-9.6
3.9
6.1
-19.3
-13.6
-30.2
22.8

-1.5
1.9
5.9
1.5
-8.2
-23.9
19.6

1.3
3.3
6.7
2.8
3.1
-24.0
24.8

-24.6

Standard
Deviation
4.8
1.5
0.6
10.6
11.0
7.5
9.1

1/ Derived as [r - g - (1+g) + (1+r)]/(1+g++g) times previous period debt stock, with r = nominal effective interest rate on external debt; = change in domestic GDP deflator in US dollar terms, g = real GDP growth rate,
 = nominal appreciation (increase in dollar value of domestic currency), and  = share of domestic-currency denominated debt in total external debt.
2/ The contribution from price and exchange rate changes is defined as [-(1+g(1+r1+g++g) times previous period debt stock. increases with an appreciating domestic currency (> 0) and rising inflation (based on GDP deflator).
3/ For projection, line includes the impact of price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Defined as current account deficit, plus amortization on medium- and long-term debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
5/ The key variables include real GDP growth; nominal interest rate; dollar deflator growth; and both non-interest current account and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP.
6/ Long-run, constant balance that stabilizes the debt ratio assuming that key variables (real GDP growth, nominal interest rate, dollar deflator growth, and non-debt inflows in percent of GDP) remain at their levels
of the last projection year.

7

Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollars (change in percent)
Nominal external interest rate (in percent)
Growth of exports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports (US dollar terms, in percent)
Current account balance, excluding interest payments
Net non-debt creating capital inflows

Debt-stabilizing
non-interest
current account 6/
-21.2

Table 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2006-2016
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

2006

Baseline: Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated
Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12)
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 3/
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Of which contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 4/
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes (2-3) 5/
Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 1/
Gross financing need 6/
in billions of U.S. dollars

2007

Actual
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Projections
2013
2014

2015

2016

178.2
58.7

165.0
56.6

189.3
60.2

199.2
60.4

190.4
52.4

183.7
38.9

177.1
31.2

171.6
28.0

166.1
25.2

161.5
23.1

-7.8
-6.4
-2.9
48.0
45.1
-3.0
-3.0
1.7
-4.7
0.0
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-1.4

-9.6
-10.6
-4.3
47.8
43.5
-3.7
-3.7
3.6
-7.3
0.0
-2.6
-2.6
0.0
0.0
1.0

-13.1
-16.1
-4.0
45.6
41.6
-8.0
-8.0
-0.6
-7.4
0.0
-4.0
-4.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

24.3
12.5
-5.9
51.5
45.6
20.6
20.6
3.7
16.8
0.0
-2.2
-2.2
0.0
0.0
11.8

10.0
8.0
-2.7
48.3
45.6
11.6
11.6
8.8
2.8
0.0
-0.9
-0.9
0.0
0.0
1.9

-8.8
-6.4
-7.6
52.9
45.2
1.4
1.4
4.3
-2.8
...
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-2.4

-6.7
-6.4
-7.9
51.3
43.4
1.7
1.7
5.0
-3.3
...
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3

-6.6
-6.3
-8.8
51.7
42.9
2.7
2.7
7.1
-4.4
...
-0.3
-0.3
0.0
0.0
-0.3

-5.5
-5.1
-6.7
49.1
42.3
2.1
2.1
7.2
-5.0
...
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.4

-5.5
-5.1
-6.5
48.9
42.4
2.0
2.0
7.6
-5.7
...
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.4

-4.6
-4.2
-6.4
48.8
42.5
2.7
2.7
8.2
-5.5
...
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
-0.4

391.4

372.8

361.8

367.4

412.2

360.3

358.2

342.6

349.8

339.4

330.7

87.6
0.4

74.8
0.4

68.9
0.4

65.1
0.3

65.4
0.3

63.4
0.4

75.4
0.4

70.6
0.4

68.2
0.4

67.7
0.5

67.0
0.5

190.4
190.4

195.1
184.0

199.9
178.5

204.5
172.2

209.1
165.7

213.7
159.8

1.5
6.3
2.3
...
4.0
0.6
-7.6

1.8
6.3
2.8
...
3.5
-2.3
-7.9

2.5
6.6
4.1
...
2.5
1.3
-8.8

3.0
6.9
4.3
...
2.6
1.6
-6.7

3.5
7.4
4.8
...
2.6
3.7
-6.5

3.5
7.9
5.3
...
2.6
3.6
-6.4

8

187.7
67.6

Debt-stabilizing
primary
balance 9/
2.1

Scenario with key variables at their historical averages 7/
Scenario with no policy change (constant primary balance) in 2011-2016
Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Underlying Baseline
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 8/
Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent)
Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, in percent)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

2.6
6.3
1.1
0.0
5.2
-5.9
-2.9

4.2
5.5
2.2
0.0
3.3
-1.5
-4.3

4.6
6.1
-0.1
0.0
6.2
0.0
-4.0

-9.6
5.6
1.7
0.0
3.9
-2.5
-5.9

-1.5
6.6
4.6
0.0
1.9
-1.5
-2.7

1/ Public sector covers general government and gross debt is used.
2/ Derived as [(r - (1+g - g + (1+r]/(1+g++g)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rate;  = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rate;  = share of foreign-currency
denominated debt; and  = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar).
3/ The real interest rate contribution is derived from the denominator in footnote 2/ as r - π (1+g) and the real growth contribution as -g.
4/ The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numerator in footnote 2/ as (1+r).
5/ For projections, this line includes exchange rate changes.
6/ Defined as public sector deficit, plus amortization of medium and long-term public sector debt, plus short-term debt at end of previous period.
7/ The key variables include real GDP growth; real interest rate; and primary balance in percent of GDP.
8/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock.
9/ Assumes that key variables (real GDP growth, real interest rate, and other identified debt-creating flows) remain at the level of the last projection year.

3.2
2.1

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ST. KITTS AND NEVIS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for Stand-By Arrangement
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Western Hemisphere Department
July 20, 2011

Contents

Page

Annexes
I.

Fund Relations ..................................................................................................................2

II.

Relations with the World Bank Group ............................................................................6

III. Relations with the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) ................................................8
IV. Statistical Issues …………………………………………………………………………11

2
Annex I. St. Kitts and Nevis—Fund Relations
(As of May 31, 2011)
I.
II.

Membership Status: Joined August 15, 1984; Article VIII.
General Resources Account:

SDR Million

Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in the Fund
III.

8.90
11.04
0.08

SDR Department:

Percent of
Allocation

8.50
8.47

Outstanding Purchases and Loans:
Emergency Assistance

V.

100.00
124.09
0.92

SDR Million

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings
IV.

Percent of
Quota

SDR Million

100.00
99.61
Percent of
Allocation

2.23

Latest Financial Arrangements:

25.00

None

VI.
Projected Payments to Fund1/:
None
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):
2011
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

0.02
0.02

Forthcoming
2012
2013
0.56
1.11
0.03
0.02
0.59
1.13

1/

2014
0.56
0.00
0.56

When a member has overdue financial obligations outstanding for more than three months, the
amount of such arrears will be shown in this section.

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:

Not Applicable

VIII.

Implementation of MDRI Assistance:

Not Applicable

2015
0.00
0.00

3
IX. Exchange Arrangement
St. Kitts and Nevis is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), which
manages monetary policy and the exchange system for its eight members. The common
currency, the Eastern Caribbean dollar, has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of
EC$2.70 per U.S. dollar since July 1976. The de jure regime is a currency board, which in
practice the ECCB has operated like a quasi-currency board, maintaining foreign exchange
backing of its currency and demand liabilities of close to 100 percent. St. Kitts and Nevis
accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in December 1984. The
exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current
international transactions.
X.

Safeguards Assessment

Under the Fund's safeguards assessment policy, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB)
is subject to a full safeguards assessment under a four-year cycle. The most recent
assessment was completed in July 2007 and concluded that the ECCB continues to have
appropriate control mechanisms in place, which have strengthened since the first safeguards
assessment was completed in 2003. ECCB management places emphasis on good governance
and sound controls, and has enhanced the bank's transparency and accountability since the
last assessment, including publications of financial statements that comply with International
Financial Reporting Standards. The assessment made some recommendations to sustain the
ECCB’s safeguards framework going forward.
XI.

Last Article IV Consultation

St. Kitts and Nevis is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV
consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on July 7, 2010.
XII.

FSAP Participation, ROSCs, and OFC Assessment

St. Kitts and Nevis participated in the regional ECCU FSAP conducted in September and
October 2003. The Financial System Stability Assessment is available at
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2004/cr04293.pdf. A review of St. Kitts and Nevis
AML/CFT Assessment was conducted by a team of assessors representing the Caribbean
Financial Action Taskforce (CFATF) in September 2008.

4
XIII.

Technical Assistance: (2005–Present)

Since 2005, St. Kitts and Nevis has benefited from technical assistance in the areas of tax
policy, tax administration, economic statistics, financial supervision and macroeconomic
management, both from IMF headquarters and the Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance
Centre (CARTAC).


Experts from CARTAC and the IMF’s Statistics Department (STA) advised the
Central Statistics Office on rebasing and improving the national accounts, rebasing
the consumer price index, and developing export-import price indices. In response to
a request from the authorities, experts from CARTAC assisted in compiling separate
production-based measures of GDP for St. Kitts and Nevis.



Experts from CARTAC, the IMF’s Monetary and Capital Markets Department
(MCM), and the IMF’s Legal Department (LEG) advised the authorities on
strengthening financial regulation and supervision, including risk-based supervision.
With assistance from the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions in
Canada (OSFI), experts from CARTAC have provided technical assistance to the
ECCB on drafting the OECS Insurance Act. They have also, in conjunction with
LEG, provided technical assistance to the ECCB in finalizing the drafting of the
OECS Money Services business Act. Experts from CARTAC also assisted in the
development of the Single Regulatory Unit.



Experts from CARTAC and MCM also provided technical assistance on public debt
management to improve debt management capacity of the government.



Experts from CARTAC, the IMF’s Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) and LEG
provided assistance to improve cash management and tax administration—including
collection enforcement. Experts from CARTAC have also provided assistance in
Property Tax reform to move the property tax base from rental value to market
value, and in improving central government fiscal and debt data.



CARTAC, FAD and LEG have provided assistance for implementation of a
value-added tax (VAT). CARTAC and FAD have provided extensive assistance,
through frequent expert visits, to sensitize politicians and technicians from the
Ministry of Finance on the VAT. This provided a general explanation on VAT, a
VAT sensitivity study, and the main steps in its introduction. Experts from
CARTAC assisted with the preparation of a VAT Implementation Project Plan, and
experts from LEG assisted in the drafting of the VAT and excise tax legislation.



Experts from LEG also provided assistance in tax legislation in the areas of Social
Service Levy and Corporate Income Tax.

5


Experts from CARTAC provided assistance in the administration and design of a
new pension plan for public sector employees.



A capacity building exercise was conducted to train new officers in the preparation
of fiscal and debt projections.

As part of the Stabilization and Adjustment Technical Assistance Program (SATAP),
St. Kitts and Nevis have benefited from capacity building in macroeconomic analysis.

6
Annex II. St. Kitts and Nevis: Relations with the World Bank Group
(As of June 13, 2011)
The World Bank Group’s Management presented to its Board the Organization of the Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS) Regional Partnership Strategy (RPS) on June 8, 2010. The RPS
covers the five year period July 2009–June 2014. It sets forth the terms of engagement of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International
Development Association (IDA) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) with the
countries of the Eastern Caribbean, sub-regional organizations and other development
partners in pursuit of the following strategic objectives: (a) building resilience; and
(b) enhancing competitiveness and stimulating growth over the medium term. To help build
resilience, the Bank Group will support interventions aimed at promoting fiscal and debt
sustainability, protecting and improving human capital—particularly social safety nets,
education and health—and strengthening climate resilience. To help enhance
competitiveness and stimulate sustainable growth, it will focus its support on two critical
areas: strengthening the countries’ domestic financial sectors and improving access to quality
services to create more competitive business environments. The Strategy will provide urgent
remedial measures to address the crippling effects of the global and regional crises, while
supporting key policy reforms that establish a platform for growth in the medium term. The
planned program of support will entail new commitments totaling up to about $120 million
on IBRD terms and up to $73 million of IDA financing for the six Bank Members of the
OECS, including St. Kitts and Nevis. St. Kitts and Nevis graduated from access to IDA
resources in 1994.
A. Projects
There is one active Bank project in St. Kitts and Nevis for a net commitment of approximately
US$0.54 million.
The Telecommunications & ICT Development Project, approved in May 2005 for
US$0.54 million, aims at improving the access, quality, and use of telecommunications and
ICT services to achieve socio-economic development in the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS). The project has four components. Component 1 will strengthen
the national and regional regulatory frameworks and promote additional competition in the
telecommunications sector. Emphasis will be given on providing capacity building to the
Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications Authority (ECTEL) and the National
Telecommunications Regulatory Commissions (NTRCs) by assisting them in revising the
regional and national sector legislation, and in developing a modem interconnection regime.
Component 2 will review current universal access policy, create related guidelines, and
provide financial support to establish a Universal Service Fund (USF). Component 3 will
improve growth and competitiveness in ICT-enabled services through utilization of
broadband infrastructure. Component 4 will finance the management and administration of

7
the overall project. The project will finance related technical assistance by providing
complementary resources.
B. Economic and Sector Work
The Bank has completed a series of analytical products relating to public expenditure, fiscal
and debt sustainability, growth and competitiveness, the financial sector, public sector
management and social protection. The ongoing dissemination of these reports represents a
key instrument for policy dialogue with the OECS governments, including St. Kitts and
Nevis.
The Bank’s program in St. Kitts and Nevis is further supported by a comprehensive series of
completed, ongoing and planned analytical and advisory activities, including the following:
“Towards a New Agenda for Growth” – OECS growth and competitiveness study (2005); An
OECS Skills Enhancement Policy Note (2006); a Caribbean Air Transport Report (2006); a
regional study on Crime, Violence, and Development: Trends, Costs, and Policy Options in
the Caribbean (2007); an OECS Private Sector Financing Study (2008); the OECS Tourism
Backward Linkages Study (2008); the report titled “Caribbean – Accelerating Trade
Integration: Policy Options for Sustained Growth, Job Creation and Poverty Reduction”
(2009); a study on the Nurse Labor & Education Markets in the English-Speaking
CARICOM: Issues and Options for Reform (2009); and Caribbean Regional Electricity
Supply Options: Toward Greater Security, Renewable and Resilience (2011).
C. Financial Relations
(In millions of U.S. dollars)

Operation
OECS Telecommunications and ICT
Development Project

Original
Principal

Available1

Disbursed1

0.54

0.20

0.23

1/ Amounts may not add up to Original Principal due to changes in the SDR/US exchange rate since signing.

Disbursements and Debt Service (Fiscal Year Ending June 30)
Total
disbursements
Repayments
Net disbursements
Interest and fees

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

1.38
0.05
1.32
0.34

1.9
0.12
1.78
0.4

4.12
0.36
3.76
0.64

2.38
0.67
1.71
0.6

1.66
0.89
0.77
0.65

1.35
1.18
0.17
0.70

1.85
1.75
0.1
0.76

2.04
2.56
-0.52
0.75

2.66
2.65
0.003
0.52

0.36
2.57
-2.22
0.28

*Note: Data as of June 13, 2011

2011*
0.03
2.30
-2.26
0.14

8
Annex III: St. Kitts and Nevis—Relations with the Caribbean Development Bank
(As of May 31, 2011)
The Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) supports the economic and social development of
St. Kitts and Nevis through the financing of priority capital projects and technical assistance,
and by undertaking policy dialogue on major developmental issues. CDB’s involvement with
St. Kitts and Nevis covers such areas as: the formulation and implementation of
macroeconomic, social and sectoral policies; development of infrastructure to facilitate
economic growth and diversification; direct and indirect lending to agriculture and industry;
and emergency disaster rehabilitation. At the end of May 2011, CDB had approved loans
totalling US$166.9 million to St. Kitts and Nevis, of which US$21.2 million were
undisbursed.
A. Major Projects Currently Under Implementation
1.

Basic Education Project—to assist Government of St. Kitts and Nevis (GOSKN) in
the provision and maintenance of a more appropriate learning environment for a
greater number of students in the system (including those with learning disabilities)
who are pursuing basic education at primary and secondary schools; and
enhancement of the education system in the areas of management, in particular,
planning, data collection and analysis, student assessment, school management,
curriculum development and pedagogy.

2.

West Basseterre By-Pass Road—to construct approximately 3.8 kilometres of road to
relieve traffic congestion in the city of Basseterre. The proposed road runs to the
north of Basseterre and along the boundary fence of the Robert L. Bradshaw
International Airport.

3.

Second Power Project—consists of the installation of a generator of approximate size
2.5MW and ancillary switchgear and the establishment of an operations facility at the
Nevis Electricity Company Limited (NEVLEC). The project will provide additional
generating capacity to satisfy projected electricity demand and to replace existing
engines that are past their useful life.

4.

Student Loan Scheme (Sixth Loan)—to assist the National Bank of St Kitts- NevisAnguilla in financing loans to students attending local, regional and extra-regional
institutions for programmes in technical, vocational and academic studies.

9
5.

Child Development Project—to provide a comprehensive framework for addressing
the care and protection of children and the reform of juvenile offenders. The project
will enhance the life chances of children in St. Kitts and Nevis by improving their
connectedness with the school system and providing rehabilitative care for those at
risk and those who have committed offences.

6.

Natural Disaster Management Project—to contribute to the rehabilitation of
economic infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Lenny. The project consists of
rehabilitating 8.66 metres of sea defence structures with rock armouring and stone on
geo-textile sheeting; reconstruction of a reinforced concrete ramp; and repairs to
other infrastructure and public buildings. The project promotes the reduction of
vulnerability to natural disasters through support for the development and adoption of
mitigation policies, standards and practices.

7.

Policy-based Guarantee—to support a bond issue of up to EC$150 million by the
Government to refinance high cost debt thereby supporting ongoing macroeconomic
reforms and structural reforms in St. Kitts and Nevis. The refinancing would also
improve the debt dynamics, thus lowering the time-path of the debt-to-GDP ratio.

8.

National Disaster Management—Immediate Response Loan—Tropical Storm Otto—to
contribute to the rehabilitation of economic infrastructure damaged by Tropical Storm
Otto. The Project consists of the restoration of part of Basseterre Bay Road, the
reconstruction of 200 metres of sea defence wall and associated roadworks.
B. Current Portfolio
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Approved
Basic Education Project

Undisbursed

14.25

1.34

6.70

3.47

6.20

6.20

8.43

8.38

West Basseterre By-Pass Road

13.85

2.39

Child Development Project
Corporatisation of the Electricity
Department
Policy-Based Guarantee
National Disaster Management
Immediate Response Loan

2.64

1.49

0.66

0.20

8.30

8.30

0.75

0.75

Natural Disaster Management
Project
Student Loan Scheme (Sixth
Loan)
Second Power Project

10
C. Loan Disbursement
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2009

2006
4.32

2007

2008

6.44

9.26

Disbursement

7.38

10.41

15.43

6.91

13.65

Amortization

3.06

3.97

6.71

4.75

5.44

Interest and charges

3.35

3.77

3.93

3.59

3.44

Net resource flow

0.97

2.67

5.33

-1.43

4.77

Net Disbursement

Source: Caribbean Development Bank

2.16

2010
8.21

11
Annex IV. St. Kitts and Nevis: Statistical Issues
Data provision is broadly adequate for surveillance, although significant shortcomings in
data provision and data quality remain. St. Kitts and Nevis has been participating in the
General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since October 2000, and its metadata are
posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB).
A. Real Sector
There are a number of deficiencies in the real sector statistics. GDP data by type of
expenditure are not available at constant prices, while the data at current prices are not
reliable due to weaknesses in estimating gross capital formation. Private final consumption
expenditure is estimated as a residual. A new CPI with weights from the 2000 household
survey has now been introduced. Monthly CPI data are reported regularly but with a long
lag. Detailed data on tourism arrivals and expenditure have not been compiled since end2001. Limited data are available on labor market developments.
B. Public Finances
Data on revenue, expenditure, and financing of the consolidated central government are
made available to Fund staff on request. Commendable progress has recently been made in
improving the quality and coverage of central government fiscal data, including on
government and public enterprise debt. However, discrepancies between overall balance and
available financing need to be resolved. It would be important to produce a set of fully
integrated accounts for the central government on a regular basis. Also, it would be
beneficial to institute a mechanism for the regular reporting of financial data on the rest of
the public sector. The most recent data on the central government published in the GFS
Yearbook are for 2003 and 2006.
C. Balance of Payments and External Debt
Estimates are currently provided on an annual basis by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank
(ECCB). The latest data published in IFS are for 2010. Data on external trade (especially
exports) are not comprehensive, as they omit important categories of goods. Most
components of the financial account also need improvement. It would be useful to reconcile
the data on the public sector investment plan for external loans with the public external debt
database. There are no data on private external debt.
D. Monetary and Financial Statistics
The 2003 money and banking statistics mission indicated that enhanced institutional
coverage, classification of financial instruments, and sectorization of economic units would
facilitate identification of credit flows to different sectors of the economy and compilation of
monetary aggregates. It recommended that the institutional coverage for other depository

12
corporations be expanded to include credit unions, finance companies, and building societies,
which also accept demand and other deposits. Further, the mission recommended broadening
the coverage to include insurance companies, pension funds, development banks, and
offshore institutions and foundations.
In April 2007, a data ROSC mission assessed the monetary statistics with reference to the
GDDS and the Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF, July 2003). It indicated that the
quality of the ECCB and Eastern Caribbean Currency Union member countries’ monetary
statistics has improved over recent years, and the monetary statistics are broadly adequate for
macroeconomic analysis and policy design and monitoring. Nevertheless, the mission
identified shortcomings that have the potential for detracting from accurate and timely
analysis of economic and financial developments. In particular, the institutional coverage of
the other depository corporations remains incomplete, as data for mortgage companies,
finance companies, building societies, and credit unions—all of which accept deposits—are
excluded. Also, accrued interest is not incorporated in the value of the interest-bearing assets
and liabilities, and valuation adjustments are included in other liabilities. In addition, source
data for the commercial banks do not provide the disaggregation recommended in the
Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual. The authorities endorsed the mission’s
recommendations and an action plan for enhancing the analytical usefulness of the monetary
statistics. In this context, with effect from January 1, 2009, the definition of broad money
aggregates is revised to include the deposits of non-bank financial institutions and
subsidiaries and affiliates held at commercial banks, and this change is first reflected in the
monetary statistics from January 2009.

13

St. Kitts and Nevis: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of June 30, 2011)
Date

Date of

rec
eiv
ed

la
te
st

Frequency
of
6
Data

Frequency
of
6
Reporting

publication

Frequency
of

observation
Exchange Rates

Fixed Rate

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
1
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

Broad Money

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

04/11

06/13/11

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

12/10

05/19/11

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and Composition
3
4
of Financing —General Government

04/11

05/20/11

M

M

A

Stocks of Central Government and Central
5
Government-Guaranteed Debt

12/10

05/23/11

Q

Q

A

External Current Account Balance

2009

04/14/10

A

A

A

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

2009

04/14/10

A

A

A

GDP/GNP

2009

04/14/10

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

12/10

05/23/11

Q

Q

A

Interest Rates

1

2

Includes reserve assets pledged or otherwise encumbered as well as net derivative positions.
Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and
bonds.
3
Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4
Central government only.
5
Including currency and maturity composition.
6
Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Irregular (I); Not Available (NA).
2

6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
St. Kitts and Nevis—Assessment of the Risks to the Fund and the Fund’s Liquidity Position
Prepared by the Finance and Strategy, Policy, and Review Departments
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by Andrew Tweedie and Jan Kees Martijn
July 21, 2011
1.
This paper assesses the risks to the Fund arising from the proposed Stand-By
Arrangement (SBA) for St. Kitts and Nevis and its effects on the Fund’s liquidity, in
accordance with the policy on exceptional access.1 The authorities are requesting a
three-year SBA with access of SDR 52.5 million (590 percent of quota). The arrangement
would be front-loaded with a first purchase of SDR 22.150 million (248.9 percent of quota)
upon approval, followed by 11 purchases of diminishing size in 2011–14, with the final
purchase in May 2014 (Table 1).
Table 1. St. Kitts and Nevis: Proposed SBA—Access and Phasing
Percent of quota
Availability

Date 1/

SDR mn

Purchase

Cumulative

2011

July 27, 2011
November 15, 2011

22.150
11.470

248.9
128.9

248.9
377.8

2012

February 15, 2012
May 15, 2012
August 15, 2012
November 15, 2012

3.161
3.161
3.161
3.161

35.5
35.5
35.5
35.5

413.3
448.8
484.3
519.8

2013

February 15, 2013
May 15, 2013
August 15, 2013
November 15, 2013

1.105
1.105
1.105
1.105

12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4

532.2
544.7
557.1
569.5

2014

February 15, 2014
May 15, 2014

0.913
0.913

10.3
10.3

579.7
590.0

52.510

590.0

Total

Source: Finance Department.
1/ Starting July 27, 2011, purchases will depend on the completion of a review.

1

Decision No. 14284-(08/18), February 22, 2008, as amended by Decision No. 1418-(08/93), October 29, 2008,
and Decision No. 14284-(09/29), March 24, 2009.

2
I. BACKGROUND
2.
St. Kitts and Nevis received emergency natural disaster assistance from the Fund
in May 2009. This assistance, SDR 2.225 million (25 percent of quota), was the first drawing
on Fund resources since the country joined the Fund in August 1984. St. Kitts and Nevis has
met all its obligations to the Fund in a timely manner.
3.
Public debt and its external component are extremely high. Reflecting chronic
deficits and assumption of liabilities (and assets) of the former sugar company, total public
debt rose to an estimated near 200 percent of GDP at end-2010.2 According to preliminary data
for last year, external debt, mostly owed to the Caribbean Development Bank and commercial
creditors, exceeded 60 percent of GDP (Table 2),3 and the external debt service, of which
interest payments represent one third, was more than 20 percent of exports of goods and
services.
4.
The balance of payments situation of St. Kitts and Nevis differs markedly from
that of recent capital account crisis cases. Accordingly, in this paper, the proposed program
with St. Kitts and Nevis is compared with two groups: (i) all recent exceptional access
arrangements; and (ii) a sub-group of exceptional access cases that did not experience a sudden
stop in capital inflows.4 Compared with all exceptional access arrangements approved since
September 2008, St. Kitts and Nevis’s public external debt as a share of GDP would be above
the mean, and the country’s total public debt as a share of GDP would rank by far the highest
(Figures 1b and 1d). Compared with recent exceptional access countries which did not face a
sudden stop of capital inflows, St. Kitts and Nevis ranks the highest by a significant margin on
all relevant ratios (Figure 2).

2

The ratio is based on current GDP series. The national accounts of the ECCU member states have been rebased
with a base year of 2006. For St. Kitts and Nevis, this will result in a 28 percent increase in the 2009 nominal
GDP, mainly reflecting a broader coverage of financial, communication, and offshore education services. Under
the rebased GDP, public sector debt is estimated at 155.8 percent of GDP in 2010.

3
4

All reported external debt is owed by the public sector. Staff believes external private sector debt to be minimal.

The reference group includes, in addition to St. Kitts and Nevis, Armenia, Belarus, Costa Rica (precautionary
SBA), El Salvador (precautionary SBA), Georgia, Guatemala (precautionary SBA), Mongolia, Pakistan and Sri
Lanka.

3
Table 2. St. Kitts and Nevis: Total External Debt, 2004–2010

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Total External Debt

339

335

329

301

323

317

319

of which: Bonds
Loans
Public
Multilateral
IMF
IBRD/IDA
Other multilateral
Bilateral
Commercial
Private 1/

13
0
326
98
0
13
84
46
183

13
0
322
99
0
13
86
40
183

16
0
313
106
0
15
91
45
163

16
0
285
107
0
15
92
42
136

38
0
285
115
0
15
100
38
132

38
0
279
120
3
14
103
34
125

38
0
282
124
3
11
110
30
127

Total External Debt

85

76

68

59

57

60

60

of which: Bonds
Loans
Public
Multilateral
IMF
IBRD/IDA
Other multilateral
Bilateral
Commercial

3
0
82
24
0
3
21
12
0

3
0
73
23
0
3
20
9
0

3
0
64
22
0
3
19
9
0

3
0
56
21
0
3
18
8
0

7
0
50
20
0
3
18
7
0

7
0
53
23
1
3
20
6
0

7
0
53
24
1
2
21
6
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

(In percent of GDP)

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (in USD mn)

Source: St. Kitts and Nevis' authorities and IMF staff estimates.
1/ No data is available on private debt, which Staff believes is minimal.

4

Figure 1. Debt Ratios for Recent Exceptional Access Arrangements 1/
A. Total External Debt
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)

B. Public External Debt
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)
140

1,200

120

1,000

100
800
80
600
60
400

40

0

0
Belarus
Romania
Latvia
Guatemala
*Armenia
Ukraine
*Georgia
El Salvador
*Pakistan
*Sri Lanka
*Mongolia
Hungary
St.Kitts&Nevis
Portugal
Iceland
Greece
Ireland

20

Armenia
Belarus
*Pakistan
*Georgia
*Mongolia
Guatemala
Sri Lanka
El Salvador
Romania
St.Kitts&Ne…
Ukraine
Hungary
Latvia
Iceland
Greece
Portugal
Ireland

200

D. Total Public Debt 2/
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)

C. External Debt Service to Exports of Goods
and Services (in percent)
350
200
300
250

150

200
100

150
100

50
50

Armenia
*Mongolia
Belarus
*Georgia
Guatemala
El Salvador
*Sri Lanka
*Pakistan
St.Kitts&Nevis
Romania
Hungary
Latvia
Ukraine
Portugal
Greece
Ireland
Iceland

Belarus
Latvia
*Armenia
Romania
Guatemala
*Georgia
*Mongolia
Ukraine
El Salvador
*Pakistan
Hungary
*Sri Lanka
Portugal
Ireland
Iceland
Greece
St. Kitts&Nevis

0

0

Source: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities and IMF staff estimates, and World Economic Outlook.
1/ For arrangements approved since September 2008, estimates as reported in each staff report on the request of the
Stand-By Arrangement or Extended Fund Facility.
* Indicates countries that are PRGT-eligible.
† Indicates countries with precautionary arrangements.

5
Figure 2. Debt Ratios for Selected Recent Exceptional Access Arrangements 1/
A. Total External Debt
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)

B. Public External Debt
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

St.Kitts&Nevis

*Mongolia

Sri Lanka

Pakistan

† El Salvador

*Georgia

*Armenia

† Guatemala

† Costa Rica

0
Belarus

St.Kitts&Nevis

† El Salvador

Sri Lanka

† Guatemala

*Mongolia

*Georgia

Pakistan

† Costa Rica

Belarus

*Armenia

0

D. Total Public Debt
(in percent of GDP at time of approval)

C. External Debt Service to Exports of Goods
and Services (in percent)
25
200
20
150
15

100

10

50

Source: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities and IMF staff estimates, and World Economic Outlook.
1/ For arrangements approved since September 2008 that did not involve a sudden capital inflows stop, estimates as
reported in each staff report on the request of the Stand-By Arrangement or Extended Fund Facility.
* Indicates countries that are PRGT-eligible.
† Indicates countries with precautionary arrangements.

St.
Kitts&Nevis

Sri Lanka

Pakistan

† El
Salvador

† Costa Rica

*Mongolia

*Georgia

† Guatemala

0
*Armenia

St.Kitts&Nevis

Pakistan

Sri Lanka

† El Salvador

† Guatemala

*Georgia

Belarus

† Costa Rica

*Mongolia

*Armenia

0

Belarus

5

6
5.
Domestic banks are the largest investors in public debt. The domestic banking
system holds about 46 percent of total public debt. Other important debt holders include
commercial external creditors, with a share of around 15 percent, and statutory bodies and the
Caribbean Development Bank, each with a share of around 10 percent.
II. NEW STAND-BY ARRANGEMENT—RISKS AND IMPACT ON THE FUND’S FINANCES
A. Risks to the Fund
6.
Access under the proposed arrangement would be exceptional on account of the
first drawing:


The proposed phasing of the disbursement is substantially front-loaded. The drawing of
22.150 SDR million (248.9 percent of quota) on Board approval of the SBA would be
very large as a share of quota and significantly exceed the annual access limit. St. Kitts
and Nevis’ initial drawing as a share of quota would be less than the ones in the recent
exceptional access arrangements with euro area members (Figure 3), but would be the
highest in the reference group of exceptional access countries which did not face a
capital account crisis (Figure 4).



If all purchases were made as scheduled, St. Kitts and Nevis’s outstanding use of GRA
resources would rise to 448.8 percent of quota during the first year of the arrangement.
Fund exposure on account of the arrangement would increase to 544.7 percent of quota
by the end of the second year, and peak at 590 percent of quota at the end of the third
year, slightly below the cumulative access limit. The projected peak exposure would
remain much smaller than the ones for recent exceptional access arrangements with
euro area members (Figure 3). However, it would be the highest peak level of Fund
exposure, in terms of quota, in the reference group of countries facing no “sudden stop”
(Figure 4).

7

Figure 3. Fund Credit Outstanding in the GRA around Peak Borrowing 1/
(In percent of quota at the time of approval)
Approved Exceptional Access Cases since September 2008 2/
3,500

Highest (Greece)

3,000

2,500

Second Highest (Ireland)
2,000

1,500

St. Kitts and
Nevis

1,000

500

Lowest
(Costa Rica)

0
t-36

t-30

t-24

t-18

t-12

t-6

t

t+6

t+12

t+18

t+24

t+30

t+36

t+42

t+48

t+54

t+60

t+66

t+72

Months
Source: IFS, Finance Department, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Peak borrowing 't' is defined as the highest level of credit outstanding for a member. Repurchases are assumed to be on an
obligations basis.
2/ Median credit outstanding at peak is 836.7 percent of quota; average is 1089.1 percent of quota.

8

Figure 4. Fund Credit Outstanding in the GRA around Peak Borrowing 1/
(In percent of quota at the time of approval)
Selected Approved Exceptional Access Cases since September 2008 2/
700

St. Kitts and
Nevis

600

Armenia (Augmented)

500

400

Costa Rica 3/

300

Sri Lanka

200

100

0
t-36

t-30

t-24

t-18

t-12

t-6

t

t+6

t+12

t+18

t+24

t+30

t+36

t+42

t+48

t+54

t+60

t+66

t+72

Months
Source: IFS, Finance Department, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Peak borrowing 't' is defined as the highest level of credit outstanding for a member. Repurchases are assumed to be on an
obligations basis.
2/ Arrangements approved since September 2008 that did not involve a sudden capital inflows stop.
3/ Precautionary arrangement.

7.
If the SBA is fully disbursed, GRA credit ratios would be relatively high by the
standard of comparable exceptional access cases (Table 3).


GRA credit would peak in 2013 at around 13 percent of GDP and at near 54 percent of
gross international reserves. Both ratios are above the median of all recent exceptional
access cases (Figure 5), and at or near the top of the exceptional access cases that did
not face a sudden capital inflows stop (Figure 6).



The share of GRA credit in external debt would reach its highest level in 2014, at near
44 percent, the top of all recent exceptional access cases (Figures 5e and 6e).

8.
If all purchases under the SBA are made as scheduled, debt service obligations to
the Fund would substantially increase the country’s total external debt service burden.5
Table 3 shows debt service to the Fund projected under the assumption that the SDR interest
rate remains at its current level and that no debt restructuring is implemented. St. Kitts and
5

Debt service to the Fund is calculated assuming that all repurchases are made as scheduled. Surcharges apply to
outstanding credit above 300 percent of quota.

9
Nevis’s projected debt service to the Fund would peak at near 12 percent of goods and services
exports in 2015, at which time it would account for around 58 percent of total external debt
service. Debt service to the Fund in percent of exports of goods and services (Figure 5d) and in
percent of total external debt service would both be among the highest of all recent exceptional
access cases. From the point of view of the “no sudden stop” reference group, St. Kitts and
Nevis’s would have the highest peak Fund exposure both in percent of GDP (Figure 6a) and in
percent of total external debt (Figure 6e). Debt service to the Fund in percent of exports of
goods and services and in percent of total external debt service would both be near the top of
this reference group (Figures 6d and 6f). However, historically, St. Kitts and Nevis has
demonstrated the ability to make large external debt service payments—7.6 percent of GDP on
average over the last 5 years.
Table 3. St. Kitts and Nevis—Capacity to Repay Indicators 1/
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Exposure and Repayments (In SDR millions)
GRA credit to St. Kitts and Nevis 2/
(In percent of quota)
Charges due on GRA credit 3/
Debt service due on GRA credit 4/

-

33.6
402.8
0.3
0.3

46.3
538.6
0.9
1.4

50.7
575.7
1.2
2.3

49.7
558.9
1.4
4.7

30.6
343.4
1.2
20.4

9.4
105.3
0.5
21.7

In percent of GDP
Total external debt
External debt, public
GRA credit to St. Kitts and Nevis
Total external debt service 6/
Public external debt service 6/
Debt service due on GRA credit

60.4
60.4
7.6
7.6
-

62.0
62.0
9.6
10.6
10.6
0.09

51.5
51.5
12.6
11.3
11.5
0.39

44.3
44.3
13.1
9.3
9.6
0.60

40.2
40.2
12.2
4.3
5.1
1.15

32.3
32.3
7.1
3.7
8.1
4.71

25.1
25.1
2.0
3.6
8.2
4.71

In percent of Central Government Revenues
Public external debt service 6/
Debt service due on GRA credit

19.3
-

24.0
0.2

27.0
0.9

22.3
1.4

12.7
2.8

20.2
11.7

20.5
11.7

205.0
205.0
-

224.6
211.5
34.9
0.3

198.8
180.6
48.6
1.5

181.9
161.7
53.9
2.5

176.5
156.4
53.6
5.0

152.8
140.3
33.4
22.3

128.0
124.1
10.4
24.0

21.4
21.4
-

28.8
28.8
0.2

30.6
30.6
1.0

25.0
25.0
1.6

13.1
13.1
2.9

20.4
20.4
11.8

20.3
20.3
11.6

In percent of Total External Debt
GRA credit to St. Kitts and Nevis

-

18.4

32.4

42.1

43.6

28.0

8.8

In percent of Total External Debt Service
Debt service due on GRA credit

-

0.8

3.4

6.3

22.4

57.9

57.2

In percent of Total Public External Debt
GRA credit to St. Kitts and Nevis

-

18.4

32.4

42.1

43.6

28.0

8.8

In percent of Total Public External Debt Service
Debt service due on GRA credit

-

0.8

3.4

6.3

22.4

57.9

57.2

Debt and Debt Service Ratios 5/

In percent of Gross International Reserves
Total external debt
External debt, public
GRA credit to St. Kitts and Nevis
Debt service due on GRA credit
In percent of Exports of Goods and Services
Total external debt service 6/
Public external debt service 6/
Debt service due on GRA credit

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis' authorities, Finance Department, World Economic Outlook, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Assumes full drawings.
2/ Repurchases are assumed to be made as scheduled.
3/ Includes GRA basic rate of charge, surcharges and service fees.
4/ Includes charges due on GRA credit and payments on principal.
5/ Staff projections for external debt, GDP, gross international reserves, and exports of goods and services, as used in the staff report that requests the proposed SBA.
6/ Interest on and amortization of medium and long-term debt.

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

15

0

400

300

100

0
*Mongolia
*Georgia
Belarus
† Costa Rica
† Guatemala
† El Salvador
*Armenia
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
St Kitts&N.
Romania
Hungary
Ukraine
Portugal
Ireland
Latvia
Greece
Iceland

† Costa Rica
† Guatemala
† El Salvador
*Georgia
*Mongolia
Pakistan
Belarus
Sri Lanka
Latvia
*Armenia
Romania
Hungary
Greece
St Kitts&N.
Ireland
Ukraine
Portugal
Iceland

20

*Mongolia
Ireland
† Costa Rica
Belarus
† Guatemala
† El Salvador
Hungary
Portugal
*Georgia
Latvia
Ukraine
Sri Lanka
Romania
Iceland
St Kitts&N.
*Armenia
Pakistan
Greece

† Costa Rica
† Guatemala
*Mongolia
† El Salvador
Latvia
Iceland
Romania
*Georgia
Ukraine
Hungary
Belarus
St Kitts&N.
*Armenia
Sri Lanka
Pakistan
Ireland
Portugal
Greece

A. In Percent of GDP
150

C. In Percent of Gross International Reserves
20

E. In Percent of Total External Debt
90

Ireland
Latvia
Portugal
Hungary
Ukraine
Greece
† Costa Rica
Romania
† Guatemala
Iceland
Belarus
*Mongolia
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
† El Salvador
St Kitts&N.
*Georgia
*Armenia

Ireland
Latvia
Portugal
†…
Greece
† Costa…
† El…
Hungary
Iceland
*Mongolia
Sri Lanka
Belarus
Romania
Pakistan
Ukraine
*Georgia
*Armenia
St Kitts&N.

10

Figure 5. Peak Fund Exposure and Debt Service Ratios for Recent Exceptional Access Cases
Peak Fund Exposure Ratios
Peak Debt Service Ratios

B. Total External Debt Service in Percent of
Exports of Goods and Services

100

10

5
50

0

D. Debt Service to the Fund in Percent of Exports
of Goods and Services

500

15

10

200

5

0

F. Debt Service to the Fund in Percent of Total
External Debt Service

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Source: St. Kitts and Nevis and IMF staff estimates, and World Economic Outlook.
* Indicates countries that are PRGT-eligible.
† Indicates countries with precautionary arrangements.

11
Figure 6. Peak Fund Exposure and Debt Service Ratios for Selected Recent Exceptional Access Cases 1/

Peak Debt Service Ratios

Peak Fund Exposure Ratios
A. In Percent of GDP

60

St Kitts&N.

Pakistan

Sri Lanka

*Armenia

*Mongolia

† El Salvador

C. In Percent of Gross International Reserves

† El Salvador

0

† Guatemala

5

0

† Costa Rica

2

Belarus

10

*Georgia

4

St Kitts&N.

15

*Armenia

6

Sri Lanka

20

Belarus

8

Pakistan

25

*Mongolia

10

*Georgia

30

† Guatemala

35

12

† Costa Rica

14

B. Total External Debt Service in Percent of
Exports of Goods and Services

D. Debt Service to the Fund in Percent of Exports
of Goods and Services

20

15

40

10
20

E. In Percent of Total External Debt

Pakistan

*Armenia

St Kitts&N.

Sri Lanka

*Georgia

† El Salvador

† Guatemala

Belarus

F. Debt Service to the Fund in Percent of Total
External Debt Service

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20

1/ Arrangements approved since September 2008 that did not involve a sudden capital inflows stop.
Source: St. Kitts and Nevis and IMF staff estimates, and World Economic Outlook.
* Indicates countries that are PRGT-eligible.
† Indicates countries with precautionary arrangements.

*Armenia

*Georgia

St Kitts&N.

† El Salvador

Sri Lanka

Pakistan

*Mongolia

Belarus

† Guatemala

St Kitts&N.

*Armenia

*Georgia

Pakistan

Belarus

Sri Lanka

*Mongolia

† El Salvador

† Costa Rica

0

† Costa Rica

10
† Guatemala

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

† Costa Rica

0
*Mongolia

*Armenia

St Kitts&N.

Belarus

Hungary

*Georgia

Latvia

† El Salvador

*Mongolia

† Guatemala

0

† Costa Rica

5

12
III. IMPACT ON THE FUND’S LIQUIDITY POSITION AND RISK EXPOSURE
9.
The direct impact of the proposed arrangement on the Fund’s liquidity and credit
risk exposure is minimal:


The proposed arrangement would have an insignificant impact on Fund liquidity (Table
4). Commitments under the proposed arrangement would reduce the one-year forward
commitment capacity (FCC), which currently stands at about SDR 246 billion, by about
0.02 percent.6



The projected peak GRA exposure of SDR 52.5 million would be very small compared
with the reference group of exceptional access countries (Figure 7). As a share of total
GRA credit, exposure to St. Kitts and Nevis would peak at a mere 0.07 percent. The
share of the top five users of Fund resources in terms of total outstanding credit would
not be materially affected.



In case of arrears on charges under the proposed arrangement, the Fund’s remaining
burden sharing capacity would be reduced modestly. Projected charges on GRA
obligations will peak at SDR 1.4 million in 2014, or about 2.6 percent of the Fund’s
current estimated residual burden-sharing capacity.



Potential GRA exposure would remain very limited relative to the level of
precautionary balances. After the first purchase, Fund credit to St. Kitts and Nevis
would be about 0.27 percent of the Fund’s current precautionary balances, and total
access would peak at around 0.65 percent of these balances.

6

The FCC is the principal measure of Fund liquidity. The (one-year) FCC indicates the amount of GRA resources
available for new financing over the next 12 months, and is calculated taking into account recent supplementary
resources; as of April 1, 2011, it reflects activation of the enlarged NAB for the six-month period through
end-September 2011. See The Fund’s Liquidity Position—Review and Outlook (EBS/11/55, April 13, 2011).

13
Table 4. St. Kitts and Nevis —Impact on GRA Finances
(In millions of SDR unless otherwise noted)
as of 7/13/2011
Liquidity measures
Forward Commitment Capacity (FCC) 1/
Impact on FCC on approval 2/

246,669
53

Prudential measures
Fund GRA commitment to St. Kitts and Nevis
in percent of current precautionary balances
in percent of total GRA credit outstanding
Fund GRA credit outstanding to top five borrowers
in percent of total GRA credit outstanding
in percent of total GRA credit outstanding including first purchase by St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Kitts and Nevis' annual GRA charges in percent of the Fund's residual burden sharing capacity for 2011

0.65
0.07
65
65
0.57

Memorandum items
Fund's precautionary balances (as of April 30, 2011)
Total FCL commitments 3/
Fund's Residual Burden Sharing Capacity 4/
Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities, Finance Department, World Economic Outlook, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ IMF Key Financial Statistics, June 16, 2011. The FCC is defined as the Fund's stock of usable resources less undrawn
balances under existing arrangements, plus projected repurchases during the coming 12 months, less repayments of borrowing
due one year forward, less a prudential balance. As of April 1, 2011, reflects activation of the enlarged NAB for the six-month
period through end-September 2011.
2/ A single country's negative impact on the FCC is defined as the country's sum of Fund credit and undrawn commitments
minus repurchases one-year forward.
3/ Includes the FCL commitments for Colombia, Mexico and Poland.
4/ Burden-sharing capacity is calculated based on the floor for remuneration at 85 percent of the SDR interest rate. Residual
burden-sharing capacity is equal to the total burden-sharing capacity minus the portion being utilized to offset deferred charges
and takes into account the loss in capacity due to nonpayment of burden sharing adjustments by members in arrears.

8,100
70,328
53

14

Figure 7. Exceptional Access Levels in selected cases 1/
In billions of SDRs 2/
6

5

4

3

2

1

Pakistan

† Costa Rica

Sri Lanka

Belarus

† Guatemala

† El Salvador

*Georgia

*Armenia

*Mongolia

St.Kitts&Nevis

0

Source: Finance Department.
1/ Arrangements approved since September 2008 that did not involve a sudden capital inflows stop.
2/ Does not include FCL arrangements.
* Indicates countries that are PRGT eligible.
† Indicates countries with precautionary arrangements.

IV. ASSESSMENT
10.
The proposed SBA for St. Kitts and Nevis seeks to address an unsustainable public
debt dynamics through a combination of significant fiscal adjustment and debt
restructuring. Staff is confident that the fiscal consolidation efforts and the debt restructuring
process can restore debt sustainability, and on balance considers that there is a high probability
that public debt is sustainable in the medium-term. However, the extremely high prearrangement public debt-to-GDP ratio and the country’s very small and undiversified economy
turn this into a particularly challenging task. Risks to the authorities’ program are extensive
and include:


the major challenges, including capacity constraints, the authorities face to implement
the fiscal consolidation and structural reforms that are needed to achieve a resumption
of growth and generate a primary surplus on the order of 5 percent of GDP, on average,
during 2012–16. However, St. Kitts and Nevis’s track record of running substantial

15
primary fiscal surpluses (4.2 percent of GDP on average during the last five years)
provides some assurance, and efforts to strengthen implementation capacity are under
way;


uncertainties surrounding the outcome of the debt restructuring;



vulnerabilities to external shocks and natural disasters, in particular in view of the small
size of the economy and the undiversified tourism sector.

11.
Overall, the proposed access entails substantial risks concerning St. Kitts and
Nevis’s ability to fully meet its scheduled debt service obligations to the Fund.


The Fund stands as the main source of financing to the program, with a likely limited
role of other possible public sector (bilateral and multilateral) contributors given that St.
Kitts and Nevis is not a member of the Inter American Development Bank and a middle
income country.



High access and front-loaded phasing result in heavy and bunched debt service
obligations to the Fund.



Absent any prior SBA, the country does not have a demonstrated track record of
discharging large obligations to the Fund in a timely way.



The direct impact of arrears on the Fund’s liquidity and burden sharing capacity would
remain very limited, but significant reputational risks could materialize.

12.

The risks of the Fund are mitigated:



to the extent that the proposed Reserve Fund to be supported with Fund resources will
only provide temporary liquidity to solvent banks;



considering that St. Kitts and Nevis has a strong track record of being able to meet high
external debt service obligations in general (7.6 percent of GDP on average during
2005-10);



by the significant progress in the debt restructuring process, including indications that
key domestic creditors support the overall aim of the debt restructuring and financing
assurances from the Paris Club, and the associated prospects for restoring debt
sustainability.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/113
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
August 15, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation with
St. Kitts and Nevis
On July 27, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation with St. Kitts and Nevis.1
Background
St. Kitts and Nevis’ tourism-dependent and highly indebted economy is recovering slowly from a
two year-long recession. Activity is estimated to have declined both in 2009 and 2010, due to a
fall in tourism receipts and FDI-related construction activities. A mild recovery is underway in
2011, driven primarily by the outlook for the United States (St. Kitts and Nevis’ major export
market) and the reopening of the Four Seasons Hotel in Nevis. Inflationary pressures, which
remained subdued in 2009, have begun to intensify towards the end of 2010, as a result of oil
and food price increases.
Faced with increasing fiscal imbalances in 2010, the authorities started to implement a strong
fiscal adjustment program at the end of the year and beginning of 2011. In response to a rising
fiscal deficit, the authorities implemented revenue reforms and expenditure cuts, with yields
starting to materialize in 2011. On the revenue front, a VAT and excise tax reforms were

1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
implemented in November 2010. Other measures implemented include streamlining import duty
exemptions, strengthening auditing and monitoring of duty free shops and introduction of an
environment levy on new vehicles. They also changed the structure of the Housing and Social
Development Levy and increased electricity tariffs in January 2011. On the expenditure side,
the authorities froze public wages, but increased capital expenditure to acquire two new
electricity generators in order to stem island-wide black outs. The primary fiscal balance
deteriorated by 5.4 percentage points of GDP to a deficit of -0.5 percent of GDP in 2010 and the
public debt-to-GDP ratio increased to about 200 percent in 2010.
Reflecting the recession, the external current account deficit improved in 2010. Available data
suggest that, while exports of goods and services remained broadly stable, imports of goods
and services declined by about 6 percentage points of GDP. As a result, the external current
account imbalance is estimated to have narrowed by about 6½ percentage points of GDP. The
deficit was financed by official inflows, FDI, commercial banks, and a further accumulation of
arrears on fuel imports.
The authorities have requested IMF’s financial assistance in support of their economic reform
program. The main objective of the authorities’ program is to put public debt on a firmly
downward trajectory, thereby creating a virtuous cycle of lower debt and higher growth. The
authorities’ reform agenda encompasses a three-pronged approach. The first priority is fiscal
consolidation—allowing revenue to rise upfront and containing spending increases, while at the
same time, making efforts to protect the most vulnerable groups. The second priority is a
comprehensive debt restructuring to address the debt overhang. The third priority is to further
strengthen the financial sector, including through the establishment of a Banking Sector
Reserve Fund as a backstopping mechanism for liquidity support, if needed. The authorities
have also outlined a structural reform agenda to help strengthening fiscal management,
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the public sector, and removing obstacles to
growth. The authorities’ economic reform program is expected to catalyze financing from
international and regional financial institutions and is supported by a Stand-By Arrangement
with the IMF, which was also approved by the Executive Board on July 27.
Executive Board Assessment
The Executive Directors noted that the St. Kitts and Nevis economy is gradually recovering from
a prolonged downturn but that the elevated public debt-to-GDP ratio poses significant risks to
the outlook. Against this background, Directors agreed that urgent action is needed to restore
debt sustainability and achieve a higher growth path. They encouraged the authorities to pursue
their ambitious fiscal adjustment plans, including a comprehensive debt restructuring, and the
wide-ranging reform agenda at the core of the economic program to be supported by a
Stand-By Arrangement with the Fund.
Directors commended the authorities for embarking on front-loaded fiscal consolidation, which
includes introduction of a VAT, implementation of an excise tax and electricity tariff reform, and
a freeze of the public wage bill. They agreed that fiscal adjustment must be sustained over the

3
medium term and welcomed the authorities’ commitment to adopt further measures in case of a
revenue shortfall.
Directors underscored that, in addition to fiscal adjustment, a comprehensive debt restructuring
is key to a sustainable fiscal position. They commended the authorities for taking steps in this
direction through public announcements and initial discussions with creditors.
Directors noted that further strengthening of the financial sector is also a critical element of the
authorities’ economic program. They looked forward to the establishment of a Banking Sector
Reserve Fund for temporary liquidity support to solvent banks, if needed. Directors also
welcomed the ongoing efforts to strengthen the oversight of non-bank financial institutions,
including establishment of the Single Regulatory Unit.
Directors encouraged the authorities to fully implement their structural reform agenda. These
forms should aim at strengthening public financial management, improving the business
climate, enhancing the social safety nets, removing obstacles to growth, and restoring lost
competitiveness
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4
St. Kitts and Nevis: Selected Economic Indicators
2007

2008

2009

Prel.
2010

Proj.
2011

(Annual percentage change; unless otherwise specified)
Output and prices
Real GDP (factor cost)
Consumer prices, end of period

4.2
2.1

4.6
7.6

-9.6
1.0

-1.5
3.9

1.5
3.9

Banking system
1/
Net foreign assets
1/
Net domestic assets
Of which: Credit to private sector

6.9
5.0
0.1

11.6
-10.0
-1.7

-8.4
14.3
1.5

1.1
3.9
0.9

4.1
1.5
-3.6

(In percent of GDP; unless otherwise specified)
2/

Public sector
Total revenue and grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall balance
Of which: primary balance
Total public sector debt (end-of-period)
Of which: Central government
Public enterprises
External sector
External current account
Trade balance
Services, net
Of which: Tourism receipt
FDI (net)
External public debt (end-of-period)
External public debt service
In percent of exports of goods and services
Real effective exchange rate (-: depreciation)
Percentage change

39.4
44.1
35.9
8.2
-4.8
3.6
178.2
134.5
43.7

37.2
42.2
35.4
6.8
-5.0
3.3
165.0
125.4
39.6

42.7
46.5
39.8
6.7
-3.8
4.9
189.3
145.4
43.9

39.5
49.0
39.9
9.1
-9.4
-0.5
199.2
154.7
44.5

44.1
48.1
41.5
6.6
-4.0
5.0
190.4
150.3
40.1

-24.3
-35.4
13.9
24.3
25.7
58.7

-33.2
-38.0
7.2
19.3
34.8
56.6

-34.0
-37.5
6.1
15.9
34.9
60.2

-27.5
-31.0
5.7
15.6
31.0
60.4

-29.5
-35.0
6.5
16.3
16.1
52.4

21.0

18.8

21.8

21.4

28.6

-5.6

12.5

-3.9

0.8

…

Sources: St. Kitts and Nevis authorities; ECCB; and IMF staff estimates and projections
1/
In relation to broad money at the beginning of the period.
2/
Central government unless otherwise noted.

Press Release No.11/295
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
July 28, 2011

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves Three-Year US$84.5 Million Stand-By Arrangement
with St. Kitts and Nevis
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has approved a three-year
Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) for an amount equivalent to SDR 52.51 million (about
US$84.5 million) with St. Kitts and Nevis. The arrangement will support the authorities’
economic program, coupled with a comprehensive debt restructuring, to restore debt and
external sustainability and set the stage for sustained growth.
As a result of the Board’s decision, an amount equivalent to SDR 22.15 million (about
US$35.6 million) is available for immediate disbursement. The three-year SBA arrangement
represents 590 percent of St. Kitts and Nevis’ (SDR 8.9 million) IMF quota. St. Kitts and
Nevis joined the Fund in August 1984.
Following the Executive Board’s decision of St. Kitts and Nevis on July 27, 2011,
Ms. Nemat Shafik, Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, made the following
statement
“The St. Kitts and Nevis economy is gradually recovering from a prolonged recession.
However, fiscal imbalances and structural fragilities pose significant risks to the economic
outlook.
“The authorities have started to implement an economic program to address these challenges
over the medium term. The main objectives of this program are achieving higher growth and
a sustainable fiscal position. The authorities’ plans include front-loaded fiscal consolidation,
a comprehensive debt restructuring, and further steps to strengthen the financial sector.
“The authorities have already taken important revenue and expenditure measures. These
include an introduction of a value added tax, implementation of an excise tax and electricity
tariff reform, and a freeze of the public wage bill. Given the magnitude of the targeted
adjustment, sustained consolidation is critical.

2

“In addition to fiscal adjustment, a comprehensive and timely debt restructuring is needed to
achieve a sustainable fiscal position. The authorities have publicly announced their intention
to restructure the public debt and have initiated discussions with creditors to this end.
“Further strengthening of the financial system is also a critical element of the authorities’
economic program. In this respect, the forthcoming Banking Sector Reserve Fund would be
able to provide temporary liquidity support to solvent financial institutions, if needed.
“Over the medium term, the structural reforms envisaged by the authorities will complement
fiscal adjustment. These reforms aim at strengthening public financial management,
improving the business climate, enhancing the social safety nets, removing obstacles to
growth, and restoring competitiveness.”
ANNEX
Recent Economic Development
St. Kitts and Nevis’ economy was severely impacted by the global financial and economic
crisis causing the economy to contract both in 2009 and 2010. This reflected a sharp decline
in stay-over tourist arrivals and FDI inflows. The fiscal position deteriorated in 2010 as tax
revenue declined by 13½ percent. The global downturn also coincided with the collapse of
two large regional insurance companies.
Faced with increasing fiscal imbalances in 2010, the authorities started implementing a
strong fiscal adjustment program towards the end of last year and the beginning of 2011,
including the introduction of a VAT and the increase in electricity tariffs by about 80 percent.
Despite those efforts, the public debt increased further to about 200 percent of GDP in 2010.
Program Summary
The authorities have requested Fund assistance to support their economic program. The main
objectives of the program are to substantially strengthen public finances, significantly reduce
public debt levels and set the stage for sustained economic growth.
Key reform objectives include:


Continued implementation of fiscal adjustment measures.



Strengthening fiscal management and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of
the public sector.



Continued support to the most vulnerable social groups.

3



Removing obstacles to growth.

These reform efforts, however, will need to be complemented by a comprehensive debt
restructuring. The authorities have announced their intention to seek a comprehensive and
substantive restructuring of the public debt in June 2011. To address the financing difficulties
and help set the public debt firmly on a downward path toward the ECCU debt target of
60 percent of GDP by 2020, a substantial reduction in the debt service burden consistent with
the country’s payment capacity will be needed.

Statement by Thomas Hockin, Executive Director for St. Kitts and Nevis and
Mathew Sajkunovic, Advisor to the Executive Director
July 27, 2011
At the outset, our authorities from St. Kitts and Nevis wish to express their appreciation to
the staff for a very constructive policy dialogue. This spans not only these Article IV and
Standby Arrangement discussions, but also the important engagement that has taken place
throughout the challenging period stemming from the global crisis. This close dialogue and
mutual understanding is reflected in a well-written document that accurately reflects not only
the risks and challenges that our authorities face but also the opportunity for a fundamental
transformation of the growth and development outlook for this small twin-island federation.
The commitment of the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis and ownership of this program is
without question. It is illustrated by the significant up-front fiscal measures they have taken
thus far, their focused efforts to restructure their unsustainable domestic and external debts,
and their clear actions to strengthen the structures underpinning their fiscal activities.
With modest recovery now taking hold, the principal objective of the authorities’ program is
to foster macroeconomic stability and create a virtuous circle of sustainable public debt and
strong economic growth. To achieve this, a program of fiscal consolidation, cooperative debt
restructuring, and efficiency-enhancing structural reforms is underway.
As the staff paper identifies, in support of the authorities’ macroeconomic and structural
reform program, they are seeking the Board’s support for an SDR 52.5 million (590 percent
of quota) loan under a 36-month Stand-By Arrangement. Other multilateral and bilateral
partners are expected to support the authorities’ efforts with financial and technical
assistance.
Background
Following a period of strong growth, the economy was hit very hard by the global economic
crisis. A significant drop in tourism, a slowdown in tourism-related construction and FDI, as
well as the closure of the largest tourism resort in Nevis following Hurricane Omar, all
contributed to a significant decline in growth in 2009 and 2010. The crisis also took a major
toll on public finances. Tax revenue declined 13.5 percent in 2010 and the deficit widened to
9.4 percent of GDP. With public debt hitting approximately 200 percent of GDP and arrears
emerging, the downturn also exposed clearly that the longstanding debt overhang was not
sustainable.

2
Beginning with the 2010 budget and reinforced by the 2011 budget, the authorities have
taken decisive steps to substantially strengthen public finances, launch the process for debt
reduction, and establish the conditions for sustained economic growth. It is this home-grown
program for which the authorities are seeking IMF support.
The Authorities’ Program
Fiscal Consolidation
Fiscal adjustment has been frontloaded and key measures are beginning to bear fruit. In 2010,
the authorities implemented the VAT and the unincorporated business tax, streamlined
import duty exemptions, introduced an environmental levy on new vehicles, and increased
monitoring and auditing of duty-free shops. Building on these efforts, further steps were
taken in 2011, including adjusting the structure of the housing and social development levy
as well as the politically difficult decision to raise the electricity tariff by 80 percent. On the
expenditure side, civil service wages have been frozen until 2013 (implying a notable
reduction in real wages over the period) and capital spending has been prioritized.
Taken together, the measures implemented in 2010 and 2011 should be sufficient to achieve
the 2011 primary fiscal surplus target of 5 percent of GDP targeted in the program. That said,
the authorities are mindful that given the scale of the fiscal adjustments that they have
undertaken, certain aspects could potentially underperform. Therefore, to be prudent, they
have identified a further 1 percent of GDP in contingency measures that could be taken if
needed to meet the primary fiscal surplus target under their program.
Debt Sustainability
While the authorities have moved decisively to sharply improve the fiscal accounts and the
people of St. Kitts and Nevis have made considerable sacrifices, these actions will not be
sufficient on their own to close the financing gaps and put public debt on a sustainable
trajectory. It has also become increasingly clear that the unsustainable debt overhang is
constraining both growth-enhancing public investments and also domestic and external
investor confidence. Accordingly, the authorities have moved forward on a process of
negotiating a comprehensive and substantive public debt restructuring, which will ensure that
the burden of adjustment is shared by all. This process is being undertaken very transparently
and is well in train. Debt and legal advisors have been hired. An official announcement
detailing the authorities’ intentions and information sharing and outreach with creditors have
occurred. Financing assurances from the Paris Club were also received in July.
As part of the overall restructuring exercise, the authorities are also moving ahead decisively
to resolve the collateralized debts of the St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corporation, which
were assumed by the government following the collapse of the sugar industry in 2005 under

3
the weight of trade liberalization and the erosion of preferential market access. A working
group has been established to facilitate the debt-for-land swap. Mapping and valuation of
land is underway (a structural benchmark for September) and a plan is being prepared to
establish a government-owned asset management company.
Taken together, the authorities expect that debt restructuring will yield substantial interest
savings to put public debt on a sustainable trajectory over the medium term and play an
important role in closing the financing gap. Finally, it should also be noted that substantive
good faith efforts have already been undertaken with an aim to resolving outstanding arrears
to creditors in line with the Fund’s lending into arrears policy.
Safeguarding Financial Sector Stability
In moving ahead with their ambitious strategy to foster macroeconomic stability and create a
virtuous circle of sustainable public debt and strong economic growth, the authorities are also
very cognizant of the central need to safeguard banking sector stability during the debt
restructuring exercise. The banking sector is very well capitalized and stress tests indicate
that banks can absorb significant shocks, including the impact of the debt restructuring.
Notwithstanding these findings, the authorities feel that it is prudent to have a precautionary
liquidity backstop for the sector in order to meet any sustained deposit outflows.
Accordingly, they intend to establish a Banking Sector Reserve Fund (BSRF), which would
be able to provide temporary liquidity (backed by collateral), if required, to solvent
indigenous banks that face liquidity constraints. The BSRF will be managed by the Eastern
Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) and is governed by a detailed Memorandum of
Understanding between the government and the ECCB (a prior action for the program).
The authorities also remain strongly committed to strengthening supervision and oversight of
the non-bank financial sector where they have lead responsibility. The new Single
Regulatory Unit (SRU) is now operational and has benefitted from technical assistance from
CARTAC. On-site inspections have been increased and licensing procedures have been
tightened. Parliament is also expected to approve an important new bill in the second part of
the year governing credit unions and cooperatives.
Structural Reform Agenda
The authorities of St. Kitts and Nevis are aware that securing additional yields from their
home-grown program and safeguarding vulnerable segments of society will require
substantial structural reforms. Therefore, the authorities’ policy framework incorporates
structural measures aimed at strengthening the efficiency and effectiveness of public
spending, civil service reform, as well as pension and social safety net reforms.

4
To enhance public financial management, the authorities intend to establish a medium-term
fiscal framework. They also plan to move ahead with the rationalization of subsidies on
liquefied petroleum gas. In recognition of the fiscal risks of the Electricity Department, the
department will be corporatized and forced to stand on its own. A new medium-term debt
management strategy will also be developed with the support of technical assistance.
Civil service reform is also a key priority for the government’s public sector transformation
program. The authorities recognize the significant impact of the size of the wage bill on the
fiscal position and have taken steps aimed at limiting the public sector wage bill. Work is
also underway on a comprehensive civil service reform plan that will cover human resource
policy, the organizational structure of the civil service and address wage policy and payroll
management. Technical assistance has been sought from the World Bank and other
development partners.
Finally, the protection of vulnerable groups will remain an essential priority for the
authorities throughout the program period and beyond. A strategy for a more targeted social
safety net system will be presented to Cabinet by March 2012. As part of this plan, the
authorities will introduce an objective and transparent targeting mechanism to more
effectively get assistance to the poor. The ultimate goal over the medium term is a coherent
social protection strategy that will rationalize programs and better link social assistance to
actions aimed at building human capital in the country.

