IMF Country Report No.12/181

EURO AREA POLICIES
July 2012

2012 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION

Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of the Article IV consultation with member
countries forming the Euro Area, the following documents have been released and are
included in this package:


Staff Report for the Article IV consultation, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on June 12, 2012, with the officials of euro area on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on July 3, 2012. The views expressed in the staff
report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

Public Information Notice (PIN) summarizing the views of the Executive Board as
expressed during its July 16, 2012 discussion of the staff report that concluded the Article IV
consultation.


Statement by the Executive Director

The document listed below has been or will be separately released.
Selected Issues Paper

The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of
market-sensitive information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

©2012 International Monetary Fund

DMSDR1S-#4915617-v10-Euro_Area-June_2012Staff_Report_for_the_Article_IV_Consultation.DOCX 2010 Article IV Report

EURO AREA POLICIES
July 3, 2012

STAFF REPORT FOR THE 2012 ARTICLE IV CONSULTATION
WITH MEMBER COUNTRIES

KEY ISSUES
Context: The euro area crisis has reached a new and critical stage. Despite major policy
actions, financial markets in parts of the region remain under acute stress, raising questions
about the viability of the monetary union itself. The adverse links between sovereigns, banks,
and the real economy are stronger than ever. As a consequence, financial markets are
increasingly fragmenting along national borders, demand is weakening, inflation pressures
are subsiding, and unemployment is increasing. A further intensification of the crisis would
have a substantial impact on neighboring European countries and the rest of the world.
Completing EMU: A determined move toward a more complete union is needed now to
demonstrate policymakers’ unequivocal commitment to sustain EMU. This means measures
to break the adverse loops between sovereigns and banks. To this end, the first priority is a
banking union for the euro area, with a common supervisory and macroprudential
framework, deposit guarantee scheme, and bank resolution authority. The progress made in
this direction during the June 28-29 summit is welcome. To reduce the tendency for
economic shocks in one country to imperil the euro area as a whole, banking union needs to
be complemented by more fiscal integration—combining ideas of a political union and
stronger central governance with more risk sharing. A unified statement of support for all of
these steps by euro area governments, with a clear timetable of decisions, could arrest the
decline in confidence engulfing the region.
Restoring strong and balanced growth: Changing the architecture will not be sufficient
without measures to support growth. Structural reforms are essential to raise trend growth
across the region and to improve competitiveness in deficit economies. But short-run
support for growth will still be needed. Crisis measures remain important and, in the case of
the European firewall, should be used flexibly. The recapitalization of weak banks—including
through direct support from EFSF/ESM resources—will help break adverse fiscal-bankinggrowth feedback loops. Monetary policy can play a role in easing the transition until
structural reforms become effective. Because inflation is low and falling, the ECB has room
for lowering rates, and deploying additional unconventional measures would relieve severe
stress in some markets. Fiscal consolidation should proceed decisively and credibly where
market pressure is high, but more gradually elsewhere to help support demand in the
region. The pace of adjustment should be guided by structural targets.

EURO AREA POLICIES

Approved By

Reza Moghadam
and Tamim
Bayoumi

Discussions took place during May 29–June 11, 2012. Mission members
included M. Pradhan (head), H. Berger, P. Koeva Brooks, A. Al-Eyd, E. Perez
Ruiz, A. Scott, T. Tressel, and N. Valckx (all EUR), S. Gray and J. Zhou (MCM),
and M. Chivakul (SPR). Executive Director A. Fayolle and his Advisor P. Garcia
Martinez, and Georges Pineau, ECB Observer at the IMF, participated in some
meetings.1

CONTENTS
KEY ISSUES ..........................................................................................................................................................................1
A DEEPENING CRISIS .....................................................................................................................................................4
WEAK OUTLOOK WITH SUBSTANTIAL RISKS ..................................................................................................5
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY.............................................................................................................................9
A. The Case for Completing EMU ............................................................................................................. 10
B. Restoring Strong and Balanced Growth............................................................................................ 15
THE AUTHORITIES’ VIEWS....................................................................................................................................... 23
STAFF APPRAISAL ........................................................................................................................................................ 25
TABLES
1. Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2007-2014 ........................................................................................ 33
2. Euro Area: Balance of Payments........................................................................................................................... 34
3. IMF Policy Recommendations for Selected Countries................................................................................. 35
FIGURES
1. Short-term Activity Indicators ............................................................................................................................... 28
2. Euro Area Inflation Developments ...................................................................................................................... 29
3a. Fiscal Outlook in the Euro Area: 2012 April WEO ....................................................................................... 30
3b. Fiscal Consolidation in the Euro Area: Challenges ..................................................................................... 31
4. LTROs: Effects on the ECB Balance Sheets and Bank Funding ................................................................. 32

1

The mission would like to thank euro area authorities, in particular President M. Draghi (European Central Bank),

Chairperson A. Enria (European Banking Authority), Head of Secretariat F. Mazzaferro (European Systemic Risk Board),
Vice-President O. Rehn (European Commssion), and President H. van Rompuy (European Council), as well as their
staff for their time, support, and accessibility. The mission has also benefited from the Fund's bilateral Article IV
consultations with euro area countries and from discussions with national authorities during meetings of the
Eurogroup and the Eurogroup Working Group.

2

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

BOXES
1. European Summit Policy Initiatives: Right Steps on the Roadmap ...........................................................9
2. The Case for a Banking Union ............................................................................................................................... 11
3. The Case for a Fiscal Union .................................................................................................................................... 12
4. The Impaired Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area ............................................................................. 16
5. Further Use of Long-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs)? .................................................................. 18
APPENDIX I: STATISTICAL ISSUES ....................................................................................................................... 37

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

3

EURO AREA POLICIES

A DEEPENING CRISIS
The euro area crisis has reached a new, critical level
1.
Market tensions have increased further. Still-pressing banking problems and continuing
sovereign funding concerns in some euro area countries have raised doubts about the viability of
the monetary union itself. This has driven sovereign borrowing costs and risk premiums to very high
levels in several countries, adding to the already-severe pressures on many bank and sovereign
balance sheets in an environment of very low confidence and growth.

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; IMF, World Economic outlook database; and
IMF staff calculations

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations

2.
The adverse bank-sovereign feedback loops at the heart of the crisis have intensified.
Concerns about banks’ solvency have increased
because of large sovereign exposures, particularly in
periphery countries. Some sovereigns, in turn, are
struggling to backstop weak banks on their own.
Depositor confidence is increasingly fragile. As
investors have moved capital "north" and abroad to
perceived safer assets, official financing—including in
the form of programs and ECB liquidity support—has
become more important. This is largely mirrored in
widening Target 2 balances between euro area Source: National Central Banks
national central banks.2
3.
And the single financial market has become increasingly fragmented. Despite low policy
rates, credit conditions vary widely among euro area countries. This is mainly due to starkly
diverging perceptions of sovereign and banking risks, as well as a drastic decline in interbank activity
(as banks reduce cross-border funding, shore up capital and liquidity buffers in their home

2

Target 2 is the payments settlement system for the euro area, largely reflecting interbank activities settled through

the transfer of reserves within the Eurosystem. Currently, large Target 2 deficits in the periphery are offset by
corresponding surpluses in northern countries, mostly Germany, but also Finland and Luxembourg.

4

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

jurisdiction, and accumulate overnight deposits at the ECB). As a consequence, financing conditions
are now the least supportive in countries where the crisis is the most acute.

Source: European Central Bank

Sources: Haver Analytics; and European Central Bank

4.
Against this backdrop, the real economy has been weak, reinforcing adverse banksovereign feedback loops. GDP was flat in the first quarter of 2012, after contracting at an
annualized rate of almost 1 percent in the last quarter of 2011. Demand was depressed, particularly
in the periphery countries (Figure 1). Tightening financing conditions and weak confidence held
back private investment and consumption, and fiscal consolidation dampened demand further.
Consequently, the euro area unemployment rate increased further, to over 11 percent in May, its
highest level since the start of EMU. In turn, the weakness in real activity has added to budgetary
pressures and the deterioration in banks’ loan portfolios.

WEAK OUTLOOK WITH SUBSTANTIAL RISKS
5.
With the crisis deepening, the outlook remains for very low growth. After averaging 1.5
percent in 2011, euro area GDP growth is expected to be -0.3 and 0.7 percent in 2012 and 2013. A
number of factors will weigh on the outlook:


Private domestic demand is expected to remain
subdued as banks and households continue to
repair balance sheets and consumers and
investors act cautiously amidst heightened
uncertainty. With many of these headwinds
significantly stronger in the periphery, growth
is expected to be much lower there than in
the core. Germany and France are expected to
post weak-but-positive growth in 2012.

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

5

EURO AREA POLICIES



Substantial
and
frontloaded
fiscal
consolidation will weigh on growth. In the
aggregate, on current policies, the euro area
structural deficit is projected to narrow by
about 1½ percent of GDP in 2012, ½ percent
of GDP in 2013, and an additional ½ percent
of GDP over 2014-17. The pace of fiscal
adjustment is particularly accelerated in the
hard-hit periphery countries: the projected
consolidation over this and next year ranges Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
from around 3½ percentage points or more calculations
of GDP in Portugal, Greece, Italy, and Spain, compared with ½ percentage point or less in
Germany, Austria, and Finland (see also Figure 3).



At the same time, the global outlook has deteriorated, reducing export demand despite the
recent depreciation of the euro. External imbalances within the euro area will narrow, but the
decline in periphery deficits will materialize largely as a consequence of weak activity and
import compression.



Trend growth remains low. Even abstracting from current factors, euro area medium-term
growth is set to disappoint in the absence of policy action. Reflecting well-known area-wide
structural weaknesses, staff sees trend growth at only about ¾ percent over the medium
term.

6.
Unemployment will remain high because of weak growth. In 2012, unemployment rates
are expected to span a wide range, from about 5 ½ percent in Germany to 24 percent in Spain. Staff
projections also indicate that these differences will persist, as growth in countries under pressure
(Portugal, Greece, Ireland, and Spain) will not be sufficient to return unemployment to pre-crisis
levels.

Source: Eurostat

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations

7.
Inflation is set to decline significantly and could even become negative. Headline
inflation is expected to fall well below 2 percent in 2013 and remain there through 2014. Although
survey-based inflation expectations are still broadly anchored, market-based indicators are clearly
6

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

pointing downward and core inflation (stripping out the most volatile components, such as energy
and food prices) signals very low underlying inflation pressures (see Figure 2). Moreover, given the
subdued growth outlook, there is a sizable risk that inflation could even turn negative in the
medium run. Specifically, the IMF’s GPM projections indicate about a 25 percent probability of
below-zero inflation by early 2014. This risk of deflation is relatively low in the faster-growing
economies but significant in the periphery, where administrative price and tax increases are masking
more severe downward price pressures from still substantial output gaps. For example, staff
estimates suggest that fiscal factors contribute over 1 percentage point to inflation in Italy in 2012.
This disinflationary environment in much of the periphery will make it difficult for many countries to
reduce the burden of debt.

Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations

Sources: IMF; and Global Projection Model

8.
The outlook is subject to a number of severe downside risks (see text Table 1). Greaterthan-expected bank deleveraging and fiscal consolidation could further lower confidence and
hamper growth; this would have a strong negative impact on public debt trajectories. Where growth
is already weak, there is a risk of stagnation and long-term damage to potential output as
unemployed workers lose skills and new workers find it difficult to join the active labor force. A
failure of a large and systemic bank could test the ability of the ECB and crisis facilities to stem
contagion. And reform slippage at the country level could have large negative spillovers throughout
the euro area. The fear of euro area exit, if not countered swiftly and effectively, could spread to
other economies perceived to have similar characteristics, potentially leading to increased financial
market stress and depositor flight from several banking systems.
9.
A deeper euro area crisis would have substantial global implications. Staff analyses
suggest that further intensification of the euro area crisis—modeled as a jump in sovereign and
private yields—could have a significant impact on the rest of the world. The spillovers would be
especially strong in the neighboring EU and southeastern European countries. Specifically, output
losses across the euro area result in nearly equivalent losses in the UK and Eastern Europe, with peak
output losses occurring within two years. However, the extent of the spillovers depends on several
factors, including the associated policy responses within the euro area and in the rest of the world,
the duration of the crisis, and the pass-through of sovereign spreads to private sector borrowing
costs. Some banks in core euro area countries are sufficiently large and connected that they could

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

EURO AREA POLICIES

generate significant spillovers—both in the core and periphery—through cross-border deleveraging
and associated increases in counterparty risks.3
Text Table 1. Euro Area: Risk Assessment Matrix1/
(Scale—high, medium, or low)
2/

Source of Risk
1. Strong
intensification of
euro area crisis

Relative Likelihood







2. Country-specific
policy and reform
slippage









3. Failure of a SIFI





4. Oil price surge

1/



Medium
The effect from bank deleveraging could be
larger than envisaged
Fiscal consolidation could depress activity more
than envisaged or fail to generate the expected
decline in risk premiums in some countries
Adverse feedback loops between sovereign and
banks could be stronger in some countries,
given banks’ increased holdings of domestic
sovereign debt
Stagnation and long-term damage to potential
output, where growth is already weak
Medium
Implementation of fiscal adjustment plans may
falter in some countries in the face of high social
costs of consolidation
Bank recapitalization efforts both at the national
level and through euro area financial support
could prove more protracted than expected
Implementation of structural reforms could stall
(periphery countries)
Backlash in the core against continued financial
support for the periphery could intensify
Sudden increase of financial stress in a euro area
member could further undermine confidence,
possibility triggering deposit flight in several
banking systems
Medium
A sizable sovereign or funding shock triggered
by a re-intensification of the crisis could lead to
a SIFI failure
However, the ECB’s LTROs have addressed
immediate bank funding pressures, and the
completion of higher firewalls should provide
added liquidity insurance to sovereigns
Low
A spike in oil prices linked to geo-political
tensions, partially offset by favorable supply
conditions

Impact if Realized











High
Undermine already fragile market
confidence
Adversely affect growth prospects, and
raise unemployment
Threaten sovereign debt trajectories,
and possibly market access

Medium/High
Raise questions about the political will
to sustain the EMU
Undermine already fragile market
confidence
Drive sovereign and bank spreads
firmly into unsustainable levels
Adversely affect growth prospects and
raise unemployment
Intensify cross-border financial
contagion and bank deleveraging
Increase market pressure on euro area
members perceived to have similar
characteristics is likely



High
Intensify cross-border bank
deleveraging
Generate strong contagion effects
through direct exposures, confidence
channels, and common exposures or
markets



Medium
Weaken economic activity and increase
headline inflation



The Risk Assessment Matrix shows events that could materially alter the baseline path discussed in this report (which is the

scenario most likely to materialize in the view of the staff). The relative likelihood of risks listed is the staff’s subjective
assessment of the risks surrounding this baseline.
2/

3

8

In case the baseline does not materialize.

These issues are addressed in more detail in the 2012 Spillover Report.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

THE IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY
10.
The deepening of the crisis suggests that its root causes remain un-addressed. EMU still
lacks the basic tools that can break the adverse feedback loops between sovereigns, banks, and the
real economy. Also, largely missing are ambitious policies to restore strong and balanced growth
across the euro area that can counter current headwinds to growth, rectify competitiveness
problems, and raise trend growth.
11.
Policy makers have responded to the crisis with wide-ranging initiatives. The ECB has
reduced policy rates to historical lows and conducted special liquidity interventions to address
immediate bank funding pressures, averting an even more rapid escalation of the crisis (Figure 4).
The enlarged European and global firewall will provide more liquidity insurance to sovereigns while
the ongoing reform of fiscal governance will help strengthen fiscal discipline. National governments
have also embarked on fiscal consolidation and reaffirmed their debt sustainability and deficit
targets. Importantly, the June 28-29 summit agreed to steps toward a single supervisory mechanism,
followed by the possibility of using ESM resources to recapitalize banks directly, in addition to other
measures (Box 1). Together, these actions represent a significant commitment to deal with the crisis.

Box 1. European Summit Policy Initiatives: Right Steps on the Roadmap4
At their summit meeting on June 28-29, European leaders agreed upon significant positive steps to address
the immediate crisis. The agreement, if implemented in full, will help break the adverse links between sovereigns
and banks and create a banking union, in line with the Article IV mission recommendations. In particular, once a
single supervisory mechanism for euro area banks is established—with key decisions to be taken by end-2012—the
ESM would be able to recapitalize banks directly. Moreover, ESM assistance will not carry seniority status for Spain—
an important step to support market confidence. In addition, the leaders re-affirmed a willingness to consider
secondary purchases of sovereign bonds by the EFSF/ESM, although without expanding the resource envelope.
Finally, an agreement was reached on terms for a “Growth Compact”, mainly in the form of infrastructure projects,
and a request to pursue the “Four Presidents” proposals, with concrete plans to be delivered to a summit later in the
year. Collectively, these steps are consistent with the direction advocated in this staff report.
Implementing these measures in a timely way would help restore longer term confidence in the union. The
hurdles to implement these measures are high: the ESM has not yet been ratified by all members, the timing of paneuro area supervision remains uncertain, and many of the announced measures will require unanimity by Euro group
ministers. Furthermore, crucial questions on the terms for direct euro area bank recapitalizations still need to be
addressed.
These initiatives are steps in the right direction that will need to be complemented, as envisaged, by more
progress toward deeper fiscal integration and a full-fledged banking union. By setting in motion a process
toward a unified supervisory framework, the Summit put in place the first building block of a banking union. But

4

The summit took place after the meetings for this Article IV consultation.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

9

EURO AREA POLICIES

other necessary elements, including a pan-European deposit insurance guarantee scheme and bank resolution
mechanism with common backstops, need to be added. Staff sees these as necessary to send a firm signal of
commitment toward completing the monetary union and decisively breaking the link between sovereigns and banks.
In addition, these steps would usefully be complemented by plans for fiscal integration, as anticipated in the report
of the ‘Four Presidents’ submitted to the summit. It is encouraging that the leaders have asked the Council President
to develop proposals for a more complete union over the next three months.

12.
But the crisis calls for a much stronger collective effort now to demonstrate
policymakers’ unequivocal commitment to sustain EMU. Only a convincing and concerted move
toward a more complete EMU could arrest the decline in confidence engulfing the region. A credible
roadmap toward a full banking union and fiscal integration will make the short-term crisis measures
more effective. Structural reforms throughout the euro area will also be necessary to revive growth
in the long run, while macroeconomic policies can smooth the needed adjustment in the short run.

A. The Case for Completing EMU
13.
The euro area is in an uncomfortable and unsustainable halfway point. While it is
sufficiently integrated to allow escalating problems in one country to spill over to others, it lacks the
economic flexibility or policy tools to deal with these spillovers.


Economic adjustment to country-specific shocks is limited. Labor mobility across countries is
low, partly owing to institutional factors such as housing market rigidities, non-transferable
social benefits, and the absence of an area-wide social safety net. Wage and price flexibility
can be limited, slowing the correction of macroeconomic imbalances. And while capital
moves freely across the euro area, it is susceptible to sudden swings that can paralyze
financial markets and threaten financial stability.



Crucially, the euro area also lacks essential financial and fiscal policy tools to stabilize the
monetary union. As the crisis has illustrated, without a strong common financial stability
framework, banking problems are hard to contain and resolve in an integrated market
(Box 2). Absent sufficient instruments of fiscal risk sharing, there are no common backstops
to support banks or other tools than can soften the fiscal consequences of country-shocks
before they spread beyond national borders. At the same time, without robust fiscal
governance, there are only weak incentives to keep sovereign debt levels low before a crisis
hits (Box 3).

10

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

Box 2. The Case for a Banking Union5
The euro area crisis has revealed the flaws in a framework in which responsibility for financial stability remains
national. Before the crisis, the euro area had achieved a high degree of financial integration. For example, sovereign
risks of periphery countries were de facto shared between core euro area and domestic investors (see figure below). But
faced by a funding freeze affecting large euro area banks dependent on wholesale funding and contagion of sovereign
stress to Italy and Spain, the euro area financial system has fragmented away from an area-wide system to within
national borders. This has created de-integrating forces in sovereign bond markets, interbank markets and lending and
deposit markets. Sovereign bond and interbank markets have been the most deeply affected by the withdrawals of
intra-euro area cross-border capital flows (see figure below). As a result, financial markets have become more
fragmented, which has impaired the transmission channels of euro area monetary policy (see Box 4).
120%
100%
80%

Share of Foreign-held Debt Securities
Held within the Euro Area (2010)

200
100

held by UK residents
held by other EA countries

Change in EA MFI Cross-border Claims, 2011 and 2012Q1
(Billions of euros)

0
On EA countries

On other EU
countries

On non-EU
countries

60%

-100

40%

-200

20%

-300

Claims on non-MFI (securities excl. shares)

0%

-400

Claims on non-MFI (loans)

Source: IMF, Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey.

Shares and MMF

Claims on MFI (excl. shares)
-500
Source: ECB , cross-border positions of EA MFI, excl ESCB.
Note: changes in cross-border claims not adjusted for potential
valuation effects.

Downward spirals between sovereigns, banks and the real economy are stronger than ever in the periphery.
Concerns about bank solvency remain large where the domestic sovereign is weak. Weak sovereigns, in turn, are
unable to backstop failed banks without jeopardizing
4.5
Selected Euro Area Countries: Monthly
their solvency, as discussed in the accompanying
Interest
Rate and Banking Stress, 2010-12
4.0
Selected Issues Paper.
To strengthen internal funds, banks make loans
3.5
pricier and adversely reduce credit supply, which
weakens growth and the fiscal balance. Staff analysis
3.0
suggests that bank funding stress has a substantial
DEU
2.5
effect on loan pricing: a 150 bps increase in bank
ESP
CDS spreads is associated with an increase in lending
ITA
2.0
FRA
rates of 0.6 percentage points for corporate loans
and 0.4 percentage points for mortgages.
1.5
These adverse feed-back loops are amplified by the
0
200
400
600
800
Average bank CDS spreads (bps.)
absence of an exchange rate that could offset part of
the adverse impact on domestic demand.
Interest rates on new loans to NFC (percent)







A banking union would strengthen the viability of the EMU by helping sever adverse feed back loops between
banks and their sovereign and providing incentives to end financial de-integration. Mitigating the adverse effects
of the sovereign-bank nexus and reducing incentives to cut cross-border exposures would stabilize financial systems
and counteract financial fragmentation, thereby contributing to restore the transmission of monetary policy. It would
also help re-start growth by ensuring that healthy euro area firms can obtain credit from financial institutions at a
reasonable cost, regardless of the strength of their sovereign.

5

Prepared by Thierry Tressel. See 2012 Selected Issues Paper for further details.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

11

EURO AREA POLICIES

Box 3. The Case for a Fiscal Union6
In a common currency area, fiscal integration provides critical tools to enhance the adjustment to idiosyncratic
shocks and deal with externalities. Greater centralized risk sharing and support for fiscal adjustment would be
particularly valuable in the euro area given that economic adjustment to country-specific shocks is less than perfect.
Compared to many other currency areas, labor is not very mobile between countries, intra-area capital flows can prove
volatile, and structural rigidities often impede the price adjustment and reallocation of resources (see Section B). At the
same time, governance safeguards against excessive debt have disappointed in the past.
Institutions of fiscal risk sharing are at work in most currency areas. In contrast to the euro area, countries such as
Brazil, Canada, Germany, Switzerland, and the U.S. offer ex ante insurance through a variety of formalized mechanisms.
The literature on the benefits of fiscal risk sharing suggests that, on average, about 10-20 percent of regional income
shocks are absorbed through sharing arrangements. This helps prevent contagion and reduces the need for costly ex
post bailouts. Among the tools employed are:
Financial stability: Common financial stability frameworks with a common, area-wide backstop such as the FDIC in
the U.S. that ensure localized banking stresses do not develop into systemic crises (see Box 2).
Transfer and tax schemes: Transfers from the central (or federal) government to regions (Figure 1a) and/or tax
sharing arrangements between regions, or between regions and the center, account for a significant share of
regional income in many currency areas. Although the institutional arrangements can differ, these transfers often
respond to cyclical developments at the regional level, providing insurance against idiosyncratic shocks.
Public goods: Important public goods and services are often provided by the center but financed through regional
taxes (see Figure 1b below). This entails fiscal risk sharing in case of an adverse shock: the benefit of a centrallyprovided public good is unchanged, but a region’s relative tax contribution will fall during a downturn.






Figure 1a. Transfers from the Center

Figure 1b. Central Provision of Public Goods

Gross Transfers from Central Government to Subnational Governments
(2005-2007 average, percent of subnational GDP)

100

35

Share of Central Government Expenditure in General Government Expenditure
(in percent, by function, consolidated, 2005-10 average)
Belgium

100

Germany

30

25

Spain

80

Max

France

80

Italy

Median

Netherlands

Min

60

Sweden

60

United Kingdom

20

Switzerland
Average

40

15

10

20

40

20

5
0

0
Defence

0
EU 1/

Brazil

Mexico

USA

Australia

Canada 2/

China

Public order
and safety

Education

Social
protection

Health

Environment
protection

Sources: Eurostat; IMF staff calculations.

Sources: Eurostat, McHugh; and Poghosyan, 2012.

Note: Excludes tax sharing arrangements. 1/ For EU, spending of EU budget, data for 2008. 2/ Excludes region of Nunavut which receives 77
percent of GDP in gross transfers.

But fiscal integration also requires strong governance arrangements to address moral hazard. As a rule,
instruments of fiscal risk sharing are complemented by governance frameworks that limit fiscal sovereignty at the
regional level and help to ensure fiscal behavior in accordance with commonly agreed standards. For example, where
public goods are provided centrally, the center usually has tax authority over the entire region. Where transfers are a
significant part of regional income, the center often has the right to intervene more directly in the regions’ public
finances. In addition, many currency areas use legally enforceable fiscal rules to ensure that regional fiscal positions are
sustainable. Some currency areas have a bailout mechanism, while others rely on no-bailout provisions to guard against
moral hazard. However, even where no-bailout provisions exist, their credibility is supported by a minimum level of risk
sharing that protects basic government functions and helps absorb regional shocks.

6

Prepared by Fabian Bornhorst. See Selected Issues Paper for further details.

12

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

14.
As a result, the pernicious feedback loop between banks and sovereigns, as well as
market fragmentation, have been accentuated during the crisis. In a number of countries, the
transfer of banking liabilities to the public balance sheet is continuing, while worsening public
finances are still causing direct losses on sovereign bonds. In some cases, the necessary provision of
ECB liquidity has led to further sovereign bond purchases by banks, deepening this link even more.
Where perceptions of sovereign and banking risks have been increasing, financing conditions have
deteriorated markedly, accelerating the re-fragmentation of the euro area’s financial market.
A banking union would help address the underlying problem…
15.

A euro area banking union could combine three main elements:



A pan-European deposit guarantee scheme. A deposit guarantee scheme can increase
depositor confidence by reducing the dependence of banks on their sovereigns and thereby
also reduce the risk of sudden deposit movements across the currency area. Eventually, such
a scheme could (and should) be funded by a levy on the industry but, to be effective, it
would need ready recourse to additional funding in times of stress, from a common pool of
government-provided resources or—for the euro area— an ECB credit line.



A pan-European bank resolution mechanism. A bank resolution authority, established with
powers to bail in private creditors and support directly the resolution of banks, would
facilitate an orderly wind-down of failing institutions and smooth the deleveraging process
across the region. As with the deposit scheme, resolution could be backed by a common
fund financed by an industry levy with recourse to government-provided resources or the
ECB.



Common supervision. In addition to deposit guarantee and bank resolution schemes, an
effective banking union will need the support of a common supervisory framework to foster
stability and deter fragmentation. The framework would be most effective if it encompassed
the entire banking system but could at first focus on cross-border banks and large
systemically-important financial institutions in the euro area. To this end, the June 28-29
summit plan to establish a single supervisory mechanism for euro area banks—to be
considered by the Council by end-2012—is an important first step toward a banking union.
But it will be important that the necessary decisions be taken and implemented quickly.

16.
Several intermediate steps can pave the way for—and add to the credibility of—a
banking union.


In particular, the recently proposed EU framework for harmonized national bank resolution
processes and deposit insurance could become a helpful building block toward a banking
union if fully implemented on an accelerated schedule. The new framework can reduce the
cost to taxpayers from future bank failures by providing strong powers to resolution
authorities, including the power to bail-in unsecured creditors, thus reducing the ‘too-bigto-fail’ subsidy.



The existing EFSF/ESM framework could provide immediate financing for the common
deposit insurance and resolution frameworks before industry contributions are available. In
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

13

EURO AREA POLICIES

this regard, the use of EFSF/ESM resources for these purposes could be linked to advances in
area-wide supervision, similar to the recent decision to consider direct bank recapitalization
by the ESM.
Strong coordination of macroprudential policies would also mark progress in the right
direction. In this regard, the recent compromise draft of the CRDIV, which provides greater
flexibility at the national level by allowing countries to impose stricter capital buffers, offers a
helpful balance between the needs of the single rule book and financial stability concerns of
national authorities. A common approach to capital and liquidity requirements is essential,
with a strong role for pan-European institutions such as the ESRB and EBA.



17.
Fast progress is more critical for the euro area than for the EU. Although the banking
union should be consistent with European Union directives, it is particularly urgent for the euro area.
This is because deposits move more easily within a currency area, and a deposit guarantee scheme
covering all euro area depository institutions would help reassure retail depositors that their savings
are safe and avoid sudden depositor flight. In the same way, a euro area bank resolution authority
would weaken the bank-sovereign feedback loops operating within the currency union. At the same
time, to align supervisory incentives within the euro area, the ECB could play the role of common
supervisor. And to further strengthen its financial markets role, the ECB could also be given explicit
responsibility for financial stability and full lender-of-last-resort functions, thereby eliminating banksovereign linkages present in the current Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) scheme.
…and steps toward a fiscal union would be helpful as well
18.
More fiscal integration would support the banking union. Elements of a fiscal union
would already be present in a banking union as described above: the provision of common
backstops for deposit insurance and bank resolution is a form of fiscal risk sharing. And unified
regulatory and supervisory frameworks provide an important element of governance in the form of
delegation of national sovereignty to the center.7
19.
Fiscal integration means stronger governance arrangements that help to ensure fiscal
behavior in accordance with commonly agreed standards. The Fiscal Compact and the proposed
“Two Pack” are important steps in this direction. The Compact re-commits signatories to the fiscal
discipline of the original Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) while offering some necessary flexibility in
the shorter term (see ¶26 and the Selected Issues Paper). If implemented well, it can go some way
to reducing fiscally-generated risks while limiting the adverse impact of fiscal consolidation on
demand. The “two pack” will reinforce the influence of the European Commission in shaping
national budgetary plans and oversight of budgetary execution. This would better align national
fiscal policy with common objectives.

7

See 2012 Selected Issues Paper for further details

14

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

20.
More ex ante fiscal risk sharing would ensure that member economies can cope better
with macroeconomic shocks. Some degree of fiscal risk sharing is already being achieved through
crisis management facilities (the EFSM, EFSF, and ESM). But it is provided after a crisis has hit, which
can make it expensive. Even worse, it can give rise to recurring market doubts about the adequacy
of available resources. By contrast, ex ante risk sharing is commonplace in other currency areas (e.g.,
Switzerland, the United States). In addition to fully-developed banking unions, these areas feature
significant fiscal risk sharing tools, such as transfers from federal to state budgets and central
provision of public goods (e.g., social security or infrastructure).
21.
Fiscal risk sharing can be achieved in different ways, but all approaches would benefit
from a clear roadmap. Ultimately, helping countries smooth adjustment to adverse shocks might
require large resources at the center. But reaching this point will imply a form of political union with
a substantial reorientation of sovereignty and burden sharing, requiring changes to the EU treaty
and national constitutions. This will take time. But the process could start now, with a clear
commitment to a broad-based dialogue about what a fuller fiscal union would imply for the
sovereignty of member states and the accountability of the center. It should deliver a schedule of
discussion, decision, and implementation.
22.
The path toward more fiscal integration could start with a limited-but-scalable
introduction of common debt, with appropriate governance safeguards. Such euro area debt
securities could, at first, be restricted to shorter maturities of small size, and be conditional on more
centralized control (e.g., veto powers over national deficits, the pledging of national tax revenues).
Among the many proposals discussed in this area, “Eurobills” come closest to such an approach,
while “the redemption fund” is also limited. Common bond financing could also be used to provide
the backstops for the common frameworks within the banking union.8

B. Restoring Strong and Balanced Growth
A forceful common response would bolster growth in the short run…
23.
The ECB can provide further defenses against an escalation of the crisis. These could
include policies to support demand in the short run and fend off downside risks to inflation, as well
as measures to ensure that monetary transmission, currently impaired by financial stress in some
countries, operates well again across the euro area (Box 4).


8

Interest rate reductions. Economic weakness and downside risks to inflation in the euro area
warrant further reductions in the main policy rates. Although the room for such reductions is
limited, they would deliver a strong signaling effect and, in addition, provide some direct
near-term support to weaker banks by reducing indexed borrowing costs under existing
LTROs.

See the 2012 Selected Issues Paper for further details.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

15

EURO AREA POLICIES

Box 4. The Impaired Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area9
Since the start of the crisis, lending conditions have varied substantially across the euro area. For instance, nonfinancial corporate lending rates have risen sharply in the periphery, but have fallen in the core countries over the
past year.
1. Retail bank lending rates

This is partly due to increased sovereign stress. Banks’ wholesale funding
and lending rates are priced off (domestic) sovereign yields. Since the euro
area started to experience periods of sovereign stress in late 2010, the
impact of ECB policy interest rate changes on domestic bond yields has
weakened as financial markets differentiate more strongly between core and
periphery countries.
Weak bank capital and liquidity positions contributed to the slowdown in
lending. Specifically, based on a panel estimation using data for 100 euro area
banks covering the period Q1:2007-Q1:2012, staff analysis reveals the
following. First, banks’ quarterly bank lending growth was significantly higher
for larger, more profitable, more liquid and better capitalized banks. Second,
banks with a higher loan/deposit ratio mismatch (reflecting business/funding
model risk or leverage) and higher CDS spreads (i.e., more risky banks) lent
significantly less. Finally, bank lending was substantially higher in countries
with higher GDP growth and higher house prices.
At the same time, reductions in the policy rate and larger liquidity
provision appear to have supported bank lending. The empirical analysis
suggests that ECB policy rate reductions were associated with higher bank
lending, and reliance on ECB funding cushioned bank lending. A higher ECBEONIA interest rate spread, which is often viewed as an alternative indicator of
monetary policy (but also captures liquidity and counterparty stress), was
associated with lower bank lending.
The empirical results suggest that improving bank soundness and
relieving sovereign stress will help underpin lending in the euro area.

9

Prepared by Nico Valckx.

16

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

7

and the ECB policy rate

6
5
4
3
2

Core (NFC)
Core (mortgages)
Periphery (NFC)
Periphery (mortgages)
ECB policy rate

1
0
2007

2009

2011

Source: ECB, staff computations. Periphery
includes Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain,
Italy. Rates are volume-weighted.

1.0

2. Slowdown in policy
interest rate pass-through
NFC shortterm

crisis

The pass-through of policy to lending rates has weakened, especially in
the periphery. Before the crisis intensified, lending rates broadly tracked
changes in the ECB policy rate, albeit to varying degrees. But since late 2010,
retail lending rates started to rise while policy rates remained low. Staff
analysis confirms that both the speed of adjustment and the long-run impact
of ECB policy rate changes on a variety of retail interest rates have declined
across many euro area countries.

NFC

0.5 long-term
mortgages
consumer
credit

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

pre-crisis

1.5

2.0

Source: ECB, IMF staff computations.
Interest rate pass-through is estimated from
monthly data (pre-crisis 1997/03-2007/02 and
crisis 2007/03-2012/02) using a standard error
correction model. Points below the diagonal are
markets that have experienced a slowdown in the
long-run pass-through.

EURO AREA POLICIES



Quantitative easing (QE). The ECB could achieve further monetary easing through a
transparent QE program encompassing sizable sovereign bond purchases, possibly
preannounced over a given period of time. Buying a representative portfolio of long-term
government bonds—e.g., defined equitably across the euro area by GDP weights—would
also provide a measure of added stability to stressed sovereign markets. However, QE would
likely also contribute to lower yields in already “low yield” countries, including Germany.



More SMP purchases. Additional and clearly communicated SMP purchases could ensure the
transmission of monetary easing where sovereign bond markets are subject to increased
stress.10 With the possible exception of Greece, SMP purchases have been relatively small
compared with the outstanding debt stock, in principle increasing the scope for additional
intervention. And a well-communicated re-activation of SMP purchases would likely carry
strong signaling effects which might mitigate the need for very large purchases. The benefits
from lower yields would also ease collateral constraints on official and interbank lending
facilities.



Further liquidity provision. This could encompass additional multi-year LTRO facilities,
coupled with adjusted collateral requirements, if needed—including a broadened collateral
base and/or a lowering of haircuts—to address localized shortages. The associated credit
risk to the ECB would be manageable in view of its strong balance sheet and high levels of
capital provisioning. Nevertheless, one of the disadvantages of the LTRO facility is that it
tends to strengthen sovereign-bank links (see Box 5).

24.
Clarification of the ECB’s seniority status would make its crisis response more effective.
Market concerns about the subordination of private sovereign bond holdings should be addressed
by clarifying the seniority status of ECB’s holdings. Similar considerations apply to the ESM. A clear
commitment to accept equal status with private sector claims, as in the case of Spain, would
enhance the effectiveness of official sector crisis management.
25.
If the crisis escalates, policymakers will have to stand ready to support the euro area
banking system, including through a flexible use of the European firewall. Clarity on common
support—including, foremost by the ECB, but possibly also by announcing a pan-European deposit
insurance scheme—may be necessary to support depositor confidence. In addition, to effectively
reduce bank sovereign links and promote confidence, the EFSF/ESM facilities should be ratified
quickly and empowered with sufficient flexibility and resources to support banks of member states.
The June 28-29 summit decision to consider direct bank recapitalization marks important progress
toward flexibility. In addition, as discussed in ¶16, the existing EFSF/ESM framework could provide
financing for common deposit insurance and resolution frameworks in the short run.

10

See 2012 Selected Issues Paper for further details.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

17

EURO AREA POLICIES

Box 5. Further Use of Long-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs)?11
The intense funding difficulties for euro area banks prompted significant liquidity support from the ECB.
Through two three-year LTROs and a further relaxation in its collateral rules, the ECB allotted €1 trillion to euro area
banks, with a net increase in liquidity of about €500 billion. For the second LTRO, the ECB expanded eligible collateral to
include additional performing credit claims (i.e., bank loans), after widening the eligibility criteria in previous years.
But further ECB liquidity support may be necessary if bank funding conditions continue to deteriorate. The total
wholesale debt roll-over need of the euro area banks is estimated at about €630 billion for 2012, some of which has
been pre-financed via the 3-year LTROs and some will be refinanced in the market. However, further long-term LTROs
may be required if funding conditions deteriorate or if banks face withdrawals. But can banks generate additional
eligible collateral to obtain ECB funding?
According to the ECB, banks on the whole would be able to generate sufficient collateral under the current ECB
eligibility criteria to meet additional refinancing needs. LTRO borrowings are around €1.1 trillion (end May), but
marketable collateral eligible for Eurosystem operations (including LTROs) is about €13 trillion (not all held by banks).
And there may be substantial non-marketable collateral, evidenced by the €3 trillion pre-pledged collateral (typically
non-marketable). This could allow borrowing of up to €2.4 trillion (assuming haircuts of 20 percent).
However, some individual banks—mainly in the periphery countries—could be short of collateral. The Greek and
Irish banks already need to use the national ELA, which has a wider collateral pool. In Spain, assuming the stability of
domestic deposits, collateral and liquidity buffers appear sufficient at the system level, but collateral posted at the ECB
is vulnerable to ratings downgrades and margin calls while the capacity to generate new collateral is weakening.
Although the LTROs have provided a sizable cushion, the phasing-out of ECB funding will likely prove problematic if
market access does not improve. Indeed, liquidity stress tests in the context of Spain’s FSAP show that liquidity risk can
potentially become the biggest risk should ECB support not be renewed.
A further relaxation of collateral rules as well as a rethinking of collateral pricing and haircut policies may be
necessary to ensure liquidity support to (solvent) banks and prevent liquidity risks from escalating into
insolvency risks. In late 2011, among other measures, the ECB allowed national central banks to accept as collateral
additional performing credit claims (i.e., bank loans). More recently, it further amended rating thresholds and eligibility
requirements for certain asset-backed securities (ABSs) to improve banks’ access to the liquidity operations.
However, additional steps may be needed to cover liquidity risk of the collateral it accepts. The ECB assesses the
value of collateral using market prices (or uses a “mark to model” approach if a market price is not available) and then
calculates the haircut to allow for sale of the collateral within a short period without loss to the ECB. This feature is
unhelpfully pro-cyclical, and may not be necessary since the ECB does not need to sell collateral quickly.12 A fire sale of
assets in a systemic liquidity crisis would indeed require large haircuts, but when imposed as part of the LTRO they
could substantially reduce liquidity crisis and asset sales at distressed prices, exactly the situation the LTRO is meant to
prevent.

11

Prepared by Simon Gray and Jianping Zhou.

12

The contrast between the ECB and the Swiss National bank (SNB) approaches to haircuts when on-lending USD

borrowed from the Fed is interesting in this regard. The ECB required a haircut of 20 percent, but with no variation
margining (later reduced to 12 percent with weekly margining); the SNB required a zero initial haircut, but used daily
variation margining.

18

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

26.
To help cushion the adverse impact of fiscal consolidation on demand, policy
measures would need to be as growth-friendly as possible. To reduce deficits and debt that have
risen sharply in recent years, most euro area countries plan significant fiscal adjustment over the
medium term. In this setting, the overarching challenge is to implement consolidation plans without
exacerbating the adverse feedback loops with the real economy. Countries where market pressure is
high have little choice but to proceed rapidly with consolidation. But the adjustment elsewhere
should be conducted at a steady underlying pace that balances the need to bring down deficits and
to support the recovery. To ensure that unanticipated shocks from the real economy do not
automatically set off a damaging wave of further cuts, it is important to focus the fiscal targets on
structural, rather than nominal deficits. This calls for exploiting the flexibility built into the Fiscal
Compact, as discussed in the Selected Issues Paper. Moreover, anchoring consolidation efforts in
fully-specified multi-year plans, with fiscal measures identified in advance, will increase their
credibility, mitigating the negative effect on demand.

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations

…and support continued national adjustment
27.
Timely and credible actions at the national level remain an integral part of the crisis
response. Although needs vary across crisis countries, transparent and comprehensive strategies to
recapitalize viable banks should be implemented without delay. In this context, the recently
announced Eurogroup support for the Spanish banking system is timely. Acting quickly to
strengthen the banking system through the ongoing independent assessments of banks’ loan
books, by dealing with legacy assets and by strengthening supervision and regulatory frameworks,
will help restore confidence and alleviate financial market pressure. In addition, policy actions to
restore the health of public finances and structural measures (labor and product market reforms) to
enhance competitiveness could support confidence and anchor medium-term expectations (see
Table 3 on IMF key policy recommendations).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

19

EURO AREA POLICIES

Rectifying external imbalances will be crucial for the euro area
28.

The euro area as a whole has been close to balance.



The current account balance of the Euro area was, on average, zero, for the period from
1999–2006. Since the 2008, the balance has dipped slightly, reflecting greater-than-average
deterioration in southern economies.



On the capital account side, portfolio flows, in particular into debt, have supported the
current account deficit as cross-border financial flows declined with the crisis. Equity
balances were substantially affected by valuations during 2008-2009 but have since
recovered. Portfolio investments by financial institutions have not recovered, as banks have
reduced lending abroad.



The net foreign asset position had deteriorated, to nearly -17 percent of GDP, but has since
recovered to -12 percent of GDP. Estimates of the cyclically adjusted current account
suggest that the NFA position will stay relatively constant going forward.

29.
Overall, the Euro area external position appears moderately weaker than implied by
medium-term fundamentals and desired policies. Staff analysis suggests that a modest
improvement in the current account, in the order of 1 percentage point of GDP, would be desirable
to ensure external sustainability.
30.
Consequently, the euro is assessed to be slightly overvalued. Analysis based on
fundamental equilibrium models, desired current account adjustment, and aggregation of staff
views of individual member states suggests that the euro is overvalued in real terms by 0 to 5
percent.13
31.
But individual member states built up large external imbalances. From the inception of
the euro, current account deficits by individual member states cumulated to nearly 20 percent of
euro area GDP in 2011, while surpluses cumulated to over 20 percent during the same period.
During the crisis, external balances of deficit economies have narrowed, to -10 percent in the case of
Greece, and all the way to balance in the case of Ireland. However, such reductions have largely
been the result of falling imports as a result of sharp declines in domestic demand. Moreover,
comparatively little adjustment has taken place in costs: unit labor costs of deficit economies such as
Greece, Portugal, and Spain declined, on average, by 1 to 2½ percent per year in 2010–11.

13

Note that, since this analysis was conducted, the value of the euro has depreciated by nearly 2 percent in real

terms.

20

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations

Sources: IMF, and Information Notice System database

32.
Ensuring external sustainability implies more substantial real exchange rate
adjustments for individual member economies. Although only a modest adjustment is needed for
the Euro area as a whole, some individual euro area economies require more substantial adjustment.
For example, in the cases of Italy and Spain, the required adjustments are in the order of 5 to 10
percent and 10 to 15 percent, respectively.
33.

Structural policies throughout the region could help address external imbalances.



In deficit economies, improving competitiveness of tradable sectors requires policies that
help reduce unit labor costs, such as labor market flexibility, reducing entry costs in product
markets, and raising labor productivity. Non-price competitiveness may also play a
significant role—this implies, for example, microeconomic reforms that make it easier for
small firms to expand into foreign markets.



In surplus economies, product market reforms—especially in the services sectors—are a
priority. Improvements in disposable incomes in surplus economies could have some
beneficial spillover effects—via improvements in external demand—to deficit economies.
Equivalently, improvements in non-tradables productivity would be matched, ideally, by
increases in nominal wages, which, in conjunction with a reduction in unit labor costs in
deficit economies, will facilitate relative price adjustment.

34.
In the short run, price adjustment can play a role in addressing external imbalances.
Wage and asset price increases in the north would
be part of the natural process of rebalancing the
sources of growth, and would help to appropriately
reduce high current account surpluses. Larger
inflation differentials would also facilitate the
needed relative price adjustment by the south. In
addition, for a given level of euro area inflation,
higher inflation in the north would reduce the risk
of debt-deflation spirals in the south.
Source: IMF staff simulations

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

21

EURO AREA POLICIES

Structural reforms are also needed to raise trend growth across the euro area
35.
Weak trend growth has fuelled the crisis. An important reason why bank and sovereign
problems have proven difficult to resolve is that debt dynamics are fragile in an environment of low
growth and poor growth prospects. At the same time, private capital has fled some economies,
reflecting increasing doubts about the ability of member states to service debt. And there has been
a corresponding increase in demand for official funding.
36.
As the crisis continues, the risks of stagnation grow larger. As unemployment has risen,
the proportion of youth and long-term unemployed has increased disproportionately in those euro
area economies hardest hit by the crisis. As more new workers fail to enter the workforce and obtain
skills, and as existing unemployed workers lose skills, the risk grows that potential output will be
lower.
37.
Raising trend growth will be challenging because of low productivity and
demographic presures. As with most advanced economies, euro area output growth has been
steadily falling over the past 50 years. Compared with its best-performing peers, however, the
deterioration in euro area growth has been worse. From a growth accounting perspective, the facts
are stark. Productivity growth has weakened over time, and effective labor utilization has been
relatively low. Moreover, euro area states face particularly challenging demographic trends, with low
and declining population growth implying substantial increases within the space of a generation in
the ratio of dependents to those of working age.
38.
Labor and product market reforms can raise total factor productivity, growth, and
employment. Studies suggest four aspects are critical: changes to labor market institutions to
improve the performance of the labor market; product market reforms that raise competition and
lower regulatory burdens; tax reforms to switch away from labor income to consumption tax
revenues and smooth marginal taxes to raise labor participation; and pension reforms to ease
revenue burdens and encourage increased labor effort.
39.
The gains from reforms are potentially large. Staff estimates suggest that eliminating half
of euro area countries’ gaps with OECD best
practice in labor market, product market, tax,
and pension policies could raise output by 5
percent over 5 years.14 Moreover, such reforms
are applicable to all euro area states, not just
those that currently have the lowest growth. This
offers the potential for significant spillover
benefits as higher growth in any one country
benefits others—estimates suggest they could

14

Sources: Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model; and IMF staff
simulations

See “Fostering Growth in Europe Now”, available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=26006.0

22

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

account for one quarter of the total gains in growth.
40.
But the full effects are likely to take time to materialize, which argues for short-run
demand support. Some reforms can have immediate effects, if implemented well, particularly active
labor market policies (e.g., retraining). There are many reasons for such lags: for example, some
reforms necessarily take time to implement; reallocating resources across sectors is costly; and the
reform process can create uncertainty that deters long-term commitments for a period. Reforms
might even have negative effects on employment in the short run (especially if focused first at labor
market measures without correspondingly-deep product market reforms). And in the current
situation where economic slack is large, some reforms might initially reduce disposable income if
unemployment rises. Thus, support for aggregate demand in the short run would be crucial to avoid
stagnation, as discussed in ¶23 and ¶26.

THE AUTHORITIES’ VIEWS
41.
There was very broad agreement between staff and the authorities on the scale of the
crisis, and the need for clear statements on the long-run architecture of the monetary union.
The authorities—the ECB and European Commission—stressed, in particular, the importance of
establishing deeper monetary integration through a banking union and setting out a credible
architecture for more fiscal integration to help stabilize the immediate crisis and anchor
expectations on the viability of EMU.
42.
The authorities broadly agreed with the overall assessment of economic developments
in the euro area, and the strong downside risks to growth. They noted a rebalancing in the
composition of growth away from domestic demand toward net trade, resulting mainly from a
compression in import demand. They also emphasized strong headwinds to growth from ongoing
private balance sheet deleveraging, credit supply constraints, fiscal consolidation, and still-weak
confidence. The authorities also argued that these factors could be further aggravated by sustained
financial market stress. Nevertheless, they currently project a recovery in domestic demand from the
middle of this year, driven by improving real incomes and confidence, rising external demand, and
lower global commodity prices.
43.
There are somewhat elevated risks to inflation this year, but price pressures are
projected to decline. Despite weakened demand and staff’s emphasis on subdued core inflation,
the ECB stressed that the impact from higher energy prices, a weaker euro, and indirect tax effects
will keep inflationary pressures high in the near-term. Looking ahead, the ECB expects inflationary
pressures to decline with weaker commodity prices, sluggish growth in the periphery countries, but
do not expect strong disinflationary pressures, particularly given what they described as still very
well-anchored inflation expectations.
44.
Increased financial market fragmentation is impeding the effectiveness of monetary
policy. In view of the strong policy response to the crisis and downside risks to growth, the
authorities considered the current monetary policy stance to be broadly appropriate. With policy
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

23

EURO AREA POLICIES

rates at historical lows, the ECB remains cautious on the benefits of further easing, emphasizing that
divergences in both liquidity conditions and market lending rates within the euro area weaken the
interest rate channel of monetary policy. In this context, the authorities argued that there were limits
to the effectiveness of additional unconventional measures, but did not exclude their use to prevent
further contagion should the crisis escalate. Against this, they noted that further euro weakness
could stoke inflationary pressures and unseat expectations.
45.
Ongoing fiscal consolidation efforts—anchored by structural targets—are needed to
ensure sustainable debt trajectories and restore market confidence. There was also agreement
with the European Commission that the 3 percent nominal deficit target was binding for several
countries in the near-term, and that flexibility embedded in the SGP/Fiscal Compact should be
exercised if slippages were the result of negative growth surprises. In this context, there was also a
consensus that emphasis should be placed on structural, rather than nominal, fiscal targets despite
the well-known difficulties in measuring the former.
46.
There was broad agreement that a concerted move toward a banking union is urgently
needed to ensure the viability of the monetary union. The authorities emphasized that this
should encompass area-wide supervision, and deposit insurance and resolution frameworks with
common backstops. In addition, it was emphasized that the recently-published EU crisis
management directive is an important step toward establishing an effective supranational financial
stability framework. Although the authorities acknowledged that achieving a banking union is critical
for the euro area, they stressed that it should be developed to preserve the single European market
at the EU level. Discussions also showed broad agreement that the flexibility embedded in the ESM
treaty could and should be used to establish new financial instruments within the framework,
including allowing the ESM to directly inject equity into banks.
47.
A credible vision for more fiscal integration is needed to raise confidence and anchor
the crisis effort. The authorities concurred that a commitment to a roadmap for fiscal integration
would be more credible if it includes intermediate steps featuring elements of more centralized
governance—such as a strong implementation of the “two-pack”—and some limited form of joint
borrowing. It was agreed that meaningful fiscal integration would take time, but should entail a
stronger center with enhanced fiscal responsibilities, sufficiently large resources, and proper
democratic controls and oversight to help contain budget shortfalls at the national level.
48.
Well-executed reforms could yield substantial benefits in terms of enhancing
competitiveness, correcting intra-euro area imbalances, and raising output. The authorities
stressed the importance of assessing competitiveness in terms of unit labor costs, or productivity,
rather than relative price developments alone. Moreover, they emphasized that rebalancing within
the euro area was proceeding, albeit currently mainly driven by import compression. In this regard,
the authorities agreed with staff that reforms targeted at labor and product markets would help
restore competitiveness and external balances over time.
49.
There was broad agreement with staff’s analysis on the significance of the global
spillovers from an intensification of the crisis in the euro area. The authorities agreed that staff’s
24

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

focus on financial rather than trade spillovers was appropriate. However, they noted that the analysis
depends on the length of the shocks that are imposed, as well as the pass-through of sovereign
spreads to private sector borrowing costs. The authorities also indicated that the growth impacts
appeared too large, and questioned whether the results have taken into account the flight to safety,
notably to German assets.

STAFF APPRAISAL
50.
The financial and economic environment continues to deteriorate. Investors are
withholding funding from member states most in need, moving capital to safe havens and driving
risk premiums to new records. Demand is weakening and unemployment increasing across the euro
area. Lower growth and heightened market stress are compounding the difficulties in reducing debt
burdens. The risk of stagnation and long-term damage to potential growth will increase as
unemployed workers lose skills and new workers find it difficult to join the active labor force.
51.
Important actions have been taken. The ECB has lowered policy rates and conducted
special liquidity interventions to address immediate bank funding pressures and avert an even more
rapid escalation of the crisis. And the larger European and global firewall will provide more liquidity
insurance to sovereigns, while the ongoing reform of fiscal governance, especially the adoption of
the Fiscal Compact, will help strengthen budgetary discipline. National governments have also
embarked on fiscal consolidation and reaffirmed their commitment to debt sustainability and deficit
targets. Most recently, the June 28-29 summit set in motion an important process toward a single
supervisory mechanism, followed by the possibility of using the ESM to recapitalize banks directly.
52.
But the crisis calls for a stronger and more collective effort. Downward spirals between
sovereigns, banks, and the real economy are stronger than ever. As concerns about banks’ solvency
have increased—because of large sovereign exposures and weak growth prospects in many parts of
the euro area—the effectiveness of liquidity operations has diminished. Sovereigns, in turn, are
struggling to backstop weak banks on their own. Absent collective mechanisms to break these
adverse feedback loops, the crisis has spilled across euro area countries. Contagion from further
intensification of the crisis—including acute stress in funding markets and tensions involving
systemically-important banks—would be sizable globally. And spillovers to neighboring EU
economies would be particularly large. A more determined and forceful collective response is
needed.
53.
A strong commitment toward a robust and complete monetary union would help
restore faith in the viability of EMU. This should encompass a credible path to a banking union
and greater fiscal integration, with better governance and more risk sharing. However, achieving this
goal will take time and hence requires a clear timeline, with concrete intermediate actions to set the
guide posts and anchor public expectations.
54.
The immediate priority is a banking union for the euro area. The proposed EU
framework for harmonized national bank resolution processes and the progress toward a single
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

25

EURO AREA POLICIES

supervisory mechanism are appropriate first steps. But they need to go further. A deposit guarantee
scheme with a common backstop needs to be established at the regional level to help break the
links between domestic banks and their sovereigns, and support depositor confidence. A common
bank resolution authority is also needed, backed by a common resolution fund to ensure burden
sharing and to limit fiscal costs. These efforts should be supported by a single supervisory
mechanism (as envisaged by the June 28-29 summit) and a macro-prudential framework to forestall
further financial fragmentation. Although a banking union is desirable for the European Union, it is
crucial for the euro area.
55.
More fiscal integration, with risk sharing supported by stronger central governance,
can reduce the tendency for economic shocks in one country to spill over to the euro area as a
whole. Ultimately, this could mean sufficiently large resources at the center, matched by proper
democratic controls and oversight, to help insure budget shortfalls at the national level. Getting to
this endpoint will take time. But the process can start with a commitment to a broad-based dialogue
about what a fuller fiscal union would imply for the sovereignty of member states and the
accountability of the center. This should deliver a schedule for discussion, decision, and
implementation.
56.
Introduction of a limited form of common debt, with appropriate governance
safeguards, can provide an intermediate step towards fiscal integration and risk sharing. Such
debt securities could, at first, be restricted to shorter maturities and small size and be conditional on
more centralized control (e.g., limited to countries that deliver on policy commitments; veto powers
over national deficits; pledging of national tax revenues). Common bonds/bills financing could, for
example, be used to provide the backstops for the common frameworks within the banking union.
57.
To restore growth across the union, long-standing structural rigidities need to be
tackled to raise long-term growth prospects. In many countries, labor market reforms are needed
to raise participation and address disparities in protection that confine “outsiders” to low-wage,
temporary jobs. Southern Europe needs to increase competitiveness in the tradables sector. In
addition, targeted investment in infrastructure and human capital will support growth and
employment. In northern Europe, product market reforms would help generate a more vibrant
services sector and help raise overall productivity.
58.
Policy efforts should also focus on improving competitiveness, in particular within the
euro area. The euro is assessed to be broadly in line with fundamentals, but there are substantial
competitiveness gaps between countries. Services sector reforms in the surplus economies could
improve disposable incomes and lead to higher external demand, including for deficit economies.
Lowering unit labor costs in the tradables sector is essential for deficit countries. This means
productivity-enhancing reforms (e.g., lowering barriers to entry, making it easier for small firms to
expand into foreign markets) and labor market measures that ensure nominal wage developments
are aligned with productivity growth. To foster relative price adjustment between the North and the
South, monetary policy should ensure that overall inflation does not drop far below two percent for
the euro area as a whole, while allowing for larger inflation differentials between North and South.

26

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

59.
The global economic outlook is weakening, reflecting—at least in part—the fragile
situation in the euro area. Given Europe’s important role in the global economy, it is important
that euro area policymakers strengthen the crisis response through further decisive and collective
action. Setting out a credible long-term vision for the monetary union and boosting the near-term
crisis response will provide much needed support to the global economic recovery.
60.
The staff proposes that the next consultation on euro area policies in the context of the
Article IV obligations of member countries follow the standard 12-month cycle.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

27

EURO AREA POLICIES

Figure 1. Short-term Activity Indicators
Early this year, some short-term activity indicators showed tentative signs of stabilization at low levels
and amid considerable volatility, while performance has differed markedly across countries.
130
130
Industrial Production Excl.
Business Confidence
125
125
Construction
(ESI, long-term average=100)
120
120
(2006 = 100)
115
115
110

110

100

100

90
80

Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

70
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12
25

20

15

Unemployment Rate
(Percent)
Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

90

105

95

95

85

Euro area
Germany

80

75

70

Italy
65
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12

25

30
20

20

15

France

Household Confidence
(Percentage points; balance of opinions)

85
75
65

30
20

10

10

0

0
-10

-10

-20

-20
10

10

105

-30
-40

Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

-30
-40
-50

5

-50
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12

65

65

55

55

55

55

45

45

45

45

35

35

25

25
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12

5
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12

65

35

PMI: Composite Output
(SA, 50+=Expansion)

Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

25
Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08 Jan-09 Jan-10 Jan-11 Jan-12
Sources: Haver Analytics; Markit; and Eurostat.

28

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

PMI: Composite New Orders
(SA, 50+=Expansion)

Euro area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

65

35

25

EURO AREA POLICIES

Figure 2: Euro Area Inflation Developments
Inflation is coming down as base effects from past
food and energy price increases disappear...
4

...and administered price and indirect tax increases
do not translate into higher core inflation
108

Services
Energy
Nonen.Ind.
Unproc. Fd
Processed fd

3
2

Administered prices
Headline
Constant taxes
Core

105

1

104

0

103
102
101

-2
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

As for underlying price pressures, firm input prices
and profits have fallen over the past year...
Domestic PPI and Profit Margin
(year-on-year percentage change)

8

100
Jan-10

15

7

5
12

2

Jan-11

Jul-11

Jan-12

Labor Costs
(Year-on-year percent change)
Unit labour costs
Compensation per employee
Hourly labour costs
Negotiated wages

6

4

Jul-10

...and also wage pressures remain contained

6

4
3

0

2

-2

9

-4
-6
-10
2008

2009

2010

2011

1
0

Industry Excl Construction & Energy
Intermediate Goods
Profit margin (percent, rhs)

-8

3.0

(Jan.2010=100)

106

-1

10

Euro Area Inflation Indices

107

-1
6
2012

Inflation expectations remain well-anchored , but some
market indicators signal much lower inflation ahead

-2
2001

130

Market and Survey-based Inflation
2.5

125

2.0

120

1.5

115

1.0

5-year forward 5 years ahead break-even
inflation rate
Consensus 5-year inflation expectation

0.5

5-year inflation rate expectation

2003

2005

2009

2010

2011

2012

2011

Base Money and M3
(Jan 2007=100)

110
M3
M3 increasing at 4.5%

100
2008

2009

And broad M3 money growth signals no imminent
inflation risks

105

0.0

2007

Jan-07 Nov-07 Sep-08

Jul-09

May-10 Mar-11

Jan-12

Sources: Eurostat; ECB; European Commision; Haver Analytics; IMF, World Economic Outlook, and staff calculations.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

29

EURO AREA POLICIES

Figure 3a. Fiscal Outlook in the Euro Area: 2012 April WEO
With 2011 deficit and debt levels well above targets...

...planned fiscal consolidation is substantial ...
7

180

3 percent of GDP Deficit
Limit

IRL

ESP

CY

140

IT

120

PRT
BEL

100

FR

EA

DEU 80

AT

NLD

MT
FIN

SI
SVK

60
40

LUX 20

60 percent of GDP Debt Limit

0
-12

-10

-8

-6

IRL

160

Cumulative Change in Structural Balance, 2011-17

Gross Government Debt, 2011 (Percent of GDP)

GRC

-4

-2

PRT

0

ESP

MLT

NLD

AUT

SVK

DEU
SVN
-10

-8

-6

1
FIN

0

-4

-2

0

2

Structural Balance , 2011 (Percent of GDP)

...and largely frontloaded...
115

...allowing debt ratio to peak earlier and at a lower
level than in other economies 1/

260
255

110

1.2

4

EST

-1
-2

2

1.4

3
2

ITA

LUX

Gross Debt (Percent of GDP)

Yearly Change in Structural Balance (Percent of GDP)

4

BEL
FRA

EST

250

105

1.0

245
Euro Area

100

0.8
0.6
0.4

US

240

United Kingdom
235

Japan (rhs)

95

230
90
225
85

0.2
0.0
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

220
215

80
2011

2012

2013

Source: 2012 April WEO
1/ Euro Area, US and the UK shown in primary axis: Japan shown in secondary axis.

30

6
5

Government Deficit , 2011 (Percent of GDP)

1.6

CYP
GRC

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

2014

2015

2016

2017

EURO AREA POLICIES

Fiscal consolidation is increasingly demanding in a
deteriorating outlook...1/

7

-0.5

2012 consolidation efforts in excess of 2011
plans

6
5

...as countries stick to SGP nominal targets 3/

0.0
-1.0
-1.5

5-Year Bond Yield

12
10

PT
IRL

8

IT

6

ES

BEL
FR

AT
DEU

2

NLD

0
-5

GRC

R² = 0.6422

FIN 4

Finland

Germany

Austria

Netherlands

Belgium

Portugal

Ireland

Italy

France

Spain

Spain

...shrinking fiscal space in many countries
16
14

Greece

Required adjustment in CAPB, 2011-20 5/
-5
0
5
10
15
20

The scale of consolidation is also large in teh
longer term ..

Slovenia

-4.5

Austria

-1

Overall deficit in 2012 SGP (Percent of GDP)
Overall deficit in 2011 SGP (Percent of GDP)

Slovak Republic

-4.0

Portugal 4/

0

3 percent of GDP deficit threshold

Netherlands 2/

-3.5

Italy

-3.0

1

Ireland 4/

-2.5

2

Greece 4/

-2.0

3

France

4

Cyprus
Portugal
Spain
Italy
Greece
Slovenia
Netherlands 2/
Finland
France
Luxembourg
Belgium
Slovak Republic
Austria
Germany
Malta
Ireland

2011-13 cumulative change in structural
balance, percent of GDP; 2012 over 2011

Figure 3b. Fiscal Consolidation in the Euro area: Challenges

0

5

10

15

20

Required Adjustment in CAPB

SK

6

R² = 0.234

NLD

2

FR
IRL

0

Finland

Luxembourg

Slovenia

France

Required Adjustment in CAPB

Belgium

-2

-2

Austria

-1

Germany

GRC

20

Slovak Republic

ES

15

Italy

PT

1
10

Netherlands

IT 5

Cumulative change 2013-17

3

Portugal

0

BEL
SI

4

Cyprus

0

DEU

Cumulative change 2011-13

Ireland

1
FIN

AT

5

Malta

2

... and overall prompting substantial frontloading in
many countries

Spain

3

-1

7

Greece

-5

Real GDP growth 2011-12

...with weak growth adding to the challenge...
4

Sources: WEO; 2011 and 2012 Stability Programs; and J. P. Morgan
1/ The chart shows fiscal consolidation over 2011-13 required at the 2012 Stability Programs in excess of fiscal consolidation envisaged
in last year's Stability Program. A positive sign indicates that fiscal policy is tighter under current plans.
2/ The figure for 2013 includes the measures recently agreed by the Dutch parliament.
3/ The chart focuses on Euro area countries currently under EDP.
4/ Targets under program commitments.
5/ Ajustment in CAPB required between 2011 and 2020 (and sustained for the 2020-30 decade) to bring down the debt-to-GDP ratio to
60 percent by 2030, or to stabilize debt at the 2012 level if the ratio is less than 60 percent of GDP.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

31

EURO AREA POLICIES

Figure 4. LTROs: Effects on the ECB balance sheet and bank funding
The 3y LTROs are extremes in terms of size and average
allotment per bidder... 1/
1000
1000
Average allotment (mil euro)

900

900

Dec 2011

800
700

800
700

May 2010

600

600

Feb 2012

500

Dec.2009

400

Jun 2009

Oct.2011

300
200

200
400
Size of refi (bil euro)

Bank Reliance on ECB Funding
(Percent of banking sector assets)

9
8

1400

Longer-term refinancing operations

1200

1200

Main (weekly) refinancing operations

1000

1000

SMP

600

600

300

400

400

200

200

800

CBPP

0

0
2005

600

ECB funding dependence of periphery banks
increased substantially...

10

1400

400

0
-

1600

ECB balance sheet composition
(Billions of euros)

500

100

0

1600

800

200

Sep.2009

100

...and led to sizable expansion and maturity lengthening
of the ECB balance sheet .

10

10

9

9

8

8

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

... while also creating room for sovereign carry trade
strategies.
10

Banks' Sovereign Bond Holdings
(Percent of bank assets)

9
8

7

Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy

7

7

7

6

Rest of the Euro area

6

6

6

5

Euro area

5

5

5

4

4

4

3

3

3

Euro area

3

2

2

2

Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain

2

1

1

1

Rest of the euro area

1

0

0

0

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

4

0
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Eventually, LTROs could be countereffective as they increase asset encumbrance and create collateral shortages
25

25

Asset Encumbrance 2007 and Feb.2012
(Percent of bank assets)

20

ECB LTRO

20

ECB (before LTRO)
covered bonds

15

15

repo

10

10

5

5

0

ESP

PRT

GRC

IRL

DEU

EMU

ITA

NLD

FRA

SVK

AUT

BEL

LUX

CYP

FIN

MLT

EST

Sources: European Central Bank; Haver Analytics; European Covered Bond Council; and IMF staff calculations.
1/ Blue circles: 6 month LTROs, green: 1yr , red: 3yr

32

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

SVN

0

EURO AREA POLICIES

Table 1. Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators, 2007-2014
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

3.0

0.4

-4.3

1.9

1.5

-0.3

0.7

1.3

1.7
2.2
4.7
2.4
0.4
2.8
0.2
6.6
6.2

0.4
2.3
-1.1
0.5
-0.1
0.3
0.1
1.0
0.9

-1.2
2.5
-12.1
-2.8
-1.0
-3.7
-0.6
-12.7
-11.7

0.9
0.5
-0.5
0.5
0.7
1.2
0.7
11.2
9.6

0.2
0.0
1.3
0.4
0.1
0.4
1.1
6.2
3.8

-0.5
-0.7
-2.4
-0.9
-0.5
-1.3
1.0
2.1
-0.2

0.5
-0.4
1.1
0.4
-0.1
0.4
0.3
3.1
2.7

1.0
0.2
1.8
1.0
0.0
1.0
0.3
3.8
3.3

Resource Utilization
Potential GDP
Output gap
Employment
Unemployment rate 3/

1.7
2.7
1.8
7.6

1.4
1.6
0.7
7.7

0.8
-3.6
-1.8
9.6

0.7
-2.4
-0.5
10.1

0.6
-1.5
0.1
10.2

0.5
-2.3
-0.7
11.1

0.7
-2.3
0.1
11.3

0.8
-1.9
0.6
11.1

Prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices

2.4
2.1

2.0
3.3

0.9
0.3

0.7
1.6

1.3
2.7

1.9
2.2

1.4
1.6

1.5
1.5

-0.7
-2.3
66.4

-2.1
-2.9
70.2

-6.4
-4.4
80.0

-6.2
-4.2
85.8

-4.1
-3.1
88.1

-3.2
-1.7
91.4

-2.5
-1.1
92.4

-2.0
-0.9
92.2

4.3
4.3

4.6
4.4

1.2
4.0

0.8
3.8

1.4
4.3

0.7
3.5

…
…

…
…

1.37
103.7
100.9

1.47
108.7
103.4

1.39
110.9
104.0

1.33
103.2
95.3

1.39
104.2
95.0

1.28
99.3
89.8

…
…
…

…
…
…

0.1

-1.6

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.9

1.0

1.1

Demand and Supply
Real GDP
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Final domestic demand
Stockbuilding 1/
Domestic Demand
Foreign balance 1/
Exports 2/
Imports 2/

Public Finance 4/
General government balance
General government structural balance
General government gross debt
Interest Rates 3/ 5/
EURIBOR 3-month offered rate
10-year government benchmark bond yield
Exchange Rates 5/
U.S. dollar per euro
Nominal effective rate (2000=100)
Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/
External Sector 4/ 7/
Current account balance

2012
2013
2014
staff projection

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Global Data Source; DataStream; and Eurostat.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/
6/
7/

Contribution to growth.
Includes intra-euro area trade.
In percent.
In percent of GDP.
Latest monthly available data for 2012.
CPI based.
Based on ECB data, which excludes intra-euro area flows.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

33

EURO AREA POLICIES

Table 2. Euro Area: Balance of Payments
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

(Billions of euros)
20.9
98.7
22.5
-44.8
-56.1

60.8
94.1
32.9
-6.8
-59.5

10.9
42.2
39.6
2.4
-73.4

-12.7
8.1
42.5
16.6
-79.6

7.3
42.3
47.9
5.3
-87.9

-143.4
-21.8
42.0
-66.8
-97.1

-22.0
31.2
36.5
3.4
-93.1

-6.9
15.0
49.6
31.7
-103.3

-3.2
4.9
61.0
31.8
-100.6

12.2

16.6

12.0

9.6

4.8

10.0

6.5

6.4

10.8

Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Equity
Debt instruments
Financial derivatives
Other investment
Reserve assets

-14.0
-9.7
54.4
32.8
21.3
-13.7
-72.8
28.0

-78.6
-79.4
44.1
-2.3
46.7
-8.3
-47.9
12.6

-35.2
-203.9
106.4
103.7
2.4
-17.3
62.1
18.2

-6.2
-159.6
186.0
89.2
96.5
-0.7
-30.9
-1.1

3.1
-90.4
126.8
102.0
24.9
-67.0
38.7
-4.9

121.3
-231.2
261.4
-14.7
276.3
-84.6
178.8
-3.4

9.4
-105.1
265.8
71.8
193.9
19.9
-175.7
4.6

-2.7
-113.8
165.1
67.4
97.8
18.4
-61.7
-10.5

-24.6
-151.0
308.1
189.5
118.9
-20.8
-150.8
-10.1

Errors and omissions

-19.1

1.1

12.4

9.4

-15.1

12.2

5.7

2.9

17.0

Current account
Goods
Services
Income
Current transfers
Capital account

(Percent of GDP)
0.3
1.3
0.3
-0.6
-0.7

0.8
1.2
0.4
-0.1
-0.8

0.1
0.5
0.5
0.0
-0.9

-0.1
0.1
0.5
0.2
-0.9

0.1
0.5
0.5
0.1
-1.0

-1.6
-0.2
0.5
-0.7
-1.1

-0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
-1.0

-0.1
0.2
0.5
0.3
-1.1

0.0
0.1
0.6
0.3
-1.1

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Financial account
Direct investment
Portfolio investment
Equity
Debt instruments
Financial derivatives
Other investment
Reserve assets

-0.2
-0.1
0.7
0.4
0.3
-0.2
-1.0
0.4

-1.0
-1.0
0.6
0.0
0.6
-0.1
-0.6
0.2

-0.4
-2.5
1.3
1.3
0.0
-0.2
0.8
0.2

-0.1
-1.9
2.2
1.0
1.1
0.0
-0.4
0.0

0.0
-1.0
1.4
1.1
0.3
-0.7
0.4
-0.1

1.3
-2.5
2.8
-0.2
3.0
-0.9
1.9
0.0

0.1
-1.2
3.0
0.8
2.2
0.2
-2.0
0.1

0.0
-1.2
1.8
0.7
1.1
0.2
-0.7
-0.1

-0.3
-1.6
3.3
2.0
1.3
-0.2
-1.6
-0.1

Errors and omissions

-0.3

0.0

0.2

0.1

-0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.2

7,546.9 7,860.4 8,145.4 8,564.9 9,030.2 9,244.3

8,930.1

9,160.9

9,425.8

462.4

591.2

667.1

Current account
Goods
Services
Income
Current transfers
Capital account

Memorandum items:
GDP (billions of euros)
Reserves of the eurosystem 1/
(billions of euros)
Source: ECB.
1/ End of period stocks.

34

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

306.7

281

320.1

325.8

347.2

374.2

EURO AREA POLICIES

Table 3. IMF Policy Recommendations for Selected Countries
Greece

Fiscal Policies and Reforms
• Specify and legislate
remaining revenue and
expenditure measures
necessary to achieve the
medium-term fiscal target
• Undertake fiscal institutional
reforms to improve revenue
collection and prevent
expenditure arrears

Ireland

• Accommodate a revenue
shortfall if growth weakens
notably in 2012 to help
protect the fragile recovery
• Specify the measures to
underpin the 2013-15 fiscal
consolidation by Budget
2013, including targeting of
social welfare
• Implement fiscal
institutional reforms through
the Fiscal Responsibility Bill
and give a statutory basis to
the medium-term
expenditure ceilings

Portugal

• Adhere to programmed
fiscal targets, but avoid
excessive structural
adjustment in case of weaker
growth and employment
• Ensure timely
implementation of PFM
reform agenda
• Reduce contingent liabilities
through timely, planned SOE
restructuring

Italy

Financial Sector Reforms
• Finalize recapitalization
strategy for viable banks and
establish timeframe for
capital raising
• Finalize plans to address
state-owned banks in a least
cost manner (while protecting
depositors)
• Implement PTSB
restructuring carefully to put
it on a sound footing,
including through timely
separation of certain legacy
assets
• Strengthen banks’ capacity
to manage distressed loans to
help restore their viability and
restart lending

Structural Reforms
• Improve competitiveness
through labor market reforms,
product and service market
liberalization, and business
environment reforms

• Fully implement Pathways to
Work strategy, and increase
resources for engaging with
jobseekers, possibly through
private employment services
• Implement asset sales in 2013,
and reinvest a portion of
proceeds, but strengthen
competition enforcement to
harness the full growth benefits

• Prepare the new personal
insolvency framework to
address household debt
distress while protecting debt
service discipline

• Review the structure of social
payments to avoid
unemployment traps, especially
for the long-term unemployed

• Avert a credit crunch by
ensuring alignment of bank
deleveraging plans with
available credit supply

• Ensure competitiveness gains
through accelerated supply side
reforms, notably the labor code
and product market reforms

• Strengthen the capital
buffers of the largest banks in
line with program targets

• Address structural weaknesses
in wage setting mechanisms
and the judicial system

• Strengthen the supervision
and resolution framework

• Lower taxes supported by
expenditure cuts to better
distribute the burden of
adjustment and help growth

• Strengthen capital and
liquidity buffers by raising
equity and/or disposing of
noncore assets

• To build buffers, target an
overall structural surplus of 1
percent of GDP as the anchor
for the new fiscal rule;
legislate medium-term

• Conduct and publish stress
tests on banks not covered by
the EBA

• Raise productivity in services
by accelerating reforms in the
energy, local public, and
professional services sectors to
reduce the cost of doing
business and increase
competition

• Encourage banks to devise

• Curb state involvement in the

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

35

EURO AREA POLICIES

expenditure cuts in next
year’s budget to lock in gains
• Strengthen fiscal institutions
by ensuring independence of
fiscal council, adopting multiyear expenditure frameworks,
and merging the various
spending reviews into a
central role in the budget
process
Spain

• Make the fiscal adjustment
less front loaded and embed
in a more prudent macro
framework
• Increase role of revenue
measures, especially indirect
taxes
• Apply sanctions on regional
government finances and
improve their transparency

36

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

strategies for selling,
restructuring or writing down
impaired loans
• Strengthen the crisis
management framework in
line with the forthcoming EU
Directive

• Communicate
comprehensive strategy,
including triaging banks
according to the independent
valuations, and managing
legacy assets
• Enhance crisis management
and resolution framework

economy
• Implement labor market
reform to reduce duality,
increase participation, and
decentralize wage setting
• Promote SME growth by
improving access to financing
and reducing start-up costs and
regulatory hurdles
• Implement approved labor
market reforms
• Implement other planned
structural reforms

EURO AREA POLICIES

APPENDIX I: STATISTICAL ISSUES

1

Statistics for the EU and the euro area are collected by Eurostat from the national statistical
institutes. These statistics are generally of sufficient quality, scope, and timeliness to allow for
effective macroeconomic surveillance. This appendix summarizes ongoing developments and
desirable improvements.
1.
The Code of Practice for the European Statistical System has been revised. The new
code reaffirms the principles for the production and dissemination of statistics set out in 2005 and
reinforces statistical independence, statistical use of administrative data and quality management.
Following this revision, a mapping of the revised code and other existing quality frameworks,
including the Fund’s DQAF, with the new UN Generic National Quality Assurance Framework was
presented at the UN Statistical Commission in 2012. The UN Committee for the Coordination of
Statistical Activities was invited to harmonize the different quality assessment frameworks.2
2.

Initiatives on National Accounts are underway. These include:



NACE Rev. 2: Annual and quarterly euro area aggregates starting in 2000 were released in
December 2011 (three months behind schedule due to late reporting by some countries).
The legal deadline for reporting long time series 1995-2000 according to NACE rev2 is endSeptember 2012, which will allow EU/EA aggregates to be released by December 2012.
Eurostat expects no significant changes in countries’ GDP under the new method.



ESA 2010: Countries are expected to adopt the new system by September 2014. The
supporting legal framework is currently under discussion and should be adopted throughout
the year. The main challenges ahead include improvements in the timeliness for the main
national accounts aggregates (from t+70 to t+60 days); the backward calculation of time
series; and the transmission of a supplementary tables on pension schemes based on SNA
2008 standards, which is being resisted by some countries.



Data Gaps Initiative: Eurostat is collaborating actively with the Inter-Agency Group (IAG) on
this front. IAG members have agreed on a template for reporting quarterly financial and
non-financial accounts by institutional sectors. To enable the provision of this data at both
annual and quarterly frequencies, it will be essential that Eurostat reaches agreement with
member countries.

3.
The new Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure has involved considerable data
collection since last year’s consultation. Eurostat and the national statistical institutes worked
closely with the European Commission (DG ECFIN–Directorate General of Economic and Financial
Affairs) and the ECB during 2011 to set up a scoreboard of indicators with which to assess internal
1

The European Department is grateful for the participation of experts from the Statistics Department also in the

consultation. Mark Van Wersch acted as the STA coordinator.
2

ibid, p. 14.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

37

EURO AREA POLICIES

and external imbalances (the so-called Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure). Eurostat has
created a new platform collecting all relevant indicators3, which will be updated on an annual basis.
In a small number of areas further work is needed, in particular house price developments (see next
paragraph) and the compilation of private sector debt, where some consistency issues exist in the
recording of intra-company loans and the treatment of Special Purpose Entities (i.e., holding
companies).
4.
Updates on data on property markets under the Principal European Economic
Indicators (PEEIs) strategy:


Residential property prices: Eurostat is currently releasing quarterly house price data, which
will be covered by a new regulation entering into force in autumn 2012 and requiring data
transmission at t+85 days. Monthly data is unlikely to become available in the near future
with full coverage. Although comparability issues remain, harmonization at EU level has been
steadily improving. To help economic analysis, it was advised that more be done to flag
countries whose coverage and/or methodology are not fully in line with the harmonized
rules.



Indicator on house sales: Eurostat expects that a harmonized indicator can be obtained as a
byproduct of improvements in transaction price quarterly indexes of residential properties
(see above). In staff’s view, where house price indices are derived from a comprehensive and
timely Land Registry, sales data could be a useful by product.



Commercial Property Price Indices (CPPIs): Collaboration between international organizations
(including the Fund) is underway to set standards for the compilation of CPPIs. As lead
agency, Eurostat has organized a tender for developing an international Handbook on best
practices for compiling such indices. This is an area for which data at present are sparse and
of variable quality. However, given the importance of CPPIs, the endeavor is worth pursuing.

5.
It was agreed that more information would be provided to explain the impact of the
new treatment of seasonal products on the HICP introduced last year. Eurostat has published an
impact report (updated regularly) for each country. It was noted that, for several countries the
effects were quite marked. Staff asked for more information to be provided on the underlying
reasons for changes, especially those due to the changes in methodology.
6.
Eurostat is working towards an improved dissemination of quarterly government
finance statistics. This includes the improvement of timelines and the production of a new press
release on quarterly government debt and actions. One outstanding issue is that a few countries still

3

The indicators comprise the current account balance (as percentage of GDP), the net international investment

position (as percentage of GDP), export market shares (goods and services) measures in values, nominal unit labor
costs, HICP-based real effective exchange rates relative to 35 industrial partners, private sector debt (percent of GDP),
general government debt (percent of GDP), private sector credit flow (percent of GDP), house prices relative to
consumption deflator, and the unemployment rate.

38

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

EURO AREA POLICIES

restrict the dissemination of quarterly government finance statistics for the first quarters of the year
because of quality concerns. A new element in the quarterly statistics is the data on
intergovernmental lending that will avoid double-counting through consolidation.
7.
The Directive on national fiscal frameworks poses considerable challenges to
government finance statistics. The Directive calls for the dissemination of monthly data on
government operations and balance sheet. This entails some difficulties for statistical compilers, but
data are expected to be disseminated from 2014. The provision of additional data on public sector
statistics is even more demanding. The analysis of public finances is currently limited to the general
government sector, following the ESA 95 and Excessive Deficit Procedure concepts. However, given
their magnitude in many countries, a fully-fledged register of debt and deficits of public
corporations is essential to the assessment of fiscal risks. Eurostat is working closely with member
states to publish new chapters on the ESA 95 Manual on Government Deficit and Debt.
8.

Work continues to modernize Balance of Payments statistics:



BPM6: The Regulation introducing BPM6 should be adopted in a matter of weeks. Eurostat is
engaged with countries to ensure the swift implementation of the new methodology. The
2014 deadline is mandatory and no derogations are envisaged, thus countries should adhere
to the deadline.



Intrastat reporting: Easing the reporting burden for international trade statistics remains a
priority. Eurostat is encouraging countries to collect and exchange micro-export data with
other trade partners. This would allow for more flexibility as compared with the current
system, which also requires the reporting of import data.



Bilateral exchange of micro-data for FDI: While the tool has proved useful to enhance data
quality, Eurostat and staff concurred that compulsory reporting would be required to perfect
the system.



Asymmetries in trade statistics: Asymmetries persist but they are limited and stable over time.
Eurostat engages with countries in regular “reconciliation rounds” that facilitate the
exchange of micro data. Due to technical limitations faced by some countries, the rounds are
voluntary. Eurostat’s efforts to develop tools to resolve this issue are welcome.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

39

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 12/80

International Monetary Fund

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

700 19th Street, NW

July 18, 2012

Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes Article IV Consultation
on Euro Area Policies
On July 16, 2012, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article IV consultation on Euro Area Policies.1
Background
The euro area crisis has intensified. Adverse links between banks, sovereigns, and the real
economy have deepened, driving sovereign borrowing costs and risk premiums to record
levels. Investors are withholding funding from member states most in need, moving capital
"north" and abroad to perceived safer assets. This has contributed to divergences in liquidity
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with

members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies. On
return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the
Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the
Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the
country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings up can be found here:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
conditions and lending rates within the euro area, adding to already-severe pressures on many
bank and sovereign balance sheets and raising questions about the viability of the monetary
union itself.
Economic activity has weakened and is likely to remain subdued, particularly in the hard-hit
periphery countries. After averaging 1.5 percent in 2011, euro area GDP growth is expected to
be -0.3 and 0.7 percent in 2012 and 2013, respectively. In this context, headline inflation is
projected to fall well below 2 percent by 2013 and to remain there through 2014. Strong
headwinds to growth—including much tighter financing conditions, subdued confidence, and
fiscal consolidation—are likely to be compounded by banks and households repairing balance
sheets and consumers acting cautious amidst heightened uncertainty. This will add further
pressure to the high level of unemployment and increase the risk of stagnation and long-term
damage to potential growth as unemployed workers lose skills and new workers find it difficult
to join the active labor force.
There are severe downside risks to the outlook, with possible substantial regional and global
implications. Reinforced negative bank-sovereign linkages could further weigh on confidence,
growth, and public debt trajectories, while boosting sovereign spreads and risk premiums.
Depending on the pass-through of weaker growth and financial market stress, the global
spillovers are likely to be significant. The potential for failure of a systemic bank, or stalled
reform or fiscal adjustment efforts at the country level, could spill into the euro area and
beyond.
Major policy actions have averted an even more rapid escalation of the crisis. The European
Central Bank has lowered its policy interest rates to historic levels, and conducted special
liquidity interventions to ease bank funding pressures. The European and global firewall has
been enlarged and will provide added liquidity insurance to sovereigns, while the adoption of
the Fiscal Compact will strengthen budgetary discipline. Moreover, national governments in
deficit countries have embarked on fiscal consolidation and reaffirmed their debt sustainability
and deficit targets.

3
Most recently, European leaders agreed to steps toward a banking union that, if implemented
in full, will help break the adverse links between sovereigns and banks. In particular, plans to
establish a single supervisory mechanism, followed by the possibility of using European
Stability Mechanism (ESM) resources to recapitalize banks directly, were defined. In addition,
the leaders re-affirmed a willingness to consider using existing resources from the European
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) or the ESM to purchase sovereign bonds. However, despite
these initiatives, bank and sovereign stresses persist, reflecting continued market concerns
that a sustainable solution has yet to be achieved.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors noted that the euro area continues to face a number of economic
challenges amid increasing financial stresses and market fragmentation, with considerable
downside risks to the already weak growth outlook, notably a further intensification of the
sovereign debt crisis. Directors welcomed the many policy actions taken recently to restore
growth and financial stability, including the rate cuts by the European Central Bank (ECB) and
the enlarged European firewall. They urged prompt and full implementation of the important
initiatives agreed at the European Leaders’ Summit in June, as well as further collective action
to strengthen the crisis response and mitigate spillovers. Directors underlined the urgency of
completing the reform of the monetary union architecture and promoting strong, balanced
growth across the euro area—key to restoring confidence in the near term and ensuring the
long-term viability of the euro. They highlighted that these are the responsibilities of the euro
zone as a whole and of each member state.
Directors stressed that, as the crisis had reached a critical stage, it is important that
policymakers continue to demonstrate shared and unequivocal commitment—with a clear,
credible roadmap—to a deeper integration of the euro area. They agreed that the immediate
priority is to break the adverse loops between banks, sovereigns, and growth prospects. This
requires action on three major fronts:


First, steps toward a banking union, comprising a pan-European deposit guarantee
scheme and a pan-European bank resolution scheme—both backed with common
resources—together with a common supervisory framework.



4
Second, greater fiscal integration, with stronger governance arrangements and risk
sharing, balanced by appropriate safeguards. Directors welcomed the Fiscal Compact
and the proposed “two pack” as important steps toward better governance, aligning
national policies with common objectives through enhanced European oversight.



Third, structural reforms in both deficit and surplus countries to raise trend growth and
address external imbalances within the euro area. Directors emphasized in particular
the need to reform the labor and product markets, and to facilitate wage and price
adjustments to boost competitiveness.

Recognizing that many of these steps would necessarily take some time to implement and
have full effect, Directors underscored the importance of the following policies directed at the
immediate situation:


First, crisis measures, financing under the enlarged European firewall facilities, and
continued official funding support. Directors welcomed the authorities’ commitment to
use EFSF/ESM resources flexibly. They looked forward to early progress toward a
single supervisory mechanism for euro area banks, paving the way for direct
recapitalization of banks by the ESM. Directors agreed that the ECB will have to
continue to play a role in the crisis response, including through liquidity provision and
securities purchases. A few Directors also noted that clarifying the seniority status of
sovereign debt holdings by the ECB would help address market concerns.



Second, supportive monetary policy. Noting fundamentally weak inflationary pressures,
Directors generally saw scope for further monetary easing, especially if downside risks
to growth materialize, including through additional non-standard measures in view of
the impaired monetary transmission mechanism.



Third, fiscal consolidation that is as growth friendly as possible and at a differentiated
pace based on individual countries’ circumstances. To deal with growth surprises in the
short term, Directors encouraged member states to focus on structural fiscal targets
and exploit the flexibility built into the Fiscal Compact.

5
Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case. The staff report (use the free Adobe Acrobat
Reader to view this pdf file) for the 2012 Article IV Consultation on Euro Area Policies is also available.

6
Euro Area: Main Economic Indicators
(Percent change)
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

staff projection

Demand and Supply
Real GDP
Private consumption
Public consumption
Gross fixed investment
Final domestic demand
Stockbuilding 1/
Domestic Demand
Foreign balance 1/
Exports 2/
Imports 2/

3.0
1.7
2.2
4.7
2.4
0.4
2.8
0.2
6.6
6.2

0.4
0.4
2.3
-1.1
0.5
-0.1
0.3
0.1
1.0
0.9

-4.3
-1.2
2.5
-12.1
-2.8
-1.0
-3.7
-0.6
-12.7
-11.7

1.9
0.9
0.5
-0.5
0.5
0.7
1.2
0.7
11.2
9.6

1.5
0.2
0.0
1.3
0.4
0.1
0.4
1.1
6.2
3.8

-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-2.4
-0.9
-0.5
-1.3
1.0
2.1
-0.2

0.7
0.5
-0.4
1.1
0.4
-0.1
0.4
0.3
3.1
2.7

Resource Utilization
Potential GDP
Output gap
Employment
Unemployment rate 3/

1.7
2.7
1.8
7.6

1.4
1.6
0.7
7.7

0.8
-3.6
-1.8
9.6

0.7
-2.4
-0.5
10.1

0.6
-1.5
0.1
10.2

0.5
-2.3
-0.7
11.1

0.7
-2.3
0.1
11.3

Prices
GDP deflator
Consumer prices

2.4
2.1

2.0
3.3

0.9
0.3

0.7
1.6

1.3
2.7

1.9
2.2

1.4
1.6

-0.7
-2.3
66.4

-2.1
-2.9
70.2

-6.4
-4.4
80.0

-6.2
-4.2
85.8

-4.1
-3.1
88.1

-3.2
-1.7
91.4

-2.5
-1.1
92.4

4.3
4.3

4.6
4.4

1.2
4.0

0.8
3.8

1.4
4.3

0.7
3.5

…
…

1.37
103.7
100.9

1.47
108.7
103.4

1.39
110.9
104.0

1.33
103.2
95.3

1.39
104.2
95.0

1.28
99.3
89.8

…
…
…

0.1

-1.6

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.9

1.0

Public Finance 4/
General government balance
General government structural balance
General government gross debt
Interest Rates 3/ 5/
EURIBOR 3-month offered rate
10-year government benchmark bond yield
Exchange Rates 5/
U.S. dollar per euro
Nominal effective rate (2000=100)
Real effective rate (2000=100) 6/
External Sector 4/ 7/
Current account balance

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Global Data Source; DataStream; and Eurostat.
1/ Contribution to growth.
2/ Includes intra-euro area trade.
3/ In percent.
4/ In percent of GDP.
5/ Latest monthly available data for 2012.
6/ CPI based.
7/ Based on ECB data, which excludes intra-euro area flows.

Statement by Mr. Fayolle, Executive Director for France
on behalf of the Euro Area Authorities
July 16, 2012
In my capacity as President of EURIMF, I submit this Buff statement on the Article IV
consultation with the euro area. It reflects the common view of the Member States of the
euro area and the European Union in their respective fields of competence.
The authorities of the euro-area Member States are grateful for open and fruitful
consultations with staff and for their constructive policy advice.
The authorities are in broad agreement with staff findings and recommendations.
Particularly the agreement reached at the Euro Area summit on 29 June to establish an
effective single supervisory mechanism, involving the ECB, following which the ESM
could have the possibility to recapitalize banks directly, represents a decisive step
towards breaking harmful feedback loops between banks and sovereigns, while
recognizing the need for supervision and liability to go hand in hand. These proposals
will be considered as a matter of urgency by the end of 2012. In the past months the areas
of fiscal policy coordination and growth support have also seen further progress in
completing the comprehensive response to tackle the root causes of the ongoing banking
and debt crisis. New fiscal governance advances include Commission legislative
proposals under the so-called 'two pack', which strengthen national fiscal frameworks,
allow for closer fiscal surveillance and establish a suitable surveillance framework for
programme countries and those facing financial stress. The Fiscal Compact agreed in
March by euro area Member States and 8 other EU members will add further weight to
the aim of establishing balanced budget rules enshrined in national legislation, and the
first implementation of the 'six-pack' entered into force last December has been a broad
success.
Growth policies are receiving further support through the "Compact for Growth and
Jobs" agreed by the European Council of 28/29 June, which rests on the strong
commitment of Member States to move forward on closer policy integration and to
implement the country-specific recommendations on structural and fiscal policies as well
as the Euro area recommendation formally agreed at the 10 July ECOFIN Council that
have been issued as part of the European Semester. These concrete efforts and the clear
trajectory that they establish towards a closer and more robust euro area should soon
begin to reassure markets, which currently still remain fragile. The concrete advances
made at the Euro Summit meeting of 29 June and the Eurogroup meeting on 9 July in
matters of financial supervision and banking sector support for Spain mean that
confidence continues to be built. The authorities reiterate their resolve to take all the
necessary actions to preserve the integrity and stability of the euro area.

Short-term economic outlook
The authorities broadly share staff's view on the outlook, particularly that a successful
handling of the sovereign-debt crisis and tackling negative feedback loops between banks
and sovereigns are essential for increasing investor and consumer confidence and the
return to a recovery path. The Commission services' spring forecast suggests that, for the
year 2012 as a whole, GDP is expected to shrink by about 0.3% before recovering in
2013 to a rate of around 1%. Given weak output growth, unemployment rates are
expected to remain close to current levels. Risks to the growth outlook are elevated and
tilted to the downside. The main risk remains an aggravation of the sovereign-debt crisis
with financial contagion and a sharp drop in credit availability. Another prominent
downside risk stems from geopolitical uncertainty that could lead to a surge in oil prices.
The real economy continues to suffer from the impact of the European sovereign-debt
crisis. In the first half of 2012, tensions in financial markets only temporarily eased in the
wake of policy decisions and unconventional liquidity provision; confidence has stopped
deteriorating but remains at low levels. In the first quarter output remained stable, but up
to mid-2012 unemployment has been increasing further and consumer price inflation has
remained above long-term averages. Leading indicators and survey data (e.g. Economic
Sentiment Indicator, Eurozone PMIs) do not provide encouraging signs for the near-term
outlook. The euro area remains faced with elevated financial stress and with the need to
complete the adjustment of internal and external imbalances, to repair financial sectors
and to achieve sustainable public finances. Market expectations that further efforts are
needed in these areas cast shadows over the outlook for the real economy.
Monetary policy and the outlook for price stability
Early July, the ECB decided to lower its key interest rates by 25 basis points. This step
was motivated by further dampened inflationary pressure over the medium term, as some
downside risks to economic activity have materialised. As a result, our main policy rate
(MRO rate) now stands at 0.75% while the deposit rate stands at 0.0%.
Euro area annual inflation was 2.4% in June 2012 (Eurostat flash estimate), unchanged
from May. Inflation should decline further in the course of 2012 and be again below 2%
in 2013. Underlying price pressures should remain moderate over the medium term
given modest growth and well-anchored inflation expectations. Information from the
monetary analysis is consistent with price developments remaining in line with price
stability over the medium term. On-going weak loan growth largely reflects the current
cyclical situation, heightened risk aversion, and balance sheet adjustments of households
and firms which weigh on credit demand. Risks to the outlook for inflation are broadly
balanced over the medium term: on the downside they relate to weaker than expected
euro area growth; on the upside risks could stem from further increases in indirect taxes
and higher than expected energy prices.
As regards non-standard monetary policy measures, the ECB in June decided that all
Eurosystem refinancing operations will continue to be conducted as fixed-rate tender

procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary and at least until the end of the
last maintenance period of 2012, on 15 January 2013. Furthermore, measures were taken
to improve access of the banking sector to these operations by enhancing collateral
availability, notably as regards asset-backed securities. Reflecting demand for ECB
refinancing operations, there is a large amount of excess liquidity in the euro area
banking system at present.
Fiscal policy
Authorities share the general view reflected in the staff assessment of the fiscal situation
of the euro area, which shows a need for consolidation, which is essential to restore
confidence though this is intertwined with short-term negative prospects for growth. Of
paramount importance is the principle of differentiated consolidation, shared by the Staff
report, which judges budgetary adjustment needs on a country-by-country basis.
Furthermore, consolidation must be as growth-friendly as possible and should be
underpinned by structural reforms to boost growth potential. The multi-annual fiscal
adjustment plans of Member States that are coordinated at the Union level and guided by
the overhauled fiscal governance architecture following the 'six-pack' reforms lend
significant credibility to the euro area's long-term fiscal adjustment aim, especially so if
accompanied by structural reforms.
Authorities would further like to stress that the fiscal effort under the Stability and
Growth Pact (SGP) has been assessed in cyclically-adjustment terms since 2005, and
indeed constitutes a cornerstone of fiscal policy coordination in the euro area and EU.
Any impression that a structural adjustment focus constitutes a ‘flexible’ interpretation of
the Pact is therefore inaccurate. It should also be noted that the Stability and Growth Pact
duly guides fiscal policies based on both nominal and structural budget balance targets.
Consolidation in 2011 has been in line with plans in spite of lower-than-planned growth
with a sizeable reduction in deficit of more than 2 pp. of GDP in the euro area. It should
further be noted that, contrary to the assertion in the staff's accompanying Selected Issues
paper, planned fiscal efforts in the euro area overall do not fall significantly short of SGP
requirements. According to current budgetary plans by euro area Member States in their
Stability Programmes, Member States will implement structural adjustment high enough
to improve their structural fiscal position by 1½ pp. of GDP in 2012 and 1 pp. of GDP in
2013 in the euro area, so as to generally respect the expenditure rule and the progress
towards the debt benchmark over the planning period (up to 2015), both rules introduced
by the '6-pack'. According to SGP budgetary plans and Commission services'
macroeconomic projections, on which SGP requirements should be assessed, all Member
States will respect the debt rule by the end of their transitional period and will be broadly
in line with the expenditure benchmark.
Financial sector policies
The Staff Report rightly focuses on the pivotal role that the banking system plays in the
current crisis, notably in terms of financial stability concerns emanating from certain
banking systems in their own right, as well as from adverse feedback loops between

banks and sovereigns. Ambitious restructuring measures have been launched to
strengthen vulnerable banking systems either using resources set aside through the
financial programmes dedicated to countries under EU assistance programmes, or
through programmes directed specifically at recapitalization and restructuring of
individual banks.
Authorities further stress that the October 2011 recapitalization exercise performed by the
European Banking Authority (EBA) represents an indispensable step towards addressing
financial stability concerns, and therefore merits mention. The 2011 EBA
recommendation required 71 banks to establish an additional capital buffer, including a
buffer for sovereign exposures, such that banks' Core Tier 1 capital reaches a level of 9%
by the end of June 2012. In accordance with the EBA overview report, the
recommendation is being implemented with success on aggregate, as the EBA's initial
estimates for banks' capital plans are in excess of the estimated capital gap by no less
than 26%. Moreover, and contrary to widespread criticism, the exercise does not appear
to have been accompanied by disruptive deleveraging. Overall, the exercise represents a
valuable tool to better scrutinize the deleveraging process that is ongoing in the euro area
banking system and to make sure it does not harm the flow of credit towards the real
economy.
Financial stability mechanisms
The euro area has made significant progress on enhancing and increasing its firewalls,
notably by agreeing on an improved ESM Treaty, signed on 2 February 2012. The new
ESM Treaty establishes a permanent European Stability Mechanism which will provide
the Eurozone firewall with a full fresh lending capacity of €500bn. Combined with the
already engaged EFSF fund, the overall firewall power is €700bn., as agreed at the 30
March Eurogroup meeting. The authorities confirm that preparations for the ESM have
advanced well and all efforts are now undertaken to finalise as soon as possible the
Treaty ratification process so that the new mechanism can become operational.
The Euro Area Summit decisions of 29 June reaffirm the strong commitment of the euro
area to do whatever is necessary to ensure financial stability, in particular through the
flexible and efficient use of existing EFSF/ESM instruments, in order to stabilise markets
for Member States respecting their EU commitments. As an immediate follow-up, the
ECB will serve as an agent to EFSF/ESM in conducting market operations in an effective
and efficient manner. Furthermore, the decision to allow the ESM to engage in the direct
recapitalisation of banks once an effective single supervisory mechanism is established
marks important progress towards more flexibility but also towards reducing the banksovereign link. This measure, together with the decision that ESM assistance will not
carry preferred creditor status for Spain, is likely to have a positive effect on the
economic and fiscal situation in Spain.

Banking Union
With regard to the authorities' plans for moving towards a banking union, significant
progress has been made at the 28/29 June summit, where the euro area Heads of State or
Government stated that proposals for a single supervisory mechanism involving the ECB
will be presented by the Commission in September or October. The authorities consider
banking union proposals as a matter of priority. They agree that the existing EFSF/ESM
framework could play a role in deepening financial integration in the euro area. In
particular, as also suggested in the Staff Report, the ESM might play a role in financing
recapitalisation once an effective single supervision mechanism is in place. Furthermore,
in order to establish a more unified prudential framework, the Commission's legislative
proposals for a single rulebook - a unified financial regulation framework – will be
considered as a priority, as will the Commission proposals concerning deposit guarantees
and bank resolution.
External Imbalances
The euro area as a whole currently registers a current account that is practically balanced,
as has been the case in almost every single year since the creation of the currency area.
The Commission's spring projections indicate that the area's current account will slightly
strengthen in 2012 and 2013, while remaining close to the equilibrium. The net
international investment position (NIIP) of the euro area is slightly negative, and should
remain relatively stable; it is not as such a source of any specific tensions.
In spite of this benign view of the currency area as a whole, the authorities do concur
with the Fund's staff that external imbalances of some euro area countries remain
unsustainably large, a persistent source of financial tension and an indicator of resource
misallocation. The reduction in those imbalances is a major challenge and a crucial
objective for the euro area. Anyhow, over the last four years, there has already been a
tangible reduction in these imbalances, in particular in the most vulnerable countries.
Notably for Greece and Portugal, the reduction in their current account deficit (2008-12)
has been of, or above, 9 percentage point of GDP, while the external accounts of Spain,
Cyprus, Slovenia and Slovakia are also moving in the right direction. While part of the
correction is driven by the different cyclical position of the economies, some of the
improvement is estimated to be structural. The Fund's staff rightly indicates that the
correction in imbalances has been mainly the result of a compression in imports resulting
from a contraction in domestic demand in these countries; however, in several countries,
such as in Portugal, exports have shown promising dynamism.
While the Staff Report rightly calls for progress in real effective exchange rate
adjustment, some adjustment on this front is already evident. The authorities agree that a
faster adjustment in price and cost competitiveness in the vulnerable countries would be
desirable. The labour market reforms that several countries are adopting with voluntarism
contribute to this adjustment and have to be tailor-made depending on the characteristics
of each labour market. The adjustment in costs should continue not only in the
programme countries, but also in other deficit economies.

Policy arrangements under the European Semester as part of the Macroeconomic
Imbalances Procedure are guiding Member States' external adjustment through in-depth
country reviews examine causes of, and suggest responses to, harmful macroeconomic
imbalances in a number of selected countries – 12 for the first review. Furthermore, the
differentiated pace of fiscal consolidation and the decisive structural reforms that both the
Commission and the Eurogroup have been promoting should also contribute to address
external imbalances. In deficit countries, they should increase labour productivity and
overall competitiveness, while in surplus countries households' disposable income and
the business environment would be supported, which will translate in higher
consumption, investment and imports and have positive spill-overs for the whole euroarea. Wage developments in surplus countries also suggest an ongoing rebalancing.
Growth and Structural Reforms
Structural reforms are critically important to enhance the EU economy's overall
efficiency and speed up its capacity to adjust. In a positive feedback loop an improved
growth outlook will support other objectives by enhancing confidence and boosting
employment, contributing to successful fiscal consolidation and to the stability in the
banking sector, as well as easing the situation in vulnerable countries. The comprehensive
overhaul of economic governance and surveillance that has occurred since the crisis has
upgraded economic policy coordination in the euro area, as the successful conclusion of
the second European Semester by the June European Council shows. The EU Semester
comprises country-specific recommendations in the fiscal and structural domain for each
Member State plus the euro area as a whole. The focus on implementation of structural
and fiscal measures has been sharpened through concrete country-specific
recommendations for each and every Member State, building in part on the follow-up to
last year's Semester.
As a means to drive forward Europe's focus on growth and prosperity, the June European
Council further adopted a new Compact for Growth and Jobs for Europe. It presents a
coherent set of priorities for action at national, EU and euro area levels. Euro area
Member States will benefit from measures agreed at the EU level as part of the Compact,
which amount to €120bn. (1% of EU GDP). These include a reallocation of EU structural
funds, focusing them on growth and competitiveness, increasing the lending capacity of
the EIB so as to boost investment at the European level and launching a pilot phase for
project bonds. These measures will allow reaching a better balance between fiscal
discipline and growth prospects, as advocated by the Staff report. Authorities note that a
further impetus for growth will come from realising the full potential of the Single
Market, especially for the services sector.

