December 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/359

© 2011 International Monetary Fund

October 12 011

2011

January 29, 2001

Solomon Islands: 2011 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Standby Credit
Facility, and Request for Arrangement Under the Standby Credit Facility—Staff Report;
Staff Supplements; Public Information Notice and Press Releases; and Statement by the
Executive Director for Solomon Islands
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members,
usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2011 Article IV consultation with
Solomon Islands and the third review under the Standby Credit Facility, and request for arrangement
under the Standby Credit Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this
package:


The staff report for the combined 2011 Article IV Consultation, third review under the Standby
Credit Facility, and request for arrangement under the Standby Credit Facility, prepared by a staff
team of the IMF, following discussions that ended on October 12, 2011, with the officials of
Solomon Islands on economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the
time of these discussions, the staff report was completed on November 8, 2011. The views
expressed in the staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Executive Board of the IMF.



Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis 2011



A staff supplement of November 18, 2011 updating information on recent economic developments.



A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the Executive
Board as expressed during its November 23, 2011, discussion of the staff report on issues related
to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.



A Press release.



Statement by the Executive Director for Solomon Islands

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Solomon Islands*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of
Solomon Islands*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
Selected Issues Paper
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund  Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430  Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Standby
Credit Facility, and Request for Arrangement Under the Standby Credit Facility
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by Hoe Ee Khor and Dominique Desruelle
November 8, 2011
Key Issues
Context and outlook. Solomon Islands’ economy has rebounded from the 2008–09 global financial crisis.
An 18-month Standby Credit Facility (SCF) was approved in June 2010 and succeeded in restoring
macroeconomic and financial stability. A strong commodity-based recovery is underway led by demand
for logging from emerging Asia, particularly in China. Reserve buffers have been rebuilt. However,
progress toward reducing poverty has been limited. Growth remains concentrated in the commodity sector
with limited spill-over to the rest of the economy. The near-term prospects remain favorable, but downside
near-term risks have increased with the uncertainty in the global outlook.
Focus. The mission focused on the policy mix that could help the country strengthen its resilience to
external shocks by building policy buffers and achieve sustainable and inclusive growth.
Medium-term agenda. In the medium term, economic prospects are contingent on the implementation of
a critical mass of structural reforms:


A new resource taxation regime is key to reap the benefits from natural resource wealth and ensure
that the government receives a fair share of mining revenue. Reforms of mining legislation should be a
key part of a broader set of measures to improve the investment climate and the regulatory framework.



The quality of public spending on education, health and infrastructure also needs to be strengthened to
lift long-term growth potential.

Program discussions. The authorities are requesting a precautionary SCF arrangement. The precautionary
SCF arrangement would build on the SCF-supported program that expires in early December 2011 and
should be instrumental in anchoring the policy agenda going forward.
Data provision has some shortcoming, but is broadly adequate for surveillance. Significant progress
has been made in the timeliness of core macroeconomic data since the 2009 Article IV.
Team. Discussions took place in Honiara during September 29–October 12. The team comprised Ms.
Tumbarello (head), Messrs. Feridhanusetyawan and Peiris, and Ms. Lin (all APD). Mr. Khor (APD) and Ms.
Hunter (OED) joined the policy meetings. Mr. Bulman (World Bank) joined the Article IV discussions. The
mission met with Deputy Prime Minister Manasseh Maelanga, Minister of Finance Gordon Darcy Lilo,
Minister of Development Planning and Aid Coordination Snyder Rini, Minister of Public Service Rick
Houenipwela, Governor of the Central Bank Denton Rarawa, other senior officials, financial institutions,
private sector representatives, and development partners.

2
Contents

Page

I.

The Setting .....................................................................................................................4

II.

Recent Developments and Outlook ...............................................................................4

III.

Enhancing Resilience to Shocks and Building Policy Buffers–The Near-term
Macroeconomic Policy Mix ..........................................................................................8
A.
Fiscal Policy ........................................................................................................8
B.
Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ..............................................................10

IV.

Policies for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth ............................................................13
A. Managing the Mineral Wealth Over the Medium Term–Fiscal Policy and Tax
Reform ...................................................................................................................15
B. Structural Reforms to Support Private Sector Growth ..........................................16

V.

Safeguarding Financial Sector Stability ......................................................................18

VI.

Addressing External Competitiveness and Safeguarding External Stability ...............21

VII.

Program Discussions....................................................................................................23

VIII.

Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................24

Boxes
1.
Global Commodity Prices, Exchange Rate Pass-through and Monetary Transmission
Mechanism ...................................................................................................................12
2.
National Development Strategy (NDS) 2011–21 ........................................................14
3.
The National Provident Fund .......................................................................................19
4.
Exchange Rate Assessment..........................................................................................22
Figures
1.
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook...............................................................28
2.
From Crisis to Recovery—Rebuilding Policy Buffers ...............................................30
3.
The Cross-Country Context .........................................................................................31

Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–12 ......................................................................32
Balance of Payments, 2008–16 ....................................................................................33
Summary of Fiscal Accounts, 2008–12 .......................................................................34
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 2009–16 ................................................................35
Summary Accounts of the Banking System, December 2008–December 2012 .........36

3
6.
7.

Reviews and Disbursement Under the Fund Arrangement..........................................37
Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–21....................................................38

Annex
I.
Millennium Development Goals .................................................................................39
Appendix
I.
Letter of Intent .............................................................................................................44
Attachment I. Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies ..............................46
Attachment II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding .........................................54

4
I. THE SETTING
1. Solomon Islands is a small open economy vulnerable to external demand shocks
and terms of trade volatility. The country’s main exports are timber and, more recently,
gold. Tourism accounts for less than 2 percent of GDP. The mineral sector has the potential
to become one of the main drivers of growth, if the appropriate policies are implemented as
logging stocks are expected to be exhausted later in this decade. Food and fuel account for
about 40 percent of total imports. Overall, the trade and production structures make the
economy extremely vulnerable to swings in commodity prices. The country relies heavily on
foreign aid to finance its external and internal imbalances.
2.
While the economy has rebounded from the global crisis thanks to strong political
commitments to sound macroeconomic management, current gains from high growth
rates will prove transitory if progress in structural reform lags. Bolstering resilience to
shocks and adopting a more inclusive-growth model remain top priorities. One key challenge
is to ensure that the forthcoming mineral wealth spills over to the rest of the economy;
another is to create jobs in the non-mineral sector. Addressing these challenges will speed up
progress toward achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) targets, which are
currently lagging behind.
3.
Against this background, the 2011 Article IV discussions tackled both near- and
longer-term policy issues. A special focus was on the policy mix that could help the country
strengthen its resilience to external shocks by building policy buffers and achieve sustainable
and inclusive growth. In the medium term, economic prospects are contingent on the
implementation of a critical mass of structural reforms. A new resource taxation regime is
key to reap the benefits from natural resource wealth and ensure that the government receives
a fair share of mining revenue. Reforms of the mining legislations should be a key part of a
broader set of measures to improve the investment climate and the regulatory framework to
attract foreign investment. The quality of public spending on education, health and
infrastructure also needs to be strengthened to lift long-term growth potential. The authorities
are requesting a precautionary Standby Credit Facility (SCF) arrangement. The precautionary
SCF arrangement would build on the SCF-supported program that expires in early December
2011 and should be instrumental in anchoring the policy agenda going forward. Given the
strong balance of payment position, no disbursement is envisaged under the baseline
scenario. However, downside risks to the outlook have increased.
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
From Crisis to Recovery
8

2008

2009

2010

6
4
2
0
-2
-4

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Tonga

Samoa

Fiji

Tuvalu

Micronesia

Marshall
Islands

Palau

Kiribati

Vanuatu

Solomon
Islands

-6
Papua
New Guinea

4.
Solomon Islands’ economy has rebounded
strongly from the 2008–09 global financial crisis.
Growth contracted by nearly 5 percent in 2009
driven by a drop in commodity exports, mainly
logging. International reserves were depleted. By
early 2010, the government had run out of cash and
accumulated large domestic arrears.

Pacific Island Countries: Real GDP Growth
(In percentage points)

5
An 18-month SCF arrangement was
Pacific Island Countries: Relative Growth Performance
approved in June 2010. The program
(Real GDP growth relative to regional median, in percent)
15
succeeded in restoring macroeconomic and
Palau
Solomon Islands
Fiji
Kiribati
financial stability, catalyzing donor support,
Vanuatu
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Tonga
10
and promoting structural reforms. Strong
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Tuvalu
demand for logging from emerging Asia,
particularly in China, and favorable terms of 5
trade triggered an unexpected surge in
0
logging production in 2010 and growth
rebounded to 7 percent. Like Papua New
-5
Guinea which has benefitted from high
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
global commodity prices, the relative
Source: IMF staff estimates.
growth performance of Solomon Islands has
improved over the last two years compared to the other Pacific island countries.

2010

5.
A strong commodity-based recovery is underway. Log production surprised on the
upside and jumped by 40 percent year-on-year (y/y) in the first eight months of 2011, close
to a historical high. This reflected
Solomon Islands: Production by Major Commodities
Mar. 2010 - Aug. 2011
investments of new logging companies, re(3mma, year-on-year percent change)
200
entry logging (the harvesting of native stands 200
Copra
in areas previously logged and where trees
160
160
Timber Logs
have not re-grown fully), and strong log
120
120
prices following the earthquake and tsunami
80
80
in Japan in March, which triggered a surge in
demand for logs to build temporary housing.
40
40
Production of copra has also increased by
0
0
80 percent (y/y) during January-August 2011.
-40
-40
The redeveloped Gold Ridge mine which
Mar-10
Jul-10
Oct-10
Feb-11
Jun-11
Aug-11
Sources: Country authorities ; and IMF staff estimates.
started its operations in April 2011 has also
supported the current expansion. Leading indicators of annual GDP growth suggest that
activity will be exceptionally high in 2011 with growth reaching over 9 percent. Anecdotal
evidence indicates that private sector activity in the retail and construction sectors has picked
up, as the recovery gained traction, but credit growth has remained sluggish as these
activities, in particular retail, appear to be self-financed and mining investment is financed
offshore.
6.
Inflation pressures are dissipating. After falling to 1 percent (y/y) in 2010, inflation
increased to 8.7 percent (y/y) in August 2011
Solomon Islands: CPI Inflation
Jan. 2007–Aug. 2011
reflecting base effects and the pass-through of
(3mma of m/m percent change, sa)
4
global energy and food prices. However, the
CPI
latest reading of month-on-month (m/m) data
3
CPI excl. food
CPI excl. food and fuel
through August suggests a sustained downward
2
momentum. Both headline and core inflation
(excluding food and fuel) are edging down
1
helped by the revaluation of the domestic
0
currency in June and the decline in fuel prices
-1
Jan-07

Dec-07

Nov-08

Oct-09

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Sep-10

4

3

2

1

0

-1
Aug-11

6
since mid-year, with headline inflation reaching
almost a negative territory on an m/m basis.

Solomon Islands: Exports of Goods
(In percent of total exports)
.

7.
Reserve buffers have been rebuilt and
Solomon Islands’ external position continues
to be strong. The trade balance shifted from
deficit to surplus during April–September 2011
for the first time since 2004, driven by
exceptionally strong gold exports and logging.
As a result, the balance of payment position
improved, supported by large FDI and aid flows.
Gross international reserves increased to
US$355 million (6 months imports) in June
2011 from less than US$100 million in mid-2009
(Figure 1, Tables 1 and 2).
8.
However, progress toward reducing
poverty has been limited. Despite strong growth,
the recovery is uneven and growth remains
concentrated in the commodity sector with limited
spill-over to the rest of the economy. The spike in
food and fuel prices in 2008 has undermined past
gains in poverty reduction. As a result, most of the
MDGs are unlikely to be met by 2015.1

8.0
20.5

Copra & Coconut Oil
8.4

4.2

Fish

9.0

14.1

Logs
3.0

Cocoa

7.7

9.3

Timber
Apr-Sep 2010

Palm Oil & Kernels

1.9

Minerals (incl. gold in 2011)

57.0

5.0

45.1

Apr-Sep 2011
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Solomon Islands: Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Progress
MDG 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger.
Halve between 1990 and 2015 the proportion of people
whose income is less than $1 per day.

Mixed

MDG 2. Achieve Universal Primary Education.

Mixed

MDG 3. Promote gender equality and empowerment
Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary
education.

Off track

MDG 4. Reduce child (Under 5) mortality by two thirds

Off track

MDG 5. Improve maternal health
Reduce maternal mortality by three quarters.

Off track

MDG 6. Reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria and
TB

Mixed

MDG 7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Integrate principles of sustainable development into
country policies.

Off track

Source: 2011 Pacific Regional MDG Tracking Report, Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat.

Outlook, Spillovers and Risks

10.
The still favorable outlook for Australia,
New Zealand and China should have positive
spillovers on Solomon Islands. China accounts
1

(annual deviations from mean growth )

9.
Under the baseline scenario Solomon Islands’ near-term economic prospects
remain favorable. Real GDP growth is projected at 6 percent in 2012 with gold production
(from the Gold Ridge mine) taking over from logging as a main driver of growth. The still
positive outlook for fast-growing emerging Asia, especially China, will continue to support
activity. Inflation is likely to decrease to around 5¼ percent down from 7 percent in 2011, as
commodity prices stabilize. The balance of
Solomon Islands: Real GDP Growth
payment position would also remain strong with
Correlation with Australia, China, and New Zealand (1992-2010)
12
gross international reserves projected at 6½
8
months of imports at end-2011 and 2012. Under
4
the baseline scenario, staff does not envisage any
disbursement under the proposed precautionary
0
SCF arrangement.
-4
-8
-12
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Australia, China, and New Zealand
(annual deviations from mean growth )
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff calculations.

The incidence of poverty is high in Solomon Islands. The latest analysis on poverty based on the 2005-06
household income and expenditure data suggest that almost 25 percent of the population is below (the basic
need) poverty line.

2

3

7
for 50 percent of Solomon Islands’ total exports, and Australia and New Zealand are the
largest providers of aid. Staff analysis suggests a positive correlation between growth in
Australia, New Zealand and China, and Solomon Islands over the last twenty years. In
addition, the planned increase in Australia’s and New Zealand’s bilateral official
development assistance over the next few years should continue to support growth. Strong
linkages with Papua New Guinea—a booming economy—through financial channels and
labor market mobility should also benefit Solomon Islands’ growth prospects.
11.
However, the near-term risks to the baseline scenario are tilted to the downside,
given the deterioration of the external outlook. On the downside, a key near-term risk is
that global recovery stalls because of the current global turmoil in Europe or Asian growth
falters, lowering commodity prices and thus exports of logs and gold—Solomon Islands’ key
commodity exports. On the domestic front, the fluid political coalition could slow down the
implementation of structural reforms affecting negatively the outlook. On the upside, activity
in the logging and mining sectors could be larger than expected should Asian economies
remain resilient to the current global turmoil.
12.
Downward scenario. If near-term external downside risks were to materialize,
contagion would occur through a sharp contraction in FDI and demand for commodities from
Asia, and a deterioration of the terms of trade. Staff estimates suggest that a 20 percent
decline in gold and log prices in 2012–13 compared to the baseline, a sharp drop in logging
exports, and delays in gold production would lower GDP growth by around 4 percentage
points and double the size of the current account deficit in 2012. Under this downward
scenario, one would envisage a disbursement under the proposed SCF arrangement of
US$8.2 million in order to maintain international reserves on average at 4 months of imports
of goods and non-factor services during 2012–13.
Solomon Islands: Baseline and Downside Scenarios
2011
Baseline

2012

Downside 1/

Baseline

2013

Downside 1/

Baseline Downside 1/

Real GDP growth (in percent)
Current account balance (in percent of GDP)
Logs export (in percent of GDP)
Gold export (in percent of GDP)

9.3
-11.6
22.3
10.8

8.8
-14.0
22.2
8.9

6.0
-12.7
13.7
19.3

2.0
-26.9
4.5
13.0

4.0
-15.6
9.7
20.6

3.2
-28.1
2.8
15.4

Financing (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Change in gross reserves (- = increase)
IMF 2/

-88.8
-98.7
10.0

-85.8
-98.5
12.7

-25.0
-24.9
-0.1

122.0
116.6
5.4

10.4
10.5
-0.1

47.2
47.3
-0.1

Gross official foreign reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
In months of next year's imports of GNFS
Overall fiscal balance (in percent of GDP)

364.6
6.5
3.6

364.3
6.9
3.4

389.5
6.4
1.3

247.7
4.4
0.1

379.0
5.8
0.2

200.4
3.4
0.0

1/ Assumes a 20 percent decline in log and gold prices in 2011-13 compared to the baseline scenario, a 40 percent decline in log production in 2012
and 30 percent decline in 2013, and delays in gold production during 2012-13.
2/ The downside scenario reflects the disbursements under the successor Standby Credit Facility of 50 percent of quota in total (US$8.2 million).

13.
Over the medium term, achieving more inclusive growth would be critical for
social cohesion and to ensure a sustainable growth path. Over the medium term, growth
will remain around 4 percent. This lower trajectory reflects the projected decline in logging
production and a leveling off in contribution of gold activity. The outlook for the medium
term depends on the scope and speed of the government’s reform agenda. The upside risk to
the medium-term growth outlook stems from stronger-than-anticipated activity in the mining
sector (e.g., gold and nickel) if structural reforms are well implemented leading to an
improvement of the business environment and more FDI. Nonetheless, mining is a more
capital intensive activity than logging. In order for mining wealth to spill over to the rest of

8
the economy, the government will have to step up the implementation of structural reforms
that promote private sector growth and broaden the economy’s base, thereby creating
employment opportunities in other sectors that are more labor intensive.
Authorities’ Views
14.
The authorities broadly agreed with staff on the outlook and balance of risks.
They were concerned about the potential impact on Solomon Islands’ economy of a
significant disruption of global growth. They considered the downside risks to the outlook as
mainly external and noted that there is no scope for complacency. However, they viewed the
underlying growth momentum as still favorable, with inflation expected to moderate and
reserves remaining at a healthy level. They shared staff’s views that under the baseline
scenario there would not be any disbursement under the precautionary SCF given their
current strong balance of payment position.
III. ENHANCING RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS AND BUILDING POLICY BUFFERS—THE
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC POLICY MIX
15.
The pillars of the successor SCF-supported program include strengthening the
fiscal framework, improving monetary operations, maintaining a strong foreign
exchange position, and containing financial sector risks (MEFP Section II). Preserving the
strong external and fiscal positions and strengthening fiscal management remain top
priorities. Increasing the capacity of the public sector including through coordination with the
donor community is also important to deliver services and implement investment projects. To
address medium-term challenges, the program also focuses on reforms to raise non-logging
revenue, including from mineral resources, develop multiyear budgeting, and resume
concessional borrowing. In addition, the program will also aim at preserving monetary
stability, reforming the National Provident Fund, and improving access to finance for the
private sector.
A. Fiscal Policy
Background

Revenue Volatility
0.35

Coefficient of Variation

16.
The fiscal position has improved as a
Solomon Islands
0.3
result of strong commodity revenues, financial
0.25
support from donors and better fiscal
Kiribati
0.2
management. The revenue base is large, but
0.15
PNG
volatile due to its dependency on commodity
Fiji
Marshall Islands
Developing Asia
0.1
Micronesia
prices. Yet, the fiscal position has strengthened
Vanuatu
Samoa
Tonga
under the SCF-supported program and fiscal
ASEAN-5
0.05
World
buffers have been rebuilt (Figure 2, Table 3). The
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
government fiscal surplus reached over 6 percent
Revenue excluding grants (In percent of GDP, average 1992-2010)
Source: IMF staff estimates.
of GDP in 2010 against 2½ percent of GDP
targeted under the program. The cash balance increased from almost zero in the first quarter
of 2010 to around SI$260 million at end of the year and reached more than SI$300 million in
June 2011—equivalent to two months of recurrent spending. Public debt has declined from
60 percent of GDP in 2005 to less than 30 percent in 2010 (Table 4). The improvement in the
fiscal position reflected stronger-than-anticipated revenue from logging as the recovery

9
gained traction together with strong improvements in tax compliance and tax arrears
collection. However, the non-commodity fiscal balance provides a more nuanced picture of
the underlying fiscal position and shows a small deterioration in 2010. Recurrent spending
was also kept under control despite some cost pressures from national elections and
additional wage bills. Finally, the strong program implementation under the SCF catalyzed
large disbursements of donor support, particularly from the EU, that contributed to the
buildup in the fiscal cash balance. The authorities are expected to submit the 2011
supplemental budget and the 2012 budget to parliament in late November.
17.
Preliminary data for 2011 suggest that the fiscal position has strengthened
further in recent months thanks to stronger-than-anticipated logging revenues and
buoyant non-logging revenues. The increase in taxes on goods and services reflects a
further strengthening in tax collections and stronger consumer confidence, consistent with the
ongoing recovery. Strong revenue performance up to August suggests that the program
targets for the rest of the year could be achieved comfortably even if the authorities pass a
2011 supplementary budget of up to 1 percent of GDP later this year.
Staff’s Views
18.
In discussing the forthcoming 2012 budget, the mission stressed that the key
challenge is to build policy buffers in a way that reinforces efforts to implement growthenhancing and poverty-reducing reforms. In particular, it raised the following points:


Preserving the cash balance. To anchor fiscal plans in the near term, the authorities
should maintain the cash balance at no less than two months of recurrent spending in
2011 and 2012.



Strengthening domestic revenues. This can be achieved by rationalizing tax structures.
The mission urged the authorities to continue applying the full market price for log
exports with an automatic quarterly adjustment. In light of the expected decline in
logging revenue starting in 2012, the ongoing efforts to raise revenues by strengthening
tax administration and customs, and broadening the tax base should be stepped up.



Boosting priority spending. As the recovery proceeds, the authorities should strike a
balance between preserving strong fiscal buffers and increasing spending on critical
infrastructure and social priorities, such as health and education. While stronger-thananticipated revenues compared to the budget should be partly saved to maintain the fiscal
buffers at a comfortable level to deal with future shocks, a scaling up of critical
infrastructure investment and social priority expenditure would be important to make
meaningful progress toward the attainment of the MGDs and achieving inclusive growth.2
However, the pace of spending will need to be calibrated, taking into account capacity
constraints. The authorities should continue to limit the growth of nonessential recurrent

2

The authorities are still working toward reconciling the data on spending on health and education. An
indicative floor on this priority spending will be set during the first program review once the tracking
mechanism is in place.

10
spending in order to create the necessary fiscal space for critical development spending.
In particular large wage/benefits increases and transfers to local constituencies should be
resisted. The mission stressed the importance of strengthening the management and
transparency of government-funded development budget, including the National
Transport Fund (NTF), and saving unspent budgetary resources to contribute to the NTF.
Authorities’ Views and Plans
19.
The authorities’ views and plans are outlined in the MEFP (¶6). The authorities
reiterated their commitment to strengthening the fiscal position and to maintaining the
government cash balance at no less than two months of recurrent spending. They indicated
that the over-performance of the cash balance carried over from 2010–11, the buoyancy of
tax collection, and windfall mining revenue could create additional fiscal space in 2012.
While they stressed the need to increase spending on infrastructure, health and education to
lift potential growth and spread the benefits more widely, they added that the low absorptive
capacity may constrain the pace of spending. Yet they are committed to keeping spending on
health and education at no less than 32 percent of the government-funded recurrent budget
and to increasing infrastructure spending by doubling the contribution to the NTF. The
authorities indicated they are currently working on the reconciliation of data on health and
education spending, including spending financed by donor budget support. Progress has been
made in improving the timely reporting of priority spending by the Ministry of Health and
Ministry of Education. In light of the limited absorptive capacity, they indicated their
intention to use any additional fiscal surplus arising from buoyant revenues to retire domestic
and/or external debt, if positive revenue surprises materialize. To improve the quality of
spending and strengthen public financial management, the authorities will revise budget
presentation from input line items to functional/output items. They will also seek assistance
from development partners to strengthen procurement and internal audit processes to reduce
leakages that affect public service delivery.
B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
Background

Solomon Islands: Bank Reserves and Interest Rate
Jun. 2007–Aug. 2011

20.
Monetary conditions have remained
accommodative over the past two years, but the
authorities have appropriately started to mop up
excess liquidity. The improved balance of payment
position, supported by strong terms of trade, allowed
the Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI) to let
the currency appreciate by 7 percent against the U.S.
dollar from March 2011 to August 2011 to help curb
inflation pressures stemming from rising fuel and food import prices. As a result, inflation is
on a downward trend. However, the rapid increase in international reserves led to a large
accumulation of banks’ excess reserves in 2010–11 because of a limited sterilization
capacity. Early this year the central bank resumed auctioning its short-term paper (28-day
Bokolo bills) following the introduction of new auction guidelines. As a result, excess
liquidity has stabilized, albeit at a very high level, while interest rates have remained low. If a
4.5

4.0

Bank reserves (ratio to deposits, in percent, RHS)
Treasury bill rate (percent per annum, LHS)
Liquid asset ratio (percent, RHS)

60

50

40

3.5

30

3.0

2.5

2.0
Jun-07
Apr-08
Feb-09
Dec-09
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Oct-10

20

10

0
Aug-11

11
downside scenario were to materialize, the authorities have space to slow down monetary
tightening.
21.
Yet there are no signs of a pickup in private credit (Table 5). Private sector credit
growth has remained negative reflecting delays in the execution of donor-funded projects, the
still nascent recovery in private investment, and a tightening in banks’ lending standards.
Staff’s Views
22.
The monetary and exchange rate policies over the past few months have helped
anchor inflation expectations and are appropriate. Staff analysis showed that while the
monetary transmission mechanism is currently weak partly because of the excess liquidity in
the system, the pass-through of exchange rate changes to headline inflation has been rapid
and nearly complete. Thus, the recent nominal exchange rate appreciation has helped contain
imported inflation and was on the mark.3 Given the uncertainty surrounding the global
outlook, subdued credit growth and the benign outlook for inflation, the current setting
remains appropriate.
23.
However, if the recovery remains on track and inflation pressures start to reemerge, monetary tightening would be warranted. The CBSI should stand ready to tighten
its policy by raising the reserve requirement and scaling up open market operations should
the large overhang in excess reserves in the banking system lead to rapid credit growth or
demand-led inflationary pressures. The exchange rate should continue to be managed in a
flexible manner in order to provide a buffer against external shocks. Should the government
decide to retire domestic debt, close coordination between the Central Bank and the Ministry
of Finance would be critical to ensure that the injection of liquidity into the private sector
does not lead to excessive credit growth. To increase the effectiveness of monetary policy,
the amendments to the CBSI Act would be critical because they would strengthen its
operational autonomy and transparency, including by improving its communication with the
public.
Authorities’ Views
24.
The Governor of the CBSI emphasized that monetary and exchange rate policies
will continue to be geared toward maintaining price and external stability (MEFP ¶8).
The Central Bank will monitor credit developments closely and tighten monetary policy
should the banks start to expand credit aggressively. Excess liquidity will continue to be
mopped up using Bokolo bills while the cash reserve requirement will be used in the unlikely
event of a credit boom. The Governor indicated that the exchange rate will be managed using
a pragmatic approach and adjusted as needed. He also noted that while the CBSI’s decision
to let domestic currency appreciate in June has helped reduce inflationary pressures, the
benefits of lower import prices have not been fully passed through to domestic consumers by
traders who have increased their margins. Yet, the objective of reducing average inflation to

3

See Selected Issues paper by S. Peiris, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Transmission Mechanism in
Solomon Islands” and Box 1.

12
Box 1. Global Commodity Prices, Exchange Rate Pass-through and
the Monetary Transmission Mechanism1
Inflation dynamics in Solomon Islands is highly dependent on global commodity prices as
confirmed by graphic analysis. Food accounts for 43 percent of the consumer price index
(CPI), nearly half of which is imported. An increase in international fuel prices historically has
resulted in an equal increase in domestic
Solomon Islands: Commodity Price Pass-Through: Fuel
prices, with a few months lag. Over the last
2006Q1 - 2011Q2
140
14
decade, food and fuel imports represented,
120
12
on average, 40 percent of total imports.
Staff’s econometric analysis suggests that
the exchange rate could be a useful tool
to control imported inflation and absorb
external shocks. A more flexible use of the
exchange rate would also provide greater
scope for monetary policy to be focused on
domestic price stability.




The exchange rate pass-through to
the imported component of the CPI
is nearly complete within a year (i.e.,
a-one percent depreciation in the
exchange rate raises the imported
component of consumer prices by
0.98 percent within 10 months).
Econometric tests suggest that the
exchange rate determines the imported
component of the CPI; and, in turn, the
import price index determines the
domestic consumer price index and not
vice-versa.

10

80

8

60

6

40

4
International petroleum spot price (US$ per barrel, LHS)

20

2

Domestic petrol price (SI$ per litre, RHS)

0
2006Q1

2006Q4

2007Q3

2008Q2

2009Q1

2009Q4

2010Q3

0
2011Q2

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Solomon Islands: Commodity Price Pass-Through: Rice
2006Q1 - 2011Q2
1200

300

1000

250

800

200

600

150

400

100

200

International price of rice (US$ per metric ton, LHS)
Domestic rice price (SI$ for 20Kg Bag, RHS)

50

0
0
2006Q1 2006Q4 2007Q3 2008Q2 2009Q1 2009Q4 2010Q3 2011Q2
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

The analysis of the transmission of external and monetary shocks to inflation suggests
that the monetary transmission mechanism is currently weak. External shocks,
particularly global fuel prices, explain a large share of the variation in headline inflation,
both directly and indirectly through second-round effects. The impact of monetary shocks
on headline inflation is weak regardless of the monetary variable considered (broad money,
reserve money, interest rates, or domestic credit), probably reflecting the excess liquidity in
the banking system and structural impediments to access to credit due to difficulties in
using land as collateral. The strong influence of the imported component of CPI on
headline inflation and the weak monetary transmission mechanism suggest a greater role
for the exchange rate in affecting inflation than monetary policy.

____________________
1

100

Prepared by Shanaka J. Peiris.

13
around 6 percent in 2011 is broadly on track. The CBSI officials reported that sluggish credit
growth reflects not only the absence of bankable projects but also on the high lending rates
and tightening of lending standards. The recent decision of commercial banks to lower the
lending rate by 2 percentage points could help stimulate private credit growth, but officials
agreed with staff that a credit boom is unlikely. CBSI officials also indicated that should the
government decide to prepay debt, they would prefer the retirement of external debt because
it would help reduce liquidity in the banking system.
IV. POLICIES FOR SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH
Background
25.
Medium-term policy challenges. One key issue Solomon Islands faces over the
medium term is to ensure that the forthcoming mineral wealth spills over to the rest of the
economy. This will entail two main policy challenges: first, how to manage the potentially
large mineral revenues from the mining sector and secure resources to finance its economic
development going forward, without jeopardizing debt sustainability; and, second, how to
foster private sector development. Investors’ growing interest and investment in the resource
sector—especially mining—is expected to underpin the medium-term growth prospects for
Solomon Islands. Sound management of the expected mineral revenues could potentially
provide the resources for financing development, thereby creating jobs, raising household
incomes and reducing poverty. But it brings with it challenges to which polices will need to
respond. Development grants will gradually decline (in terms of GDP) over the medium term
as the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI), which started in 2003, will
scale down its operations beginning in 2013.
26.
Authorities’ medium-term policy agenda. The authorities have formulated an update
of the Medium-term Fiscal Strategy for 2010–15 in August 2010.4 The strategy does not only
cover fiscal and tax reform issues but it also contains a blueprint for structural reforms to
support private sector development. In addition, the authorities have launched a
comprehensive National Development Strategy (NDS) on structural reforms in September
2011. The overarching theme of the NDS is to build better lives for all Solomon Islanders by
focusing on poverty alleviation and achievement of the MDGs, providing access to quality
health care and education (Box 2). In addition, the authorities have also developed a strategy
together with the donor community under the Core Economic Working Group (CEWG)—a
government donors partnership. The CEWG reform program is based on three pillars: public
financial management, budget reform, and economic growth. The medium-term growth
strategy outlined in the MEFP aims at maintaining macroeconomic stability and reducing the
costs of doing business by improving the business climate and land tenure-security. On
strengthening the fiscal framework, the authorities’ new plans include developing a multiyear budget framework next year, in time for the 2013 budget.

4

www.mof.gov.sb/.../Medium_Term_Fiscal_Strategy_2010-2015.sflb.ashx.

14
Box 2. Solomon Islands: National Development Strategy (NDS) 2011–211
In September 2011, the government launched the NDS with an overarching objective of
alleviating poverty and helping the attainment of the MDGs.
The NDS has eight development objectives:
1. Alleviating poverty: Develop and implement programs to alleviate poverty; improve
equity in social service provision; manage the rate of population growth; and promote
and foster national unity and sustainable peace.
2. Supporting the vulnerable group: Establish a social security system; support people with
disability; provide food security; protect and develop the interests and rights of children;
promote the development of youth; and improve gender equality and opportunities for
women.
3. Ensuring access to quality health care: Provide quality health service, including by
ensuring adequate supply of medicine; building and maintaining health infrastructure;
and promoting healthy diets.
4. Ensuring access to quality education: Promote effective implementation of the National
Education Action Plan and the Education Sector Framework; prepare and implement
education infrastructure development plan; and ensure that the education and training
systems develop skills required for the labor market.
5. Increasing economic growth and equitably distributing employment: support private
sector led growth; increase opportunities for trade; increase opportunities for
employment; develop economic growth centers; and promote sustainable use of natural
resources.
6. Developing physical infrastructure and utilities: Improve water supply and sanitation;
ensure availability and efficient use of energy; develop efficient and cost effective
communication services; develop air services and infrastructures; rehabilitate road
infrastructure; and improve local transport services.
7. Responding to climate change and managing the environment: Mainstream climate
change into national development planning; promote a holistic and sustainable approach
to natural resources management; and develop measures to manage and reduce natural
disaster risks.
8. Improving governance and law and order: Improve standards of governance and service
delivery by public servants; increase effectiveness, reliability, and efficiency of electoral
processes; strengthen the provincial government; promote a safe, secure, and stable living
environment; strengthen the capacity of legal system; and improve border security.
___________________
1

Prepared by Tubagus Feridhanusetyawan.

15
A. Managing the Mineral Wealth Over the Medium Term—Fiscal Policy and Tax
Reform
Staff’s Views
27.
Prudent management of natural
resources is critical to replace revenue from
logging. The mission suggested the following
policy measures:




5

Implementing the resource tax regime
legislation would help sustain fiscal revenue.
Tax reform can play a key role in allowing
Solomon Islands to take full advantage of the
strong prospects in the mining sector. The
authorities should finalize the amendments to
tax legislation and implement the new
resource taxation regime in line with FAD
recommendations. As a critical first step, the
authorities should enforce the Gold Ridge
mining agreement to ensure that revenues
from gold, particularly corporate and
additional profits taxes are collected
effectively. Mining revenue (from the Gold
Ridge mine) is expected to remain modest at
1 percent of GDP during 2011–12. Under the
current WEO commodity assumptions, staff
estimates that mining revenue could amount
to around 4 percent of GDP in the medium
term, replacing revenue from the declining
logging industry. Staff’s sensitivity analysis
suggests that if gold prices were to decline by
25 percent from the current WEO price
baseline, mining revenue would still amount to
2–3 percent of GDP. 5

Solomon Islands: Fiscal Revenue Excluding Grants, 2009-2016
(In percent of GDP)
40

30

20

10

0
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Mining tax

Logging tax

Nonmining nonlogging tax

Other revenue

2015

2016

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Solomon Islands: Fiscal Expenditure, 2009-2016
(In percent of GDP)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2009

2010

2011

2012

Recurrent (grant funded)
Development (grant funded)
Development (government funded)

2013

2014

2015

2016

Recurrent (government funded)
Development (loan funded)

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

Solomon Islands: Fiscal balance, 2009-2016
(In percent of GDP)

40
30
20
10
0
-10

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Strengthening the medium-term fiscal
Revenue excluding grants
Development expenditure (gov. funded)
framework by adopting fiscal responsibility
Recurrent expenditure
Development expenditure (loan funded)
Overall balance
Noncommodity balance
provisions would help maintain fiscal
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
sustainability. The mission praised the
authorities for reforming the Public Finance Act to incorporate fiscal responsibility
provisions that include commitments to developing medium-term budget strategy,
maintaining appropriate level of cash balance, management and use of public funds, and

See Selected Issues paper by T. Feridhanusetyawan, “Managing Mineral Resources in Solomon Islands.”

16
promoting budget transparency and accountability. Staff urged the authorities to adopt
these provisions by end-2012.


Developing a multi-year budget framework would also provide more fiscal discipline.
Realistic fiscal plans in line with the objectives of the NDS would be more easily
designed and fiscal sustainability safeguarded.



Targeting the non-commodity fiscal balance as opposed to the cash balance starting in
2014 would help anchor fiscal plans over the medium term, as mining taxes become a
large source of government revenue. This rule would help moderate pro-cyclical fiscal
policies driven by volatile revenues and support the economy during downturns. It
would also ensure a more sustainable use of exhaustible resources.



Resuming concessional borrowing after completing the Honiara Club Agreement review
would be key to tap resources to finance development needs going forward. The
improved fiscal position and the favorable revenue prospects provide scope for resuming
concessional borrowing. Public debt has declined from about 60 percent of GDP in 2005
to below 30 percent at end-2010 under the framework of the Honiara Club Agreement
(HCA) which allows the country to receive only grants, not loans. The authorities are
currently developing a new debt strategy and reviewing the HCA framework to facilitate
access to external borrowing on concessional terms. Preliminary Debt Sustainability
Analysis (DSA) results indicate that Solomon Islands will remain at a moderate risk of
debt distress, even after transitioning to concessional borrowing.

Authorities’ Views
28.
The authorities agreed that strengthening the management of natural resources
is key over the medium-term (MEFP ¶7). They also indicated that the new plan of
developing a multi-year budget framework should also help from a political economy point
of view, particularly in containing spending pressures in the near term. The multi-year budget
framework will help build consensus on the appropriate sequencing of development projects
and calibrate better the pace of development spending taking into account capacity
constraints.
B. Structural Reforms to Support Private Sector Growth
Background
Pacific Island Countries: Business Climate Indicators
180
160
140

Solomon Islands (2012)
Solomon Islands (2011)
Pacific Islands (2012 average)

120
Rank 1/

29.
The business environment has improved
in recent years, but private sector continues to
face several barriers. According to the 2012
World Bank’s Doing Business Report, Solomon
Islands ranks better than most Pacific island
countries on the overall ease of doing business
index, having climbed seven places since last year
to rank 74th. However, procedures for starting a
business and registering property are more
cumbersome than in other Pacific islands.

100
80
60
40
20
0

Ease of
Doing
Business

Starting a
Business

Dealing with Registering
Construction
Property
Permits

Getting
Credit

Source: World Bank Doing Business (2012 Doing Business Report).
1/ Higher rank indicates more costly.

Enforcing
Contracts

17
30.
The authorities have implemented several reforms since the 2009 Article IV
consultation. The government made starting a business easier by implementing an online
registration, it made registering property faster by separating the land registry from the
business and movable property registries, and it strengthened investor protections by
increasing shareholder access to corporate information and adopted a new law that simplified
insolvency proceedings.
31.
The momentum for state-owned-enterprise (SOE) reforms seems finally to have
gained traction. In 2007, Parliament passed the SOE Act which was promulgated in 2009.
Since then, the authorities have liberalized the telecommunication system and the rice sector
by terminating the government monopolies. As a result the calling costs have been reduced
by 50 percent, and the price of rice has declined too. The authorities also plan to resolve the
cross arrears between water and electricity companies to improve service delivery.
Staff’s Views
32.
The authorities’ ongoing efforts to support private sector development have
proved to be effective and should continue. Achieving sustainable, inclusive and broadbased growth will require further implementation of structural reforms. These include: (i)
reforming mining legislations to develop a stable and transparent regulatory regime to attract
foreign investment; (ii) instituting a “one-stop shop” to ease procedures for opening a
business; (iii) streamlining land title registration and transfer of ownership to ease access to
credit, improving collateral recovery and supporting private sector investment; and, (iv) and
exploring options for small business financial schemes (Section VI).
33.
The SOE reforms underway with the assistance of the Asian Development Bank
(AsDB) and the World Bank are critical. Urgent reforms are still needed in public utilities,
such as water and electricity. Reforming the SOEs would also reduce the drain on the budget
and the contingent liabilities, and create more space for social spending.
34.
The NDS is an important step toward a comprehensive poverty reduction and
growth strategy over the next ten years. Going forward, the strategy could benefit from an
appropriate sequencing of policy actions; it should also include costing and prioritization of
projects, and articulate the linkages between spending, growth and poverty reduction. It is
also critical to incorporate an underlying macroeconomic framework with the assistance of
development partners and to provide prudent financing mix to ensure long-term debt
sustainability.
Authorities’ Views
35.
The authorities agreed that a shift to a more inclusive growth model hinges on a
vibrant private sector, as reported in the medium term fiscal strategy and on the NDS
with a special focus on mining, agriculture, tourism, and fishing (MEFP ¶7, 12, 13). With
regard to mining, they noted that the reform of mining legislation and participating with the
Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) should foster the development of the
private sector. On SOE reforms, they agreed to resolve cross arrears between the water and
the electricity companies and undertake tariff reform for water charges. They also stressed
that one impediment to private sector growth is the country’s vulnerability to climate change,

18
in particular the absence of climate change-proof infrastructure, and the impact of income on
rural areas. The authorities are planning on developing an adaptation and migration strategy
with the help of development partners to mitigate the adverse impact on the most vulnerable.
V. SAFEGUARDING FINANCIAL SECTOR STABILITY
Background

Pacific Island Countries: Interest Rate Spreads of
Commercial Banks, 2010

Sources: Country authorities, IFS and IMF staff estimates.

Fiji

Tonga

Marshall
Islands

Micronesia

Samoa

Vanuatu

PNG

Kiribati

Solomon
Islands

14
36.
Solomon Islands’ financial sector
has a simple structure but it has structural 12
Pacific Islands (average)
10
impediments that limit access to credit by
8
small business and households. It consists
6
of three major foreign commercial banks
(ANZ, Westpac and Bank of South Pacific), a 4
2
non-bank financial institution (Credit
0
Corporation Solomon Islands Limited) and a
saving and retirement fund—the National
Provident Fund (NPF), a systematically
important financial institution with a large share of its assets held as deposits in the banking
system (Box 3). On-site examinations on the NPF conducted by Australian Prudential
Regulatory Authority (APRA) suggest that weaknesses remain in the governance and
financial performance of the NPF. Access to finance by the private sector is expensive and
constrained by customary land practices which limit the use of land as collateral, especially
in rural areas. Lack of financial reporting and the single borrower limit also constrain access
to credit. Banks have complained that commercially viable projects are few while the size of
their loans is constrained by the single borrower limit, which explains why credit growth has
been sluggish. The interest rate spread is above the Pacific island average, although in
October commercial banks reduced lending rates by 2 percentage points. The private sector
has regularly complained about high banking charges and fees.

37.
The authorities have tried to bolster financial intermediation. The CBSI had
established a small business finance scheme a few years ago that provides a partial risk
guarantee to banks that lend to small private sector businesses. More recently, Credit
Corporation has been recently active in expanding credit to small and medium enterprises
(SMEs) and using the Secured Transactions Act of 2008. However, the scale of these
operations remains small. Mobile banking is likely to be introduced in 2012 using cellular
phones. This financial innovation may compensate for the closing of a few bank branches for
lack of economic viability.
Staff’s Views
38.
The banking system is sound, adequately
capitalized and highly profitable but some
challenges remain. The ratio of nonperforming loans
(NPLs) to total outstanding loans moderated from 8.3
percent at end-2010 to 6.1 percent at end-June 2011.
On-site examination of major banks conducted by the
CBSI with IMF TA has revealed weaknesses in
accounting and classification, due to the

Solomon Islands: Core Financial Soundness Indicators 1/
2008

Capital adequacy:
Regulated capital to risk-weighted assets
Nonperforming loans, net of provisions to capital
Asset quality:
Nonperforming loans to total gross loans 2/

2009
Mar.

2010 /2
Jun. Sep.

Dec.

2011
Mar.
Jun.

22.6
6.6

22.0
8.5

17.1
15.7

13.9
12.5

19.3
13.1

23.5
14.4

19.8
11.4

21.1
8.6

2.7

3.8

7.0

6.1

7.6

8.3

7.2

6.1

Earnings and profitability:
Return on average assets
Return on average equity
Net interest income to gross income
Noninterest expenses to gross income

6.7
43.0
50.2
34.3

6.0
34.4
52.6
37.5

5.4
33.2
48.3
39.8

5.2
31.1
48.1
40.0

4.8
28.1
47.7
41.9

4.9
28.5
43.9
42.0

2.9
15.9
47.8
52.3

6.6
36.1
46.5
49.7

Liquidity:
Liquid assets to total assets (liquid asset ratio)
Liquid assets to short-term liabilities

20.7
38.3

33.5
67.4

37.8
57.7

41.0
61.9

47.8
74.4

47.8
72.8

51.8
79.4

54.4
82.3

Source: Central Bank of Solomon Islands.
1/ Commercial banks only, as of end-period.
2/ Revised data for 2010 reflecting on-site bank examinations.

19
Box 3. Solomon Islands: The National Provident Fund1
The National Provident Fund Act (NPF) is Solomon Islands’ only pension fund and the largest
pool of financial savings. It provides the only retirement income scheme in the country.



The NPF was established in 1973 as a
defined-contribution pension scheme.
Employers contribute for a minimum of
7½ percent of the employees’ salary and
employees pay 5 percent. The minimum
yearly rate of return guaranteed is
2½ percent. Members can withdraw their
full savings at age 50 (lump-sum
payment) and are allowed to use se their
fund balances as collateral for bank loans
up to two-thirds of their account balance
at any time before then.

National Provident Fund: Rate of Return on Assets
(In percent)
20

20
Return on assets

16

16
Return paid to members

12

12

Minimum return on assets
(2.5 percent)

8

8

4

4

0

0
2009

2010

2011

Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.



National Provident Fund: Asset Allocation
Member contributions (total liabilities
(In percent of total assets)
Total Offshore
Shares and
Dividend
of the fund) have grown at double-digit
Equities
Receivables
9%
4%
rates over the last couple of years
suggesting strong employment growth
Total Domestic
Total Domestic
Cash & Fixed
Shares and
Term Deposits
Equities
in the formal sector. As of June 2011,
31%
16%
total assets amounted to about SI$ 1.27
Total loans to
Total Offshore
Private Individuals
Properties
billion or 20 percent of GDP. The
Cash & Fixed
1%
12%
Term Deposits
11%
NPF’s balance sheet is growing fast but
Total Bonds and
Debt Securities
its investment portfolio is largely
Loans to
8%
Subsidiaries
8%
invested in short-term liquid assets with
Sources: Country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
low returns. While the NPF is allowed
to invest up to 30 percent of its assets off-shore, only about 20 percent is currently
overseas. About one third of the portfolio is held in cash and fixed deposits in the
domestic banking system. The NPF is by far the largest depositor in all three major
banks.



The requirement for the NPF to declare the annual return to members before the
finalization of the audited accounts could result in an unsustainable drawdown of the
Fund’s reserves. As a result, the return paid to members has not always reflected the
return on assets of the Fund. In addition, the lack of a domestic secondary market for
equity and debt instruments makes it difficult to value higher risk equity stakes and real
estate investments which are valued at cost. The politicization of investment decisions in
the past also has resulted in poor investments and non-performing loans, some of which
have been recently restructured.

___________________
1

Prepared by Shanaka J. Peiris.

20
treatment of offshore balances, including transactions with their parent institutions which has
resulted in a significant downward revision of capital in 2010. However, recent data (midOctober) suggest that all banks are above their minimum capital requirement following the
implementation of remedial actions specified by the CBSI.
39.
Progress continues to be made in improving operations and financial
performance of the NPF. This occurred through better management of information systems
and restructuring of non-performing loans in 2010, although the long-term sustainability of
the NPF and ensuring that benefits to its members are maximized would require a reform of
the NPF Act. Reforming the NPF Act based on the approved reform plan and APRA on-site
examination is a priority in order to safeguard and enhance the value of its members’ assets
over the long run. Cabinet approval of the drafting instructions for the amendments to the
NPF has been delayed due to the unavailability of expected TA (program benchmark) and the
need for wider consultations among stakeholders to strengthen ownership of the reform. This
benchmark is now expected to be met by June 2012. The authorities’ ongoing efforts to
improve access to credit are appropriately focused. The mission suggested taking further
steps such as an expanding micro-credit scheme, as done in other Pacific island economies,
with the help of development partners.
40.
The supervisory and regulatory framework of the financial system will need to
be further strengthened. Supported by Fund TA, the CBSI will need to continue to
strengthen its effectiveness by obtaining Cabinet approval of the amendments to the CBSI
Act (program benchmark) and enhance its supervisory capacity through both on-site
examinations and off-site monitoring as part of a move from a regulatory approach that
focuses on compliance of financial institutions with laws and rules to a framework that
identifies risks in the financial system as a whole, from a macro-prudential perspective.
These examinations will need to be followed up by steadfastly enforcing corrective actions
that are identified and conducting stress tests of the banking system to identify vulnerabilities
going forward.
Authorities’ Views
41.
Officials broadly shared staff’s views on the financial sector and requested
additional IMF TA on strengthening the supervisory and regulatory framework (MEFP
¶9-11). They agreed that the amendments to the CBSI Act will strengthen the effectiveness
of monetary policy operations and supervisory activities. The Financial Institutions Act of
1990 will also be amended to reflect structural changes in the financial system and the latest
international best practices. The CBSI will request IMF technical assistance for this purpose.
The authorities remain committed to reforming the NPF and improving access to finance.
The officials shared staff’s views that improving NPF’s governance and investment
performance would be essential to provide adequate retirement income and maintain
financial stability. In this regard, they plan to seek Cabinet approval of the drafting
instructions to amend the NPF Act by end-June 2012 to reduce political influence on
investment decisions and maximize returns on its investments. To facilitate large project
financing, the prudential guideline on the single borrower limits will be revised by end-2011
as recommended by PFTAC TA. To improve financial access by households and small
enterprises, the authorities aim at streamlining land title registration and transfer of

21
ownership to facilitate the use of land as collateral. They also plan to explore ways to revamp
the use of the small business finance scheme administrated by the CBSI.
VI. ADDRESSING EXTERNAL COMPETITIVENESS AND SAFEGUARDING EXTERNAL
STABILITY
Background

Cumulative percentage change

42.
The exchange rate arrangement
Solomon Islands: Decomposition of the Real Effective Exchange Rate
(March 2009– August 2011) 1/
is currently classified as an “other
15
15
6
managed arrangement.” The REER has
10
10
5
5
depreciated by 13 percent as of August 2011
0
0
from its peak in March 2009. This reflects the
-5
-5
-10
-10
U.S. dollar depreciation of around 23 percent
-15
-15
in real terms against other currencies in the
-20
-20
-25
-25
basket as well as the Solomon Islands dollar
-30
-30
appreciation vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar of 10
percent in real terms over this time period.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
The REER appears to be in line with its
estimated equilibrium level (Box 4).
However, the current account balance deficit widened to 30 percent of GDP in 2010, well
above the historical average of 15 percent, driven by imports of machinery and transport
equipments related to the revival of the Gold Ridge mine. High fuel prices also took a toll on
the import bill. In 2011, the current account deficit is expected to narrow to about 12 percent
of GDP reflecting strong growth in commodity exports, especially gold and logs. Looking
ahead, the current account deficit should stabilize at 12–13 percent of GDP, as the
exploitation of Gold Ridge mine continues to boost mineral exports while mining-related
imports of machinery and transport decline after the initial sunk cost investment.
Jul-11

May-11

Jan-11

Mar-11

Nov-10

Jul-10

Sep-10

May-10

Jan-10

Real appreciation (+) against USD

Mar-10

Nov-09

Jul-09

Sep-09

Mar-09

May-09

USD appreciation (+)
SBD REER appreciation (+)

1/ Real appreciation of the Solomon Islands dollar against the U.S. dollar, and real appreciation
of the U.S. dollar against other currencies in the basket.

Staff’s Views
43.
The current exchange rate regime has provided a strong nominal anchor and
remains appropriate. While the current regime has served Solomon Islands well, the
exchange rate policy should continue to be managed in a flexible manner. This would
provide a buffer against external vulnerability given the economy’s large exposure to
commodity prices. Staff welcomed the authorities’ decision to adjust the NIR targets upward
by around US$60 million for the remainder of program given the recent over-performance
and to further reduce vulnerability to external shocks. The reserve coverage of 6½ months of
imports (7½ months excluding mining-related imports) is in line with the optimal reserves
coverage for low-income countries.7 While model-based staff’s analysis suggests that the real
effective exchange rate is in line with its medium-terms fundamentals, a further

6

Solomon Islands accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 in 1979 and maintains an
exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions.
7

The optimal reserve coverage for fragile states ranges from three months of imports under flexible exchange
rate regimes to less than eight months of imports under fixed exchange regimes.

22
Box 4. Solomon Islands: Exchange Rate Assessment1
Simple metrics such as long-term averages and model-based estimates suggest that Solomon
Islands’ exchange rate is broadly in line with its medium-term fundamentals.


The real effective exchange rate is
currently in line with its 20-year average
and only 2 percent above its 10-year
average.



According to the macroeconomic
balance approach the equilibrium
current account deficit, or norm, over the
medium term is about 14 percent of
GDP. The projected current account
deficits over the medium term are
broadly in line this norm, implying no
misalignment. However, the estimates
are subject to considerable uncertainty,
as shown by the wide range of the
confidence intervals. This approach
determines the change in the real
effective exchange rate that is needed to
close the gap between the underlying
current account balance (i.e., staff
projections) and its equilibrium level
(i.e., norm). The explanatory variables
include fiscal balance, economic growth,
foreign aid and demographics. All
variables are measured in deviation from
the average of the trading partners.

Solomon Islands: Real Effective Exchange Rate
(Index, 2005=100)
150
Real effective exchange rate
20-year average

140

10-year average
Other PIC's Average

130
120
110
100
90
80
1991Q2 1993Q4 1996Q2 1998Q4 2001Q2 2003Q4 2006Q2 2008Q4 2011Q2
Sources: INS; and IMF staff estimates.

Exchange Rate Assessment: Baseline Results
(In percent)
REER

Current Account/GDP
Norm
Macroeconomic balance 2/

Projection 1/

Overvaluation

-13.9

-13.2

-2.0

...

...

2.7

Equilibrium real exchange rate 3/
Source: IMF staff estimates.

1/ Staff projection of the underlying CA/GDP during 2012-16.
2/ Based on semi-elasticity of CA/GDP with respect to the REER of -0.37.
3/ Overvaluation is assessed relative to Q2 2011.

Solomon Islands: Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate Estimates
(Percent of misalignment)
60
40
20

Point
estimate

90 percent
confidence
interval

0



According to the equilibrium real
-20
exchange rate approach, the real
-40
exchange rate is also broadly in line with
its medium-term fundamentals. The
-60
Equilibrium real exchange rate
model explains the equilibrium REER
Source: IMF staff estimates.
based on projections on the terms of
trade, relative productivity, and relative government consumption.

___________________
1

Prepared by Huidan Lin.

Macroeconomic balance

23
improvement in the business environment would help improve competitiveness based on
institutional indicators (Section V).
44.
Current account deficits in the lower-double digits over the medium term are
likely to be manageable as they are driven by investment to increase export capacity.
For instance, the investment in the mining sector is expected to be financed by foreign direct
investments. Going forward, while resuming concessional borrowing after completing the
Honiara Club Agreement is important to tap resources to finance large development needs,
such as the hydro power project, this borrowing should still be prudent to safeguard external
stability. The joint IMF-World Bank DSA shows that the debt distress remains at a moderate
risk level, even after transitioning toward external concessional loans, if borrowing remains
on check.
Authorities’ Views
45.
The authorities concurred with staff’s assessment on the exchange rate and
external stability. They noted that the relatively high current account deficits over the
medium-term should be sustainable because they will be financed mostly with non-debtcreating inflows.
VII. PROGRAM DISCUSSIONS
46.
Current arrangement. The current SCF-supported program remains on track, with
strong performance on the quantitative targets and notwithstanding delays in implementing
some of the program benchmarks. All end-June performance criteria were met with large
margins owing to larger-than-expected logging production, while government spending has
been broadly in line with the program (MEFP Table 1). A few program benchmarks are
being implemented with some delays, partly because of capacity constraints (MEFP Table 2).
47.
Modalities of successor arrangement. Staff agreed with the authorities that a 12month precautionary SCF for SDR5.2 million (equivalent of 50 percent quota) would be the
appropriate modality in light of the current strong external position and favorable mediumterm prospect. The successor arrangement would help consolidate the macro improvements
made during the current SCF and take significant steps toward strengthening economic
institutions and structural policies. It would be a building block in implementing an
ambitious medium-term structural reform agenda. All of these will give greater confidence
about the medium-term stability of Solomon Islands’ economic policies and boost its
resilience to external shocks. The SCF would be monitored through semi-annual reviews,
quantitative targets, and structural benchmarks (Table 6, and MEFP Tables 1 and 2). The
target for the government cash balance is specified as end-of-period stock rather than
cumulative changes from the beginning of the year to strengthen program monitoring and
reporting, and to make the 2012 targets independent from the end-2011 outcome. The
benchmarks for 2012 include the amendment of tax legislation on exemption,
implementation of new resource tax regime, reforms of public finance act, completion of
Honiara Club Agreement review, improving the budget presentation, and amendments to
NPF Act. If purchases under the precautionary arrangement were made, annual repayment to
the Fund would amount to less than one percent of exports of goods and services (Table 7).

24
An update of the Safeguards Assessment of the CBSI is expected to be completed by the time
of the first review of the successor arrangement.
48.
Financing. Large donors’ financing is in the pipeline from Australia and New
Zealand (around US$40 million per year), the AsDB (US$7–14 million per year during
2012–14 to finance infrastructure and transports projects in the form of both budget support
and loans), the World Bank (US$2 million in budget support in 2012 and other future
disbursements in the form of grants and loans including to finance Tina River hydro project),
and the EU (US$4–7 million per year in budget support). The AsDB has recently approved
the second tranche of its budget support (US$5 million). Disbursements from development
partners hinge on the continuation and good implementation of a Fund-supported program.
The development partner community is very active in Solomon Islands. In 2003, after a
period of social unrest, the Solomon Islands government requested assistance from Pacific
island countries, which is being delivered through the Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI). Australia’s and New Zealand’s bilateral aid program, which
covers sectors not included in the RAMSI mandate, focuses on health and education. The
World Bank is taking the lead on Public Expenditure Review. The AsDB’s support focuses
on structural reforms to support private sector development by providing TA on state-ownedenterprise (SOE) reform and on microfinance and credit. The Fund will continue to take the
lead on banking supervision (through PFTAC), tax reforms to manage the forthcoming
mining revenue in the medium term, public financial management and fiscal responsibility
provisions to improve budget transparency and accountability. Development partners
coordinate closely to avoid duplications in the work program.
49.
Risks. The risks to the program stem from possible delays in the 2012 budget,
political instability, and capacity constraints. However, the strong implementation and
success of the current program provides a good indication that program ownership is strong
and likely to continue. The first review of the successor arrangement is expected to take place
in April 2012.
VIII. STAFF APPRAISAL
50.
Solomon Islands’ economy has rebounded from the 2008–09 global financial
crisis and a strong commodity-based recovery is underway. The economy has benefited
from the implementation of the government’s economic reform program supported by SCF
arrangement approved in June 2010 due to strong political commitment to rebuilding fiscal
and financial buffers and sound macroeconomic management that triggered donors’ support.
Reserves have been rebuilt and fiscal health has improved.
51.
Despite a still positive near-term outlook, several challenges remain. The
economy remains extremely vulnerable to swings in commodity prices and external demand
shocks, and the risks to the global outlook have increased with potential spillovers to
Solomon Islands. Logging—the main source of growth in recent years—is expected to
decline and be exhausted during the current decade. So far, growth has remained
concentrated in the commodity sector, mainly logging, with limited spillovers to the rest of
the economy. The mineral sector has the potential to become the main driver of growth, but
several reforms need to be implemented to ensure that the country as a whole benefits from
its mineral wealth. Continued high growth alone may not be sufficient to address social

25
imbalances and policy measures are necessary to make growth more inclusive and to make
progress toward the achievements of the MDGs which are currently out of reach. The
government’s National Development Strategy is an important step toward a comprehensive
poverty reduction and growth strategy over the next few years. Going forward, the strategy
would benefit from a more detailed implementation plan that includes costing and
prioritization of projects, and a further articulation of the linkages between spending, growth
and poverty reduction.
52. Bolstering resilience to shocks and adopting a more inclusive growth model
remain top priorities. This will imply continuing rebuilding policy buffers, a scaling up of
critical infrastructure investment and spending in health and education, and structural reforms
(such as a new resource tax regime and new mining legislation) that would help boost
investors’ confidence and ensure sustainable growth. However, the pace of spending will
need to be calibrated taking into account capacity constraints to avoid waste. Measures to
foster private sector development such as streamlining land title registration and transfer of
ownership to ease access to credit and improve collateral recovery are also urgently needed
to ensure a more broad-based growth. A precautionary SCF would build on the previous SCF
program that expires in early December 2011 and should be instrumental in anchoring the
policy agenda, going forward.
53. Preserving a strong fiscal position and strengthening the medium-term fiscal
framework would ensure fiscal sustainability. Staff welcomes the authorities’ commitment
to strike a balance between maintaining a strong fiscal buffers and increasing spending on
critical infrastructure and social priorities. In the medium-term, resuming concessional
borrowing to secure financing for development needs, managing resources revenue,
anchoring fiscal policy on non-commodity fiscal balance, and adopting fiscal responsibility
provisions would be critical to maintain fiscal sustainability. The mission strongly supported
the authorities’ plan of moving toward a multi-year budget framework later next year.
Casting budget decisions in a multi-year perspective will help the authorities design realistic
fiscal plans and build consensus on the appropriate sequencing of development projects.
54. The monetary stance and the exchange rate policy over the past few months have
helped anchor inflation expectations and are currently appropriate. However, if the
recovery remains on track and rapid credit growth re-emerges monetary tightening would be
warranted.
55. Financial and external stability are not at risk. The banking system remains
profitable and adequately capitalized. The supervisory and regulatory framework will need to
be strengthened. The exchange rate is broadly in line with fundamentals. While resuming
concessional borrowing after completing the Honiara Club Agreement is important to tap
resources to finance large development needs, this borrowing should still be prudent to
ensure external stability as analyzed in the joint IMF-World Bank DSA.
56. The quality of macroeconomic data should continue to be improved. The
authorities should continue the ongoing progress to implement PFTAC recommendations on
the compilation and dissemination of economic data.
57. Based on the strong program performance, staff recommends the completion of
the third and final review of the current SCF-supported program. The authorities’

26
reform program going forward is also well focused. Therefore, staff recommends the
approval of the authorities’ request for a successor arrangement in the form of a
precautionary SCF arrangement (SDR5.2 million). The current SCF arrangement will expire
as soon as the last disbursement is made in the coming days. Because a member cannot have
two arrangements effective at the same time under the PRGT Instrument, a draft proposed
decision approving the new SCF arrangement will be circulated to the Board for adoption
after the current SCF arrangement has expired.
58.
It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on a 24month cycle. This recommendation is in accordance with the Decision on Article IV
Consultation Cycles (Decision No. 14747-(10/96) (9/28/2010),
http://www.imf.org/external/pp/longres.aspx?id=4515.

27

Figure 1. Solomon Islands: Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook
The economic recovery has been driven by logging and mining,
although logging is expected to decline over the medium term.

World food and fuel prices have contributed to higher inflation
although pressures are now dissipating.

Logs and mineral exports have contributed to narrowing the current
account despite robust import growth...

… and reserves continue to build up driven by donor grants and FDI.

Export volume has been strong driven by log and mineral exports,
although log exports are to decline down the road…

…and import volume is likely to decline as Gold Ridge mine is now
operational and ready for full scale production.

Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

28

Solomon Islands: Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook (concluded)
Fiscal over-performance has been strong, contributing to a large
increase in the cash balance.

Public external debt has declined and is expected to remain
sustainable over the medium term.

Rapid increase in reserve position has contributed to strong money
growth…

…while private sector credit growth has been sluggish leading to a
decline in loan-deposit ratio.

The recent increase in CBSI’s bills has helped stabilize banks’
excess liquidity albeit at a high level.

The real effective exchange rate has recently increased due to the
currency appreciation which has reduced inflationary pressures.

Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

29
Figure 2. Solomon Islands: From Crisis to Recovery—Rebuilding Policy Buffers 1/
Thanks to political commitment to sound policies, Solomon Islands is
in a stronger macroeconomic position than in the pre-crisis years…

… with more manageable fiscal…

Fiscal Balance
(In percent of GDP)

Overall Buffer Index, 2004-07 and 2010
30

30

2010

20

Solomon
Islands

4 PICs have higher buffers
in 2010 than in 2004-07
(above 45°line)...

10
0
-10
-20

2004-2007
average

Vanuatu
PNG

Marshall Islands
Micronesia

0

Kiribati

-10

-40

-60
Micronesia

-70
-70

-60

-50

...and 4 PICs have
lower buffers in 2010
than in 2004-07
(below 45°line)

Weaker policy
buffers in 2010
than in 2004-07
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

… and current accounts deficits…

20

Higher fiscal deficits
in 2010 than in 2004-07

-30

Tuvalu
-30

Solomon
Islands

Higher debt in 2010
than in 2004-07

2004-2007 average

...and deteriorated in
5 PICs (below 45°line)

0

10

20

9

Vanuatu

...and lower in
5 PICs (below 45°line)

0

2004-2007 average

30

30

60

Reserves
(In months of imports of goods and services)
12

45° line

Inflation was higher in 2010
in 4 PICs (above 45°line)...

45° line

2010
Reserves were higher in 2010
in 7 PICs (above 45°line)...

PNG
Tonga

6

Vanuatu
Marshall Islands

0
Kiribati

-3

Fiji

Solomon
Micronesia Islands 2004-2007
Palau
average

Tuvalu

8
Tonga
Solomon
Islands
PNG

Tuvalu Samoa

Higher inflation in 2010
than in 2004-07

-6

Vanuatu

Fiji
Samoa

4

Kiribati
Micronesia

-9
-12

...and lower in
7 PICs (below 45°line)

-15
-15

-10

90

… and stronger reserve coverage.

2010

3

Solomon
Islands

0

Inflation
(In percent)
12

PNG

Tuvalu

Palau

…lower inflation…

15

30

Fiji

Tonga

Micronesia

30

Kribati

Tuvalu

Higher CA deficit
in 2010 than in 2004-07
-10

20

Marshall Islands

Samoa

Micronesia
-20 Kiribati

-20

10

45° line

60

Vanuatu
Fiji
Marshall Islands
Palau
Tonga
PNG
Samoa

-30

0

Debt was higher in 2010
in 6 PICs (above 45°line)...

10

-30

-10

2010

The current account + FDI has
improved in 2010 in 6 PICs
(above 45°line)...

-10

-20

...and deteriorated
in 6 PICs (below 45°line)

Gross Debt
(In percent of GDP)

90

45° line

2010

0

Samoa

Tonga

… reduced debt…

Current Account and FDI
(In percent of GDP)
30

Palau Vanuatu

-20

30

2004-2007 average

PNG
Fiji

-30

-50

Solomon
Islands

10

Samoa

Fiji

The fiscal balance has improved
in 2010 in 5 PICs (above 45°line)...

20

Kiribati
Tonga

45° line

2010

45° line

-5

0

5

10

15

...and lower in
2 PICs (below 45°line)

Lower reserves in 2010
than in 2004-07

0
0

4

2004-2007 average
8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
1/ The buffer index comprises: the fiscal balance, the current account balance plus FDI, public debt (all in percent of GDP), inflation and

12

30
Figure 3. Solomon Islands: The Cross-Country Context
Solomon Islands is one of the poorest countries in the Pacific
region...

… as subsistence agriculture and forestry are core activities with
tourism still relatively small.

GDP per Capita, 2010

Contribution by Activity, 2010

(In U.S.dollars)

(In percent of GDP)
70

Kiribati
Solomon
Islands
PNG

Tourism

60

Pacific Islands
(median)

Agriculture, forestry, fishing

50

Tuvalu

40

Micronesia
Marshall
Islands

30

Tonga

20

Vanuatu

10

Samoa

1,500

3,000

4,500

6,000

7,500

9,000

10,500

The country relies on foreign aid…

Palau

Vanuatu

Fiji

Samoa

Tonga

Marshall
Islands

Micronesia

0

Solomon
Islands

Tuvalu

PNG

Palau

Kribati

0

Fiji

… to finance its trade deficit and large developments needs.
Trade Balance

External Grants, 2010
(In percent of GDP)

(In percent of GDP, 2010)

100

50

Imports

90

Pacific Islands Average

40

Exports

80
70
60

30

50
20

40
30

10

20
10

Government Expenditure, 2010
(In percent of GDP)

Others

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Kiribati

Marshall
islands

Micronesia

Solomon
Islands

Samoa

Palau

PNG

Tonga

Vanuatu

Vanuatu

Tuvalu

Tonga

Micronesia

4

Pacific
Islands

2
Tonga

Marshall
Islands

Vanuatu

Kiribati

PNG

0

Fiji
Solomon
Islands

0
Fiji

Solomon
Islands

Samoa

RMI

PNG

Samoa
Real GDP per Capita
(Average growth rate,2000-10)

80

Palau

Real GDP per Capita vs. Business Climate
6

100
Wage expenditure

Micronesia

Fiji

… and constraints to private sector development.

The economy is largely dominated by the public sector due to its
narrow production base…

90

Kiribati

0

Fiji

Tonga

Papua New
Guinea

Vanuatu

Samoa

Palau

Solomon
Islands

Kiribati

Micronesia

Marshall
Islands

0

Palau

-2
10

30

50

70

90

110

130

150

Starting a Business Rank, 2012 WB Doing Business (higher=more costly)

Sources: IMF, APDLISC database, WEO; WB, WDI; country authorities; and IMF staff estimates.

31
Table 1. Solomon Islands: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008-12
Per capita GDP (2010): US$1,280
Population (2010): 528 thousand (estimate)
Poverty rate (2006): 23 percent
2008

2009

2010
Est.

2011
Proj. Rev.Proj.

2012
Proj.

(CR/11/180)

Growth and prices (percentage change) 1/
Real GDP
Of which : nontimber nonmining

7.1
6.5
17.4
18.1
11.4
4,713
1,207
1,018

-4.7
-2.6
7.1
1.8
7.3
4,815
1,159
839

7.0
4.8
1.0
0.8
5.8
5,449
1,280
975

5.6
4.8
6.0
6.5
2.7
6,270
1,457
1,107

9.3
4.8
6.6
7.1
7.6
6,404
1,554
1,210

6.0
4.7
5.3
5.2
7.0
7,265
1,769
1,300

46.5
29.0
17.5

55.2
30.5
24.7

63.0
32.2
30.8

57.7
31.2
26.5

59.5
33.6
25.9

58.5
33.8
24.7

Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Development expenditure
Unrecorded expenditure 2/

46.7
25.3
19.5
1.9

53.5
28.6
25.6
-0.7

56.7
28.4
28.0
0.3

56.0
27.7
28.4
0.0

55.9
27.1
28.9
0.0

57.2
27.7
29.5
0.0

Overall balance
Foreign financing (net)
Domestic financing (net)
Privatization receipts

-0.2
-1.6
1.8
0.0

1.8
-1.1
-1.6
0.9

6.3
-1.2
-5.1
0.0

1.7
-0.9
-0.9
0.2

3.6
-0.9
-2.8
0.2

1.3
0.5
-1.8
0.0

35.0
11.2
23.8
140.4

33.2
10.0
23.2
138.7

28.1
8.2
19.9
134.7

24.5
7.0
17.4
137.4

21.3
6.6
14.7
126.9

17.1
3.6
13.5
131.9

26.5
6.9
-2.3
2.0
17.0

-4.2
24.7
62.5
2.7
15.4

-4.7
13.5
75.3
2.6
13.5

5.0
15.0
13.9
...
...

2.0
21.0
21.6
...
...

8.0
18.0
16.7
...
...

-124.5
-20.5
…
269.5
20.6
110.3
408.8
14.0
91.1
-31.0

-128.2
-21.4
…
234.9
-12.9
88.1
344.2
-15.8
116.8
56.4

-204.4
-30.3
-11.2
333.0
41.8
124.7
547.8
59.2
235.6
119.8

-171.0
-21.7
-13.2
458.0
37.5
…
624.4
14.0
…
28.8

-97.7
-11.6
0.1
524.3
57.4
187.5
628.3
14.7
155.7
88.8

-124.3
-12.7
-2.3
596.8
13.8
134.5
677.8
7.9
105.2
25.0

89.5
3.1
…

146.0
3.2
4.2

265.8
5.1
6.0

304.6
5.5
7.2

364.6
6.5
7.6

389.5
6.4
7.5

8.00
112.7
87.9

8.06
120.5
88.7

8.06
112.0
83.5

...
...
...

7.40
...
...

...
...
...

CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)
GDP deflator
Nominal GDP (in SI$ millions)
Per capita GDP (in US$)
Per capita GNI (in US$)
Central government operations (percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Grants

Central government debt (percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 3/
Domestic debt
External debt
(In US$ millions, end of period)
Monetary and credit (percentage change, end-year data)
Credit to private sector
Broad money
Reserve money
Interest rate - deposit (percent per annum)
Interest rate - lending (percent per annum)
Balance of payments (in US$ millions, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
(Percent of GDP)
(excluding mining-related capital imports, in percent of GDP)
Exports of goods and nonfactor services (GNFS)
(Percentage change)
Log exports
Imports of GNFS
(Percentage change)
Foreign direct investment
Overall balance
Gross official reserves (in US$ millions, end of period) 4/
(In months of next year's imports of GNFS)
(In months of next year's nonmining-related imports of GNFS)
Exchange rate (SI$/US$, end of period) 5/
Real effective exchange rate (period average, 2005 = 100)
Nominal effective exchange rate (period average, 2005 = 100)
Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.

1/ Incorporates the 2009 revised GDP estimates published by the National Statistics Office in June 2011.
2/ Includes changes in the stock of unpaid payment orders and unpresented checks and the statistical discrepancy.
3/ Includes disbursement under an IMF-supported arrangement
4/ Includes SDR allocations made by the IMF to the Solomon Islands in 2009 and actual and prospective disbursements under the IMF-supported
arrangement.
5/ For 2011, as of September.

32
Table 2. Solomon Islands: Balance of Payments, 2008-16 1/
2008

2009

2010
Est.

2011
Proj. Rev. Proj.

2013

2012

2014
Proj.

2015

2016

(CR/11/180)

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Current account balance

-124.5

-128.2

-204.4

-171.0

-97.7

-124.3

-163.6

-148.0

-140.1

-140.2

Trade balance for goods
Exports
Imports
Trade balance for services
Exports
Imports
Income balance
Current transfers balance 2/
Of which : Official transfers, net

-82.4
210.5
-292.9
-56.9
59.0
-115.9
-95.0
109.9
90.5

-74.3
164.9
-239.2
-35.1
69.9
-105.0
-164.9
146.1
120.8

-133.8
226.5
-360.3
-81.0
106.5
-187.5
-160.7
171.1
167.5

-78.3
341.3
-419.6
-88.1
116.7
-204.8
-189.2
184.6
180.7

-5.0
409.5
-414.5
-99.0
114.8
-213.8
-185.5
191.7
188.4

21.8
464.4
-442.7
-102.7
132.3
-235.1
-259.8
216.5
212.6

-13.1
468.5
-481.6
-126.3
125.7
-252.0
-252.3
228.1
213.3

-40.7
472.5
-513.3
-135.4
133.3
-268.7
-202.0
230.2
213.2

-43.9
505.6
-549.5
-145.7
142.2
-287.8
-183.7
233.2
213.8

-48.8
539.2
-588.0
-156.8
153.2
-310.0
-171.5
236.8
215.1

Capital and financial account balance
Capital account balance
Direct investment balance
Portfolio investment balance
Other investment balance 3/

104.0
14.3
91.1
3.3
-4.8

164.7
26.8
116.8
1.2
19.9

319.8
49.8
235.6
-2.6
37.1

199.7
30.4
174.7
0.0
-5.4

186.5
31.8
155.7
0.0…
-0.9

149.3
35.2
105.2
0.0
9.0

153.2
36.6
101.3
0.0
15.4

165.7
37.0
106.1
0.0
22.7

166.0
37.1
102.5
0.0
26.4

169.7
37.3
102.0
0.0
30.5

Errors and omissions

-10.5

19.9

4.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Overall balance

-31.0

56.4

119.8

28.8

88.8

25.0

-10.4

17.7

25.9

29.5

Financing
Change in gross reserves (- = increase)
IMF

31.0
31.0
…

-56.4
-56.4
…

-110.3
-119.8
9.6

-28.8
-38.8
10.0

-88.8
-98.7
10.0

-25.0
-24.9
-0.1

10.4
10.5
-0.1

-17.7
-16.0
-1.7

-25.9
-22.5
-3.4

-29.5
-25.1
-4.5

Current account
(excluding mining-related exports and imports of goods and services)
(excluding mining-related imports of goods and services)
(excluding net official transfers)
Trade balance for goods
Exports (in percent of GDP)
Of which: Logs
Of which: Fish
Of which: Minerals
Imports
Of which: Food
Of which: Fuel
Of which: Machinery and transportation equipment
Mining imports
Nonmining imports
Excluding mining capital imports and reinvested earnings
Trade balance for services
Income balance
Current transfers balance
Of which: Official transfers net

-20.5
…
…
-35.3
-13.5
34.6
18.1
3.7
0.4
48.2
10.4
13.9
12.9
…
48.2
-9.4
-15.6
18.1
14.9

-21.4
…
…
-41.6
-12.4
27.6
14.7
2.8
0.6
40.0
10.1
8.7
12.4
…
40.0
-3.1
-5.9
-27.6
24.4
20.2

-30.3
-14.5
-11.2
-55.1
-19.8
33.5
18.5
3.6
0.5
53.3
11.6
8.4
21.2
12.1
41.2
5.6
-12.0
-12.0
25.3
24.8

-21.7
…
…
-44.6
-9.9
43.3
12.9
4.4
13.5
53.3
12.9
11.9
17.1
8.5
44.7
-2.2
-11.2
-24.0
23.4
22.9

-11.6
-13.1
0.1
-34.1
-0.6
48.8
22.3
3.3
10.8
49.4
11.8
10.3
16.3
8.2
41.2
16.0
-11.8
-22.1
22.8
22.4

-12.7
-22.2
-2.3
-34.4
2.2
47.5
13.7
3.5
19.3
45.2
11.5
10.5
11.5
6.3
39.0
8.4
-10.5
-26.6
22.1
21.7

-15.6
-26.2
-5.1
-35.9
-1.2
44.6
9.7
3.7
20.6
45.9
11.7
10.5
11.6
6.6
39.2
3.1
-12.0
-24.0
21.7
20.3

-13.5
-24.0
-3.4
-33.0
-3.7
43.2
7.6
4.3
20.1
46.9
12.2
10.7
11.3
6.5
40.5
2.9
-12.4
-18.5
21.1
19.5

-12.3
-22.5
-2.4
-31.0
-3.8
44.3
6.9
4.9
19.7
48.1
12.7
10.9
11.2
6.3
41.8
2.4
-12.7
-16.1
20.4
18.7

-11.7
-21.9
-2.2
-29.7
-4.1
45.0
6.6
5.5
19.4
49.1
13.1
11.0
11.1
6.2
42.9
1.6
-13.1
-14.3
19.8
18.0

Capital account balance
Direct investment balance
Of which: Inward FDI
Other investment balance

3.3
21.2
22.1
-1.1

4.5
19.5
20.0
3.3

7.4
34.9
35.2
5.5

3.9
22.2
22.9
-0.7

3.8
18.5
19.2
-0.1

3.6
10.7
12.0
0.9

3.5
9.6
11.0
1.5

3.4
9.7
10.9
2.1

3.2
9.0
10.5
2.3

3.1
8.5
10.1
2.5

Errors and omissions

-2.4

3.3

0.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Net international reserves (in US$ million) 3/

89.5

146.0

256.2

285.0

345.0

370.0

359.6

377.4

403.2

432.8

Gross official foreign reserves (in US$ million)3/ 4/
In months of next year's imports of GNFS
In months of nonmining-related imports of GNFS

89.5
3.1
…

146.0
3.2
4.2

265.8
5.1
6.0

304.6
5.5
7.2

364.6
6.5
7.6

389.5
6.4
7.5

379.0
5.8
6.8

395.0
5.7
6.5

417.5
5.6
6.4

442.6
5.5
6.3

23.8
1.3
5.6

23.2
0.0
3.6

19.9
0.0
3.0

17.4
10.0
2.0

14.7
0.0
1.9

13.5
12.0
1.4

13.9
18.4
1.4

15.1
27.3
1.7

16.4
31.4
1.7

17.9
35.9
1.7

608.2

597.8

675.6

…

839.6

…

…

…

…

…

Gross external public debt
Disbursement of consessional borrowing (in US$ millions)
External public debt service (in percent of exports of GNFS)
Nominal GDP (in US$ million)

Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Incorporates the authorities' revision of historical data, including new formula for f.o.b/c.i.f conversion, new estimates of reinvested earnings and donor
grants, and reclassification of current and capital transfers.
2/ For 2010-11, includes additional donor support expected under the IMF-supported arrangement.
3/ Includes the SDR allocations made by the IMF in 2009, and private loans from International Finance Corporation in 2010.
4/ Includes actual and prospective disbursements under the IMF-supported arrangement.

33
Table 3. Solomon Islands: Summary of Fiscal Accounts, 2008-12
2008

2009

2010
Est.

2011
Budget

Proj

Rev. Proj.

2012
Proj.

(CR/11/180)

(In millions of Solomon Islands dollars)
Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Income and profits
Goods and services
International trade and transactions
Of which: Tax on logging
Other revenue
Grants
Development grants
Recurrent budget grants 1/

2,193
1,366
1,199
442
425
332
209
167
827
717
109

2,659
1,467
1,272
540
423
309
162
196
1,192
1,054
138

3,434
1,757
1,589
638
569
382
241
168
1,677
1,281
396

3,635
1,959
1,760
741
641
378
199
199
1,676
1,469
207

3,620
1,959
1,762
735
639
389
197
197
1,661
1,335
326

3,811
2,150
1,968
727
744
498
342
182
1,661
1,335
326

4,248
2,454
2,235
856
867
512
279
220
1,793
1,439
355

Expenditure
Of which: Appropriated 2/
Recurrent expenditure
Compensation of employees
Interest payments
Other recurrent expenditure 1/ 3/
Development expenditure

2,201
1,484
1,192
453
53
686
921
204
…
0
88

2,574
1,521
1,376
511
45
820
1,231
178
…
0
-33

3,091
1,809
1,548
588
23
937
1,525
243
…
0
18

3,529
2,060
1,616
588
29
1,000
1,914
444
51
0
0

3,514
2,179
1,735
588
29
1,118
1,779
444
51
0
0

3,583
2,248
1,734
588
28
1,118
1,849
514
51
0
0

4,156
2,628
2,012
680
24
1,308
2,144
616
100
89
0

Current balance
Overall balance

284
-8

230
85

605
343

550
106

550
106

742
228

797
92

Total financing
Foreign (net)
Domestic (net)
Banking system
Central bank
Commercial banks
Nonbank
Others 5/

8
-75
84
92
96
-4
-8
0

-85
-53
-77
-64
-25
-39
-13
45

-343
-65
-279
-282
-284
2
2
1

-106
-58
-58
-49
-24
-25
-9
10

-106
-58
-58
-49
-24
-25
-9
10

-228
-58
-180
-171
-146
-25
-9
10

-92
37
-129
-115
25
-140
-14
0

Total revenue and grants
Total revenue
Tax revenue
Income and profits
Goods and services
International trade and transactions
Of which: Tax on logging
Other revenue
Grants

46.5
29.0
25.4
9.4
9.0
7.0
4.4
3.5
17.5

55.2
30.5
26.4
11.2
8.8
6.4
3.4
4.1
24.7

63.0
32.2
29.2
11.7
10.4
7.0
4.4
3.1
30.8

58.0
31.2
28.1
11.8
10.2
6.0
3.2
3.2
26.7

57.7
31.2
28.1
11.7
10.2
6.2
3.1
3.1
26.5

59.5
33.6
30.7
11.3
11.6
7.8
5.3
2.8
25.9

58.5
33.8
30.8
11.8
11.9
7.0
3.8
3.0
24.7

Expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Compensation of employees
Interest payments
Other recurrent expenditure 1/ 3/
Of which : Government funded
Development expenditure

46.7
25.3
9.6
1.1
14.6
12.2
19.5
4.3
…
0.0
1.9

53.5
28.6
10.6
0.9
17.0
14.2
25.6
3.7
…
0.0
-0.7

56.7
28.4
10.8
0.4
17.2
13.5
28.0
4.5
…
0.0
0.3

56.3
25.8
9.4
0.5
15.9
12.6
30.5
7.1
0.8
0.0
0.0

56.0
27.7
9.4
0.5
17.8
12.6
28.4
7.1
8.1
0.0
0.0

55.9
27.1
9.2
0.4
17.5
12.4
28.9
8.0
0.8
0.0
0.0

57.2
27.7
9.4
0.3
18.0
13.1
29.5
8.5
1.4
1.2
0.0

Current balance
Overall balance
(excluding unidentified expenditure)

6.0
-0.2
1.7

4.8
1.8
1.1

11.1
6.3
6.6

8.8
1.7
1.7

8.8
1.7
1.7

11.6
3.6
3.6

11.0
1.3
1.3

Total financing
Foreign (net)
Domestic (net)
Others 5/

0.2
-1.6
1.8
0.0

-1.8
-1.1
-1.6
0.9

-6.3
-1.2
-5.1
0.0

-1.7
-0.9
-0.9
0.2

-1.7
-0.9
-0.9
0.2

-3.6
-0.9
-2.8
0.2

-1.3
0.5
-1.8
0.0

4,713
137

4,815
106

5,449
326

6,270
351

6,270
351

6,404
472

7,265
447

67
0.7
0.0

47
0.4
0.0

263
2.0
0.0

287
2.1
0.0

287
2.0
0.0

287
2.0
0.6

335
2.0
0.9

0.9
-3.5
-3.5

2.7
-0.7
-0.7

3.1
-1.3
-1.3

2.1
-1.1
-1.1

2.1
-1.0
-1.0

3.4
-1.9
-1.9

1.9
-1.9
-3.2

Of which : Government funded
National Transport Fund (NTF)
External loan funded

Unidentified expenditure 4/

(In percent of GDP)

Of which: Government funded
National Transport Fund (NTF)
External loan funded

Unidentified expenditure 4/

Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in SI$ millions)
Gross cash balance (in SI$ millions)
Target of program cash balance (in SI$ millions) 6/
in months of recurrent spending
Mineral revenue (percent of GDP)
Nonmineral balance (percent of GDP) 7/
Noncommodity balance (percent of GDP) 8/
Including loan-funded expenditure

Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes prospective budget support from donors in 2011-12. The 2011 Budget does not include some grants that are projected under the program.
2/ Expenditure appropriated or recorded in the government's recurrent and development estimates.
3/ Includes spending financed by recurrent grants.
4/ Includes changes in the stock of unpaid payment orders and unpresented checks (+ = reduction) and the statistical discrepancy.
5/ Includes privatization and receipts from a telecom company related to the sale of new telecommunication license.
6/ Program cash balance is the sum of government deposits in the cash balance accounts minus unpaid payments orders and unpresented checks.
7/ Nonmineral balance is defined as nonmineral revenue minus government-funded recurrent and development spending excluding interest payments.
8/ Noncommodity balance is defined as nonlogging nonmineral revenue minus government-funded recurrent and development spending excluding interest payments.

34
Table 4. Solomon Islands: Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 2009-16
2009

2010

2011

2012

Est.

Growth and prices (percentage change) 1/
Real GDP
Of which : Nontimber and nonmining
CPI (period average)
CPI (end of period)
GDP deflator
Nominal GDP (in SI$ millions)
Per capita GDP (in US$)
Per capita GNI (in US$)

2013

2014

2015

2016

Proj.

-4.7
-2.6
7.1
1.8
7.3
4,815
1,159
839

7.0
4.8
1.0
0.8
5.8
5,449
1,280
975

9.3
4.8
6.6
7.1
7.6
6,404
1,554
1,210

6.0
4.7
5.3
5.2
7.0
7,265
1,769
1,300

4.0
4.6
4.2
4.6
4.6
7,910
1,854
1,409

3.4
4.5
4.2
4.6
3.8
8,486
1,887
1,538

3.7
4.4
4.6
4.8
3.8
9,134
1,927
1,617

4.0
4.5
4.6
4.5
3.8
9,857
1,972
1,690

Central government operations (percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
Revenue
Grants
Total expenditure
Recurrent expenditure
Development expenditure
Unidentified expenditure 2/
Overall balance
Nonmineral balance 3/
Noncommodity 4/

55.2
30.5
24.7
53.5
28.6
25.6
-0.7
1.8
2.7
-0.7

63.0
32.2
30.8
56.7
28.4
28.0
0.3
6.3
3.1
-1.3

59.5
33.6
25.9
55.9
27.1
28.9
0.0
3.6
3.4
-1.9

58.5
33.8
24.7
57.2
27.7
29.5
0.0
1.3
1.9
-1.9

57.6
33.7
23.9
57.4
27.7
29.8
0.0
0.2
1.2
-1.5

59.4
36.4
23.0
57.6
27.7
29.9
0.0
1.8
0.6
-1.5

58.8
36.8
22.0
57.1
27.7
29.4
0.0
1.7
0.6
-1.4

58.1
36.9
21.2
56.6
27.7
29.0
0.0
1.4
0.6
-1.2

Central government debt (percent of GDP) 5/

33.2

28.1

21.3

17.1

16.4

16.9

17.8

19.0

Balance of payments (in US$ millions)
Current account (balance (- deficit)
(In percent of GDP)
(excluding mining-related capital imports, in percent of GDP)
Overall balance

-128.2
-21.4
…
56.4

-204.4
-30.3
-11.2
119.8

-97.7
-11.6
0.1
88.8

-124.3
-12.7
-2.3
25.0

-163.6
-15.6
-5.1
-10.4

-148.0
-13.5
-3.4
17.7

-140.1
-12.3
-2.4
25.9

-140.2
-11.7
-2.2
29.5

Gross official reserves (end of period) 6/
(In months of next year's imports of GNFS)
(In months of next year's nonmining-related imports of GNFS)

146.0
3.2
4.2

265.8
5.1
6.0

364.6
6.5
7.6

389.5
6.4
7.5

379.0
5.8
6.8

395.0
5.7
6.5

417.5
5.6
6.4

442.6
5.5
6.3

Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Incorporates the 2009 revised GDP estimates published by the National Statistics Office in June 2011.
2/ Includes changes in the stock of unpaid payment orders and unpresented checks and the statistical discrepancy.
3/ Nonmineral balance is defined as nonmineral revenue minus government-funded recurrent and development spending excluding interest payments.
4/ Noncommodity balance is defined as nonlogging nonmineral revenue minus government-funded recurrent and development spending excluding interest
payments.
5/ Includes disbursement under an IMF-supported arrangement.
6/ Includes SDR allocations made by the IMF to the Solomon Islands in 2009 and actual and prospective disbursements under the IMF-supported
arrangement.

35
Table 5. Solomon Islands: Summary Accounts of the Banking System, December 2008 - December 2012 1/
2008
Dec.

2009
Dec.

2010
Dec.
Est.

2011
Mar.
Est.

Jun.
Prog.

Sep.
Prog.

Est.

(CR/11/180)

Dec.
Proj. Rev. Proj.

Mar.

2012
Jun.
Proj.

Sep.

Dec.

(CR/11/180) (CR/11/180)

(In millions of Solomon Islands dollars, end of period)
Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI)
Net foreign assets (NFA)
Net international reserves (NIR)
Other NFA
Net domestic assets (NDA) 2/
Net claims on central government
Claims
Deposits
Other items (net)
Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Bank deposits
Other deposits

708
716
-9
-262
-52
138
190
-210
446
273
166
7

1,051
1,177
-126
-328
-77
124
201
-250
724
326
389
9

1,942
2,066
-124
-673
-361
117
479
-312
1,269
436
822
11

2,133
2,261
-128
-767
-373
118
491
-394
1,366
449
908
10

2,130
2,258
-128
-700
-331
117
449
-369
1,430
453
974
3

2,613
2,743
-131
-1,199
-639
111
750
-560
1,414
475
928
12

2,154
2,282
-128
-722
-353
117
471
-369
1,432
456
972
3

2,170
2,298
-128
-725
-385
117
503
-340
1,445
460
982
3

2,432
2,558
-126
-889
-507
117
625
-382
1,543
500
1,040
3

2,477
2,603
-126
-870
-488
117
605
-382
1,607
510
1,094
3

2,523
2,649
-126
-869
-486
118
605
-382
1,655
520
1,132
3

2,570
2,696
-126
-875
-493
118
611
-382
1,695
535
1,157
3

2,617
2,743
-126
-817
-485
115
600
-332
1,800
510
1,287
3

NFA of commercial banks
Assets
Liabilities
NDA of commercial banks
Net claims on central government
Claims
Deposits
Claims on the private sector
Other items (net)
Reserves and vault cash

137
143
6
888
90
116
26
1,274
-476
188

181
184
2
927
51
125
74
1,219
-343
410

51
141
89
760
53
121
68
1,163
-456
847

36
195
159
766
42
119
76
1,124
-401
938

39
198
159
774
43
111
68
1,157
-425
1,013

187
274
87
870
50
118
67
1,167
-347
963

41
200
159
845
36
104
68
1,189
-380
1,002

44
203
159
903
29
96
68
1,221
-346
1,008

196
250
54
778
29
96
68
1,186
-436
1,068

206
260
54
789
39
106
68
1,169
-419
1,129

216
270
54
1,069
34
101
68
1,225
-190
1,170

226
280
54
1,050
29
96
68
1,214
-193
1,192

246
300
54
924
-112
-44
68
1,281
-245
1,316

Deposits

1,213

1,519

1,658

1,740

1,826

2,019

1,889

1,955

2,042

2,124

2,455

2,468

2,486

845
708
137
625
38
1,278
-690
1,470
898
250
648
572

1,233
1,051
181
600
-26
1,224
-598
1,833
1,130
305
824
703

1,994
1,942
51
87
-308
1,166
-772
2,080
1,310
412
898
771

2,170
2,133
36
-1
-331
1,128
-798
2,168
1,494
418
1,075
675

2,169
2,130
39
74
-288
1,160
-798
2,243
1,412
414
998
831

2,799
2,613
187
-329
-589
1,171
-911
2,470
1,784
439
1,344
687

2,195
2,154
41
122
-317
1,193
-753
2,318
1,459
426
1,033
859

2,214
2,170
44
178
-357
1,225
-690
2,392
1,506
434
1,072
886

2,628
2,432
196
-111
-478
1,190
-822
2,517
1,585
472
1,113
933

2,683
2,477
206
-81
-449
1,173
-806
2,602
1,638
475
1,162
964

2,739
2,523
216
201
-453
1,230
-576
2,940
1,851
481
1,369
1,089

2,796
2,570
226
175
-464
1,218
-579
2,971
1,870
500
1,370
1,101

2,863
2,617
246
107
-596
1,285
-582
2,970
1,870
481
1,388
1,101

-2.3
26.5
6.9
-9.1
16.0

62.5
-4.2
24.7
26.4
-1.7

75.3
-4.7
13.5
41.5
-28.0

73.7
-8.0
16.7
47.9
-31.2

54.3
-4.9
17.2
39.3
-22.2

52.6
-4.0
29.1
72.3
-43.2

26.3
6.7
18.1
30.6
-12.5

13.9
5.0
15.0
10.6
4.4

21.6
2.0
21.0
30.5
-9.5

17.7
4.0
20.0
23.7
-3.7

17.0
5.0
19.0
-2.4
21.4

16.4
6.0
18.0
-1.1
19.1

16.7
8.0
18.0
9.3
8.7

3.3
105.0

2.5
80.3

1.6
70.1

1.6
64.6

1.6
63.3

1.7
57.8

1.6
62.9

1.7
62.4

1.6
58.1

1.6
55.1

1.8
49.9

1.8
49.2

1.6
51.5

2.0
17.0
4.0

2.7
15.4
4.0

2.6
13.5
2.9

2.4
13.5
2.9

…
…
…

3.8
14.3
3.0

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

…
…
…

90
-262

146
-328

256
-673

280
-767

280
-700

340
-1199

351
-870

357
-869

364
-875

370
-817

Other depository corporations

Depository corporations survey
NFA of the banking system
Central bank
Other depository corporations
NDA of the banking system
Net claims on central government
Claims on the private sector 3/
Other items (net)
Broad money (M3)
M1
Currency outside banks
Demand deposits
Savings and time deposits

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Reserve money
Credit to the private sector
Broad money
NFA of the banking system 4/
NDA of the banking system 4/
Memorandum items:
Money multiplier
Loan to deposit ratio (in percent)
Interest rates (percent per annum)
Deposit rate 5/
Lending rate 5/
91-Day Treasury Bill Rate
Program targets
NIR of CBSI (in US$ millions)
NDA of CBSI (in SI$ millions)

…
…
……
283
-722

…
…
…
…
…

…
…
……
345
-767

Sources: Data provided by the Central Bank of the Solomon Islands; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Based on the program exchange rate of SI$8.06 per US$.
2/ The end-2009 estimates and 2010-11 revised program projections incorporate the changes in the measurement of reserve money following the recommendations of
the IMF Safeguards Assessment.
3/ Includes claims of the CBSI on other (nonbank) financial corporations.
4/ Contribution to year-on-year broad money growth, in percentage points.
5/ Weighted average of different maturities.

36
Table 6. Solomon Islands: Reviews and Disbursement Under the Fund Arrangement
Date

Amount of Disbursement
In percent of quota
In SDR

Condition

Reviews and Disbursement Under the Current Standby Credit Facility
June 2, 2010

30

3,120,000

Approved Fund arrangement

November 17, 2010

30

3,120,000

Completion of the first review and observance of end-June 2010 performance
criteria

June 29, 2011

30

3,120,000

Completion of the second review and observance of end-December 2010
performance criteria

November 15, 2011

30

3,120,000

Completion of the third review and observance of end-June 2011
performance criteria

Total

120

12,480,000

Reviews and Disbursement Under the Successor Precautionary Standby Credit Facility 1/
November 23, 2011 2/

17

1,733,333

Approved Fund arrangement

May 15, 2012

17

1,733,333

Completion of the first review and observance of end-December 2011
performance criteria

November 15, 2012

17

1,733,334

Completion of the second review and observance of end-June 2012
performance criteria

Total

50

5,200,000

Source: IMF.

1/ Reflects the schedule if the credits are disbursed, although the baseline framework assumes no disbursement.
2/ The Board discussion on the successor arrangement is scheduled for November 23, 2011, but a draft proposed decision approving
the new arrangement will be circulated to the Board for adoption after the current arrangement expires upon the making of the fourth
and last disbursement thereunder.

Table 7. Solomon Islands: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010-21
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016
Proj.

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Fund obligations based on existing credit (in SDR millions)
Principal
Charges and interest

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.1

1.0
0.1

1.7
0.0

2.1
0.0

2.1
0.0

1.7
0.0

0.7
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Fund obligations based on existing and prospective credit (in SDR millions) 1/
Principal
Charges and interest

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.1

1.0
0.1

2.3
0.1

3.7
0.1

3.9
0.1

3.6
0.0

2.5
0.0

0.6
0.0

0.0
0.0

Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of gross international reserves
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.0
0.8

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.9

1.1
1.8
0.5
0.3
10.0
0.2
10.9

2.4
3.7
0.9
0.6
18.0
0.3
22.6

3.8
6.0
1.4
0.9
28.2
0.5
36.6

4.0
6.3
1.3
0.9
30.3
0.5
38.3

3.6
5.7
1.1
0.7
28.0
0.4
34.7

2.6
4.0
0.7
0.5
20.1
0.3
24.5

0.6
0.9
0.2
0.1
4.6
0.1
5.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

6.2
9.6
3.6
2.9
61.5
1.4
60.0

14.2
22.7
6.2
4.3
133.0
2.7
136.6

17.7
28.1
7.2
4.7
176.6
2.9
170.0

17.7
28.1
7.4
4.7
175.1
2.7
170.0

16.6
26.4
6.7
4.4
147.1
2.4
160.0

14.4
22.8
5.5
3.5
110.2
2.0
138.2

10.6
16.8
3.8
2.4
78.7
1.4
102.2

6.7
10.6
2.2
1.4
51.0
0.8
64.4

3.1
4.9
1.0
0.6
24.2
0.4
30.0

0.6
0.9
0.2
0.1
4.6
0.1
5.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

6.2
0.0

8.0
0.0

3.5
0.1

0.0
0.1

0.0
1.1

0.0
2.4

0.0
3.8

0.0
4.0

0.0
3.6

0.0
2.6

0.0
0.6

0.0
0.0

333
266
15.6
10.4

524.3
364.6
17.1
10.4

596.8
389.5
15.9
10.4

594.2
379.0
16.0
10.4

605.8
395.0
17.9
10.4

647.8
417.5
20.7
10.4

692.4
442.6
21.4
10.4

733.5
479.5
20.8
10.4

777.7
518.7
20.4
10.4

821.7
556.4
20.1
10.4

807.4
580.2
19.9
10.4

794.7
582.8
19.8
10.4

Outstanding Fund credit
In millions of SDRs
In millions of US$
In percent of gross international reserves
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service 2/
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota
Net use of Fund credit (in SDR millions)
Disbursements
Repayments and repurchases
Memorandum items:
Exports of goods and services (in US$ millions)
Gross international reserves (in US$ millions)
Debt service (in US$ millions) 2/
Quota (in SDR millions)

37

2010
Est.

Source: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Prospective credit includes the 50 percent of quota (SDR 5.2 million) available under the successor precautionary Standby Credit Facility although the baseline framework assumes no disbursement.
2/ Total public debt service, including IMF repayments.

37
38
Annex 1. Solomon Islands: Millennium Development Goals
1990
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Employment to population ratio, 15+, total (%)

1995

2000

2005

2009

67

67

66

65

65

58

59

55

53

51

GDP per person employed (constant 1990 PPP $)

..

..

..

..

..

Income share held by lowest 20%

..

..

..

..

..

Employment to population ratio, ages 15-24, total (%)

Malnutrition prevalence, weight for age (% of children under 5)

16

..

..

12

12

Poverty gap at $1.25 a day (PPP) (%)

..

..

..

..

..

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP) (% of population)

..

..

..

..

..

Vulnerable employment, total (% of total employment)

..

..

..

..

..

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Literacy rate, youth female (% of females ages 15-24)
Literacy rate, youth male (% of males ages 15-24)

..

..

80

..

..

..

..

90

..

..

Persistence to last grade of primary, total (% of cohort)

..

..

..

..

..

Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group)

61

70

..

..

..

..

..

..

75

81

Total enrollment, primary (% net)
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%)

0

2

2

0

0

Ratio of female to male primary enrollment (%)

86

88

94

96

97

Ratio of female to male secondary enrollment (%)

84

64

66

79

84

Ratio of female to male tertiary enrollment (%)

..

..

..

..

..

Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of total nonagricultural employment)

..

..

30.8

..

..

Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12-23 months)

70

68

87

70

60

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)

31

31

30

30

30

Mortality rate, under-5 (per 1,000)

38

38

37

36

36

Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)

..

..

57

47

39

Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

..

85

85

70

70

Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

..

11

7

27

27

130

110

110

110

100

Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%)

..

..

..

74

74

Unmet need for contraception (% of married women ages 15-49)

..

..

..

11

11

Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
Children with fever receiving antimalarial drugs (% of children under age 5 with fever)

..

..

..

19

19

Condom use, population ages 15-24, female (% of females ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

..

Condom use, population ages 15-24, male (% of males ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

..

312

240

185

142

115

Prevalence of HIV, female (% ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

..

Prevalence of HIV, male (% ages 15-24)

..

..

..

..

..

Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population ages 15-49)

..

..

..

..

..

39

40

39

59

61

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
CO2 emissions (kg per PPP $ of GDP)

0

0

0

0

0

CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)

1

0

0

0

0

83.0

..

81.0

80.1

79.1

Improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access)

..

29

31

29

..

Improved water source (% of population with access)

..

69

70

69

..

Marine protected areas (% of territorial waters)

0

0

0

0

0

146

132

164

419

394

Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)

Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

Forest area (% of land area)

Net ODA received per capita (current US$)
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development
Debt service (PPG and IMF only, % of exports, excluding workers' remittances)

11

1

3

5

3

0.0

0.0

0.5

0.8

1.9

Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)

0

0

0

1

6

Telephone lines (per 100 people)

1

2

2

2

2

Fertility rate, total (births per woman)

6

5

5

4

4

Other
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)

790

890

1,000

890

960

GNI, Atlas method (current US$) (billions)

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.5

20.3

7.6

6.6

13.8

..

57

60

62

65

67

Internet users (per 100 people)

Gross capital formation (% of GDP)
Life expectancy at birth, total (years)
Literacy rate, adult total (% of people ages 15 and above)
Population, total (million)
Trade (% of GDP)
Source: World Development Indicators
Figures in italics refer to periods other than those specified.

..

..

77

..

..

…

…

0.4

0.5

0.5

94.7

94.8

62.7

88.7

80.5

39
APPENDIX I–LETTER OF INTENT
Ref: RF457/5/5

November 4, 2011

Ms. Christine Lagarde
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
Dear Ms. Lagarde
Solomon Islands has benefited from the implementation of the government’s economic
reform program supported by a Standby Credit Facility (SCF) arrangement approved in June
2010. Economic recovery has been stronger than expected, the fiscal and external positions
have strengthened, and donors’ support has been catalyzed.
Given the observance of all end-June 2011 quantitative targets by large margin and the
progress in implementing the structural benchmarks, we request the completion of the third
and final review under the SCF arrangement and the release of the corresponding
disbursement of SDR3.12 million.
Looking ahead, while growth momentum is expected to remain strong, downside risks to
global growth have increased. We remain committed to reforms aimed at strengthening our
economic resilience and promoting strong, sustainable, and inclusive growth to help advance
our poverty alleviation efforts with a continued engagement with the Fund. To move toward
achieving these objectives and to preserve the reform momentum, we are requesting a
successor arrangement. Given the strong reserve position and program performance, we
would like to request a new precautionary 12-month Standby Credit Facility (SCF) for
SDR5.2 million (equivalent of 50 percent quota). We believe that this successor arrangement
would help lock in the progress made so far in strengthening macroeconomic performance
and economic institutions. It would be a building block in implementing an ambitious
medium-term structural reform agenda which could be supported by another Fund facility in
the future.
The attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) describes the
Government’s reform policies during 2011–12, which we believe will strengthen our
macroeconomic management framework, preserve the strong external and fiscal positions,
maintain a stable monetary condition, and strengthen the financial sector. In order to ensure
strong implementation under the precautionary SCF, the program will be monitored through
quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets, structural benchmarks, and semiannual reviews (see MEFP Tables 1 and 2).
We intend to maintain a close policy dialogue with the Fund, and stand ready to take
additional measures, as appropriate, to ensure the achievement of the government’s
macroeconomic objectives under the precautionary SCF. We will consult with the Fund in
advance on the adoption of these measures or on any revisions to policies contained in the
MEFP, in accordance with the Fund’s policy on such consultation. Furthermore, we will
provide the Fund with any information it may request on policy implementation, as

40
necessary, to achieve program objectives. We also authorize the publication of this Letter of
Intent and the attached MEFP.
Sincerely yours,
/s/

/s/

Hon. Gordon Darcy Lilo, MP
Denton Rarawa
Minister of Finance and Treasury
Governor
Ministry of Finance and Treasury
Central Bank of Solomon Islands
Attachments: Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies and Technical
Memorandum of Understanding

41
APPENDIX I—ATTACHMENT I
MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
This memorandum sets forth economic and financial policies and objectives of the Government
of Solomon Islands for the period 2011–12 under a requested precautionary Standby Credit
Facility (SCF) arrangement with the IMF.
I. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK
1.
Macroeconomic conditions have improved remarkably. The strong
implementation of the IMF program has helped restore economic and financial stability and
triggered donor support. Activity rebounded from the global financial crisis by 7 percent in
2010 and is estimated to have grown by nearly 10 percent in 2011. Logging production has
been stronger than expected and gold investment supported growth in the transport,
telecommunication and construction sectors. Inflation increased to 8¾ percent (year-on-year)
in August 2011, partly driven by commodity prices, but there are signs of moderation on a
month-on-month basis, with inflation expected to recede to 6½ percent on average in 2011.
The balance of payments position has also improved substantially with gross international
reserves reaching US$355 million (around 6 months of imports of goods and services) in
August 2011, from less than US$100 million in mid-2009.
2.
The near- and medium-term outlook is still favorable, but challenges remain. An
uncertain global environment poses downside risks in the near term, while vulnerability to
climate change could take a toll on long-term economic prospects. In the near term, real GDP
growth is projected to remain healthy at around 6 percent in 2012 with gold production taking
over logging as the main driver of growth. Over the medium term, logging production is
expected to decline, but gold production and agriculture should continue to support growth in
the range of 4 percent. Headline inflation is likely to remain around 4½ percent in the medium
term as commodity prices stabilize. The balance of payments position should also remain
strong with gross international reserves above 4 months of imports. Assistance from
development partners is also expected to continue to support growth in the medium term. The
downside risks are mainly external due to the rapidly weakening global outlook that could hit
commodity prices and demand as Solomon Islands remains highly vulnerable to commodity
price volatility and external demand shocks. On the upside, the outlook for logging and mining
may be stronger than expected should the Asian economies remain resilient to negative
spillovers from the current global financial turmoil. Over the medium term, climate change
could negatively affect incomes and food security in rural areas through an increase in water
salinity, especially in the outer islands.
3.
The reform program under the SCF arrangement is on track. The program targets
for end-June 2011 were met with comfortable margins. Government cash balances reached
more than SI$300 million at end-June, covering two months of recurrent spending, and the net
international reserves stood at US$340 million. The targets for net credit to government and the
central banks’ net domestic assets were also met with comfortable margins. We have also
implemented most of the benchmarks committed under the program (Tables 1 and 2).

42
4.
Further reforms are needed to ensure that Solomon Islands reduces its
vulnerability to external shocks and remains on a sustainable growth path. Building on
the success of the current program, we are formulating a set of reform policies that can be
supported by a successor arrangement with the Fund.
II. PROGRAM POLICIES
To increase resilience to shocks we will need to rebuild our policy buffers and implement
growth-oriented structural reforms which would help boost investors’ confidence and ensure
sustainable and inclusive growth. To this end, our program will continue to focus on
strengthening fiscal management framework, improving monetary operations, maintaining a
strong foreign exchange position, and containing financial sector risks. The quantitative
targets and structural policies underlying our program are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
5.
Our policies are aimed at preserving stable macroeconomic conditions to help
advance our poverty alleviation efforts. Our macroeconomic objectives include achieving
growth at 6 percent in 2012 and 4 percent in the medium term. We will also seek to maintain
strong domestic and external balances by preserving adequate fiscal buffers, maintaining low
inflation at 4–5 percent, and building a comfortable international reserves position at more than
4 months of imports. The policy framework under our program will also ensure adequate
resources for health, education, and infrastructure, which are critical to support our poverty
alleviation and growth objectives in the medium-term.
A. Fiscal Policies
6.
We remain committed to preserving a strong fiscal position while providing
adequate resources for health, education, and infrastructure (including water sanitation).
The fiscal position has improved over the last year as a result of strong commodity revenues
and better fiscal management. The buoyancy of tax collections, over-performance in the cash
balance in 2010–11, and additional mining revenue would provide an opportunity to scale-up
quality spending in 2012. However, we realize that revenue will continue to remain volatile
due to its dependence on commodities. Thus, we will strike a balance between preserving
strong fiscal buffers and refocusing on critical infrastructure and social priority expenditure,
such as health and education. To achieve this goal, we will ensure that the 2011 supplemental
budget and the 2012 budget are consistent with the following policies:


To retain an adequate fiscal buffer, we will continue to maintain the cash balance at no
less than 2 months of recurrent spending.



To improve the composition of spending and ensure sustainable and inclusive growth, the
2012 budget will shift more resources toward the social sector (health and education) and
infrastructure, including water sanitation. Thus, we will maintain spending on education
and health at no less than 32 percent of government-funded recurrent budget, in line with
our economic reform program and consistent with the Core Economic Working Group’s
recommendation, and make a larger contribution (SI$100 million in 2012) to the National

43
Transport Fund.1 This will help make meaningful progress toward the achievement of the
MDGs, which are out of reach under current policies and alleviate poverty. We will
continue to restrain growth of non-essential recurrent spending. In particular, large
wage/benefits increases and transfers to local constituencies will be resisted.


To strengthen public financial management and better monitor priority spending, we will
revise our budget presentation from input line items to functional/output items by
September 2012, in time for the preparation of the 2013 budget (program benchmark). We
will also seek assistance from development partners to strengthen procurement and
internal audit processes to reduce leakages that affect public service delivery.



Should commodity revenue surprise on the upside, or under-spending of the development
budget materialize due to capacity constraints, we will build up government saving or
retire external and/or domestic debt to create fiscal space for critical spending and deal
with future shocks. If we decide to retire domestic debt, we will ensure that the injection
of liquidity into the private sector does not lead to excessive demand pressure on the
economy. We will closely coordinate cash flow projections and plans for debt repayments
between Ministry of Finance and Treasury and the Central Bank of Solomon Islands.



We will continue to boost domestic revenue by strengthening compliance, streamlining
exemptions. In July we raised the export price of logs in three equal increases (for July–
September 2011, October–December 2011, and January–March 2012) to reach the full
market price starting on January 1, 2012, and we will continue to apply the full market
price with quarterly adjustment. We will also submit to Parliament the amendments to tax
legislations to strengthen exemption rules and clarify the role of exemption committee by
end-2011 (program benchmark).



To enhance public service delivery we will reduce operational and non-technical losses to
ensure cost recovery and efficiency gains in the state-owned electricity and water
enterprises with the assistance of development partners. In particular, we will resolve cross
arrears between the water and the electricity companies and undertake tariff reform for
water charges.

7.
Over the medium term, in view of the expected decline in logging revenue and
development grants, our fiscal policies will focus on strengthening the management of
natural resources and securing sufficient resources for development needs. The National
Development Strategy (NDS) launched in September 2011 will form the basis for a
comprehensive poverty reduction and growth strategy over the next few years. The NDS is
aimed at alleviating poverty and providing greater benefits and opportunity to improve the
lives of all Solomon Islanders in a peaceful and stable society. This would be done by taking
better care of the people by fulfilling social needs, improving the livelihood and the economic
1

We are still working toward reconciling the data on spending on health and education. An indicative floor on this
priority spending will be set during the first program review once the tracking mechanism is in place.

44
benefits, and providing enabling environment to achieve development objectives. Going
forward, the strategy will also include costing and prioritization of projects, and will articulate
further the linkages between spending, growth and poverty reduction. Measures to boost
private sector development and improve access to credit would also ensure a more broad-based
growth.


To strengthen our medium term fiscal position, we will implement a multi-year budget
framework by September 2012 in time for the 2013 budget. Casting budget decisions in a
multi-year perspective will help design realistic fiscal plans in line with the objectives of
the NDS. It will also help build consensus on the appropriate sequencing of development
projects.



To help anchor the fiscal plans over the medium term, we will shift toward targeting the
non-commodity fiscal balance as opposed to the cash balance in 2014, as mining becomes
a larger source of government revenue. This will insulate the budget from the volatility of
commodity revenues, help smooth expenditure over the mining cycle, and ensure a longterm sustainable use of exhaustible resources.



Implementing a new resource taxation regime will be critical for the country to benefit
from its natural resource wealth. In this context, we will seek to obtain Cabinet approval
by March 2012 of draft amendments to income tax, custom and excise tax, and goods tax
legislations to implement a new mining taxation regime, in line with IMF technical
assistance recommendations (program benchmark). Until this new tax regime is in place,
we will refrain from approving new mining leases. At the same time, we will enforce the
agreements currently in place with mining companies to ensure that the government
receives its share of mining revenue.



Reforms of the mining legislations should move in parallel to provide a predictable
investment regime and a transparent regulatory framework to attract foreign investment. In
this context, we have also endorsed the principles of the Extractive Industry Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and will move toward the EITI participation.



Adopting fiscal responsibility provisions would help strengthen the medium-term fiscal
framework. We will continue to reform the Public Finance and Audit Act (PFAA) by
seeking a Cabinet approval by September 2012 of the new PFAA that incorporates fiscal
responsibility provisions, management and use of public funds, and management of public
debt (program benchmark).



Resuming concessional borrowing after completing the Honiara Club Agreement (HCA)
review in areas where donor grants are less available but have high economic returns such
as infrastructure projects would be key. The work on formulating a new debt management
strategy, by incorporating the results of the IMF-World Bank Debt Sustainability
Analysis, is now ongoing. We plan to finalize the new debt strategy by end-2011 and,
together with the signatories of HCA, will complete the HCA review by end-April 2012
(program benchmark), paving the way for concessional borrowing to resume by mid-2012.

45


Providing a reliable and a cost-efficient source of energy is critical for private sector
development, including the mining sector. To exploit our hydro power potential we will
secure financing to develop the Tina River power project with the assistance of the World
Bank Group. To provide wider access to renewable energy and reduce reliance on volatile
imported diesel, we will promote broader use of solar power.
B. Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Policies

8.
Monetary and exchange rate policies will continue to be geared toward
maintaining price and external stability. Given the comfortable level of foreign reserves, the
Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI) let the currency appreciate by 7 percent against the
US dollar from March 2011 to August 2011 to mitigate the imported inflation pressure. As a
result, inflation is on a downward trend. Yet, monetary conditions have remained
accommodative over the past year as a result of the improved balance of payments position,
but with no signs of pickup in private credit. In view of the high level of banks’ excess
reserves, the CBSI has enhanced the use of the central bank Bokolo and treasury bills recently
(rising to SI$ 319 million since April 2011) to mop up liquidity. The CBSI will closely monitor
credit developments and tighten monetary conditions using both direct and indirect monetary
instruments should banks begin to expand credit aggressively. The current exchange rate
regime has provided a strong nominal anchor. Exchange rate policy will continue to be
managed in a flexible manner to buffer against external shocks.
9.
To strengthen the effectiveness of CBSI in the conduct of monetary policy and
supervisory activities, we are amending the CBSI Act. The process has taken longer than
envisaged as we had to seek Cabinet approval of the drafting instructions (obtained in October
2011) for the amendments. Following consultations among stakeholders, we will seek Cabinet
approval of the draft Act by end-March 2012 (revised program benchmark).
10.
We will continue our efforts to strengthen the financial sector and improve access
to credit. On-site examinations of all three major banks have now been completed and they
have revealed a significant overstatement of capital due to the accounting treatment of Nostro
balances. The CBSI has requested the banks to undertake urgent corrective actions and to
ensure that all banks are above the minimum capital requirement by end-October 2011. To
facilitate large project financing, the prudential guideline on the single borrower limits will be
revised by end-2011, taking into consideration the constraints posed by the small size of the
banking system and the predominance of three foreign banks. The Financial Institutions Act of
1990 will also be amended to reflect structural changes in the financial system and the latest
international best practices. We will request IMF technical assistance for this purpose.
11.
Reforming the National Provident Fund (NPF) to improve its governance and
investment performance would be essential to provide retirement income and maintain
financial stability. The drafting instructions to the amendments to the NPF Act (September
2011 benchmark) have taken more time than envisaged due to delays in the provision of
external technical assistance and the need for wider consultations among stakeholders to
strengthen ownership. In this regard, we plan to seek Cabinet approval of the drafting
instructions by end-June 2012 (revised program benchmark). The drafting will be guided by

46
the approved policy paper on NPF reforms that strengthen governance structure to reduce
political influence on investment decision and maximize returns to its members.
III. OTHER STRUCTURAL REFORMS TO SUPPORT PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
12.
Reforms to support private sector development are critical for inclusive growth.
We will streamline land title registration and transfer of ownership to ease access to credit and
improve collateral recovery. To encourage financial access by small enterprises we will
explore options to enhance the use of the small business finance scheme administrated by the
CBSI and Secured Transactions Act. To achieve these objectives, we will build on the
experience of other countries and tap on resources from our development partners.
13.
Solomon Islands is vulnerable to climate change. An adaptation and migration
strategy will need to be developed with the help of development partners to mitigate the
adverse impact on the most vulnerable and to fund climate change-proof infrastructure.
IV. OTHER ISSUES
14.
Safeguards assessment. We agree to ensure the completion of the Safeguards
Assessment update by the time of first review of the successor precautionary SCF arrangement.
The CBSI will provide Fund staff with all necessary information for the update.
15.
Statistics. Progress has been made in strengthening the quality of national account
statistics and fiscal and monetary data for program purposes. We will continue to improve the
quality of macroeconomic data by devoting more resources to the national statistics office by
hiring more staff.

Table 1. Solomon Islands: Quantitative Performance Criteria (PC) and Indicative Targets (IT) for the Current and Prospective Successor Arrangement

IT

3/31/2011
IT

Est.

(CR/10/359) with adjustors

PC
(CR/11/180)

6/30/2011
PC

Est.

with adjustors

9/30/2011
IT

12/31/2011
PC

3/31/2012
IT

6/30/2012
PC

9/30/2012
IT

(CR/11/180)

Performance criteria 1/
206

197

277

280

284

340

283

345

351

357

364

Net domestic asset (NDA) of the CBSI (ceiling, end-ofperiod stock, in millions of Solomon Islands dollars (SI$))
3/
Net credit to central government (NCG) (ceiling,
cumulative change from the beginning of the year, in
millions of SI$) 4/

-401

-332

-767

-700

-731

-1199

-722

-767

-870

-869

-875

31

100

-23

17

17

-288

-15

-58

27

19

4

New nonconcessional external debt maturing in more than
one year, contracted or guaranteed by the public sector
(ceiling, end-of-period stock since the beginning of the
program, in millions of US$) 5/

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

New nonconcessional external debt maturing in one year
or less, contracted or guaranteed by the public sector
(ceiling, end-of-period stock since the beginning of the
program, in millions of US$) 5/

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Accumulation of new external payment arrears by the
public sector (ceiling, end-of-period stock since the
beginning of the program, in millions of SI$) 5/

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Central government program cash balance (floor,
cumulative change from the beginning of the year, in
million of SI$) 4/

-33

-105

34

-30

-30

47

-8

…

…

…

…

Central government program cash balance (floor, end-ofperiod stock, in million of SI$) 4/

…

…

…

…

…

…

…

287

287

292

313

Central government program cash balance (floor, end-ofperiod stock, in million of SI$) 4/

134

62

297

233

233

309

255

…

…

…

…

Budget support from bilateral and multilateral donors
other than IMF (cumulative change from the beginning of
the year, in millions of US$), program level.

11

…

2

21

…

25

39

50

14

30

44

Outstanding stock of Solomon Islands government (SIG)
treasury bills, excluding restructured government bonds
(end-of-period stock, in millions of SI$), program level.

40

…

38

40

…

40

40

40

60

60

60

Memorandum items:

1/ Evaluated at the program exchange rate.
2/ The adjustors are specified in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) and include: the floor on NIR will be adjusted upward (downward) by the amount of budget support from bilateral and multilateral donors
(excluding IMF) in excess (short) of the program level.
3/ The adjustors are specified in the TMU and include: the ceilings on NDA will be adjusted downward (upward) by the amount of budget support from bilateral and multilateral donors (excluding the IMF) in excess (short) of the
program level. Following the recommendations of the IMF Safeguards Assessment, the program targets starting from end-December 2010 incorporate the recommended changes in the measurement of reserve money. Such
changes, however, are not applied in measuring the September 2010 NDA outcome to make it consistent with the September 2010 IT, which was set before the changes were made.
4/ The adjustors are specified in the TMU and include: the floor on central government program cash balance will be adjusted downward and the ceiling on NCG will be adjusted upward by the stock amount of budget support
from bilateral and multilateral donors (excluding the IMF) short of the program level; the floor on the program cash balance will be adjusted upward (downward) by the stock of government treasury bills, excluding restructured
government bonds, in excess (short) of the program level.
5/ These performance criteria are applicable on a continuous basis.

47

Net international reserves (NIR) of the Central Bank of
Solomon Islands (CBSI) (floor, end-of-period stock, in
millions of U.S. dollars (US$)) 2/

Table 2. Solomon Islands: Structural Benchmarks
Actions

Macroeconomic criticality

Date

Status

Current Standby Credit Facility Arrangement
June 30, 2011

A policy paper outlining the new resource tax regime has been
submitted to Cabinet, and approval was received in September (Met
with delay).

Obtain Cabinet approval of a proposal to reform Public Finance and Audit Act
and to incorporate fiscal responsibility provisions.

To strengthen budget management and ensure fiscal
sustainability.

June 30, 2011

The proposal was submitted to Cabinet in June, and approval was
received in July 2011 (Met with delay).

Publish the proposed amendments to the Public Finance and Audit Act
including the draft fiscal responsibility provisions for public consultation.

To strengthen budget management and ensure fiscal
sustainability.

September 30,
2011

Expected to be published in November 2011 (Expected to be met with
delay).

Obtain Cabinet endorsement of the drafting instructions to revise the National
Provident Fund (NPF) Act incorporating the reform plan.

To improve the long-term financial viability of the NPF
and reduce fiscal risks.

September 30,
2011

In progress, but delayed due to capacity constraints. Technical
assistance from donors is being sought and new completion date is
set (Delayed, see below).

Publish the opinion rendered by the international audit firm on the Central Bank To improve transparency of the CBSI.
of Solomon Islands (CBSI) audit results and the IFRS-based financial
statements, beginning with the 2010 financial statements.

June 30, 2011

The opinion is included in the 2010 CBSI Annual Report published in
the CBSI website (Met).

Obtain Cabinet approval of draft amendment to the CBSI Act.

To strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy.

September 30,
2011

In progress. The drafting instruction to amend the CBSI Act has been
approved by the Cabinet in October, but the draft amendment is
expected to be approved in March 2012 (Delayed, see below).

Publish finalized national income accounts for 2007-09.

To strengthen macroeconomic indicators.

June 30, 2011

The National Statistics Office (NSO) published the national account
statistics in June 2011 (Met).

Successor Arrangement
Submit to Parliament the amendments to the Customs and Excise and Income To promote fiscal transparency and enhance the
Tax Acts to strengthen exemption rules and clarify the role of exemption
efficiency of revenue collections.
committee.
Obtain Cabinet approval of a draft amendment to income tax, customs and
excise tax, and goods tax legislations related to the new mining tax regime in
line with IMF TA recommendations.

To broaden the tax base and increase revenue
transparency.

Obtain Cabinet approval of draft amendment to the CBSI Act to strengthen the To strengthen the effectiveness of monetary policy.
monetary policy and supervisory framework.

December 31,
2011
March 31, 2012

March 31, 2012

Complete the Honiara Club Agreement (HCA) review and reach agreements on To strengthen debt management and maintain public
amendments to the HCA.
debt sustainability.

April 30, 2012

Obtain Cabinet approval of the drafting instructions to revise the NPF Act
incorporating the reform plan approved by the Cabinet to strengthen its
governance structure and investment framework.

To improve the long-term financial viability of the NPF
and reduce fiscal risks.

June 30, 2012

Obtain Cabinet approval of the draft of new Public Finance and Audit Act that
covers fiscal responsibility provisions, management and use of public funds,
and management of public debt.

To strengthen budget management and ensure fiscal
sustainability.

September 30,
2012

Revise the budget presentation from input line items to functional/output line
items.

To strengthen the quality and monitoring of
government spending.

September 30,
2012

48

Formulate a resource tax regime, consistent with IMF technical assistance (TA) To broaden the tax base and increase revenue
recommendations.
transparency.

49
APPENDIX I—ATTACHMENT II
SOLOMON ISLANDS: TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
The program will be monitored through quantitative performance criteria, indicative
targets, structural benchmarks, and reviews. This memorandum sets out the definitions for
quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets under which performance under the
program will be assessed. Monitoring procedures and reporting requirements are also specified.
I. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND INDICATIVE TARGETS
2.
Performance criteria for end-December 2011 and end-June 2012 and indicative
targets for end-March 2012 have been established with respect to:


Floors on the level of net international reserves (NIR) of the Central Bank of Solomon
Islands (CBSI);



Ceilings on the level of net domestic assets (NDA) of the CBSI;



Ceilings on the level of net credit to the central government (NCG); and



Floors on the central government cash balance.

3.
Performance criteria applicable on a continuous basis have been established with
respect to:


Ceilings on the contracting and guaranteeing by the public sector of new medium- and
long-term nonconcessional external debt;



Ceilings on the contracting and guaranteeing by the public sector of new short-term
nonconcessional external debt; and



Ceilings on accumulation of new external payment arrears by the public sector.
II. INSTITUTIONAL DEFINITIONS

4.
The central government includes all units of budgetary central government and extra
budgetary funds.
5.
Depository corporations (DCs) include the CBSI and other depository corporations
(ODCs). ODCs include commercial banks, the Credit Corporation of Solomon Islands, and
credit unions. Financial corporations include DCs and other financial corporations (OFCs).
OFCs are the National Provident Fund (NPF), the Development Bank of Solomon Islands,
and the Investment Corporation of Solomon Islands.
III. MONETARY AGGREGATES
6.
Valuation. Foreign currency-denominated accounts will be valued in Solomon
Islands dollar (SI$) at the program exchange rate of SI$7.42 per U.S. dollar, as of end-June
2011. Foreign currency accounts denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar and

50
monetary gold will first be valued in U.S. dollars at actual exchange rates and gold prices
used by the CBSI, respectively, before they are converted to Solomon Islands dollars.
A. Reserve Money
7.
Reserve money consists of currency issued by the CBSI (excluding CBSI holdings of
currency) and all transferable deposits held at the CBSI.
B. Net International Reserves of the CBSI
8.
A floor applies to the level of NIR of the CBSI. The floor on NIR will be adjusted
upward (downward) by the amount of budget support from bilateral and multilateral donors
(excluding IMF) in excess (short) of the programmed level.
9.
NIR will be calculated as gross international reserves (GIR) less international reserve
liabilities. For program monitoring purposes, the stock of foreign assets and foreign
liabilities of the CBSI, as reported in Solomon Islands dollars, shall be valued at program
exchange rate in U.S. dollars, as described on paragraph 6.
10.

GIR of the CBSI are defined as the sum of:



Foreign currency assets in convertible currencies held abroad and as vault cash that are
under the direct and effective control of the CBSI and readily available for intervention
in the foreign exchange market or the direct financing of balance of payments
imbalances and are of investment grade or held with an investment-grade institution.



The reserve position of Solomon Islands in the IMF;



Holding of SDRs; and



Monetary gold.

Excluded from the definition of GIR are:


Foreign currency deposits of ODCs and OFCs held at the CBSI;



Any foreign currency claims on residents, capital subscriptions in international
institutions, and foreign currency assets in nonconvertible currencies, and;



GIR that are in any way encumbered or pledged, including, but not limited to, reserve
assets used as collateral or guarantee for third-party external liabilities.

11.

International reserve liabilities of the CBSI are defined as the sum of:



All outstanding liabilities of Solomon Islands to the IMF, excluding IMF SDR
allocations; and



Foreign currency liabilities in convertible currencies to nonresidents with an original
maturity of up to and including one year.

51
C. Net Domestic Assets of the CBSI
12.
A ceiling applies to the level of NDA of the CBSI. The ceiling on NDA will be
adjusted downward (upward) by the amount of budget support from bilateral and
multilateral donors (excluding IMF) in excess (short) of the programmed level.
13.
NDA of the CBSI will be calculated as the difference between reserve money and the
sum of NIR of the CBSI and other NFA of the CBSI. Any revisions to the historical stock of
reserve money based on changes to the accounting treatment of the profit/loss account of the
CBSI will be notified to the Fund immediately and used to adjust monetary aggregates by an
equivalent amount, as deemed appropriate. Other NFA of the CBSI includes:


Foreign assets related to holdings of foreign currency deposits, and securities not
included in NIR of the CBSI, and loans, shares, financial derivatives, or accounts
receivable with nonresidents; and other foreign assets that are not included in NIR of
the CBSI, as defined in Section III. B; and



Foreign liabilities related to IMF SDR allocations; deposits, securities, loans, financial
derivatives, and other accounts payable with nonresidents; and other foreign liabilities
that are not included in NIR of the CBSI, as defined in Section III. B.
D. Net Credit to the Central Government

14.
A ceiling applies to the NCG measured cumulatively from the beginning of the year.
The ceiling on NCG will be adjusted upward by the amount of budget support from bilateral
and multilateral donors (excluding IMF) short of the programmed level.
15.
NCG is defined as the sum of net claims of: (i) the CBSI, (ii) commercial banks and
other ODCs, (iii) OFCs, (iv) insurance companies, (v) and government treasury bills held by
the general public.
IV. FISCAL AGGREGATES
A. Cash Balance of the Central Government
16.
A floor applies to the program cash balance of the central government. The floor on
the program cash balance will be adjusted downward by the amount of budget support from
bilateral and multilateral donors (excluding IMF) in short of the programmed level. The
floor on the program cash balance will also be adjusted upward (downward) by the stock of
government treasury bills, excluding restructured government bonds, in excess (short) of the
program level of SI$40 million in 2011 and SI$60 million in 2012.
17.
The program cash balance of the central government is defined as the gross cash
balance minus the total amount of unpaid payment orders and unpresented checks.
18.
The gross cash balance is defined as the sum of government deposits, which are not
in any way encumbered or pledged as collateral or used as a guarantee against government
incurred liabilities, in the following accounts:

52


In CBSI: Solomon Islands Government (SIG) Revenue Account, SIG Funded
Development Account, SIG Debt Servicing Account;



In Australia New Zealand Bank: SIG Creditors Account; Payroll Imprest Account, and
Airport Service Fees Account;



In Bank of South Pacific: Provincial Revenue Holding Account, SIG Inland Revenue
Account, Sub Treasury Gizo Account, and Sub Treasury Auki Account; and



Donor funded budget support accounts that are created by and under control of
the government.
V. EXTERNAL DEBT
A. Medium- and Long-Term External Debt

19.
A ceiling applies to the contracting and guaranteeing by the public sector of new
nonconcessional borrowing with nonresidents with original maturities of more than one
year. The ceiling applies to debt and commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value
has not yet been received. This applies to private debt for which official guarantees have
been extended and which, therefore, constitutes a contingent liability of the public sector.
The public sector comprises the central government, the CBSI, nonfinancial public
enterprises (i.e., enterprises in which the government owns more than 50 percent of the
shares), and other official entities.
20.
The definition of debt, for the purposes of the program, is set out in Point 9 of the
Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to External Debt in Fund Arrangement
Executive Board Decision No. 6230-(79/140), as revised on August 31, 2009 (see Annex I).
21.
Excluded from the ceiling are (i) the use of Fund resources; (ii) lending from the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank; (iii) debts incurred to restructure, refinance,
or prepay existing debts, to the extent that such debt is incurred on more favorable terms
than the existing debt and up to the amount of the actually restructured/refinanced/prepaid
debt; (iv) concessional debts; (v) any SI$-denominated treasury bill and bond holdings and
Bokolo bonds held by nonresidents.
22.
For program purposes, the guarantee of a debt arises from any explicit legal
obligation of the central government, the CBSI, nonfinancial public enterprises, or other
official entities on behalf of the central government or the CBSI to service debt in the event
of nonpayment by the main obligor (involving payments in cash or in kind).
23.
For program purposes, a debt is concessional if it includes a grant element of at least
35 percent, calculated as follows: the grant element of a debt is the difference between the
net present value (NPV) of debt and its nominal value, expressed as a percentage of the
nominal value of the debt. The NPV of debt at the time of its contracting is calculated by
discounting the future stream of payments of debt service due on this debt. The discount rates
used for this purpose are the currency specific commercial interest reference rates (CIRRs),
published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation Development (OECD). For debt
with a maturity of at least 15 years, the 10-year-average CIRR will be used to calculate the

53
NPV of debt and, hence, its grant element. For debt with a maturity of less than 15 years, the
6-month average CIRR will be used. To both the 10-year and 6-month averages, the same
margins for differing repayment periods as those used by the OECD would continue to be
added (0.75 percent for repayment periods of less than 15 years, 1 percent for 15 to 19 years,
1.15 percent for 20 to 29 years, and 1.25 percent for 30 years or more).
B.

Short-Term External Debt

24.
A ceiling applies to the contracting and guaranteeing by the public sector of new
nonconcessional borrowing with nonresidents with original maturities of up to and including
one year. The ceiling applies to debt and commitments contracted or guaranteed for which
value has not yet been received. This applies to private debt for which official guarantees
have been extended and which, therefore, constitute a contingent liability of the public sector.
25.
For program purposes, the definition of debt is set out in Point 9 of the Guidelines on
Performance Criteria with Respect to External Debt in Fund Arrangement approved by the
Executive Board Decision No. 6230-(79/140), as revised on August 31, 2009 (see Annex I).
26.
Excluded from the ceiling are (i) debts classified as international reserve liabilities of
the CBSI; (ii) debts incurred to restructure, refinance, or prepay existing debts, to the extent
that such debt is incurred on more favorable terms than the existing debt and up to the
amount of the actually restructured/refinanced/prepaid debt; (iii) SI$-denominated treasury
bills and bonds and CBSI and Bokolo bills held by nonresidents; and (iv) normal import
financing. A financing arrangement for imports is considered to be “normal” when the credit
is self-liquidating.
VI. EXTERNAL PAYMENT ARREARS
27.
A continuous performance criterion applies to the nonaccumulation of external
payments arrears by the public sector, comprising the central government, the CBSI,
nonfinancial public enterprises, and other official entities. External payments arrears consist
of external debt-service obligations (principal and interest) that have not been paid at the
time they are due, as specified in the contractual agreements.
VII. DATA PROVISION
28.
The data listed below will be provided for monitoring performance under the
program based on data templates agreed with Fund staff. Under each section, reporting
responsibilities are indicated in parentheses. Weekly data are requested for submission to
Fund staff by the end of the following week. Monthly and quarterly data are requested for
submission within six weeks of the end of the observation period. The authorities have
committed to using the best available data, so that any subsequent data revisions will not
lead to a breach of quantitative performance criteria or benchmarks. All revisions to data
will be promptly reported to Fund staff.

54
A. Monetary Data (CBSI)


On a weekly basis:



Daily exchange rates, both buying and selling rates, of Solomon Islands dollar against
the U.S. dollar, including the official, interbank, and parallel market exchange rates;



Stock of NIR and sales and purchases by the CBSI in the foreign exchange markets;



Stock of reserve money and its components; and



Treasury bill auction reports.



On a monthly basis:



Financial corporations’ survey, including the balance sheet of CBSI, the consolidated
balance sheet of ODCs, and the consolidated balance sheet of OFCs;



Liquid asset ratios and/or reserves requirement of the commercial banks;



Interest rates, including average interbank rate, bank deposit rates, and bank
lending rates;



A detailed breakdown of NCG from the CBSI, commercial banks and other ODCs, and
OFCs;



Foreign exchange cash-flow of the CBSI, including donor disbursements; and



Balances of each central government account specified in Section IV. A., as recorded or
collected by the CBSI.
B. Fiscal Data (Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MoFT))

On a monthly basis:


Consolidated accounts of the central government, including detailed data on:



Revenue, including tax and nontax revenues, and recurrent and development grants
included in the consolidated budget;



Recurrent expenditure, including payroll, goods and services, and other recurrent
outlays, including those funded by donor support;



Other recurrent charges of the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health, separating
spending funded by donor support;



Debt service payments, classified into amortization and interest payments on
(i) domestic debt, (i) external debt, (iii) domestic arrears, and (iv) external arrears; and

55


Development expenditure funded by (i) central government of Solomon Islands, and (ii)
foreign grants and loans included in the consolidated budget.



Detailed financing components of central government’s accounts, classified into foreign
and domestic sources.



Foreign financing includes (i) disbursement and amortization of project and program
loans, and (ii) changes in external debt arrears, classified into principal and interest
arrears.



Domestic financing includes (i) borrowing from and repayment to the CBSI,
commercial banks and other ODCs, and OFCs; (ii) changes in deposits at the CBSI,
commercial banks and other ODCs, and OFCs; and (iii) privatization receipts and
changes in domestic debt arrears, classified into principal and interest arrears.



Stock of domestic debt, including the outstanding balance of government securities,
treasury bills, cash advances, and other debt instruments.



Balances of each central government account specified in Section IV. A., as recorded
by the MoFT.



Stock of unpaid government payment orders and unpresented checks.
C. External Sector Data (CBSI and MoFT)

On a quarterly basis:


New external debt obligations contracted and/or guaranteed by the government of
Solomon Islands, CBSI, and other official entities, including details on the amounts,
terms, and conditions of each obligation.



Stock of outstanding external debt at end-month and disbursement, amortization, and
interest payments for short-term external obligations contracted or guaranteed by the
government or the CBSI by creditor in original currency and U.S. dollars.



Stock of external debt at end-month and disbursement, amortization, and interest
payments for medium- and long-term external obligations contracted or guaranteed by
the government or the CBSI by creditor in original currency and U.S. dollars.



Stock of arrears on the external debt contracted or guaranteed by the government or the
CBSI by creditor in original currency and in U.S. dollars at end-month.

56


On a quarterly basis:



Balance of payment data, including detailed components of current accounts and capital
and financial accounts.
D. Real Sector Data (MoFT, National Statistical Office)

On a monthly basis:


The monthly consumer price index and a detailed breakdown by major categories of
goods and services included in the consumer basket.

57
Annex I. Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt
Excerpt from Executive Board Decision No. 6230-(79/140), as revised on August 31, 2009
9.

(a)
For the purpose of this guideline, the term “debt” will be understood to
mean a current, i.e., not contingent, liability, created under a contractual
arrangement through the provision of value in the form of assets (including
currency) or services, and which requires the obligor to make one or more
payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future
point(s) in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest
liabilities incurred under the contract. Debts can take a number of forms, the
primary ones being as follows:
(i)
loans, i.e., advances of money to the obligor by the lender
made on the basis of an undertaking that the obligor will repay the
funds in the future (including deposits, bonds, debentures, commercial
loans and buyers’ credits) and temporary exchanges of assets that are
equivalent to fully collateralized loans under which the obligor is
required to repay the funds, and usually pay interest, by repurchasing
the collateral from the buyer in the future (such as repurchase
agreements and official swap arrangements);
(ii)
suppliers’ credits, i.e., contracts where the supplier permits the
obligor to defer payments until sometime after the date on which the
goods are delivered or services are provided; and
(iii)
leases, i.e., arrangements under which property is provided
which the lessee has the right to use for one or more specified
period(s) of time that are usually shorter than the total expected service
life of the property, while the lessor retains the title to the property.
For the purpose of the guideline, the debt is the present value (at the
inception of the lease) of all lease payments expected to be made
during the period of the agreement excluding those payments that
cover the operation, repair or maintenance of the property.
(b)
Under the definition of debt set out in point 9 (a) above, arrears,
penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from the failure to make
payment under a contractual obligation that constitutes debt are debt. Failure
to make payment on an obligation that is not considered debt under this
definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will not give rise to debt.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Standby
Credit Facility, and Request for Arrangement Under the Standby Credit Facility––
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department
November 8, 2011

Contents

Page

I. Fund Relations .....................................................................................................................2
II. Support from the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center ........................................6
III. Relations with the World Bank ............................................................................................8
IV. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ....................................................................10
V. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................12
VI. Main Websites of Data .....................................................................................................14

2
ANNEX I. SOLOMON ISLANDS—FUND RELATIONS
(As of September 30, 2011)
I.

Membership Status: Joined September 22, 1978; Article VIII

II.

General Resources Account:
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in the Fund

SDR Million
10.40
9.85
0.55

Percent Quota
100.00
94.73
5.29

III.

SDR Department:
Net cumulative allocation
Holdings

SDR Million
9.91
9.26

Percent Allocation
100.00
93.43

IV.

Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million
SCF Arrangement
9.36

V.

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type
SCF
Stand-by

VI.

Approval
Date
6/2/2010
6/22/1983

Expiration
Date
12/1/2011
6/21/1984

Percent Quota
90.00

Amount Approved
(SDR Million)
12.48
2.40

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)
9.36
0.96

Projected Payments to Fund:
(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs):

Forthcoming
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total
VII.

2011

2012

2013

0.00
0.00

0.05
0.05

0.05
0.05

Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not applicable.

VIII. Implementation of MDRI Assistance: Not applicable.
IX.

Implementation of PCDR: Not applicable

2014
1.04
0.05
1.09

2015
1.73
0.04
1.77

3
X.

Exchange Rate Arrangements:
The de jure exchange rate arrangement is a conventional peg. The exchange rate of the
Solomon Islands dollar is calculated on the basis of a basket of foreign currency but
further managed by the Central Bank of the Solomon Islands (CBSI) through
interventions on a daily basis to determine its value vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. At the
beginning of June 2008, the Solomon Islands dollar began to depreciate, leaving the peg,
before stabilizing around a new level by end-March, 2009. Because there was no
discernible pattern during this period, the de facto exchange rate arrangement was
classified as other managed. From April 2009 through January 2011, the Solomon Islands
dollar remained pegged to the U.S. dollar at SI$8.06 per U.S. dollar. Accordingly, the de
facto exchange rate arrangement was reclassified retroactively to a conventional peg from
other managed, effective April 1, 2009. Even though the method of exchange rate
calculation has not changed, the currency composition and weights of the basket,
determined on the basis of the volume and direction of the country’s trade, have been
updated, effective February 1, 2011. The exchange rate regime of pegging the Solomon
Islands dollar to a basket of currency remains unchanged. After implementation of the
updated basket in February 2011, the Solomon Islands dollar began to appreciate and
move more freely against the U.S. dollar. Due to the increased flexibility, the de facto
exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified to other managed from a conventional
peg, effective February 1, 2011.
The CBSI determines the exchange rate of the Solomon Islands dollar against the U.S.
dollar with a mandatory spread. The CBSI publishes for commercial banks the U.S.
dollar/Solomon Islands dollar buying and selling rates and the mandatory spread limits.
Under the Central Bank of the Solomon Islands Act, the CBSI may change the exchange
rate arrangement only on written instructions from the minister of finance. Solomon
Islands maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of
payments and transfers for current international transactions.

XI.

Safeguards Assessment:
Under the Fund's safeguards assessment policy, the Central Bank of Solomon Islands is
subject to a safeguards assessment with respect to the proposed Standby Credit Facility.
An earlier safeguards assessment, concluded in October 2010, noted that annual financial
statements prepared and audited in accordance with international standards have been
timely published. However, a disjointed 2009 audit exercise led to a departure from
international standards and highlighted capacity limits in the governance and audit areas.
Formal reviews of monetary data are warranted and some operational controls require
improvement.

4
XII.

Last Article IV Consultation:
The 2009 Article IV Consultation discussions were held in Honiara during July 20–29,
2009. The staff report (IMF Country Report No. 09/309) was considered by the
Executive Board and the consultation concluded on October 16, 2009.

XIII. Technical Assistance:
Date
January 2005
February 2005
April 2005
May, August, and October 2005; and
February 2006
May 2005
August 2005
August 2005, February and April 2006
September 2005 and February 2006
October 2005
November 2005 and July 2005
January 2006
April and June 2006
May, August, and October 2006 and
January 2007
October 2006
October 2006
October 2006
December 2006
February 2007
February and November 2007 and May
2008
March 2007 and March 2008
February 2008-February 2009

Department
PFTAC
PFTAC
PFTAC
MFD

Purpose
Financial reporting system
Financial supervision of insurance
Financial supervision
Financial supervision of insurance

PFTAC
MFD
PFTAC
PFTAC
LEG
STA
PFTAC and LEG
MFD
PFTAC

Tax policy and administration
Reserve management
Statistics
AML/CFT
AML/CFT
Monetary and Financial Statistics
Tax policy
Central Bank Accounting
Public Financial Management and
Accounting
TA program monitoring
Financial sector supervision
Reserve Management
Business Revenue Reform
Balance of Payments Statistics
National Income Accounts

MCM
STA

February-March 2008
April 2008, February 2009
June 2008
April 2008-April 2009
June 2008, September 2008, June 2009

PFTAC and FAD
PFTAC
LEG
MCM
MCM

July 2008
January 2009, April 2010, April 2011
April 2009
June 2009
June 2009

STA
STA
MCM
LEG
MCM

MCM
MCM
MCM
PFTAC
PFTAC
PFTAC

Accounting
Peripatetic Export and Import Price Index
Statistics
Tax Policy
Balance of Payments Statistics
Review of Central Bank Act
Peripatetic Advisor to CBSI
Monetary Operations and Liquidity
Management
Money and Banking Statistics
Monetary and Financial Statistics
Insurance Supervision
Insurance Sector Law
Central Bank Law

5
April 2010
April 2010, May 2011
September 2010
June 2010, October 2010, March 2011
October 2010, March 2011
October 2010, June 2011

PFTAC
PFTAC
PFTAC
PFTAC
FAD, PFTAC
MCM

July 2010, October 2010, January 2011
April 2011
April 2011
April 2011
July 2011
September 2011

PFTAC
FAD
PFTAC
STA
PFTAC
LEG

Balance of Payment Statistics
National Account Statistics
Government Finance Statistics
Financial Supervision
Natural Resource Tax Policy
Monetary Operation and Liquidity
Management
Public Financial Management
Budget Law
Macroeconomic advisor visit
GDDS Metadata Development
Customs Administration
Tax Legislations

XIV. Resident Representative:
The resident representative office for the Pacific Islands was opened in September 2010 in Suva,
Fiji. Mr. Yongzheng Yang is the Resident Representative.

6
ANNEX II: SOLOMON ISLANDS—SUPPORT FROM THE PACIFIC FINANCIAL TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE CENTER1
Solomon Islands: PFTAC Country Strategy 2011–13
Background
Solomon Islands has recovered well from a precarious position during the global economic
crisis. Growth has accelerated rapidly and international and fiscal reserves increased, mainly
on the back of increased logging and mining, but also due to better fiscal management and
increased international assistance. The medium-term reform agenda under the Core
Economic Working Group emphasizes, amongst other things, strengthening of public
financial management in particular with regard to the management of natural resource
revenues.
Solomon Islands has been a moderate user of PFTAC TA. Despite the large international
presence, mainly through RAMSI which caters for much of the technical assistance needs in
the government, PFTAC has made specific technical contributions in particular with regard
to the fiscal regime for natural resources. In the PFM area, PFTAC has also contributed to a
World Bank-led PER and provided follow up support to a revision of accounting standards.
Significant amounts of support have been provided to CBSI in formulating and implementing
new prudential regulations for banks and also in developing a more robust inflation
forecasting regime.
Strategy 2011–13
PFTAC’s TA strategy is guided by the APD regional strategy note and is planned within the
results framework for the current PFTAC funding cycle.2
The main focus of PFTAC TA will be on strengthening fiscal management, particularly
with regard to natural resource management and solidifying the financial sector. In the
Government area inputs will either be at the strategic/policy level or dealing with niche

1

The Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center in Suva, Fiji, is a regional technical assistance institution
operated by the IMF with financial support of the Asian Development Bank, Australia, Japan, Korea, and
New Zealand. The Center’s aim is to build skills and institutional capacity for effective economic and financial
management that can be sustained at the national level. Member countries are: Cook Islands, Federated States of
Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Timor Leste, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
2
See PFTAC program document, available at: www.pftac.org. The specific result in the framework that
activities target is identified in italics in the section, for example cash management is referred to as (1.6), where
1.6 is the code in the result framework in the program document.

7
requirements where IMF/PFTAC has a comparative advantage. Support for implementation
is expected to continue to come from other donors, in the context of RAMSI or its successor.
In the Public Financial Management area, following on from participation in the World
Bank-led PER the main focus will be assisting the authorities conduct a follow-up PEFA
assessment in early-2012.The assessment will lead to revised PFM reform priorities to be
taken forward in the context of the CEWG. The process will guide the need for any PFTAC
support to implementation, but priorities are likely to be follow-up on accounting reform and
development of systems to appropriately manage natural resource revenues (including fiscal
responsibility provisions).
In the revenue area, support to the implementation of the fiscal provisions for the mining
sector designed with PFTAC TA will be financed by HQ-based trust funds. Solomon Islands
has made significant progress in improving revenue administration—it recently was awarded
one of two regional awards. The RAMSI TA that assisted in this is expected to continue to
take the lead in supporting administration reforms. PFTAC will make resources available to
support modernization on income tax legislation and VAT implementation should the
authorities choose to pursue this.
In statistics, PFTAC has recently assisted the NSO enhance national accounts and balance of
payments statistics. The main focus of follow up TA will be to complement inputs by
RAMSI-funded advisors, with a particular focus on methodological improvements on the
balance of payments. Support may also be available for expanding the range of aggregates
available in the National Accounts. A review of the methodology and data sources for the
CPI will be undertaken in early 2012.
In financial sector supervision, making use of PFTAC support, the CBSI has made great
strides in improving its regulatory framework and on and off-site supervision. The skills and
processes that have been built can now function effectively with a lower level of technical
assistance-probably with one short review visit a year from the PFTAC advisor (at around the
same time as an on-site exam). Additional support may be required if CBSI opt to implement
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand information technology system to enhance supervision.
In the macroeconomic area, work will focus on building macroeconomic modeling and
analysis capacity in CBSI with the aim of having better inflation and external forecasts to
feed into monetary policy making. Work on developing fiscal forecasts, including for the
natural resource sector will continue with the Ministry of Finance, including inputs into their
financial programming framework.

8
ANNEX III: SOLOMON ISLANDS—RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
(As of October 2011)

1.
The Bank and the Fund teams led by Mr. Vivek Suri (Lead Economist, World Bank
Sydney Office) and Ms. Patrizia Tumbarello (IMF Mission Chief for Solomon Islands)
maintain a regular dialogue on macroeconomic and structural issues. In recent years,
collaborative efforts have focused on the joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Analysis and
regular discussions during missions and at headquarters. IMF missions regularly meet Bank
staff in the World Bank Honiara office, led by Ms. Edith Bowles (World Bank Country
Manager), and at headquarters. Bank staff joined the 2011 IMF Article IV discussions.
2.
The teams agree that the key priorities for Solomon Islands include consolidating the
recent improvement in the country’s macro-fiscal framework in the face of ongoing volatility
in external conditions, improving the quality of public spending to ensure the public
resources support the provision of basic social services, and ensuring state owned enterprises
can sustainably provide public services.
3.
The risks to the economy from slippages in domestic policy decisions or a
deterioration in external conditions remain considerable. Ongoing efforts to strengthen
Solomon Islands’ economic management and reinforce protective buffers are to be
supported. Some policy areas continue to present short-term challenges, particularly
regarding the solvency and urgent maintenance needs of the main public utilities.
4.
The Bank and Fund teams agree that the focus has shifted to the medium-term reform
agenda. Priority issues include developing a more coordinated and prioritized approach to
address the weaknesses in public financial management systems, developing new budget
allocation baselines that better reflect actual spending patterns and bringing these closer to
the priority of improving delivery of social services, and of strengthening the investment
climate and improving mining regulation. The Bank agreed to take the lead in public
expenditure management framework and structural reform issues and the Fund will continue
to take the lead on macro issues.
The Banks and Fund teams agree to continue close collaboration, mainly with regular
contact through the Bank’s Honiara and Sydney offices, the IMF regional resident
representative office in Suva, and at headquarters. The Fund will also continue to collaborate
with the government-donor Core Economic Working Group convened regularly in Honiara
by the Ministry of Finance and Treasury with World Bank support. Appendix I provides a list
of planned activities in the coming year.
5.

9

Appendix I. Solomon Islands: Bank and Fund Planned Activities,
October 2011–September 2012

World Bank






IMF















Activities
Line Ministry Public Expenditure
Analyses (analytic and TA)
Support for review and revision of
mining sector regulatory and institutional
framework (TA)
Advisory and analytical support to the
Solomon Islands Statistics Office for the
2012 HIES
Supporting Solomon Islands EITI
candidature (TA)
Urban land management (TA)
Health sector PER (analytic)
Technical assistance on developing and
implementing new resource tax regime
and amending relevant tax legislations
Technical assistance on strengthening
monetary operations, foreign exchange
management, banking supervision, and
review of Financial Institution Act.
Technical assistance on public finance
management, including assistance with
developing a medium-term budget
framework and with developing a new
public finance and audit act.
Technical assistance on General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS), national
accounts, price, balance of payment
statistics.
Technical assistance on building capacity
for inflation forecasting
2011 Article IV Consultation (including
Debt Sustainability Analysis), Third
Review of the SCF-supported program
and Request for a Precautionary SCFsupported Program.
First Review of the Precautionary SCFsupported program

Expected Delivery Date
FY 12
FY12 (ongoing)
FY 12 (tentative)

FY 12 (ongoing)
FY 12
FY 12 (tentative)
2010-11

2011-12

2011- 12

2011-12

2011
September-October 2011

April 2012

10
ANNEX IV: SOLOMON ISLANDS—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of October 2011)
Since joining the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) in 1973, Solomon Islands has received
16 loans amounting to US$79.3 million, six grants amounting to US$51.3 million and 65
technical assistance (TA) projects amounting to US$20.55 million. Including cofinanced
amounts, AsDB's ongoing program in Solomon Islands totals $96.1 million. Solomon Islands
is eligible for Asian Development Fund (ADF) grants available to countries that are very
poor, heavily indebted, or in a post-conflict situation. The AsDB approved ADF grants of
US$15.0 million and US$17.0 million in 2009 and 2010, respectively. The 2009–10 ADF
allocations for Solomon Islands succeeded in catalyzing substantial grant cofinancing from
the governments of Australia and New Zealand, the European Commission, and the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI).
The AsDB’s country assistance strategy seeks to reduce poverty by promoting equitable
private-sector-led economic growth through improved transportation infrastructure and
services and a stronger business-enabling environment.1 A new Country Partnership Strategy
(2011–15) is being prepared for approval in February 2012. Capacity development and the
promotion of good governance are guiding priorities. In light of the global economic
turbulences, the AsDB is adjusting its operations to support the government in terms of
mitigating the impacts, currently through analytical support and adjustments in the design
and delivery of investment projects to increase local content. In line with the improvements
in its public debt situation, AsDB assistance is currently provided in a 45:55 ratio mix of
grants and concessionary loans, effective 1 January 2011. The government is currently
developing the new debt strategy and reviewing the Honiara Club Agreement, aiming to
facilitate better access to external borrowing to support much needed infrastructure
development.
In transport infrastructure, the AsDB supports the institutional strengthening of the Ministry
of Infrastructure Development. Investment projects, all grant funded, include a second
Solomon Islands Road Improvement Project (approved in 2009) that is rehabilitating roads
and bridges; and a Transport Sector Development Project (approved in 2010). Building on
the progress made in earlier transport projects, TSDP has set the stage for a comprehensive
transport sector-based approach by implementing and building project management
capacities and improving government systems, including procurement and safeguards. The
TSDP presents an important step in harmonization and alignment has been the passage, with
AsDB assistance, of the National Transport Fund Act in 2009.

1

The Interim Country Partnership Strategy 2009–11 can be found at <http://www.adb.org/documents/CPSs/SOL/CPSSOL-2009-2011.pdf>, and the Country Operations Business Plan 2012-2014 at
<http://www.adb.org/Documents/CPSs/SOL/2012-2014/cobp-sol-2012-2014.pdf>.

11
Following the 2009 global economic crisis, AsDB provided support for an Economic
Recovery Support Program (ERSP)2 in 2010, with the first and second subprogram grants of
$5 million each released in April 2010 and September 2011, respectively. The formulation
and implementation of the ERSP has been carried out through a joint governmentdevelopment partner Core Economic Working Group (CEWG) mechanism.3 The ERSP
supported reforms aimed at strengthening fiscal management, restoring macroeconomic and
fiscal stability to aid economic recovery, enhancing structural reforms, ensuring that the
budget accords priority to vulnerable groups, and public consultation. Structural reforms
include long-standing areas of ADB business environment support such as improved SOE
oversight, telecommunications deregulation, enactment of the Companies Act and an
electronic Companies Registry, a Secured Transactions Act and establishment of the Secured
Transactions Registry, submission of the national transport fund regulations.
The AsDB’s Pacific Liaison and Coordination Office in Sydney is responsible for country
programming, project implementation, and administration, supported by the Pacific
Operations Division in Manila.
Solomon Islands: Loans, Approvals, and Disbursements, 2000–10
(In millions of U.S. dollars)
2000
Loan approvals

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

10.00

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

Loan disbursements

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.89

2.76

4.09

3.75

0.073

--

--

Cumulative loan
amount approved
(as of end-of-year)

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

Cumulative net
effective loans (as
of end-of-year)

54.30

64.05

64.83

65.87

66.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

79.31

Cumulative
disbursements (as of
end-of-year)

54.07

54.07

54.07

54.30

55.16

57.91

62.00

65.75

65.82

65.82

65.82

Contact person: Eugenue Zhukov, Regional Director, Pacific Liaison and Cooperation Office, AsDB
Sydney (ezhukov@adb.org).

2
ADB. 2010. Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Program
Cluster and Grant for Subprogram 1, Solomon Islands: Economic Recovery Support Program. Manila (Grant
197-SOL).
3
CEWG development partners include ADB, Australia, the European Union, New Zealand, the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands, and the World Bank.

12
ANNEX V. SOLOMON ISLANDS––STATISTICAL ISSUES
(As of October 2011)
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General: Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance.
National Accounts: Recent technical assistance (TA) from the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center has
led to improvements in constant and current price GDP estimates. Revised estimates for 2009-2005 incorporating
the results of the 2009 Census have been published by the National Statistics Office. While limited data on
employment can be obtained from the National Provident Fund, wage data are not compiled.

Price statistics: A monthly consumer price index (CPI) is produced with a short lag (about a month), but
covers only the capital Honiara. The weights of this index were revised in 2007, based on the results of the 2005–
06 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. The authorities plan to compile a nationwide CPI, and have
already compiled a list of goods to be contained in the basket. However, the timing of actual compilation is
unclear due to lack of funds. TA has been provided on the development of an import price index but, due to
resource constraints, there has been little progress in implementation.
Government finance statistics: Monthly fiscal data for the central government are published by the Ministry of
Finance and Treasury (MOFT). The authorities have started collecting disbursement information on donors’
grants, including those nonappropriated in the budget. Monthly public debt data are published, and the quality
debt data has improved through better coordination between the MOFT and the Central Bank of Solomon Islands
(CBSI).

Monetary and financial statistics: The CBSI publishes monthly monetary and financial statistics (MFS) in
summary form and reports to the IMF’s Statistics Department using the standardized report forms (SRFs).
External Sector Statistics: The CBSI has been compiling quarterly balance of payment statistics (BPS) using its
own survey since 2006. Compared to the previous method, which was based on foreign exchange transactions
reported through the banking system, the newly compiled BPS has improved both coverage and data accuracy.
However, these quarterly data have not yet been reported to the IMF's Statistics Department.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Solomon Islands has participated in the General Data
Dissemination System (GDDS) starting in 2011.

No data ROSC available.

III. Reporting to STA (Optional)
No fiscal data are currently reported to STA for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook or in
the International Finance Statistics.

13

Solomon Islands: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance

(As of October 2011)
Date of
latest
observation

Date
received

Frequency
of
Data/7

Exchange Rates

10/24/11

10/31/11

D

W

M

International Reserve Assets and Reserve
Liabilities of the Monetary Authorities/1

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Reserve/Base Money

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Broad Money

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Central Bank Balance Sheet

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Banking
System

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Interest Rates/2

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Consumer Price Index

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing/3 – General
Government/4

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Revenue, Expenditure, Balance and
Composition of Financing/3– Central
Government

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

Stocks of Central Government and Central
Government-Guaranteed Debt/5

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

M

External Current Account Balance

06/30/11

09/30/11

Q

Q

Q

Exports and Imports of Goods and Services

08/31/11

10/15/11

M

M

Q

GDP/GNP

12/31/09

06/30/11

A

A

A

Gross External Debt

06/30/11

09/30/11

Q

Q

Q

International Investment Position/6

06/30/11

09/30/11

Q

Q

Q

Frequency
of
Reporting/7

Frequency of
Publication/7

1/ Any reserve assets that are pledged or otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also, data should comprise short-term
liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive
foreign currency, including those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means.
2/ Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on treasury bills, notes and bonds.
3/ Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.
4/ The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary funds, and social security funds) and state and
local governments.
5/ Including currency and maturity composition.
6/ Includes external gross financial asset and liability positions vis-à-vis nonresidents.
7/ Daily (D); weekly (W); monthly (M); quarterly (Q); annually (A); irregular (I); and not available (NA).

14
ANNEX VI. SOLOMON ISLANDS––MAIN WEBSITES OF DATA
Central Bank of Solomon Islands (www.cbsi.com.sb)
Central bank survey
Depository corporation survey
Financial corporation survey
Monetary aggregates
Treasury bills and Bokolo bills
Exchange rates
Interest rates
Balance of payments
Government budget accounts
Public domestic and external debt
Export and imports
Ministry of Finance (www.mof.gov.sb) and National Statistics Office
(www.spc.int/prism/country/sb/stats/Index.htm)
Budget documents
Medium-term fiscal strategy
Central government revenue and expenditure
National accounts
Public domestic and external debt
Consumer price statistics
Exports and imports
Population and housing census

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Joint IMF/World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis 20111
Prepared by the Staff of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
Approved by Hoe Ee Khor and Dominique Desruelle (IMF)
and Jeffrey Lewis and Ahmad Ahsan (World Bank)
November 8, 2011
Solomon Islands is at moderate risk of external debt distress according to this World BankIMF Low-Income Country (LIC) Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA). The debt profile is
sensitive to shocks to non-debt creating flows, export growth, and financing terms.
Containing the risk of debt distress will require continued efforts to rebuild fiscal buffers,
establish a multi-year budget framework to provide fiscal discipline, and implement
structural reforms that are essential to promote broad-based growth.
I. BACKGROUND
1.
Solomon Islands is a small commodity exporter heavily reliant on imports,
foreign aid and FDI, and vulnerable to external shocks. The export and production basis
are narrow and include mainly logs, more recently gold, and a few agricultural products. As a
result, the country is vulnerable to both external demand and commodity price volatility. The
country also heavily relies on foreign aid and FDI to finance its structural trade deficit and
large development needs.
2.
The economy was hit hard by the global economic crisis, but the 18-month
Standby Credit Facility (SCF) Arrangement approved in June 2010 succeeded in
stabilizing the economy and catalyzing donor support. The fiscal position has improved
substantially since then as a result of strong economic rebound and improvement in tax
compliance and tax arrears collection. The government cash balance increased from almost
zero in the first quarter of 2010 to about 2 months of recurrent spending by the second
quarter of 2011.

1

This DSA was produced in consultation with the Asian Development Bank (AsDB). It is based on the
common standard LIC DSA framework. Under the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA),
Solomon Islands is rated as a weak performer, and the DSA uses the indicative threshold indicators on the
external public debt for countries in this category: 30 percent for the present value (PV) of debt-to-GDP ratio;
100 percent for the PV of debt-to-exports ratio; 200 percent for the PV of debt-to-revenue ratio; 15 percent for
the debt service-to-exports ratio; and 25 percent for the debt service-to-revenue ratio. The fiscal year of
Solomon Islands starts on January 1.

2
3.
Total public debt has declined from about 60 percent of GDP in 2005 to about
28 percent of GDP as of end-2010 under the framework of the Honiara Club Agreement
(HCA).23 Domestic public debt, including the publicly guaranteed debt of the state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) at around 1 percent of GDP, was about one third of total public debt as of
end-2010, owed mainly to the banking sector (including the Central Bank of Solomon
Islands) and the National Provident Fund. Total external debt has declined from about
50 percent of GDP in 2005 to about 32 percent of GDP as of end-2010, with public and
publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt accounting for about 20 percent of GDP (US$135
million).
4.
Looking forward, the challenge is to diversify the sources of growth away from
logging given the projected decline of log production over the medium term.
Nevertheless, the country has a more favorable medium- and long-term outlook than
envisaged in the DSA issued in September 2009 (Box 1). This reflects: (i) the success of the
SCF that contributed to a healthy fiscal balance and triggered stronger aid inflows from the
donor community; (ii) the new debt strategy currently being developed by the authorities in
the context of the ongoing review of the HCA which should help regain access to external
borrowing to finance much needed infrastructure development; and (iii) the production at the
Gold Ridge mine expected to contribute to about 35 percent of export earnings on average in
the next decade.
II. EXTERNAL AND PUBLIC DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS
A. External Debt Sustainability Analysis
5.
The external DSA indicates that Solomon Islands is at moderate risk of debt
distress. Under the baseline scenario (Table 1a), total external debt is projected to decline to
around 25 percent in 2011 and further to below 23 percent next year, as foreign aid and FDI
are expected to fully finance the trade and services deficit. However, the total external debt is
projected to gradually increase starting 2014 reaching around 37 percent of GDP over the
longer term. The increase in external debt over the medium term also reflects renewed access
to external financing after completion of the review of HCA, compensating for the decline in
foreign aid. Similarly, PPG external debt is projected to decline to 15 percent in 2011 and to
moderately increase to around 30 percent of GDP over the longer term. Other key indicators
of sustainability—the present value of PPG external debt, the ratio of PPG debt service to

2

At the central government level only.
External borrowing has been restricted since 2005 under the Honiara Club agreement (HCA) which was
signed by the government and major creditors. Under this agreement, Solomon Islands cannot borrow from
official external lenders until it receives a “green light” rating from the World Bank’s International
Development Association.
3

3
Box 1. Macroeconomic Assumptions under the Baseline Scenario


GDP growth and population. The economy is expected to grow at 9.3 percent in 2011,
driven by logging and gold production. In the medium term, growth is projected at 4
percent, as log production declines, consistent with the projection of the Ministry of
Finance and Treasury (MOFT). Over the longer term, the growth would decline further
to around 3½ percent, reflecting the negative impact of the scheduled closure of the
Gold Ridge mine more than offsetting the positive impact of a more diversified export
base. Population is projected to grow at around 2½ percent per year.



Logging and mining. After peaking in 2011, log production is expected to decline by
20 percent each year until 2015 and remain stable afterwards. Consistent with the
projection of the MOFT, gold production is projected at 55 thousand ounces in 2011,
105 thousand ounces in 2012, and 120 thousand ounces during 2013–19, and to
gradually wind down by 2023.



Aid flows and FDI. The amount of aid flows has increased remarkably in recent years,
compared to those in the 2009 DSA, reflecting large grant disbursement catalyzed by
the SCF-supported program and better recording of grant disbursement since 2009.
After peaking in 2010 at 25 percent of GDP, aid flows are expected to remain around 20
percent of GDP over the medium term and decline gradually to their historical average
of about 10 percent of GDP by 2031. This assumption reflects the gradual scaling-down
of the operation at the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI). As
the Gold Ridge mine is now operational and ready for full-scale production, FDI is
projected to decline to 20 percent of GDP in 2011, from 35 percent of GDP in 2010, and
further to around 10 percent over the medium term. It would stabilize at around 8
percent over the longer term, slightly lower than its historical average of 9 percent of
GDP, reflecting the closure of the Gold Ridge mine more than offsetting the potential
investment in new sectors.



New loan disbursements are assumed to average about 2½ percent of GDP over the
next 5 years. This amount includes lending on concessional terms from the World Bank
and the AsDB, to finance infrastructure and transport projects. Over the longer term,
concessional borrowing is projected to average around 3 percent of GDP per year.

 The primary balance is expected to average around 1½ percent of GDP over the
medium term, driven by strong mining revenue. Over the longer term, however, it is
expected to turn into deficit and stabilize at around 1 percent of GDP, because grants
and mining revenue are projected to decline while additional external borrowing would
partially substitute for previously grant-funded development expenditure. Revenue (exc.
grants) is projected to be at around 35 percent of GDP over the medium and long term.
 The non-interest current account deficit is projected to be about 11 percent of GDP in
2011, and to worsen to around 15 percent of GDP in the next two years mainly
reflecting the decline in log exports more than offsetting the increase in gold exports. It
is likely stabilize at about 10 percent of GDP in the medium and long term with the
decline in fuel imports—a major input of gold production—together with a more
diversified exports base, roughly offsetting the decline in gold exports.

4
exports and the ratio of PPG debt service to revenue—all remain well below the indicative
thresholds (Figure 1). 4
6.
Sensitivity analysis suggests that the country’s debt path is vulnerable to several
shocks, in particular, to a shock to the net non-debt creating flows (Table 1b, and
Figure 1). A shock to non-debt creating flows is defined as a lower share of net current
transfers and net FDI of GDP in 2012–13 at about one standard deviation less than the
historical average.5 Such a shock would keep the PV of PPG external debt to GDP ratio
above the threshold for 19 years before starting to decline to below the threshold in 2031. PV
of PPG external debt to exports would also temporarily breach the threshold during the years
around the scheduled closure of the Gold Ridge mine. Debt services to revenue/exports ratios
would jump around 2022–23 as the grace period of the marginal borrowing is 10 years.
7.
A shock to the nominal export growth and a permanent shock to financing terms
would also lead to a breach of thresholds (Table 1b).6 Under the shock to the nominal
export growth, the PV of PPG external debt to GDP ratio would be above the threshold
during 2016–28. A permanent shock to financing terms is defined as a higher interest rate by
2 percentage points during 2011–31 than in the baseline. Such a shock would keep the PV of
PPG external debt to GDP ratio above the threshold starting 2023.
B. Public Debt Sustainability Analysis
8.
Public debt analysis paints a similar picture. In addition to the PPG external debt,
public debt includes guaranteed loans for SOEs of about 1 percent of GDP as of end-2010,
while it does not include the central government’s contingent liabilities of about 1.5 percent
of GDP. Under the baseline scenario (Table 2a), the PV of total public debt will further
decline to around 15 percent of GDP in the medium term. Over the longer term, it is
projected to increase to around 25 percent, driven by external borrowings after the
completion of the review of HCA. Public debt sustainability is vulnerable to shocks as well.
Under the most extreme stress test scenario—real GDP growth being one standard deviation

4

The large residuals in Tables 1a and 2a reflect the assumption that the large mineral revenue in the pipeline
will be saved in a special fund to support health, education and infrastructure.

5

The historical (10-year) averages of foreign aid and FDI are 11.7 and 8.7 percent of GDP, while the standard
deviations of these flows are 9.9 and 11.7 percent of GDP. The template does not capture the decline in the
imports that the shock may induce.
6

A shock to nominal export growth is defined as a lower growth rate of export value in US dollar in 2012-2013
at about one standard deviation less than the historical average. The historical (10-year) average and standard
deviation of growth of exports is 14.1 percent and 24.2 percent, implying a growth rate of -10 percent in 201213 under the stress test. In these two years, current account as a percent of GDP is lower than in the baseline
because of lower exports. In 2014-31, current account as a percent of GDP is the same as in the baseline, as
imports are adjusted to a permanently lower level.

5
temporarily lower in the next two years—the PV of debt reaches about 60 percent of GDP by
2021, and more than 90 percent of GDP by 2031 (Table 2b and Figure 2).
C. Fiscal Policy Going Forward: Anchoring The Non-Commodity Balance
9.
Over the medium and long term, it is important to target the non-commodity
fiscal balance as opposed to the cash balance. In the near term, it remains appropriate to
target the cash balance as the mining revenue is
Solomon Islands: Fiscal balance and Government Saving
small. However, over the next decade, mining
(percent of GDP, or otherwise indicated)
revenue is about to pick up to an estimated
18
average of around 5 percent of GDP, exposing
14
the cash balance and the overall fiscal balance to 10
the budget to a larger volatility of commodity
6
revenues. Setting a target on the non-commodity 2
balance can insulate the budget from such
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
-2 2008
volatility.
-6
Cash balance (in months of recurrent spending)
Fiscal balance

Nonmineral balance

Nonlogging nonmineral balance

Nonlogging nonmineral balance (including external loans)

‐10

10.
Anchoring a non-commodity balance
over the medium term has two advantages over targeting the cash balance. It would
smooth expenditure over the mining cycle, while targeting the overall balance/cash balance
could lead to spending levels rising and falling in line with commodity revenue forecasts,
regardless of cyclical or efficiency considerations and could spur inflationary pressures.
Another advantage is that it may provide room for a fair use of commodity resources across
generations.
III. POLICY IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
11.
Solomon Islands is at moderate risk of debt distress. Maintaining public and
external debt at sustainable levels requires actions on multiple fronts. First, continued efforts
should be put on rebuilding the fiscal buffers and creating fiscal space, especially in light of
the uncertainties surrounding the external environment. Second, the government should step
up implementing the structural reforms (such as a new resource tax regime and new mining
legislation) that would help maximize the spillovers from the commodity sector to noncommodity sectors, boost investors’ confidence and ensure sustainable growth. These
reforms would also help strengthen the prospect for exports, reducing the vulnerability to
external shocks. Third, establishing a multi-year budget framework would help prioritize the
areas that are essential to promote broad-based growth as well as provide fiscal discipline.
Finally, structural reforms formulated under the National Development Strategy should be
prioritized and implemented as they would help increase potential growth and maintain the
debt sustainability over the long term.
12.
The authorities have broadly agreed with the assessment. They are fully
committed to completing the review of the HCA and formulating a new debt strategy to
resume access to external concessional financing. Supported by the precautionary SCF, they
will also implement a new resource taxation regime to ensure that the government receives a
fair share of mining revenue and they will reform the mining legislation to provide a
predictable investment regime to attract foreign investment.

6
Figure 1. Solomon Islands: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed
External Debt under Alternatives Scenarios, 2011-31
a. Debt Accumulation
30

40
Rate of Debt
Accumulation

25

35
30

Grant-equivalent
financing (% of GDP)

20
15

Grant element of new
borrowing (% right
scale)

10
5
0
2011

2016

2021

2026

-5

2031

b. PV of debt-to-GDP ratio
70
60
50

25

40

20

30

15

20

10

10

5

0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

0

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

140

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

250

120

200

100
150

80
60

100

40
50

20
0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2031

f .Debt service-to-revenue ratio

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio
16

30

14

25

12
20

10

15

8
6

10

4
5

2

0

0
2011

2016
Baseline

2021

2026

2031

Historical scenario

2011

2016
Non-debt flows

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

2021

2026
Threshold

2031

7

Figure 2.Solomon Islands: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2011-31 1/
Baseline

Fix Primary Balance

Most extreme shock Growth

Historical scenario

100
90

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

2021

2023

2025

2027

2029

2031

250

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/
200

150

100

50

0
2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

14
12

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

10
8
6
4
2
0
2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ The most extreme stress test is the test that yields the highest ratio in 2021.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Table 1a.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2008-31 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Historical 6/ Standard
Average
Deviation

Actual

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

Projections

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

32.1
23.8
-8.8
-0.7
19.3
22.9
44.3
67.2
-18.1
-15.1
14.5
-15.0
-5.1
1.1
-2.5
-3.7
-8.1
0.0

32.4
23.2
0.3
2.5
20.7
18.3
39.3
57.6
-24.4
-20.3
26.8
-19.5
1.3
0.8
1.5
-1.0
-2.2
0.0

32.2
19.9
-0.2
-8.4
29.6
31.8
49.3
81.1
-25.3
-24.9
23.1
-34.9
-3.1
0.7
-2.0
-1.7
8.1
0.0

24.9
14.7
-7.3
-9.3
10.9
12.4
62.4
74.8
-22.8
-22.5
21.3
-18.5
-1.7
0.7
-2.4
…
2.0
0.0

22.6
13.5
-2.4
0.7
12.1
8.3
61.0
69.3
-22.1
-21.8
25.9
-10.7
-0.7
0.6
-1.3
…
-3.0
0.0

22.6
13.9
0.1
5.1
15.0
13.3
56.6
69.9
-21.7
-20.4
23.4
-9.6
-0.3
0.6
-0.9
…
-5.0
0.0

23.7
15.1
1.1
3.1
13.0
16.1
55.4
71.5
-21.1
-19.6
17.9
-9.7
-0.1
0.6
-0.7
…
-2.0
0.0

24.8
16.4
1.1
2.5
11.7
16.6
56.7
73.3
-20.4
-18.8
15.5
-9.0
-0.2
0.6
-0.8
…
-1.4
0.0

...
...
...
...
...
7.5
5.6
8.6
0.0
28.1

...
...
...
...
...
5.9
3.6
4.6
0.0
20.4

27.1
55.0
14.8
30.1
46.0
4.7
3.0
4.5
0.0
29.8

21.1
33.9
10.9
17.5
32.5
3.3
1.9
3.5
0.0
18.2

19.0
31.2
9.9
16.3
29.4
2.7
1.4
2.6
0.0
14.5

18.9
33.3
10.1
17.9
30.0
2.7
1.4
2.4
0.1
14.9

19.5
35.2
10.8
19.5
29.7
3.0
1.7
2.6
0.1
11.8

7.1
10.0
3.3
20.6
14.0
...
29.0
0.2
0.1
0.1
...
...

-4.7
3.2
2.3
-12.9
-15.8
...
30.5
0.3
0.1
0.1
...
...

7.0
5.6
2.3
41.8
59.2
...
32.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
...
...

9.3
13.7
2.9
57.4
14.7
0.0
33.6
0.2
0.2
0.0
25.9
100.0

6.0
9.9
2.8
13.8
7.9
34.2
33.8
0.2
0.2
0.0
25.1
96.9

4.0
3.1
2.8
-0.4
8.2
34.2
33.7
0.3
0.3
0.0
24.5
95.5

0.6
17.9

0.6
-1.7

0.7
13.0
0.1

0.8
24.3
0.1
-0.9
0.0
10.9
17.5
1.9

1.0
16.6
0.1
0.4
0.0
9.9
16.3
1.4

1.0
7.3
0.1
0.8
0.0
10.1
17.9
1.4

8.3

14.0

-11.7

9.9

-8.7

11.7

2011-16
Average

2021

2031

26.1
17.9
1.2
2.3
11.1
17.2
57.8
75.0
-19.8
-18.0
13.7
-8.5
-0.3
0.6
-0.9
…
-1.0
0.0

36.1
29.0
2.6
5.0
11.1
23.3
54.1
77.4
-17.3
-14.7
5.2
-6.0
-0.1
0.6
-0.7
…
-2.4
0.0

37.5
32.4
-1.2
0.3
9.3
23.1
56.8
80.0
-13.6
-9.8
-0.2
-8.1
-0.9
0.6
-1.5
…
-1.6
0.0

20.0
35.4
11.6
20.5
31.6
3.2
1.7
2.6
0.1
10.6

20.7
35.8
12.6
21.7
34.0
3.1
1.7
2.6
0.1
9.9

27.7
51.1
20.5
37.9
57.4
2.5
1.2
1.8
0.1
8.5

29.7
52.2
24.6
43.3
72.5
3.8
3.0
5.1
0.1
10.5

3.4
0.8
2.7
1.9
6.6
34.2
36.4
0.3
0.3
0.0
23.8
93.5

3.7
0.8
2.6
6.9
7.1
34.2
36.8
0.3
0.3
0.0
23.0
92.7

4.0
0.8
2.5
6.9
7.2
34.2
36.9
0.3
0.3
0.0
22.2
91.8

2.3
-0.2
2.0
-1.6
2.8
34.2
35.8
0.3
0.3
0.0
18.4
88.9

4.0
2.0
1.6
7.6
6.1
34.2
33.9
0.3
0.3
0.0
12.2
89.2

1.1
4.2
0.1
1.1
0.0
10.8
19.5
1.7

1.1
4.5
0.1
1.3
0.0
11.6
20.5
1.7

1.2
4.8
0.1
1.5
0.0
12.6
21.7
1.7

1.5
2.1
0.3
2.4
0.0
20.5
37.9
1.2

2.5
6.1
0.6
0.8
0.0
24.6
43.3
3.0

2017-31
Average

11.1

-16.2

-7.6

8

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (Billions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

6/

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in Billions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (Billions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in Billions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross workers' remittances (Billions of US dollars)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittances)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittance

0.0
...
...
...

0.0
...
...
...

0.0
14.8
30.1
3.0

3.6
2.6
2.1
14.1
19.6
...

6.6
7.4
0.7
24.2
32.8
...

5.1
4.9
2.7
14.4
8.6
28.5

10.3
0.7

3.6
1.4
1.9
5.0
5.5
34.2
34.8

16.5
89.1

5.0
1.9

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/
2/
3/
4/
5/
6/
7/
8/

Includes both public and private sector external debt.
Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

Table 1b.Solomon Islands: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-31
(In percent)
Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2021

2031

11

10

10

11

12

13

21

25

11
11

10
10

6
10

4
11

3
13

2
14

0
26

0
35

11
11
11
11
11
11

11
19
11
33
36
14

12
29
12
54
62
14

12
30
13
54
63
15

13
30
14
55
64
16

14
31
15
55
64
17

24
38
25
62
73
28

28
26
30
28
35
33

17

16

18

20

21

22

38

43

17
17

16
16

10
18

7
21

5
23

3
25

0
49

0
61

17
17
17
17
17
17

16
38
16
54
56
16

18
72
18
95
95
18

19
75
19
98
98
19

20
75
20
97
96
20

21
75
21
96
95
21

37
99
37
114
115
37

43
64
43
49
53
43

33

29

30

30

32

34

57

72

33
33

29
29

18
30

11
31

7
35

4
39

0
73

0
102

33
33
33
33
33
33

32
55
34
97
107
40

35
87
37
160
185
41

34
82
37
150
173
40

36
83
39
149
173
43

39
84
42
150
174
46

66
107
71
173
203
78

83
76
89
83
103
98

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-31 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-31 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average m inus one s tandard deviation in 2012-13 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline

9

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-31 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-31 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average m inus one s tandard deviation in 2012-13 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-31 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-31 2
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average m inus one s tandard deviation in 2012-13 4/

B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

Table 1b.Solomon Islands: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-31 (continued)
(In percent)
Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2021

2031

2

1

1

2

2

2

1

3

2
2

2
1

2
1

2
2

2
2

2
2

1
2

0
5

2
2
2
2
2
2

1
2
1
1
2
1

1
2
1
2
2
1

2
3
2
3
3
2

2
3
2
3
3
2

2
3
2
3
3
2

1
2
1
2
2
1

3
7
3
8
8
3

4

3

2

3

3

3

2

5

4
4

3
3

3
2

3
3

2
3

2
3

1
3

0
8

4
4
4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3
3
4

3
3
3
3
4
3

3
3
3
4
5
4

3
3
3
4
5
4

3
3
3
4
5
4

2
2
2
3
4
3

6
9
6
14
16
7

33

33

33

33

33

33

33

33

Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-31 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-31 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/

10

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Key variables at their historical averages in 2011-31 1/
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2011-31 2/
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-13 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 5/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in
in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level
after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

Table 2a.Solomon Islands: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2008-31
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Actual

Estimate
5/

Average
2008

2009

2010

Standard
Deviation

Projections

5/

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2011-16
Average

2021

2031

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

35.0
23.8

33.2
23.2

28.1
19.9

21.3
14.7

17.1
13.5

16.4
13.9

16.9
15.1

17.8
16.4

19.0
17.9

30.3
29.0

34.3
32.4

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

-8.2
-5.6
-0.8
46.5
17.5
45.8
-4.9
-3.6
-0.8
-2.9
-1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.5

-1.8
-3.3
-2.3
55.2
24.7
52.9
0.0
1.3
-0.5
1.7
-1.3
-0.9
-0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.5

-5.2
-10.2
-6.7
63.0
30.8
56.3
-3.4
-2.5
-0.3
-2.2
-1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

-6.8
-9.3
-4.0
59.5
25.9
55.5
-5.1
-2.6
-0.3
-2.4
-2.5
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.4

-4.2
-3.8
-1.6
58.5
24.7
56.9
-2.2
-1.5
-0.3
-1.2
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.4

-0.6
-1.2
-0.4
57.6
23.9
57.1
-0.7
-0.7
0.0
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

0.5
-2.5
-2.0
59.4
23.0
57.3
-0.5
-0.6
0.0
-0.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

0.9
-2.5
-2.0
58.8
22.0
56.9
-0.5
-0.7
-0.1
-0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.4

1.2
-2.3
-1.7
58.1
21.2
56.4
-0.6
-0.7
-0.1
-0.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.5

2.7
0.4
0.6
53.1
17.3
53.6
-0.2
-0.7
-0.1
-0.6
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.4

-1.0
-0.4
1.3
45.4
11.5
46.7
-1.7
-1.6
-0.2
-1.4
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.6

...
...
...
...
3.3
…
…
…
7.4

...
...
...
...
0.3
…
…
…
3.8

23.0
14.8
14.8
...
-4.1
36.4
71.2
46.0
3.3

17.5
10.9
10.9
...
-1.5
29.4
52.1
32.5
3.1

13.5
9.9
9.9
...
0.4
23.2
40.1
29.4
2.5

12.7
10.1
10.1
...
1.7
22.0
37.7
30.0
2.4

12.7
10.8
10.8
...
0.2
21.3
34.8
29.7
2.5

13.0
11.6
11.6
...
0.0
22.1
35.4
31.6
2.3

13.6
12.6
12.6
...
0.2
23.5
36.9
34.0
2.2

21.8
20.5
20.5
...
1.9
41.1
60.9
57.4
1.5

26.5
24.6
24.6
...
3.4
58.4
78.1
72.5
3.9

Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio

11.9
7.4

6.9
-0.5

6.4
-1.6

5.5
2.8

4.4
2.6

4.0
0.2

4.0
-2.5

3.6
-2.9

3.4
-2.9

2.2
-2.2

5.3
2.3

Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciat
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in perce
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

7.1
2.7
-8.1
-4.2
11.4
0.1
...

-4.7
1.3
-4.9
-5.2
7.3
0.1
...

7.0
1.2
-3.6
-4.5
5.8
0.1
...

9.3
1.6
-4.6
-13.5
7.6
0.1
0.0

6.0
1.3
-4.2
...
7.0
0.1
34.2

4.0
1.3
-1.0
...
4.6
0.0
34.2

3.4
1.2
0.3
...
3.8
0.0
34.2

3.7
1.2
0.4
...
3.8
0.0
34.2

4.0
1.3
0.5
...
3.8
0.0
34.2

2.3
1.1
5.3

4.0
1.0
-1.3

-2.2

3.4

-1.9

2017-31
Average

1.2

11

Other Sustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/

3.6
1.3
-3.6
0.1
7.2
0.2
…

6.6
0.8
2.5
7.9
3.7
0.3
…

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

5.1
1.3
-1.4

3.6
1.1
1.7

...

...

...

...

5.1
0.1
28.5

2.8
0.0
34.2

5.1
0.0
34.2

4.4
0.0
...

12
Table 2b.Solomon Islands: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2011-31

Projections
2012 2013 2014 2015

2011

2016

2021 2031

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

17

14

13

13

13

14

22

26

17
17
17

13
12
14

12
9
14

11
7
15

12
7
17

12
6
20

14
2
45

0
0
105

17
17
17
17
17

17
15
15
18
20

21
16
15
16
19

25
16
17
16
19

29
16
20
16
19

34
16
23
16
20

64
25
43
23
28

93
28
62
29
30

29

23

22

21

22

23

41

58

29
29
29

23
20
24

20
15
24

19
13
25

20
11
28

21
10
33

26
3
81

0
0
214

29
29
29
29
29

28
26
25
30
35

34
27
25
28
33

39
26
28
27
32

47
27
32
27
33

55
28
38
28
34

114
46
78
44
53

197
62
134
64
66

3

3

2

2

2

2

2

4

3
3
3

3
3
3

2
2
2

2
2
3

2
2
2

2
2
2

1
1
2

2
0
10

3
3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3
3

3
2
3
3
3

3
3
3
3
3

3
2
2
3
2

3
2
2
3
2

3
2
2
2
2

12
4
8
6
5

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Real GDP growth and primary balance are at historical averages
A2. Primary balance is unchanged from 2011
A3. Permanently lower GDP growth 1/
B. Bound tests
B1.
B2.
B3.
B4.
B5.

Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-13
Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
SOLOMON ISLANDS
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation, Third Review Under the Standby
Credit Facility, and Request for Arrangement Under the Standby Credit Facility—
Supplement
Prepared by the Asia Pacific Department in Consultation with Other Departments
Approved by Hoe Ee Khor and Dominique Desruelle
November 18, 2011
This supplement reports on political developments since the Staff Report (EBS/11/161) was
issued on November 9, 2011. The thrust of the staff appraisal remains unchanged.
On November 16, 2011, Mr. Gordon Darcy Lilo, former Minister of Finance under the
government led by Mr. Danny Phillip, was elected as the new Prime Minister (PM). His
election was supported by the same political coalition—the National Coalition for Reform
and Advancement (NCRA)—in power since 2010. Former PM Danny Philip resigned on
November 11. The new government has reconfirmed the commitments outlined in the Letter
of Intent of November 4, 2011, which was signed by Mr. Lilo and Governor Rarawa, and its
attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/149
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 30, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation with
Solomon Islands
On November 23, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the 2011 Article IV Consultation with Solomon Islands.1
Background
Solomon Islands’ economy has rebounded strongly from the 2008–09 global financial
crisis. Growth contracted by nearly 5 percent in 2009 driven by a drop in commodity
exports, mainly logging. International reserves were depleted. An 18-month Standby
Credit Facility (SCF) Arrangement was approved in June 2010. The program succeeded
in restoring macroeconomic and financial stability, catalyzing donor support, and
promoting structural reforms. Strong demand for logging from emerging Asia,
particularly in China, and favorable terms of trade triggered an unexpected surge in
logging production in 2010 and growth rebounded to 7 percent.
A strong commodity-based recovery is underway. Log production surprised on the
upside and jumped by 40 percent (year-on-year) in the first eight months of 2011, close
to an historical high. This reflected investments of new logging companies, re-entry
logging (the harvesting of native stands in areas previously logged and where trees
have not re-grown fully), and strong log prices following the earthquake and tsunami in
1

Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
Japan in March, which triggered a surge in demand for logs to build temporary housing.
The redeveloped Gold Ridge mine which started its operations in April 2011 has also
been supporting the economic expansion over the last few months.
Inflation pressures are dissipating. After falling to 1 percent in 2010, inflation increased
to 8.7 in August 2011 reflecting base effects and the pass-through of global energy and
food prices. However, the latest reading of month-on-month data through August
suggest a sustained downward momentum. Both headline and core inflation (excluding
food and fuel) are edging down helped by the revaluation of the domestic currency in
June and the decline in fuel prices since mid-year, with headline inflation reaching
almost a negative territory on a month-on-month basis.
Reserve buffers have been rebuilt. The trade balance shifted from deficit to surplus
during April-September 2011, for the first time since 2004 driven by exceptionally strong
exports of gold and logging. As a result, the balance of payment position improved,
supported by large FDI and aid flows. Gross international reserves increased to US$355
million in June 2011 from less than US$100 million in mid-2009.
However, progress toward reducing poverty has been limited. Despite strong growth,
the recovery is uneven and growth remains concentrated in the commodity sector with
limited spill-over to the rest of the economy.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the Solomon Islands authorities for the strong
performance under their Fund-supported program. Macroeconomic and financial
stability have been restored and international reserves have been rebuilt. The
government’s sound economic management also helped catalyze donor support. While
the prospects of the economy are favorable, downside risks have increased with the
uncertainty in the global outlook. The vulnerability to commodity price and demand
shocks, along with concentration of growth in the commodity sector, pose further
challenges.
Directors emphasized that building resilience to shocks, and adopting a more balanced
and inclusive growth model, by fostering economic diversification and private sector
development, while accelerating progress on poverty reduction remain top priorities.
They agreed that the authorities’ economic program would help consolidate
macroeconomic progress and strengthen institutions and structural policies.
Directors emphasized the importance of preserving the strong fiscal position and
strengthening the medium-term fiscal framework. They welcomed the authorities’ plan to
move to a multi-year budget framework and their commitment to achieving a balance
between maintaining strong buffers and increasing spending on critical infrastructure
and social priorities. Directors looked forward to the new resource taxation regime to
promote fiscal transparency and enhance the efficiency of tax collection; reform of
mining legislation to broaden the tax base; and strengthening public financial

3
management. For the medium term, Directors also highlighted the importance of prudent
management of mineral resources, anchoring fiscal policy to the noncommodity balance
in order to avoid pro-cyclicality, and resuming concessional borrowing to secure
development financing.
Directors considered that the monetary and exchange rate policies since the beginning
of the year have helped moderate inflation and anchor inflation expectations. They
agreed that monetary tightening would be warranted if private sector credit increases
rapidly and creates inflationary pressures.
Directors noted that the banking system remains profitable and adequately capitalized.
They encouraged the central bank to continue strengthening the supervisory and
regulatory framework to mitigate risks facing the financial sector. Directors agreed that
reforming the National Provident Fund legislation will also help to preserve financial
sector stability.
Directors welcomed the adoption of the National Development Strategy, which should
help the authorities achieve their growth and poverty reduction objectives. They called
for sustained further efforts to promote private sector-led growth by improving the
business environment and access to credit by small businesses, and reforming stateowned enterprises.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

4

Solomon Islands: Selected Economic Indicators, 2008–12
Per capita GDP (2010): US$1,280
Population (2010): 528 thousand
Poverty rate (2006): 23 percent
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Growth and prices (percentage change) 1/
Real GDP
7.1
-4.7
7.0
9.3
6.0
Of which: nontimber nonmining
6.5
-2.6
4.8
4.8
4.7
CPI (period average)
17.4
7.1
1.0
6.6
5.3
CPI (end of period)
18.1
1.8
0.8
7.1
5.2
GDP deflator
11.4
7.3
5.8
7.6
7.0
Nominal GDP (in SI$ millions)
4,713 4,815 5,449 6,404 7,265
of which: non-mining nominal GDP (in SI$ millions)
4,684 4,779 5,369 5,900
Per capita GDP (in US$)
1,207 1,159 1,280 1,554 1,769
Per capita GNI (in US$)
1,018
839
975 1,210 1,300
Central government operations (percent of GDP)
Total revenue and grants
46.5
55.2
63.0 59.5
58.5
Revenue
29.0
30.5
32.2 33.6
33.8
Grants
17.5
24.7
30.8 25.9
24.7
Total expenditure
46.7
53.5
56.7 55.9
57.2
Recurrent expenditure
25.3
28.6
28.4 27.1
27.7
Development expenditure
19.5
25.6
28.0 28.9
29.5
Unrecorded expenditure 2/
1.9
-0.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
Overall balance
-0.2
1.8
6.3
3.6
1.3
Foreign financing (net)
-1.6
-1.1
-1.2
-0.9
0.5
Domestic financing (net)
1.8
-1.6
-5.1
-2.8
-1.8
Privatization receipts
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.2
0.0
Central government debt (percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 3/
35.0
33.2
28.1 21.3
17.1
Domestic debt
11.2
10.0
8.2
6.6
3.6
Of which: principal arrears
External debt
23.8
23.2
19.9 14.7
13.5
(In US$ millions, end of period)
140.4 138.7 134.7 126.9 131.9
Monetary and credit (percentage change, end-year data)
Credit to private sector
26.5
-4.2
-4.7
2.0
8.0
Broad money
6.9
24.7
13.5 21.0
18.0
Reserve money
-2.3
62.5
75.3 21.6
16.7
Interest rate - deposit (percent per annum)
2.0
2.7
2.6
...
...
Interest rate - lending (percent per annum)
17.0
15.4
13.5
...
...
Balance of payments (in US$ millions, unless otherwise indicated)
Current account balance
-124.5 -128.2 -204.4 -97.7 -124.3
(Percent of GDP)
-20.5 -21.4 -30.3 -11.6 -12.7
(excluding mining-related capital imports, in percent of GDP)
…
… -11.2
0.1
-2.3
Exports of goods and nonfactor services (GNFS)
269.5 234.9 333.0 524.3 596.8
(Percentage change)
20.6 -12.9
41.8 57.4
13.8
Log exports
110.3
88.1 124.7 187.5 134.5
Imports of GNFS
408.8 344.2 547.8 628.3 677.8
(Percentage change)
14.0 -15.8
59.2 14.7
7.9
Foreign direct investment
91.1 116.8 235.6 155.7 105.2
Overall balance
-31.0
56.4 119.8 88.8
25.0
Gross official reserves (in US$ millions, end of period) 4/
89.5 146.0 265.8 364.6 389.5
(In months of next year's imports of GNFS)
3.1
3.2
5.1
6.5
6.4
(In months of next year's nonmining-related imports of GNFS)
…
4.2
6.0
7.6
7.5
Exchange rate (SI$/US$, end of period) 5/
8.00
8.06
8.06 7.40
...
Real effective exchange rate (period average, 2005 = 100)
112.7 120.5 112.0
...
...
Nominal effective exchange rate (period average, 2005 = 100)
87.9
88.7
83.5
...
...
Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Incorporates the 2009 revised GDP estimates published by the National Statistics Office in June 2011.
2/ Includes changes in the stock of unpaid payment orders and unpresented checks and the statistical discrepancy.
3/ Includes disbursement under an IMF-supported arrangement
4/ Includes SDR allocations made by the IMF to the Solomon Islands in 2009 and actual and prospective disbursements under
5/ For 2011, as of September.

Press Release No. 11/434
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 28, 2011

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Completes the Final Review Under the Standby Credit Facility Arrangement
for Solomon Islands and Approves US$ 4.85 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has completed the third and
final review of Solomon Islands’ economic performance under the Standby Credit Facility
(SCF) arrangement.
The completion of the review has enabled the disbursement of an amount equivalent to
SDR 3.12 million (about US$ 4.85 million), bringing total disbursements under the
arrangement to an amount equivalent to SDR 12.48 million (about US$ 19.39 million). The
SCF arrangement was approved on June 2, 2010 (see Press Release No. 10/223) for an
amount equivalent to SDR 12.48 million (about US$ 19.39 million), or 120 percent of the
Solomon Islands' quota.
Following the Executive Board's discussion of the Solomon Islands on November 23,
Mr. Naoyuki Shinohara, Deputy Managing Director and Acting Chair, stated:
“Solomon Islands’ economy has rebounded strongly from the 2008—09 global financial
crisis and the outlook remains favorable. Strong program implementation under the Standby
Credit Facility arrangement has succeeded in restoring macroeconomic and financial
stability. However, downside risks have increased with the uncertainty in the global outlook.
The economy is also vulnerable to commodity price and demand shocks while growth
remains concentrated in the commodity sector. Therefore, bolstering resilience to shocks and
adopting a more inclusive growth model remain top priorities.
“Preserving a strong fiscal position and strengthening the medium-term fiscal framework
would ensure fiscal sustainability. The near-term priority is to strike a balance between
maintaining strong fiscal buffers and increasing spending on critical infrastructure and social
priorities. Looking ahead, a key challenge is to ensure that the forthcoming mineral wealth
spills over to the rest of the economy. To this end, managing resource revenues, anchoring

2
fiscal policy to the noncommodity balance, and resuming concessional borrowing to secure
development financing would be critical.
“Monetary and exchange rate policies over the past few months have helped moderate and
anchor inflation and are currently appropriate. Monetary tightening would be warranted if
private sector credit were to increase rapidly.
“The banking system remains profitable and adequately capitalized. The central bank should
continue to strengthen the supervisory and regulatory framework of the financial system.
Reforming the National Provident Fund to improve its operation and financial performance
will also help preserve financial sector stability.”

Press Release No. 11/448
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
December 7, 2011

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board approves a one-year Standby Credit Facility Arrangement for
Solomon Islands
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has approved a one-year
arrangement under the Standby Credit Facility (SCF) for Solomon Islands, in an amount
equivalent to SDR 5.2 million (about US$ 8.08 million). This arrangement is intended to be
precautionary, meaning that the authorities do not intend to draw on the Fund’s resources
unless a need arises.
The SCF-supported program aims at consolidating recent macroeconomic progress,
implementing a new resource taxation regime to promote fiscal transparency and enhance the
efficiency of tax collection, reforming mining legislation to broaden the tax base, and
implementing public financial management reforms to strengthen fiscal institutions. The
SCF-supported program is expected to be instrumental in anchoring the authorities’ policy
agenda going forward.

Statement by Christopher Legg, Executive Director for the Solomon Islands
and Leni Hunter, Senior Advisor to the Executive Director
November 23, 2011
The current SCF has been the first arrangement between the IMF and the Solomon Islands
since the 1980s. It has laid the groundwork for a constructive engagement with the IMF in
assisting the Solomon Islands to progress an important reform agenda. The relationship and
the program continue to be highly valued by all parties, irrespective of recent political
instability which has involved a change of Prime Minister.
The Solomon Islands authorities comfortably met program targets for end-June 2011, and
have implemented most of the benchmarks committed to under the program. They appreciate
the constructive interactions that they have had with Staff during the current arrangement,
and have requested a successor arrangement in the form of a precautionary 12-month SCF for
SDR5.2 million.
Although Solomon Islands does not face an immediate balance of payments need, our
Authorities’ request for a successor precautionary arrangement is motivated by their
recognition of vulnerabilities inherent in Solomon Islands’ commodity-dependent economy.
It is also envisaged that the program will continue to assist with catalyzing donor support.
Of equal importance to the Authorities is a continued engagement with the Fund as they
proceed with a multi-year period of structural reform. Proposed benchmarks for 2012 include
Cabinet approval for replacement of existing financial legislation to improve the fiscal
framework. These cover budget processes, revenue collection, fiscal transparency and debt
management. Other benchmarks aim to strengthen the monetary operations and financial
supervision, improve the National Provident Fund, and complete the Honiara Club
Agreement Review. In the context of emerging opportunities for growth, the Authorities’
reform agenda has the potential to create conditions to foster important and needed gains in
the living standards of all Solomon Islanders.
The economy is in a markedly better position than it was during the sharp downturn
experienced in 2009. Real GDP growth has rebounded and is projected to remain healthy at
around 6 percent in 2012, in the context of increased mining and declining logging activity.
There are signs that recent inflationary pressures have abated, following a modest upwards
revaluation in the exchange rate. However inflation remains at around 6 percent. Favourable
commodity prices and accumulated donor funds resulted in a substantial increase in the
balance of payments position, with gross international reserves projected to reach around
US$420 million by the end of 2012.
Although the external environment continues to pose downside risks, resilience in Asian
markets provides some insulation to the Solomon Islands’ economy. Over the longer term,
the Authorities are conscious of the risk that climate change could negatively affect incomes
and poverty in rural areas through an increase in water salinity, especially in the outer
islands.

2

While recent headline GDP performance is strong, the Authorities remain highly conscious
of the continued low level of GDP per capita. The need for inclusive growth that alleviates
poverty and benefits the wider local population thus remains the key challenge.
Unemployment remains high, and appears to be concentrated among youth (labour market
statistics are not produced). It remains unclear whether jobs lost from the declining forestry
industry will be replaced by more capital-intensive mining. In part this will depend on how
quickly mining projects come on-stream, and how much these projects spill over to create
demand and jobs in other sectors and industries. Jobs will be created by infrastructure
projects such as road works, notwithstanding some recourse to imported labor.
Given the need for inclusive growth, the Authorities attach high priority to the
implementation of the structural benchmark on the mining tax regime. They are aware of the
dual aims of capturing the benefits from an expendable natural resource for future
generations, while maintaining an investment climate that attracts foreign investment and
provides employment and income. The Authorities agree with Staff regarding the
complexities inherent in mining taxation revenue collection, which requires specialty skills.
The process of negotiating mining licenses is also critical, as are processes around
negotiations and payments to landowners. Getting the right tax structure and licensing terms,
and managing landowner interests, are crucial to the success of the mining industry and its
capacity to contribute to the Solomon Islands. The Authorities are appreciative of assistance
and advice from the World Bank and IMF on these issues.
In July the Authorities released their National Development Strategy (NDS) covering the
period 2011 through to 2020. The development and adoption of the NDS has been heralded a
significant milestone by development partners, as it provides direction on development
priorities and a framework for costed multi-year sector strategies. The Core Economic
Working Group continues to ensure donor efforts are coordinated in line with the
Government’s priorities.
The Authorities have taken serious note of the recent Public Expenditure Review, which
highlighted problems with budget and procurement processes. Given the strong need to
alleviate poverty, they wish to ensure that their use of financial resources results in tangible
benefits. To achieve this, they need to ensure development spending does not outpace the
capacity to follow through on high quality project implementation. The Ministry of Finance
and Treasury intends to move to a multi-year budgeting process over the coming year, which
will enable the budget to reflect future development project spending. They will also revise
the budget presentation from input line items to functional/output line items to strengthen the
quality of expenditure outcomes. Further, the Authorities have set aside funds in the National
Transport Fund (NTF) as a measure to protect excess cash balances, as well as to ensure
quality spending in infrastructure projects.
The Ministry of Finance and Treasury is also considering early debt repayments, which will
improve the Government’s standing with creditors. In addition, early repayments would

3
create a flow of savings from reduced debt servicing costs that would be spread over future
periods. A drawback from early repayments of domestic debt could be an addition to the
already substantial stock of liquidity being held in the banking sector. The central bank has
been issuing short-term Bokolo bills in order to mop up liquidity. These bills have, to a
significant extent, displaced longer-dated Treasury bills.
Some discussions with Staff questioned whether increased liquidity at the banks could lead to
excessive lending and inflationary pressures. However, there have been no signs of this
occurring to date, with the commercial banks reducing lending from earlier levels (that had
been associated with the previously stronger housing market). The Authorities report some
businesses having difficulty raising loans. Unsecured lending, and financial service provision
in remote areas, are issues that continue to need to be addressed.
As custodian of the bulk of household financial assets, the National Provident Fund plays a
key role in the Solomon Islands’ economy. Long-awaited legislative reform will give the
NPF a greater degree of independence in investment decisions, coupled with enhanced
central bank supervision through changes to the Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI)
Act. Changes to the CBSI Act will also relax the single-borrower limit which on the margin
may have led to constrained lending activity through bank branches.
The Honiara Club Agreement, which involved a zero cap on new borrowing, is due for
renegotiation in 2012. The Agreement acted as a significant external constraint on debt
accumulation and played a useful role in facilitating the improved fiscal position. However,
the Authorities look forward to the opening up of opportunities to take on measured levels of
concessionary borrowing which will be directed to projects in areas of high economic
returns, e.g. in infrastructure.
Regrettably, poor governance and financial management has led to difficulties in several
Solomon Islands’ State Owned Enterprises. The postal service, and water and electricity
utilities are of concern, creating risks to service provision. The Authorities are already
addressing these issues with the help of donors, understanding that such problems pose
hurdles to attracting private sector investment. In addition, landowner disputes have delayed
plans to improve electricity provision with the Tina River hydro development project.
The continued success of the policy reform agenda will depend in large part on public sector
capacity and implementation. The Authorities note the RAMSI mission has had a major
impact on the Solomon Islands, contributing many dedicated advisers to the public sector.
The withdrawal of RAMSI will need to be carefully timed, with appropriate attention given
to maintaining capacity and strengthening local public sector staff.

